Tes Iatrikes Kartos: OR A TREATISE DE Morborum CAPITIS Essentiis and
Prognosticis. Adorned with above three hundred Choice and Rare Observations:
Many of them Selected out of the most Eminent and Renowned Authors now Extant
amongst us.

BY ROBERT BAYFIELD, Physician.

Morborum Medicamina, si a Doctis usurpata, remedia; si vero ab indoctis and
inexercitatis, reperientur venena.

DEPRESSA RESVRGO


LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwel, and are to be sold by Richard Tomlins, at the
Sun and Bible in Pie-corner, 1663.

Supremo omnium Capiti,
Gratia singulari, nocnon minus mirabili Providentia

R. B.

ROBERTUS BAIFIELD, Anagrammata,
Bis dote laurifer;
Non lauros, neve omnis enim fert omnia tellus;
Bis Te Lauriferum, dotibus esse patet.
Aliter,

Ab sudore fit liber.
Ab sudore Liber tibi fit conamine multo;
Nec fructus profert, ni been cultus ager.
ROBERT BAYFIELD. Anagrams.
O life bred by Art,
Be (if tried) labor.
O life crowned with Bays, since bred by Art.
Wherein (if tried) true Labor bears chief part.
R. P.
The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THis Tractate which I now present unto thee, is the fruit of my spare hours,
it having been my recreation, for some time, to read the best Authors which I
could meet with; and for the help of my memory, I have collected the choicest
Observations, and the most infallible Prognostics which did occur, and reduced
them under several Heads, distinguished into several Chapters; which I have
found very useful, profitable, and pleasing unto me; and presuming they may be
so to others also, I have now published them to the World, that so they which
neither have money to buy, nor leisure to read many Volumnes, may find in this
little Epitome the choicest, and chiefest things that are contained in them,
touching all those Diseases and Symptoms which affect the Head. I have also
inserted many Observations of my own, which were never before in Print. Indeed
when I considered the paucity of Observations, and especially how
immethodically (for the most part) those extant are digested; I thought it
might be worth my pains to run through the whole body of Practical Physic in
this Method, which affords not only the Definitions, and Prognostics of
Diseases, with select Observations upon them, but also their Causes, and
Diagnostick signs, as will clearly appear to the Observing Reader. Yet when I
had finished this Tractate of the Diseases of the Head, I thought it not
convenient to proceed any further, but rather to put a stop to my intended
purpose, until I saw how this would be resented. There can be no better means,
I am sure, to preserve, further, and assist, the practicing of Physic, then is
the careful and painful penning of it, especially of Observations: For as
Practice is the best and chiefest part of Physic; so is Observation the
surest, and most demonstrating part of Practice: Hence it comes to pass,
through the defect of Observations, that so many Prescriptions we meet with in
the Works of most learned Practitioners, fall often short in performing the
Cures they promise, and we took them up for; but Observations are the
Touchstone for the trying of what ever is not good, and what current in
Physic. I presume that it will be superfluous for me to tell thee, what great
benefit thou may reap by acquainting thy self with this Tractate; for as
Zeuxis, picturing Helen, drew the Liueaments from five of the fairest Virgins
of Croton: So this Book (excluding what is mine) is borrowed from the richest
treasuries of the best Physicians: And verily, I judge him of too mean capacity
for this Art or Science, that cannot by the light of these things proceed into
further Particulars, when need requires.

This I profess, that my care in beginning, continuing, and ending this Work,
has been for the benefit of my Country, that I might help young Students in
Physic (as I am one my self) to the attaining of some perfection, not
esteeming my pains, but hazarding my credit: For I am not ignorant, that a
large brood of pregnant Wits, fraughted with jeers, (and good ones, as they
term them) will snarl, though themselves either cannot, or (be it spoken in the
best sense) will not spare time from their pleasures or profits to advantage
others. These proud wits and curious heads are so extremely in love with their
own shadows, and do so highly admire their own conceits, that they despise all
the understanding and learning of other men. They will whip Homer, as did
Zoilus; sift great Hippocrates, as did Thessalus, and lash Seneca, that
super-intendent of Wit, Learning, and Judgment, as did Caligula, Agellius,
Fabius, and Lipsius himself, his chief Propugner; they have sucked Lamia's
breasts in Plutarch, who when she sat spinning at home laid her eyes by her in
a Basin, but put them into her head when she went abroad: They are as kind as
the Cuckoo, which devoureth the Bird that brought her up, and with the male
Spider (as Aristotle says) they eat the prey, but take no pains. Unwise were
I, being empty and barren, if I thought to escape that which Homer, that sweet
and sugared Mecaenas of Greece, might in no wise avoid. Simple were I to seek to
evade that which the wisest, and Learnedest, Socrates, Architas, and Seneca,
could not shun. Zeno the poor Philosopher could resist the violence of the
great King Antigonus, and Demosthenes could withstand the force of Philip, and
yet neither of them could avoid the snares of those that defamed their Labor,
and envied their diligence in Writing, and making of Books. Indeed it is the
common doom of all Writers: Scaliger makes Galen fimbriam Hippocratis; and
Paracelsus will have them both mere Idiots, Infants in Physic and Philosophy:
Yea, Cardan condemns them also, for tediousness obscurity, and confusion. If
such, and so many famous men that I could name, have suffered so much, what
shall I expect? How shall I that am vix umbra tantae doctrinae, hope to please?
For that which is most pleasing to one, is amaracum sui, most harsh to another:
Quot homines, tot sententiae, so many men, so many minds; Unusquisque abundat
sensu suo; and whilst each particular Party is so affected, how should one give
satisfaction to all? How shall I hope to express my self to each man's humor and
conceit? Some understand too little, some too much, Qui similiter in legendos
libros, atque in salutandos homines irruunt, non cogitantes quales, sed quibus
vestibus induti sint, as Austin observes, not regarding what, but who writes.
If he be not rich, in great place, polite, and brave, a great Doctor, or full
fraught with grand Titles, though never so well qualified, he is a Dunce! but,
as Baronius has it of Cardinal Caraffa's Works; he is a mere Hog that rejects
any man pro paupertate sua* Truly, the malice of men so exceedingly increases,
that no man, no not the best learned, as you have heard (much less I) can do
ought without reproach and slander; yea, and that chiefly by men of his own
profession: For how hateful and vile a matter is this, and a plain
demonstration of Envy, when one man of Science shall be asked by a stranger,
what opinion he has of another man of Science that he knows; he shall
answer, he is a good Herbalist, or he understands well the practick part of
Physic, I know nothing else of him. They that are perfect in nothing
themselves have ever in readiness such disdainful reproach to hide their own
Ignorance: as though a man being excellent in any one thing, it proved him to
be ignorant in all other. Certainly the remembrance of such disdainful
Objections (when I had already finished this thing) made me in doubt to put
forth this Work; but that my Friends, with whom I conferred my doings,
earnestly persuaded me not to regard the rage of Envy, so long as Truth would
bear out it self, while Time consumed both Slander and also Envy, the Author
of all reproach; And that I should in no case cease to do that should profit
many, for the evil of a few; some perhaps will say (to diminish that little
honor which I might get by this my Work) that the Ancients have written the
greatest part thereof: But they shall learn from the mouth of this great
Oracle, That there is no less wit and understanding required to be able to
judge of Sciences formerly written, then to be the first Authors of them.
Indeed the Ancients, whose studious endeavors conspired the subduing of these
and other Diseases, have left behind them most honorable Testimonies of their
Labors; yea, and Modern men also have been stirred up to do the like; but some
of them with so much tediousness and prolixity, that you may sooner find your
Patient dead, than a remedy in their Writings, which (if my judgment be any
thing) are more learned then useful. Besides, though there were many Giants of
old in Physic and Philosophy, yet I say, with Didacus Stella, A Dwarf standing
on the shoulders of a Giant may see further then the Giant himself; and it is
no greater prejudice for me, to endite after others, then for Aelianus
Montaltus, that famous Physician, to write De Morbis Capitis, after Jason
Pratensis, Heurnius, Hildesheim, etc. Oribasius, Aetius, Avicenna, have all out
of Galen, but to their own Method, diverso stilo, non diversa fide. Yea, I must
usurp that of Wecker, e Ter. Nihil dictum quod non fuit dictum prius, Methodus
sola artificem ostendit. I gathered my Stones out of many Quarries, but I
composed my frame my self: If I have done well, it is that which I desired, but
if I have done slenderly, it is that I could attain unto. For my own part, I
respect matter, not words; remembering that of Cardanus, Verba propter res, non
res propter verba: and seeking with Seneca, Quid scribam, non quemadmodum,
rather what, then how to write: I neglect Phrases, and labor wholly to inform
my Readers understanding, not to please his ear; it is not my study, or intent,
to compose neatly, which an Orator requires, but to express my self readily and
plainly, as it happens: Whether I have attained the mark at which I aimed, or
shot wide, I submit my self to thy learned, and favorable Censure: And as for
those malicious Calumnies of Railers, and Detractors (as the barking of a Dog)
I securely contemn them: What thou find here amiss (except the faults of the
Press) I freely confess it mine; yet neither wittingly, nor willingly is it
mine; howsoever charge it to mine account, for I was ever of that Fathers
mind, which in all his Works and Writings, desired not only pium Lectorem, a
courteous Reader of his Labors, but also liberum Correctorem, a free Reprover
of his Faults; but so that they do it friendly, to blame in their judgment
where it is equity, and not to blaze my faults unto the World, which is a
breach of Charity; therefore do thou friendly reckon with me, and I will
thankfully satisfy thee, and be sure to remember, that as it is thy duty to be
thankful for the best, so thou ought to be charitable in thy censure of the
rest. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

Thy Servant in Him, who took upon Him the form of a Servant for us, R. B.

Index Capitum in hoc Tractatu Contentorum.
CAp. 1. De Intemperie Cerebri page 1 2. De Meatuum cerebri angustia 5 3 De
commotione cerebri 7 4 De Inflammatione cerebri 9 5 De cerebri Sphacelo 10 6 De
Hydrocephalo 11 7 De Capitis contusione 13 8 De Vulnere cutis and pericranii 15
9 De Cranii Vulnere, seu fractura 16 10 De Cephalalgia, seu dolor Capitis 18
11 De Cephalaeae 20 12 De Hemicrania 21 13 De Monoplegia, seu Clavo 23 14 De
Vigiliis nimiis 24 15 De Comate somnolento, seu Cataphora 26 16 De Vertigine 28
17 De Memoriae laesione 31 18 De Delirio 32 19 De Phrenitide 36 20 De
Melancholia 39 21 De Mania, seu insania 42 22 De Rabie, seu Hydrophobia 46 23
De Lupina insania 49 24 De Chorea lasciva 51 25 De Comate vigili 52 26 De
Lethargo 53 27 De Lassitudine 55 28 De Inquietudine ibid. 29 De Rigore 56 30 De
Tremore 58 31 De Paralysi, seu resolutione nervorum. 59 32 De Spasmo, seu
Convulsione 61 33 De Incubo 64 34 De Catalepsi, seu Catoche 66 35 De Epilepsia
68 36 De Caro 74 37 De Apoplexia 76 38 De Catarrho. 77 39 De Trachomate, seu
paelpebrarum Asperitudine. 81 40 De Psoropthalmia, seu Pruriginosa Scabiosaque
Lippitudine 82 41 De Emphysemate, seu palpebrarum Inflatione. 83 42 De
Palpebrarum inviscatione. 84 43 De Ectropio, seu palpebrarum inversione. ibid.
44 De Lagophthalmia, seu Leporina palpebra 85 45 De Hydati ibid. 46 De
Xeropthalmia, seu Arida Lippitudine 86 47 De Sclerophthalmia, seu Palpebrarum
duritie 87 48 De Hordeolo ibid. 49 De Chalazio, seu Grandine 88 50 De Madarosi,
seu Glabritie 89 51 De Trichiasi, and Phalangosi 90 52 De Phitiriasi ibid. 53
De Rhyade 91 54 De Encantide 92 55 De Anchilope ibid. 56 De Aegilope, seu
Fistula lachrymali 93 57 De Ophthalmia, seu Lippitudine 94 58 De Taraxi seu
Conturbatione 99 59 De Chemosi 100 60 De Pterygio, seu Ungue oculorum ibid. 61
De Panno 101 62 De Hyposphagmate, seu Suggillatione 102 63 De Corneae tunicae
Crassitie 103 64 De Nebula 104 65 De Albugine 105 66 De Phlyctaenis, seu
pustulis corneae 106 67 De Corneae Ruptura 107 68 De Corneae and Adnatae
ulceribus 108 69 De Nomis, seu Ulceribus depascentibus ibid. 70 De Canero
Corneae 109 71 De Vulneribus Corneae, and Oculorum dolor 110 72 De Hypopyo,
seu pure sub cornea 111 73 De Prop^osi, seu Uveae procidentia 112 74 De
Mydriasi, seu pupillae dilatatione 113 75 De Myosi, seu pupillae Angustia 115
76 De Hypochyma, seu Suffusione 116 77 De Humoris aquei vitiis 119 78 De
Humoris Crystallini vitiis ibid. 79 De Humoris vitrei vitiis 121 80 De Oculi
Atrophia, and Microphthalmo 122 81 De Oculi procidentia, and Exophthalmo 123 82
De Hippo 124 83 De Paralysi, seu Oculi resolutione 125 84 De Strabismo 126 85
De Amblyopia, seu Hebetudine 127 86 De Epiphora, seu Lachrymis involuntariis
128 87 De Paremptosi, seu Gutta serena 129 88 De Symptosi, seu Concidentia, and
Aporrexi 131 89 De Aurium Inflammatione 132 90 De Vlceribus aurium, and
Vermibus 134 91 De Otalgia, seu Aurium dolor 135 92 De Cophosi, seu Surditate,
and Gravi auditu 136 93 De Sonitu, seu Tinnitu aurium 138 94 De Narium Ulcere,
and Ozana 139 95 De Sarcomate, and Polypo 140 96 De Narium foetore 141 97 De
Hamorhagia narium 142 98 De Olfactus laesione 146 99 De Coryza, seu Gravedine.
147 100 De Sterutatione 148 101 De Linguae Tumore 149 102 De Batracho, seu
Ranula sub Lingua 152 103 De Linguae nigritie cum Scabritie, and Scissuris 153
104 De Linguae Balbutie, Paralysi, and Aphonia 154 105 De Laesione Gustatus 155
106 De Labiorum Fissuris 156 107 De Labiorum Ulceribus 157 108 De Labiorum
tremore, and Perversione 158 109 De Oris Apertione, and Hiatu 159 110 De Oris
Oscitatione 160 111 De Oris Tortura, seu distortione. 161 112 De Ptyalismo, seu
Crebra Sputatione 162 113 De Oris Ulceribus, and Aphthis 163 114 De Oris
Foetore 165 115 De Dentium Corrosione 166 116 De Dentium mobilitate 168 117 De
Odontalgia, seu Dentium dolor 169 118 De Dentium Stridore, and Stupore 175 119
De Dentium Nigredine 176 120 De Ginoivarum Excrescentia, and Epulide 177 121 De
Parulide, seu Gingivarum inflammatione 178 122 De Gingivarum Erosione, and
Exulceratione 179 123 De Fluxu Sanguinis ex gingivis 180 124 De Maxilla
inferioris immobilitate 183 125 De Maxillae inferioris luxatione ibid. 126 De
Uvulae, seu Columellae relaxatione 185 127 De Columellae inflammatione 186 128
De Tonsillarum, seu Amygdalarum inflammatione 188 129 De Malignis tonsillarum
Ulceribus 189
ERRATA.
PAge 5. linea 11. read causato. p. 32. l. 23. r. depravation. p. 35. l. ult.
r. praec ^ue p. 63. l. 12. r. she. p. 68. l. 20. r. orta p. 70. l. 21. r.
Castore.. p. 71. l. 8. r. i. l. 22. r. he took p. 72. l. 14. r. carui. p. 74.
l. 24. r. Coch. ss. p. 75. l. 6. r. i. p. 93. l. 6. r. coaguli leporis. ss. p.
95. l. 16. r. Croci i. p. 109. l. 26 dele to be. p. 114. l. 4. r. scattering.
p. 117. l. 12. r. couching. l. 16. r. couched. p. 122. l. 21, 22, and 23. dele.
because therein, etc. p. 132. l. 9. r. (...). p. 133. l. 26. r. i ss. p. 142.
l. 10. r. extracted, p. 149. l. 12. r. waterish phlegm. p. 147. l. 15. r.
concitata. p. 148. l. 19. r. promittit. p. 153. l. ult. r. office, p. 155. l.
9. add fol. origani, salviae, staechadis, rorismar. ana M. ss. p. 159. l. 16.
r. quod, p. 162. l. 12. r. ss. p. ibid. l. 13. r. i. p. ibid. l. 20. add
Lavendula, p. 167. l. 7. r. i. p. 171. l. 27. r. mororum, p. 172. l. 25. r.
held, p. 174 l. 13. r. i. ss. p. 178. l. add Nutmeg. p. 185. l. 24. r. ii. p.
186. l. 6. r. upon a student who had. p. ibid. l. 14. r. not off.

Plurima forsan occurrent, sed levinscula mibi raptim perlegenti praeterlapsa,
quae Lector Candidus facile condonabit, intelligens facillime emendabit.

(...): SEU Tractatus de Morborum Capitis Essentiis and Prognosticis: Plusquam
trecentis selectis Observationibus adornatus.
CAPUT I. De Intemperie Cerebri.
INtemperies Cerebri, The Distemper of the Brain, is a swerving of the same
from its natural and pristine temper, brought upon it, by reason of some
external and internal causes.

A distemper of the brain with or without matter, if recent, is a great deal
easier to be cured then that which has continued long, and is almost turned
into a habit. Intemperies per consensum (quando materia aliunde ad caput
transmittitur) ceteris paribus, quam quae per essentiam, facilius curatur. A
distemper of the brain proceeding from blood, either overthin, or too thick, is
not to be made light of, but the cure must forthwith be set upon and attempted,
lest an inflammation follow thereupon. Intemperies cum pituita saepe in
stuporem, paralysin, apoplexiam, and soporosos affectus degenerat.

Dominus Sindal, 24 annorum, Intemperie cerebri ab humore melancholico
praecipue procedente laborabat. He was of a very timorous and fearful nature,
and often complained of a siccity in his nostrils; at last desiring my advice,
I thus set upon the cure.

foliorum senae i ss. seminis foeniculi contusi ii. decoctionis communis, ix.
fiat Infusio: in qua dissolve syrupi rosarum sol. i. Misce, pro duabus dosibus,
half over night about ten of the clock, and the other half in the morning warm;
It wrought very well, and did him much good: the decoction was thus prepared.

Recipe polypodii quercini contusi ii. prunorum Damascenorum vi. folioru^ senae
i. ss. Glycyrrhizae rasae and contusae i. ss. passularum enucleatarum i ss.
seminis foeniculi contusi ii. Herbarum, Endiviae, Cichoreae, violarum, ana M i.
aquae fontanae lb. iii. ss. vel lb iv. Fiat decoctio secundum artem. I
commanded him to refrain from wine, strong beer, and salt things; So often as he
was thirsty, he drank of this Julep.

Recipe aquae fumariae lb i. syrupi e succo fumariae iii. Misce. By this he
felt much refreshment; I caused him to boil in his broth Endive, Cichorie,
Lettice, Bugloss and Borage, and every night to eat a roasted Pippin. ^^om the
Cephalic vein was let out six ounces of blood, which was very adust: and then
next I prescribed him this potion.

Recipe Rhabarbari electi i. senae ii. foeniculi dulc. ii. fiat omnium infusio*
in sero lactis v. factaque forti expressione, add syrupi epithymi, fumariae,
ana i. misce. It gave four stools: I also caused the temples of his head to be
bathed, and the inside of his nostrils to be touched every night with a little
of this Unguent.

Recipe Unguenti populeonis cum opio, i. olei nucis moschatae gut. iii. misce.
This procured sleep, by which his brain was humected. And lastly, I directed
him to the use of Cassia new drawn with syrup of Roses, one ounce to be taken
at a time in posset ale, wherein sweet Fennel seeds have been boiled. With
these Remedies at length (through Gods blessing) he was freed from his
distemper, and is at this present in very good health.

Domina Sugget, aetatis 37 annorum, intemperie cerebri, ab humore pituitoso
praecipue, correptae est. She was very much indisposed to stir, having a
heaviness in her head, with a propensity to sleep; she also complained of a
pain about the hinder part of her head, which afflicted her commonly from the
third hour of the night until the ninth; her face was sometimes red, and as it
were painted, but for the most part extraordinary pale; I being sent for,
prescribed this Clyster.

Glycyrrhizae contusae i. passularu^ i. ss. cardui benedicti, staechadis,
florum chamomillae, meliloti, betonicae, rorismarini, ana, m ss. Bulliant in
sufficienti quantitate aquae, ad lb i. collaturae add hierae picrae ii. mellis
i. salis communis i. Fiat enema. It was often repeated, with good success.

Centaurii, Cardui benedicti, ana, m ss. sarsaparillae incisae and contusae
iii. these were boiled in posset ale, and a draught thereof given her hot, at
her entrance into bed; it procured sweat very plentifully by the space of one
hour: The next day she sat up with less heaviness; after the second sweating
she told me she was well, being able to walk, and to endure the light;
nevertheless, to strengthen the animal faculty, I gave her this Electuary
following.

Conservae rorismarini, betonicae, ana i. ss. Lapidis Bezoardici orientalis,
gr. iii. Specierum dianthos,. ss. Syrupi de stoechade, q. s. Fiat Electuarium:
Of this she took the quantity of a small bean evening and morning and so she
was perfectly cured.

Domina Collard, 70. annorum, mihi vicina, post diuturni i^teritiae laboris
curam, intemperie cerebri a vapore per consensum correpta est; and sic curata
fuit.

syrupi rosarum sol ss. Decocti communis ix. spiritus cinnamomi, gut. ii.
misce. she took half last at night, which gave three stools next morning; after
which, (the weakness and lightness in her head being removed) she was able to
sit up; and soon after the taking of the rest she went abroad, and the
distemper returned no more. I remember, she had also this mixture, which did
her much good.

Rob de ribes ss. confectionis Alkermes, Syrupi infusionis florum
caryophillorum, ana, ii. aquae cinnamomi, aquae menthae, ana, gut. v. folium
auri, misce; she took a little often off a knifes point, and that with very
much delight.

Juvenis quidam melancholico temperamento affectus, Intemperie cerebri a seroso
humore, a nimia vini potatione causata, procedente, laborabat; For the removing
of which I prescribed the following Pills. pilularum Cochiarum, Extracti Radii,
ana i. Resinae jalapae gr. vii. misce. and f. pil. numero 7. he took three over
night, about ten of the clock, and the rest in the morning about 7. they
wrought so effectually, that being again repeated, he became perfectly well.

CAP. II. De Meatuum Cerebri angustia.
MEatuum Cerebri angustia, the straightness of the passages of the brain then
happens, when the said passages are either obstructed through humors or
vapors; or else compressed by reason of some tumor or violence offered to the
skul.

Angustia a vapore proveniens levior est, and facilior curatu, quam ea quae ab
humore procedit. If it proceeds a sanguine e vasis effuso, an inflammation
follows from its putrefaction and rottenness: Si vero sanguis adhuc in vasis
suis haereat, facile curatur. If phlegm obstruct the passages of the brain, it
must be timely and speedily evacuated, lest it unavoidably causes the Palsy.
Angustia a tumore vel defectu suturarum incurabilis est.

Robert Lemon of Armingale, being about four and forty years old, is taken
twice in a year with a dolorous heaviness in his head, and his sight is so weak
that he is not able to endure the light, but is brought to me by his wife who
leads him all the way with a double cloth before his eyes; yet immediately after
bleeding all the symptoms vanish, so that he plucks away his muffler, walks
home without any help, and continues very well and sound until the next spring.
I have been forced to let him blood at least twelve or thirteen times, and
every time I draw away about 14 or 15 ounces; yet so great is the plethory,
that he misseth it not: surely in his extremity the passages of the brain are
very much compressed, by reason the vessels thereof are so much distended with
blood.

We read in Paraeus of two men that were cured of a most dangerous Angustia
caused by the malign fume and venomous vapor of charcoal, First, aqua vitae
mingled with Triacle was often injected into their mouths. Secondly, Vomitories
of Oxymel in a great quantity was given them. Thirdly, sternutation was
excited, by blowing into the nostrils the powder of Euphorbium, thereby to stir
up the expulsive faculty of the brain, to the expulsion of that which oppressed
it. Fourthly, the chemical oil of Mints was rubbed on their palates and cheeks.
Fifthly, sharp Clysters were administered, and frictions of their arms, legs,
and back-bones were not omitted. Thus at length (through Gods blessing) they
came to themselves again; after which Cordials were administered unto them; not
only to generate new spirits, but also to attenuate and purify those that were
cloudy and gross in their bodies.

CAP. III. De commotione Cerebri.
COmmotio cerebri, The commotion of the Brain, is a removal of the same from
its natural place, by reason of some external and violent causes.

Every commotion of the brain is very dangerous; because for the most part
(beside an Apoplexy and Palsy, which does sometimes happen) there follows a
Fever arising from the matter that becomes putrid and rotten, also a delirium,
a sphacelus of the brain, and consequently death. Si materia, in cerebri
commotione, e capite ejiciatur, and ad nervos detrudatur, caecitas ab
obstructione nervorum opticorum and convulsiones, sequuntur.

A little lad, ten years of age, in St. Saviors Parish, receiving a blow on
his head, fell into a sudden consternation, insomuch that he became, as it
were, altogether dumb, speechless, and likewise altogether deprived of motion,
only he opened his eyes; Mr. Crop, an experienced Surgeon (now deceased) and
I, being sent for about two of the clock in the afternoon, we find him
moreover infested and afflicted with vomiting, by consent of the stomach, and
in an acute fever; all which considered, we concluded he would die in a very
short time, and so accordingly it fell out; for about the third day following
he departed this life.

Etiam memini Dominum Hamond, Scarnicensem, violentissima commotione cerebri
mortuum fuisse. For falling from an high place, the passages of his brain were
so smitten, and the Vessels so broken, that there happened not only an Aphony
or loss of Speech, with deprivation of motion, but also a pouring forth of
blood by his mouth, ears and nostrils, and that in great abundance. I being
sent for some few hours before he died, could feel no motion of any Pulse, save
only about the heart, I felt a small pulsation. Half an hour before he died he
was taken with Singultus.

Plura de Cerebri commotione vide in Paraeo, lib. 10. cap. 9. where many
Histories are inserted touching this most perilous disease, of which very few
escape or recover.

CAP. IV. De inflammatione cerebri.
INflammatio cerebri, The inflammation of the brain is a swelling thereof,
proceeding from blood poured forth out of the vessels into the void spaces of
that part, and there putrefying.

As for the Prognosis, or foreknowledge of things, in this disease, if the
Urine be white and extraordinary clear, it signifies death, quia bilis ad caput
rapitur: If there be a trembling of the tongue, or if they scrape together
straws, there is but small hope of cure. If there appear to fall from the
nostrils a black drop, sincere or bright, it is desperate, in regard it
proceeds from a very vehement adustion. If a convulsion follow upon an
inflammation of the brain, death is to be expected. There is very little or no
hope of cure, if a delirium being at the first present, there follow thereupon
gnashing and grating together of the teeth: Nam convulsio musculorum in
temporibus and maxillis significatur. Eaque etiam ad suppurationem tendens
lethalis est: quia pus intra cranium and membranam evacuari non potest. Si
sudor multus calidus a capite, vel die critico copiosus sanguis naribus
effluit, aliqua spes curationis est.

My brothers servant, twenty two years old, I remember, was taken with an
inflammation of the brain; he had a perpetual Delirium which began sensibly or
gradually, by little and little, a red kind of color and deformity of his face
and eyes, caused through the heat which dried up the membranes; he had a swift
and quick pulse, an acute and continual fever, which from third day to third
day was exasperated; also salt and sharp tears did sometimes distill from his
eyes. I gave notice to his friends of the danger he was in, and the
impossibility of his recovery, for so great an inflammation in so moist and
tender a part as the brain, does quickly produce a sphacelus or mortification;
yet his master being very importunate with me to do something for him, I opened
a vein, prescribed cooling clysters, gave him gentle Apozems, etc. but all in
vain, for on the seventh day he died.

CAP. V. De cerebri Sphacelo.
SPhacelus cerebri. The mortification of the brain is a suppuration or
corruption of the very substance thereof, quae gangraena, vel syderatio etiam
nominatur.

This disease is most dangerous, and commonly deadly, even in three days space,
as Hippocrates shows in his 51. Aphorism, Sect. 7. saying, They die within
three days whose brain begins to corrupt; but if they live longer, they recover
their health. Galen teaches that we are not here to understand, by a sphacel,
a complete corruption of the brain, because that is uncurable; but such as is
at hand by reason of the great inflammation. In those which recover ( quod
rarissime contingit) nulla est praeteritorum memoria: they can neither remember
their disease, nor any thing concerning it.

Dominus Henricus House, e Parochia Sanctae Margaritae, Sphacelo cerebri
correptus est. He tossed to and fro, and could not remain in the same place;
yet if any man asked him how he did, he would answer, he was well; he never
took any meat or drink, but utterly refused all that his keeper endeavored to
give him; he would often bring his hand to his head, on which he would
sometimes lay hold, being desirous to tear and pluck his hair; but as the
disease increased, his body grew faint, which abated his violence: Sometimes he
would suddenly rise up and roar out, and then presently lie down; on the third
day he died, but a little before, I remember there came forth a filthy green
matter out of his nostrils.

CAP. VI. De Hydrocephalo.
(...), seu Hydrops capitis, is a swelling of the head, arising from the
collection of some serous or wheyish humor in some one part or other of the
members that constitute the head.

Affectus curationem recipit, si aqua extra cranium contineatur. Si vero intra
(inter cranium, piam and duram matrem) collecta sit, plerumque incurabilis est
Hydrocephalus. If an Apoplexy or a Lethargy seize upon the party, death
suddenly follows.

Petrus Forestus, in one of his Observations, tells us, how he cured a little
Infant newly born with a mighty swelling in his head, by an Ointment which
consisted ex pulvere origani, chamomillae, absinthii, ana iii. pulv. myrtil.
ros. rub. meliloti, ana, ii. olei chamomil. q. s. ad incorporationem, cum pauco
butyro, and cera adjecta fiebat unguentum. After unction there was cast on a
powder framed ex myrtillis, ros. cinnamomo, caryophillis, and chamomilla;
quibus infans curatus est.

Many children have been cured by the use of that Liniment set down in meo
Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. page 276. Yea Amatus Lusitanus writes, that an
Infant taken with the Hydrocephalus was cured therewith in three days.

Moreover, in the forementioned page of my Enchiridion, there is another
excellent Liniment, consisting of oil of Chamomil and Brimstone in powder;
which Placentinus did use with most happy success. Also Forestus declares, how
a little infant was cured therewith: The childs head was besmeared twice in a
day with the Liniment warm, by the space of a month; which being done, warm
and dry wool was applied to his head until he had recovered his health.

Fabricius says, that in the greatest swelling of the head, the water of quick
lime ( abjecta calce) is a most effectual remedy, if a sponge be dipped
therein, and applied warm; ac hoc solo remedio se hydrocephalum curasse scribit.

CAP. VII. De Capitis Contusione.
COntusio capitis, The contusion of the head, is a smiting or knocking together
of the same (the external part thereof mean while, for the most part, appearing
sound and entire) by something that is weighty, hard, obtuse and blunt.

Si musculi temporales contundantur, delirium, paralysis, convulsio, and mors
inde sequitur.

Petrus Pachequus, a famous Physician, declares that a nephew of his, receiving
a bruise on his head, became sad, and complained a little of headache. A month
after he fell into a Fever, cum somnolentia and capitis dolor: Ever and anon
he rose up and cried out; on the seventh day of his fever, he voided corrupt
matter from his nose, and presently died.

A maid, twenty years of age, received a blow with a stone a little above her
forehead, and went for all that about her usual business. Howbeit three days
after she complained of a dull pain in her head, she became sleepy, and was a
little feverish. Upon the seventeenth day certain convulsive motions appear;
upon the twenty an Imposthume breaking, and greenish quittour coming out of her
nostrils, she died.

A certain Gentleman fell backwards; he remained some days intent upon his
business, afterward he began to rave, to desire fire, saying that he was cold;
to be sleepy. He had a bad night, ever and anon putting his hand unto his head.
Upon the eleventh day the imposthume broke, and voiding purulent quittour out
of his mouth, he suddenly died.

A certain young man, twenty eight years old, fell down headlong upon the left
Bregma, upon a marble pavement, whence he received a contused wound, without
any fracture of the skull, and being he was of a sanguine temperature; by
occasion of this wound a Fever took him on the seventh day, with a continual
delirium, and a Phlegmonous tumor, which possessed his whole head and neck; yet
was he cured by losing twenty seven saucers of blood, drawn away at five times,
within the space of four days.

CAP. VIII. De Vulnere cutis, and pericranii.
VUlnus cutis, The wound of the skin (the Cranium mean while remaining unhurt)
is, to wit, when the skin alone, the fleshy panicle, the muscles, or even also
the Pericranium is wounded.

A simple wound of the head by it self is not perilous, neither do any die
thereof, if rightly handled: Yet it is well said of Hippocrates, that no wound
of the head is to be neglected, because oftentimes it brings danger, yea
sometimes a fever. A notable example we have in Schenkius, lib. 1. observe. 35.
Concerning Charles the King of Spains son, who by reason of the neglecting of a
wound in his head, at first not perilous, was afterward brought into danger of
his life. We have also another example of one who by reason of a wound in his
head not well cured, had the bone of his skull corrupted and vitiated; from
whence there arose diuturnus and longus capitis dolor.

If the wound shall be simple and supersiciary, it may then be cured alter this
manner: First, the hair must be shaven away, and a plaster applied made of the
white of an Egg, Bole-armoniack and Aloes. Then, the day following, you must
apply Emplastrum de janua, or else de Gratia Dei, until the wound be perfectly
healed.

But if it be deeper, and penetrate even to the Pericranium, then it will be
good to apply, at the second dressing, a digestive made of Venice Turpentine,
the yelks of Eggs, oil of Roses, and a little Saffron; and that must be used so
long, until the wound come to maturation; for then you must add Honey of Roses,
and Barley flour, to the digestive. The rest of the cure is easily performed,
Linimentum Arcei is indeed as a sufficient Balm for new wounds, especially in
the head, so that a better can scarce be found out by art It does all the
intentions of healing a wound in the head merely of it self, the Flux being
stayed; for it digesteth, mundifieth, incarneth, and cicatrizeth.

CAP. IX. De Cranii vulnere seu fractura.
VUlnus seu fractura cranii, The wound or fracture of the skull, is a continual
solution, caused by some external violence and force; and yet such as reaches
not, neither attaineth unto, the membranes of the brain.

If the wound be in the Sutures, or very nigh unto the brain, or happen with a
Contusion, or at the full of the moon, it is hard to cure. Si etiam in
temporibus accidit; curatu est difficile* quia musculi temporales arteriis,
venis and nervis abundant. The cure is doubtful, if presently upon the blow,
the Patients strength and spirits fail him. But if the wound become withered,
dry, purulent and black, there is little or no hope of cure. In vulneribus enim
magnis, si tumores non superveniant, malum; authore Hippocrate. It is no less
dangerous, if after the seventh day a Fever come to appear: Quia putredinis in
cerebro est indicium. Periculosum etiam est, si quis in capite post veneris
usum vulneretur. It is not without danger, if the head be prone and subject to
distillations, and the tumors called Erysipelas's, aut lue venerea infectum,
aut omnino cacochymicum sit, aut hectica febre, vel tabe, vel alio morbo
consumptum.

You must note, that nothing is so hurtful in fractures and wounds of the head,
as venery; not only at that time the disease is present, but also long after
the cure thereof: For great plenty of Spirits are contained in a small quantity
of seed, and the greatest part thereof flows from the brain; hence therefore
all the faculties, but chiefly the animal, are resolved; whence we have diverse
times observed death to ensue in small wounds of the Head, yea, when they have
been agglutinated and united.

Quo ad vulneris, seu fracturae Cranii, curationem, vide Paraeum, lib. 10. c.
15, and 16.

Hitherto has been spoken of the Diseases of the Brain; in the next, we shall
treat of the Symptoms thereof, and first of those of the external Senses.

CAP. X. De Cephalalgia, seu Dolor Capitis.
(...), The Cephalalgy, is a new, and painful grief, of the whole head, arising
either from a thick and cold matter, compressing the sensible parts; or else
from a thin and hot humor or vapor, which touches the Membranes.

An external headache is always less dangerous, and easier cured then an
internal: Dolor capitis in febre acuta cum urina tenui and alba, periculosus.
In a great headache it is evil, to have the extreme parts cold; for by the
vehemence of the pain there is a strong attraction of heat to the part
affected, which will cause Inflammation: Dolor capitis post febres acutas
perseverans, ostendit naturae imbecillitatem in expellendo materiam morbosam:
hinc itaque alia insequitur aegritudo, sicuti phrenesis, vel lethargus, vel
apoplexia, vel paralysis, vel mania, vel surditas, vel caecitas, secundum quod
materia vel calida, vel frigida, vel simplex, vel composita fuerit: and
secundum quod ad hanc, vel illam partem, inclinabit. A strong pain of the head
suddenly seizing, without evacuation following, or mitigation of the disease,
is deadly; destructionem enim facultatis animalis significat, which no more
feels that object which caused the grief. Dolor capitis, qui a principio non
fuit, certum est indicium futurae erisis per vomitum, aut sanguinis e naribus
fluxum. To women with child, sleepie, and heavy headaches are evil: But if
pus, water, or blood flow forth by the mouth, ears, or nostrils, the danger is
then past. They that recover of a disease in the inferior parts, and have
after a vehement headache, (if a manifest evacuation went not before) will have
an Impostume in their brain; materiae enim morbisicae translationem ad cerebrum
significat.

A certain Gentleman tarrying too long in the Sun, was taken with extreme
headache; for the removal of which, there was taken seven ounces of blood from
his forehead vein, whereby his headache was presently abated, and soon after
went quite away.

I read of a Spanish Prince, who being grievously tormented with headache, was
four times let blood in the arm; but the pain still continuing as strong as
before, it was taken away within the space of an hour, by opening the Saphena
in his right ancle.

A certain Baronet, aged about 44. was altogether freed of a most cruel pain in
his head, chiefly, by the applying of Leeches to the Hemorrhoid Veins.

Vide mean Scholam Physicam, Rec. 40.

CAP. XI. De Cephalaea.
(...), is a long, continued, contumacious pain, infesting and annoying with
most grievous Paroxysms the whole Brain and Head, or at least the greatest
part, but especially the Membranes.

Cephalea antiqua* omnium capitis dolorum est pessima, nam (ut scribit
Gordonius) epilepsiam futuram denotat. Also a headache continually vexing, and
depriving the Patient of rest, is not without danger; for it is the forerunner
of madness, and maxim, si vomitus accedat aeruginosus.

A certain Gentlewoman, of a melancholy constitution, being troubled many years
together with a most grievous headache, which held her in a manner perpetually;
after a multitude of Medicaments used in vain, was thus helped.

Conservae fol. absynthii, capill. ven. and rad. enulae camp. ana i. salis
absynth. and tamarisci, ana i. cum syrupo capill. ven. fiat opiata. Of which
she took two drachms every day, two hours before meat. Every fifth day she took
two scruples of Pillulae Catholicae, with which remedies continued ten days
together her grievous and long-lasting pain was cured.

A certain Virgin, being tormented with a grievous headache, for many months
together, and having tried many remedies in vain; a certain Surgeon shaved
all the hair from her head, and covered the same with a Vesicatory, whereupon
bladders being raised, a great quantity of wheyish blood flowed out, and so she
was cured.

A certain woman, fifty years old, was troubled with a most cruel and stubborn
pain in her head, caused by the malignant quality of Quicksilver (after the use
of Mercurial Unguents and Pills) assailing and molesting the brain: for the
removing of which, a piece of gold was wrapped up, and thrust into each
nostril, and kept there some hours; also another piece of gold was held five
hours in her mouth, they were taken out white, and being put on hot coals, the
quicksilver vapoured away; this remedy being often repeated, that most cruel
pain of her head was wholly taken away.

Another woman, wanting her courses, was afflicted for four months together
with a most grievous headache; at last, her temporal artery being opened, and
five ounces of blood drawn away, she was quite freed from her pain.

CAP. XII. De Hemicrania.
(...), Is a painful distemper of one half part of the head only, which
arises from those parts that are situated beneath it.

He micrania multo durans tempore, and quae incurabilis facta est, ad malas
oculorum aegritudines, visus scilicet debilitatem, and caecitatem, perducere
solet.

A certain Gentleman was troubled with a pain possessing the one half of his
head, for many years together; and after many Medicines tried in vain, he was
cured by the smoke of Amber, which he received in at his mouth and nostrils,
for half an hour together, when the pain was upon him.

Paraeus and Formius highly commend the opening of an artery in the temples,
for the curing of Hemicrania; especially if the cause proceed from hot, thin,
and vaporous blood, which will yield to no Medicines.

Zacutus Lusitanus propounds four Remedies, confirmed by experience: Namely, An
Issue in the back of the hand, between the thumb and fore finger; opening of
the vein in the forehead, and the corner of the eye, and Horse-leeches to the
temples. He is not content to apply two or three, as ordinarily is done, but
ten or twelve, round about the temples; whence comes a great attraction of
blood, which may draw forth the whole matter of the disease.

Among the proper Medicines for the Headache, from what cause soever it arises,
Vervain is the chief; whose water distilled, you may both apply externally, and
give of it internally, to the quantity of four ounces, with three drops of the
Spirit of Salt.

Green Vervain only hung about the neck has cured two Patients, when many
other Medicines failed, as Forestus reports.

Sweating decoctions are very good in Hemicrania; and famous Authors declare
that many have been cured thereby.

Plura de Hemicrania, and Cephaloea, Vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. c.
16.

CAP. XIII. De Monoplegia, seu Clavo.
(...), seu Clavus, is a sharp pain possessing a small part of the head, most
commonly the right or left eye-brow, as if a nail were driven in there, caused
by a fierce and subtle matter shut up with some wind.

Forestus, in one of his Observations, declares, how his wife Eva Teylingia,
being taken, in the year 1572. in the month of January, with the pain of the
head called Clavus, and much afflicted with the Cough; after she had used a
decoction of Hysop, Betony, Maidenhair, Raisins, and such like; was helped with
the following Pills, which she took after midnight.

Pilul. mastichinarum. i. ss. pilul. cochiar. aurear. de agarico, ana, ss. cum
sir. e stoechade: Fiant pilulae quinque. They gave six stools, and so she was
delivered from her pain.

Formius, in his 31 Observation, says, That the opening of the temporal artery
does wonderfully help in Monoplegia, or Clavus, and that he has safely
performed it in many. Concerning the manner of doing of it, vide Riverii
observationes, cent. 2. observe. 56. and 89. and Simeonis Jacoz observe. 12.
sicut and Paraei, lib. 17. cap. 6.

Anno Domini 1642. Memini unum ex cognatis meis circiter annos quinquagenos
natum correptum fuisse vehementissimo dolor paulo supra dextrum supercilium,
quitandem in phrenitidem ipsum ingessit; but escaping that danger, fifteen
years after he was taken with the like pain, and fearing the like event, I
first prescribed a dose of Cephalic Pills, which wrought very well; and then
caused him to chase and bathe the part affected with that incomparable Unguent
set down in my Tractate, De tumoribus praeter naturam, sect. 1. cap. 5. p. 21.
After twice or thrice using it, the pain was quite taken away, and returned no
more. And so much touching the Symptoms of the External senses: Next follow
those of the Common sense.

CAP. XIV. De Vigiliis nimiis.
VIgiliae praeter naturam, Watchings preternatural, are; The exercise and
wearying of the common sense, and the external (likewise) beyond a due and fit
measure; arising from the continual uninterrupted influx of the Spirits into
the Organs.

Vigiliae si longo tempore durant, aegrum in pessimas aegritudines deducunt, in
maniam, melancholiam, phrenitidem, febrem acutam, hecticam, and interdum ad
cachexiam: Et si perseveraverint, aeger tandem moritur. We find by experience
that much watching hurts the temperature of the brain, weakens the senses,
wastes the spirits, breeds crudities, heaviness of the head, falling away of
the flesh, and leanness over all the body. In senio, test Avicenna, and ex
pituita salsa, nitrosa, vix curationem recipit. If watchings have their
original from internal causes, the cure is difficult. Si a vigiliis nimiis
tussis proveniat, malum. Siccitatem enim organis respirationis communicari
significat. If watchings bring a convulsion, or delirium, on the Patient, it is
evil. Nam vehementem exiccationem, and facultatis animalis debilitatem
significant. Corpora vigiliis assueta minus laeduntur.

The cure consists, First, in removing of the causes that occasion and produce
those watchings. Secondly, In procuring sleep, either by cooling Cephalicks
outwardly applied, or inwardly given, or else by Narcoticks.

I knew a Gentlewoman, that could seldom or never rest well, unless she took
overnight, about bedtime, the quantity of one dram and half, or two drachms
of Diascordium: Sometimes she would take a spoonful of the syrup of Poppies;
and if she rested not in an hour or two, she would then take another, and so a
third, if need did require.

Many I have cured of this affect, only with that Apozem and Unguent described
in the First Chapter, De intemperie cerebri, in Domini Sindal curatione.

CAP. XV. De Comate somnolento, seu Cataphora.
COma somnolentum, The somnolent or sleepy Coma, is a deep and profound kind
of drowsiness, arising from hence, to wit, that the sensus communis, or common
sense, is become so dull, sluggish, and stupid, that it permits not the Animal
spirits to be diffused unto the external senses, neither does it know, or is
able to judge of those Objects that it receives from them.

Periculosius coma est quod in continuis febribus accidit. It is desperate, si
a morbis calidis and siccis oriatur; for then, by this means, of necessity
there must needs be an extraordinary cooling in the brain; if the malady grow
to be so sad and grievous, ut sensus motus, and respiratio ipsa tollatur,
lethale est. The cure is doubtful if it arise from some malignant cause, or
follow upon the extreme imbecility of the Patients strength; Minus periculosum
est, quod ob consensum sit, sive ventriculi, sive intestinorum, sive uteri;
modo caussa tolli possit.

Dominus Moss, Paswicensis, 67. annos natus, comate somnolento laborabat. He
slept with his lower jaw bone somewhat hanging down; and when I spoke aloud to
him, he would open his eyes, and answer to a question, but immediately fall
asleep again. I foretold the danger he was in, because it followed upon a
malignant and quotidian Fever; yet his friends being very desirous I should do
something for him, I first prescribed this Clyster.

Glycyrrhizae rasae and contusae, i. passularum enucleatarum, i. ss. Rutae,
salviae, ana P. ss. centaurei minor. cardui benedicti, ana M. ss. Flor.
betonicae, rorismarini, chamomillae, ana p. i. Seminis foeniculi contusi, iii.
ex quibus fiat decoctum, de quo sumatur, lb i. cui addatur butyri quantit. ovi,
mellis, i. ss. salis com. ii. F. enema. Next, I sent him these Pills; pilularum
cochiarum, ss. Extracti Rudii, ss. Misce, and fiant pil. numero quinque. They
were dissolved in Posset-Ale, wherein Rosemary and Betony had been boiled; yet
he scarce tasted their bitterness, so great was the stupidity of the sensus
communis; he had four or five stools, after which he came to himself, and
within a few days (the former Clyster being often repeated) he grew perfectly
well, and came to my house. And so much of the Symptoms of the Common sense,
next follow those of the Imagination.

CAP. XVI. De Vertigine.
VErtigo, is a false imagination, in which all objects, and the head it self,
seem to turn round, ab inordinato and circulari motu spiritus animalis in part
anteriore cerebri exorta. Or, it is a sudden darkning of the eyes and sight, by
a vaporous and hot spirit, which ascends to the head by the sleepy arteries,
and fills the brain, disturbing the humors and spirits which are there
contained, and tossing them unequally, as if one ran round, or had drunk too
much wine.

A new Vertigo, that comes but seldom, and proceeds only a causis externis,
levior est, ac curatu facilior. If in it the head and whole body seem to wheel
and to turn round, the cure is very doubtful; and if the sick man falls to the
ground, it foretells an Epilepsie, or Apoplexy; especially if the Vertigo has
continued long, and comes very often. In an old man its most dangerous, because
his brain is colder and weaker, and phlegm does more abound: A vertigo
proceeding from hot humors is sooner dissolved, than that which comes of cold,
quia humores calidi facilius discutiuntur.

A certain maid, 24 years of age, troubled with the Vertigo or giddiness, I
thus helped; Calomelanos, gr. xv Scammonii praeparati, gr. viii. Conservae
rosarum rubrarum, i. Misce. Toward night it gave her ten or twelve stools;
after which she became perfectly well.

Another I helped with this, Mercurii dulcis, gr. xvi. resinae jalapae, gr.
viii. cons^rosarum rubr. i. misce. It gave nine stools, and so she was cured.

A certain young man was a long time troubled with the dark Vertigo, called in
Greek (...), or (...), in which the eyes are both darkened, as it were, with
smoke, or a cloud, and desiring my advice, I thus set upon the cure: Extracti
Rudii, ss. Calomelanos, gr. vii. Resinae benedictae, gr. iii. misce. and f.
pil. numero quinque they wrought very well, and did him much good.

Next, I commanded him to sneez every third morning, with a little of this
powder: pulveris sternutatorii ( descripti in meo Enchiridio medico, p. 6.) ss.
pulveris castorei, gr. iii. Misce. Every night, for 7 nights together, he drank
a draught of Posset-Ale, wherein Holy Thistle, and sweet Fennel seeds were
boiled; after which, the Vertigo was quite taken away, and returned no more.

Memini me eisdem remediis Dominum Sugget ex periculosa vertigine curasse; only
he was twice purged with Pills.

Ancilla Dominae Laurence vertigine and tumore supra faciem laborabat; for the
removing of which I prescribed this following Apophlegmatism. Take a quantity
of white Wine Vinegar, a quantity of Mustard Seed, and as much Pellitory of
Spain; bruise them, and tie them up into little Bags about the bigness of a
Walnut, then put them into the Wine Vinegar, and let them boil a little; then
take out one of the Bags, and hold it between your teeth; when that is cold,
take another, so continue half an hour: Thus do every day for four or five days
together: This drew an incredible quantity of Rheum, and filth from her head;
after which, I gave her a dose of Cephalic Pills, which wrought very well; and
so she was perfectly cured.

Dominus Robertus Hamond gravissimae vertigini obnoxious erat; from which he
could never be free, until he used this following Electuary.

Absynthii i. artemisiae, vi. sacchari albi, iv. ss. Fiat conserva, deinde add
pulveris stoechados, ii. conservae florum rorismarini, ss. cum syrupo de
stoechade, fiat Electuarium, Dosis, ii. singulis noctibus.

Vertiginem per consensum ventriculi per vomitum ordinary sublevo, and eam
quae calida intemperie accidit, cum infusione senae and foeniculi dulcis, in
decoctione communi, removeo.

Domina Brogdel, annos circiter 40. nata vertigine simplice correpta est, quae
a Graecis (...) nominatur, in which the sight remains unhurt: At last, desiring
my help, I prescribed these following Pills: Extracti Rudii, i. pillularum
cochiarum ss. misce and f. pil. number. vi. they gave seven stools, and so she was
perfectly cured.

Some have been helped with the dung of a Peacock (one dram thereof by
weight) macerated in wine, strained, and so given: Many I have cured of a dark
vertigo, only by opening a vein, especially the Cephalic; which usually
appears very full, when the cause arises from blood.

Quidam Nobilis periculosa vertigine laborans hoc Clystere (in mea Schola
Physica, Rec. 209. descripto) curatus est. Next follows the Symptoms of the
Imagination, and the Ratiocination or rational faculty.

CAP. XVII. De Memoriae Laesione.
MEmoriae laesio, The hurting of the memory, is a diminution, or utter
abolition of the same, arising from causes that hurt the dryness of the brain,
conjoined with a moderate heat, (very necessary as to the memory) and so by
means rendering the Animal spirits either torpid, that is, over-dull and
sluggish; or else (which is as bad) inordinately moveable.

oblivio quae aetatis ratione accidit, incarabilis est. If the hurting of the
memory come on a sudden, and proceed from coldness and moisture, it is an
imminent sign either of the Apoplexy, Lethargy, Epilepsie, or Palsy; for it
denotes much plenty of phlegm contained in the head. Oblivio a caliditate and
siccitate contracta difficilior curatu est, quam ea quae a frigidite and
humiditate contrahitur.

The Anacardine confection is exceedingly commended by all for the
strengthening of the memory, weakened by coldness and moisture, the dose is, ss
vel.. ii. in conserva de staechade: For the same purpose, this mixture
following has been often used with most happy success.

Conservae betonicae, rorismarini, ana i. cons. rosarum rubr. i. ss. Nucis
muschatae, dianthos, Macis, ana i. Cinnamomi, i. syrupi betonicae i. Mix them,
and take the quantity of a small Walnut at a time.

Plura de hoc affectu vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 9. and etiam
in mea Schola Physica, Rec. 87.

CAP. XVIII. De Delirio.
DElirium, A Deliry or dotage, is a deprivation of the Fantasy, and the
ratiocination, or rational faculty, arising from the bringing and presenting of
an absurd and inconvenient Phantasm: Or more briefly, according to Paraeus, it
is a perturbation of the fantasy, and function of the mind, not long
enduring.

An intermitting delirium has nothing of danger, if it be light and gentle, if
the Fever which causes it decrease, and there follow an evacuation of blood by
the nostrils, vel menstruae purgationes vel haemorrhoides prorumpant. Deliries
foreshew certain destruction, if they appear in the beginning of a Fever, or
happen without signs of concoction; si delirans non videat, si oculi lucem
subterfugiant si aeger obmutescat, and vox fiat clangosa.

A certain Gentlewoman, aged about twenty four, being not well purged after
birth, fell suddenly into a most dangerous Delirium, no other disease
preceding: By intervals she was afflicted with an acute Fever, so that a
Frenzy was feared; yet through Gods blessing, a happy success was wrought by
the following prescriptions.

Herbarum malvae, violarum, betarum, lactucae, boraginis, ana, M. ii. Hordei
mundi, i. Sem cucurbitae, cucumeris, ana, ss. fiat decoctio in sufficienti
quantitate aquae; ad xi. colaturae, add olei violati, iii. cassiae noviter
extractae, diacatholiconis, ana, i. salis communis, i. Fiat Enema.

Diacatholiconis, electuariilenitiv. ana. iii. syrupi artemisiae i. rhabarbari,
castorei, ana, ss. aquae betonicae, iii. misce. She had five stools, it was
again repeated. The 22 of May there was taken away six ounces of blood very
black, and aqueous: For watching and restlesness, there was given this
following Syrup. Syrupi de papavere, i. ss. Syrupi violarum, ss. Aquae
scabiosae, iii. Aquae rosarum, ss. Olei vitrioli, gut. ii. Misce. To the head
was applied a Hen new cut through; and to the soles of her feet, Radishes beaten
with Salt, and besprinkled with rose Vinegar, which was renewed every third or
fourth hour, for revulsion: Also Cupping-glasses were applied to the shoulders:
On the 25. in the morning, she received this Potion; Cassiae noviter extractae,
cum aqua betonicae, i. Syrupi rosarum sol. ss. aquarum buglossae, boraginis,
violarum, ana, i. misce. Thus in seven days she was happily cured.

Domina Moss, Paswicensis, annos nata circiter 60. levi delirio correpta est,
etc. sic juvata fuit.

syrupi rosarum, i. Decoctionis communis, ix. Misce. She took half over night,
about ten of the clock, and the other half in the morning, warm; it wrought
very well, and did her much good: Next, I prescribed this following Cataplasm,
to be applied to the soles of her feet: Take Fetherfew, and Sention, of each a
like quantity, two pennyworth of Saffron, and six or seven cloves of Garlic;
stamp them together with a little gray salt, and apply them. Thus without any
other means, through Gods blessing, she was perfectly cured in a very short
time.

Memini me, aetatis anno duodecimo, levi quodam delirio affectum fuisse; for
the removing of which, there was applied to my feet a Pigeon cut open alive; It
drew down the vapors, and cured me.

Joannes Cussion, e Parochia Sanctae Mariae, periculoso delirio correptus est.
He having had two fits; to prevent the coming of the third, I opened a vein, on
the 27 day of April, which was his best day, (for he was vexed with a Tertian)
and drew away about 14 ounces of blood: Next, I prepared this potion:
Diacatholiconis, x. Syrupi rosarum sol. ss. decocti communis, q. s. fiat potio.
He took three spoonfulls that night about ten of the clock, and the rest next
morning, about six hours before the fit: It gave him twelve stools, and so
prevented the delirium, which returned no more.

In all bleedings which are made in time of a delirium, you must observe this,
that the Orifice be not very large, for then it will quickly heal, and you must
must bind it up carefully, lest the Patient being unruly, cause it to bleed
again; as also it is very good for the sudden cure of it, to lay a Plaster of
Aloes, white of an Egg, and the hair of a Hare.

If the feet of the Sick man be put into fair water, when it is a little
warmed, for three or four hours, it frees him from his delirium, and makes him
sleep.

CAP. XIX. De Phrenitide.
(...), A Frenzy, is a perpetual, and continual deliry, or dotage, arising
from the inflammation of the membranes, or films of the brain, and afflicting
the Patient with a continued Fever. Et dicitur (...), id est, a mente, nam
alienatio mentis est.

As to the Prognostic; A Frenzy is for the most part deadly: The greatest
hope of recovery is, when there is dotage with laughter, a decrease of
Symptoms, and continuance of strength; as also when after the height of the
Frenzy there happens some beneficial evacuation. If a drop of black blood
flow from the nostrils, death is to be expected. Phrenitis si vertatur in
Lethargum, aut Coma, malum est. A great chilness or cold in the beginning of
the Frenzy, foreshew the destruction of the sick: Also an Aphony, the Hicket,
trembling of the hand, white excrements, and similia, supra, capite de cerebri
inflammatione, enumerata, Phrenitidem lethalem significant. Haec enim omnia
bilis translationem a toto corpore in partem affectam denotant.

Mr. Denis Pomaret, a skilful Surgeon of Monpelier, declares, that a certain
Husbandman, by reason of a burning Fever, fell into a Frenzy, and continually
raving without sleep, he cried out that he was damned, and that he desired to
die: Now he cured him by this Police; he consented, and told him that he would
kill him, and diverse Horse-leeches being fastened upon his forehead, and blood
running down from the wounds which they had made; he showed him his Razor,
wherewith he told him that he would cut his throat; and ever and anon with the
haft of the said Razor he scraped his throat very hard; and in the mean while
the Razor is all bloodied with the blood that came from his forehead.
Whereupon, showing him the bloody Razor, he told him that he was killed, and
presently he covered his face with, linen clothes, and shut the windows, so
that no light could be seen in the Chamber. He supposing himself to be dead,
never stirs, and a while after is taken with a deep sleep, and so is freed from
his Frenzy.

The wise of John Norton, a Husbandman in Porland, by reason of a sharp Fever,
sell into a Frenzy; I being sent for, presently opened a vein, and drew away
11 or 12 ounces of blood* then I prescribed a cooling Glyster; after which I
sent her this Pill. Laudani opiat. gr. iii. ss. l^pidis Bezoardici orientalis,
gr. i. f. pil. It was given in one dram of the conserve of red Roses; how
they prevailed with her to take it, I know not; but having swallowed it, she
fell into a sound sleep, and so was quite freed from her Frenzy: But I
remember also, the Cataplasm described in the Chapter de Delirio, in curatione
Dominae Moss Paswicensis, was applied to the soles of her feet, which might
help very much.

Great Housleek bruised with woman's milk, and laid to the forehead, appeaseth a
Frenzy, and provokes sleep. But as soon as the Patient begins to sleep, you
must take it away, lest he fall into a Coma, or sleeping disease.

It is good to wash the feet with an actually hot decoction, made of cold
things; for it will soften those parts by its hot moisture, and make the humors
descend, and its potential coldness will be communicated to all the body, and
to the brain especially, by the Nerves, whereby sleep will be procured: It is
thus made; Take of Violets, Mallows, Willow-leaves, Vine-leaves, Water Lillies,
of each two handfuls: the flowers of Water Lillies, and Roses, of each one
handful: Poppie heads ten; make a decoction for the use aforesaid.

Zacutus Lusitanus tells us, that he cured a most desperate Frenzy, by
applying a Cupping glass to the forepart of the head with scarification; but
Mercatus advises, that this be not used in Phrenzies, that come from other
Fevers, but only in that which begins of it self.

I have sometimes given four or five grains of Laudanum, in a cooling Clyster,
with most happy success.

Vesicatories applied to the shoulders and arms, are very much commended.

Plura de Phrenitide vide, in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 4.

CAP. XX. De Melancholia.
(...), Melancholy, is a dotage arising from a Melancholy phantasm, with the
which whosoever is affected and detained thereunder, becomes wholly, and only,
addicted to thoughtfulness, being, as it were, altogether ingulphed therein,
without either fury or Fever, but yet with pensiveness, and fearfulness; Vel si
brevius definire velis; Melancholia est delirium sine febre, cum metu and
tristitia.

Melancholy, which does seize upon the essence of the brain, and continues
long, making the effect, as it were, natural, is altogether incurable: A
Melancholy humor which comes by adustion, and inclines to black choler,
contemns the force of Medicines, if weak, and opposes the strongest; whence a
Melancholy humor is said to be the scourge and disgrace of Physicians.
Melancholia quae fit vitio totius corporis, difficillime curatur. Si
haereditaria, nulla spes curationis est. A new sprung melancholy coming of
immediate causes, is easily cured; sometimes by diet alone, together with the
humectation of the whole body, and sometimes of the head in particular.
Haemorrhoides, aut varices, supervenientes Melancholicis, curationem interdum
afferunt, si humores ad illas parts inferiores critice a natura detrudantur.
If the distemper be with some kind of laughter, and corpus victu augmentum
sumat, facile curatur. Sometimes it is cured by scabs, itch, or other diseases
breaking forth of the skin.

A certain Gentlewoman, seventeen years of age, miserably afflicted with
Melancholy, was thus helped: After the opening of a vein in the lest arm, and
Leeches applied to the Hemorrhoids, she was purged with an Helleborated apple,
in quo pomo una dram corticum elleb^ri nigri tosta erat. Afterward the
Hellebor was cast away, and the apple given. Then were the principal parts
strengthened with the following Electuary.

Conservae rosarum vitriolat. boraginis, buglossae, ana, i. condit. corticum
citrinorum, conservae caryophillorum, ana, ss. Confectionis de hyacintho, ii.
specierum de gem. laetific. ana, ii. confectionis Alkerm. i. spec. diamarg.
frigidi, i. ss. cum syrupo pomorum fiat Electuarium: The dose was one dram
before meat. For her watching, there was given at bed time a spoonful of
Diacedium; This caused rest, and in it she sweat. In Chicken broth there was
Tartar often used, by reason of its great force in contemperating melancholy,
and atra bilis. And thus, by the blessing of God, she was delivered from her
distemper.

Great variety of doting arises from the various disposition of the
Melancholic humor: Hence it is, that some think themselves* to be Kings,
Princes, Prophets; Others that they are made of Glass, or Potters Clay; or that
they are Barley Corns, ready to be devoured by the Hens: Some think they are
melting Wax, and dare not approach the fire: Others, that they are Dogs, Cats,
Wolves, Cuckows, Nightingals, or Cocks, whose voices they imitate: Others fancy
themselves dead, and will neither eat nor drink: Others dare not piss, lest
they should drown the world by a second deluge Some think they have lost their
heads, or some other member; or that they carry the world upon their fingers
end; or that they have sparrows in their heads, or serpents, frogs, mice, and
other creatures in their bellies.

Galen reports, in his third Book, de lec. affect. cap. 7. That he has often
cured a melancholy in the beginning, with only Baths of sweet water.

This Clyster following I have sometimes used with good success.

Epithymi, Thymi, florum Staechados, violarum, foliorum Malvae, Mercurialis,
ana, m. i. Bulliant in sufficienti quantitate aquae, ad lib. 1. colaturae add
Cassiae noviter extractae, i. ss. Olei violati, iii. Sacchari rubri, i. ss.
Salis communis, i. vitellum unius ovi; misce, and fiat Clyster.

For all Diseases of Melancholy, those Remedies will suffice, which are
propounded in the cure of Hypochondriack Melancholy.

Plura de Melancholia vide, in meo Enchiridio medico, lib. 1. cap. 10.

CAP. XXI. De Mania, seu Insania.
(...), seu Insania, Madness, is a continual motion of the mind, with an
unwonted boldness, or fierceness (yet without a Fever) arising from a fiery
heat of the Spirits. Et dicitur vel a morbo Graeco (...), id est, vaticinor;
and sic maniaci, vaticinatores appellari possunt: vel a (...), id est, a luna;
unde lunatici nuncupantur.

Young men, and those of a middle age, are most subject unto madness:
Gravissimus est affectus, and non solum per menses, sed per annos aliquando,
and usque ad mortem perseverat, praesertim si haereditaria sit. The Bloody
Flux, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Tertian-ague, or Quartan, happening to a madman,
cures him. If the Courses and Hemorrhoids flow forth, it is a good sign; as
also if there be a plentiful flux of blood by the nostrils. Mania quae cum risu
est facilius curatur, quam quae cum studio ac furore: If the Symptoms be
gentle, and the distemper turn into a kind of silent desipience, there is good
hope of cure.

In the year 1649. Robert Harman, of Berestreet, was taken with madness; his
fits were so strong, that I was oftentimes forced to bind him in his bed,
which he shook with great violence: He was tall, black, and very fierce to
behold, especially in the Paroxysm: He often roared out, making such a hideous
noise, that the bystanders and neighbors were greatly afraid: One night,
whilst he lay bound in his fit, the candle (as I was informed by those that
were about him) burnt blew by the space of half an hour, and there was heard so
strange a deen that the keepers did tremble with fear, not being able to stir
from their places. All these things considered, I earnestly besought the Lord
that he would please to give the cure into my hands, and to bless such means as
I used for his recovery; and that if he were possessed with any unclean spirit,
he would lease to rebuke him, and cast him out: Being then but a fresh-water'd
soldier; First, I opened a vein, and drew away 14 ounces of blood; next, I
gave him this potion, which wrought very well. Diacatholiconis, i. Pulveris
sancti, ii. Syrupi ros. sol. ss. decocti communis, q. s. Misce and fiat potio.
Every night, and in every Paroxysm, he was fumed with this Powder, which did
not only procure rest, but it did also mitigate the force and violence of the
fit; even to admiration, Sulphuris, Bombardic. pulv. Hyperici, Artemisiae,
verbenae, radicis Poeoniae, ana, i. ss. Fiat pulvis, carbonibus injiciendus. I
also gave him this Vomit, which proved very successful. Infusionis stibii, xv.
Syrupi paupaverini, dram; i. misce. By this the symptoms were very much
abated, and therefore it was often repeated, a little before the fit. I
commanded those about him, that they should keep him from strong Beer, Wine,
hot Waters, and Flesh; and to boil in his Broth; Lactuca, Endivia, Cichorea,
Borrago, and Portulaca. His drink was very small, sometimes mixed with water;
and when he was very faint by reason of the Physics operation, I commanded
they should give him a little water-pap, or panada without any Spice, and
sometimes a roasted Apple, cum paucis guttis aquae cinnamomi. Every night I
caused the temples of his head to be bathed, and the inside of his nostrils to
be touched with a little of this Unguent. Unguenti populeonis cum opio, ii.
Olei nucis moschatae, gut. iiii. misce. Thus at last (after the taking away 64
ounces of blood, in the space of two months, or ten weeks) he was perfectly
cured.

There was a certain young man mad, and for his cure the most effectual
Remedies were put in practice, so far as to come to the use of Antinomy, the
Trepan, and the opening of the Arteries of his temples: And when all did no
good, Formius, an experienced Surgeon, advised that he should be gelded;
which being done, all symptoms were abated, and his fury quite ceased; yet so
as that he continued in a melancholy dotage, his madness being changed into
melancholy.

It is reported, that Melampus the son of Amythaon the Physician, cured the
daughter of Praetus King of Greece with Hellebor'd wine, when by madness they
supposed themselves to be Cowes.

Brassavola tells a story, how he cured one Melatasta, a mad man, that was
thought to be possessed, in the Duke of Ferrara's Court, with one purge of
black Hellebor; his excrements were like Ink; yet I would have none venture to
give it in substance.

Paracelsus is the greatest admirer of this plant, and especially in the
extract; he calls it Theriacam, terrestre Balsamum, another Treacle, a
terrestrial Balm, instar omnium, all in all, the sole and last remedy to cure
this Malady: The Dose is ss. with one ounce of the syrup of Violets.

Dominus Theophilus Barnard, Norvicensis, annos natus circiter 25. gravissima
mania a plethora procedente laborans, Phlebotomia, purgatione, emeticaque
infusione praecipue juvatus est, quam sic praeparo.

Antimonii contusi, iii. Cinnamomi electi, i. Vini albi odoriferi, lb i. Fiat
infusio: Dosis, quam ordinary cepit, erat ii.

This following fomentation is of wonderful virtue; Herbarum cephalicarum cum
floribus, q. s. decoquantur in aqua fontana. Deinde, baccarum lauri, and rad.
hellebori nigri very, ana, q. s. Beat them grossly, and sew them into a long
bag, and then let it boil in the forementioned decoction. Afterward, for nine
days together, Take two pints of the decoction, and foment the head being
shaved with double clothes, for the space of an hour; after apply the bag to
the Coronal Suture, binding it about with linen clothes; let the Patient lie
down and rest, if he can: Then will he purge by all the Emunctories of the
brain, and also somewhat by stool; so will the filth sticking to his skul, and
brain; be wonderfully dissolved, which few other Medicines can perform: This
following is held for a secret: Fol. Melissae, m. i. incidantur minutim, and
infundantur in spiritus vini iv. deinde add margarit. praep. ss. misc. dos.
est cochlear. ii.

CAP. XXII. De Rabie, seu Hydrophobia.
RAbies, seu Hydrophobia, Raging madness, is a deliry (or doting) produced from
some certain peculiar poison bred in any living creature, and communicated unto
a man, with a strong and vehement abhorring of all things that are liquid, but
more especially water.

We cannot so easily shun the danger we are incident to by mad Dogs, as that of
other Beasts, by reason he is a domestic creature, and housed under the same
roof with us. The virulency that resides in his foam or slaver is hot and dry,
malign, venenate and contagious, so that it does not only hurt, when as it is
taken in by a bite, but even applied to the skin, unless it be forthwith washed
away with salt water or urine; now malign symptoms happen sooner or later, as
in some, about the fortieth day, in others about six months, and in others a
year after: If the wound or hurt reaches not unto any nerve, vein, or artery,
and if it be not very deep, there may be some good hope of cure. Such as fall
into a fear of the water, never recover, especially if sighing or sobbing
follow thereupon. Yet Avicen thinks their cause is not desperate, if as yet
they can know their face in a glass; for hence you may gather, that all the
animal faculties are not yet overthrown, but that they stand in need of strong
Purgations. It is a deadly sign, to tumble themselves on the ground, to have an
hoarse voice, for that is an argument that the Weazon is become rough, by
reason of too excessive dryness. Finally, the principal parts being possessed,
there is no recovery, or life to be hoped for.

A certain Lawyer being by chance lightly bit in the lip, by a little dog
wherewith he was delighted, not knowing that he was mad, and neglecting the
wound by reason of the smalness thereof, after some four months space, he died
mad, having in vain assayed all manner of Medicines.

There be some who apply to the wound an Onion beaten with the leaves of Rue,
and common Salt. Others presently eat Garlic with bread, and then drink after
a draught of good Wine; indeed this is highly applauded, for Garlic by its
spiritous heat does mightily defend the noble parts from poison.

Many are the Remedies prescribed by Authors to be applied to the wound; but
they are all exceeded by Treacle dissolved in aqua vitae, or strong Wine, and
rubbed hard upon the part, (so that the blood may follow) laying upon the wound
when you have wiped it, clothes dipped in the same Medicine; then presently
apply Garlic or Onions beaten with common Salt and Turpentine: By this only
remedy Paraeus freed one of the daughters of Mademoiselle de Gron from the
symptoms of madness, and healed the wound, when as a mad Dog had bit her
grievously in the calf of the right leg.

The use of Antimony is exceedingly commended by Paraeus, for the cure of such
as fear the water, but yet are able to know themselves in a glass: Assuredly
such, and so great danger, is never overcome without danger; so that it is a
part of extreme madness to hope to vanquish the cruel malignity of this poison,
already admitted into the bowels, by gentle purging Medicines.

Aetius tells, that there was a certain Philosopher, who taken with this
disease, and a fear of water, when as he descended with a great courage unto
the Bath, and in the water beholding the shape of the dog that bit him, he made
a stand; but ashamed thereof, he forthwith cried out, Quid cani cum balneo?
what has a dog to do with a Bath? which words being uttered, he threw himself
forcibly into the Bath, and fearlesly drank of the water thereof, and so was
freed from his disease, together with his erroneous opinion.

CAP. XXIII. De Lupina Insania.
(...) seu Lupina insania, Wolf-madness, is a disease, in which men run barking
and howling about graves and fields in the night, lying hid for the most part
all day, and will not be persuaded but that they are Wolves, or some such
beasts.

Donatus ab Altomari says, they have usually hollow eyes, scabbed legs and
thighs, very dry and pale, and that he saw two of them in his time.

Wierus tells a story of such a one at Padua, 1541. that would not believe to
the contrary, but that he was a Wolf: He has another instance of a Spaniard,
who thought himself a Bear* Forestus confirms as much by many examples; one
amongst the rest, of which he was an eyewitness, at Alcamer in Holland; a poor
Husbandman, that still hunted about graves, and kept in Churchyards, of a pale,
black, ugly, and fearful look.

This malady, faith Avicenna, troubles men most in February, and is now adays
frequent in Bohemia and Hungary, according to Heurnius.

A certain young man, in this City, tall, slender, and black of a wild and
strange look, was taken with this kind of malady, for he run barking and
howling about the room where he was, and would make to get out; so that its
most like, if he had got abroad, he would have haunted some solitary place: I
remember I opened a vein, and drew forth a very large quantity of blood, black
like Soot; after which, I gave him this Potion.

Epithymi, ii. corticum rad. Hellebori nigri praeparati, i. foliorum senae,
iii. seminis foeniculi contusi, ii. decoctionis communis, viii. Fiat infusio:
In qua dissolve Diacatholiconis, vi. sir. rosarum sol. i. misce. He took four
spoonfulls last at night, and all the rest in the morning, warm. It wrought
very well, and abated the symptoms: He was often fumed with some of the Powder
set down in the Chapter, De Mania in Roberti Harman curatione; Sorrel, Lettice,
Bugloss, and Borage were boiled in his broth: And lastly I gave him this Vomit:
Infusionis stibii, xiii. syrupi violarum, ii. This wrought upward and downward;
after which, he became perfectly well.

CAP. XXIV. De Chorea Lasciva.
LAsciva chorea, The Lascivious dance, is a malady, arising from a malign
humor, with the which whosoever are taken, can do nothing but dance till they
be dead, or cured.

This disease has been very common in Germany, as appears by those relations
of Sckenkius, and Paracelsus, in his Book of madness, who brags how many
several persons he has cured of it.

It Is strange to hear how long they will dance, and in what manner, over
stools, forms, tables, even great bellied women sometimes (and yet never hurt
their children) will dance so long that they can stir neither hand nor foot,
but seem to be quite dead. Felix Platerus, de mentis alienatione, cap. 3.
reports of a woman in Basil, whom he saw, that danced a whole month together.

Such as are taken with this malady cannot abide or endure one in red clothes:
But Music above all things they love, and therefore the Magistrates in Germany
will hire Musicians to play to them, and some lusty, sturdy companions, to
dance with them. Next follow the Symptoms of more of the Internal senses.

CAP. XXV. De Comate Vigili.
COma vigil, The waking Coma, is a propension to sleep, and yet withal an utter
disability thereunto, arising from Narcotick (or dull, sleepy) vapors, that
induce and cause a drowsy, and sleepy disposition, and withal trouble and
disquiet the mind.

Galen places this malady as a mean between a Frenzy and a Lethargy, and
Typhomaniam appellat.

Curatio est difficilis, quia facile in lethargum, vel phrenitidem mutatur. Si
humor tenuis, in comate vigili, e naribus distillet, morbum periculosum
indicat. It is no less dangerous, if the parties speech be hindered, and while
they breathe a murmuring noise be heard in the throat; as also if the sick
cannot swallow his drink without much ado. Moreover, its accounted desperate,
if it come of vapors which arise from the malignant humors of a pestilent
Fever. Deliria vehementiora in Comate vigili plerumque convulsionem praesagiunt.

Filia Domini Dallis^ni, annos nata circiter 13. Comate vigili correpta fuit:
She lay with her eyes shut, and did seem to sleep, but could not; when I
touched her pulse, she presently opened her eyes, tossed and tumbled about the
bed, with an inordinate motion of her hands and thighs; this she did for a
short time, and then fell asleep again. After I had left her, concluding it in
vain to enterprise the cure, by reason of some deadly symptoms apparent, they
sent for one Master Boles; who being wholly ignorant of this kind of malady,
said it was the Scurvey in the joints, and so deluded the Parents for some
time, until I signified the contrary: She was was taken on the 24th of March,
and died on the 29th.

CAP. XXVI. De Lethargo.
(...), A Lethargy, is an insatiable propension to sleep, together with a
gentle Fever, forgetfulness, and a dull slothfulness, or laziness; arising from
a pituitous kind of blood, putrefying in the hinder nooks and cells of the
Brain: Vel si brevius definire velis, Lethargus est symptoma in action animali
principe laesa. Et dicitur (...), id est, oblivione, and (...), id est,
inertia: ac si diceres, inertem oblivionem.

Men sick of a Lethargy die within seven days, if they live longer, they
recover. If an impostumation happen behind the ears in a Lethargy, vel materia
putrefacta per aures, aut nares, evacuatur, and the symptoms abate, it is a
sign of health; as also, if the animal actions be not greatly empaired. Cold
sweat about the head, white and thin Urines, and trembling, are sure messengers
of great danger. In old men, Lethargies are for the most part deadly.

Zacutus Lusitanus being called to visit a sick man, who was for the space of
thirty days taken with drousiness, and irresistible sleep, with a small Fever,
after many things used in vain, he applied an actual Cautery, with much
benefit; for with a red hot iron he scorched the crown of his head, till it was
hard and crustie, as also the hinder part, and almost every where about his
head; by which means he awaked, and the places burned beginning to matter, he
arose and came to himself.

The fume or smoke of white Amber is excellent for the awaking of men in sleepy
Diseases; as also the oil of it often applied to the temples and nostrils.

Plura de Lethargo vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 6. And so much
of the Symptoms of the Internal Senses; next follow those of the Animal motion.

CAP. XXVII. De Lassitudine.
LAssitudo, A Lassitude or Litherness, is a certain unaptness, and unfitness
(together with a certain kind of pain) unto the exercise of the animal motion,
which ought to have been performed freely, and in a natural way.

(...), Lassitudines spontaneae morbos praesagiunt. For they show humors to
abound in the body, either in quality or quantity, or in both hurtful. Post
febrem lassitudo totius corporis perseverans recidivam significa.

The Cure is accomplished by the removing of the causes, and likewise by the
cherishing and comforting of the Muscles. Some are cured by venesection, or
blood-letting. Others, by frictions, or rubbings with sweet Oil, and by baths
of sweet Water. Lassitudes, for the most part, arise from a Scorbutic humor,
and then the cure is more easy.

CAP. XXVIII. De Inquietudine.
INquietudo, Restlesness, or unquietness, is a frequent various shaking to and
fro of the whole body, and the several members thereof, arising from matter
molesting and disquieting those parts that are capable of suffering.

Periculosa est inquietudo, quae ortum habet a malignitate and acrimonia
materiae febrem excitantis; or from an internal Inflammation, or weakness of
the natural strength and powers of the body, which is soon overcome by the
malady.

A certain Gentleman, being exceeding restless, in a malignant Fever, having a
looseness, was cured by the following prescription: Laudani opiat, gr. iii.
Lapidis bezoardici orientalis, gr. ii. f pil. I gave it him in a little
conserve of red Roses. It procured rest, stayed the Flux, and removed the
saintness; insomuch that within a very few days he was able to come to my
house: An infinite company of people were cured, the last year, of Malignant
distempers, chiefly by the use of that Pill.

Vide etiam meam scholam, Physicam, Med. 120, 153, 245, 154, and 155.

CAP. XXIX. De Rigore.
RIgor, The unnatural vehement stiffness, is a vibration, shaking, and
quavering of the Muscles of the whole body, conjoined with refrigeration, and a
certain pain, arising from something that does molest, by a sudden, and unlookt
for vellication, and pulling of the sensible parts, throughout the whole
circumference of the body, and likewise by irritating, and stirring up, the
expulsive faculty.

The Symptomatical Rigor (if it cease not upon the use of an evacuation) is
very evil and dangerous; and so likewise if it be attended and accompanied with
a consumption and wasting of the whole body. It is an evil sign if upon the
appearing of a periodical Rigor, the body waxes not hot, Quod naturam and
calorem languidum significat: Many are the Prognostics touching this Malady,
ad doctrinam vero de febribus pertinent.

Juvenis quidam pituitoso, ac melancholico temperamento affectus, Rigore
vexatus est; for the removing of which, I prescribed these following Pills.

Extracti Rudii ss. resinae benedict. gr. v. misce and f. pil. number. 6. He took
one last at night about ten of the clock, and the rest in the morning, about
seven: They gave eight stools; after which, the Rigor was very much abated;
therefore the Pills were again repeated, and so he was perfectly cured.

Some have been helped by bathing the back, ( a quo Rigor ixcipit plerumque)
cum oleo rataceo, laurino, de castoreo, and juniperino. Others have been freed
with Treacle and Mithridate, given in decoctione centaurii, and car dui
benedicti.

Novi juvenem qui Rigore laborans sic curatus fuit; bibitione unius cheophinae
vini Hispanensis.

CAP. XXX. De Tremore.
(...), seu Tremor, Trembling is a depravation of the voluntary motion, (by
reason of the which the member elevated and lift up cannot be kept in its own
proper situation) arising from the debility and weakness of the faculty of
motion.

As for the Prognostic: Trembling of it self is not dangerous; but if it be in
old people it continues with them till they die, ob spirituum and cerebri
magnam imbecillitatem. Per accidens tamen lethalis esse potest, in as much as
it usually goes before a Lethargy, an Apoplexy, Palsy, or Convulsion.

For those Remedies that are taken inwardly, these following are chiefly
commended; viz. The Essence of Balm, and Staechas of Arabia; among the
medicaments that are to be externally administered, these are highly approved
of, to wit, the oil of the flowers of Trifoyl, or the three-leafed grass; Ol.
Vulpinum, or the oil of a Fox, the oil of Castor, and Pepper. Vide etiam infra,
capite de Paralysi.

CAP. XXXI. De Paralysi, seu resolutione nervorum.
(...), The Palsy, is a spontaneous and voluntary abolition of motion in the
parts, (without any the least hurt of the Reason) arising from a defect and
want of the animal spirits, through some fault and error in the Nerves.

There are many kinds of Palsies; for either it is in all the parts of the body
below the Head, and then it is called (...); or else it possesses only one
side of the body, and then it is called (...); or it possesses but one part of
the body, and then it is called a particular Palsy.

Paralysis inveterata, videlieet post annum, incurabilis est. An Atrophy or
want of nourishment in the Paralytick part, with great paleness, takes away all
hope of cure; for it does not only signify spiritus animalis defectum, but
also a near extinction of natural heat: A strong Fever coming upon a Palsy is
good: materiam enim morbificam absumere potest. If the part affected has an
actual heat in it, there is hope of health; but if it be always actually cold,
it is difficult to be cured: If the eye on that side the Palsy is be hurt,
exigua spes curationis est: ponuriam enim spirituum in ea corporis part
significat. In aged people the Palsy is exceeding difficult, and hard to be
cured, ob caloris nativi inopiam. Si ex nervi grandioris aut spinalis medullae
incisione accidit, nulla spes curationis est, because there is no hope of a
coalition, or closing together again of the incision. A trembling coming upon,
or after a Palsy, is healthful, for it signifies that the passages of the
Nerves are somewhat open, by which some of the Animal spirit begins to pass,
for to move the muscles.

Augustine Aldrid, fifty years old, taken with the Palsy, was thus helped:
After frictions on both sides, I prescribed the following Pills: Pillularum
cochiarum,. ss. Extracti Rudii, i. spir. succini gut. iii. misc and f. pil.
number. 6. But because he could not swallow them, they were dissolved in three
ounces of Sage-water, and so given, they gave seven stools: spir. rorismarini,
olei succini, ana, parts aequales, misce; with which his neck was gently
anointed: Every morning sneezing was procured by the help of a little of this
powder. Pulveris sternutatorii ( descripti in meo Enchiridio Medico, p. 6.).
ss. Pulveris castorei, gr. iii. misce. He snuffed up about a grain and half at
a time; this did him much good: I also commanded him to wash his hands often in
the decoction of Sage: But that which finished the cure was this:

Staechadis, ii. Liquiritiae, ii. Herbarum salviae, betonicae, rorismarini,
hyssopi, ana, m. i. aquae fontis, quantum sufficit. Fiat decoctio, dosis vi.
evening and morning; moreover, Sage, Betonie, Rosemary, and Staechas, were put
into his vessel of drink which he used at meals; and every other night he took
one dram of Mithridate, in the foresaid decoction: With these Remedies
(through Gods blessing) he in a very short time recovered his health.

Much after this manner, I remember, I cured one Fit of Lakenham, a man
fourscore years old, of a Hemiplegia; and Camplin of a Palsy of the tongue;
only the last had, moreover, a Vesicatory applied behind on his neck; and quia
pauper erat, imperabam ut linguam succo salviae cum sinapi saepe confricaret.

Excellentissima est Decoctio, qua multi a Paralysi curati fuerunt, descripta
in mea Schola Physica, Med. 118. Vide etiam Med. 29. and 124.

CAP. XXXII. De Spasmo, seu Convulsione.
(...) seu Convulsio, A Spasm, or Convulsion, is an involuntary, perpetual, and
painful retraction (or drawing back) of the Muscles toward the place of their
original, and first beginning, arising from the abbreviation and shortning of
the nervous (or sinewy) parts, which is evermore attended and followed with a
Rigor or extreme stiffness, and a depravation of the figure, shape, and
symmetry of the foresaid parts. Spasmus (...), a trahendo dicitur, deducto
nomine ab ipso. symptomate.

A Convulsion coming of too much bleeding, or purging, especially with
Hellebor, is deadly. Lethalis etiam est, si Convulsio post phrenitidem
exoritur: Aetius affirms, that he never heard of, or saw, any so taken, that
recovered. It is better that a Fever follow a Convulsion, than a Convulsion a
Fever; febris enim convulsioni supervenions illius causam absumit: But a
Convulsion coming upon a Fever shows a malignant matter, quae periculum
minatur. Convulsio ex vulnere, cerebri praesertim, lethalis est; by reason of a
filthy, stinking, and corrupt matter, vellicating, and pulling the nerves: If
those parts only are surprised and seized that are remote from the brain, there
is good hope of cure. Convulsio a siccitate confirmata lethalis est.

A certain young man had a Convulsion, so that he told not bend his backbone.
By the help of this following Medicament, he could presently walk nimbly.

Butyri rancid. and lardi veteris, ana, iv. Bdellii, ammoniaci, ana, i.
Myrrhae, castorei, ana, iii. Flor. staechad. anthos, ana, p. i. nucis moschatae
and garyophyl. ana, i. catum parvum exenteratum, excoriatum, and in frusta
concisum. Stop the belly of a Goose with these things, sew it up, and roast it
on a spit; and the first liquor that drops, cast away, the next save in a
dripping-pan, half full of Vinegar, to anoint the cramped, or convulsed back:
Remedium est divinum.

A certain Gentlewoman grievously afflicted with the contraction of the Leg,
was helped by the use of the following Unguent: Olei Chamomelini, lumbricorum,
castorei, ana, i. pinguedinis gallinae, anseris. ana,. ss. unguenti dialthaeae,
ii. succ. e fol. cochlear. becabung. nastur. aquat. ana, i. cerae, q. s. Fiat
unguentum. This proved excellent, for in three days space he was able to walk
with a staff.

Another woman, suddenly taken with a Convulsion of the face and eyes, with
loss of speech, was helped by this following mixture. Castorei, i. succi rutae
cochlearium, aquae salviae, ii. syrupi artemisiae, i. misce. She was
constrained to take it, within the space of few minutes, she both spoke, and
stood up.

A lusty girl, four years old, taken with Convulsion fits, I thus helped:

Castorei contusi,. ss. rhabarbari electi,. ss. foeniculi dulc. i. decocti
communis, i. ss. Fiat infusio: In qua dissolve syrupi de rhabarbaro,. ss. She
took half at night about ten, and the rest in the morning about 7. It gave five
or six stools; the night following she had this: Lapidis Bezoardici orientalis,
gr. ii. aquae cerasorum nigrorum dulcium cochlearium; misce. She slept very
well all night, and the fits returned no more.

A Lad, ten years old, taken with a most dreadful Epileptick Convulsion, was
helped chiefly by the use of these following prescriptions: Diacarthami, ss.
syrupi rosarum sol. i. aquae betonicae, ss. misce. This was given him about the
evening, because in the morning he had his fits; he was well purged in the
night: Afterward there was given to him Ol. succini, and spirit. vitxioli,
ana, gut. v. in aqua betonicae: After this his fits were more light, although
somewhat more frequent: Lastly, there was given him this Potion: Aquarum
theriac. Bauderon. Cardui benedicti, Scordii, ana, i. Salis Cardui benedicti i.
Confectionis Alkerm. i. misce, and fiat potio: By help whereof all Convulsions
were taken away. Next follow those symptoms that hurt the Internal senses, the
Reason and Motion, together with the External senses.

CAP. XXXIII. De Incubo.
(...), seu Incubus, The Nightmare or Hag, is an interception of the motion,
especially that of breathing, and the voice, with a false and erroneous dream
of some heavy and weighty thing lying upon the breast, and thereby causing a
suffocation (as it were) and choking of the party, by means of the impeding
and hindering the free penetration; of the spirit (the passages being obstructed
and stopped) unto the Nerves. Vel si brevius definire velis, Ephialtes est
symptoma facultatis animalis, quo thoracis motus impeditur, sensus hebescit,
and phantasia depravatur. Et (...) nuncupatur, quod invadere and premere
significat.

If this affect chance to be of long continuance, and frequent, it does
threaten an Apoplexy, or Falling sickness, (especially if it happen unto the
party while he is half asleep, and half awake) as also madness, saepius
melancholiam hypocondriacam, vertiginem, paralysim, spasmum, nervorum
distentionem aut subitam mortem. If after the Patient awake, panting of the
heart, and cold sweating do happen, it is an ill sign; as also, if a Convulsion
or a Syncope do follow. The cure is doubtful, if after the awakening, the sick
person remains stupid and blockish: He that uses a slender diet, and
accustometh himself to lie on his side, is seldom troubled with the Nightmare.

Theriaca in aqua Poeoniae exhibita contra incucubum commendatur.

CAP. XXXIV. De Catalepsi, seu Catoche.
(...) seu Congelatio, A Congelation, is a sudden surprizal of all the senses,
the motion, and the mind, with the which those that are seized upon, and
invaded, remain and abide stiff, in the very same state and posture in which
they they were taken and surprised, with their eyes open and immovable,
Catalepsis sic dicta est (...), quod aeger eodem statu permaneat, quo
prehenditur.

They that are taken with this malady are in great hazard of life; wherefore
present remedy must be sought for: If it be a strong Catalepsis, it will hardly
or never be cured. Congelatio levis sanatur, and praesertim in puero, and in
juvene. In seen vero semper habet difficultatem.

Galen mentions a story of a school-fellow of his, who when he had wearied
himself with long study, fell into a Catalepsis or Congelation; he lay (says
he) like a log all along, not to be bent, stiff, and stretched out, and seemed
to behold us with his eyes, but spoke not a word: And he said, that he heard us
what we said at that time, although not evidently and plainly, and told us some
things that he remembered, and said, all that stood by him were seen of him, and
could remember and declare some of their gestures at that time, but could not
then speak, or move one part of his body.

Cardanus reports of eight Mowers, which supping under an Oak were struck with
thunder, so as they kept the same shape of body, the one seeming to eat, the
other to lay hold of the pot, another to drink, when they were all dead.

Fernelius relates two stories, which are these; one while he being very
studious and writing was so suddenly struck with a Congelation, that sitting
and holding his pen, with his eyes open, and looking upon his Book, you would
have thought he had been hard at study, till he was by calling, and jogging,
found to want all sense and motion.

Another I saw like a dead man, lying along, with neither seeing, hearing, nor
feeling when he was pinched; but he breathed freely, and whatsoever was put
into his mouth he presently swallowed; if he were taken out of his bed, he did
stand alone, but being thrust he would fall down; and which way soever his arm,
hand, or leg was set, there it stood fixed, and firm; you would have taken him
for a Ghost, or some rare Statue.

A certain noble woman, taken with a continual Fever, called Synochus, had in
the nineteenth day a Congelation, which was cured by a large flux of blood from
her Nose.

Plura de Catalepsi, seu Catoche, vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap.
12.

CAP. XXXV. De Epilepsia.
(...), The Epilepsie, is a Cessation of the animal and principal actions,
together with a convulsive motion of the whole body, arising from a sharp
matter, which by a peculiar and proper power and quality it has, that is
hurtful and prejudicial to the b^ain, vellicating and pulling the Nerves where
they begin, streightning, and as it were binding them fast together, and
irritating them unto expulsion. Vel si brevius definire velis: Epilepsia est
convulsio omnium corporis partium non perpetua, cum mentis ac sensuum laesione.
It is likewise called the Puerile, or childish disease, the Herculean, the
Comitial disease, (or the Falling Sickness) the Lunatic, Divine, Sontick, or
noisome and hurtful, and lastly, Caducus, or the Falling evil.

As to the Prognostic; An Epilepsie is a malady of long continuance, and very
stubborn and deadly in Infants, especially if it grievously afflict them. An
Epilepsie a melancholico humore oriunda, turns sometimes into madness, when the
humor is sent from the ventricles of the Brain, into the substance thereof.
Quo magis aeger ab ore spumat, eo morbus difficilior, and periculosior. If upon
the use of Sternutatories the sick party cannot be made to sneez, whilst he is
in a most grievous Paroxysm, its a thousand to one but he dies in that fit.
Epilepsia haereditaria incurabilis est; but that which comes from external
causes, and evil diet, is curable: as also, that which happens by consent of
some inferior part. A strong Epilepsie often kills the Patient in the Fit,
vel in apoplexiam degenerat. Si mulier praegnans morbo Comitiali corriptur, per
foetus emissionem liberatur. But the child of such a woman, for the most part,
dies of an Epilepsie: A quartan Ague coming upon an Epilepsie, and continuing
long cures it, by reason the matter of the disease is by degrees consumed by
the heat of the Fever, if it be of phlegm.

A certain Gentlewoman long laboring of a Scorbutic Epilepsie, was thus
helped: Pillularum cochiarum, foetidarum, aelephanginae, ana, i. Agarici
Troch.. ss. Castorei, gr. vi. cum syrupo de staechade, q. s. f. pil. number. 7.
She took three of them at night at going to bed, and four in the morning: Next,
the following sneezing powder was used. Nucis moschatae, rad. poeoniae, ana,.
ss. Hellebori nigri,. ss. pyrethri, piperis albi, ana,. ss. Misce, and fiat
pulvis, a small portion of which was blown into the nostrils: Whilst the time
of the fits (which commonly lasted ten hours) was expected, there was given
every morning, ii. of this Opiate.

Conservae betonicae, specierum dianthos, ana, i. conservae cochleariae, i. ss.
Mithridatii antiqui, theriacae venetae, ana, i. visci quercini, cornu cervini,
sem. paeoniae, cranii humani pulveriz. ana, iv. misce. It is to be taken of it
self, or with Betony water, to which is added, Oil of Vitriol; by these she was
fully delivered from her fits for many years.

Another Gentlewoman was vexed many years with an hysterical Epilepsie; she
tried many remedies, prescribed by many Physicians, but all in vain. At last,
by the advice of a woman, she took the flesh of a Wolf reduced to powder, and
wore a piece of the said flesh salted always about her; after which, she was
perfectly freed from the aforesaid disease.

A certain Gentleman, twenty years of age, troubled with the Falling Sickness,
by consent from the stomach; as also with a depravation of both sense and
motion of the ring and middle fingers of the right hand, was helped chiefly by
the following prescriptions: Pilularum foetidarum, ii. pil. sine quibus i.
castorei, i. aq. borag. q. s. f. pil. number. 10. These exhibited on the fifth of
June, gave five large stools; at the conclusion of its working, the sense and
motion of the fingers returned. Next, at bed-ime was given, pil. succin. number.
iii. The day following, being the seventh, he had three stools: In the very
instant of the fit the following Fume was used: Mummiae, benzoin. picis nigr.
ana, i. misce cum succo rutae, f. suffit. The eight day the following was
prescribed, Castorei, assae foetidae, ana,. ss. rad. poeoniae, subtilis. pulv..
i. aromat. rosat.. ii. misce cum syrupo de mentha, f. pil number. 7. He took one
of them, although very large, when he entered his bed. Every morning before the
use of an Opiat, prepared against Melancholy, this sneezing powder was used:
Rad. poeoniae, pyrethri, ana,. ii. Hellebori nigri,. ss. f. pulvis
subtilissimus: By these means he was cured in a very short time.

Forestus seni Epilepsia laboranti tria corticis Hellebori nigri praeparati
grana in una pilularum dosi foelici successu dedit, sicuti observare potes in
lib. x. De morbis cerebri, observe. 54. De Epileptico sexagenario.

Dominus Crask, Norvicensis, adhuc adolescens gravissima laborabat Epilepsia,
sed observatione hujus sequentis methodi a paroxysmo per multos annos fuit
immunis.

Corallii rubri, sem. poeoniae maris, excort. ana,. ss. pulveris cranii humani,
i. misce and fiat pulvis. Of this take as much as will lie on a three-penny
piece, twice in a week, or oftener, if he be sensible of the least distemper, in
a little black Cherry-water. Sometimes he purged gently with one Pill of
Cochiae Mesuae, which usually gave him two or three stools; he also wore
continually about him a piece of the hoof of an Elk, which indeed is famous for
its specifical virtue against the Falling Sickness. Moreover, he has had an
Issue on his left arm these many years, which without doubt does help very much
to preserve him from the Epilepsie.

Praeterea Excellentissimum invenies remedium contra Epilepsiam, in mea schola
Physica, Med. 212. quo multi ab ea curati fuerunt.

A Girl, ten years of age, of a Phlegmatic constitution, was troubled five or
six months with the Falling Sickness, and also a privation of motion and sense
in her right arm: Within twenty days she was perfectly cured, chiefly by the
use of this following Opiate.

Radic. poeoniae maris, stoechad, costi, ana, x. Agaraci, v. pyrethri, sem.
anisi, assae foetidae, and aristolochiae rotundae, ana, ii. ss. succi scyllae,
and mellis electi, ana, lb i. ii. Coquantur simul scylla and mellento igne,
usque ad bonam consistentiam, deinde superadditis speciebus, fiat Electuarium:
The dose was, two drachms every morning, two hours before meat.

Multos curavi infantes ab Epilepsia solo usu hujus armillae, and ecligmatis
descripti in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 5. p 9.

A little child, six months old, afflicted with the Falling sickness by
consent, was thus freed; in the fit there was applied, with a sponge, to the
nostrils the juice of Rue mixed with white Wine Vinegar; by the use of which it
was presently recovered; and falling into the fit again, it was removed in the
same manner: To the Region of the heart was applied the following: Theriacae
venetae, ii. radic. poeoniae pulveriz.. ss. misce. The hair was poudered cum
pulvere rad. poeoniae, collectae luna decrescente; and thus the child was
delivered from all its fits.

A Boy, three years old, had a fit of the Falling Sickness, from which he was
freed with the smoke of Tobacco; which a servant drew out of a Pipe, aad blew
into the open mouth of the boy; the boy fell a vomiting, and the fit ceased.

Robert Woodwork was exceedingly troubled with the Epilepsie even from his
infancy, and being by chance at a neighbors house, he fell into a fit, and
vomited there; a little dog being in the room licked up the vomit, fell mad,
and died; and the young man never had a fit since: A thing wondrous strange, it
being five or six years since this happened.

Forestus, libro decimo de cerebri morbis, observe. 60. page 392.
Excellentissimum contra Epilepsiam habet Electuarium, in quo, duas pulveris
hirundinis in furno exsiccati drachmas praescribit. Pulvis etiam in capite de
mania descriptus, contra morbum comitialem maxim potens est.

A maid, that had the Falling sickness, was cured by the use of Oxycratum, a
draught whereof she took every morning, and before the fit she drank pure
Vinegar: The disease being cured, she was taken with pains of her limbs, which
were cured by the use of hot Baths.

CAP. XXXVI. De Caro.
(...), is a deep, and profound sleep, with the hurt of the sense, and motion
(the breathing only excepted) and likewise the imagination, arising from the
impeded motion of the Animal Spirits. Et dicitur (...) quod caput in eo
gravetur, pars enim anterior cerebri potissimum in caro afficitur. Ab Arabibus
subeth nucupatur.

Carus in declinatione febrium continuarum proveniens, si vires sint debiles,
lethalis est. It is evil, if it befall the party after some great evacuation,
or if in it the breathing be hurt; the cure is exceeding doubtful, Si cum
capitis gravitate carus conjungitur; because that a humor not over gross and
thick, penetrating into the substance of the Nerves, and extending them,
immediately a Convulsion follows.

Peter Whitebread, a Baker, I remember, was taken with a most grievous Caros,
insomuch that when I pricked the sole of his foot with a Needle, he stirred not
in the least, neither did he taste the bitterness of this Potion which I gave
him: Extracti Rudii (quia melancholico temperamento affectus erat) i.
pillularum cochiarum, i. Resinae benedict. gr. iii. Aquae betonicae, ii. misce.
It gave him nine or ten stools; after which, he came to himself, and was able
to sit up; yet for fear of a Relapse, I prescribed him Clysters, gave him more
Pills to take, one at a time, every second or third day: Also Sneezing powder
with Castoreum was not omitted, and sometimes a draught of Mithridate was given
him last at night in Posset ale, wherein the flowers of Rosemary and Betony had
been boiled: Thus at length he was perfectly cured, and is at this day in very
good health.

A certain man taken with a profound sleep, having a cold and moist brain,
abounding with phlegm; after Oxymel sciliticum, and syrup. de stoechade, given
to prepare the humor, he took the following Pills, with most happy success;
Pilul. cochiar. ii. ss. Castorei, ss. cum syrupo de stachade, fiant pillulae:
Next. i. of Treacle was given; after which he awoke, and returned to his own
mind.

The daughter of a certain Goldsmith, four years old, was taken with this
sleepy evil, for the removing of which, there was given her of the juice of
Onions, and ordinary Oil, of each one spoonful mixed together, wherewith she
vomited, and was presently cured.

CAP. XXXVII. De Apoplexia.
(...). The Apoplexy, is a sudden abolition of all the Animal functions, the
breathing alone remaining, (and this likewise now and then exceedingly
afflicted) arising from the streightness and shutting up of the passages,
(especially about the Basis of the brain) by the which the Animal spirits are
derived unto the members; vel si brevius definire velis; Apoplexia est totius
corporis sensus and motus privatio. Et (...), a percutiendo, nomen habet: quod
qui laborant, veluti de coelo percussi videantur.

Men in Apoplexies die* in seven days, as Hippocrates teaches, except a Fever
take them. Illa autem febris acuta esse debet, and essentially springing from
the inflammation of the humors and spirits, or else it will not discuss the
matter which causes the Apoplexy. It must also come in the beginning of the
disease, whiles nature is in some strength, otherwise it is deadly, as
Hippocrates in Coacis shows. Apoplexia urina rubea mortem significat.
Apoplexia vel cito interficit, vel in paralysi, aut memoriae laesione desinit.
A faint sweat in an Apoplexy is ev^l, magnam enim naturae oppressionem denotat.

Dominus Crask, Norvicensis, annos circiter 20. natus, levi Apoplexia
correptus, sequentibus remediis praecipue sublevatus fuit. In the Paroxysm I
caused a little sneezing powder, cum pulvere castorei, to be blown into his
nostrils; after which was given him two spoonfuls of the infusion of Castoreum,
in aqua Epileptica: The fit going off, I prescribed the following Clyster.

Centaurei, salviae, ana, M. ss. Flor, betonicae, rorismarini, ana, p. i.
Radic. poeoniae incisae, i. Staechados, m. ss. coquantur in s. q. seri lactis
cerevisiati, ad lib. i. colaturae add mellis, i. ss. Diaphoeniconis,. ss.
Butyri quantit. ovi, salis communis, i. ss. fiat Enema: It wrought very well,
and did him much good, and therefore it was often repeated; his usual drink
between meals, and at bed time, was the Decoction described in mea schola
physica, Med. 194. sic administravi, and Deus curavit.

Quidam nobilis levi Apoplexia laborans hoc Clystere, in mea Schola Physica,
Med. 208. descripto, curatus est. In the next place, follow the Symptoms of the
excrements of the Head.

CAP. XXXVIII* De Catarrho.
(...), A Catarrh, is nothing else but a defluxion or flowing down of some
excrementitious humor (generated by reason of the concoction of the Brain its
being hurt) from the head, upon the parts that are situate underneath it,
proceeding from a distemper therein; or else from an over-abundant repletion,
irritating and stirring up the expulsive faculty. Vel si brevius definire
velis: Catarrhus est humoris excrementitii e capite in subjectas parts,
praeternaturalis effluxus.

The Prognostic of this affect, is elegantly laid down by Cornelius Celsus in
these words: Si ex capite in nares destillat humor, leve est malum; si in
fauces, pejus; si vero in pulmonem, pessimum est: For the Lungs are in danger
of being ulcereted, from whence comes a Consumption. Hippocrates says, That a
Catarrh is very hard to be concocted in those that are old: In such as are
young if the Catarrh be more frequent than ordinary, and withal more grievous,
the cure is the more difficult; as also if it rush down with a kind of
impetuousness and violence; for it may cause suffocation, or some other
grievous accident. A Catarrh accompanied with a continual pain of the head, is
hardly to be cured.

In the year 1510. there happened a famous Catarrh, with difficuly of
breathing, which went almost over all the world, and raged over all the Cities
and Towns of France, with great heaviness of the head whereupon the French
named it Cuculla) with streightness of the heart and lungs, and a Cough, a
continual Fever, and sometimes raving.

A certain Gentlewoman, twenty five years old, was grievously troubled with a
thin, sharp Rheum, which fell down upon her breast, with a dry, and almost
continual cough, leanness, and a slow Fever. On the 15. day of May, in the year
1629. she took a purging potion, Ex senna, rhabarbaro. manna, and syrupo
rosaceo, cum decocto pectorali. The next day she was let blood; after which she
used pectoral and cooling broths for twelve days together, purging between
times with the infusion of half an ounce of Senna: Mean while she took every
night one spoonful of a syrup, to stay her Rheum and Cough, which was
compounded ex syrupo violaceo, jujubino, de rosis siccis, and de papavere, of
each a like quantity: With these Remedies at last she grew perfectly well.

Domina Sugget, Norvicensis, aetatis 38. annorum, gravissimo Catarrho correpta,
juvata and curata fuit eo solo sequenti remedio.

Calomelanos, gr. xx. Resinae benedict. gr. viii. Conservae rosarum rubrarum,
i. misce. a quo remedio septies purgata est, and a fluxione omnino liberata,
ita ut aliis remediis opus non fuerit.

Nothing does more stop a Catarrh or flux of Rheum, then this following
Cataplasm of Rulandus: Fermenti acrioris, ii. carabes pulverizat. ii. fiat
Cataplasma, and apply it to the crown of the head, after the hair is first
shaven away.

Riverius cured himself of a Catarrh, to which he was most subject, with twice
taking Laud. opiat. the first time three grains, the next time two. Vide etiam
Centur. 3. observe. 15. and 44. In the 24. Observation of the same Century, He
tells us, that he cured himself of a most grievous Catarrh, by taking twenty
grains of Calomelanos, (qui est Mercur. dull. sexies praeparatus) cum december
jalappae granis; with which remedy he voided, by stool, much phlegmatic and
choleric matter, per os autem multam pituitam ejecit, by coughing and
spitting, which evacuation continuing two days, the Catarrh ceased, and his
cough which accompanied it went quite away, sicque a gravi illo morbo (Dei
beneficio) liberatus fuit.

These following Tros^hisques are much commended by Soleander: Thuris masculi,
succi liquiritioe, ana, i. Opii, croci, myrrhae, ana, i. cum syrupo papav.
forma trochiscos, vel pilulas, to be taken, now and then, two scruples, or half
a dram at a time.

Benedictus Faventinus, uses the following pills in a salt Catarrh, with good
success.

Succi glycyrrhizae, ii. aloes lotae, i. pillul. de cynoglosso, ss. cum syrupo
violac. Fiat massae pilularum, de qua capiat, i. hora somni. And thus much
shall suffice to have been spoken touching the Symptoms of the brain: We shall
now proceed to treat of the diseases of the Eyes; and first of the Affects of
the Eyelids.

CAP. XXXIX. De Trachomate, seu palpebrarum asperitudine.
(...), is an inequality and roughness of the internal part of the eyelids,
with redness, itching, and an hard ruggedness, as if the Seeds of Millet were
in them, arising from an adust humor, that is salt, sharp, and biting. If the
Malady grow further, and there appear clefts, and little parts standing forth,
not unlike the seeds of Figs, it is called Sycosis. And when the disease waxes
old, and the Eyelid becomes as hard as brawn, it is called Tylosis.

(...) in primo gradu curationem suscipit; (...) raro; (...) raro aut nunquam,
and maxima cum difficultate.

After emollient things used to qualify the acrimony of the peccant humor,
Aloes dissolved in Rosewater, and Myrrh dissolved in a woman's breast Milk, is
very much commended to cleanse.

Some cure this Malady, by rubbing the eyelid, inverted and turned the inside
outward, with Sugar Candy, even until the blood follow.

CAP. XL. De Psorophthalmia, seu Pruriginosa Scabiosaque Lippitudine.
(...) is, when the eyelids are red, and salt biting tears issue from them,
the corners of the eyes having ulceration and redness, with much fretting and
itching.

This is cured (universal and general Remedies, being first premised) by a
Liniment of Roses, and adding thereto a very little of Tutty prepared.

This Collyrium is much commended, Aquae rosarum, plantaginis, ana, ii. in
which boil with a soft fire, Aloes Hepaticae,. ss. copperass, ii. of Sugar
Candy, i. This Eye Salve removes the itching, consumes and dries the sharp
phlegm, and gives strength to the Eye.

In this Affect I have often used these following Pills, with most admirable
success.

Pillularum cochiarum, ss. Extracti Rudii, i. calomelanos, gr. vii. Resinae
jalappae, gr. iii. misce, and f. pil. number. vii.

CAP. XLI. De Emphysemate, seu palpebrarum inflatione.
(...) is a puffing up of the uppermost Eyelid, losing his natural color,
without pain, yet with heaviness and hard moving, arising from External and
Internal causes.

If this Malady happen by the touch of a Spider, or the stinging of a Wasp, it
is taken away by the application of Treacle, and juice of Plantain mixed
together.

If by the stinging of a Be, then a Be bruised, and imposed upon the place,
performs the cure.

If it proceeds from a hot humor, the Ophthalmick of Rhasis, has its place,
and is of singular use.

If from a waterish and wheyish humor, the following is excellent.

Rosarum rubrarum, p. i. flor. anthos, p. ss. chamomillae, meliloti, hysopi,
absynthii, pulegii, origani, ana, m. ss. Sees them in equal portions of Wine
and Water, and apply it with a sponge: Also many have been cured by the use of
Unguentum Comitissae, and Desiccativum rubrum, mingled together.

CAP. XLII. De Palpebrarum inviscatione
(...), seu palpebrarum inviscatio, is, when either the eyelids grow together
one to the other, or else with the white, or the horney, or both those tunicles
of the Eye.

It is not to be cured without much difficulty, if the Eyelid wholly grow
together; but seldom or never si cum cornea simul concrevit: It is more easily
cured, if it stick only unto the eye in the extremity thereof; and if it be
only (as it were) agglutinated, or glewed together unto the Adnata tunicle.

CAP. XLIII. De Ectropio, seu palpebrarum inversione.
(...) is, when the lower eyelid turns the inside out, and draws so much
back, that it covers not the white of the eye, nor is joined to the other
eyelid which is above.

There is required in this, and the former Malady, rather the hand of the
Surgeon, than Medicines.

CAP. XLIV. De Lagopththalmia, seu Leporina palpebra.
(...) is, when the higher eyelid is so drawn back, that in shutting the eye
the whole is not, nor cannot be, covered wholly, but in sleep it is open, as we
see Hares do sleep.

Unguentum Basilicum, made of Wax, Rosin, Black-pitch, and the suet of an Ox,
is much commended for the curing of this Malady; as are also the Mucilages of
Quince, Fenugreek, and Lin-seed, if the lid be not too short; otherwise it is
impossible to cure it by any kind of means: As touching manual operation, Vide
Paraeum, lib. 10. c. 23.

CAP. XLV. De Hydati.
(...), seu Aquula, is an increase of the unctuous substance in the upper
eyelid, pouring forth (continually) a humor, especially in the morning
betimes, before the light appear.

Those children (says Albucrasis) which have this malady lie sleeping always
upon their face, and at the dawning of the day are greatly tormented with that
abundance of humors which has been gathered in the night; they are not able to
behold the Sun, but their eye trembles, and sheddeth tears.

If this disease be but newly begun, it may be easily helped cum jejunia
saliva: But if it be of long continuance, and included in its proper membrane,
it requires the operation of the hands.

CAP. XLVI. De Xerophthalmia, seu Arida Lippitudine.
(...), is a dry blearedness, wherein the Eyes are neither puffed up, nor send
forth tears, but are only red, and heavy with pain, and in the night the
eyelids stick fast, and are as it were glued together with thick phlegm; which
disease is of the longer continuance, since the matter is tough and heavy.

This Remedy is greatly praised of Celsus; to take bread dipped in wine, and
apply it to the eye: Also to hinder the eyelids from sticking together;
Unguentum de Tutia is very much commended to be used at bed time.

CAP. XLVII. De Scleropthalmia, seu palpebrarum duritie.
(...) is, when the eyelids are more hard than accustomably they use to be,
and also the eye more slow in moving, more red, more painful; especially when
one awaketh, the eye lids can hardly be opened, yet no moisture issues from
them, neither is there any itching, and in the corners of the eyes sticks
some phlegm, dried and folded together.

Avicen greatly extolleth these Remedies, to apply a fomentation unto the eye,
with spunges wet in warm water, and after to put upon the eye the white of an
Egg, with oil of Roses: when the humor is thick and salt, he uses the mucilage
of Fenu-greek drawn with milk: Unguentum rosatum Mesuae has been oftentimes
used with most happy success. Next follow the affects, or things that are amiss
in the eyebrows.

CAP. XLVIII. De Hordeolo.
(...), seu Hordeolum, is a small, hard, firm, and somewhat long tumor, like
unto a Barley corn, especially when it comes to suppuration, having his matter
contained in a little skin, growing in the outmost part of the eyelid, where
the hairs be, arising from a phlegmatic humor thick and mingled with blood.

This Tumor is taken away by Barley masticated, or chewed, upon an empty
stomach, and so applied; or by the body of a Fly (the head thereof being cast
away) if it be rubbed therewith.

Galen appoints a Plaster of white Wax; And Avicen uses the blood of a
Pigeon, or Turtle, and this Liniment: Olibani, myrrhae, ana, ii. ladani, ss.
boracis, i. cum oleo liliorum, fiat linimentum.

CHP. XLIX. De Chalazio, seu Grandine.
(...), is a round little rising, or swelling, in fashion like a hailstone,
transparent, and moveable, hither and thither, arising from a matter that is
hard, even as hard as a stone.

It is to be mollified and suppled cum ammoniaco in aceto dissoluto, and
mingled together cum adipe gallinae, vel terebinthina and cera.

CAP. L. De Madarosi, seu Glabritie.
(...) is only taken for the falling of hair from the eyelids, by a flowing,
of sharp humors: And where the hairs do simply fall away, and the utmost part,
and banks, as it were, of the eyelids are red like unto lead, the malady is
called (...) But if the edges thereof grow thick and hard in such manner that
the hair cannot there be fastened, or pierce through, and that the eyelids
swell, and become shining, it is then called (...).

Ma drosis, for the most part, invadeth the party after malignant Fevers.

Avicen uses the powder of Mice-dung with Honey for the increasing of Hair:
Also the following remedies have been often used with happy success. Olei lini,
i. sevi hircini, pinguedinis ursi, ana, ss. stercoris murium, dactylorum
combustorum, ana, i. stercoris hirundinis, ss. misce.

For the Crassitude or thickness of the eyelids, Avicen commends a Cataplasm
of Endive, oil of Roses, and the white of an Egg.

CAP. LI. De Trichiasi, and Phalangosi.
(...) is, when preternatural hairs grow up under the natural hair, and
pointing inwardly do prick the Tunicles of the eyes.

Some, to cure this malady, pull away the hairs with pincers, and then apply
such medicines as may stay them from growing again: Of this sort are Ants eggs,
the gall of a Calf, the blood of all sorrs of Frogs: Amongst other, this of
Archigenes is praised wonderfully, which is made of the blood and gall of an
Hedg-hog, with Castoreum in equal proportion.

Other sear the hairs to the roots with an iron made for that purpose; but this
may be more safely done in the following malady.

(...), is when (the eyelids turning inward) the hairs appear not unless the
eyelids be lifted up.

CAP. LII. De Phthiriasi.
(...), is when a great abundance of small Lice infest the hairs of the
eyebrows; by reason of nastiness and filthiness, in those especially that
seldom or never wash, and keep themselves cleanly, and such as use a naughty
and corrupt kind of diet.

It is to be timely and seasonably cured, ne acres fluxiones concitet.

Ablutio palpebrarum decocto betae and staphisagriae laudatur: This Ointment
following has been often tried: Unguenti rosati Mesues, i. sulphuris vivi,
staphisagriae,. ss. hydrargyri cum cum jejuna saliva extinct. i. fiat
unguentum: Next follow the Affects, or things that are amiss in the flesh, that
is, in the corners of the eyes.

CAP. LIII. De Rhyade.
(...) is a consuming, or diminishing, of the Caruncle ( viz. the little piece
of flesh) that is situate in the greater Angle, or corner of the eye; arising
either from sharp humors falling upon the part, or from cleansing Medicines
formerly mis-applied.

This disease often follows the Fistula Lachrymalis.

It is cured by the use of the following Collyrium; Aloes, thuris, ana, i.
sanguin. dracon. ss. rosarum rubr. and granor. sumach. ana, i. aquae rosarum,
l. i. Bulliant ad quartae partis consumptionem. Fiat instar Collyrii.

CAP. LIVE. De Encanthide.
(...), is the immoderate increase and swelling of the Caruncle, or little
flesh, in the great corner of the Eye, caused through too much blood flowing to
the part.

Si magnum and antiquum malum est, non nisi Chrurgia curatur.

Encanthis, at first, is cured by the use of burnt Alum: In the cure great
heed must be taken, that no more be eaten away, but that which is superfluous,
lest it turn to Rhyas.

CAP. LV. De Anchilope.
(...), is a Tumor between the great corner of the eye and the nose, without
any pain, inflammation, or solution of unity, arising from a dull and sluggish
humor, (somewhat resembling Honey, and a Pultise) that most commonly is shut up
in a little skin or bag.

This disease is hardly cured, because of the delicateness and tenderness of
the bone whereupon the swelling grows; and because it is so near unto the
eye, that the medicines may endanger the same.

In the beginning, Emplastrum contra rupturam, or Unguentum de bolo, with a
little Opium added, is highly commended, to repel and beat back.

In the increase, Aetius appoints this remedy; thuris, i. myrrhae, i. ladani,
i. cerae i. alumin. sciss. ss. spumae nitri, ss. Beat these together, and with
the grossest part of Oleum irinum make them soft, and fit to be used.

CAP. LVI. De Aegilope, seu Fistula Lachrymali.
(...) is a little Fistula (attended with smart, pain, and an inflammation) in
the corner of the eye, near to the root of the nose, out of which issues
continual phlegm, or a thin humor, arising of some former disease, as of
Anchilops suppurated, but either not speedily opened, or negligently dressed.

A Lachrymal Fistula that is newly begun, and quae orificium habet extrinsecum
ac manifestum, medicamentis curabilis est; but that which is deep and old, and
has fouled the bone, is scarcely cured without burning. Sometimes Aegilops
turns to a Cancer, which comes with a pricking pain; extention of the veins,
hardness and blewness of the skin, and then it is better to let it alone,
because Medicines will enlarge it, doloresque acerbiores excitat,

Hildanus boasts that he cured a Fistula lachrymalis cum ossis carry, in
puero tredecim annorum, with Medicines alone, dilating of it with prepared
spunges, and after sprinkling Euphorbium into it, and that very much and often;
and after applying only an Emplaster of gum elemi; having used these things
diligently for the space of diverse weeks, he perceived a scale of the bone,
which he drew forth; and then with half a drop of Tolutan Balsam upon a little
lint, once in a day conveyed into the Ulcer, he perfectly consolidated the
Fistula in a short time: Next follow the diseases of the Adnata Tunicle.

CAP. LVII. De Ophthalmia, seu Lippitudine.
(...), The Ophthalmy, is an inflammation of the Adnata Tunicle or Membrane in
the eye called Conjunctiva, joined with swelling, extension, pain, redness, and
a flowing forth of tears; arising from a sharp blood distending the small veins
that belong to the Membrane.

Alvi fluxus Ophthalmiae superveniens, bonus, humorum enim abundantia
evacuatur, and ad inferiora retrabitur. Curatio est difficilis, si ophthalmia
pueros infestat, because that it continually flows from a tender and a weak
head. It is desperate, if it be by consent from the membranes of the brain, and
the parts contained within the skull: An old pain in the eyes is very
dangerous; Gausae enim contumaciam arguit; and it is to be feared ne suppuratio
aut exulceratio succedat. They who have great eyes are most subject to this
disease.

A certain Gentleman, fifty years old, having an Ophthalmia, was thus cured:
First, there was administered for four nights together, ss. of Pillulae de
Succino Craton. made in three Pills; these gave five or six stools the
following days without any griping; outwardly was applied to the forehead the
following Plaster: Mastiches, myrrhae, thuris, ana, i. ss. sanguinis Draconis,
i. Boli Armeni, farinae fabarum, ana, ss. Croci, i. cum albumine ovorum, oleo
rosarum, and modico aceto, fiat frontale; into the eye was distilled the
following Collyrium: Tutiae praepaeratae, i. ss. camphorae, croci, ana, gr.
xii. tie them up together in a fine rag, and hang them in Rosewater, and
White Wind, of each half an ounce; of this there was dropped into his eyes,
helying on his back, two or three drops, three or four times a day; whilst this
was doing, he used the following decoction: Sarsaparillae incisae and contusae,
ii. ligni Guaiaci incisi, i. sussafras incis. ii. Infuse them in 15. pints, of
spring water for 12. hours, then boil them till five pints be wasted, after
take it from the fire, adding presently of Cinnamon bruised, i. let it pass
through an Hyppocras bag: dose vi. taken hot, being in bed, composing the body
to sweat gently; after sweating, the sweat was rubbed off gently with fine dry
warm linen; an ordinary drink was made of the second decoction, which was used
in those days he did not sweat: Thus in twenty days he was cured, beyond all
expectation.

Another Gentleman, being grievously vexed with the same disease, was cured by
the following Medicines: Pillularum Succin i. pil. aurearum, ss. troch.
agarici, i. cum syrupo de betonica, f. pil. numero 10. He took five of these
when he went to bed, which gave him the next day six stools; the other five he
took the following night: To his forehead and temples there was applied an
astringent Plaster, and upon his eyes whites of Eggs well beat^n with
Rosewater and woman's milk: Into the eyes was dropped one or two drops, twice or
thrice a day, of this Ophthalmick Collyrium: Sarcocollae in lacte asinino
lotae, iii. tutiae praeparatae, i. aloes i. sacchari candi, alb. i. ss. croci,
gr. iii. aquae rosarum, iv. Mix them, letting them stand a day, shaking them
before you use it: By these he was cured:

A certain Gentlewoman, being miserably afflicted with a hot distillation in
her eyes, so that she could not open them in the morning, was thus helped:
After purging with Pil. de succino Craton, the following remedy was applied to
her eyes: Succi Sempervivi cochlear. i. vini albi, cochlear. ii. misce. Of
which there was dropped one or two drops into the eyes, laying upon them all
night a double linen rag wet in the same; this mitigated the heat: After, there
was some of the Ophthalmick Collyrium, prescribed in the former Observation,
distilled into her eyes twice or thrice a day; and so at length she was
perfectly cured.

A Country man, fifty years of age, being troubled with an old Inflammation of
his eyes, by the advice of a Physician, did for a long time observe a cooling
diet, and did drink water, but found no ease: At last, another Countryman
persuaded him to leave off that cooling diet, and give himself to drink pure
wine; after his first cup of Wine he perceived his eyes to be better, and
within a few days, continuing the same drink, his eyes became well. Indeed
Hippocrates says, that pains of the eyes are sometimes cured by drinking pure
Wine; quando scilicet Ophthalmia fit a sanguine crasso and pituitoso oculorum
tunicis impacto, which by the use of pure Wine is melted, attenuated, and
discussed.

A Child, new born, was troubled with redness of the eyes, and much filth which
came from them like quittor; after the disease had continued three months, by
the advice of a certain Physician, Cotton Wool was every night laid upon each
eye, being first diligently dried over the coals, and well teased and pulled
asunder with the fingers, and afterward each eye was covered with a little
Cotton, in manner of a Bolster, which was swathed down. In the morning the
Cotton Wool was much fouled with the foresaid matter: This Remedy bring
continued diverse nights together, the Infant was perfectly cured.

A Vesicatory applied to the forepart of the head, as Forestus reports, did a
wonderful cure upon an old woman with sore eyes.

Zacutus Lusitanus cured an old Ophthalmy, which would no otherwise be removed,
in a whole year, with a Mercurial Unguent, although there was no apparent sign
of the French disease; being persuaded by Mercurialis, who (in his Book de
Morbo Gallico) says. When you see any disease that will not be cured by
ordinary means, imagine it to be the Lucs Venera.

Cataplasma ex medulla panis triticei, and pomi assati, cum lacte muliebri,
pauxillo croci, and sacchari saturni, plurimum in Ophthalmia laudatur.

Plura de hac aegritudine vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 5. and
etiam in mea Schola Physica, Med. 51, 53, and 59.

A certain old man, by reason of a defluxion of Rheum falling into his eyes,
had his sight so far weakened, that he could not go without one to guide him; of
which disease he was cured, and his sight restored, by putting into his eyes,
every night when he went to bed, five or six of the seeds of Clary, which drew
the Phlegmatic humors out of his eyes, and cleansed the tunicle or coat called
Cornea: Indeed this Observation does more properly belong to the Chapter de
Albugine.

Solenander commends highly the decoction of Quince leaves, which are to be
gathered, without breaking, in the beginning of the Spring, and kept
diligently, that they be neither dusty nor musty, nor otherwise defiled; and
when you use them, boil one handful of them in pure water, and let the eyes be
often washed therewith: It is a wonder (says he) to see how it does preserve,
cleanse, and stop Rheumes in the eyes.

CAP. LVIII. De Taraxi, seu Conturbatione.
(...), is taken for a swift Inflammation of the eye, being red and moist, but
less grievous than Ophthalmia, proceeding from external causes.

If the heat of the Sun, or the fire, have caused this affect, then the
Cataplasm mentioned in the latter end of the preceding Chapter cures it, if
applied thereto; also a Cataplasm of new drawn Cassia, is held by some to be
excellent.

If wind, smoke, and dust have been the cause, the eyes are to be washed with
Milk blood-warm, and sleep to be taken thereupon.

If it happens by a blow or a fall, then blood ought immediately to be drawn
forth by opening a vein.

If from the stinging of a Be, or Wasp, or Hornet; then Repellers ex albumine
ovi, lacte muliebri, etc. are to be imposed.

CAP. LIX. De Chemosi.
(...) is, when the eyelids are, as it were, inverted, and turned the inside
outward, so as the eyes can scarce be covered therewith, and the white of the
eye, called Conjunctiva, stands out higher then the black, and the redness does
cover most part of the iris or circle.

Chemosis eadem remedia, quae ophthalmia, postulat, sed vehementiora; because
of the exceeding great inflammation, accompanied with most vehement pain.

CAP. LX. De Pterygio, seu ungue oculorum.
(...), The Haw, nail, or little wing, (as they term it) of the eye, or, as
some call it, the arrow, is a little membrane that is nervous, fibrous, and
somewhat white, which proceeds forth from the corners of the eyes, (the
greater of them especially) and cleaves fast unto the Adnata tunicle; and is
sometimes drawn forth in length even unto the Cornea tunicle; and very often
(if it so much increase) covers and overspreadeth the Pupilla or ball of the
eye, and so hinders the sight.

A new Haw, that is small, may be cured with Medicines; but an old overgrown
one, covering the black of the eye, cannot be cured but by Surgery. If the
eye affected grow smaller, Malum est signum, partis enim debilitatem arguit. A
Haw which is thick, hard, and black, cannot be cured, Cancrosam enim naturam
obtinet.

This powder is very much commended, and has been often used with happy
success; Ossis sepiae, sacchari candi, i. Vitrioli, ss. tutiae praeparatae, ss.
misce. Fiat pulvis subtilissimus, to lay upon the Haw.

CAP. LXI. De Panno.
PAnnus, The Pin or Web of the Eye, is a certain red substance, like unto a
small piece of cloth, arising from the exuberancy and overgreat abounding of
blood, in the exterior veins of the eye.

Recens haec affectio medicamentis; inveterata tantum manus opera curatur.

Curatio abstersione, per ea supra-dicta in capite de Encanthide, and de
Pterygio, perficitur. Vide etiam meam Scholam Physicam, Med. 82.

CAP. LXII. De Hyposphagmate, seu Suggillatione.
(...), The Hyposphagm or Sugillation (as they call it) is a blemish or spot,
reddish, or black and blew, arising from blood poured forth of the veins being
opened, and common to the tunicle Cornea.

Sugillatio in adanata tunica salubrior, quam in Cornea.

In curing this malady, blood-letting is most necessary; and of local
Medicines, the blood of a Turtle or Pigeon taken out of its wing is excellent
at the beginning, the cure being then most easy. Or a Collyrium composed ex
sanguine columbarum ex alis detracti, ii. lactis mulieris temper. ss. thuris,
i. Also the Cataplasm of Hyssop, sodden with Cows milk, is praised of Avicen;
or the tops of Hyssop may be boiled in ordinary and common water, and tied up
in a little bag, and so applied. We may withstand the Inflammation by the white
of an Egg well shaken together; and if there be present any pus, or purulent
matter, the same may be lessened by a Collyry composed ex mucilag. foenugr. cum
aqua foeniculi, and melle rosaceo.

Water of Honey does most certainly take away spots of the eyes; but if the eye
be pained withal, the pain must first be assuaged, before this water be used:
And so much of the diseases of the Adnata Tunicle; next follows those of the
Tunicle Cornea.

CAP. LXIII. De Corneae tunicae crassitie.
CRassities corneae tunicae, The thickness of the Horny-membrane, is an extreme
drying of the substance thereof, joined with a certain corrugation or
wrinkling; in so much that the Patient sees as through smoke; arising either
from the incautelous, and careless application of cold Remedies; or else from
gross and thick humors that insinuate themselves.

Si (...), corrugatio, sit ex humoribus crassis impactis, and recens adhuc,
curari potest: Si vero diuturnum sit, and ex vehementi frigidorum usu, vix
curatur.

In curatione laudatur, chelidoniae succus expressus, and oculis guttatim
instillatus.

CAP. LXIV. De Nebula.
NEbula, or the little cloud, is the color of the tunicle Cornea, altered and
changed by a subtle humor flowing forth.

That which is prevalent in this case, is, the powder of Margarites, prepared
in the water of Roses and Fennel: As also Saccharum albissimum (candi dictum)
in aqua euphrasiae, chelidoniae aut foeniculi dissolutum: Vide Forestum, lib.
6. observat. 56. ubi reperies infantem a nebulis hoc saccharo curatum.

Amatus Lusitanus reports, that he cured thick clouds in the eye of a girl
twelve years of age, post decocti salsaeparillae exhibitionem per viginti dies,
sequenti Collyrio.

Mellis in ipso favo, lb. ii. summitatum foeniculi, flor. sambuci, euphrasiae,
ana, P. ii. sacchari candi, iv. Destillentur in B. M. and aqua instilletur in
oculos.

Lastly, The yellow color of the jaundies, which appears most in the eyes,
when the jaundies is cured, is easily discussed, by taking the sum of Vinegar
into the eyes, si curam accelerare velis.

CAP. LXV. De Albugine.
(...), seu Albugo, is a white spot, rendering the Cornea tunicle so thick, that
there is denied all manner of passage unto the visible species.

As to the Prognostic; An Albugo which comes of phlegm, or a thick humor
remaining after an Ophthalmy, is easily cured, praesertim si inveterata non
sit; but that which comes after a wound, or an ulcer, and is a scar, is very
hardly cured, especially in those that are ancient.

The following decoction is much commended in Albugo.

Rad. althaeae i. foliorum malvae, euphrasiae, chelidoniae maj. ana, m. i. sem.
lini and foenugraeci, ana, iii. florum meliloti, P. i. Fiat decoctio in aqua
fontis, cujus vapor recipiatur in oculum mane and sero.

Also the water of Honey, prescribed in the preceding Chapter de Nebula, is
very good to take away all blemishes in the eye, si usus illius diu continuetur.

CAP. LXVI. De Phlyctaenis, seu Pustulis corneae.
(...), seu Pustulae, are little risings, common to the Adnata and Cornea
tunicles, like the grain or seeds of Millet, arising from a sharp, serous, or
wheyish humor, lifting up the Membranes.

Phlyctaenae in Adnata minus periculosae sunt, quam in Cornea. The more
superficial these Pustules be, the less dangerous they are, the more inward,
the more desperate; for it is to be feared, lest the whole thickness of the
Cornea be eroded, and so either the watery humor will flow forth, or else the
Uvea start out.

Saccharum Saturni (or Sugar of Saturn) with the water of Eyebright, is (here)
of all remedies the best and chiefest: You may frame your Medicine thus: Aquae
euphrasiae, i. aquae rosarum, i. ss. sacchari saturni, gr. xv. tutiae
praeparatae,. ss. misce, and utere.

CAP. LXVII. De Corneae Ruptura.
RUptura Corneae tunicae, The Rupture of the Horny tunicle happens either from
an Ulcer or Wound, or else from an afflux of humors, by which the said Membrane
is so distended, that it cracks in the middle, and the humors contained are let
out.

Incurabilis est plerumque haec affectio, and visus privationem relinquit.

Some foment the part with a decoction of red Roses, Solomon's seal, Bramble
buds, Shepherds purse, and Plantane, boiled in red Wine, if there be no
Inflammation; but if there be, in Spring water; and for the perfect
consolidation and cure, they use this Collyrium.

Aloes lotae, tutiae praeparatae, and sarcocollae nutritae in lacte muliebri,
ana,. ss. croci, gr. v. cum mucilagine gummi tragacanthi, fiat collyririum.

CAP. XLVIII. De Corneae and Adnatae Ulceribus.
ULcera corneae and adnatae tunicae, Ulcers of the Ho^n^^ and Adnata tunicle,
are wont to arise from sharp corroding humors flowing into the eyes; and
sometimes they follow the Phlyctaenae, or little swellings which breed in the
Cornea, but not till they break. There are diverse sorts of these Ulcers
mentioned in Authors:

(...), or Fossula, is a hollow, na^rrow, and hard Ulcer, without filthy matter.

(...), is broader, but not so deep.

(...), or Ulcus Coronale, is a round Ulcer in the white of the eye, near unto
the circle named Iris, or the rainbow; it is white, near to the apple of the
eye, and red in the membrane conjunctiva.

(...) is a deep, filthy, and crustie Ulcer.

The Ulcers of the eyes are dangerous, and hard to be cured, but more in the
Cornea, than in the Adnata; an Ulcer in the Pupilla is more dangerous, because,
after it is cured, it will leave a scar, which will hinder the perspicuity of
the Cornea, and so the sight will be hurt.

The following Collyrium does moderately dry and cleanse: Aquar. verbenae, and
plantaginis, ana, ii. sacchari candi, ss. misce pro Collyrio; vel Aquae mellis
in B. M. Destillatae, and aquae rosarum, ana, parts aequales.

CAP. LXIX. De Nomis, seu ulceribus depascentibus.
(...), seu ulcera depascentia, are malicious and painful Ulcers, attended with
a Fever, which in time does gnaw and consume the parts, next adjoining to the
eyes, as the muscles and eyelids, beginning partly at the Corners, partly at
the white of the eye, and sometimes at the Horney membrane.

If the veins and Arteries of the temples seem very full, it will be most
expedient to let them bleed: To the forehead and temples may be applied an
emplaister made of Emplastrum contra rupturam, Unguentum Comitissae, and
desiccativum rubrum mixed together: And for the eye, you may use the Collyrium
set down in the former Chapter.

I have sometimes used aqua spermatis ranarum, which is very powerful to stay
and overcome the evil and spreading nature of the humor.

CAP. LXX. De Cancro Corneae.
(...), corneae tunicae, is a little Ulcer, happening in the black of the eye,
which cannot be closed, very painful, replete with swollen vessels, as in the
disease called Varix; and sometimes when it seems to be closed up, upon no
manifest occasion, it opens again, and becomes ulcerous.

This disease is accounted incurable, as well in the eye, as in any other part,
when it is fixed; except it be taken away by manual operaton.

Amongst local medicines, the white of an Egg beaten with woman's milk is to be
praised by many; also Lintels sodden and steeped in Plantain water, or juice,
the Mucilages of Quinces, and Lin-seed, often renewed.

Moreover the flesh of Chickens is very powerful of assuage pain; and some say
that the disease it self has been cured by it alone. Vide Tractatum meum de
Tumoribus praeter naturam, sect. 2. cap. 7. page 98, and 99. Some apply the
flesh of young Pigeons while it is warm, cut in thin broad pieces.

Sic etiam concipio hunc and praecedentem morbum de Nomis (quamvis curatu
impossibiles teneantur) curari posse Salivatione usu mercurii dulcis
Antimoniique diaphoretici curiose administrati, procurata, post sufficientem
totius corporis sarsaeparillae, etc. decoctione, praeparationem. Vide dicta
Zacuti Lusitani, and Mercurialis, supra posita, capite, 57. De Ophthalmia
versus finem, eaque Alexandri Trajani, Petri, infra, capite de Suffusione.

CAP. LXXI. De Vulneribus Corneae, and oculorum dolor.
VUlnera Corneae, Wounds of the Cornea, are made by the violence of things
pricking, cutting, bruising, or otherwise loosing the continuity thereof.

They require first, Evacuation, per venaesectionem praesertim. Secondly,
Revulsion, per Caetaplasmata super palpebram duntaxat imposita. Thirdly,
Consolidation; and for this purpose the strains of twelve Eggs well-beaten with
a little Rose Water, and so put into the eye, are very much commended: It is a
remedy held pro secreto. Upon the eyelid may be applied filie round pleageants
of flax or soft tow, as broad as a shillling, dipped in the white of an Egg,
beaten to Oil; it must be renewed as it dries; and this will not only draw
away the corrupt or bruised blood, but also cleanse and cool the eye.

Dolor oculorum, oculis, praecipue ob tunicas externas, convenit. Mitigatur
albumine ovorum; ab opiatis cavendum.

Some highly commend this Anodyne medicine for the eyes: Pomi dulcis assati,
ss. Camphorae, gr. xv. croci gr. v. cum aqua rosarum, and lacte muliebri: Fiat
Cataplasma.

CAP. LXXII. De Hypopyo, seu pure sub Cornea.
(...), is an heap of corrupt matter possessing about half the black of the
eye, or shining through the Horney coat, which covers the Pupilla, arising
most commonly from a stroke or contusion.

Galen reports, That there was one Justus, an Oculist in his time, that cured
many of this disease by shaking their heads; for setting them straight upon a
seat, and taking hold on both sides of their head, he shaked them till he
perceived the mattter to descend.

Some highly commend this following Remedy; Aquarum verbenae, rutae, chelidon,
rosarum and foeniculi, ana, ss. aloes opt. tutiae praeparatae, ana, ss.
Sacchari candi, i. Pulverizentur and misceantur, addendo lactis muliebris
tantillum; and fiat collyrium; of which drop some into the eyes twice or thrice
in the day: But this mixture is excellent.

Croci, aloes, myrrhae, ana, i. vini, iii. mellis. vi. Dissolvatur crocus in
vino. Deinde cum aloe and myrrha misceantur. Tandem mel addatur. Hoc remedio
oculi illinantur. And thus much touching the diseases of the Cornea tunicle; we
proceed next to those of the Uvea.

CAP. LXXIII. De Proptosi, seu Uveae procidentia
(...), is here taken for a starting, or falling out of the Membrane named
Uvea, when the Horney tunicle is either loosed or broken by a wound or an
ulcer; and as this malady appears greater or less, so there are numbered
diverse kinds thereof, having names given unto them from the likeness of those
things which they do represent.

Si enim parva uveae portio procidat (...) dicitur, quod formam capitis muscae
habeat: But if the greatest part of the Uvea issues forth, so that it
over-reacheth the eyelid, representing an Apple hanging by the stalk, it is
then called (...) is, when the Uvea being so far thrust out of the eyelids,
becomes hard, and the hornie coat round about being brawnie, presses it down,
as if it were the head of a nail.

The cure of this disease is difficult, and the more when the Uvea comes most
forth; si vero minor sit, ut in myocephalo, curationem admittit.

Proptosis medicamentis astringentibus sine asperitate (qualia in Corneae
ruptura supra fuere proposita) curatur; and if it be not removed by these, then
it is requisite that we make use of the incision knife.

CAP. LXXIV. De Mydriasi, seu Pupillae Dilatatione.
(...), is when the Pupilla is enlarged (above, and besides the ordinary course
of nature) toward the Iris, or parti-colored circle of the eye, whereby the
sight is either much empaired, or utterly lost.

They which are troubled with this disease, which some call (...), do think
every thing which they see to be greater than it is; which error comes by the
shattering of the spirits, at the largeness of the hole in the Apple of the
eye. Sometimes it is not only enlarged and stretched abroad, but it seems to
be removed from the midst of the eye, and to have changed his place, which
(in Arnoldus) is called, Pupillae e loco remotio.

If the dilatation of the Pupilla happens through siccity or dryness, extending
the Uvea, (like as we see in skins or Hides that are perforated) it is not to
be cured without some difficulty: But if it arise from humidity or moisture,
the cure is much more easy: Quae a percussione oritur incurabilis est, si uvea
sit lacerata. Si post vehementem capitis dolorem, magna sequatur pupillae usque
ad iridem dilatatio, exigua sanationis spes est, ob immodicam materiae copiam.

The cure is varied according to the variety of the cause; if this malady
proceed from dryness, the best remedy is Goats milk, wherewith you may wash and
drench the eye often; if from moisture, then this following Collyrium may
safely be used: Rosarum rubr. siccarum, ii. croci, spicae-nardi, corticis
thuris, ana, ss. tutiae praeparatae, spodii, acaciae, ana, i. Bring them into a
powder, and put them in a thin linen cloth, and tie it; then hang it in three
ounces of Rose Water, and wash the eyes often with the water, dropping into
them, squeezing the cloth as often as you use the water. If it comes from wind
(after universal evacuations, which are not to be neglected in oculorum
morborum curatione) you may foment the eyes with the decoction of Fennel, Rue,
Dill, red Roses, and Myrtles, made in Rose Water, with the fourth part of white
Wine. If it come with a stroke, and there be no inflammation, you may apply at
the first a Cataplasm, ex farina fabarum, foliis plantaginis, and rosis rubris,
cum aqua rosarum paratum: after that, you may often drop therein the blood of a
Pigeon, which is a most excellent remedy in all wounds and contusions of the
eyes. Si vero adsit inflammatio, instar opthalmiae curanda est.

CAP. LXXV. De Myosi, seu Pupillae Angustia.
(...), seu Angustia pupillae, The streightness or narrowness of the Pupilla
is, when it is rendered and made narrower than naturally it ought to be, thereby
hindering the sight.

As to the Prognostic, A streightness in the Pupilla, which comes from the
loss of the watery humor in the eye, is incurable, because when that is once
lost, it cannot be recruited, especially in old folks. In pueris tamen
aliquando per vulnus effusus humor aqueus reparatus (...) regeneratus est. A
Constriction of the Pupilla from dryness can scarce or very hardly be cured.
Illa vero quae ab humiditate fit, in suo principio, and adhuc recens, facile
curari potest, inveterata vero difficilime.

The cure of this disease differs not from the former, for they come both
from the same causes, namely, dryness or moisture.

CAP. LXXVI. De Hypochyma, seu Suffusione.
(...), seu Suffusio, A Suffusion or Cataract, is a heap of superfluous humors
made thick, between the horny membrane and the Crystalline humor, directly
upon the apple of the eye, swimming above the waterish humor in that place,
which Celsus affirms to be void and empty, hindering the sight, or (at least)
the discerning and judging of such things as are before the eyes.

A Suffusion newly begun, when the Patient can perceive an Object as through a
cloud, is curable, as Galen says: A Cataract in an old man, whose eyes are
naturally of a weak constitution, is altogether uncurable. Si ex febre acuta,
peripneumonia, phrenitide, aut dolor capitis intensi suffusio proveniat,
difficillime curatur. A black Cataract free from all brightness, can neither be
cured by Physic, nor Surgery; because the visive spirits are destroyed; but
a clear Cataract that has some splendour, is curable. Suffusio confirmata, in
qua materia jam concreta est, discuti medicamentis non potest, and sola
compunctione curabilis est. That which moves, and is colored like
Quicksilver is incurable; as also, that which is green, dark, or very yellow.
A Cataract which represents objects full of holes, is not to be tampered
with: The Cataract which is fit for touching uses to be sky-colored, and
seagreen, or of the color of Iron or Lead, not black; also it ought to be
like a thin skin, which may be rolled about the needle; for if it be too thick
and solid, it cannot be touched, which you may perceive when it is like Chalk,
or Hail.

Quercetan, in his Dispensatory, does much commend the Infusion of Crocus
metallorum, which is thus prepared: Aquarum chelidonii maj. vi. croci
metallorum, i. Infundantur simul, and drop three or four drops of this water
warmed into the eyes, three or four times a day for a long continuance. Fonseca
says, That he knew one cured by this water, who was very dim-sighted many
months: This is the excellency of it, which few other Medicines have; it
cleanses very powerfully, without any sharpness.

It is good to chew sweet Fennel-seeds in the morning some space of time, and
then to fill the mouth with white Wine; and when it is warm, to wash the eyes
therewith, till they begin to smart.

It is no less profitable to let a child eat sweet Fennel-seeds in a morning,
and afterward breathe into the eyes.

You may make bread with the bran in it, with the powder of Rue, Celandine,
Eyebright, Betony, and Fennel, with a little Honey, which as soon as it drawn,
and cut in pieces, must be put between two peuter, or silver dishes; whence
will come a water, which Zechius affirms, dropped into the eyes does wonders.

Alexander Trajanus Petronus declares, that a certain man, before he had the
French disease, being blind of one eye with a thick Suffusion, was wonderfully
freed from his Cataract and Pox both at once hydrargyri inunctione: Neither is
it without reason that Cataracts may be dissolved with that Unction, when we
see by experience, that very hard tumors of thick and gross phlegm are
powerfully dissolved by the Unction of Quicksilver.

Plura de Suffusione vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. c. 6. Next, of what
is amiss in the humors of the eyes.

CAP. LXXVII. De Humoris aquei vitiis.
HUmor aqueus, The watery Humor is out of its natural condition when it is
distempered in quantity or quality: When the distemper is in quantity, it is
enlarged or diminished, and makes the Pupilla be dilated or contracted; which
diseases are mentioned before in their places. When the distemper is in
quality, it becomes thicker, and that comes from another humor mixed with it,
and that is called Suffusio, which we spoke of in the Chapter preceding: Indeed
the faults or things amiss in the watery humor, are especially four, Imminutio,
Effusio, Crassitiedo, and Obscuratio.

CAP. LXXVIII. De Humoris Crystallini vitiis.
HUmor Crystallinus, The Crystalline humor is the chief instrument of sight,
and therefore ought to be kept more pure and perspicuous than the rest; those
things that are amiss in this humor, are especally three.

First, (...), or the changing of the Crystalline humor into a gray, or
sky-colour, arising from exsiccation, which causes the Patient to apprehend
all objects as through smoke and little clouds.

Secondly, (...), seu caecitas nocturna, or a nocturnal blindness; with the
which such as are affected see indifferently well in the daytime, but more
obscurely and dimly after sunset, and in the night time nothing at all.

Thirdly, Situs mutatus, or the situation changed, qui multipliciter accidere
solet.

Moreover, although many Authors do not distinguish between a Glaucoma, and a
Suffusion, yet they which diligently observe may distinguish them thus: In a
Suffusion there is a white in the very Pupilla, and very near the Membrane
called Cornea; but in Glaucoma it lies deeper.

Incurabilis est hic affectus, praecipue in senibus, in quibus siccitas partium
emendari non potest; but if it be not manifest that the fault is in the
Crystalline, and there is suspicion of a Suffusion, you may use the Remedies
prescribed for it.

I read of a certain Physician, who going up a Ladder to take a Book from a
shelf, and turning his eyes violently upwards, saw all things afterward turned
upwards, as though men walked upon their heads, which came by the attraction
and displacing of the Crystalline. For a quarter of a year after, when again he
turned up his eyes violently, his natural sight returned, and all things
appeared in right order. Hence it appears that by a violent motion of the eye,
the Crystalline may be displaced, and again by the same motion be set right.

The juice of Chickweed, or Fennel, dropped into the eye, is very much
commended in the cure of Nyctalopia, as also to receive the vapor of Rue,
Fennel, Eyebright, Celandine, Ligni-Aloes, and Saffron, sodden together in
Wine or water, or else to distill them with Honey, and so put the water into
the eyes.

CAP. LXXIX. De Humoris vitrei vitiis.
HUmor vitreus, The vitreous or Glassie humor, is next under the Crystalline,
and therefore it is made by nature transparent, that the Species carried to the
Optic nerve may be pure and clean: Those things that are amiss in this humor
are these:

First, The Augmentation thereof, by which not only the Pupilla is more
dilated, sed etiam Crystallinus obumbratur, and has as it were a mist cast
before it, and the spirits also much dulled and blunted.

Secondly, Diminution, from whence the tunicles are wrinkled up together, and
the Pupilla contracted.

Thirdly, Crassities, or the thickness thereof, which arises from the
admixture of some other humor; and this cannot be perceived by any Signs, but
only it is judged so probably by reason; for the vitreous humor cannot be
seen, or its condition known; and therefore Practitioners are constrained to
confound it, and to make it one with Gutta serena, quia nullum vitium in oculis
appareat.

Moreover, This humor may be out of order in respect of its situation;
namely, when any part of it by a blow or contusion shall be brought before the
Crystalline.

The vitreous humor being displaced can by no art be reduced to its former
condition. But this by nature has sometimes been done, and therefore the whole
business is to be committed unto her. Next follow those diseases that infest
and annoy the globe of the eye.

CAP. LXXX. De oculi Atrophia, and Microphthalmo.
(...) is then, when the parts of the eyes consume and waste away, by reason of
some evacuation, and overgreat exsiccation. It differs (...), that is, the
consumption of the eye, because therein is only a diminishing of the Apple, and
not of the whole eye, because therein is only a diminishing of the Apple, and
not of the whole eye; which in Atrophia is smaller and lesser than naturally it
should be, there appearing a hollow deepness, it being sunk down within the
circle, and the sight darkened and dimmed in such sort, that the things which
they look upon, do seem much greater then they are.

Malum curatu difficile est: Neque enim siccitas in ulla corporis part facile
euratur; and nisi mature ei succuratur, causa caecitatis esse solet.

It is cured by those medicaments that humect and moisten (and chiefly the
breast milk of a woman) laid therein.

(...), that is, the pinking eye, is, when any one has from his birth so
little eyes that they seem scarcely opened, albeit they are not sunk down
within the circle, more than they should be; whereunto it is not expedient to
apply any medicine, since nature cannot be amended.

CAP. LXXXI. De Oculi procidentia, and Exopthalmo.
(...), is when the eye either stands out of its Orb, in an unusual and
unbeseeming manner; or otherwise falls out so (at least) that it cannot be
covered with the eyelids.

If it happen through some external cause, as the sounding of an Instrument, or
hard labor in childbearing; It is cured, First, by putting back the eye into
its proper seat: Secondly, by reteining and keeping the same in its place, by
Fomentations made of Astringents; to wit, Roses, Pomegranate flowers, and
Acacia. Thirdly, and lastly, by blood-letting: If Resolution of the Muscles be
the cause thereof, then Apophlegmatisms are very available.

(...), The Ox eye, called of some the goggle eye, is also a standing out, or
lifting up, and as it were, a casting forth of the eye, from the hollowness and
circle wherein it is set and placed, as a precious stone within his Collet. But
this affection or disposition is merely natural, as we may see in such as have
great eyes, and to them it is not needful to apply any thing.

CAP. LXXXII. De Hippo.
(...), is an affection of the eye, coming at the first framing, and from the
birth of the party, wherein the eyes cannot abide in one place, but are always
shaking, and continually trembling in such manner, that you may behold the eye
going hither and thither without any rest.

Although Gorraeus accounts it no disease, because no Physician has set down
any cure for it, yet in laboring to redress this fault, I would use the
Instrument called a Mask, as we hinted, to the end, that he which were molested
therewith might not see but by that little hole, whereby the eye should be
compelled to stay in that place in looking, which might cause it afterward to
remain more steadfast.

Some think it best to bind or roll the eyes for a time, and then again to
unroll them, which may be profitable in this affection, as also in the
squint-eye, called Strabismus.

CAP. LXXXIII. De Paralysi, seu oculi resolutione.
(...) is here taken for a want of sense and motion in the eye, when it can
neither be moved to the right side nor to the lest, up nor down, because the
Muscles are benumbed, and if any sharp remedy be laid to, it cannot feel the
same.

If the whole eye be loosed, it is hardly cured, especially in those that are
aged.

It is cured, First, by bathing with such herbs as are good for the sinews,
having virtue partly to comfort, partly to make thin. Secondly, by applying a
Cataplasm made of the same Herbs, putting to it a little Castoreum, carefully
providing that it go not into the eye. Thirdly, by dropping into the eye, in
small quantity, the water of Fennel, Annis-seeds, Cinnamon and Eyebright,
mingled. Lastly, the blood of a Turtle, or Pigeon, is of singular use.

CAP. LXXXIV. De Strabismo.
(...) is then, when the Pupilla or Ball of the eye declineth from the midst,
so that it appears more in the one part of the eye than in the other.

Strabismus a primo ortu, and mala conformatione, non curatur; nec qui a mala
assuetudine, vel etiam convulsione aut paralysi, si sit inveteratus, nunquam
curatur. Recens vero malum interdum curationem suscipit.

This malady is most incident to children presently after their birth, through
the negligence of the nurse, who sets the cradle in which the Infant lies
on the side of the light, and not directly contrary unto it, which makes the
children looking to the light, to turn the eye on the side to it; and thus by
continuance they are accustomed to turn their eye awry.

I have seen it proceed in some, of having too much company with women, the
excess whereof does marvellously scatter the spirits. In such a case the sick
party ought to be nourished, and to drink Asses milk. Also the blood of a
Turtle or Pigeon dropped into the eye does powerfully help.

Paulus Aegineta appointed a Mask for such as had this disease, to the end they
might always look straight, which is most fit for young children.

CAP. LXXXV. De Amblyopia, seu Hebetudine.
(...), seu Hebetudo, is a continual dimness and hinderance of the sight, which
is darkened, and yet no blemish or hurt to be perceived in the eye, nor in its
membranes, arising either from the fault of the brain, that makes and yields
not a sufficient supply of the animal spirits, or else from something amiss in
the animal spirits themselves, qui lucidi, tenues, multi, esse debent.

Dimness, or weakness of sight, coming after overmuch evacuation, or long and
lasting diseases, is helped by the restoration of the body, to its former
vigor and strength: Debilitas visus ex senio vix curationem suscipit.

To quicken and sharpen the sight, you have plenty of Remedies in many of the
foregoing Chapters. Also see the following, De Gutta serena.

Moreover, Leonellus Faventinus tells us, how he cured a Hebetudo, by dropping
into the eye the juice of Celandine; also the distilled water of white Honey
and Rose flowers is highly commended by many.

Vide meam Scholam Physicam, Med. 68. and 135.

CAP. LXXXVI. De Epiphora, seu Lachrymis involuntariis.
(...) is here taken for the defluxion of a thin Rheum, which daily flows from
the corners of the eyes. Some from their childhood are troubled with this
malady, never having dry, but always moist eyes, with a thin piercing humor.

New Epiphora's coming from outward causes are easily cured, especially in
youth; but old, and in old men very hardly. Quae vero ex aliis morbis
procedunt, ut agylope, fistula lachrymali and similibus, ab illorum affectuum
curationibus omnino dependent.

In a stubborn Epiphora, a Vesicatory applied to the forepart of the head does
wonders; as Forestus shows, concerning an old woman who had sore eyes,
weeping and mattery, with great pain and itching, and could by no means be
cured, that with applying a plaster of Cantharides, with Honey and Leaven to
her head being shaven, he perfectly cured her.

This following Cataplasm is of singular use, if the defluxion come from a
sharp hot humor.

Boli armeni, sanguinis dracon. balaustiorum and myrtyllorum, ana, i. ss.
acacia and hypocistidos, ana, i. thuris, mastiches, ana, ii. rosarum rubr. p.
i. Powder them, and mix them with the white of an Egg, and a little vinegar,
make a Cataplasm, which spread upon a cloth, and apply to the forehead and
temples, and renew it as fast as it grows dry.

Some highly commend the opening of the veins and arteries in the head and
temples, which draws out the humor, if it flow inward, and cutteth off the
course of it, if it be outward: Moreover, many remedies may be found for this
malady, in the Chapter de Ophthalmia.

CAP. LXXXVII. De Paremptosi, seu Gutta serena.
(...), most commonly is a hinderance of the whole sight, without any
appearance thereof in the eye (unless it be that the Pupilla seems blacker
and larger) for the Apple of the eye remains sound, and unchanged, the sinew
of sight only is obstructed and stopped, by reason of a watery humor flowing
down from the brain upon the Optic nerves.

Platerus reports, That he saw a blindness which came from a round tumor
growing in the brain, and compressing the Optic nerves, which appeared by
opening of the head, after the Patient was deceased.

As to the Prognostic; if this disease be absolute, that is, if there be a
total loss of sight, it is for the most part incurable, especially if the
Patient be old. But if the obstruction be imperfect, which only causes a
diminution of sight, but not blindness, there is more hope of cure, because
then it is supposed that the humor is not fastened within the substance of the
nerve, but only gathered together in the brain, about the original of those
nerves.

Some Practitioners do relate, that some by a wound in the forehead have been
cured of blindness: In which it is most probable, that the cause of their
blindness was the compression* of the optic nerves, by the veins and arteries
adjoining, and swelling with too much blood, which the wounds aforesaid emptied
forth. Whence Spigelius (as Plempius reports in his Book of the eyes) was wont,
in gutta serena, with good success, to open the middle vein in the forehead,
and let it bleed while it stop of it self.

Old Physicians say, that Treacle is of excellent virtue to strengthen the
brain and the eyes, which may be taken by a dram every night, with Fennel,
Eyebright, or Celandine water, twice or thrice in a week: Nutmeg eaten every
morning fasting is much commended if it be long chewed, that the vapor maybe
carried to the eyes.

Candid Mirabolans taken in the morning are thought to clear the sight
exceedingly.

The usual Opiate given after purging is thus prepared.

Conservae florum betonicae, and anthos, ana, ii. myrobalanos conditas, number.
ii. theriacae veter. ii. pulveris foliorum euphrasiae, iii. sem. foeniculi
dulc. ii. nucis moschatae, cinnamomi, and caryophil. ana, i. cum syrupo e
succis foenic. rutae, thelidon. cum melle confecto, fiat opiata: Let him take
thereof the bigness of a Chestnut, drinking after it a little wine mixed with
Fennel water.

In a desperate case, when all other medicines have been used in vain, a
vesicatory applied over the whole head (being shaven) in form of a cap, has
many times been very successful: If it be twice or thrice used after the drying
up of the former blisters, it is more advantageous.

CAP. LXXXVIII. De Symptosi, seu Concidentia, and Aporrexi.
(...) is, when the sinew of sight is so flat, weak, and pressed down, that
there is not any hollowness remaining in it, because the inside of the skins do
touch each other, by reason either of abundance of humors which fall not into
the hollowness, but upon the substance of this sinew, or else dryness, whereby
it is withered, and gathered together.

If old age do bring this infirmity, it is to be accounted incurable: If the
party be young, and you perceive the disease do proceed from abundance and
fullness; It is cured by an universal evacuation, and by such things as cleanse
and sharpen the sight. Vide supra, in capite de Gutta serena.

(...) is, when the sinew of sight is utterly broken asunder, and separated
from the brain by a stroke or fall, in such sort, that presently upon it does
ensue most desperate blindness, because the spirit of sight cannot be carried
unto the eye.

Concerning the cure, the Surgeon shall have more care to maintain and
preserve the beauty of the eye, then to endeavor the restoring of the sight
which is utterly lost. And so much touching the diseases of the eyes: Next
follow those of the ears.

CAP. LXXXIX. De Aurium Inflammatione.
INflammatio aurium, The Inflammation of the ears, arises from a thin and
choleric blood, fallen forth of the small veins of the brain, into the
membranes of the ear.

Curatio est dubia, propter symptomatum magnitudinem, inprimis in juvenibus;
for they being of a hot temper, and their blood hot, the inflammation is
greater quae nativum calorem cerebri dissolvit; Hence it is that they die for
the most part within seven days: But if they live longer they recover. This
disease is likewise very dangerous in Infants* and little children, which by
reason of the quickness of their sense, minus dolorem sustinere possunt.

Zacutus Lusitanus in praxi ad Historias, commends four Hors-leeches applied
behind the ears, which he says, gave much ease to a young man which had a
violent Inflammation in his ears.

I have sometimes opened the Cephalica vein, on that side the ear has been
grieved, with most happy success.

Gener Domini Hardy, annos circiter 8. natus, magna sinistrae auris
inflammatione correptus est, which caused a most vehement pain, with redness of
color, extending it self even as far as the cheeks and temples: His father
desiring my advice, I directed that a healthful nurse should squirt a little of
her milk from her breast into the lads ear, twice or thrice a day. I also
prescribed these Syrups; Syrupi rosarum sol. ss. syrupi de rhabarbaro, i.
misce. He took half overnight, about ten of the clock, and the rest in the
morning, cum succo prunorum Damascenorum: He had four or five stools, and so
was freed from the Inflammation and pain.

CAP. XC. De Ulceribus aurium, and vermibus.
ULcera aurium, Ulcers of the ears, arise from those things that either pour
forth pus or matter, or else such as by their acrimony and tartness are of a
corroding nature.

Ulcera in auribus difficile curantur, quia cerebrum vicinum ad eas parts
excrementa deponit; But those which follow an Imposthume are easier cured,
especially if the matter be laudable; but where the matter is virulent,
stinking, or the like, it is difficult; especially if the Ulcer be cavous, and
the bone foul.

For drying and cleansing of an Ulcer in the ear, this Medicine following is
excellent, as I have found by experience: Mellis optimi, and vini albi antiqui,
ana, iii. Bulliant ad despumationem, and instillentur in aurem, and stop it
with Cotton dipped in the same: But if you would not have it so strong, you may
boil the Honey with Water and Wine: Or Decocti hordei, iv. mellis rosacei, i.
misce. instillentur tepide in aurem,

Vermes, worms, discover themselves by the corroding pain, restlesness, and
other such like conjectural Symptoms.

Necantur unguento ex axungia capi, and oleo coryli, cum gr. ii. Mercurii
dulcis misto: This medicine following is highly commended.

Olei amygdal. amar. succi apii, centaurii minor. ana, ii. aceti, ii. Bulliant
parum, deinde add myrrhae, aloes, ana, i. M. Instillentur in aurem. Also the
decoction of Hemp dropped into the ear is very effectual for the killing of
Worms. Hitherto of the diseases of the ears: Next follow the symptoms.

CAP. XCI. De Otalgia, seu Aurium dolor.
(...), seu aurium dolor, Pain of the ears, arises from causes distending the
membranes encompassing about the cavity of the ear, and endued with an
exquisite sense.

Prognosis doloris aurium varia est pro varietate causarum. That which* comes
from a bare distemper is easily cured: Qui a materia frigida, pituitosa,
serosa, vel flatuosa producitur, is not very dangerous, but uses to continue
long. The cure is somewhat doubtful if it abide in the deeper part, or bottom
of the ear, sicut etiam si juvenes infestat. Aurium dolor acutus cum febre
continua, ac vehementi, curatu est difficilis: periculum enim delirii,
convulsionis, mortisque imminet.

This Remedy is greatly praised by many: Lactis muliebris recenter mulcti, ii.
albumin. ovi agitati, ut in liquorem abeat,. ss. M. instillentur tepide in
aurem.

Sows, called Aselli, infused in oil of Chamomil, Roses, or Water Lillies, and
strained, are the best Anodynes; haec enim animalia eximiam habent vim dolorem
sedandi.

Plura de aurium dolor vide in meo Enchiridio medico, lib. 3 cap. 13.

CAP. XCII. De Cophosi, seu surditate, and gravi auditu.
(...), seu Surditas, Deafness, is when the hearing is totally gone, so that
the Patient either hears no noise, or if he do, he cannot distinguish it.

Surditas a nativitate non est curabilis. Quae vero inveterata and diuturna,
difficillime curatur. A deafness from choler or blood, which happens only in
sharp continuing Fevers, cum earum febrium curatione solvi consuevit. Surditas
per intervalla crescens and decrescens curabilis est. For it signifies that it
comes from a moveable humor, which sometimes is more, sometimes less in
quantity: A deafness coming from a distemper of the brain is more easily cured,
than that which comes from a proper disease of the ear.

A certain woman of Delf, as Forestus reports, after a long disease fell deaf,
which after sufficient purging abstained from Physic; at length she was
persuaded by an old woman to put a grain or two of Musk into her ears with a
little Cotton, and so doing she was wonderfully cured.

Some Authors commend the water of an Ash, which is made by putting one end of
a green Ash into the fire, and taking the water out of the other end; this is
best when deafness comes of a hot cause: Mathiolus mixeth this water with
juyces, and commends it highly in these words: We know that the water which
comes out of Ash, when it is burnt, mixed with the juice of Sow-bread, Squils,
and Rue, in equal parts warmed together, to be excellent against deafness, if
it be dropped into the sound ear when the Patient goes to bed, and lies upon
that ear which is deaf; but when both ears are deaf, then into that which is
least affected.

Many I have cured of deafness, only by dropping into the ear the distilled
water of Carduus Benedictus, the leaves thereof being twice infused in the
glass vessel.

Ants Eggs mixed with the juice of an Onion, and dropped into the Ear, do cure
the oldest deafness, as Zechius says.

The Gall of a Hare is much commended, if it be used fresh, with an equal
portion of the purest Honey, and warmed in the shell of an Onion.

Si affectus contumacissimus propositis remediis non cedat, curari potest
salivatione, usu mercurii dulcis curiose administrati procurata quia Surditas
ex lue venerea contracta ita curari solet. Vide supra, in capite de cancro
corneae, versus finem.

(...), seu gravis auditus, is, when one cannot hear without much difficulty,
nor understand what others say, except they speak very loud.

Thick hearing, if it be not speedily cured, ends in a perfect deafness.

Plura de Surditate, and gravi auditu, vide in meo Enchiriaio Medico, lib. 3.
cap. 15. Et etiam in mea Schola Physica, Med. 107.

CAP. XCIII. De Sonitu, seu Tinnitu Aurium.
TInnitus, or ringing noise, is defined to be a preternatural sound in the ears
made and perceived in the instrument of hearing, or else in the cavity of the
Head-bone, arising from vapors, First shut up therein, and then moved.

As to the Prognostic, a new begun noise in the head is easily cured, but an
old hardly, and the more si a lue venerea ortum habet. Si in febribus sonitus
aurium fiat ex spiritu vel humore frigido and crasso, sponte sonitus ille,
absque medicamentorum usu, cessare solet. Pulsationes in capite, and sonitus
aurium, haemorrhagiam narium significant. Diuturnus aurium tinnitus a materia
pituitosa in aure contenta oriundus, in surditatem degenerat; for when the
matter is increased, the passage of hearing is stopped.

A certain Gentlewoman, 36 years of age, troubled with a ringing noise in her
head, I thus helped: Extracti Rudii, ss. Calomelanos, gr. vi. resinae jalappae,
gr. iv. misce, and f. pil. number. vi. they wrought very well, and did her much
good: Next I commanded her to sneeze every third morning with a little of this
powder; Pulveris sternutatorii, ( descripti in meo Enchiridio Medico, p. 6.)
ss. pulveris castorei, gr. iii. misce. Every night, for seven nights together,
there was dropped into her ear two or three drops of Carduus water, twice
distilled; after which, the ringing noise in her head was quite taken away, and
returned no more.

Plura de hoc affectu vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 14. Next
follow the diseases, and symptoms of the nostrils.

CAP. XCIV. De Narium ulcere, and Ozaena.
ULcus narium, The Ulcer of the nostrils, is either new or simple, or old and
stinking; this last is called Ozaena.

The new Ulcer which is simple, either comes of external causes, ut vulnere,
aut contusione, or else from internal, as the sharpness of humors, flowing to
the part, ac praecipue pituitae salsae a cerebro profluentis.

(...) comes from a simple ulcer neglected, or from the malignity and acrimony
of the cause by which it becomes putrid and filthy.

Ulcers that are new, and come from a gentle humor that has little malignity,
are easily cured: But old Ulcers that are sordid and putrid are hardly cured;
but if they turn into a Cancer, never. Si a lue venerea, aut Elephantiasi
oriantur, curari non possunt, nisi affectus illi prius auferantur.

Plura de Ozaena vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib 3. cap. 17. Et etiam in mea
Schola Physica, Med. 241.

CAP. XCV. De Sarcomate, and Polypo.
(...), is flesh growing in the nostrils without any certain shape, but like
the proud flesh of an Ulcer.

(...) is a loose and soft excrescency of flesh, growng with small roots and
strings, spreading and hanging down to the lower part of the nose, like the
fish called Polypus, from whence it has its name.

A Sarcoma is easily cured, for the most part, but but Polypus hardly: But that
which is soft, white, or red, or white and red, facilius curatur; durus vero ac
lividus, difficillime and periculum est, ne in cancrum degeneret: also that
Polypus which grows low, or in the middle of the nostril, is more curable
than that which is rooted high, quoniam remedia ad eam partem vix possunt
pertingere.

Mercury Precipitate, which is red, is accounted the best medicine to consume
proud flesh without pain, if it be often washed; Ille pulvis cum melle rosaceo
permiscendus est, and applied with a tent. This Plaster following is of the
same virtue to consume a Polypus without pain: Massae Emplastri de
Mucilaginibus, ss. pulveris sabinae, ii. Incorporate them, and put thereof into
the nostrils, circa lunam decrescentem, for then the tumor is less.

Plura de Polypo vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 19.

CAP. XCVI. De Narium Foetore.
FOetor narium, The stink of the nostrils, comes of foetid vapors either bred
in the nostrils, as in Ozaena, Sarcoma, or Polypus; or sent thither from putrid
humors contained in the forepart of the brain; or about the Processus
mamillares, or os cribrosum.

Foetor narium qui a corruptis humoribus in cerebri anteriori part contentis
exoritur, si recens fuerit, facile curatur; si inveteratus, incurabilis est:
especially if it comes from a depression, and flatness of the nose.

It is cured (after universal evacuations) by snuffing up white Wine ( in quo
centaurium minus, and calamentum incoctum fuerit) morning and evening from the
Palm of the hand: And then by using, in like manner, the juice of Beers cum
aqua majoranae extractus: To oppose the stink the following remedy is good:
Cinnamomi, nucis moschatae, caryophillorum, ana. parts aequales; coq. in vino
albo odorato, quod naribus excipiatur.

CAP. XCVII. De Haemorrhagia narium.
(...), The Haemorrhage, is an immoderate excretion of the blood by the veins
of the nose, the said veins being divided, rarefied, or opened.

Drops of blood upon the day of demonstration, namely, the fourth, or eleventh,
shows that there will be an Haemorrhagy upon the Critical day; namely, the
seventh, or fourteenth, because in those days nature begins to transfer the
humors to those parts.

Sanguis e naribus die critico moderata quantitate fluens, salutaris.
Haemorrhages that are very great are the worst, for they tend to a Convulsion.
I^ in bleeding, either doting or Convulsion happen, it is a very bad sign;
Spasmus enim ex inanitione mortalis est. An Haemorrhagy in the beginning of a
disease is evil, because it is symptomatical, and comes from the malignity of
the matter, nature being stirred up to send it forth before her time. It is
also evil, if in the affects of the Liver it flow out of the left nostril, and
in the affects of the Spleen, out of the right, quia omnis bona evacuatio (...)
debet fieri) and especially if it be accompanied with a sweating of the breast
or head. A few drops coming from the nose, on the Critical day, are evil,
naturae enim imbecillitatem, and malignitatem morbi significant. But a drop
coming upon the day of indication, and signs of concoction also appearing, it
signifies that there will be an Haemorrhagy upon the critical day, as I hinted
before. If bleeding at the nose have continued long, swounding, weakness, and
too much cooling of the liver, Cachexia or Dropsy is to be feared: To him who
has bled at the nose, in quartan Fevers, it is evil; for, as Avicen says,
bleeding in Melancholy and Phlegmatic people is hurtful, because it cools too
much. It is a good sign, if the Patient by bleeding be eased of pain.

A young Roman, as Galen reports, had an acute disease, and thought he saw a
red serpent about the Chamber seeling; at which being frighted, he leaped out
of his bed: Hence Galen foretold an Haemorrhagy at hand, and hindered the
letting of blood, which other Physicians had prescribed. Avicen says, that
blood has come from the nose to the quantity of four pints by a Crisis,
without any decay of strength; this might fall out in some plethorick body,
such a one as the young Roman, whom Galen suffered to bleed four pints and a
half before he would stop it.

Filia mea, tres circiter annos nata, Haemorrhagia narium correpta, retenta
fuit Bufonis exiccatae (quam semper mecum retineo) appropinquatione ad nasum.
Et eodem modo Filium meum curavi, post sufficientem sanguinis evacuationem.

Homo quidam Haemorrhagia narium laborans, cum ad me venisset ut sublevaretur,
venam statim atque habuit a me apertam; postque trium aut quatuor unciarum
sanguinis evacuationem, in animi deliquium incidit, and statim Haemorrhagia
narium penitus cessavit.

A certain Gentleman was taken with so violent a bleeding at the nose, that he
was much weakened thereby; for the stoppage whereof many Remedies being used,
this alone did the cure; Viz. Vinegar and water frequently snuffed up into his
nostrils, quo statim cohibitus est sanguinis fluxus. Which Flux breaking out
again two days after, he used the Vinegar and Water after the same manner as
before, and it was presently stopped.

A Country man being almost dead with bleeding at his nose, a little vinegar of
Roses was dropped into that ear which was next the nostril out of which the
blood came, and his bleeding presently ceased.

A certain Gentleman, having lost at least twelve pound of blood from both
nostrils, had two cupping glasses set upon his feet, without scarification,
which wonderfully stopped the Flux; but after the cupping glasses had been a
while fixed, the Patient fell into a swound; and therefore they took them off,
and threw water in his face, by which he recovered; and then being refreshed
with the scent of Wine he came to himself, and was restored to his former
health, from his bleeding, beyond all expectation.

A piece of money bound to the root of the nose (between the eyebrows when the
veins or arteries in the forehead or temples do swell) stops the Flux. And
for the better compression, you may lay upon the money a pledget, dipped in the
white of an Egg beaten with time.

Pereda speaks of an old woman, that was cured of an Haemorrhagy of three days
continuance, only by Mints put into the Nose.

Rodericus a Castro, in his Book de morbis Mulierum, says, that a Physician of
seventy years old, given to violent bleeding, carried always Asses dung not
quite dry about him in a Box, than which, he confessed, he never knew a better
medicine; especially, if when it was dry, he mixed it with the juice of a
Nettle, or if wet, he put it alone into his Nose.

Some use a Cataplasm, ex bolo armena, mixed cum ovi albumine and aceto, with
very good success.

Vinegar alone will stop blood, if the forehead be fomented therewith in a
sponge.

And so will the Cotton of an Inkhorn, if squeezed a little, and bound to the
forehead.

Plura de Haemorrhagia narium vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 18.

Praeterca in periculosissimo casu (si permaxime debilis non sit aegrotus) cum
nulla praevalent remedia, tria aut quatuor grana Laudani, cujus operatio
cujuslibet fluxus humorumque motionis repressio est, adhibere potes.

CAP. XCVIII. De Olfactus laesione.
OLfactus laesia, The hu^ting of the sense of smelling, is the abolition, or
the diminution thereof, which differ only in degrees, and in the greatness of
their causes.

Olfactus laesio recens, and a simplici coryza genita, facile curatur;
inveterata vero, and a confirmata intemperie proveniens, difficile: That which
comes fom the ill shape of the nostrils is incurable.

That that chiefly deserves commendation in this malady, is the root of
Gentian, fitly put up into the nostrils; Oleum Nigellae, rutae, majoranae,
succini, and castorei.

CAP. XCIX. De Coryza, seu Gravedine.
(...), seu Gravedo, The Pose is a defluxion of the excrements of the brain
being crude and thin like water) unto the nostrils, which is accompanied and
attended with a frequent sternutation, or sneezing.

Among all kinds of Catarrhs, that which is through the nose, levissima and
tutissima est, ac cito curatur, si recens fuerit, and a causa externa
concitare. Quae vero diuturna est, a contumaci cerebri intemperie oriunda,
difficile curatur. As also, when it proceeds of a hot distemper of the Liver,
which sometimes causes sharp and hot Catarrhs; by which the nose is often
ulcerated, and ill-affected otherways.

Authors do commend, for the removing of a Pose, the vapor of boiled Marjoram
taken into the nose: The fume of Vinegar sprinkled upon a red hot Iron is good
for the same; and the better si in aceto rosae rubrae prius infundantur: If the
defluxion be very cold, dry fumigations of Nigella, Frankincense, and the like,
thrown upon Embers are very good: his enim frigida cerebri intemperies
corrigitur, and superflua humiditas absumitur.

CAP. C. De Sternutatione.
STernutatio, Sneezing, is a violent and involuntary expulsion (by the
nostrils) of the flatulent windy spirits, and sharp vapors offending the
brain.

It is most certain that neezing is sometimes so troublesome, that it requires
a Physician as we may read in Forestus, 127. lib. 10. in his History of a
certain maid, which had so grievous a fit of sneezing, from a sharp Catarrh,
that she had the advice of many Physicians.

Hic affectus in principio Catarrhi, and Coryzae valde nocet, because it keeps
the humor from concoction by its motion. Sternutatio in febribus praecipue
malignis, salutem permittit: Neezing provoked with medicines is good against
Apoplexies, and other great diseases of the brain: And if being provoked they
do not sneez, it is a sign of death, for it signifies that nature leaves to
act.

The little veins in the greater angle of the eyes, and that is nighest unto
the nostrils, being forcibly pressed together, do forthwith stay and stop the
frequency thereof: Also it is good to snuff up warm milk into the Nose, by
which only remedy Forestus presently cured the maid mentioned formerly: Next
follow the diseases and symptoms of the tongue.

CAP. CI. De Linguae Tumore.
TUmor Linguae, The Tumor or swelling of the tongue, arises either from a
choleric blood flowing unto it, (and then for the most part an Inflammation is
excited) or from a waterish (and then the tongue waxes white) or else from a
poisonous matter, as in the French disease.

Forestus speaks of a Brewer that had a great Inflammation of his tongue, which
came to suppuration and brake.

Galen makes mention of a certain man, whose tongue was so swollen by reason of
Rheum which fell from his head, that he could not contain it in his mouth.

The same Author reports, that he saw a tongue which grew exceeding great,
absque ullo sensu doloris, neither would it pit, or yield to the singer, but it
was a bare increase of the quantity of the tongue, which came by too much
nourishment brought and converted into the substance of it.

Tumors of the tongue, for the most part, do not endanger the life, unless they
grow so big that they cause suffocation: Si linguae tumor sit durus, lividus,
and ad cancri naturam fere tendens, incurabilis est.

A certain Gentlewoman being grievously afflicted with an inflammation of the
tongue, in a burning Fever, was thus helped: First, there was taken away from
the Cephalic vein four or five ounces of blood, although she had passed
fourteen weeks of her time, being with child. The same day the following
Gargarism was used. Aquae fontanae, lb. ii. julepi rosarum, i. ss. mellis
mororum, vi. aceti rosacei, i. olei vitrioli, q. s. ut acidus sit; with this
she washed her mouth, which brought away much phlegm: Now and then the dry
places were anointed with honey of Roses, and sometimes with Butter, and so she
was cured.

Galen cured a Patient of sixty years, whose tongue was very much inflamed,
only by washing it with the juice of Lettice, after purging.

Zacutus Lusitanus, in a desperate case, when the tongue of his Patient grew to
a wonderful bigness, so that he feared suffocation, after emptying and
re-velling medicines used in vain applied four Hors-leeches to the tongue, and
in a short time, after plentiful bleeding, it became thin and small, and the
Patient escaped.

The same Author declares, that he cured a child of ten years old, who had a
tongue swollen by defluxion, so big that it could not be contained in his mouth
(after revulsions by bleeding, cupping-glasses with scarification, and sharp
Clysters) because the Tumor was soft and loose, only by profound scarification
of the tongue; and after he commanded that it should be washed with Salt water,
from whence there came such abundance of humors that the child presently
recovered.

A certain person, by reason of the too frequent use of Mercurial Unguents, had
his tongue so swelled (from the violence of the Flux which followed thereupon)
that it hung out of his mouth the breadth of four fingers: He continued in this
condition by the space of four months, and his tongue being altered by the air
was grown three fingers thick. Mr. Des Grands Prez, a most expert Physician of
Greenoble, being sent for after bleeding, washing of the part, and a Seton
fastened to the neck, took down the swelling thereof, chiefly by the use of a
powder framed of Pepper, Ginger, Mustard Seed, and parched Salt.

CAP. CII. De Batracho, seu Ranula sub lingua.
(...), is a swelling, in shape resembling a Frog, which now and then arises
and grows out under the tongue, out of that soft flesh on which the tongue
lies, and unto which it is tied and sastned as with a chain.

Ranula recens, and pituitosa, facile curatur; antiqua vero, and ab humore
adusto, Chirurgia indiget. This disease in children sometimes threatens
suffocation by reason of the neerness of the Larynx to the rough Artery; in
men, if they have pain and Fever there is danger, for it may turn to a
Squinancy: Ranula sub lingua, si coloris obscuri fuerit, non irritabitur, ne
cancerosa fiat.

Forestus speaks of a Girl of twelve years of age, that was cured of a Ranula
in two days space, with this only Medicine; Cortic. granat. hyssopi sicci,
salis communis, ana, ii. Fiat pulvis sub lingua detinendus, and frequently use
it: To men, instead of common Salt, you may use Sal ammoniac, quod magis
penetrat and potentius dissolvit.

Petrus Forestus used the forementioned powder to a Student; as also a
decoction made of equal parts of Galls, Alum, and Pomegranate flowers; and
lastly, he commanded the part to be rubbed with parched Salt, and Sal gem. and
the Patient was cured without manual operation, quod rarissime solet contingere.

The same Author cured the like Tumor in a woman, by an Incision made on both
sides, and after by washing with Vinegar and Water, mixed with a little Salt.

Plura de Ranula sub lingua, vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib 3. cap. 29.

CAP. CIII. De Linguae nigritie, cum Scabritie and Scissuris.
LInguae nigrities cum scabritie and scissuris, Blackness of the tongue with
seat bedness and clefts, arises, for the most part, from hot and fiery vapors
and exhalations, and this especially in burning Fevers.

In omni morbo in quo lingua aduritur fere semper malum praesagium est. Linguae
nigrities cum pulsu frequenti, and parvo, mortem propinquam denotat.

The heat, toughness, and dryness of the tongue in Fevers is to be mitigated by
washing of the mouth cum aqua portulacae, rosarum, decocto hordei, cum exigua
portione aceti; vel decocto violarum, lactucae, cum syrupo violarum and diamor.

Item frustum Cucumeris super linguam applicatum commendatur.

Ad Fissuras linguae efficit decoctum Hordei, Glycyrrhizae, Psylii, Sem.
Cydoniorum, Passularum, ad spissitudinem, and utere.

CAP. CIV. De Linguae Balbutie, Paralysi, and Aphonia.
(...), seu Balbuties, and (...), seu Blaesitas, Stammering and stuttering
infest the party, either from drunkenness, or from an ill composure and frame
of the tongue, or from the shortness, and excessive thickness thereof, or else
from an immoderate dryness, or overgreat humidity and moisture.

Galen, in his Comments, says, That they who naturally stammer, have either a
moist brain, or tongue, or both. And therefore stammerers are most subject to
long Fluxes of the belly, as Hippocrates speaks.

Balbuties a nativitate contracta incurabilis est. But an accidentary
stammering coming by reason of some great defluxion of Rheum upon the jaws and
tongue may be cured by evacuation, revulsion, and derivation of the humors; as
also by drying and strengthening the brain. Indeed the Remedies are the same
with those for the Palsy.

Paralysis, A Palsy happens either unto the whole tongue, or else only unto
a part thereof, (whether the right or the left) either by the default of the
Nerves or the Spirits.

If a Palsy of the tongue follow an Apoplexy or Lethargy raro and difficulter
admodum curatur; especially if the Patient be well stricken in years. Ex
confirmata Paralysi omnes obmutescunt.

This Gargarism following is very much commended ad linguae paralysim.

Rad, ireos Florent. ss. cubebarum, iii. liquiritiae, i. Coquantur in aequis
partibus aquae and vini albi, ad lib. i. In colatura dissolve oxymelitis
scillitici, ii. Fiat gargarisma, and saepissime utatur.

If it work not strong enough, you may add two or three drachms of the
decoction of Pellitory of Spain, or of Mustard Seed. Vide supra in capite 31.
de Paralysi, seu resolutione nervorum, versus finem.

(...), The Aphony, or speechlesness, arises either from a default and error
in the natural formation thereof; or elfe from the Palsy when it is
consummated.

Curatur ut Paralysis.

CAP. CV. De Laesione Gustus.
GUstus laesio, The hurting of the taste, is then said to be, when it is either
diminished, abolisht, or depraved.

The diminution and abolition of the taste happens by reason of a defect of the
Animal spirit in the part, or a distemper of the third pair of nerves which
come to the tongue.

The taste is depraved when the tongue is infected with an evil humor; ut in
febribus saepe contingit.

Gustus laesio ab intemperie frigida and sicca difficilius curatur, quam ab
intemperie calida and humida: The hurting of the taste, if it continues long
facultatem naturalem laedit; and in that condition the Patient alimenta
discernere nequit.

If the disease lie in the brain, or nerves, (which is known when there appears
no change in the tongue) you may apply such Remedies as use to be prescribed
for the cure of the Palsy. Cum vero a pravis humoribus gustus depravatur,
commonly that symptom depends upon other diseases; which being cured, the
symptoms also are removed.

Moreover, a Radish root pickled in Salt, and chewed before supper, and the
mouth afterward washed with Wine, does help very much. Next follow the diseases
and symptoms of the lips.

CAP. CVI. De Labiorum Fissuris.
FIssurae, Fissures or Clefts, are a solution of the continuity of the lips, by
overmuch dryness and extension.

Labiorum fissurae non plane negligendae. Nam si diu durent in ulcera crustosa,
aliquando etiam cancerosa, degenerant.

They are cured by correcting the dryness with those things that humectate and
moisten, and by uniting of the dissolved union. For this purpose we prescribe
that fat which distilleth out of those wooden spoons used in kitchings, if they
be put near unto the fire: And if the chaps or clefts be somewhat deep, adipe
anserino and caponis illiniri debent.

Si a frigore externo sit fissara, solo unguento pomato albo labia inungere
sufsicit.

CAP. CVII. De Labiorum Ulceribus.
ULcera Labiorum, Ulcers of the lips, proceed from humors that are sharp,
choleric, and serous or wheyish, either from adustion and putridness, or else
from their admixture.

Ulcers of the lips which are critically thrust forth in Fevers are a good sign
for the most part, and signifies either the perfect solution, or else the
diminution of the Fever; and those ulcers are easily cured of themselves, if
they appear with signs of concoction. Si vero cum viribus diminutis sint,
mortem minantur; as happened in the wife of Hermoptolemus: Difficiliora curatu
sunt and Pejora, quae a morbo Gallico proveniunt.

Si sine Febre and morbo Gallico ulcera oriantur, universalibus praemissis tale
adhibeatur unguentum; Unguenti rosati Mesuae, i. linimenti ex lithargyrio, ss.
misce, in mortario plumbeo, and utere. You must note that Medicaments are most
fitly and best of all administered about the time of the Patients sleeping.

Permultos hoe sequenti linimento and julepo, curavi, Mellis rosati, i.
cerussae, ii. vel sacchari saturni, i. misce pro linimento, and utere. Aquae de
fumoterrae, lb. i. Syrupi. e succo fumariae, ii. misce, pro quatuor dosibus,
mane and sero sumendis.

CAP. CVIII. De Labiorum Tremore, and Perversione.
TRemor labiorum, The trembling of the lips, proceeds either from external
causes, to wit, cold, ( cum dentium stridore,) wrath, or fear; or else from an
internal cause, as from the weakening of the nerves in some extraordinary great
affect of the brain, or in the nauseousness of the stomach, and propension to
vomit; for when the lower lip trembles, unless it be from anger or fear,
Vomitum plerumque praesagit, ut Galenus docet, libro de crisibus.

Perversio labiorum, The* Perversion of the lips proceeds from the affect of
the Nerves of the third pair, there being then a Convulsion of the Muscles.

In continual Fevers it is deadly, if the strength and powers of the body be
extremely weakened: But if they be strong and vigorous, the actions thereof
constant and uniform; and when the Metastasis (as they term it) or transferring
of the critical matter unto the head be accomplished, it is then void of all
danger.

Interdum etiam in febribus continuis livida fiunt labra; quod signum lethale
est, and caloris nativi extinctionem significat.

Curatio labiorum tremoris perficienda est secundum ipsius causas.

Quo vero ad labiorum perversionem, vide infra, capite III. de Tortura oris,
seu distortione. We proceed next to the diseases and symptoms of the Face.

CAP. CIX. De Oris Apertione, and Hiatu.
ORis Apertio, The opening of the mouth, is, when that bone that by nature
ought to have been shut is not yet shut; either by reason of some tumors
arising near about the conjuncture of the jaw bone, ( ut in inflammationibus
maxillae and tonsillarum accidere solet) or else by reason of some filthy humor
gotten into that juncture, and there deeply inserted.

Oris Hiatus, The gaping of the mouth, is then when the mouth that by nature
(one lip falling down, and resting upon the other) ought to have been shut,
gapeth; either from an ill custom, or from the obstruction of the nostrils,
that so more store of air may be attracted, vel a luxatione inferioris
maxillae, vel a laesa in Lethargo memoria, or else from the ascending up of
extreme hot vapors in Fevers; and then, if there be pains of the jaws (without
any swelling) that seem as though they would suffocate and strangle the party,
the minds disturbance and alienation is then portended, and threatened.

Utriusque curationes pendent a causarum, a quibus haec vitia proveniunt,
remotione.

CAP. CX. De Oris Oscitatione.
OScitatio, Oscitation or yawning is a vehement distention of the mouth, by
halituous and windy vapors gathered together, in the spaces of the Muscles of
the nether-jaw-bone, and of the cheeks, and extimulating or provoking the
excretive faculty to do its office by excretion.

Oscitation if frequent without occasion, presageth diseases, and is in very
deed the praeludium of Fevers: If yawning happen to a woman in travel, it is
accounted a deadly sign.

Avicennas contra oscitationem masticationem acori commendat. Vinum etiam cum
pari portione aquae aptissimum est.

CAP. CXI. De Oris Tortura, seu Distortione.
TOrtura oris, The writhing of the mouth is a distention thereof, proceeding
either from the muscles of the face, or the nerves of the third and fifth
Conjugation, or those which descend from the first and principal vertebrae of
the neck.

Tortura oris, quae ultra sex menses producitur, aut nunquam, aut difficulter
curatur, test Avicenna. If this unseemly affect has no consent or agreement,
the cure is so much the easier. Quae per spasmum sit tortura oris, in morbis
acutis, lethalis est, test Rhase.

A certain Gentlewoman vexed with the Convulsion of the mouth, was thus helped:
Pillularum aurearum, i. pil. de succino, ss. f. pil. number. v. These she took
when she went to bed, the same night her neck was anointed with Oil of
Sassafras; in the morning she took ss. of Pil. Ruffi; and again the said Oil
was used with Aqua vitae, the Oil being wanting, the following was used with
most happy success: Unguenti martiat. magn. i. olei laurini, petrolei,
castorei, terebinthinae, ana, ss. olei de Lateribus, i. misce. But first, the
neck was fomented with Aqua-vitae, in which was infused Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Pepper, and theriaca Andromachi; she eat Nutmegs often; to the nostrils
and top of the head was used oil of Amber: She chewed on the sound side
Pellitory of Spain, and was often purged with the following Pills: Pillularum
foetidarum, i. castorei pulv. ss. pil. Ruffi, and de succino, ana, i. f. pil.
number. vi. and thus she was cured beyond all expectation.

Another Gentlewoman afflicted with Tortura oris, was helped chiefly by the use
of this Unguent; Unguenti martiat. ss. olei sassafr. and succini, ana, gut. v.
misce. with which her neck was often anointed.

Gaergarismus etiam ex ruta, salvia and stoechade, commendatur.

Plura de Tortura oris vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 3.

CAP. CXII. De Ptyalismo, seu Crebra sputatione.
(...), A Ptyalism, is a frequent and involuntary spitting and spawling,
without any cough, or retching, proceeding from a superfluity and overgreat
store of spittle.

A Ptyalism sometimes preserves from great diseases, imo magnos morbos tollit.
And we have observed that some have been cured of an acute Fever by much
spitting.

Resina jalappae optimum est remedium, ut multoties experientia comprobatum
fuit; a dry diet does also help very much.

Quidam decoctione ex foliis plantaginis, myrti, alumine and balaustia
composita, utuntur; which is only to be kept and contained in the mouth, and
not to be gargarized therewith, lest that thereby more phlegm be attracted, and
drawn unto the superfluous spittle. Si tamen critica sit evacuatio, fluxus ille
impediendus non est: Next follow the Affects of the mouth.

CAP. CXIII. De Oris Ulceribus, and Aphthis.
ULcera oris, Ulcers of the mouth, arise from sharp humors, or vapors, a variis
partibus in fauces translatis.

(...), The Aphthae, are certain small, but hot and fiery exulcerations in the
highest part or superficies of the mouth, arising in children, for the most
part, a lactis acrimonia quae os exulcerat.

Those Ulcers which come of phlegm are least dangerous; those that come of
blood, or choler, more; and those that come of melancholy most of all: The
mouth ulcerated in a Fever is hard to cure, quia humoris erodentis malitiam
indicant. Ulcera nigra and crustosa pessima and lethalia sunt, praecipue in
pueris.

Mouth-waters made of Plantane, Honey-suckle, and red Roses, cum syrupo de
moris, and de rosis siccis, are here chiefly commended, if the ulcerated mouth
be inflamed; but it there be no Inflammation, unicum ac summum remedium est
spiritus vitrioli, aut sulphuris, which may be used alone, to men, upon a
little Lint at the end of a stick, gently touching the part, by which it will
be presently cured, if it be a simple Aphtha, In pueris vero permiscetur dictus
spiritus cum melle rosaceo, so that it may be a little sharp, and with a little
lint at the end of a Probe often apply it, and cito curantur: But first it will
be convenient to wash the child's mouth with Chalybeated milk, mixed with
conserve of Roses.

A child four years old was cured with one grain of Laudanum, when his jaws and
tongue were deeply ulcerated with such an inflammation that he could neither
take broth, nor topics, the humors flowing so fast from his mouth, that he lay
night and day complaining without any rest.

A certain person after the use of Mercurial Unguents, had his mouth so
inflamed, that he was almost desperate, which inflammation, all other remedies
being tried in vain, was healed only with Chicken-broth made without so much as
any Herbs in it; the virulency of the Quicksilver being mitigated, as was
supposed, by the benign and debonaire substance of the Chicken.

Plura de Aphthis vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 21. Et etiam in
mea Schola Physica, Med. 112.

CAP. CXIV. De Oris Foetore.
FOetor oris, The stinking of the mouth, is the offensive unsavoriness of the
breathing, proceeding and arising from a foetid and stinking vapor passing out
of the mouth.

Foetor oris ob dentes corrosos, vel gingivas exulceratas, per extractionem
dentium, and gingivarum consolidationem removeri solet. Si Anhelitus foeteat in
tabidis, ut plurimum laethale signum est.

If the breath stink by reason of corrupt humors in the stomach, eos humores
aloeticis optime evacuantur. Also Cloves, Nutmeg, the root of Angelica,
Cinnamon, seeds of Fennel, etc. are to be held and kept in the mouth.

Vide plura de hoc affectu, in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 20. We
proceed next to the diseases and symptoms of the Teeth.

CAP. CXV. De Dentium Corrosione.
COrrosio dentium, The Corrosion of the Teeth, is a diminution of their
magnitude, from causes that eat through them, so that they are broken, fall
forth by piece meal, the said diminution or corrosion, now and then, producing
Fistulaes.

Now the teeth are corroded or eaten in by an acride and thin humor penetrating
by a plenteous and frequent defluxion even to their roots, and being there
contained, it putrifies; and becoming more acrid, it does not only draw the
teeth into the contagion of its putrefaction, but also perforates and corrodes
them; the putrefaction may be corrected, if after general medicines, you put
oil of Vitriol into the hole of the eaten tooth; or else, if you burn the tooth
it self to the root with a small iron Wier, being red hot; you may thrust this
hot Iron through a pipe or cane made for the same purpose, lest it should harm
any sound part by the touch thereof; and thus the putrefaction, the cause of
the erosion, may be stayed.

Moreover, corruption may be carefully prevented by cleansing of the teeth
(with a penknife) from meats that stick betwixt them; and likewise by washing
the mouth with Wine: Also here are commended the little round balls of
Trallianus, ex opii Thebaici, i. myrrhae, styracis calam. ana, ss. Piperis
albi, croci, galbani, ana, i. cum melle scillitico conformati, and denti
inserti.

Worms breeding by putrefaction in the roots of the teeth may be killed by the
use of Causticks, by Garglings or Lotions made of Vinegar, wherein either
Pellitory of Spain has been steeped, or Treacle dissolved; for the same
purpose Aloes and Garlic are good to be used.

A Fistula is hardly to be cured, unless that the tooth be wholly pulled out by
the roots: For although the corrupt and rotten filth which insensibly distills
by little and little (and qui interdum in os cum foetore influit) may by the
use of Medicines seem to be removed, and the Fistula cured, yet it will soon
break out again: But now that the tooth may be the better drawn forth, it may
be well rubbed with the fat of green Frogs living in trees.

Petrus Pachequus was wont to fill hollow teeth with Turpentine, and then to
burn them with a red-hot iron, which succeeded very happily.

CAP. CXVI. De Dentium Mobilitate.
DEntium Mobilitas, The Mobility of the teeth, is the weak and infirm standing
of them, proceeding from the proper causes thereof; upon which said vacillation
or infirmness, the falling forth of them does oftentimes ensue.

Looseness of the teeth happening through defect of Aliment (as in old people
whose gums decay) can never be cured; Modice tamen astringentibus agendum est.
If the teeth grow loose by means of the Scurvie, the disease is then the more
easily cured.

If they become loose by a fall or blow, they must not be taken forth, but
restored and fastened to the next that remain firm, for in time they will be
confirmed in their sockets, as Paraeus tried in one Anthony de la Rue a Tailor,
who had his jaw broken with the Pummel of a Dagger, and three of his teeth
loosned, and almost shaken out of their sockets; the jaw being restored the
teeth were also put in their places, and bound to the rest with a double
waxed-thread; for the rest he commanded the Patient neither to speak too
earnestly, nor to chaw hard things, but to feed on Broths, jellies, and the
like; and he made astringent Gargarisms of Cypress nuts, Myrtle-Berries, and a
little Alum boyld in Oxycrate, and wished the Patient to hold it a good while
in his mouth; by these means he brought it so to pass, that the Tailor within a
while after could chaw as easily upon those teeth, as upon the other.

Plura de Dentium mobilitate vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 23.
Hitherto of the diseases of the teeth; next of the Symptoms.

CAP. CXVII. De Odontalgia, seu Dentium dolor.
(...), is a sad and grievous sense of pain in the teeth, proceeding from the
solution of continuity in them by reason of humors.

The Prognostic is diverse, according to the variety of causes: For that pain
which comes from a hot, thin, watery, sharp, and salt humor, is more violent,
but sooner at an end. Qui vero ab humore frigido and pituitoso excitatur,
mitior est, sed multo diuturnior. There is good hope of cure if there be a
kind of pus or purulent matter gathered together in the ear. A Tumor also
arising in the gums or jaws takes away the pain of the teeth: Dolores dentium
intentissimi aliquando ad syncopen, Interdum ad Epilepsiam aegrum deducere
solent.

Uxor Domini Lemon, Castoriensis, dolor dentium a seroso humore procedente
maxim turbata, habuit, remotionis causa, hoc sequens medicamentum:
Calomelanos, gr. xv. resinae jalappae, gr. viii. conservae rosarum rubr. i. ss.
misce. It purged her so effectually that the pain went away in the working, and
returned no more: It is a most incomparable remedy wherewith I have helped a
great number of people of the pain of the teeth, and other diseases arising
from serous humors. Indeed the words of Carolus Piso first moved me to make
trial of it in pains of the teeth; for he reports, that himself being troubled
with the toothache for many days, half an hour after he had taken a purging
medicine, vomited up above a pint of clear water, with such success, that for
ten years after he was never troubled with it. By which experience, he always
prescribed medicines that purge water to them who were so troubled, and with
very good success. Moreover, He striveth to prove that it comes from this
cause, by this sign, because they who have the toothache, do continually spet.

Domina Thompson, annos circiter 25. nata, vehementi dentium dolor a tenui sed
calido humore emanante laborans sic levata fuit. Laudani opiat, gr. iv. lapidis
bezoardici orientalis, gr. i. f. pil. She took it in a little conserve of red
Roses at her entrance into bed; it procured rest, quite removed the pain, and
so prevented a Fever, and other symptoms, which I exceedingly feared.

Samuel Formius, a most experienced Surgeon of Montpelier, declares, that he
has freed an infinite company of people from the toothach, by putting a little
Cotton-Wool wet in oil of Box wood, into their hollow tooth: This oil is drawn
in a Retort, with a reverberating heat; first, infusing the dust thereof in
White Wind twenty four hours, and then stilling all together: First, there
comes away an acid water, which does good in the toothache, only by washing
the teeth therewith; after that comes the oil, which is to be diligently
preserved.

Gabriel Hardvinus reports, that he has seen the toothache cured with salt of
Ash-wood, with which a woman's Thimble, or some such implement is filled, and
applied to the artery of the temple where the Pulsation is felt; and within a
short time it makes a knot in the Artery, whereby the Flux is intercepted.

A certain Lady cruelly tormented with the toothache, proceeding chiefly from a
Scorbutic humor, was helped by the use of the following prescription: Aquae
cochleariae, vi. aquae rosarum rubr. plantaginis, ana, iii. mellis rosacei,
mellis morum, ana, i. spirit. vitrioli, q. s. ut acidum sit remedium. Of this
she took in her mouth, which freed her from the toothache, and took down the
swelling of her gums, which were filled with black blood.

A certain Nobleman was cruelly vexed with pain of his teeth, and very much
molested with the swelling of his gums, which was removed by the following
Remedies: Pil. de succino Cratonis, iii. f. pil. number. 18. Of these he took
three every morning and night for three days, which purged very well. This
Gargarism was used: Decocti cortic. guaiaci, decocti Hordei, ana, iv. syrupi
mororum, mellis rosacei, ana, ii. spirit. vitrioli, ut acidus sit, In this also
there was often in a day a piece of Sponge wet, and applied to the pained gums:
by these medicines he was delivered from all his symptoms: The second day he
could eat meat, and the third day he was perfectly healed.

Formius tells us, that he has happily used this following medicament.

Sem. plantaginis, ii. tormentillae, iii. rad. hyoscyami albi, iv. omnia
exsiccata redigantur in pulverem subtillissimum, addendo opii granum unum,
includantur in nodulis, qui macerentur in decocto sequenti. Flor. sambuci, m.
i. rosarum rubr. p. ii. Bulliant in aceto ad usum supradictum. These Nodules
being steeped in the said decoction are peeled and gently pressed between the
teeth, and within a while much moisture flows out of their mouth, and the pain
is taken away.

Simeon Jacoz, a most expert Physician, exceedingly tormented with the
toothache, and a troublesome Ptyalism, took eight grains of Resina benedicta,
with which being very well and gently purged, he voided in great quantity the
superfluous serosity in seven stools, and the day following he found himself
free from the foresaid pains and troublesome spittings: But not long after the
pain of his teeth, and Ptyalism returned, which went away within twenty four
hours, upon his taking the foresaid Medicine, and so he was perfectly cured.

Permultos curavi dentium dolor laborantes usu Apophlegmatismi descripti supra
capite 16. de Vertigine.

A decoction of the roots of the great Nettle, with a little Nutmeg and
Saffion, made, in equal parts, of Wine and Vinegar, and held warm in the mouth,
does wonderfully draw the humors forth; but, at first, the pain will seem to
increase; but afterward it will be mitigated, and cease.

A Country man troubled with the toothache was persuaded by another, to rub his
tooth with a leaf or two of Elleboraster; he unwittingly rubbed all the teeth
on that side, and presently almost all his teeth fell out: Therefore if any
will try this medicine, let him first defend the other teeth with soft Wax.

In a cold Defluxion, the juice of Garlic, mixed with Treacle, and dropped warm
into the ear, on the same side, does wonderfully assuage the pain of the teeth.

A Nettle bruised and laid to the jaw, does quickly assuage the pain, when it
is swelled.

Many Topics made of Narcoticks are in use; but these two following are the
best:

Opii, myrrhae, and ladani, ana. i. Pulverizentur, and cum vino albo
decoquantur in formam linimenti, which put with Lint into the tooth.

The other is, the Emplaister of Riverius, chief Physician to Henry the great;
It is thus made: Nucum cupressi, rosarum rubr. seminis nasturtii torrefacti,
Mastiches, terrae sigillatae, ana, i. ss. Macerentur in aceto rosaceo per horas
24. postea siccentur, and add opii in aqua vitae dissoluti, iii. picis
navalis, colophoniae, ana, i. cerae flavae in oleis expressis, seminum
hyoscyami and papaveris. albi, liquatae, q. s. Fiat Emplastrum; apply it to the
Arteries, and the part affected with pain.

A certain Gentlewoman of a choleric Complexion, being seven months gone with
child, and recovered newly of an acute disease, was taken with so fierce a
toothache, that all remedies being tried in vain, she lay many days and nights
without rest, crying out and weeping* At last (when as she was brought almost
to desperation) there was given her four grains of Laudanum; which having taken
with a little Confectio de Hyacintho, after a quarter of an hour, she fell into
a quiet sleep for some hours, and being awaked, and void of pain, she passed
the rest of her childing time without any grief.

CAP. CXVIII. De Dentium Stridore, and Stupore.
STridor dentium, The grinding or crashing noise of the teeth, proceeds
either from Worms, the Brain being affected by consent, or from the imbecility
of the jaw bone, Muscles produced and caused by cold, vel a vaporum
multitudine, ut in paroxysmorum principiis.

Grinding of the teeth is wont to threaten the Apoplexy, or Epilesie, and
likewise, in Fevers, the deliry or dotage; (in such especially as are not
accustomed thereunto) in case this doting went not before the Fever.
Hippocrates puts the Stridor or crashing of the teeth, amongst the signs of
conception.

The cure of it must not be directed to the Stridor it self, but to the causes.

(...), seu stupor dentium, The astonishment of the teeth, happens for the most
from the sourness either of meats, or of the humors, or else of the Fumes and
Vapors, which frequently befalls those that are Hypochondriacal.

It is cured and taken away by chewing of Wax, hot Bread bitter Almonds,
Liquorice-Roots, etc. Rhases etiam dentes sale affricare jubet. Confert and
frequens oris collutio cum vino calido vel decocto salviae.

CAP. CXIX. De Dentium Nigredine.
DEntium Nigredo, Blackness of the teeth, proceeds from filthy vapors that
fly upwards, and are engendered of evil nourishment, or from the distemper of
the stomach, which corrupts good nutriment.

Quo ad dealbationem, mundationem, preservationemque dentium ab omni sorditie,
Spiritus sulphuris aut vitrioli maxim ab omnibus commendatur. Montanus
reports, that he learned that at Rome, of a Woman called Greek Mary: to whom
when he came when he was young, and she twenty years old, and after when she
was fifty, he found her almost in the same condition, and she confessed that
her beauty and strength was preserved by the Spirit of Vitriol, and that her
teeth which were very bad in her youth, were by that made very fair and firm,
and also her gums; and also that she perceived her self by the use thereof to
seem more youthful, and she used every day one drop or two to rub gently her
teeth and gums.

In a great foulness you may use the oils by themselves, dipping therein a
little stick, and rubbing the teeth with the end thereof, and then wiping them
with a clout; otherwise you must mix them with Honey of Roses, or fair water,
ne usu frequenti gingivas erodat.

Cinis Nicotianae ad dentes abstergendos and de-albandos est etiam mire
efficax.

It is observable, that those Women which use Mercury to make them fair, have
always black and ill-coloured teeth. Next follow the Affects of the Gums.

CAP. CXX. De Gingivarum excrescentia, and Epulide.
EXcrescentia gingivarum, The Excrescence of the gums, is sometimes so great by
reason of their spungy rarity, and looseness, caused by the abundant afflux of
blood, that the teeth (and especially the grinders, or Molares) are quite
covered over.

In the cure we are to use Astringents, to wit, Alum burnt, Sal Ammoniack,
Mastick, Frankincense, all of them reduced and made into a very fine flour, in
case there be no putrefaction present; but if there be, then this that
follows is singularly useful: Take Powder of the leaves of Celandine, Sage,
crisped Mints, of each half an ounce, Alum burnt one ounce, the purest Honey
four ounces: Let the Honey be thoroughly freed from its scum by the fire, and
then when it is scummed, while it is yet hot, let the Pouders be sprinkled
thereinto; and make a Liniment, for the anointing of the teeth therewithal.

(...) is a little piece of flesh that stands out, and hangs forth of the Gums.

Vitriol often sprinkled thereon does help very much. Plura etiam de Epulide
vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 24.

CAP. CXXI. De Parulide, seu Gingivarum inflammatione.
(...) is an inflammation of the Gums, extending it self inwardly unto the root
of the teeth, and outwardly so sticking out, that even the near neighboring
parts are likewise distended, grow hot, and become red.

Inflammatio gingivaram nisi statim reprimatur, in Apostema abit: sometimes
this evil does turn into a long lasting ulcer; yea, now and then into a
Fistula. Hoc malum etiam saepe in Cancrum incurabilem degenerat, ubi materia
melancholica, sicca, and adusta fuerit. If the inflammation of the Gums do turn
into a gangrene, it is for the most part an incurable evil. Quando Apostema
est in Gingivarum superficie citius rumpitur and curatur.

The way and method of curing this Inflammation Parulis, is one and the same
with that in all the other Inflammations.

CAP. CXXII. De Gingivarum erosione, and exulceratione.
ERosio gingivarum, and exulceratio, Erosion and exulceration of the gums,
happens either from Worms, or from the corrupt humors which cause them, vel
ab humoribus acribus. and erodentibus, a eerebro, aut ventriculo, aut liene, ad
eas parts confluentibus.

Fabricius Hildanus says, That the Son of a Citizen of Dusseldorp was long
troubled with erosion of the gums, and died, after the use of many internal
Medicines and Topics: and when he was opened there was found abundance of
Worms which had eaten through his guts, and many in his stomach.

This water following is very much commended in the erosion of the gums: Take
of unripe Galls, A corn cups, and Flowers of Pomgranates, of each an ounce: Red
Roses one Pugil, Alum three drachms: Boil them in two parts of Frog-water, and
one part of old red Wine, and wash the gums often therewith.

The Spirit of Vitriol and Sulphur, as they cleanse and whiten the teeth, so
they take away the rottenness of the gums, either alone, vel cum aqua, aut
melle rosaceo permixtus, ut supra capite de dentium nigredine dictum est.

If the Ulcer be deep and foul, you may anoint with this: Myrrhae Elecctae,
and sacchari candi, ana, parts aequales. Pulverizentur, iisque impleatur album
ovi ad duritiem coctum, and per medium sectum; then tie it with a thread, and
hang it in a Wine-Cellar with a glass under it, and there will come forth a
Liquor or Balsam, with which anoint often: But if by the use of the aforesaid,
the disease be not cured, if the tooth near the Ulcer be rotten, you must pull
it out, and then it will be presently cured.

CAP. CXXIII. De Fluxu Sanguinis ex gingivis.
FLuxus sanguinis ex gingivis, The Flux of Blood from the gums, is, when it
either critically or symptomatically breaks forth.

Zacutus Lusitanus speaks of a Goldsmith, who when he fell into a Fever by
laboring at the Furnace, being of a strong constitution, lost much blood by
opening a vein, and amended, so that the seventh day (having had an itching of
his gums, and a pain in the lower lip) the blood gushed from the veins of his
lower gums for three days in such quantity, that he lost above three pints
more; and the more he bled, the more his Fever abated, and when it was gone,
the blood stopped.

Dodonaeus reports, that a certain Quarrier, having the small Pox, had a Flux
of Blood from his gums, and being stopped, it made the Urine bloody, which being
stopped, it returned again to the gums, and there continued till he recovered.

The Gums bleed Symptomatically, when the blood is sharp, and the Liver or
Spleen distempered; Sic in Scorbuto familiaris est hujusmodi sanguinis e
gingivis effluxus.

If it come from a tooth drawn, after revulsion by blood-letting, you may apply
to the part a Cataplasm of Bole Armoniack, Terra Sigillata, Sanguis Draconis,
and the like Astringents made up with the white of an Egg. If that do not
suffice, you may lay the Patients finger upon the part, and let him hold it
there till the blood congeal above the orifice of the Artery.

Zacutus Lusitanus relates a History of one who having a grievous tooth that
ached, drew it violently forth, and after had a great Flux of blood, from the
Artery torn, which when it could not be stopped by blood-letting, cupping, and
Astringents, nor by laying on the finger, nor by burnt Vitriol, at last by his
advice the place was filled with Gum Arabic, which stopped it in three hours
space, for it has power to stop, cool glutinate, and dry.

A certain strong Soldier, who after great pain violently drew forth a tooth,
and bled much from the Artery under the tooth, for two days; the best
Physicians use all Astringents to the part, with Revulsives, and burn the
Artery with a hot Iron, but all in vain, for he bled still even unto death:
Zacutus being called, applied the Plaster of Galen, made of Frankincense,
Aloes, the hairs of an Hare poudered, and mixed with the white of an Egg, by
which in a few hours the blood stopped, and the Patient recovered. Next follows
the Affects of the jaw-bones.

CAP. CXXIV. De Maxillae inferioris Immobilitate.
MAxillae inferioris Immobilitas, The Immobility, or the unmoveableness of the
Nether jaw bone happens either by reason of some luxation (when it is put out
of joint) or from a Coalition, or growing together of the said Jaw Bone with
the head; or else by reason of a Distillation derived from the crown of the
head, which flows into the joint thereof at the root of the ear, there
following upon the same a pain, and likewise a hard and conspicuous swelling:
And hitherto appertains scorbutical rigidness and stiffness of the Jaw-bones.

Curatio pendet a caussarum remotione, a quibus hoc vitium provenit. Vide etiam
suprae, capite 109. De oris Apertione and Hiatu.

CAP. CXXV. De Maxillae inferioris Luxatione.
MAxillae inferioris Luxatio, The Luxation (or dis-joynting) of the jawbone is,
the rare but dangerous depulsion, and forcing of the same (either in the one
only part, and then the mouth is writhed, the Dog-teeth standing directly
under the incisorii or cutters; or else in both parts thereof, and then the
ranks or rows of the teeth answer, and fall in one with the other, and the
lower jaw bone can by no means be joined close with the upper, (but this
stands out further then that) unto the foremost parts: from whence proceeds
pain, an Inflammation, an acute Fever, and griping pains of the Stomach.

As to the Prognostic; If the luxated jaw bone be not restored to its place,
it then threatens danger of death about the tenth day, with a continual Fever
accompanying it, as also an irresistible necessity of sleeping: And therefore
the Cure is to be taken in hand with all possible speed, lest also that the
affected Muscles (which draw upward the jaw bone, and also the Nerves inserted
into the said Muscles) should likewise draw the brain into a consent and
agreement with them. Yet the luxation of one side of the jaw bone is not so
dangerous in its restitution, as that which happens on both: Practitioners
affirm, that the jaw, twelve days after it is set, is free from the danger of
relapse.

Quo ad curationem vide Paraeum, lib. 16. cap. 8, 9, 10. Et etiam Hippocratem,
2. de articulis, Et Galenum in eundem locum commentantem. Next follow the
Affects of the Columella, or Uvula.

CAP. CXXVI. De Uvulae, seu Columellae Relaxatione.
UVulae, seu Columellae Relaxatio, The Relaxation of the Uvula, or Columella,
is the preternatural swelling, or extension thereof, (without any inflammation,
redness, or pain) arising for the most part from a Phlegmatic or waterish
humor, transmitted from the Brain to that part, and there extending it
oft-times into an extraordinary length, even the upper part of the Oesophagus,
or Wezand; whence follows a nauseousness and difficulty of swallowing, with a
troublesome Titillation or tickling.

This disease in the beginning is easily helped; but if it continue long it
will hardly be cured, by any other means than Chirurgerie.

That which is here of singular benefit is, a new laid Egg, boiled unto a
hardness, cut through the midst, and for some hours applied to the crown of the
head: Pulvis ex aluminis usti, ii. rosarum rubr. balaust. corticis granat. ana,
dr. s. rad. bistortae, tormentillae, gallarum immaturarum, ireos Florent. ana,
dr. s. Compositus, and post adstringentis gargarismi usum insufflatus.

As touching manual operation or section, which is the last remedy; We have an
example of the good success thereof in Amatus Lusitanus, Obs. 65. Cent. 3. who
had his Uvula hung down like a thong, long, and without blood in it; which when
Medicines could not cure, he cut off, and after touching the part with a little
Spirit of Vitriol, he cured the Patient. And so you see that if the Uvula be
long and white, or, as Hippocrates says, small at the top, it may then be
safely cut off: But take heed you cut cut off too much, for then the voice and
breathing will be hurt. Plura de Columella relaxata vide in meo Enchiridio Med.
lib. 3. cap. 26.

CAP. CXXVII. De Columellae Inflammatione.
COlumellae Inflammatio, The Inflammation of the Columella, (or Pin, as some
call it) is the rising, or swelling of the same, from a choleric blood fallen
down into it, with a redness, burning heat, pain, danger of suffocation, and
sometimes also with a Fever.

Galen says, That an Uvula inflamed is not to be cut off, or scarified; but
after the Inflammation is gone, and the superior part lessened. So says
Hippocrates, when the Uvula hangs down, and the lower part of it is greater
then the higher, and round, then it is safe to operate after the administering
of a Clyster. But if it be red and swollen it cannot be cut, scarified, or burnt
without danger, for a greater Inflammation will follow, as also a Flux of
blood; therefore you must endeavor, as he says, to extenuate these accidents
by other means at that time.

Paulus Aegineta will not have us to touch the Uvula with an Iron to cut it,
when it is livid or blackish, that is, when it has malignity in it, and
inclines to be a Cancer.

Plura de hac aegritudine vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 25. It is
cured after the same manner as are other Inflammations. Next follow the Affects
of the Tonsils, or Almonds.

CAP. CXXVIII. De Tonsillarum, seu Amygdalarum Inflammatione.
TOnsillarum, seu Amydgdalarum Inflammatio, The Inflammation of the Tonsils, or
Almonds, is a rising or swelling up of them, produced by the afflux of humors.

Tonsillarum Inflammatio morbus acutus est, and saepe suffocationis periculum
minatur. Tonsillae in febribus denigratae and arefactae mortem imminere
portendunt. Tonsillarum inflammatio, and tumor, vel resolvitur, vel suppuratur,
vel induratur; and si in Scirrhum degenerat raro aut nunquam sanatur.

Curatur ad modum aliarum Inflammationum, Vide plura de hoc affectu, in meo
Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 28.

A certain Gentlewoman was taken with so great an Inflammation of the Almonds,
and her tongue was so infected with many small Ulcers arising from a copious
defluxion of a very sharp serous matter, that she could not speak, or sip a
little broth, without much difficulty. The Malady continuing after she had been
four times let blood, there was given her six grains of Resina jalappae in a
soft Egg, whereby she was gently and largely purged, and the day after, she
began to eat and speak freely.

CAP. CXXIX. De Malignis Tonsillarum Ulceribus.
MAligna tonsillarum Ulcera, The Malignant Ulcers of the Tonsils proceed either
from some Salt Distillation eating through those parts, or from a Pestilential
air, or else from some vaporous exhalation which happens in the Venereal or
Neapolitan disease.

Amongst the Ulcers of the Tonsils some are familiar and mild, quae sunt
exigua, munda, non alte descendentia, nec inflammata, nec dolorem excitantia.
Others are malignant and pestilential, being broad, hollow, nastie and filthy,
by reason of some congealed humor, that is either white, or black, or livid:
and if those congealed impurities descend deeper, then they produce an Eschar
or crustiness; quod si in pectus per trachaeam penetrant, they then strangle
the party the very self-same day. Tonsillarum Ulcera sine febre securiora sunt.

The Cure may be fetched from above, either out of the 122 Chapter, De
Gingivarum erosione and exulceratione; or else out of the 113th De Oris
Ulceribus and Aphthis.

no soph THe, sotri mn, dxa ka megalosne, krto, kai xousa, ka nn ka e pnta to
ina.
FINIS.

