WHICH IS THE True Church? The whole Christian World, as Headed only BY CHRIST,
(Of which the Reformed are the soundest part) OR, THE POPE of ROME And his
SUBJECTS as such?

IN THREE PARTS.

I. The Papists Confusion in explaining the terms of the Questions; not able to
bear the light.

II. A Defense of a Disputation concerning the continued Visibility of the
Church of which the Protestants are members.

III. A Defense of the several Additional proofs of the said Visibility.

By RICHARD BAXTER..

Written especially to instruct the younger unexperienced Scholars how to deal
with these Deceivers in these dangerous times.

LONDON; Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway, in Butcher-hall Lane.
1679.

The Preface to the Lovers of Truth.
ABove eighteen years past I received a Paper (by the mediation of one Mr.
Langhorne) from one that called himself William Johnson, to prove the Papal
Church to be the Catholic, because no other had been visible in all Ages. I
answered it, and received a Reply, and wrote a Rejoinder. But being not rich
enough to pay either an Amanuensis or Transcriber, I never (to my remembrance)
took a Copy of any Book which I wrote, except this Rejoinder to him, and one
other; and I never (to my remembrance) lost any but those two. When I had sent
this by the ordinary Carrier, he lost it, but took on him that he never knew
how. Whereupon when I looked for a Reply, I received an insulting Letter for not
answering. But when I sent my Rejoinder the second time, I could never have any
Reply thereto. Above a year after, coming up to London at the Kings
Restoration, I enquired after the Disputer, and called yet for some Reply, but
could get none: and I was there informed, that his name was Terret, and that he
usually lived with the Earl of Shrewsbury (within seven miles of me, when I was
told he lived near an hundred miles off): But that he was one of the greatest
of their Disputers about London, where he spent much of his time, and had
lately disputed with Mr. Pet. Gunning, and Mr. Pierson (now both Bishops), and
had printed the Dispute without their consent. And lest he should do so by any
part of mine, I sent him word, That if he would not prosecute the Dispute, I
would publish what was done. Whereupon he offered to do it rather by Conference
than by Writing: Which I accepted, and he came to me, and we agreed to begin
with the true explication of some terms which were likest to be most used in
our Controversy. I offered to give him my sense of any terms of which he would
desire it, and desired the like of him, which he granted. He desired none at
all of me; but such terms as I offered to him, he wrote me immediately his
explication of; which because it rather increased the darkness and uncertainty,
I excepted against it, and desired fuller explication. By this time our hour
was at an end, and I expected him to prosecute the Dispute, but could never see
him more. Whereupon after urgency and expectation, I published what had passed
between us.

The next year the Countess of Balcarres (now Countess of Argyle) a person to
whom I had extraordinary obligations, sent for me, being in great affliction
for her eldest Daughter turned Papist. Whereupon I offered a Conference with
the person that had persuaded her, or any other whom she would choose: which the
Lady accepted, and undertook to bring one speedily to perform it. But at last
she said the person was afraid of the danger of the Law. I urged her still, and
then she told me, that when he knew who it was that he was to speak with, he
professed that he feared no danger from me, and greatly honored me, being one
that knew me; but refused the Dispute. I provoked her to get some other, though
it was the ablest that then attended on the Queen mother (who then encouraged
her:) But she would have none but him that did refuse it. Whereupon (her mother
being in danger of death by grief) I was forced to speak more harshly to her,
and ask her, Whether she dealt wisely to follow such as durst not let her hear
what was to be said? I told her, that if he would spend but one hour in giving
the reasons why she should turn Papist, and let me spend another hour in giving
her my reasons to the contrary, I would leave the issue to her Conscience.
After long denial, at last she told me, that the person did consent, on
condition that there might be no speaking, but only writing ex tempore, and
nothing done but by syllogism, according to the Laws of Disputation. I asked
her, Whether that way was most suitable to her understanding and patience? And
whether she would stay till we had done our writings, which might possibly be
some years? And whether she might not as well read what is written already? But
when nothing else would be consented to, I yielded to such writing, so be it
she would but hear our several Reasons one hour or two first. And when that
could not be obtained, I consented to meet him, and only to write. But just
when the time came, the Lady was stolen away; and when they followed and
overtook her, she told them that she was but going on some business, and would
presently return (her mother professed that before her perversion she scarce
ever found her in a Lie or disobedience, and after could scarce believe any
thing that she said). But she went to a Nunnery in France, and her Mother saw
her no more; but ere long received Letters of the Reasons of her Religion,
which at her Mothers desire I answered, but you may suppose that they suffered
her not to see the Answer.

When she was gone, I understood that it was this same Mr. W. Johnson, alias
Terret, who was the man that had seduced her, and refused the Dispute.

But not long after he Printed a Reply to the Book which I had published, and
called it, Novelty represt: which when I perused, I saw that a Rejoinder would
be of little use, because it must consist for the far greatest part, of the
detection of his fallacious words, and of the vindication of a great deal of
Church History; and the former would rather tire than edisie the Reader, and
the later would profit none but those that were already well acquainted with
Church History, or such as would fully search the Authors cited, till they
understood by them who it is that cites them aright: He that will not do this
cannot judge of our case, and he that will do it needs not my help. Wherefore
having much better work, and no time to spare, expecting that my change was
near, my Conscience forbad me such a frivolous expense of time as a Rejoinder
to his Reply would prove. But having since written many Books against Popery,
to none of which I can procure yet a word of answer, and hearing that they are
obliged not to answer me till I am dead, (which they may shortly expect) by the
persuasions of some I have attempted to make this Return to this one Reply,
which is all that ever they published against me, that I know of.

And because true Order requires first that we understand each others terms, I
must begin with that, though it be the last thing in his Book; in which you
will see what a sandy fabric it is which is adorned by them with the great
Epithetes of Apostolical, Ancient, Universal, Infallible, and how little they
know, or can make others know what it is of which they do dispute, or what that
Church is, to which so many hundred thousand Christians (called by them
Heretics) have been sacrificed by sword and flames.

In the second Part I defend the Visibility of the Church which the Protestants
are members of, against his vain Objections. And in the third Part I defend
those Additional arguments by which I proved it.

In all which I doubt not but the impartial understanding Reader may see, that
their Terrestrial Universal Monarchy, and their condemnation of the greatest
part of the Church of Christ, are contrary to Sense, Reason, Tradition,
Consent, Antiquity and Scripture; and that their Kingdom stands but on three
Legs, IGNORANCE and deceit, worldly INTEREST, and the SWORD and violence. And
when these (and especially the sword of Princes) do cease to uphold it, it will
presently die and come to nothing. For though Melchior Canus say, that the
Roman Privileges (as he calls them) have stood, though the greater number of
Bishops and Churches, and the Arms of Emperors have been against them, yet was
it upheld against all these by no better means than those aforesaid. The
greater number of Churches and Bishops (viz. of East and South) being against
them; and all the other four Patriarchates renouncing them (as they do to this
day) they laid the faster hold of the West, and by mastering Italy, flattering
and advancing France, promising Kingdoms and Empire to their Adherents,
threatening the deposition of others, dividing Germany and all Europe, that many
might need the Pope, and few be able to resist him, and by keeping men ignorant
that they might be capable of their Government, by these means they overcame
the Arms of Emperors, and made them their Subjects, whose Subjects they had
been.

If there were nothing else to satisfy the Reader against Popery but these
following Particulars, it were a shame to humane nature to receive it. 1. The
natural incapacity of one man to be a Church-Monarch,
any more than to be a Civil Monarch of the whole Earth. 2. That Bellarmine
confesses that the Pope succeeds not Peter as an Apostle (but as an
Universal Pastor): But Peter never had any higher office than to be the first,
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set in the Church first Apoctles, (not first a
Vice-Christ.) 3. That they affirm that it is not de fide that the Pope is
Peter's Successor. 4. That none of the other Apostles had Successors as in
superior seats; nor did any Patriarch (much less twelve) claim power as
Successors of any Apostle, save Antioch and Rome, and Antioch as from the same
St. Peter, but no Universal Sovereignty. 5. That whoever will turn Papist, must
confess that he was an ungodly hypocrite before, and that all professed
Christians are so, save the Papists, that know their doctrine. 6. That he must
renounce the senses of all sound men, and believe them all deceived by Miracle.

The Contents of the first Part.
CHAP. 1.
Sect. 1. HIs Explication of the terms CATHOLIC CHURCH.

1. He excludes all from Christ's Universal Church, and Christianity, that are
no Members of Christian Congregations: Yet means not only Churches, but
Families, Ships or any civil Assemblies. Damning all solitary Christians, or
that are alone among Infidels. 2. He makes subjection to the supreme Pastor
necessary, and yet says the Votum of it alone will serve.
Sect. 2. He unchurcheth Parish-Churches. He makes dependence on lawful
Pastors in general necessary, but not on the Pope particularly. Sect. 3 What
Faith must be in a Churchmember. His implicit discourse of implicit faith,
which indeed is no faith of any particular Article. Several senses of implicit
faith opened His general faith proved, No particular faith. In what sense we
believe all that God has revealed, Sect. 8. His instances explained, Sect. 9.
When virtual repentance suffices, Sect. 10. His avoiding to answer, Sect. 11.
The Papists Church invisible Sect. 12. His strange Doctrine of generals. Sect.
13. What Christianity is, is no point of faith with them, Sect. 14. The
invisibility of their Church further proved, Sect. 15. Their contradictions
about receiving all faith on the Churches Authority. Sect. 16. 17. The true
method of believing. Sect. 18. Humane faith is joined with Divine. Sect. 20.
What the Essentials of Christianity are. Sect. 21. Papists utterly disagreed
what a Christian is, and confounded, and their Church invisible, Sect. 22.
Notes of great moment hereupon. The baptizing of men that believe only that
[there is a rewarding God] is a new false baptism. Sect. 23. Q 3. Who are the
Pastors whose rejection unchurcheth men? Of Parish Priests. Q. 4. How shall all
the world be sure that Popes and Priests had a just Election or ordination.
Sect. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
CHAP. 2. Their sense of the word HERESY.
Whether Heresy be in will or understanding. Sect. 1. Heretics by their
definition are unknown, Sect. 2. The power of judging of the [Sufficiency] of
proposals, make's the Clergy Masters of all men lives, Sect. 3. He makes none
Heretics that deny not Gods Veracity. Sect. 4. And all Heretics to deny it;
Yea all that receive not every truth safficiently proposed. Yet unsaith all,
and says, that not culpable neglect of sufficient proof of all, but
contradiction to the known proposal of lawful superiors, makes a Heretic.
Sect. 7. Q. What sufficient proposal is. Sect. 8. 9. He says that the true
Church Governors may be known without Revelation. Sect. 10. Sufficiency
further examined. Sect. 11. He hereticateth themselves or none. Sect. 12.
Whether every misunderstanding of an intelligible Text of Scripture be Heresy.
Sect. 13. What Heresy is indeed. Sect. 14.
CHAP. 3. Their meaning of the word POPE.
Sect. 1. Popes judged Herteicks by many Councils. Where Christ's institution of
the Papacy must be found. Sect. 2. Who ad esse must elect the Pope. Sect. 3. W.
J. cannot and dare not tell Consecration denied to be necessary to the Pope.
Sect. 6. Neither Papal nor Episcopal Jurisdiction, he says, depends on Papal
or Episcopal ordination. Sect. 7. So they may be Laymen. What such jurisdiction
is. Sect. 8. What notice or proof is necessary to the subjects.
CHAP. 4. Their sense of the word BISHOP.
The Pope is not of Gods ordaining, in their way. Sect. 1. 2. Their Bishop of
Calcedons testimony put off. Sect. 3. They make all men that will, or no men to
be Bishops. His great confusion and contradictions. Saying, we want not
Episcopal Consecration, but Election, Confirmation, Vocation, Missions,
Jurisdiction. All these explained. Sect. 8. He makes the Chapters in Queen
Elizabeth days to have had the power of choosing all the Parish Priests. Popes
no Popes for want of common consent. Sect. 9. who must choose a Monark of all
the earth. Sect. 10. Their succession interrupted. Sect. 11. 12. Is it
essential to a Bishop to have many Congregations, parishes or presbyters. By
affirming this he nullifieth all the first Bishops, who were Bishops before
they made presbyters under them, and so denies all succession by denying the
root.
CHAP. 5. What they mean by TRADITION.
Sect. 1. He thinks the Tradition of all the world may be known by every
Christian; as easily as the Tradition of the Canonical Scripture. Sect. 2.
Tradition against Popery. Sect. 4. The Protestants, Abassines, Armenians,
Greeks, etc. are of one Church. Sect. 4. The contradictions of W. J. The unity
of all other Christians, as such, greater than the unity of Papists as Papists,
Sect. 5.
CHAP. 6. What they mean by a General COUNCIL.
His definition of a general Council is no definition. Sect. 2. Councils of old
not called by the Pope, Sect. 3. His confusion and contradictions. Sect. 4.
General Councils were but of the Empire, proved. Sect. 5. The impossibility and
utter unlawfulness of a true universal Council of the whole Christian world,
proved. Sect. 6. How many make an universal Council. Sect. 7. They make
presbyters incapable of voteing in councils, and yet the highest ancient part
of the Papacy (viz. to preside in councils) is often deputed to presbyters, Sect.
8. The council of Basil that had presbyters rejected by them for other reasons.
Sect, 9.
CHAP. 7. What they mean by SCHISM.
Papists acquit all from schism who separate not from the Whole visible Church
of Christ, Sect. 1. We separated not from the Greeks, Arminians, etc. Sect. 3.
He absurdly requires that we should have our Mission and Jurisdiction from
them, if we have communion with them, Sect. 4. We have the same faith with
them, Sect. 5. How far we separate from Rome, Sect. 6. They were not our lawful
pastors, Sect. 7. Of hearing the pharisees, Sect. 8. We infer not Rebellion
against Authority by our rejecting traiterous Usurpers, Sect. 9. Whether the
first Reformers knowingly and wilfully separated from the whole Church on
earth, Sect. 10. He pretends that the Churches unity is perfect, and
therefore that it is impossible there should be any schism in it, but only from
it, when their own sect had a schism by diverse Popes for forty years. Whether
all that followed the wrong Pope those forty years were out of the Church and
damned, Sect. 11. His definition of schism agrees best to the Papists, who
separate from all the Church save their own sect, Sect. 12. An admonition to
others, Sect. 13. My Reasons unanswered by which I proved. 1. That we
interrupted not our Church succession when we broke off from Rome. 2. That the
Roman Church is changed in Essentials.
PART. II.
The PREFACE.
ALL was not well said or done by every Bishop, or Council of old, Sect. 1, 2,
3. Of the considerableness of the extra-Imperial Churches of old. Sect. 4, 5.
The plea of Peter's supremacy, and their succession, overthrown: There never
were twelve Patriarchal seats as the successors of the twelve Apostles. No one
Patriarch claimed to be an Apostles successor but Rome and Antioch, and Antioch
never claimed supremacy on that account, Sect. 6. The true state of the
controversy about the Churches perpetual visibility, Sect. 7. Papists make
Christians no Christians, for not obeying the Pope, and no Christians to be
Christians if they will be his subjects, Sect. 8, 9. What I maintain, Sect. 10.
A discourse republished proving that Christ's Church has no Universal Head but
himself, (Pope nor Council)
CHAP. 1. The Confutation of W. I's. Reply.
Twelve instances confu^ing the wild fundamental principle of W. J. that
[whatever has been ever in the Church by Christ's institution, is essential to
it] Sect. 4. By this he unchurcheth Rome, Sect. 5. He says that every such
thing is essential to the Church, but not to every member of the Church, but to
such as have sufficient proposal, confuted, Sect 6. By this their Church cannot
be known, or the faith of a few may make others Christians, Sect. 7. His
assertion further confuted, Sect. 8. His Logical proof shamed [that every
accident is separable] and therefore all that Christ instituted to continue is
no accident, Sect. 9. Whether the belief of every institution for continuance,
be essential to the Church, Sect. 10. They unchurch themselves, Sect. 11. He
acknowledges that all Christian Nations are not bound to believe the Popes
supremacy expressly, but implicitly in subjecting themselves to them that
Christ has instituted to be their lawful pastors. Five notable consequents of
this: The true method of believing, Sect. 12. The instance of the conversion of
the Iberians and Indians vindicated. He supposes that every revealed truth was
taught them by lay-persons, Sect. 13. The instance of Peter's not preaching his
own supremacy, Act. 2. vindicated, Sect. 14. The Indians converted by the
English and Dutch are taught the true faith, Sect. 15. And so are the
Abassines, Sect. 16. His Doctrine against Christ's visible reign, contains
many gross errors commonly called Heresies. And by making the Christian world a
Monster if it have not one Papal Head, he makes the humane world a Monster
because it has not one humane King. Sect. 17.
CHAP. 2. Our Churches visibility confessed.
Theirs to be by them proved. How far any Protestants grant the power of
Patriarchs, and the Pope as Patriarch, Sect. 1. He bids me but prove that
any Church which now denies the Popes Sovereignty has been always visible,
and he is satisfied, whether that Church always denied it or not, Sect. 2.
Notes hereon. Whether they should exclaim against Christ as an invisible Head,
who make him as visible in the Eucharist to every receiver, as a King is in his
clothes, Sect. 3. Whether a Ministry be essential to the universal Church,
Sect. 4. His Argument against our Christianity re-examined, and confuted by
diverse instances of such fallacies, Sect. 5. He requires an instance of any
Church-Unity, though without a humane head: which ends the controversy,
Sect. 6. More differences and greater amongst Papists than among all the other
Churches, Sect. 7. He has no evasion, but saying that these Churches are not
Christians (because they depend not on the Pope) from which he before said that
he abstracted, Sect. 8. He denies us (with the Abassines, Greeks, Armenians,
etc.) to have been of the Church, and of one Church, both fully proved, Sect.
9. The charge of Nestorianism and Eutichianism on many Churches, examined,
Sect. 10. His shameful calling for the names of sects, and requiring proof of
the Negative, that they are not such, Sect. 11.
CHAP. 3. More of our Unity.
Of the speech of Celestines Legate at Ephesus, Sect. 1, 2. His saying and
unsaying, Sect. 3. His instances of Goths, Danes, Swedes, examined, Sect. 4, 5.
Whether extra Imperial Churches were under the Pope, Sect. 5. In what cases
some were, and which. His pretense to the Indians, Armenians, and Persians,
examined, Sect. 6. The Tradition of these Churches is against Popery, Sect 7.
His notorious fictions about the subjection of the Indians, Armenians, and
Abassines, to Rome, Sect. 9. 10. Of Pisanus, Arabic, Nicene Canons, Sect. 11.
He intended to write a Tractate to prove that extraneous Bishops were at the
Councils. But that put-off goes for an answer, Sect. 12. He confesses that
the very Gallicane and Spanish Liturgies mention not the Popes Sovereignty, no
more than the Ethiopick, Sect. 13. When Constantine entreated the King of
Persia for the Churches there, the Pope did not command there, Sect. 14.
Whether before Gregory's Mission, the British Church was ever subject to the
Pope, or heretical, Sect. 15. Reynerius words vindicated, viz. [The Churches of
the Armenians, Ethiopians, and Indians, and the rest which the Apostles
converted, are not under the Church of Rome. Sect. 16. The 28. Can. of the
Council of Calcedon vindicated, which declares the Pope to be but the first
Patriarch in the Empire, by humane right, for the sake of the Imperial City,
Sect. 17. 18, 19, 20. His brave attempt to prove that extra-Imperial Bishops
were summoned to the Councils, At Nice of John Persidis, Armenians, Gothia; At
Ephesians. 1. Thebamnon Bishop of Coptus, Sect. 21. 22. His other citations
confuted, Sect. 23. Of Eusebius his circular Letter, Sect. 24.
CHAP. 4. The Emperors and not the Pope called the old Councils, Sect. 1.
Myraeus his Notitia Episcopat against him, Sect. 2. Of the authority over the
barbarous given, Con. Calced. c. 28. Proof that the Papal power was held to be
but jure humano, Sect. 5. He was over but one Empire, Sect. 6. No councils but
of one Empire. Prospers testimony examined, and caput mundi expounded, Sect. 7.
Pope Leo's words examined, Sect. 8, 9. The Decretal Epistles show the Popes
ruled not the world, Sect. 10. More of Ethiopia and Pisanus's Canons, Sect. 11.
CHAP. 5. The Case re^eated. The uselesness of his Testimonies therein.

CHAP. 6. The Vanity of his proofs that Councils were called General as to all
the world, and not only to the Empire. From the words [totius orbis] from the
end, the peace of the World: and the rest, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
His Question answered, what Heretics are Christians, Sect. 8, 9, 10, 11. He
says that no Heretic believes for the authority of God revealing; and so
acquitteth all that do but believe that God is true, which is all that believe
indeed that there is a God, Sect. 12. Of sufficiency of proposal of truths. It
is not equal. He absolveth Heretics. And makes Heretics of the Papists,
Sect. 13, 14, 15. Whether the Papists and Protestants are one Church. Whether
the Pope and Christ are two heads. Whether a King that says God has made me
the Vice-god of all the earth, set not up a policy destinct from Gods, Sect.
16. One called a Papist may be a Christian, and another not, Sect. 17. 18.
CHAP. 7. Whether we separate from the Church, as the old Heretics did, Sect.
1.
Whether we separate from other Churches as we do from the Papal, Sect. 2.
Arrians separate from the Church as Christian, Sect. 3. Why they-call us
Schismatics, Sect. 4. 5. Papists agree not whether Heretics are in the
Church, Sect. 6. What we hold herein, Sect. 6. His absurd answer, Sect. 7.
Whether every man deny Christ's veracity who receives not every truth
sufficiently proposed, Sect. 8, 9. He makes it a grand novelty of mine, to say
that there may be divisions in the Church, and not from the Church, because the
Church is a most perfect unity. The shame of this charge, Sect. 10, 11. His
charge of Eutychianisme on the Abassines, etc. Sect. 12. Of self-conceited
hereticating wits, Sect. 12. Whether the Abassines confess themselves
Eutichianes, Sect. 14. Of the Greek Churches rejecting us, Sect. 16. The Greek
Church claimed not Sovereignty over all the world, but in the Empire Sect. 17,
18, 19. Whether every child, subject, or neighbor, must judge Heretics, and
avoid them unsentenced, Sect. 20. His false answer to the testimony of their
own writers, that free the Greeks from heresy, Sect. 21. The witness of the
Council of Florence, That the Greeks meant Orthodoxly, Sect. 23. Nilus
testimony vindicated, Sect. 24 Our unity with Greeks and others, Sect. 25. A
notable passage of Meletius Patriarch of Alexandria and Constantinople, for the
sole Headship of Christ, and the Popes usurpation, novelties, and forsaking
tradition, which (with Cyril's testimony) W. J. passed over, Sect. 26.
The Answer to W. J's second part of his Reply.
Sect. 1. SUfficient answers to all his citations pretermitted in terms. Sect.
2. Because I cite a Patriarch and Councils excommunicating a Pope by the
Emperor Theodosius countenance, he says, I plead for Rebellion. Sect. 4. His
instances of the Popes extraneous power confuted. Sect. 5. His particular
proofs (before promised in a special Tract) examined, 1. His error of
Theophilus Gothiae, Sect. 6. 2. Of Domnus Bosphori his gross error, Sect. 7. 3.
Of Joh. Persidis, Sect. 8. 4. Of Bishops of Scythia, Sect. 9. 5. Of Etherius
Anchialensis (for Sebastianus), Sect. 10. 6. Of Phaebamnon Copti. Sect. 11. 7.
Of Theodulus Esulae (so falsely called), Sect. 12. 8. Of Theodorus Gadarorum,
Sect. 13. 9. Of Antipater Bostrorum, Sect. 14. 10. Of Olympius Schythopoleos,
Sect. 15. 11. Of Eusebius Gentis Saracenorum, Sect. 16. 12. Constantinus
Bostrorum, Sect. 17. 13. One pro Glaco Gerassae. All show his gross ignorance
of the Bishoprics of the Empire. Sect. 19. The Nestorians Epistle at the
Council Ephesians. to Callimores Rex, expounded. Sect. 20, 21. Remarks upon
passages in the first Ephisine Council. Sect. 22. Remarks of the Council of
Calcedon. Sect. 23. Of the Titles, Caput Mundi, Matter omnium Ecclesiarum,
Primatus Apostolicus, etc. given to Antioch and Jerusalem. Sect. 24. Binnius
confession, that at Conc. Constable. 1. The Pope presided not, per se vel per
Legatos. Sect. 25. His assertion, that the Councils pretended to jurisdiction
over the Church through all the World, examined. Sect. 26. The vanity of his
first proof. Sect. 27, 28. Of his second and third. More Notes of the Council.
Calced. Sect. 29. His fourth instance confuted. Sect. 30. His fifth confuted.
Sect. 31. His sixth confuted. Sect. 32. His last instance vain. Sect. 33. He
could not disprove the Roman Church from being really two Churches (named one)
as having two supreme Heads. Sect. 34. I could not entreat him by any
provocation, to prove the continued visibility of the Church as Papal.
PART. III.
A Defense of my Arguments, for our continued visibility.
Sect. 1. WHether all Believers are Christians. Sect. 2. The vanity of his next
Cavil against my definition. Sect. 3. My definition of Protestants vindicated.
Sect. 4. One may have communion with faulty Churches. Sect. 5. His shameful
reformation of Syllogisms, and pretense of Logical form. Sect. 6. He denies
Protestants to be of the Church of Christ. I prove it. His silly cavils at the
form of the Argument. Sect. 7. Protestants profess all the Essentials of
Christianity. Proved. His cavils shamed. Sect. 8. His often repeated Reason
confuted, of not receiving the Churches expositions. Sect. 9. The novelty and
discord of Popery. The confusions in Councils. Sect. 10. My second Argument's
to prove, that we hold all essentials: The Popish faith explained. Sect. 12. My
third Argument, Creed and Scriptures are with them too little; and yet, an
insufficient proposal makes Christianity it self unnecessary. Sect. 12. He
gives up his Cause, confessing the sufficiency of our explicit belief. Sect.
13. My fourth Argument, His ridiculous denying, that to deny the minor, is to
deny the antecedent. Sect. 14. The minor proved: All Protestants, as such,
profess to love God: Ergo, sincere Protestants do love him. What miracles
believing in the Pope does. Sect. 15. He had no way to deny that Protestants
profess true faith, but by his impudent denying, 1. That we profess to love
God. 2. And that we feel that we do love him. Sect. 20. My second Argument, to
prove the perpetual visibility of our Church, confounds him. Sect. 21.
Scripture sufficiency. Sect. 22. My third Argument, and his shameful Answer.
Sect. 25. My fourth Argument proves the visibility of our Church, not only as
Christian, but as without Popery. Ten sub-arguments for that, 1 From the
twentyeighth Canon of Conc. Calced. 2. From the silence of the old Writers
against Heretics. Sect. 28. 3. From Tradition proved. 4. From Churches never
subject to Rome. His citations briefly confuted. S^ct. 30. 5. From the
non-subjection, even of the Imperial Churches. Sect. 32. 6. From Gregory the
first's testimony. Sect. 33. 7. From their confessions, Aen. Silvius,
Reynerius, Canus, Binnius, vindicated. Sect. 38. 8. Phocas giving the Primacy
to Boniface. Sect. 39, 9. Their Liturgy new. Sect. 40. Twelve instances of new
Articles of the Papists Faith, which he durst not Answer. S^ct. 42. The tenth
Argument, he yields the cause in sense. S^ct. 43. Notable testimonies
unanswered. S^ct. 44. Papists differ de fide. Sect. 47. What Heretics are, or
are not in the Church; fully opened: His shameful exclaiming against me for
distinguishing. Sect. 48. Fifty six of Philastrius Heresies, named, many being
small matters, and many notorious certain truths. Sect. 49. The woeful work of
Hereticating Councils. Sect. 50. Councils hereticated Popes and one another:
Almost all the Christian world hereticate one another. Sect. 55. His reasons
answered for unchurching all Heretics. Sect. 60. Their Doctrine of sufficient
proposal fullier confuted, and their hereticating and unchurching themselves,
evinced.
Mr. Iohnson's (alias Terret's) Explication of seven Terms of our Questions
examined, and his confusion manifested.
CHAP. I.
Question 1. WHAT mean you by the Catholic Church? Sect. 1.


W. J. The Catholic Church is all those Visible Assemblies, Congregations or
Communities of Christians, who live in unity of true faith, and external
Communion with one another, and in dependence of their lawful Pastors.

R. B. Qu. 1. Whether you exclude not all those converted among Infidels, that
never had external communion, nor were members of any particular visible
Church, of which you make the Catholic to to be constituted.

W. J. It is sufficient that such be subject to the supreme Pastors in voto, or
quantum in se est, resolved to be of that particular Church actually, which
shall or may be designed for them by that Pastor, to be included in my
definition.

R. B. You see then that your definitions signify nothing: No man knows your
meaning by them.

W. J. You shall presently see that your Exceptions signify less than nothing.

R. B. 1. You make the Catholic Church to consist only of visible Assemblies;
and after you allow such to be members of the Church, that are no visible
Assemblies.

W. J. I make those converted Infidels visible Assemblies, as my definition
speaks, though not actual members of any particular visible Church. For though
every particular visible Church be an assembly of Christians, yet every
assembly of Christians is not a particular visible Church. I do not therefore
allow such to be of the Church, who are no visible assemblies, as you
misconceive.

R. B. 1. Would any man have understood that by [Visible Assemblies] the man
had not meant only [Churches] but also Families, Schools, Cities, etc? 2. Does
he not here expressly deny all those persons to be of the Church, who are not
members of some other visible assemblies. And if a man be a Pilgrim, a Hermit,
or if one or many be cast upon an uninhabited coast, and if any are members of
no visible assembly, as Merchants, Ambassadors to Infidels, etc. when will he
prove that this unchristeneth or unchurcheth them?

R. B. 2. You now mention subjection to the supreme Pastor, as sufficient,
which in your description or definition you did not.

W. J. Am I obliged to mention all things in my definition, which I express
after in answering your Exceptions.

Ans. All that belongs to a notifying definition.

R. B. 3. If to be only in Voto resolved to be of a particular Church, will
serve; then inexistence is not necessary: To be only in Voto of the Catholic
Church, proves no man a member of it, because it is terminus diminuens, but
the contrary. Seeing then by your own confession, inexistence in a particular
Church, is not of necessity to inexistence in the Catholic Church, why do you
not only mention it in your definition, but confine the Church to it?

W. J. I make them actually inexistent in some visible assembly, according to
my definition, and in Voto only in a particular Church: Now every particular
family or neighborhood, nay two or three gathered in prayer, is an actual
assembly.

R. B. Strange Doctrine! so it is of necessity to our Christianity and
Salvation, that we be members of a Christian City or Village, or Fair or
Market, or some Meeting! And so all Christians that live solitarily in
Wildernesses, or among Turks or Heathens, are all unchristened and damned.

W. J. St. Hierome says, Ecclesia est plebs unita Episcopo. -- In this
consists your fallacy, that you esteem none to be actually members of the
Universal Church, unless they be actual members of some particular Church,
which I deny.

R. B. I thought verily it had been I that was denying it, all this while. This
is dispu^ing in the dark. Will you say that you meant in Voto? who can
understand you then, when you say, They must be of visible assemblies, and mean
that they need not be of any, but wish they were, or purpose to be so.

W. J. It is sufficient if they be actually of some assembly or congregation of
Christians, though it be no particular Church.

R. B. 1. Here is a new Exposition of Solomon's Vae soli, Woe to him that is
alone; for he is unchristened by it, or unchurched. O poor Anchorites,
Hermites, that are alone, and shipwrackt Christians, etc. 2. Here is a new
found privilege of having company, if in a Tavern or Alehouse; and of being
married and in a family; such may be Christians, when the solitary cannot. Who
would have thought that the Papists had held this!

But you say nothing to the case of them that are converted to Christ by a
solitary Preacher, that never tells him of a supreme Pastor, as the English and
Dutch convert many Indians: Can they be subject to him that they hear not of?

W. J. Whether he be named or no, the Church must be supposed to be
sufficiently explicated to them, as having some prudent manner of Government;
so that they must be instructed to render obedience to such Governors as
Christ instituted in his Church, which is virtually to a chief Pastor.

R. B. 1. So they that take the Pope for Antichrist, may virtually be Papists:
Be content with that virtue. 2. But I think that even that general belief of
Pastoral Government is necessary ad been esse, rather than ad esse of a
Christian.

R. B. 1. I note by the way to be hereafter remembered, his description of a
particular Church as given by Hierome, that it is Plebs unita Episcopo; and
Cyprian says, Ubi Sect. 2:
Episcopus ibi Ecclesia. And Ignatius, To every church there is one Altar, and
one Bishop, with the Prosbyters and Deacons. But by this Rule they make those
that are now called Parish-Churches, to be no Churches, but only parts of a
particular Church.

2. Note, that in his Definition he makes living in external communion
essential to those Congregations or Communities of Christians who make up the
Catholic Church; but tells us not whether it must be a Civil or only a
Religious Communion; or what Religious Communions besides unity of faith and
dependence on Pastors it must be: If by those words, page 3. every particular
family or neighborhood, he express that external communion, then if their
Pastors never give them Gods Word, Sacraments, or Prayer, it may serve.

3. He says, p. 4. In this consists your fallacy, that you esteem none to be
actually members of the universal Church, unless they be actual members of some
particular Church, which I deny. Which is his mere fiction, of which I was so
far from giving him any occasion, that I was charging it as an error on
himself; reasonably supposing that by Visible Assemblies he had meant Churches.

4. Note that he makes it essential to the members of the Catholic Church,
that they depend on their lawful Pastors, and yet that it is but a virtual
subjection to the Pope (by subjecting themselves to Christ's manner of
Government) which is essential. 1. Are not all Protestants and other Christians
that own not the Pope, true members of the Church then, while they subject
themselves in general to Christ's manner of Government? 2. He subjecteth himself
to no Governor, who does it not to some existent individual: For the
universal, existeth not but in the individuals. And if it be not necessary that
the Pope be this individual then subjection to some other is more essential
than to the Pope And who is that who must be preferred before him?

Q. 2. What is that Faith in unity whereof all members of the Catholic Church
do live? Is it the belief of all that God has revealed to be believed? or of
part? and of what part?

W. J. Of all, either explicitly or implicitly.

R. B. He might easily have known that it is explicit belief which the
question meant; for his implicit belief is the actual belief of nothing but
the general, and not of any unknown particulars. Where there is no object in
esse cognito vel percepto, there is no act of faith (for the object
essentiateth the act in specie.) And where only the general object is
perceived, and no particular, (e. g. All that God says in Scripture is true,
when one word of Scripture is not known) there is no object for a particular
belief: But it is the belief of this or that in particular that we enquire of
(e. g. that Jesus is the Christ, etc.) Your implicit belief is actual belief
of the general; but of particulars it is actually none at all, as common reason
tells us.

His reply to this I shall answer by parts in order.

R. B. We have here a most implicit account of the implicit faith which is
essential to a Sect. 3.
Churchmember. The man would make the ignorant believe, that their Schools are
agreed of the sense, when he might easily know the contrary. I mentioned
different senses of implicit faith. 1. When Particulars are known and believed
actually, but confusedly, and not distinctly, but in gross. So Dr. Holden in
Analys. sid. seems to take it: so the parts are seen or known often in the
whole; so a purblind man sees all the letters, men, trees, etc. before him. I
see all the sand in the hourglass, or much; but not distinctly one sand from
another. This is a real knowledge of the very things, but an imperfect knowledge.
2. But besides this, there is a knowledge of things only in their general
nature, which is a real knowledge, but partial and imperfect. As when I see
something coming toward me afar of, and know not whether it be a man or a
beast, I say it is an animal or a wight; but what, I know not. This is not to
know the thing formally, but to know aliquid rei, somewhat of that thing.

3. There is also a knowledge which besides the general nature, extends to
some inadequate conception of the form, but leaves out other parts of the
conception which are essential. As when one knows so much of a man as that he
has a rational soul, and not that he has a body; or that his soul is a virtus
intellectiva, but not that it is volitiva; or when one knows that fire is
formally a virtus illuminativa, but not that it is calefactiva or motiva. This
is a real knowledge, but partial, and not formal, being not of the whole
essence. So when one knows Christ to be God, but not to be man, or man and
not God; or to be a Teacher, but not a King or Priest; this is not properly to
know Christ, but somewhat of Christ.

4. There is a knowledge of mere universal Propositions, (which is but Organical
as to things:) And this is no knowledge of all the particular things spoken of,
nor often of many, nor sometimes of any of them; nor of the particular
Propositions which should be further known; nor of the conclusion that should
be inferred from both. For instance, Men may say that Omnis spiritus est
immaterialis. And one may mean and know by it, but as the Sadducees, or Hobs,
or Gassendus, that a spirit is a chimaera, and si daretur spiritus,
immaterialis foret. And another may doubt and mean, si detur spiritus,
immaterialis est. And another may hold that there is no spirit but God, and the
Anima Mundi, and say that these are immaterial, and never the more believe that
Angels or Souls are spirits: And no man can reasonably imagine, that omnis
spiritus est immaterialis, does include omnis anima est spiritus; or that W.
I's est spiritus immaterialis.

So one may say, that all that are sanctified shall be glorified; and yet not
believe that Peter, Paul, yea, or Christ were Holy: of this sort of knowledge I
mentioned that which is a belief of no more but the formal object of Faith,
that is, Gods veracity, that God cannot lie; and so, that all that God says is
true: when yet one that confesses this, denies all the Bible to be his Word,
and believes rather. Mahomet, Amida, or Confutius to have been Gods
Messengers, or the ancient Oracles at Delphos, etc. to have been his word.

But the confused Head of W. I. confounds several of these different sorts;
and because he thought that he might handsomely call a mere general knowledge, or
faith, confused; therefore he confounds the true confused faith with the
general, which are easily distinguished.

And first he calls for my proof, That a mere general belief, is no belief at
all of the particulars; (though a confused faith may) I prove it.

1. Where there is no intellectual conception of the particulars, there is no
actual belief of the particulars: But where there is only a conception of a
general proposition, there is no intellectual conception of the particulars:
Ergo, etc. the major is undeniable, and the minor no less.

2. Where the particular Object is not understood or believed, there is not the
particular Act of knowing or believing that Object; for the Object is essential
to the Act: But where there is only a knowledge and belief of the general
Object, there the particular Object is not understood or believed. Ergo, etc.

3. That is not an actual belief of the particulars, which may consist with the
actual belief of the contradictory: But a mere belief of the General
Proposition may consist i h the contradictory to the belief of particulars.
Ergo, etc.

But he comes upon me with some instances so worded, as may deceive the
ignorant.

1. Says he, Does not this Proposition, Omne animal vivit, contain the
substance of these truths, Equus vivit, Leo vivit, Aquila vivit, etc?

Answ. No surely, unless by substance, you mean not the other Proposition, but
somewhat else, what you list; for it contains not the very subject, that
there is such a thing as Equus, Leo, Aquila in being, and that they are
animalia. May not a man that never heard or believed that there was such a
creature as an Eagle, Lion, etc. (no more than a Unicorn or Phaenix) yet know
that omne animal vivit?

2. He says, Believing all that is in Scripture is the Word of God, and true
expressly, I believe in confuso, all that is in Genesis, etc.

Answ. Yes, if (in confuso) be terminus diminuens to actual belief of the
particulars: By mere believing the first, you do not actually believe a word of
Genesis or Exodus, etc. for your Proposition says not that there is any such
Book in the Scripture: As I believe all the holy Scripture to be true, and yet
believe not Tobit, Judith, Bell and the Dragon to be true, because I believe
them not to be the Holy Scriptures; so may others by Genesis, Exodus, etc. as
the Heretics of old denied many Books: and as Infidels may believe all that is
Gods Word to be true, and yet not believe that the Scripture is his Word.

3. Says he, Is not an express knowledge of the Genus, a confused knowledge of
species under it: and so the species of the individua?

Answ. Yes, if by confused knowledge, you mean no knowledge of them, it is no
true knowledge of them at all.

4. But he says that my words (not knowing whether you be Animal or Cadaver)
is a contradictory Proposition.

Answ. Say you so? May not I see you asleep, and think that you are dead? Does
this Proposition, Omne animal vivit, include that there is such a Wight in
being, as W. I. or N. N? or that he is now alive? or that it is really a Man
and not a Horse that is so called, any more than that Bucephalus was a Man? Yet
does he back these absurdities with advising me to a little more heed to what I
write?

Note that page 9, he asserteth that, The object of implicit faith delivered
in the Schools, is nothing save particular truths contained in substance under
some general propositions; so that they be neither known nor believed
distinctly and expressly; yet in confuso they are, by the knowledge or belief of
their general proposition.

Answ. But there is a confused knowledge of particulars which is actual, of the
Being of them, though not distinct, not fit or ripe for words to utter it: This
is different from the knowledge of mere Generals; which is indeed no knowledge of
the particulars, that any such are contained in those generals at all.

He next comes to expound his words, That faith believes all that God
reveals explicitly Sect. 4.
or implicitly; that is now some things explicitly, and some things
implicitly; when as I asked him, What was the faith in which we must unite?
who would have expected such an answer, That it is a general belief of all
things revealed, and a particular belief of some things? That it is such a
belief of all particulars, as is no real actual belief of some of them; and it
is an actual belief of other some? But is any man ever the nearer the knowledge
of their minds by this?

1. Here is no notice what the General is that must be believed: He professes
that it is not the formal object only, that is, The veracity, or faithfulness
of God the Revealer: And what else it is whether that all that the Scripture
reveals is true, or that all that the Church declares to be Gods word is
true; and whom we must take for that Church, etc. he has not told us; and so
has given an answer which is no answer.

2. Nor has he told us what the Particulars are that must be believed: But we
may know what faith it is that the Church must unite in, by hearing that it is
something we know not what; or that it is somewhat in general, and somewhat in
particular: Does this account satisfy themselves? or do they look that it
should satisfy us? Will this distinguish their Church from Heretics or
Mahometans? Do not these believe somewhat in general, and somewhat in
particular? And do not Heathens do the same? If this be enough for Christianity
or Concord, why do they call us Heretics? Are we not all of that Faith which
believes somewhat in General (even that all Gods Word is true) and somewhat in
Particular? But it is well that he says, that the explicit belief of somewhat
is necessary, though we may not know what.

And he tells us, That while they have an explicit belief of some Articles
they can never be thought to be without faith. Sect. 5.


Answ. Either he means that faith which was in the question, which must
notify us from Heretics and from others without, and which the Church must
unite in, or some other faith: If any other, does he not wilfully juggle, and
fly from answering when he pretends to answer? If he means the faith in
question, then Mahometans and Heathens are of their Faith, and Members of their
Church; yea, and all that they call Heretics, and anathematize themselves;
yea, and the Devils that believe and tremble.

But one would think, that, page 11, he described the necessary implicit
Faith* when he says, Our ordinary sense is, so to believe that point, that we
have no distinct or express knowledge Sect. 6.
of it, but only a confused understanding; because it is contained, in confuso,
under this proposition, I believe all that God has revealed: or I believe all
that is delivered to be believed in the Holy Scripture.

Answ. 1. But I must again repeat, that here the word, confused, is used but to
confound: This is no actual belief of any particular under that proposition.
When a thing is actually known in it self, but only by a General knowledge, or
not d^stinct, this is truly an Impersect knowledge; It is to know somewhat of
that thing, though not its form or individuation: If I see something, which I
know not whether it be a Man or a Tree, a Steeple or a Rock; I verily know
somewhat of that thing it self, but not the form of it. If I see a Book open at
two-yards distance, I see the Letters distinctly, but not formally; for I know
not what any one of them is. If I see a clod of Earth, or a River, I see much
of the very substance of the earth and water; but I discern not the sands or
the drops as distinct parts: Here something is known, though the special or
numerical difference (much more some accidents) be unknown. But in knowing W.
I's general proposition only, I know nothing at all of the particulars, as
shall yet be further manifested.

2. And mark what his general Proposition is, which, he says, is the object of
their Sect. 7.
Implicit says, viz. I believe all that God has revealed, or, all that is
delivered to be believed in the Holy Scripture. Either he really means that
this is the implicit faith by which Christians are notifi^d, and which uniteth
the Members of the Church, and distinguishes them from those without; or he
does not: If he do not, what does he but deceive his R^ader? If he do, then as
I said, All Christians, Heretics, most Mahometans and Heathens, believe the
first proposition, viz. That all is true that God reveals. And Protestants
and Papists, and most other sorts of Christians agree in the second, The
Scripture-truth. Here then is a justification of our Faith so far. But do you
think that he means as he seems to mean? Do they not hold it also
necessary, that men must take their Church to be the declarer of this
Scripture-truth? And also that Tradition not written in the Bible be believed?
Must not both these make up their Implicit Faith? If our general Faith and
theirs be the same, what makes them accuse us herein as they do?

But now, page 11. he proceeds to assault me, with such reasoning as this: No
man knows all that God has revealed, to wit, with an actual understanding of
every particular: Sect. 8.
Ergo say I, No man believes all that God has revealed. Now I proceed, If no
man believe all that God has revealed, then you believe not all that God has
revealed. Then further, Whoever believes not all that God has revealed, is no
good Christian, nor in state of salvation: But you believe not all that God
has revealed, Ergo, you are no good Christian, nor in a state of salvation.
See you not how fair a thread you have spun? Or will you say, that he that
believes not all that God has revealed is a good Christian? If you will, you
may; but no good Christian will believe you.

Answ. The man seems in good sadness in all this Childish Play; And must Rome
be thus upheld? And must poor men's Faith and Consciences be thus laid upon a
game at Cheating Words? No wonder that this Hector would have nothing said in
dispute but syllogism, etc. Few Lads and Women would unmask his pitiful
deceits; whether the great disputer saw their vanity himself I know not: But
men at age, that can speak and try sense, will see, that all this Cant is but
the sporting-equivocation of one syllable ALL: This ALL is either a term of a
mere general proposition: e. g. All Gods word is true. Here I believe what is
predicated of this general word ALL, and take this for a true proposition, ALL
Gods word is true: Or it signifies the very things, species, or parts, as in
themselves known; and so if the very things, species, or parts generally
expressed by the word ALL, be not themselves known as such things, species, or
parts, it is no actual knowledge of them at all, to know that truth of the said
general proposition. And does not every novice in Logic know this? The same I
say of Beliefs as of Knowledge; He is no good Christian, who believes not that
all Divine Revelations are true (which Heretics and Heathens believe) But
neither I, nor any Christian known to him or me, knows or believes ALL the
particular verities which God has revealed: And he believes not one of them
(beside that proposition it self which is found among the rest) who believes
but that general.

But yet he will justify his vanity by more instances: page 12, he says, When
you profess in Sect. 9.
the Creed, that God is the Creator of all things visible and invisible, I
demand, Do you believe as you profess? If you do, then you may believe with an
actual belief, that he is the Creator of many things visible and invisible,
whereof you have no actual understanding, or which are wholly unknown
particularly, or distinctly to you, or by any other knowledge, than as
confusedly contained in the word ALL.

Ans. 1. What Is all this, but to say, that I believe this proposition, All
things, of which many are unknown to ^e, are created by God? This proposition I
know and believe; but the things themselves as such, I no further believe than
I know: if I know not that they are, I believe not that they are: if I know not
what they are, I believe not what they are; that is, if I have not an
intellectual conception That they are, and What they are: for believing is
indeed but a knowing by the medium of a Testimony or Revelation, and the
veracity of the Revealer.

I believe that God man all that is about the Center of the earth; and yet I
neither know nor actually believe any one thing, species, or individual or part
that is there. If the question be, whether there be there fire, water, air,
earth, gold, silver, or men or devils, created by God? I neither know nor
believe that there is, or is not.

A Sadducee or an Atheist may believe, That all that is in heaven is good: Is
this an implicit actual belief, that God, Angels, and Spirits are good, when
he believes not that in heaven or any-where else, there is any God, or any
Angel, or Spirit?

A Protestant believes, that he can prove by the Bible, that the Pope is a
Traitor against Christ by claiming his prerogative. Does he also believe, that
he is Christ's Vicar General, because he believes that the Bible is true?

Protestants believe that all Tradition is true which really comes down to us
from Christ and his Apostles by credible evidence: Does it follow that they
believe the Papists Traditions to be true, when they believe multitudes of them
to be novelties or fictions contrary to Scripture, and to the Tradition of the
greatest part of the Church?

The Papist woman mentioned by Dr. White, believed the Creed; but she knew and
believed no more of Jesus Christ, but that it was some good thing (she knew not
what) or else it would not have been in the Creed.

But he goes on: You profess to believe that All men shall rise at the last
coming of Christ; and yet you have no actual knowledge of many thousands.

Ans. And what then? If I know not that those thousands had a being, and were
men, I cannot know or believe that they shall rise; notwithstanding I believe,
that All shall rise: and if the question be, whether this, or that, or
thousands that you may name, shall rise, I know not, because I know not whether
you feign not men that never were. If any were so foolish as not to know that
there ever were more men in the world than he has seen, he cannot believe that
any more shall rise; and yet may believe that All shall rise; not all in true
reality, as signifying the whole that has existed indeed; but all as the
subject-term in the proposition. When I say all shall rise, I do not only say
that I believe that proposition; but I know many individuals contained in the
whole; and I know that there are more than I personally know, and that there
have been more than I have heard of; and by the word all* I mean all these
particulars inclusively; and so the word being a General expressing A Totum*
some of whose parts I have known by sight, and others by history, and I know
that other parts have been, but some parts I know not at all that they have
been, accordingly my belief is according to the object, partly singular, partly
particular, partly indefinite, and partly universal.

He proceeds: Act. 24. 5, 14. Credens omnibus quae in Lege and Prophetis
scripta sunt: Yet Paul had not an actual understanding of every particular
contained in them.

Ans. Then he had not an actual belief of those particulars. He believed in
general, that all Gods word was true; and he believed all in particular which
he knew to be part of that word: But when he thought that he ought to do many
things against the Name of Jesus, and persecuted and blasphemed him, had he
then an actual belief that This Jesus was the Messiah?

He adds: A Christian that has forgotten some sin, yet at death is sorrowful
for all his sins; Has he no actual sorrow for that forgotten sin?

I answer, No: if he have no actual understanding of it. There were some that
Christ foretells would think that they did God service by killing his
servants: Do you think that if these repented of all sin in general, and took
this for a duty, that this were an actual repentance for this sin? Nay, is a
mere general repentance, any actual repentance at all, if it extend to no
particulars? If a man say, I repent of all my sin, but I think I have no sin,
but my hearing, praying, being a Christian, etc. does he actually repent of
any? And as to your instance, if you do but forget a sin, it implies that you
did once remember it, and perhaps repented of it then; but if you know not or
remember not that ever you committed any such thing, or that it is any sin, you
have no actual repentance of that sin.

O but says he, What horrid Doctrine would this be?

Ans. What a childish exclamation is this! It Is ten to one but if you were well
examined Sect. 10.
your self, you would confess that all this quarrel is but de nomine. You
confess that here is no particular repentance or faith of the thing in
question; nor are universals as containing the particulars known confusedly in
themselves; but with the bare name of an actual knowledge of Particulars, you
would cheat them that have only the knowledge of the universal Proposition. That
you may see it is no horrid Doctrine, consider, that 1. If this general
repentance have also joined a particular repentance of all such sin as must be
so repented of, of necessity, to Salvation, then a virtual repentance of other
forgotten particular sins, will prove sufficient to pardon and salvation. A
general repentance which has an actual hatred of sin as sin, and a habit
inclining the person unfeignedly to repent of all sin when he knows it
[joined with an actual repentance of all that he knows, and a faithful
endeavor to know all] this is not an actual repentance of the unknown
particulars; but it may be called a virtual repentance of them, because there
is that cause, that virtue, that Grace which would produce an actual repentance
if the impediment of forgetfulness were removed. But even confused actual
repentance, has not a total oblivion or ignorance of the particulars, but only
a confused knowledge and memory of them, and is another thing than the knowledge
of Universals.

He adds, One that forgiveth all injuries, and has forgotten some; does he not
forgive those forgotten?

Ans. Yes, if the word forgiveness signify the effect, or his act as
sufficient to that effect: For it is in his power to discharge, acquit, or
forgive another, by a mere general remission or discharge, though he remembered
but one or no particular at all: But if by forgiving you mean an act of his
will whose object is the crime as well as the punishment, and evil consequents
remitted; he so actually forgiveth in his own mental act no more than he
knows: But his general forgiveness suffices to all the ends without it; and
such a sufficient remission goes commonly by the name of full forgiveness: But
instead of speaking to the point in hand, you play with ambiguous words of
another sense and subject. Forgiving another is an act of the Will, whose
effect is extrinsecal; and as a man may burn a house, or give away or sell a
house, and all that is in it, though he know not what is in it; so a man may
remit all debts or penalties to another, or the King may pardon all crimes by
an Act of Oblivion, without knowing what they are: But if the question were
about an intellectual act, whose object does specify it intrinsecally in the
mind; As whether the King actually know the particular crimes which he
pardons? If you say that he knows the particulars actually in confuso,
because the only knows in general that some crimes there are, this is but to
talk against all the usual ^ense of mankind, and to call that, An actual
knowing of particulars in confuso, which other men call, No actual knowledge of
particulars, but only of generals, which in some cases may be called a virtual
knowledge of Particulars, (which is no actual knowledge of them) and in some not.
But if he had heard some imperfect confused Narratives of the crimes
themselves, this might be called, An actual conf^ed knowledge of them.

But mark Reader what edification is to be expected from these men's
Disputations. He knew very well that he and I are agreed that all Christians
must take Gods Veracity in his Revelations Sect. 11.
for the formal object, without which faith is no faith, and so must believe
that God cannot lie, and that all is true which he asserteth. And that we
Protestants hold that this is not enough, nor includes the knowledge or belief
of any thing which he has revealed (beside this one general): He knows that
our question is, Whether it be not necessary to believe some particulars as
revealed by God? And whether this faith do not go to essentiate a Christian and
a member of the Church? And if so, then what those particulars are which must
be believed to constitute a true Christian and member of the Church. Now he
durst not come into the light, and answer this question; but as if he were
mocking women or children, says, All that God has revealed must be believed
explicitly or implicitly. We understand you, Sir, that we must believe this
Proposition, All that God reveals is true. But is that enough? then Heathens,
Idolaters, Sadducees, Infidels, Mahometans, are Christians and members of your
Church. (But do they think so themselves?) If you can thus with a juggle make
all the world Christians, the like art may make them subjects of the Pope. No,
says he, there must some things also be believed explicitly. But the question
is, What they are? O there you must excuse him; he dare not, he cannot tell you
what. But Sir, are these [some things] essential to Christianity and
Church Membership, or not? If you say, Not; what! nothing essential to
Christian faith in particular? Is it faith, and yet a belief of nothing in
particular? Is there no material difference at all between a Christian and a
Sadducee, Infidel, Mohammedan, or Heathen? And yet cannot Protestants be saved
for want of the right belief? O mavelous Religion! But if any particular
belief be necessary, cannot it be known what it is? How then can a Christian be
known by himself or others from all the unbelieving world? or your Church from
other men? This was my question to you, Is not your Church then invisible, when
no man can know what makes a member of it?

And yet the man talks confidently in his darkness, as if this would serve
instead of light: Sect. 12.
and says, I make my Church visible, though by comprehending in it all those
who profess an explicit faith in several Articles, which they understand
distinctly, and an implicit belief of the rest whereof they have not distinct
understanding, by professing that they believe all that God has revealed to be
believed by them, whatsoever they be in particular: Now so long as they
persevere in this belief, though they should happen through culpable negligence
not to arrive to the knowledge of many things which they ought to know
necessitate praecepti, yet they remain members (though corrupt and wicked) of
the Church: Whereby you see how easily I avoid that difficulty which you
thought I could not.

Ans. Too easily against all reason, Reader, this Paragraph is worth the
nothing. 1. Several Articles must be believed explicitly: but not a word to
tell you which, or what they are; or whether it be any whatever that will serve
the turn, if it be but that Cain was the son of Adam.

2. The implicit belief of all the rest, is not here said to be any implicit
belief of the Pope, Council or Church of Rome, but that they believe all that
God has revealed to be believed by them. And are we not yet so far right and
reconciled? This is too kind to the Protestants, For it takes in all mankind
with them who confess a God. For to give him the Lie, is to deny his
Perfection, that is, his Godhead.

3. Mark, that even culpable ignorance of other things unchurcheth not.

4. And yet all this denotes but a corrupt and wicked member of their holy
Church, which (if such) cannot be saved.

5. And with this chat the man thinks he has done his business. And doubtless
there are some so ignorant as to believe him.

But all this wants but two things to make it just the true Christian faith:
One is to name those Particulars essential to Christianity which must be
believed: The other is to distinguish between a sound and serious practical
belief, and a dead opinion or profession: And to conclude that the sincere
practical belief constituteth invisible justified members, and the profession
makes only visible ones.

Next he has another bout against Omne animal vivit, the question was whether
to know this, be to know that W. I. Bucephalus, a Phoenix, or an Unicorn
lives? I say, No: because Sect. 13.
it may stand with the ignorance that ever there was or will be such an Animal
as is called W. I. or any of the rest. But he makes all good on his side by
talking of Impossibilities and suchlike words, which are of the same use in
respect to our arguments, that Drums in an Army are to drown the groans of
dying men, and put courage into the Soldiers. He says, When Philosophers say,
Omne animal vivit, they mean it of the essence or notion of Animal to be a
living thing; and this is true of me and all particulars, whether we be in
actual existence or not. Is not here excellent Philosophy! It Is very true that
this is a true Proposition, Omne animal vivit, whether VV. I. exist or not. But
is this true of VV. I. and all particulars, Whether they exist or not? That
which existeth not, is nothing, neither VV. I. nor any particular. The sum is
then, Nothing is a living thing, or animal. There is a VV. I. and all
particulars, which are all nothing, and yet are animals, or live. Who would not
turn Papist, and run into a Nunnery that is but charmed with such Philosophy?

Next, page, 15. he says, That how much must be believed explicitly, is a
dispute among Divines, not necessary to be determined here; yet I will say
something to that presently. Sect. 14.


Ans. I warrant you, nothing is necessary to you to do, which you cannot do
without coming into the light. It Is a dispute among the Papists Divines what a
Christian is, or what Christianity is? And yet they have an Infallible Judge of
all the Scripture, and all Controversies. And yet they can tell that
Protestants are Heretics. And yet they can tell who are members of their
Church though it be a dispute among Divines. But mark, that this is not then
with them de fide, any point of faith (what a Christian is, or what must be
believed): For their Divines dispute not that which they take to be de fide.

I told him that a man may believe that the Bible is true, and Gods word, and
yet not know a word that is in it, or that Christ is the Messiah, or that there
was ever such a person. Sect. 15.


He answers that, This is morally impossible: For either such a person
believes the Bible rashly and imprudently, and then (according to all Divines)
his faith cannot be supernatural and divine, or sufficient to constitute him a
Christian; or he believes it prudently by, prudential motives of credibility.
-- Now that can be no other than the authority of the Catholic Church, which
he cannot be ignorant to profess the faith of Christ, there being no other save
that; though he know not by experience that Christ is mentioned in the Bible,
he cannot but know that he is professed to be the Son of God, and Savior of
the world by those of the Catholic Church, who delivered the Bible to him as
the word of God, and that such a faith is necessary to Salvation.

Ans. Here are many things worthy our consideration. 1. That a man is not a
member of the Church that is, a Christian, unless his faith be supernatural and
divine, not only in the object, but his act: And surely no man knows what
other man's act of faith is supernatural and divine: Therefore no man knows
who is a Christian, and so their Church is still invisible.

2. No man that believes the Bible rashly and imprudently is a Christian: And
no man knows whether another believe it not rashly and imprudently, (yea
whether he believe it at all:) Therefore no man knows who is a Christian, or
member of the Church of Rome.

3. No other motive than the authority of the Catholic Church, can serve to
free a man from this rashness, imprudence and nullity of his Christianity. 1.
But why then had we not this General, The Church Catholic is to be believed,
and the Scripture to be received only by its authority, before, in the
description of implicit or explicit faith? 2. Was that man no Christian in
the Primitive times who was converted by a single Apostle, and took not the
faith on the authority of the Catholic Church? Did the Eunuch converted by
Philip, Act. 8. or the Jailer and Lydia converted by Paul, Act. 16. or the 3000
converted by Peter, Act. 2. receive faith on the authority of the Catholic
Church? Or the Indians when converted by Frumentius and Edesus? or the Abassian
Empire that till lately knew nothing of the Pope and his pretensions? Or do we
read that the Apostles did use that argument, The authority of the Catholic
Church, to convert their hearers? or that they always first told them of the
authority of such a Church? If by the Church you mean any single Apostle or
Teacher, hold to that, and we shall do well enough with you. 3. But Authority
is an ambiguous word, and may deceive. We maintain that a preserving and
teaching ministerial authority, is usually needful to men's conversion to the
faith, though not absolutely necessary to be first believed by the hearer: But
a judging authority, (viz. Whether there be a God, a Christ, a Scripture, a
Heaven, etc. or not) which determines by a sentence, rather than teaches by
opening that evidence which caused belief in the Teacher himself) this is not
necessary to man's faith. 4. And what if a man should hear a Preacher open the
other reasons of Christianity without talking of the Catholic Church, and its
authority, and should hereupon believe? or should believe by the bare reading
of a Bible? how prove you that this man is no Christian, nor shall be saved?
when Christ says, He that believes shall be saved, and shall not perish; and
says not, He that believes on any other motive than the authority of the
Catholic Church (and that must be the Romans) believes rashly and impudently
and shall perish?

4. But it is well worth the enquiry, could we possibly find it out, what he
means by Sect. 16.
knowing the Church, and its profession, and its authority, and whether this be
an act of necessary faith before any thing else can be believed? Or what other
points of faith are contained in our belief of this Church and its authority?
And what is the foundation of this faith?

It seems that he supposes that the Church must be known before that the
Christian faith be believed: And that in knowing the Church we must know the
faith of the Church. It is one thing to know that they are a company of men
called the Christian Church; and another thing to know what a Christian Church
is; and another thing to know that this company of men is that Church: Must all
these be known before we can believe? or but one, or two? and which?

1. If the name were enough, a man may know that a company of men are called
Christians, (or Mahumetanes) who knows not at all what Christianity (or
Mahumetanism) is. You say, that it must be known that they profess to trust in
Christ: this they may do and not know who Christ is, whether God or man, or
what he has done, or will do for us. If you say, that they must know that they
profess that Christ is the Savior, so they may do, and yet not know what the
word Savior signifies, or what Christ ever did or will do for our Salvation.

2. But if he mean here that every one that will believe Gods Word, must first
know the Church as defined, or know it in all its essence; then 1. How few will
he be able to prove to be Christians? And how will he know who they are? 2. And
still the question recurreth, what is it that must be particularly believed to
essentiate the Church? For if he know not that, he cannot know that he knows
what the Church is.

3. And when that is done, it seems he must know which is that Church
considered in existence, as different from all Heresies, and other Societies.

But by this method our difficulties are multiplied. 1. How shall I be sure
that this Church does not deceive me, in saying that this and not that is Gods
Word? Is this by an act of knowledge, or of divine faith? If of knowledge, what
evidences prove it? If of faith, then I must believe God before I can believe
him? that is, I must believe that this is his Revelation and true, that the
Roman Catholic Church cannot or does not err in telling me what is Gods
Revelation, before I can know or believe any of his Revelation. If they mean
that this act of faith must go first, before I can have any other, why may I
not know and believe other articles of faith without the divine belief of the
Churches authority or infallibility, as I may believe this one, God has
revealed that the Church is infallible or true in telling me what I must
believe. If one Article may be believed without that motive (and sure it is not
believed before it is believed) why not others as well as that? 3. And which
way, or by what Revelation did God confer this Infallibility on the Church? If
by Scripture it is supposed that yet you know not what is in the Scripture, or
believe it not to be true, till you have first believed the Churches Veracity.
Therefore it cannot be that way: If by verbal tradition, it is equally supposed
that you know not that Tradition to be Gods word and true, before you know the
Churches Veracity that tells you so. So that the Question, How I must believe
the Churches Veracity herein? by what divine revelation (before I can believe
any other revelation)? is still unanswered, and answerable only by palpable
contradiction.

But (were it not for interpreting him contrary to his company) I should by his
words here Sect. 17.
judge that it is no Divine faith of the Churches Veracity, which he makes
pre-requisite to all other acts of faith; but it is Prudential motives of
cre^bility, which must draw him to afford credit to that authority as derived
from God, which commends to him the Bible as the word of God: now that can be
no other than the Authority of the Catholic Church.

Ans. Mark Reader, It can be no other than the authority of the Church which
must be the prudential motive to credit the authority of the Church as derived
from God. So the Churches Authority must be first credited, that he may credit
it; or else the Authority not credited must move him to credit it; which is all
contradiction, unless he mean that the Churches Authority credited by a humane
faith, or by some notifying or conjectural evidences, besides divine
revelation, must move him to believe that it is authorized by God. When they
have told us, whether that first credit given to the Church, have any certainty
for its object, and also what and whence that certainty is, we shall know what
to say to them. Knot against Chillingworth is fain tosay, That it is the
Churches own Miracles, by which it is known to have divine authority, before we
can believe any word of God. And so no man can be sure that Gods word is his
word, and true, till he be first sure that the Church of Rome has wrought such
miracles as prove its veracity as from God; which will require in the
Catechumene so much acquaintance with Historical Legends (which the more he
reads them, the less he will believe them) as will make it a far longer and
more uncertain way to become a Christian, than better Teachers have of old made
use of.

And 2. it seems, when all is done, that he takes this Authority of the Church
but for a prudential motive. But is it certain or uncertain? If uncertain, so
will all be that is built upon it. If certain, again tell us by what
ascertaining evidence?

Reader, it is the crooked ways into which byassing-interest has tempted these
men to lead poor souls, which are thus perplexing and confounding. Sect. 18.


How plain and sure a way God has prescribed us, I have told you in a small
Tractate called The Certainty of Christianity without Popery. In short, it is
possible if a man never hear but one Sermon (which mentions not the authority
of the Church) or find a Bible on the highway and read it, that he may see
that evidence in it that may persuade him savingly to believe (through grace)
that it truly affirms it self to be the word of God. But the ordinary method
for most rational certainty is, To have first Historical ascertaining evidence
of the matter of fact, viz. that This Book was indeed written, and these
miracles and other things done as it affirms. Or first perhaps, That this
Baptismal Covenant, Lords Prayer, Creed, and Decalogue, have been delivered
down from the first witnesses of Christ, and Miracles wrought to confirm the
Gospel, which is also written at large in that Book. This we have far greater
Historical Certainty of, than the pretended authority of a judging-Church of
Rome; even the infallible testimony of all the Churches in the world; and as to
the essentials (Baptism, the Creed, etc.) of Heretics, Infidels, and Heathens,
which I have opened at large in a Book called, The Reasons of Christian
Religion, and another called The Unreasonableness of Infidelity, and in other
writings. And the matter of fact with the Book being thus certainly brought
down to us (as the Statutes of the Land are) we then know the Gospel and that
Book to be of God, by all those evidences which in the foresaid Treatises I
have opened at large (and more briefly in a Treatise called The Life of Faith)
the sum of which is the Holy Spirit as Christ's Agent, Advocate, and Witness, in
his Works of Divine Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, or Love, printed first on
Christ himself, his Life and Doctrine, and then on the Apostles their Works and
Doctrine, and then on all sanctified believers in all ages, and especially on
our selves (besides his antecedent prophesies).

Page 16. He again pretends that he need not name the necessary, Articles of
Faith, because I my self say, They must be the Essentials; and it is supposed I
understand my own terms. Sect. 19.


Ans. A candid Disputant! The light follows him while he flies from it. Does
it follow that if I know my own meaning, I therefore know yours? and if I know
which are the essentials, that therefore you know them, and are of the same
mind.

Page 17. The man would make me believe, that I speak not true divinity, when I
say that Divine and Humane Faith may be conjunct, when the testimonies are so
conjunct, as that we are sure Sect. 20.
that it is God that speaks by man, who is therefore credible, because God
infallibly guides and inspireth him. He would make you believe that I am
singular and erroneous here:

Ans. And why? He says, that would make Christian faith partly humane. But 1.
when I talk but of two faiths conjunct, what if I called the former divine
faith, only the Christian faith? May not a humane yet be conjunct with the
Christian?

2. But words must be examined. If Christian faith be so called from the
Object, then Christ and not his Apostles, are the reason of the name
materially; we are called Christians for believing in Christ, and not for
believing in them. 2. If Christian faith were taken subjectively it is humane
faith, for men are the subjects of it. 3. If Christian faith be denominated
from the prime or second efficient of the revelation, it is the belief of God,
and of Christ as Mediator, and not of the Apostles: and so Gods own Veracity,
and not man's, is the objectum formale, fidei divinae. 4. But why may not a
subordinate humane faith be conjoined with this, and so we believe Christ to be
the Messiah at once; 1. By the testimony of God, 2. Of Christ as man 3. And of
the Prophets and Apostles?

1. Did not the union of the Divine nature with the humane, make Christ as man
to be credible? If so, why should we not believe him?

2. Did not the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost, and divine inspiration
joined to it, make the Apostles and Prophets credible persons? If so, why
should we not believe them?

3. Did not the Miracles which they wrought, render the persons and their
testimonies credible, together with the circumstances of their being
eyewitnesses, and suchlike?

4. Is not every honest man credible according to the measure of his skill and
honesty?

5. Does not every man know that there may be many efficient causes conjoined
in producing one effect? May not faith now be wrought by the Preachers word and
Spirit? Why else does Christ say to Paul, Acts 26. 17, 18, I send thee to open
their eyes, and turn them, etc. And Paul directs Timothy to save himself and
those that hear him. Why may not believing God, believing Christ as man, and
believing Peter and John, etc. that saw him risen, be conjunct causes of our
faith in Christ's Resurrection? If they might not produce one faith, at least
they might produce three faiths united by conjunction.

But would one ever have expected this from a Jesuit or Roman Priest? Remember,
Reader, that Divine belief, and a belief of the Church, Council, Pope, or
Priest, are not to be taken for conjunct causes of our believing the Gospel, or
Christian faith, in this man's opinion.

But he says, Though the Prophet be a humane person, yet he speaks when he is
inspired by God, not by humane, but divine authority, God speaking by his mouth.

Ans. It is Veracity that is the thing that we now speak of, and is the
authority in question. And does not Gods Veracity give Veracity to the Speaker,
and use it? Does God speak by Prophets and Christ's Humanity, as through an
inanimate Pipe or Whistle, or as by Balaam's ass? Does he make no use of the
reason and honesty of the speaker? nor make them more knowing, and more honest,
true and careful, that they may be the fitter to be believed? Is this Roman
Divinity? Why then do the Apostles so often protest that they speak the truth and
lie not, even of that which they had seen and heard? Would the Gospel have been
equally credible to us, if all the witnesses had in other matters been knaves
and liars?

2. Reader, judge whether those that accuse the Roman Clergy of Fanaticism and
Enthusiasm, do them any wrong, while they think that God makes them infallible
by such inspiration, as makes no use of their Reason, Learning, or Honesty.
And read but what their own Historians say of Fifty Popes together, besides all
the rest, and of the Ninth and Tenth Centuries of the Church, and of the Popes
that were lads, and could not read Mass, but were illiterate. Read what their
Councils have said of some whom they deposed as inhuman Monsters, and judge
whether it be easy to believe that any inspiration used those men as
infallible deliverers of that Christian faith; and see here why it is that they
think wit and honesty no more necessary in Pope or Councils, if God use them
but as an organ-pipe or trumpet.

Page 18. When he is urged to tell me, what it is that is the necessary belief
of their Church, Sect. 21.
which must make a man a member of it: he again bids me tell him what points I
make essential to a Christian, and I shall save him the labor.

Ans. And are we indeed agreed? And yet do they writeso many Volumes to the
contrary? Reader, I take him at his word: I have said that it is. The belief
and consent to the Baptismal Covenant, that is the constitutive essence of a
Christian. Remember this when they jest at Fundamentals, and tell us of
damnation if we believe not their Councils, and the Country-Priests that are
the reporters of them. Remember now the extent of the Christian Church, that it
reaches to all that believe and consent to the Baptismal Covenant. But will
these wavering men long stand to this, and confess their Sect to be but a
fourth or third part of the Church?

But perhaps they will say. That words not understood are no true faith, we are
yet to seek what believing in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost do mean and
comprehend.

Answ. These ignorances or artifices have too long abused unstudied men. It is
not now the unsearchable, truth of men's subjective faith or internal acts which
we dispute of: But it is of necessary objective faith, or what ex part objecti
is essentially necessary to true subjective faith in case it be truly believed
(which God only can tell,) And I say, 1. It is no mere words spoken more or
less which can prove to another the sincerity of the speakers belief of them.
2. But the words of the Baptismal Profession and Covenant if sincerely
believed, contain all essential to the Christian faith. 3. And for more or
fewer words, I say, that the more understanding any man has, the more fully
and easily he may understand the sense of those words, though general and few;
but to an ignorant person there must be many words and often repeated to make him
understand the same thing which the other does by these few. And must we
therefore have as many symbols of Christianity as there are various degrees of
Understandings? 4. And the Church has in its best times taken up with the
Creed as the Exposition of the Baptismal faith; and if it now contain any words
more than essential, that crosses not its use, which was to be a just and
satisfactory Explication of that Baptismal faith, which had nothing but the
Essentials. And accordingly till faith and piety degenerated into opinion and
tyranny, Baptized persons were accounted Christians and members of the
Catholic Church, and as obliged to live as Christ's Disciples in love to one
another; it being none but Christ himself who instituted Baptism as our
Christening, to be the symbol and badg of his Disciples.

Page 19. When I had pressed him to a particular answer, and told him what would
follow Sect. 22.
upon the Answers which I supposed he might make, he tells me that Divines have
a hundred times told us that some things must be believed necessitate
praecepti, and some things necessitate medii.

Ans. We have heard some things, some things so often, that we would fain know
what things at last, are necessary ut media? Reader, if these Writers must not
be ashamed of their tergiversation, what sort of Disputants should blush? would
you think after all this, what his answer is? You shall have it in his own
words: And know you not that Divines are divided what are the points necessary
to be believed explicitly necessitate medii? Some, and those the more ancient,
hold that the explicit belief of God, of the whole Trinity, of Christ, his
Passion,
Resurrection, etc. are necessary necessitate medii. Others among the
Recentiors, that no more than the belief of the Deity, and that he is a
rewarder of our works, is absolutely necessary with that necessity to be
explicitly believed. Now to answer your Question, what it is whereby our
Church Members are known? I answer, that 1. All those who are baptized and
believe all the points of our faith explicitly, (if any such are to be found)
are undoubted members of our Church. 2. All those who believe explicitly all
the Artiales whatever belongs to them in particular, by reason of their
respective offices in the Church. 3. Those who so believe all things necessary,
necessitate medii, or necessitate praecepti extended to all adulti. 4, All
those who believe in that manner all things held necessary necessitate medii
according to the first opinion of the more ancient Doctors. 5. It is probable,
though not altogether so certain as the former, that such as believe
explicitly the Deity, and that he is a rewarder of our works? and the rest
implicitly as contained in confuso in that, are parts of the Catholic Church
(Baptism supposed) (...) Now^ seeing all those in my four first Numbers (which
comprehend almost all Christians) are certainly parts of the Catholic Church,
we have a sufficient certainly of a determinate Church, consisting at least of
these, by reason whereof our Church has a visible consistency, those of the
fifth rank, though not so certain, not taking away the certainty of the former,
-- See you not by this Discourse that we answer sufficiently to your question
by telling which are undoubted members. --

Ans. Reader, how sad is the case of mankind, when such a talker as this shall
go for a Champion, and prevail with silly souls in the matters of Salvation,
against common reason, and the notices of Christianity? Mark here, 1. He asks
me, Know you not that Divines are divided? Yes, and I know how lamentably you
have divided the Christian world. See, Reader, what is the unity and concord of
the Church of Rome: Not only the Laity but their Divines are divided about the
very essence of a Christian, and their Church. These are the men that cry up
Unity as a mark of their Church, and cry out of us as Schismatics, as if we
were all crumbled into dust by Sects, because we differ about some small
circumstances of Worship, or Exposition of some imposed words of men, or of
some difficult point of no flat necessity.

2. Note here also the Infallibility of their Church, and what a privilege they
have in having a Judge of Controversies; While their Doctors are divided on the
question, what a Christian is? And Pope and Council dare not, or cannot, or
will not determinate what makes a Christian or member of their Church? O happy
infallible Judge of Controversies!

3. Note also the extent of the Roman faith (...) it is so big as that it and
its circumstances fill large Volumes, called the Councils; and yet it is no
article of their faith, what Christianity is, or what must constitute a member
of their Church, but this is left at liberty to disputes.

4. Note also the great partiality of the Papists. The Doctors may be divided
about the essence of Christianity, and may deny faith in Christ to be
particularly necessary to a Christian. But if a man believe not that Rome is
the Mistress of all Churches and the Pope the Universal Governourr, and that
there is no bread and wine in the Lords Supper, when the Priest has
consecrated, he is to be exterminated or burnt as a Heretic, and Princes
deposed that will not execute it.

5. Note here, that here is not a word in all this of believing the Pope to be
the Governor of all the Churches in the world. Either they take this to be
essential to a member of their Church, or not, If they do, are they not juglers
and ashamed of their faith, when they thus hide it? If not what is become of
their Sectarian Church, and all their accusations and condemnations of most of
the Christian World, who believe no such office of the Pope? And what a Society
is that where the reception of the Pars Imperans is not necessary to every
subject?

6. Note here whether the Roman Religion be mutable or not? and whether
constancy be a note of their verity? When he professes that the ancient
Doctors, and the Recentiors (or Novelists) do differ about the very essence of
Christianity. Have these Recentiors antiquity to boast of?

7. Note also from hence the validity of their common argument from Tradition,
As if all their Church were now and always of one mind! when at present they
are divided about the essence of Christianity; and the Recentiors forsake the
Ancients. But had these Ancients Tradition for their opinion or not? If they
had, how come the Recentiors to forsake it? If not, what an insufficient thing
is your Tradition, that has not told you what a Christian or Churchmember is?
And yet we must take this Tradition as sufficient to tell us what orders and
ceremonies Peter settled at Rome.

8. I pray you note, that even their ancient Doctors opinion (which is all that
must keep his cause from utter shame) he durst not describe in answer to my
question; but having named five words, God, the whole Trinity, Christ, his
Passion, and Resurrection, he craftily shuts it up with an E^ caetera; so that
if you suppose him to say that these five things are all that they require, he
may deny it, because he added an etc. If you ask, what are the ^est? you, are
where we begun, an etc. is all the answer.

9. Well, let us peruse his five particular sort of members distinctly, which
make up their Church, and try (...) be the m^ey (...) (...) or (...) or whether
the Reader will not wonder that such trained disputers have no more to say, nor
a more plausible sort of fraud to use.

1. His first sort of visible members are, All those that are baptized, and
believe explicitly all the points of our faith (if any such are to be found.)

Ans. Is not this a modest Parenthesis? whether any such are to be found, he
seems uncertain; and yet says, These are the undoubted members of our
Church. The undoubted members! when he doubts himself whether any such are to
be found? And can we find the Church by them then? And no wonder that they are
not to be found; for note, Reader, that he never tells you here yet at all,
what the faith of their Church is, but only that if any have it all, they are
Christians. Is this a satisfactory answering? And yet if you will know the
truth from their common writings, the faith of their Church contains these
great bodies: 1. All that is in the holy Scripture and the Apocrypha. 2. All
the Decrees of their General Councils (if not also the Provincials and Popes
Decretals) that are de fide. 3. All their unwritten Traditions de fide, which
they have yet to bring forth as need requires. And do you not approve his
modesty that says, If any such be found that believes all this.

2. The second sort of their Church Members are, All who believe explicitly
all Articles, and whatever belongs to them in particular, by reason of their
respective offices.

Ans. But he tells you not a word what Articles these be, nor what belongs to
their Offices; whether it be all the Articles of all the Creeds, or also of
their Councils, Decrees, or when it shall be known what is necessary to be
believed about their office. And is here any notice how to know a member of
their Church any more than in the former? He that believes all that he should
believe is a Christian; But is there any such? and what is that all? and how
shall we know them?

3. His third sort of members are, Those who so believe all things necessary
necessitate medii vel praecepti, extended to all the adult.

Ans. And what is this but the same again? we know none but the adult that are
to believe. And so here we are told, That all men that believe all things
commanded are Christians. We were told this before: But it was with, If any
such are to be found. And who knows by this what your All is? When we find men
that do all commanded and sin not, we will hope to find men that know all
revealed, and have no ignorance; yet here is no visible Church.

4. His fourth sort are, All those who believe in that manner all things
necessary necessitate medii, according to the first opinion of the more ancient
Doctors. But what those things are, we are not yet told, but five words set
down with an etc. And is here yet a word to satisfy any man of reason what
their faith is, or what Christianity is, or what makes a member of their
Church, or is the bond of union?

But Reader, has God left us so much in the dark? Is Christianity any thing or
nothing? If something, has it not an essence which may be defined? Is this all
our notice of it. That men that know all that God has revealed, and believe
it, are Christians? or such as believe five Articles, and caetera? Judge now
whether their Church be not invisible. And if any little part of it were
visible, what is that to the rest? or to that visibility of particular members?
He tells us these are almost all Christians; and yet questioned whether any of
the first be found; and the rest are no more to be found than they.

5. And his fifth sort he confesses himself to be uncertain, which yet its
doubted are no small part that go for Papists.

And note, I pray you, that it is the present Church which they use to approach
to for necessary resolution; and the Recentiors are more the present Church
than the Ancients. And according to these, 1. Their Church is confessedly
doubtful or unknown as to most or multitudes of members. 2. And note; that
their Articles being but two, That God is, and that he rewards works, all the
common Heathens of the world, and all the Mahometans, are of the Papists Faith
and Church, according to this opinion. 3. But mark, Reader, another desperate
corruption, That Baptism must concur with these two articles. O horrid
corruption of Christianity it self! Is this antiquity and tradition? Did the
Christian Church use to baptize men that believed neither in Jesus Christ nor
the Holy Ghost, if they did but believe a God and a Rewarder? Do you baptize
such in your Church? I suppose even Pope Stephen himself would have been for
the re-baptining of such.

Reader, if one of us had charged such doctrine on the Papists as this their
Champion does, should we not have been thought to slander them? viz. That their
later Doctors hold that all that believe explicitly but a God and a Rewarder,
and are baptized, are members of the Church of Rome; and consequently, that all
that believe but this much, should be baptized; that is all the Mahometans, and
almost all the Heathens in the world: And is Baptism and the Creed come to
this? But I confess if the world were persuaded of this, the Pope could make
his use of it: For when he is once taken for Governor of all the Church on
earth, if he can but prove all the world to be the Church, it follows that he
is Governor of all the world. And what need they now their feigned embassies
and submissions to prove the Abassines, Armenians, and Greeks to be of their
Church, when Heathens and Mahometans are proved of it? and yet are Protestants
no part.

He tells us, That a living body may be defined by head, shoulders, arms,
though there be a doubt among Philosophers, whether hair, humors, etc. be
animated or parts.

Ans. But 1. it is known then that there is visibly head and shoulders, etc.
But you tell us not how to know any individual persons to be visible members of
your Church. To tell us that there are some men that hold all that they are
bound to hold, makes none visible, while we are not told either what they are
bound to believe, or by what profession or proof it must be known that they do
so. When we tell you that sincere justifying faith and love do prove true
Christians, and that such there are, it is agreed that this proves but a Church
as invisible or unknown to us, because we know not who have this sincerity. So
is it when you tell us that there are men that believe all that is necessary;
for till it be known what that is, no profession can thereby prove them
Christians.

2. But what if you had told us how to know those men that are certain or
eminent members of your Church? Is it nothing to you to leave all the world
besides, almost, uncertain whether they be in the Church or not? How know you
whom to admit to your Sacramental Communion, or to use as a Christian? When a
Congregation of many thousand persons called Papists meet, you cannot tell how
many of these are of your Church, and yet you give them the Eucharist? And it
seems by you that they must be Baptized, though you know not after whether
they be members of the Church.

Remember, Reader, that our question is not what mercy God shows to the rest
of the world, nor whether any out of the Christian Church be saved? But it is,
what is the faith which is essential to a member of the Christian Church? and
whether Papists make it not uncertain? and whether he that believes only that
there is a God that rewards, and believes not in Christ, or the Holy Ghost,
be a member of the Christian Church, or should be baptized.

My third Question about his definition of the Church was, Is it [any] lawful
Pastors, or Sect. 23.
[all] that must necessarily be depended on by every member? who are those
Pastors?

To this he said, Of all respectively to each subject; that is, that the
authority of none of them, mediate or immediate, be rejected or contemned.

I showed him how he contradicts himself; for dependence is more than
non-rejection: and Millions of Heathens neither depend on the Pope or reject
him, that never heard of him.

To this he rejoineth, that he spoke of subjects only, and not of others.

Ans. 1. But we are never the nearer knowing their Church by this, while we are
not told who the subjects are, and what makes a visible subject? 2. Do not
they take all Infidels and Heathens, and the Christian Abassines, Armenians,
Greeks, Protestants, etc. to be subjects of the Pope, as to obligation and
right, though not consent? yet the Abassines neither obeyed the Pope, nor
rejected him till Oviedo was sent to them. 3. For about forty or fifty years
one part of Europe took one man for Pope, and the rest took another man for
Pope, and men were uncertain which was the right, or whether either of them,
and so of the Clergy authorized by them. Which was the Church then, and who
were the members, when Millions received one, and Millions rejected him? and
many neither received nor rejected, but remained in suspense? 4. And if all the
Priests should desert a Country (as Ireland, Me^co, or our Wales, or Highlands)
are all the people thereby unchristened or unchurched, while they have no
Priest either to receive or reject, and perhaps hear not of a Pope.

But I specially answered him, That this makes every Priest so essential to
that Church, that a man is unchurched that rejects or contemns any one of
them, though he should honor the Pope, Councils, and thousands others: If a
man take a Priest in such a crime, as Watson, Montaltus and others tell us of,
is contemning him an unchristening of us? Yea, if it be done causelessly upon a
quarrel? This is a notable advancement of the Clergy. If contempt of one Priest
be damnation or unchristening us, he that can make Priests for all the world,
may well be Lord of all the world, even of Princes as well as other men.

To this he rejoineth, that by the word respectively he did not mean all
Priests, but all that are Pastors to that man; for there are some Priests that
have no care or cure of souls committed to them; but a private Christian
rejecting the authority of his Parish Priest, Bishop, Archbishop, Metropolitan,
Primate, Patriarch, or supreme Bishop, becomes a Schismatic, and casts himself
out of the Church.

Ans. 1. He is a strange Priest that has no Cure of Souls, what then is his
office? If he be not affixed to a particular charge, sure he has an indefinite
cure of Souls in the Church Universal. 2. Then one of the next Parish may take
our Parish Priest and all the Parish Priests in the Country save his own, for
Heretics, Fornicators, Traitors, and such as must be rejected, and yet be no
Schismatic but a Churchmember: But if I reverence all other Priests, and take
our own Parish Priest for an ignorant sot, or a knave, or a wicked man, and
contem^ him, I am cut off from the Church. This tells us more reason than I
knew of before, for our Canon against going from our own Parish-Churches when
we have no Preacher there And this else me how great the power of Patrons is,
who can make an ignorant wicked man so absolute a Lord of all his Parishioners,
though they be the greatest Lords, that to contemn him shall cost them their
damnation.

And this tells me more than I knew before, that the Roman Clergy do not plead
for the Pope for his sake only, but for their own; if all men be in as much
danger of damnation or unchurching for rejecting any Parish Priest, as for
rejecting the Pope.

And this tells me more than I knew before of the great Pre-eminence of the
Secular Clergy (as they call them) above the Regulars, and how low
comparatively the Jesuits and Friars are, when it will cut a man off from the
Church to contemn one sottish drunken Curate, or Parish Priest that can but
read Mass, and to contemn ten thousand Friars and Jesuits will not do so?

And this tells us of how great concernment Parish-bounds are, and what a
privilege it is to remove ones dwelling: For if I will but remove my dwelling
one yard out of the Parish, I may then contemn the Parish Priest without being
unchurched, which on the other side the way I could not do.

And this (...) us why the Clergy are exempt so much from Princes and
Magistrates judgment. It may cut off a Prince from the Church to contemn his
Priest, (whether to hang him if he prove a Traitor, be contempt I know not.)
Many such lessons may be hence learnt.

3. But how came Cyprian then so much mistaken, that said, Plebs maximam ^abet
potestatem -- sacerdotes indignos recusandi? And how came all the ancient
Churches to use that freedom in consenting or di^enting, electing or rejecting
their Bishops and Priests, which Blonde^ has copiously proved, pro sentent.
Hi^ron. and de jure plebis in regim. Eccles.

4. And what a privilege has the Pope or a Patriarch above an inferior
Christian? when he may reject a ^housand Priests, or Interdict whole Kingdoms,
or reject most Christian Churches and Pastors in the world* as being none of
Christ's, and yet not be himself cut off for so doing; whereas one that falls
out with his P^rish-priest and rejects him alone* is presen^ly ^o member of
the Universal Church?

It seems that God punishes not men according to the greatness of their sin;
for sure it is a greater sin unjustly to reject ten thousand Priests* than one.
Or to contemn all other Priests in the Country, mistaking them all for
Heretics, Usurpers, or in^ollerable, than so to do by one Parish Priest only.

5. How many Millions then that seem to be of the Church of Rome are not so;
because they contemn the authority of their Parish Priest?

6. But what is the proof of this assertion? None at all* In other Societies no
Union is essential to a member but that which is with the Pars Imperans, or
supreme power, and with the body. A man that rejects a Justice, or the Mayor
of a City, or the Master of a College or School, etc. may be yet a subject, and
a member of the Kingdom while he rejects not the King, though he be faulty,
and be cut off from the City, College or School. And I think that to reject a
Parish Priest that ought to be so rejected, is well done: and if he ought not,
it is ill done. And that he that separateth from that Parish Church, may yet be
(...) member of the Church Universal, while he separateth not from it. But I
see that Guiliel* de Sancto Amore, and such others, had greater reason to
condemn the Friars; and Watson, and such others, the Jesuits, than we knew of.

I noted also the difficulty* How we shall know the Authority of every
Parish Priest, Bishop* Archbishop, Patriarch, and Pope. And 1. in a Country
where Orders have ordinarily been forged.

To this he answered, As much as you can be assured of any being Pastor of such
a Church, or Bishop, or Justice, etc.

A^s. 1. If you prove it a duty to believe and obey every such deceiver that
has no authority, we will not believe till you prove it, that to do otherwise
does unchurch us. 2. And if two or three claim authority over us at once (as
they did in the Papacy about forty years together) are we cut off from Christ
if we receive not both? or how shall we know which* If either will serve, then
they that took John of Constantinople for Universal Bishop, were as much in the
Church, as they that received Pope Boniface as such. And they that followed
Dioscorus at Alexandria (being Orthodox), as they that adhered to Proterius?
etc. Is it no matter who it be, so we think him to be the right? Why then do
you deny our English Clergy, when we judge them to have the true authority?

2. I asked, What if we be ignorant whether the ordainer had intentionem
ordinandi, how shall we be sure of the authority of the Ordained?

He answered, As sure as you can be that you were the lawful child of your
parents who could not be truly married without intention.

Ans. This is new Doctrine; they that speak the words and do the actions which
properly signify a true intention, and do profess it, do thereby mutually
oblige themselves in the relation of husband and wife to each other; and they
that truly so oblige themselves, are truly (though sinfully) married: For what
is Marriage, but such a mutual obliging contract; they are truly my parents,
and I owe them obedience whatever their intention was. But you hold a man to be
no Priest that was not ordained ex ^entione ordinandi, and our Salvation to lie
on our obeying him as a Priest who is none.

My fourth Question was, How the people that dwell in other Countries can know
whether the Sect. (...).
Priest, Prelate, or Pope, had necessary Election and Ordination.

To which he says, When it is publicly allowed in the Church, witnessed to be
performed according to Canonical prescription, by those that were present, and
derived to the people without contradiction by public fame.

Ans. 1. This allows the Ministry in Ethiopia, Armenia, Moscovie, Gr^ece, as
much as the Roman: For it is publicly allowed and attested, and brought to the
people by uncontradicted fame. And so is the Ministry of the Reformed Churches
to all that hear not your contradiction. 2 But with Rome the case is otherwise,
one part of the Church has publicly allowed one Pope and all his Clergy, and
another part rejected him, and allowed another and his Clergy* and public fame
has contradicted one party. 3. And what can fame say to us in England of the
Election or Ordination made at Rome, of a Pope, Prelate, or Parish Priest, when
we hear not any witness of it? 4. And how can we expect contradiction of an
action done a thousand miles off, which none near knew of? 5. And yet how few
Priests or Prelates are they whose authority fame publishes without
contradiction? Do not Protestants contradict the authority of your Priests, and
most of the Christian World the authority of your Pope?

My fifth Question was, If you tell me your own opinion of the sufficient means
to know the Popes or Priests authority, how shall I know that you are not
deceived, unless a Council bad desined Sect. 25.
it. sufficient?

To this he says, That the orders prescribed in the Canon Law, and universally
received, are sufficient for this, without Decrees of General Councils: for
they are no points of faith but of order and discipline, whereof a moral
certainty and Ecclesiastical authority are sufficient.

Ans. 1. Is this moral certainty, true certaints, or uncertainty? If true
certainty, it has its moral ascertaining evidences. And what are those?

2. Who is the maker of this Canon Law? If not General Councils, how shall we
know their authority? If the Pope and Cardinals, how shall we know whether
those of e. g. Stephen, Sergius, or Formosus, be the authentic ones? and so of
many other contradictory ones? If a General Council damn and depose, e. g.
Eugenius the fourth as a Heretic, etc. and he make Canons after, how shall we
know that they are authoritative?

3. But are your matters of order and discipline no matters of faith? Then God
has not bound us to believe that the Pope is the Universal Bishop or Pastor,
or that Rome has any authority over the world, or other Christian Churches; or
that your Priests are the true Ministers of Christ, and have any authority over
us; or that the Mass is to be celebrated, etc. But either these are matters of
Divine or Humane Law. If man only command them, how comes our Christianity and
Salvation to be laid on them? What man commands, man may abrogate, unless
extrinsick accidents hinder. If God command them, does God command any thing
which he binds us not to believe to be our duty? Many things may be de fide,
revealed, which are not de moribus, nor to be done; but nothing is by God
commanded to be done, which is not first to be known or believed to be duty.

4. If it be no matter of faith, how to know that your Elections and
Ordinations are true; then it is no matter of faith that you are true Pastors,
or have any authority (because without true Election and Ordination, it is not
so; and if so, then it is no heresy to believe that you are all deceivers.

5. Your Authority (or Decrees) below that of Pope and General Councils,
pretend to no Infallible certainty: upon this it seems your Church is built,
and into uncertainty its authority resolved; and yet from this we must fetch
our certainty of the Gospel in your way. And is not the Gospel then made
uncertain by you, which must be believed on the authority of an uncertain
Ministry? yea, and are not Councils uncertain which consist of such a Ministry?

6. It Is a vanity to pretend that your Canon Law is universally received; most
of the Christian World receive but part of it, and much no part at all, unless
you call the Scripture the Canon Law.

7. If your Canon Law be so universally received and sufficient, then when that
Law is received into England, England must be burnt as a land of Heretics; for
that is part of your Law; and so your Ministry and our burning as Heretics,
have the same authority.

My next Question was, If I culpably were ignorant but of some few Priests
authority among thousands, am I cut off from all the rest, and the Church?
Sect. 26.


His answer is, It is not all Priests, but all Pastors in relation to their
flocks.

Ans. 1. But if my Parish Priest be but one of twenty or an hundred thousand,
does my culpable ignorance of his authority cut me off from all the Church? It
may be I believe Pope Nicolas Decrees, that a man must not hear Mass of a
Priest that has a Concubine? Or that a Simonical Pope or Bishop is no true
Pope or Bishop. 2. And remember, that my Parish Priest, and my Bishop,
Metropolitan, Patriarch and Pope, can never make a General Council: Either I
may be safely ignorant of the Priesthood of all the rest in such a Council, or
not: If not, then I must know the certain Priesthood of all others as well as
of my own Pastors, contrary to what you say; If yea, then I have no certainty
of the Priestly authority of Councils.

I next argued, That it is not the rejecting of a Constables authority which
makes him no subject Sect. 27.
the owns the Sovereign.

To this he rejoineth, That yet if I reject the Constable, and with him all
superior Magistrates, and at last the Sovereign, I am a rebel. And so if I
reject the authority first of a Parish Priest, and then the Bishop of the
Diocese, and after of all his Superiors to the highest, I am a rebel to the
visible Church, and cast out, and reject Christ's authority.

Ans. 1. Do you see what all our dispute is come to at last? All this while it
was the rejecting of any one Pastor that cut us off; and now it is the
rejecting of him and all above him to the bighest, Is it not lost labor to
dispute with these men?

2. When you have proved that Christ has such a thing as you call the visible
Church, that is, all the world obliged to obey any one man or Governor besides
Christ, (when he is naturally as incapable of it, as of being the Universal
Physician) even at the Antipodes, and where he can never send, then we will
take it for rebellion to reject that Head: Till then, we shall take it to be
Treason against Christ to claim and own that which is his prerogative.

How comes it to pass that no one yet learned to call himself the Universal
King of the Earth? or the Universal Judge, Physician, Schoolmaster, etc. as
well as the Universal Priest and Teacher of Religion?

Next I craved his answer to much which I had written on this subject before in
my Safe Relig. which he refuses, and tells me, That I make a visible body with
an invisible head to the Church, which Government is internal and invisible,
abstracting from visible supreme authority.

Ans. 1. Christ was seen on Earth. 2. He is seen in the Court of Heaven. 3. He
has left a visible Universal Law, by which he governs. 4. He has appointed
visible Officers over the world (though no Head) which is the way that the Pope
pretends to govern, (even per alios, when he never sent to a quarter of the
world). 5. His subjects are men visible, known by audible profession and
visible worship. 6. He will visibly judge the world in Glory, and be seen by all
his Church for ever. And when you prove that he has a Church that is otherwise
visible, we will hear you.

They that assert an Anima Mundi, and they that think one Intelligence or Angel
rules all the Earth, say that which is possible, though they can never prove
it: But to talk of a Governor of all the World, that never heard who dwells
on a third part of it, and that can get no Ships to sail about the Earth in
many ages; and when they do, come not near the hundredth part of the world,
this is a prodigious claim for a waking man.

My fourth Question about his definition of the Church was, Why exclude you the
chief Sect. 28.
Pastors that depend on none?

He answers, I include them, Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo unita.

Ans. 1. But he had defined the Church as those that depend on the Pastors:
which seemed to exclude the Popes that depend on none. 2. Hierome defines a
particular Church, and not the universal. 3. They often call the Clergy the
Church.

He rejoineth, That Terms have different acceptions.

Ans. But by all this ado I can have no reasonable satisfaction from you, what
you mean by the Church, or what that Church is which you call us to unite with,
and which you accuse us as separating from. We are like to dispute well with
men that cannot or will not explain the terms of the question.

CHAP. II. Of their sense of the Word HERESY.
W. J. HERESY is an obstinate intellectual opposition against Divine Authority
revealed, when it is sufficiently propounded.

R. B. Q. 1. Is the obstinacy that makes Heresy, in the Intellect or the
will? W. J. In the Will, by an imperate act restraining the understanding to
that.

R. B. Still your descriptions signify just nothing; you describe it to be an
Intellectual Obstinate opposition, and now say that it is in the will.

He replieth, that the error is in the Understanding, but the obstinacy in the
Will.

Ans. Indeed the obstinacy is in both, but radically in the Will; but did
Intellectual opposition notify this?

R. B. And you contradict your self by saying that it is an imperate act. For
no imperate act is in the will, but of or from the Will. The imperant act is in
the Will; but the imperate (as Intelligere) in the commanded faculty.

To this he replieth, That 1. he meant not the act was in the Will, though he
said it was an act of the Will. 2. That all Philosophers are against me, and
say that the Will may command Charity and other acts in it self.

Ans. 1. Who could conjecture that by an act of the Will, you meant not an act
in the Will, but from it? 2. It Is true that Volo velle is a proper speech, and
one act of the Will may be the object of another; and a good man wills
nothing more here than to will better; and if you will call this commanding, I
will not contend about the word: But certainly all these Volitions are such
acts as they call elicite, which they usually distinguish from imperate; and
thus you confound them. Otherwise every act of the will which is willed by a
former act should be called imperate, and so none but the first should be
elicite? And who knows when that first act was in being, seeing the will does
still will its own future action?

R. B. 2. I hence noted, that if wilful obstinacy be essential to Heresy,
their Church cannot Sect. 2.
know a Heretic (while they burn them): For they know not the heart; and many
that they burn, would take their oaths that they are not willing to err: He
answers,

W. J. We enter not into men's hearts, that we leave to God: only the Church
presumes such to be Heretics as have Catholic truths sufficiently propounded
to them, and yet contradict and oppose them; let such be ready to swear what
they will.

R. B. 1. Note here that they burn men for Heretics, and yet profess that
Heresy is an obstinacy of the will, which they know not, but leave to God; and
only presume that men are Heretics though they know it not. And so a presuming
Clergy are masters of the Crowns of Kings, and the lives of all men. How
excellently would this power have fitted the turn of Abab and Iezebel, and the
murderers of Christ? they need not have got false witness to condemn them as
Blasphemers: A presuming Clergy might have served: For the very act which the
Papists judge men for, is internal in the intellect and will, as Blasphemy is
external. To condemn men for Blasphemy has some reason of justice, because it
may be proved; but Intellectual obstinate opposition cannot.

2. He tells us now that Heresy is a contradicting Catholic Truths, but never
tells what those Catholic Truths are; Whether any one, or only some of the
greater sort: and how we may know them. But it is sufficient that the presumers
know. It is a Catholic Truth with them for which Bellarmine cites many
Councils, See them answered by Ioh. Rossens. (Bishop Bucke^idge.)
That the Pope may excommunicate and depose Kings and Rulers: To oppose this
now is Heresy: A Heretic must be burnt! O happy Kings that have such a King
over them, and such a presuming Clergy!

3. But this Catholic Truth must be sufficiently proposed: That sufficiently
is a doubtful dangerous Sect. 3.
word: who would think how much lies on Grammatical learning! The Pope and his
Clergy are Masters of Kingdoms, and all men's estates and lives, by being the
only judges of the meaning of this one word, SUFFICIENTLY; either it is called
sufficiently proposed, with respect to the proposer, (as a Law is sufficiently
promulgate) when he has done as much as he was bound to do: And then a lazy
or a proud Priest will think that two words is sufficient to oblige mankind to
renounce all their senses (e. g. for Transubstantiation.) And one that has a
Parish ten times greater than he can speak to, will think that he has done his
duty to all, when he has spoken to as many as he could: yea indeed the Decree
of a General Council Printed goes for sufficient proposal to millions that
cannot read, nor ever heard those Councils read. Or else it is called
Sufficient with respect to the effect on the understanding of the hearer
sufficient to convince him; and it is supposed that it is not effectual: and
what mortal man is able to judge of the sufficiency of proposal, respectively to
all men's understandings? some men have great natural dullness and slowness of
conception, next to Idiots; some by long disuse of such cogitations, hear all
spiritual Doctrine as if it were spoken in an unknown tongue; some cannot
easily see the connection of verities: And some of weak heads or memories cannot
endure to think long enough of such matters, as to overcome the difficulties:
And some think that they perceive such clear evidence for the contrary opinion,
that it is not in their power to take it to be false. There is as great variety
of receptive capacities, as there is of persons in the world. And the Priest
knows not the internal case of another man: And therefore is here no sitter a
judge of sufficiency to all other, than he is of their thoughts: They are like a
man that had a writing in a Table Book to obliterate, and another to write in
it in the dark, and would so judge that it was sufficiently done.

And what is Sufficiency? they will say, that which makes conviction possible;
and so poor men that might but possibly have been convinced, must be burnt
because it is not done.

Is not this a notable way to save Parish Priests much labor? If they have
told thousands the truth once or so often as might possibly have convinced them:
burn them then to save him the labor of any longer preaching to them; but who
then shall pay him his Tithes? There is remedy in that case, most, rather than
be burned, will say what the Priest bids them, whether they understand him, or
believe him or not, and then they are safe.

But they will say perhaps, That that proposal is sufficient to convince men
which were sufficient if they were not possessed with a blind zeal for their
opinions, (for that is it that W. I. here lays it on.

Ans. But is there any man that has no error? and must a man have no zeal for
that which he judges truth: The sense of this is, that Proposal is sufficient
to cure a man, which supposes him to have no disease: If his mind and will
have no sin in them to resist the truth, but a pure receptivity of any revealed
truth, as Christ in his childhood, and Adam in innocence, then this proposal is
sufficient; But if he be not as white paper that has nothing to be
obliterated, but have any sinful opinion to resist the truth, than burn him for
an Heretic: And are not the Papists merciful men that will burn none but
sinners?

4. But, Reader, if this definition of Heresy be not recanted, the number of
Heretics is very great. For by this all the Heathens and Infidels, Jews and
Mahometans in the world are Heretics, that believe not when the Gospel is
sufficiently proposed to them. For here is no distinction nor exception: surely
that Christ is the Son of God is a Catholic truth; and so obstinate
intellectual opposition to it is Heresy: But the old Doctors never said so,
nor do the Papists ordinarily say so: nor do they burn all Infidels that will
not turn Christians: whether it be because such are unwilling to be burned, and
ten men can scarce burn ten thousand against their wills, I know not.

But I suppose W. I. forgot here to put Baptized persons into his definition.
And if he had, if all the Ianizaries be but baptized before the Turks take them
from their parents, then they are Heretics, and to be burnt it seems, or else
not.

But perhaps Apostates also should have been excepted. But there is no end of
conjecturing at unexpressed meanings, or of amending other men's words.

R. B. Q. 2. Must it needs be the formal object of faith? Is he no Nere^ick
that denies the matter revealed, without opposing obstinately the authority
revealing? (For he defined it to be an Sect. 4.
opposition to Divine auth^ity.

W. J. Yes: nor is he a formal, but only a material heretic, who opposes a
revealed truth, which is not sufficiently propounded to him to be a Divine
revelation.

R. B. To this I answer, 1. His definition and his answer here are
contradictory. 2. His addition solveth it not; sufficient propounding it to be
a Divine revelation, does not infer that he takes God for a liar, but only
that he culpably denies this to be the Word of God.

I answered therefore, That all men that believe a God, believe him to be true,
and no liar; and so W. I. makes none but Atheists to be Heretics. To this he
answers:

W. J. There is a twofold denying of God, one formal and direct, the other
virtual and indirect: Atheists are guilty of the first, Heretics of the
second. -- This I oblige my self to prove, -- Whosoever obstinately contradicts
any truth revealed from God, as all Heretics do some or other of them, they
sinfully and wilfully affirm that what God has revealed is not true, and
consequently that God is a liar, and by that destroy as much as in them lies
the very essence of God.

R. B. Here is little but novelty and deceit. 1. It is deceit to call that a
denying of God, in a controversy of such moment (whatever you might do
rhetorically in an Oration) which you confess your self is not a denying him:
For you say that it is not a formal but a virtual denying him; and that is
truly no actual denying him; for forma dat nomen and esse, Boys will deride you
if you deny this.

If you object Paul's words, Tit. 1. They confess him in words, but in their
works they deny him, I answer, that they denied him formally by their works.
For those works signified that their minds did not formally believe God to be
God indeed, according to his Essentialities.

2. It is novelty and deceit to affirm (and stoutly undertake to prove) that
the denying of one of the Propositions from which the Conclusion must arise, is
virtually a denying of both. e. g. Whatever is Gods word is true; but the story
of Bell and the Dragon, and of the Angel in Tobit, saying he was the Son of
Ananias of the Tribe of Naphthali; and that the intrals of a Fish would drive
away all Devils, that they should never return, etc. are the word of God. May
not a man firmly believe the Major, that takes the Minor for a lie? And
suppose that the Roman Church say that I am obstinate: my reasons are, 1.
Angels be not born of man. 2. Christ says, This kind goes not out but by
fasting and prayer, etc. so that I must take Christ for a liar, if I take not
Tobit to be false: may not I be obstinate in this, and yet not deny that all
the Word of God is true. If the Manichees tell me that the Gospel of Nicodemus,
and of Saint Thomas is the word of God, and the Papists, that the Apostolical
Canons and Constitutions, and the Itinerary of Peter, were written by Clemens,
is obstinate unbelief of this, a denying that God is true. Your sufficient
proposal is that of your Church. A General Council is your highest proposer
(with the Pope). I find that the Council at Constance, and Basil, and Pisa, say
one thing and that at Lateran and Florence say the contrary; and I obstinately
refuse to believe them both, may I not yet firmly believe that God is true? you
are not God; And verily I have more reason to suspect you than God. The
Countryman that never read Councils, nor traveled to Rome, knows nothing of
your matters, but by his Parish Priest. If he know this Priest to be a common
whoremonger and liar, may he not suspect him without denying God?

But if you can prove what you undertake, it is the sadder with you, that can
triumph in sentencing your selves as Heretics to Hell. e. g. Whatever is Gods
word is true, but it is Gods word that the Lords Supper should be administered
in both kinds (bread and wine) (This do in remembrance of me), and that it is
bread after the consecration, 1 Cor. 11. and that it is better to pray in a
known tongue than in an unknown, 1 Cor. 14. and that they know not what manner
of spirit they are of, who would have the resisters of Christ's Apostles, and of
Christ himself consumed with fire; and that the Clergy must not Lord it over
Gods heritage, but as servants to all, rule them willingly, and not by
constraint, etc. Ergo, this is all true.

And whoever denies this truth of God, indirectly denies Gods essence, and
makes him a liar: But the Church of Rome denies all these: Does it follow
that the Church of Rome are Heretics, blasphemers and liars? And all this is
sufficiently revealed, for it is plainly written in the Word of God.

3. Note Reader, that such a contradiction of any truth revealed by God, does
make a man an Heretic; O then what abundance of Heretics be in the world?
What one man can say, that he does not contradict some truth revealed by God,
by nature or Scripture, or both? Every man's mind and will is depraved, and
being so, has some degree of obstinacy in resisting some truth of God; and so
all men in the world (as well as the obstinately erroneous Papists) are
Heretics. Not only Papists that will believe neither the Scripture, Tradition.
Reason, nor all men's senses, that there is bread after Consecrations; but any
one that does not believe who was the Father of Arphaxad, e. g. or any point of
Genealogy, or of Chronology, or differing Numbers in Kings and Chronicles, Ezra
and Nehemiah, Mat. 1. and Luke 3, etc. Or that does not believe that every word
in Judith, Tobit, etc. are Gods word, are all Heretics and deniers of Gods
Essence.

Nor does he except any age of persons; so that if a Schoolboy should but
obstinately deny to believe his Master about a tradition, or a Scripture-name
or number, he were a Heretic.

The Council of Basil reveals the sinless conception of the Virgin Mary, and
yet the Papists that deny it are not accounted Heretics: And what show is
there of this consequence, the Council of Ephesus 2. of Arminum, of Lateran, of
Nice 2, of Florence, of Constance, Basil, Trent, may lie: Ergo, God is a liar.
Heretics should be softer in defining Heresy.

I next instanced, What if a man deny that there is a Heaven, Hell,
Resurrection, and also the Sect. 5.
revelation of these, and yet deny not the veracity of God (no nor of the
Church) is this no Heretic?

He answers, No, if not sufficiently propounded to him as revealed from God.
-- But that Proposition must be made by the Church; and as long as he believes
the infallible veracity of the Church propounding, he cannot disbelieve what it
propounds sufficiently, etc.

R. B. 1. But a man that does not believe the Infallibility of the Church, may
believe Gods Veracity, and yet be an Heretic.

2. A Papist that holds your Church infallible, may disbelieve what General
Councils deliver as de fide, for so you do. So that this word Sufficient is as
unintelligible among your selves, as mere nonsense: For even General Councils
proposals are not accounted sufficient when you are against them, and yet every
Priest is, when your turn requires it.

3. And many a man may take the Churches proposal to be certain, and yet think
that the Roman Church is but an erroneous faction, and scarce a (corrupt) third
part of the Church.

I next told him that the Jesuit Turnbull against Rob. Baronius, maintains
that Revelation Sect. 6.
is no part of the formal object of faith, and therefore to deny it, is not to
deny the formal object. 2. And that forma dat nomen, and he is no Heretic that
is none formally.

To the latter he gives no answer; and to the first as bad as none, viz. that
the Heretic denies also the material object (and what is that to the case in
hand?) and that which he is obliged by sufficient reason to believe to be
revealed of God; and therefore virtually denies God to be true.

Ans. But I again reply, 1. Virtual is not actual. 2. It is no virtual denial
that God is true, but only that the proposer is true. To be obliged to believe
a thing to be Gods word, only proves that I break that obligation if I believe
it not to be his word; but not at all that I believe God to be a liar, whose
word I believe it not to be. Again, this makes all Christians to be Heretics,
past dispute: For all Christians receive not something or other (small or
great) which they were obliged to belie^e to be Gods word. Do you err in any
thing that is revealed by Scripture or Tradition, or not? If you say no, and so
that your understanding has no sin, you deceive your self, and the truth is
not in you: If yea, then were you not obliged to believe the contrary to be
Gods word; if not obliged, then your error is no sin: so that you make every
sinful error to be Heresy, and proudly deny that you have any sinful error,
lest you should be a Heretic.

I added, that their Church is constituted of men that sinfully neglect some
point of truth or other sufficiently proposed: Ergo is it constituted of
Heretics. Sect. 7.


To this he answers, That whatever their neglect be to know what is propounded,
yet so long as they believe explicitly what is necessary to be so believed
necessitate medii, and implicitly the rest, they can be no Hereitcks: for it
is not the ignorance though culpable, but contradiction to what is known So all
that take not every Priest for a lawful superior, and to contradict him, though
about a word, must be burned and damned.
to them to be propounded by those that have power to oblige them as being
their lawful superiors, which makes an heretic.

R. B. 1. But still you agree not, nor tell us what is explicitly to be
believed necessarily. 2. By this we are all absolved from heresy; for we
believe all explicitly that is necssary necessitate medii, and all the rest
implicitly by a double implicit faith; 1. In God and our Redeemer. 2. In the
inspired Apostles and Prophets; we believe all to be true which God has
revealed, and which his Apostles have delivered as Gods word. 3. Yea, and all
that we know to be propounded by any obliging superiors; for we know not the
Pope, nor your contradictory Councils to be such.

My next Qu. 2. was, What mean you by sufficient proposal? Sect. 8.


W. I. Such as is sufficient among men in humanis, to oblige one to take
notice, that a King has exacted such and such Laws, etc. that is, a public
testimony that such things are revealed by the infallible authority of those
who are the highest tribunal of Gods Church, or by notorious and universal
tr^dition.

R. B. 1. Here the Reader may see, that he takes sufficiency respectively to
the Promulgator, viz. as much as he was obliged to do: for a King is not bound
to publish his Laws in every parish, or county, but only to make such a
publication of them in the chief places of his kingdom, as that men may take
notice of them. Kings send not Schoolmasters to teach every man how to prove
that his Laws are not counterfeit, and what they are, and what is the meaning
of them. For the enacting of them being a late matter of fact, and easily
notified, as near unto them, and no other knowledge or belief of them being
required but such as is necessary to that part of the obedience of them which
belongs to every man in his place, this is not necessary. And if such a
publication of Gods Laws be sufficient, millions that never heard a word of the
Bible, or what Christ is, have such a sufficient publication: for the Gospel is
published in many parts of the world, and perhaps in many places of the
Kingdoms where they dwell, though they never heard it.

2. But when men have the public testimony that such statutes are made, and
such a Book sent from God, this does not acquaint men what those Statutesor
that Book contains: sothat by this rule it should be sufficient to know that
God made the Bible, without knowing what is in it; or else he that is but told
that there is such a book, is bound by that much to know all that is in it.

3. But note the Popish difficulty of faith; W. I. tells us (after the rest)
that we must know these things revealed by the infallible authority of those
who are the highest tribunal of Gods Church, etc. And is it possible for one
that knows nothing of Christ or the Scripture, or that Christ has a Church,
to know yet, 1. That he has a Church. 2. And that he has authorized some men
to be the highest Tribunal to judge that Church through all the world. And 3.
That he has particularly authorized them to judge which is and is not his
revelation. 4. And to know who be the men that are this highest Tribunal to all
the world, viz. for those of Abassia, that had not so much History as to tell
them that there was such a City as Rome, or such a man as the Pope in the
world, till Oviedo was sent (who told it but to few), could yet know that this
Pope and his Council are their Judges, and from them they must receive the
Gospel. 5. And to know that this Universal Tribunal is infallible, before they
believe in Christ himself, who is supposed to give them their Infallibility?
Alas! must every poor Infidel know all this, before he can believe in Christ,
when we that live among them, and read their laws and doctrines, cannot easily
believe the Infallibility of those Popes, who by General Councils are charged
not only with Murder, Adultery, Simony, Perjury, etc. but with Heresy also, or
Infidelity? Nor the Infallibility of those General Councils, who are accused by
Popes and by other Councils of Error, Heresy or Schism?

4. But he adds another way, Or by notorious and universal Tradition. And 1.
If this will Sect. 9.
serve, then I hope we may have true faith that believe no humane infallible
Tribunal over all the world, much less that the Pope and his Council are such a
Tribunal; for we have notorious Universal Tradition, delivering us all our
Religion.

2. But yet these are hard terms for every poor Heathen to come to Christ by:
Alas, how shall the millions of people through the world, who know nothing that
is many days journey from their houses, know what is the notorious Tradition of
all the Christian world? I that search after it in all the books that I can
get, can scarce give a good account of the Tradition of much of the greater
part of Christians. Nay no Universal Tradition at all is notorious to most
Christians, much less to all the Heathens and Infidels on earth. It is not
notorious to most in England, what is the Tradition of the Abassians, Syrians,
Armenians, Greeks, no nor of the Italians, French, Spaniards, Germans, etc.
That is notorious to Scholars, which is not so to the unlearned; and to
Antiquaries, which is not so to other Scholars.

Here W. I. answers two things, 1. That to know some Laws of the
Commonwealth, is of importance Sect. 10.
to salvation. 2. That God should have made a visible Government imprudently,
whose Governors could not be known but by revelation.

R. B. 1. And how comes importing to be put instead of necessity to salvation?
This is but fraud.

2. It were worth our diligent enquiry, could we prevail with these men to open
to us this mystery, How it is that the Pope and his Council may be known to be
the supreme Governors of the world, without revelation? I will abate my
Antagonists the answering of all the rest, if they will but be entreated to
answer me this one question. It seems that it is by no promise of Christ, no
word of God, no nor by any revelation of the Spirit, or Miracles, that we must
know them to be our Governors. I confess I can know without revelation, that
they claim such authority as any Traitor or Usurper may do; but that they have
such authority, it is past my reach to conjecture which way it is to be proved
without revelation.


But I entreat the Reader to remember this, in all our further disputes with
them; That they confess that it is not by revelation (by Scripture, Spirit,
Miracles, or Tradition, made known) that the Pope and his Council are the
supreme Governors of the Universal Church.

And yet we must know this before we can believe in Christ, or believe the
Scripture to be true: And we must know it of necessity to salvation.

And another difficulty here seems insuperable, viz. Seeing this is not a
matter of Revelation, it can be no matter of Divine faith; and if so, how is
all other faith resolved into it?
and how is the belief of this (which is no belief) called our implicit belief
of all the word of God? can no man be saved that cannot unriddle all these
contradictions?

Next I further noted:

R. B. That if he lay the sufficiency on the respect to all men's various
capacities of receiving Sect. 11.
the notice, then they can never know who are Heretics; but if they lay it on
a general publication, then all or almost all men are Heretics, being
unavoidably ignorant of many things so published.

To this he says, That he Judges of no man's conscience.

Ans. But do not they judge of them, that burn them, and depose Princes for not
exterminating them?

He says, It is sufficient, 1. that such as acknowledge themselves they know
such points of faith to be propounded by the Roman Church (which I infallibly
believe to be the true Church) and that notwithstanding reject them as errors,
give me ground to presume them to be Heretics.

Ans. 1. I perceive that it is not the Pope only that is infallible, but you
also are infallible in believing his Church. But alas! how many are deceived
and deceivers, that call themselves infallible?

2. But if your belief in the Pope were infallible, must all others be
heretics, and be burnt, that have not attained to your degree of knowledge (or
self-conceitedness)?

3. Just now you said the Governors of the Church need no revelation to make
them known; and now it is an article of your belief, That the Roman Church is
the true Church: so slippery is your foundation!

4. But what means that hard word The true Church? Is it not enough if it
were proved a true Church? Either you mean the universal Church, or a
particular Church; if the former, why speak you so sneakingly, and did not
speak out, that the Roman Church is all, the whole Church that Christ has on
earth? Which assertion we abhor, and despair of any thing like a proof of it.
If the latter what is it to us whether Rome be a true Church, any more than
whether Ephesus, Thessalonica, or such other be so?

5. But (to leave your parenthesis) what is all this to the most of the
Christian world that do not acknowledge themselves that they know such points of
faith to be propounded by the Church of Rome? There is not one of five hundred
among us that ever read your Councils, nor knows one of many things
propounded by you to be such. And are all these now absolved from heresy? How
long will that be their security, if the burning and exterminating Religion
should prevail? And is it my hard fate to become a Heretic more than all the
rest of my neighbors, because I have read your Councils when they have not?
Then I would counsel all that love not to be burned, to take heed of meddling
with such Councils. I have often read how dangerous a thing you judge it for
unlicensed men to read Gods word, and of many that have been burned for it, and
its consequents, and how you account it the way to Heresy: But I have not often
before read how dangerous it is to read your Decrees, or to know all that the
Church of Rome propounds; for he that knows them all, must have a very
ready commandable faith, such as can believe in despite of Sense, Reason,
Scripture, and Tradition, to escape the guilt of Heresy. But I pray you (were
you not inexorable executioners) when it comes next to the burning of
Dissenters, that you will spare all that confess not that they know what is
propounded by your Church, yea though they take not their parish priest that
tells it them, to be infallible, especially if they know him to be a common
liar, or one that holds that lying for men's good, is a venial sin, or none.

W. I. 2. Such as oppose what all visible Churches have most notoriously
practiced and believed as Divine truths, while they were so universally taught
and practiced, I may safely presume to be Heretics. Sect. 12.


R. B. 1. No O^dipus can tell whether (while) here, refer to (believed) or to
(oppose). If to the latter, then neither Abassines, Armenians, Greeks, or
Protestants, are Heretics; for they oppose not such points while they were so
universally taught and practiced (whatever their forefathers did); for they
have themselves so many partners, as derogates from the pretended Universality
of the Adversaries. But if by all the visible Church, you mean all except
themselves; or if the word (while) relate to (believe), then the Church of Rome
are characterized by you for certain Heretics: for I defy impudence it self,
in challenging it to deny, that the Universal Church did notoriously believe
and practice the administration of the Lords Supper in both kinds (the Cup as
well as the Bread) and the celebration of public worship in a known tongue,
and the reading and hearing of the Scripture in a known tongue by the people,
and others such like.

But yet I will not take you at your word, nor call you Heretics merely on the
account: asserted by you; for I know that your rule is false. And if a man had
known that the Universal Church had held some opinion of Chronology, or
Genealogy, or Cosmography, (as about Cainan, or the age of Sem, or that there
were no Artipodes) especially in the dismal Ninth Century; and if he had
thought that they took this point for a Divine Revelation, believing the
Septuagint or some other mis-translation (which was commonly received before
Ieromes time) this man so thinking that the whole Church then erred in so small
a point, was no Heretic for so thinking; for I would know of your self,
whether the Popes and all their followers be not Heretics? For the Septuagint
was long taken by the Universal Church for the Word of God, and so was the
Vulgar Latin long after by your Universal Roman Church; and consequently that
those Texts were Gods Word which yet afterward you altered: Many hundred or
thousand alterations in the one were made by Sixtus 5, and Clement 8, all which
were so many judgments that the Church had erred that before took the other
readings for the Word of God (unless you can make one thing Gods word to day,
and the contrary to morrow.)

5. But by this rule also we are acquit from Heresy, if it was not notorious
to us that the Universal Church believed and practiced contrary to us, which
sure is notorious to very few at most. And indeed we differ from the Roman
Church the more, because we dare not with them differ from the belief and
practice of the far greatest part of the Church of Christ in this and in former
ages.

R. B. Is not the Bible a public testimony and record, and being universally
received is an universal tradition? and yet abundance of truths in it, are not
actually known or believed by most of your own Church.

W. J. It is only a Tradition, that whatever is there delivered is the word of
God; but it is no tradition that such a determinate sense and no other is the
word of God in every sentence Sect. 13.
contained in it, when according to the analogy of faith the words are capable
of many senses.

R. B. Worse and worse still! 1. Tradition tells us that this Bible is Gods
Word: This Word of God is significant and intelligible, or else it is worse and
more defective than the common words of men: This intelligible Bible or Word
therefore delivers to us its own sense: If not, then Councils do not deliver
us the sense of Gods Word, or their own: For God could speak as well as they,
and their words are no more plain than his. Yet a multitude of plain
intelligible Texts are not understood by many of your Church, whom you call not
Heretics; yea your learned Commentators differ and fight about their sense.

2. Therefore when you talk of every sentence, you do but fly and hide your
fraud. If your meaning be that no sentences of Scripture are Divine revelations
as they are in Gods own words, but as expounded by your Church, all Christian
ears should abhor your blasphemy. If you mean only that there are some Texts so
difficult as that most Christians cannnot understand them, or that are capable
of various senses, we grant it: But what are those to all the rest? Is every
man a Heretic that erreth about the sense of any one plain Text of Scripture,
or not?

And it is perverse that you say, of diverse senses according to the analogy of
faith: For a Text may be expounded contrary to the plain words and context,
which yet is not expounded contrary to the analogy of faith, if by that word
you mean as is usual, contrary to the harmony of Christian necessary Truths,
yea or contrary to any other truth whatever, save that Text it self.

And now, Reader, I leave it to thy reason whether this man have given us any
regardable notice at all, what is Heresy? or what they mean by it, or have not
trifled and said nothing.

But what Heresy is, I will briefly tell you: The word signifying Election,
was used in the beginning sometime for any Sect or Party divided from the
common body of the Sect. 14.
Church: And Christians were called a Heresy by the Jews. By the Christians
the name signified any party of men that professing to differ in some necessary
thing from the common body of Christians, and the Doctrine of the Apostles; did
separate from them as unmeet for their Communion, and gather themselves into
divided Societies. So that differing from the Apostolical Doctrine and
Churches; and making different Sects or Societies therefore which separated
from and opposed the Churches, was called Heresy by the Apostles; and it was
the same thing with the grossest sort of Schism. And the commonest sense of the
word. Schism, then was lower, signifying either the contentious making of
divisions within a Church without separating from it, or else the breaking of
one Church into many, without separating from other Churches, or the generality
of Christians. And so long after the word Heresy was sometime used for such
Schism only (and hence Lucifer Calaritanus, and the Novatians, and many others
were called Heretics). And sometimes used more cautelously in a narrower
sense, for those only that denied some essential article of faith or practice.
And sometimes in a yet narrower sense, for those only that upon such a denial
of some essential point, did gather into a separated Society to maintain their
error, and oppugn the truth.

And according to these various senses of the word Horesie, and Heretic, we
must conclude that a Heretic may or may not be saved, and is, or is not within
the Universal Church; which W. I. does deceitfully confound.

Of which I have said more in the End, and showed you by an instance of
Philastrius, how mischievous it is to abuse the name of Heresy against every
different opinion of true Christians, and so to make Heretics of all Believers
in the world.

CHAP. III. What mean you by the Word POPE?
W. J. By POPE I mean St. Peter, or any of his lawful successors in the Sea of
Sect. 1.
Rome, having authority by the institution of Christ, to govern all particular
Churches next under Christ.

R. B. I am never the nearer knowing the Pope by this, till I know how St.
Peter's Successors may be known to me.

Q. 1. What personal qualification is necessary ad esse?

W. J. Such as are necessary ad esse of other Bishops, which I suppose you know.

R. B. If so, then all those were no Popes that were Heretics, or denied
essential points of faith.

W. J. It Is true, they were no Popes while formal Heretics, if any such were.

R. B. As John 22, 23, Eugenius 4th, etc.

W. J. Prove that.

R. B. The Articles brought against them, and the judgments thereupon, are a
proof, if any thing may be called a proof; viz. in the Council at Rome against
John, in the Councils of Constance against diverse, at Basil against Eugenius,
and others much elder against Honorius, etc. Is a General Council no proof?

I added that so they were no Christians: and he answers, Prove that Yet he
maintains himself that Heretics are no Christians but equivocally. Baronius,
Binnius, Bellarmine, Genebrard, your greatest flatterers confess it, and much
more. Who that ever read the Councils and Churchhistory doubted of it? see then
the impudency of men pretending to lay their cause on tradition, and history.
. To which I say, General Councils are your Catholic Church representative,
and those charge these Popes with Heresy and Infidelity: If you are so
frontless as to deny it, I will not therefore tire the Reader with transcribing
Councils as often as you can say, Prove it.

I added, And all those that wanted the necessary abilities to the essentials
of their works. He says, Prove that there were such Popes? I answer, That you
have had children Popes, and some that were illiterate and ignorant, I have often
proved by the express testimonies of your own Historians. How often must I repeat
them?

I added, That therefore their Church has often been headless, and the
Succession interrupted; Councils having thus censured many Popes.

W. J. When you have proved the precedents, prove that.

R. B. Reader, is not the cause of the Papacy in a desperate case, if Arms
upheld it not, when their Champion has no more to say for the very successive
being of the Popes, but to bid me prove that which all men that read them know
is commonly and copiously asserted by their Councils and Historians? How often
have I cited their Platina, Werverus, yea Baro^us, Binnius, Genebrard their
greatest flatterers, telling us that some were Children, and some illiterate,
and fifty together were not Apostolical, but Apostatical, etc.

W. I. Prove that they were lawful Councils which so censured any Popes, which
we admit as true and lawful.

R. B. Alas, poor men* are you driven to that? 1. If you have the face to deny
those to be lawful Councils that censured Honorius, the two John's, Eugenius,
etc. we may as well and a little better use the same liberty, and question
whether that of Trent, Florence, Lateran, etc. were lawful?

2. May not the world see now what is the foundation of your faith, and the
validity of your Authority and Tradition? even your own wills? General Councils
tell you the sense of the Church, and the Tradition of your forefathers, if
you like them. But if the Pope dislike them, they are no lawful Councils, and
their testimony null. The sum is, whatever Councils say, the Pope shall never
be proved a Heretic or Infidel till he will say that he is one himself, and
will subscribe as Marcellinus did to his own condemnation, or with Liberius
confess his fault.

3. And have not these men a notable advantage to proselyte Ladies and
illiterate persons, when if General Councils damn their Popes, it is but
bidding them, Prove those to have been lawful Councils. And though I can prove
to them that even their own Popes have affirmed them lawful, yet few women are
so far skilled in History, and so they must yield to every impudent deceiver:
And when I have proved all, it is but as Bellarmine's fetching a denial out of
the word Conciliariter, against the approbation of Martin 5.

4. But is this enough for you? what if none were lawful Councils that
displease the Pope? Are they therefore no competent witnesses of a matter of
fact? In the I said that the charge of Simony made many of them incapable; to
which he gives no answer, for their most flattering Historians assert it, and
lament it.
mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. And are not
so many hundred Bishops and other Clerks as were at the Councils of Basil,
Constance, Pisa, etc. competent Witnesses, that the Pope was a Heretic,
Simonest, Murderer, etc. had the Pope but consented these Councils had been the
Catholic Church and infallible? And may they not be credible Witnesses against
him till he consent? How shall we believe them, when they tell us what was held
and done in all the Christian World a thousand or fourteen hundred years ago,
if after examination of Witnesses we may not believe them concerning one man,
one public sinner, in their own time, and known to many of themselves? What
then would the testimony of a Historian or an hundred Historians signify, if
the testimony of many hundred Bishops congregate and deliberately examining,
consulting and sentencing, be false?

R. B. I next asked, Q. 2. Where and how must this Institution of Christ (of
the Papacy) Sect. 2.
be found?

W. J. In the revealed Word of God, written or unwritten.

R. B. 1. Remember, Reader, that even now he told us that the Church Governors
are known without Revelation, else God had made an imprudent Government. He
could not mean that they are known to be men, but Governors, distinct from
Usurpers, or else he had spoke nonsense or impertinently. And yet now it is in
the revealed word of God.

2. I answered, That they never gave the world assurance how to know the
measure of their unwritten word, nor where to find it, so as to know what it is.

W. J. We say we have.

R. B. Just as now you do to me: If that Word of God be still unwritten, and
neither to be found in your Councils, nor any of your Books, I challenge all
the reason in the world, to tell us where we may certainly come to know what it
is, and when we have all; especially when so great Councils as Ariminum, Ephesians.
2, Constance and Basil may be deceived in your very Fundamentals of Authority,
in matter of fact so near at hand?

R. B. Till you prove Christ's institution, which you have nev^ done, you free
us from believing in the Pope.

W. J. All are free from believing in the Pope; we believe in God, but not in
the Pope: who of us ever charged you to do so?

R. B. Even they that charge us to trust our very Salvation upon his
Infallibility, Veracity or Authority, as from which only with his Council we
must know what is Gods Word, and what the meaning of it, what is it to believe
in, but to believe his Authority and Veracity, and trust upon it? But we thank
you for discharging us from believing in the Pope: But I doubt when we are in
your power, you will call us to an afterreckoning, and burn us for not
believing on him, when you acquit us from believing in him; so much of your
faith does lie on a Letter.

R. B. Quest. 3. Will any ones Election prove him to be Pope? or who must elect
him Sect. 3.

ad esse?

W. J. Such as by approved custom are esteemed by those to whom it belongs, fit
for that charge, and with whose election the Church is satisfied.

R. B. Now we come to their desperation! never were men put to more open
confusion in the very essence of their cause. Something must be said, but they
know not what. I noted here, that if no Election, or any ones Election will
serve turn, the Scholars may elect a Schoolmaster Pope, and any man may be
Pope, or an hundred may be Popes: But if not, then it must be known who it is
that has the power of Election, and that it was done by them. The people of
Barnet or Brainford have no authority to elect a Lord Mayor of London; nor
would one of their choice be any better than a Playhouse Lord. Our Question
is, Who must choose the Governor of all the world? In reason all the world
should meet by themselves, or their just Delegates to choose him. But the man
that claims this Divine Sovereignty has been sometime chosen at Rome by a
meeting of Lay-citizens; and sometimes by Neighbor-bishops, and sometimes (at
the best) by Citizens and Presbyters together, Bishops approving it, and
sometimes by the Emperors of Rome, of Constantinople, or of Germany, and
sometime by a sort of things called Cardinals. Now if none of these have more
right to choose him than the rest, then either any body has right that can
carry it out, and get possession, or else no body has right, or none can tell
who has it. Accordingly for above forty years together, the Emperor and his
party chose one Pope, and the King of France and his party chose another; one
reigned at Rome, and another at Avignion in France. Part of Europe chose or
owned one, and part another; and at once, says Wernerus, there were six alive
that were then Popes, or had been Popes (of whom one honester than the rest,
because he could not read himself, chose another Pope to be his partner to read
the Mass, which he could not do, and to help him in the rest).

Here in the answer of W. J. 1. He durst not tell us who have the power of
Election. 2. But he says it must be those that are fit for the charge. If I
should ask who must choose the Lord Mayor of London, and you should so answer
me, Those that are fit for the charge, would not any sensible Reader judge by
your answer that you were unfit for an honest disputation.

3. He says, that the Electors must be so esteemed (fit for the charge) by
those to whom it does belong, To whom what does belong? why, to esteem the
Electors fit. But how should a man know to whom it does belong to judge who is
fit to be an Elector? Does it belong to the World or to Rome? To the people,
Presbyters, Bishops, Emperors or Cardinals? Here we have more difficulties
than we thought of; we must know who is fit to be Pope, and who is fit to elect
him, and to whom it belongs to judge who are fit to be Electors; that is, to
elect Electors; and when shall we come to know all this? If he say that it is
the people that must choose the Choosers, what people be they? they of Rome? or
they of all Italy? or they of Germany? or of France? or of all Europe? or of
all the World?

3. He says that the choosers must be such as by custom are esteemed fit by
these; But what custom does the man mean? when there have been four or five
ways or sorts of Election, had not every one of them a beginning? and at their
beginning could they plead custom? O that your sword were no stronger than your
reasons!

4. Yea, he says, It must be approved customs. But not a word who must be the
approvers of all these new customs.

5. And when all is done, no more is needful, but that the unknown persons to
whom it belongs do esteem the Electors fit, and so be they fit or unfit their
estimation carries it.

6. But yet the hardest part remains, The Church must be satisfied with the
Election. But, 1. Either the Election is valid or invalid before: If valid,
will the Churches dissatisfaction invalidate it? If invalid, will the Churches
satisfaction make it valid, or make him Pope that was none before? Who would
have thought that a Pope had been a wight so utterly unintelligible?

2. And what way must the Churches satisfaction be notified to me? Is it by
some note of approbation, or by silence? It Is in vain for men to contradict
that have no power. But what if I believed in my conscience that most of the
Church is unsatisfied in the Election? Must I take that man to be no Pope? Then
I am necessitated to believe that when Whores and Murderers, and such like,
brought in the fifty that Baronius and Genebrard called Apostatical, etc. there
was an interruption of the Succession by the dissatisfaction of the Church.
Good Sir, was the Church satisfied with such men? Was it satisfied with those
that the foresaid Council condemned as Heretical, wicked, and one of them a
Devil incarnate? Did those Councils signify no dissatisfaction of the Church?

3. And must I suspend my reception of the Pope till the Abassines, Armenians,
Greeks, yea or Mexicans, and the Antipodes signify their satisfaction?

4. But what is the Church that must be satisfied? when half Europe was for
one, and the rest for another for forty years and more, with which of them was
the Church satisfied? Was France or Germany the Church?

5. Lastly, by this we are acquit from acknowledging your Pope at all, while we
know that three fourth parts, or at least two third parts of Christ's Church on
Earth is unsatisfied with your Pope and Papacy it self. To all this he answers:

W. J. 1. Tour exceptions are fallacies, a sensu conjuncto ad sensum divisum.

R. B. See, Reader, what the Papacy is come to, if it had not the sword, or
ignorance to uphold it? when he puts together so many things as necessary ad
esse to the Election of a Pope, (and yet makes nothing but a mere name to
deceive the ignorant of any one of them) is it fallacious of me to expect that
all those things be found in the Election? Or is it not fallacious in him that
can show us never a one of them?

Next W. I. says, If the Church did really acquiesce in such an elected person
as Pope, it was satisfied according to the substance of the Election, though
not in the circumstances.

R. B. 1. Reader, is this any answer to any of the foresaid Objections? what
satisfaction? what Church? when part of the Church was divided, and the greater
part abhorred them all? And was he Pope or no before this acquiescing? If so,
what made him so? And, 2. What does he but cheat us by his distinction of the
substance and circumstances of Election? Does he not obstinately (but
necessarily) refuse to tell what is the substance of Election? Have those that
were brought in by Whores, Poison and Murders, the substance? Had those that
were chosen by people, Presbyters, Bishops, Emperors, and Cardinals, all the
substance? If so, why may not twenty have the substance at once, or four or
five at least? what is it that is the substance? Alas, we ask in vain that
which cannot be told us!

Next he says, If the Church never accepted them as Popes, they are not to be
accounted Legal Popes.

Ans. Farewell the Papacy then: and yet must we be burnt for not being their
Subjects: 1. Then it seems that Election and Consecration made them not Popes
at all before the Sect. 4.
Churches acceptance: And sure that never made them such afterward. 2. Then we
have no Popes; now most of the Church (Abassines, Copties, Armenians, Syrians,
Greeks, Moscovites, Protestants, etc. there are two to one) are against the
Papacy. 3. And then Eugenius the 4th, and others disowned and damned by General
Councils (your own Churches Representatives) were no Popes.

Next he says, That the abuses of Election came from mingling Lay-authority
with Church Government, Sect. 5.
which is out of their Sphere. Now this abuse is much consonant with the
Doctrine of Protestants; so that those for the most part who conform their
practice according to the Protestants Principles, introduced this abuse into
the Popes Election.

Ans. Reader, what does this man deserve for thus murdering the Papal cause? 1.
Our question was not who it was long of the they had no true lawful Popes for a
long time, but whether it be not true, and their succession interrupted?

2. And is he worthy to be accounted a man that ever read Church History that
knows not, that before there were any Christian Emperors, the Laity with the
Presbyters chose the Bishop of Rome, and all other Bishops? so then, if this
was the abuse, the first and ancient way was the abuse, which their innovation
rectified; and who knows not what power the Emperors used from 320 till 1000
years, in disposing of all the Patriarchal seats? And seeing Cardinals are the
newest way of Election, is not the newest likest to be the abuse?

3. But I desire the Reader specially to note, that this man confesses that
Popes, were formerly chosen according to Protestant principles; and that their
present way is a Reformation of the Protestant way as abusive; and who then are
the Innovators, and the culpable Reformers? even Hildebrand Greg. 7. after
bloody Wars against the Emperors, and the perjury that he had involved a great
part of the Clergy in. And yet they would persuade men that it is our
Principles and Reformation that are new, and theirs is the old way.

4. We are not ashamed to own that the Protestant principles do assert the
power of Christian Princes in matters of Religion so far as the sword is
therein to interpose (which Bishop Bilson of Chris. Subjection has well
opened) and the power of the people in consenting to their Pastors; and that we
abhor their forcing Princes to be their executioners.

R. B. Is consecration necessary, and by whom ad esse? Sect. 6.


W. J. It is not absolutely necessary ad esse.

R. B. If Consecration be not necessary to Papacy, then it is not necessary
that this or that man consecrate him more than another; and then it is not
necessary to a Bishop, and then the want of it makes no interruption in any
Church, any more than in yours.

W. J. Neither Papal nor Episcopal Jurisdiction (as all the Learned know)
depends of Episcopal or Papal ordination, nor was there ever interruption in
successions in Episcopal Jurisdiction in any See Sect. 7.
for want of that alone, that is necessary for consecrating others validly, and
not for jurisdiction over them.

R. B. What multiplied self-destroying answers are you driven to? 1. See here,
Reader, how short a solution you have from themselves, of all their old
objections about the Bishops Ordination at the Nags. head-Tayern in Cheapside,
and the interruption of our Succession, and nullity of our Priesthood; now you
see that jurisdiction depends not on Ordination, but may be without it. Their
Pope and Bishops may have all their Ecclesiastical Government, though they be
Laymen. And may not Parish Priests have so also over the people? These Papists
are more kind to the Protestant-Churches that have not Episcopal Ordination,
than some called Protestants in this age are; want of Ordination nulleth not
their Government. But for my part I would the Church had never known any such
Jurisdiction, as is neither the Magistrates by the sword, nor given by
Ordinaion to the Pastors, called the power of the Keys: At least I thought that
it had been necessary to Popes and Prelates that they be Priests. If some as
seniors among Presbyters, may be the Governors of the rest, (as an Abbot among
Monks) yet sure he must be a Presbyter (or Monk) himself. I take the Priestly
Office or Ministry to be essentiated by a Subordination to Christ in the
participation of the three parts of his Office ministerially, viz. to be
Sub-teachers, Sub-rectors, and Sub-priests to guide the people in Gods worship.

If Ordination be not necessary to Jurisdiction (a presumptuous word for
Clergymen) then either such unordained Bishops may ordain or not. If not, they
are no Bishops. What is their Jurisdiction? If yea, then they may give that
which they never had, and Laymen may ordain. And may not ordained Presbyters
ordain much more? One would think that the reading of Voetius against
Iansenius, De desperata causa Papatus, had driven this man to these desperate
answers: But he was aware that some Popes having been unordained men, he had no
other shift.

Join to this what Dr. Stillingfleet after others has fully proved, that the
Orders given by Schismatics and Heretics are valid in the opinion of their
Doctors, and you will see that their talk against the English Ministry is such,
as the men do not believe themselves.

R. B. Q. 3. What notice or proof is necessary to the Subjects? Sect. 8.


W. J. So much as is necessary to oblige subjects to accept of other elected
Princes to be their Sovereigns.

R. B. 1. But what that is, you would not tell us.

2. But if this be so, it must be so much as suffices to the subjects to
distinguish him from Usurpers; or else Kings and Usurpers must be equally
obeyed; and if so, then 1. The greatest part of the Christian world (Abassines
and the rest before named) have no such notice of your Pope; it was many ages
before the Abassines heard of him. 2. And Greeks and Protestants have no such
notice; nay you tell no man which way he should have it, when neither any one
way of election, nor any Consecration is necessary to the Office. 3. And then
what notice had men in the long Schisms, which was the true Pope?

But note, Reader, that a Kingdom is so narrow a space, that notice may be
given to all the subjects who is their true King. But the Earth is so great,
and so much of it unknown, and so few ever sailed about it since the Creation,
and those few saw so few of the inhabitant, that verily it is a hard matter to
satisfy all the world who is the true Pope, and that he is truly elected, and
is no Usurper. And on these terms it is but little of the world that is obliged
to be subject to the Pope.

And now, Reader, if this man has taught thee to understand what a Pope is,
and what makes him so, and who is he, thou art far more teachable than I am;
for he leaves me more at a loss than he found me.

CHAP. IV. What mean you by the word Bishop?
W. J. I mean by Bishop such a Christian Pastor as has power and jurisdiction
to govern the Sect. 1*
inferior Pastors, Clergy and people within his Diocese, and to confirm and
give holy Orders to such as are subject to him.

R. B. Here I desired to know of him, whether he meant a power given by God or
by men? and if by God, whether mediately or immediately? But this he was not
willing to answer. Saying:

W. J. The definition abstracts from particulars, and subsists without
determining that question.

R. B. But sure equivocals make no good definitions; and power or Episcopacy
given by God, and given by man, cannot be ejusdem speciei, and therefore the
word as to them is equivocal. Here therefore I asked:

Q. 1. Whether, seeing they seem to make the Pope himself but a humane creature
(or jure humano) Sect. 2.
they set not the Bishop above him, if the Bishop be jure divino. And if not,
whether they make not all their Churches humane things; (or however the Roman
Church to be humane, and so its form not necessary to Salvation, if the Pope be
humane.)

W. J. Where said I that Election was jure humano? that there be an election of
him, is jure divino, (by competent Electors): the determination who hic and
nunc are competent, is jus Ecclesiasticum. -- Know you not that neither the
Electors nor Consecrators of him, give him Papal jurisdiction, but Christ?

R. B. 1. You say that there is no need of Revelation to know the
Church Governors: therefore they are not of Gods making, unless it be jure
naturali; which none pretend. For God no way gives right but by natural
evidence of this will, or by Revelation, (either natural in the constitution of
the Creatures, or natural by Providential alterations, or by Supernatural
notice.) 2. If God have not annexed the power to any one sort of Electors
choice, or have given no power to any determinate persons to choose a Pope, nor
to any to choose the Choosers, then either God gives no power to the Pope, or
else he gives Papal power to every one that shall be chosen by whomsoever: The
later you abhor, for then any man might be Pope at his pleasure, and there
might be a thousand at once. The former consequence is plain, because if God
make not every man a Pope, but one man in the world; the Donation of God must
by God be some way applied to that person rather than to others: Now if God
has neither empowered any determinate (or specified) persons to elect him
rather than others, nor any to elect Electors, nor yet made the Consecrators
the determining appliers, there is no way by which God applies it more to that
man than to others. You neither do nor can name any other way. Now you confess
that God has not given the power of Election to any determinate persons, but
that the Electors may be sometimes people, sometime Presbyters, or both;
sometime Princes, sometime Bishops sometime Cardinals. All that God says you
hold, is that they be competent. But this determines of none. And you neither
do, nor can tell us to whom God has given the power to judge antecedently of
the Electors competency, and to choose the choosing persons, without which it
will never be any man's work, unless all that think themselves competent may
choose Popes. You dare not undertake to tell us, whether it be all the
Christian world, or only the City of Rome, Princes, Prelates, Presbyters
people, or who, that God has made choosers of the choosers So that you cannot
say that God gives the Pope his power by your way.

3. But on the by I desire those that say that their Electors or Ordainers give
Ministers their power, to learn here this truth from you, that God gives the
power by his Donative
word, and men do but determine of the person that shall from God receive it.
But yet a determination there must be, and that of Gods appointment.

R. B. I told him that R. Smith, called Bishop of Calcedon, Governor of the
English Papists, ubi supra, confesses it to be no part of their faith that the
Pope is St. Peter's successor jure divino. He answers:

W. J. You should have done well to cite the place; for I have no time to seek
whole books over.

R. B. Note what trust is due to this sort of men: I had to him in the same
book cited the words in page 289. of my book, and R. Calcedons book, cap. 5.
the words are: To us it suffers that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peter 's
successor, and this all the Fathers testify, and all the Catholic Church
believes; but whether it be jure divino, or humano, is no point of faith. Now
when he came to the words where I cited them, he wisely takes no notice of
them. And now when I refer him to the citation which was a few leaves before,
the weary wary man instead of an answer, says, I should have done well to cite
the place, for he has not time to seek whole books. But what good will
well-doing do to such a one as you, where the better it is, the worse you like
it? Is not this a false intimation, that I did not cite them?

R. B. Qu. 4. I asked, How shall we know who has this Episcopal power? What
election or consecration is necessary to it? If I know not who has it, I am
never the better. He answers: Sect. 4.


W. J. As you know who has temporal power, by an universal or most common
consent of the people: The Election is different according to different times,
places, and other circumstances; Episcopal Consecration is not absolutely
necessary to true Episcopal Jurisdiction.

R. B. More hard things still! 1. I know who is King in temporal power in our
hereditary Kingdom, by the constitution of the Monarchy confessed by all men to
be hereditary, and so attested by Law and History; and by most credible
testimony, and uncontrouled fame, that CHARLES the Second is the true Heir: And
in Elective Kingdoms, as Poland, it is known by public undenied testimony. But
do Bishops become such by their birthright and hereditary Title? who has
asserted that? If it be by Election, the Electors must have just power to elect?

2. But what mean you by common consent of the people? No man can tell whether
you join those words to know, or to has, If you mean that I must know it by
the peoples consent, as notifying it to me, it is nothing to our question now;
nor is it always true: The greater part of the people may mistake the Prince's
right, and suppose it to be in a Usurper, and yet the Prince does not lose his
right by that, nor must I believe them. And I think in your Schisms, no man
could say that the common consent of the people, was always for him that
carried it at last as right. But if you mean, as you seem, that the universal
or common consent of the people, is the determining cause that must qualify
the person for the power, Then either you mean an antecedent or a consequent
consent. If antecedent, that is election, which you say may vary. If
consequent, it could not cause that which was caused before. And it is not true
that the consequent consent of the most of the people, depriveth the King of
his Power, or proves it to be in a Usurper.

3. But seeing you here also say, that Consecration is not absolutely
necessary, nor Election by any one sort or way, but may be varied as times
vary, you have made either any man a Bishop, that any men will choose; or you
have made no man a Bishop, for want of a determining application; or no man can
know himself, or be known to be a Bishop. If the question were, Who is the true
Husband of such a woman? and you should say, That her own antecedent consent or
election is not necessary, but without it sometimes the Kings election,
sometimes the Ministers, sometimes the Parents may serve; and Matrimonial
celebration is not necessary; it would follow that the woman may have a Husband
against her will, and before she consent; and she may have many, or can never
know which is he, for the King may choose her one, and the Priest another, and
the Parents a third. So here.

4. And if his Consecration be not necessary to Episcopacy, how will you prove
Ordination necessary to the Priesthood? Here I noted,

R. B. that he resolves the mysteries of their succession and mission, into
popular consent. Sect. 5.


To this W. I. says, that he means it only as the means of knowing it.

Ans. But I enquired of the causes or evidences by which a Bishop may be known
from a Usurper, what it is that makes him a Bishop? as I would know a man from
a brute; a Judge, a Physician, a Merchant, from other men. But he durst not come
to this, because guilt makes them conscious of their own defect.

But W. I. says, p. 50, It is sufficient that some generalities of Election be
determined jure divino. Ans. Let them be such that I may know a Bishop from a
Usurper by, and it is enough.

W. J. As that it he done by Christians, by such as are capable to know who is
a fit person for the Sect. 6.
Office, choosing freely occording to the Laws of God; the further
determinations are left to the Church, etc.

R. B. Worse still! 1. If the men of York choose a Bishop of London, or several
parties choose ten Bishops here, they are all chosen by Christians. But that is
not enough. What if ten parties choose ten Popes, ten Kings, ten Bishops, the
Christianity of the chusers will not prove them all authorized.

2. Nor will the choosers capacity of knowing the capable prove it. Three or
four very wise men may best know who is capable to be a Judge, a Bishop, a
Husband, a Tutor, a Physician etc. and yet if they should choose all the
Judges, Bishops, Husbands, etc. in the land, the persons chosen by them would
be never the more such, than the unchosen.

3. But being conscious that you had said nothing, you put in these words,
according to the Sect. 7.
Laws of God. But the question is, How shall I know what makes a true Bishop
according to the Laws of God? and you skilfully tell me, he must be chosen by
knowing Christians according to the Laws of God. He that is not satisfied by
you with such talk, let him be unsatisfied.

R. B. I here noted again that by his way none of our Churches are disabled
from the plea of a continued succession for want of Episcopal Consecration
(Ordination) or due Election. 2. But that we cannot know their Bishops to be
true Bishops, because we cannot know that they have common consent. He
answers:

W. J. No man argues you of the want of succession in your respective Sees
because you want Episcopal Consecrations, but because you want Episcopal
Election, Confirmation, Vocation, Mission, Sect. 8.
Jurisdiction. For your first Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's time (and the same is
of your Ministers of Parishes) were intruded by secular power, -- the Capitula
had the present power of electing the Bishops, -- vid. caet.

R. B. 1. It Is well we are now quite rid of the old cavil of the Nags-head
Consecration: Why was not this confessed sooner? Did you well to abuse the people
so long?

2. I thought we had nothing to have proved but due Qualifications, due
election (or consent) and due Ordination (or Consecration). But here now comes
in I know not what and how much more, Confirmation, Vocation, Mission,
Jurisdiction. All hard words: Had I put him but to have told us the meaning of
these also, what work should I have made him?

1. What is Confirmation without which Qualifications, Election and Ordination
make not a true Minister or Bishop? O that we knew it. 2. What is Vocation
besides the three aforesaid, and which is necessary ad esse? 3. And what is
Mission besides those three, which is also so necessary? 4. And what means he
by Jurisdiction that was wanting? was it the Jurisdiction of the Collator, or
of the Receiver; not the former, for we never knew that God gave any
Jurisdiction to the Clergy, but the Pastoral power of guiding the Churches by
the Word and Keys; which is the work of their own office; and the office of the
Ordainer is ^o ordain; and if he have power to Ordain (or Consecrate) he has
that Jurisdiction which consists of that power. If it be the Receivers
Jurisdiction that he means, that is the same contradiction. For to ordain one
to the Pastoral office, is to give him all the jurisdiction which is part of
that office. And for any other jurisdiction we wish Princes would keep it both
from the ordainers and the ordained.

But he says that our Bishops wanted Episcopal Election. Is it come to that,
and yet the way of Election all this while made so indifferent? What is
Episcop^l Election? not an Election by Bishops, that you affirm not: Not an
election to be Bishops; that you deny them not. It is therefore such an
Election as is necessary to the being of a Bishop. And what is that? why all
that we have been able to extort from you is, That it be done by Christians
capable to know fit persons, choosing freely according to the word of God. But
what it is that is according to the Word of God, and what measure of consonancy
to the Word, and in what points is necessary ad esse, you durst never tell us:
And we say that our Bishops were chosen by Christians capable of knowing fit
persons. I confess that it is my own judgment that they should have the choice
or consent of the people whom they are to oversee (and of the Presbyters where
there are any under them) and so thought your own Bishops for above 600 years,
even when Gregory 1st. wrote his Epistles: But if you had asserted that, it
would do more to unpope and unbishop your Church, than to disprove ours.

But he says that the Capitula had the power of electing Bishops, and of
constituting Parish Priests in such places as wanted them,

Ans. 1. Suppose they had: you say no particular Electors act is necessary ad
esse; and why theirs? 2. But quo jure, by what right could one Dean and Chapter
of a City elect an Overseer of many hundred Parish Priests, and many score or
hundred thousand souls, without their consent? You dare not say that God gave
them that power; and if man did it, what men were they? If you say that they
were men that had more power in England than the King. Parliament, and the
consenting people, you must prove it. If you lay it on any foreign power, Pope
and Council, we will deny their power here and herein. What man does, man may
undo. 3. But indeed your mere Capitular Election is null and contrary to Gods
Word, and the ancient custom of the Churches. By Gods Word, the consent of the
Flock, and of the ordainers and of the ordained, made a Pastor, Bishop or
Presbyter. By the customs of the Churches in the Empire, sometime the greatest
Neighbor-bishops assumed the power, and sometimes Councils overtopt them all,
and undid what they did, and sometimes the Emperors put in and out as pleased
them (as Solomon put out Abiathar.) But always the peoples election or
acceptance was necessary. For instance; when Gregory Nazianzene had confuted
the Macedonians and Arrians, and increased the Church at Constantinople, though
the Arrian Bishop since Valens time kept the great Church, Gregory had a little
one, and was chosen their Bishop by the Orthodox people alone. This was his
first title. After that, Peter Bishop of Alexandria made him Bishop quantum in
se, or confirmed him; this was his additional title. After this, the same Peter
bribed by money, without recalling his former grant, made Maximus (a right
seeker of a Bishopric, as the world has since gone) bishop in his stead: the
people refused the change, and retained Gregory. Afterward Maximus got both
Peter and the Egyptian bishops to make him bishop of Constantinople (where was
the Pope all this while?) the people still kept close to Gregory. Afterward
Theodosius the Emperor (returning from the West) puts Gregory in possession of
the great Church, and turns out the Arrians, and confirms him bishop. After
this Miletius of Antioch, and a Council at Constantinople, make Gregory bishop.
After this more bishops coming in to the Council, got the major vote, and he
discerning that they were resolved to depose him, departed, requesting the
Emperors leave, as seeing the doleful divisions and contentiousness of the
bishops, not otherwise to be quieted; entreating the Emperor to keep them in
some unity and peace, lest it should disgrace and ruin the newly reformed
Church. And the Council Or rather the Emperor: For some Bishops put in several
names, and the Emperor chose Nectarius an unbaptized man and so no Christian
in the Churches judgment.
made Nectarius bishop (the Pope in all this never minded). By this one
instance you may see how bishops were then made in the greater places; though
in lesser, the election of the people and Presbyters, and the ordination of
three neighbor-bishops did suffice, according to the ancient rule and custom.

But he says, That the old bishops were living, and not legally deposed.

Ans. 1. Sub judicelis est; we say they were. 2. Some deserted. 3. An illegal
removal of the former, does not ever nullisie the title of the latter, viz.
when the flock consents to the change, etc. else what seat is there that has
not had their succession interrupted and corrupted? but none more than Rome,
and Constantinople, and Alexandria; What poysonings, fightings, unjust
depositions and schisms, have made way for successions? Is your Papacy
therefore null?

But methinks it is a strange novelty that he makes the Capitula to have had
the right of choosing (not only the bishops, but) all the Parish Priests: to say
nothing of the Patrons or the Sect. 9.
Princes power (which I think is as good as the Chapter.) who knows not that
the bishops and the people did always choose the Presbyters, and not the
Chapters?

But he says that they were intruded by Seculor Power. Ans. And were not your
Popes so ordinarily, till Hildebrand got the better of the Emperor? But we had
more than this.

R. B. Your Popes have not the consent of the most of the Christians in the
world; nor (for ought you or any man knows) of most in Europe. Sect. 10.


W. J. Of what Christians? such as you and your associates are? We regard that
no more than did the ancient holy Popes, not to have bad the consent of the
Nestorians, Eutychians, Pelagians, Donatists, Arrians, etc.

R. B. Contempt of most of the body of Christ, is one of the great proofs that
you are all the Church: And did not the Donatists say the same before you? And
what but the sword does make your cause to be better than theirs? How easy is
it for any Sect to say, We are the only Church of Christ; and though most of
the Christian world be against us, we regard them not?

Reader, mark the truth and c^ndor of these men! When we tell them that the
Greeks, Armenians, Syrians, Iacobites, Georgians, Copties, Abassines, are of
the same Church with us (because they have the same Head, and the same
essential faith), the Papists (in their talk and writings) tell us, that they
are more of their mind than of ours; and that indeed they are not Heretics,
but well-meaning-men. But when we tell them then how two or three parts of the
Church is against their Popes pretended universal power, they number all these
then with Heretics, as not to be regarded.

But abundance of their own Writers, yea such as have lived among them at
Jerusalem and other parts, do vindicate the generality of these foreign
Christians from the charge of Heresy.

2. But does not the world know, that a man is supposed to be rightful Pope as
soon as the Cardinals (an upstart sort of things) have chosen him, before ever
any of the people of Europe, even Papists, do consent? But perhaps he will say,
that the people consent that these shall be the chusers; sure they did not so
till Hildebrands days; nor since any otherwise than by silence or
non-resistance, where they have no places to speak, nor power to resist, even
as the Contrymen consent to the conquering Armies that oppress them.

R. B. It Is few of your own people that know who is Pope (much less are called
to consent) till after Sect. 11.
he is settled in possession.

W. J. What then? Is not the same in all elective Princes, where the extent of
their Dominions is exceeding large?

R. B. 1. I confess when we have an Elective King of all the world, I had
rather Cardinals choose him at Rome, than all the world should meet to choose
him. And if Christ had made us a King or Bishop of all the world, he would have
told us who must choose him, to save the men at the Antipodes their journey.

2. But why pretend you then the peoples consent, when you plead it
unnecessary? In Poland, that their Diets choose their Kings, is from a known
reason; it is the Constitution of their Kingdom, which the people agreed to,
and choose many of the chusers. But when did the Universal Church constitute
your Cardinals to be the Electors? Or which of the Cardinals are chosen by the
Universal Church, or any other than the Pope himself? God made Bishoprics like
Corporations, where all may choose the Mayor: Who made them like great Kingdoms,
or set one over all the world (where the people cannot choose, nor God made any
chusers), is the question?

R. B. 4. According to this rule your successions have been frequently
interrupted, when against the will of General Councils, and of the far greatest
part of Christians, your Popes have kept the seats Sect. 12.
by force.

W. J. These are generalities: What Popes? What Councils in particular? Name
and prove, if you will he answered.

R. B. What disgraceful ignorance are you forced to pretend? What need I go
over your Schisms? What need I name any more than Eugenius the 4th deposed by a
great General Council, and two or three parts of the Church disowning your Pope
at this day?

R. B. I told him how his instance even about Civil Power failed, seeing the
consent of a people Sect. 13.
pre-engaged to their Prince, gives not right to a Usurper.

W. J. The people cannot be supposed to consent freely and lawfully to an
usurper, etc.

R. B. Lawfully indeed they cannot, and that is the same thing that I affirmed:
you confute me by granting what I say. When the Bishop of Rome has a lawful
election to be Bishop of all the world, we will obey him; and so we will any
Prelate or Priest that has a known lawful election.

R. B. Will any Diocese suffice ad esse? What if it be but in particulor
Assemblies?

W. J. It must be more than a Parish, or than one single Congregation, which
has not different inferior Sect. 14.
Pastors, and one who is their Superior, etc.

R. B. 1. How ambiguously and fraudulently do you answer? No man can tell by
this whether you unbishop all that had but one Parish or Congregation; or only
all that had not Presbyters under them? Which ever you mean, it is notoriously
false, and a nullifying of the ancient Episcopacy. Ignatim tells you, that in
hi^ days one Church was known by one Altar, and one Bishop, with the Presbyters
and Deacons. And though I think not as Dr. Hamond, that all the first. Bishops
in Scripture-times were settled as the sole Pastors of single Congregations,
without any Presbyters under them; yet when you consider with whom he agrees
in this, viz. Dionysius Petavius, and what St. Clara says for it, fathering it
on Scotus, we think you should not so far differ from your own Doctors, as to
deny all those to be true Bishops of the Scrip^re-times, who they think were
the only Bishops. You have a custom of calling the Apostles Bishops, even Peter
Bishop of Antioch and Rome; Did not those first Bishops then make all the
Presbyters that were under them? Qu. Whether they were no Bishops till they had
made those Presbyters? If no, then those first Presbyters had not Episcopal
ordination: If yea, then habetur quaesitum.

The truth is, all the ancientest Bishops were the Pastors of single Churches,
not near so big as many of our Parishes: I have elsewhere proved this at large.
I instanced to him only in Gregory Neoc^sariensis, who was Bishop only of
Seventeen souls, when he came thither first. He answers:

W. J. How know you that there were no more in the Country adjacent? 2. Know
you not that he was sent to multiply Christians, and make himself a competent
Diocese?

R. B. I know the first by the consent of History; that tells us of the
Seventeen in the City over whom he was set, and speaks of no more in such
circumstances as would have occasioned it. 2. And I believe your second: but do
not you see that you desert your Cause? and contradict your self? 1. Speak out:
Was he the bishop of the Infidels? Were they his Church? Or was he only to
convert and gather them to the Church? 2. Was he not a Bishop there (before he
had converted any one) to those seventeen alone? You dare deny none of this.
Therefore he was a Bishop before he had more Congregations than one, and before
he had any Presbyters to govern.

And here you may see how the changes that Popes and their Prelates have made
in the Church, constrains them to defend them by subverting their own
foundation. For if those were no Bishops who had but one Congregation, yea and
those that had no subject-Presbyters, then the first ages (if not also the
second, except in Rome and Alexandria) had no true Bishops, or at least the
founders were not such; and their Episcopacy, as they describe it, has no
succession from the Apostles. Truth and Error will never make a close coalition.

CHAP. V. Q. What mean you by TRADITION?
W. I. I Understand by Tradition the visible delivery from hand to hand in all
cases, of the revealed Sect. 1^
will of God either written or unwritten.

R. B. I suppose by visible from hand to hand, you mean principally of the
unwritten (audible from ear to ear by speech). But all the doubt is, by whom it
must be delivered, by the Pastors or people, or both? by the Pope, or Councils,
or Bishops disjunct? by the major part of the Church, Bishops or Presbyters? or
by how many?

W. J. By such and so many proportionably as suffice in a Kingdom to certify
the people which are the ancient universal received customs in that Kingdom,
which is to be morally considered.

R. B. O wary Disputant! that takes heed lest you should answer while you seem
to answer! Reader, a Kingdom is not so big as all the world! The Customs of a
Kingdom may be known by the constant consent of the people of that Kingdom; and
if they differ about it, Records and Law-booke decide it expositorily, and
judges by the decision of particular men's cases by such rules. But can customs
be known as well over all the world? Yea, and can matter of faith and doctrine
be as easily known as practiced customs? Can we know as easily what are the
Traditions of Abassia, Armenia, Syria, Egypt, etc. as of England? Can they of
Abassia tell what are the true Traditions of all the Christian world, that have
Traditions in their own Country so different from ours? They have many books
as sacred among them by tradition, which we receive not. They have annual
Baptism, and other ceremonies by Tradition, which we account to be unlawful.

Here I told W. I. 1. How certainly Tradition is against them, when most of the
Christian world deny the Popes Sovereignty, and that as by tradition. And how
lame their tradition is which is carried but by their private affirmation, and
is but the unproved saying of a Sect.

To this he says:

W. J. That this belongs to our Controversy, and not to the explication of our
terms. And so I must pass it by.

R. B. Q. 2. What proof or notice must satisfy as in particulars, what is true
tradition? Sect. 2.


W. J. Such as with proportion is a sufficient proof or notice of the Laws and
Customs of temporal Kingdoms.

R. B. But you durst not tell us what that is that is proportionable. This was
answered before. I added, Is it necessary for every Christian to be able to
weigh the credit of contradicting-parties? When one half of the world say one
thing, and the other another thing, what opportunity have ordinary Christians
to compare them, and discern the moral advantages on each side? As in the case
of the Popes Sovereignty, when two or three parts are against it, and the rest
for it: Does salvation lie on this?

W. J. As much as they have to know which books are, and which are not
Canonical Scripture among those that are in controversy.

R. B. That these books were sent to the Churches from the Apostles, 1. Is a
matter of fact. 2. And an assertion easily remembered. 3. And all the Churches
are agreed of all that we take as Ca^cal. 4. And yet men that practically
believe but the Creed and Summaries of Religion, shall certainly be saved,
though they erroneously doubted of some of the uncontroverted books (as
Chronicles, Esther, Canticles, etc.) much more that receive not the
controverted Apocrypha.

But 1. Your Traditions in question are many particulars, hard for to be
remembered. 2. And that of matter of faith and fact, where a word forgotten or
altered, changes the thing. 3. And most Christians in the world are against
it. 4. And you would lay the peoples salvation on it; yea, and make it one of
your cheating quibbles, to prove your religion safer than ours, because some
Protestants say a Papist may be saved, but you say that Protestants cannot be
saved (that is, because you have less sincerity and charity). Is not here
difference enough?

If you hold that all they are damned that believed not that all the Apocryphal
books were Canonical, peruse Bishop Cousins Catalogue of Councils and Fathers
that received them not, and see whether you damn not almost all the Church. But
if you confess that there is no more necessity to salvation for men to be the
subjects of your Pope, than there is that they try all the Apocrypha whether it
be Canonical, and know it; why then do you found your belief that Christ is the
Son of God, upon your forebelieving that the Pope is his Vicar, or your Church
his Church? And why do you make such a stir in the world to affright poor
people to believe and be subject to your Pope?

I here asked him. Must all the people here take the words of their present
Teacher? And he Sect. 3. This se^ms to confess that your people have no ^ivine
faith for our belief of a Priest, saying, This book is canonical, is but humane.
durst not answer yea or nay, but as much as they do for the determination of
Canonical Scriptures.

Ans. If it be no more, it gives them no certainty: but by the belief of one
man as a Teacher, they are broug^ ^o ^cern themselves those notifying evidences
by which the Teacher himself (...) books are (...). And if they attain no
higher than to believe fide D^ the (...) Doctrines, the doubting or ignorance
of some texts or books, will not (...) in the Scripture that impress of Divine
authority, which to a prepared hea^ o^ reader will (...) convince him that they
are of God, though not r^e him of every particular Text and Book.

R. B. Then most of the world must believe against you, because most of the
teachers are against Sect. 4.
you. Tradition quite ^eth P^er).

W. J. There is no Congregation of Christians united in the same profession of
faith, external Communion and dependence of Pastors, which is contrary in
belief ^o (...), any way to be parallel with us in extent and multitude. Prove
there is, and name it. All our adversaries together are a patcht body of a
thousand different professions, and as much adversaries one to another as they
are to us; the one justifying us in that, wherein the other condemn us; so that
no beed is to be taken to their testimonies; non sunt convenientia.

R B. They agree not with your interest: But if the Testimonies and Tradition
of two or three parts of the Christian world, be not to be heeded. I doubt the
testimony of your third or fourth part will prove much less regardable. Let us
try the case, for here you are utterly confounded, 1 Indeed none that our
ordinary language calls a Congregation, that is, men that meet locally
together, are so big as all your party: But a Church far better united than you
are, is far greater than yours. Those that have all the Essentials of the one
Church of Christ,
are that one Church of Christ: But the Reformed Churches, the Greeks,
Armenians, Abassines, Syrians, Iacobites, Georgians, Copties, etc. have all the
Essentials of the one Church of Christ* Therefore they are that one Church of
Christ. The Major is undeniable. The Minor is thus proved, They that hold the
same Head of the Church, believing in the same God the Father, Son and ^ly
G^st, and are devoted to him in the same Baptismal Covenant, and believe all
the Articles of faith, desire and practice essential to Christianity, in the
Creed, Lords-prayer and Decalogue, and recei^e all the ^re as Gods lord, which
i^ ^y here received by us as Canonical, these have all the ^ls of the one
Church of Christ (and much more) But such are all the forementioned Christians:
Ergo, etc.

The Head and the Body are the constitutive parts of the Church: The Head is
Christ, the Body are Christians 1. They are united in the same profession of
faith; viz. the same Baptism ^reed and Scriptures. 2. They are united in the
same external communion, if you mean external worship of God in all the
Essentials of it, and much more. They have the same Scriptures read and (...)
they preach the same Gospel; they use the same Sacraments of the Covenant of
Grace, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper; yea they are commonly for some
Confirmation, Ordination (...) of penitence and absolution of P^nitents,
Matrimony, etc. though they agree not whether the name of Sacraments be fit for
them all, much less Sacraments of the Cove^ Grace; they observe the same Lords
day for public worship; they pray, confess sin, give thanks and praises to
God; and hold the communion of Saints, and communication to each other in want.
This is their external communion. 3. They have the same depen^ of the people on
their Pastors, as the Ministers of Christ, authorized to (...) and guide the
Churches, and to go before them in the public worshipping of God. But if you
mean that they have not the same ext^ communion of Pastors in dependence on one
as the (...) Pastor or Governor of all the rest; indeed there is none such but
you. For it is in that that they differ from you.

Reader is not here an excellent Disputer? I affirm that the judgment of most
of the Christian world is against the Papists* in the point of an Universal
Head or Governor of all Sect. 5.
Churches. He says that no one party which is for an Universal Governor, and
yet is against an Universal Governor, is so big as their party. I grant it.
Had they all dependence on one as an Universal Governor, they were not against
on Universal Governor. The Abassines have one Abuna, but he claims no
Universal Government. The Armenians have their Catholic Bishop but he claims
no Universal power. The Greeks have their Patriarch at Constantinople, but he
pretends not to govern all the World. We are all against any Head of the
whole Church on Earth but Christ, and therefore are united under no other.

You say that (...) (...) patcht body of a thousand different professions, etc.

Ans Reproach not the Body of Christ* they are far more united than your Church
as Papal. Are not the se^en points of (...) mentioned by Paul (...) (...), 4,
5, 6, 7* as good as yours* 1. They have one ^ead that never ^arieth, and whom
all receive* you have a Head rejected by most Christians, and often turned into
two or three Heads, one saying I am the Head, and another I am the Head, and
setting the world in blood and contention to try it out which of them shall get
the better, as your forty years Schisms showed. 2. Therefore this Church which
you reproach as patcht, is but one: But yours is really many and not one,
specifically, as well as often numerically; when there were two or three Popes,
you had two or three Churches. For it is the pars imperans that individuateth
the Society. And de specie, you are still three Churches, as holding three
several heads: one holds the Pope to be the Head, another a Council, and a
third the Pope and Council agreeing: And these Heads have often condemned and
deposed one another, Councils namned Popes as Heretics, Infidels, Simonists,
Murderers, Adulterers; and Popes accused Councils of schism and rebellion at
least. And to this day there is no certainty which were true Popes, nor which
were true Councils, some being called by you Reprobate, because they pleased
not the Popes, and some approved. But our Head of the Church is not thus
divided, nor schismatical. 3 Our common faith is still the same, and its rule
the same; but yours is mutable by new additions, as long Councils will make new
Decrees, and no man can tell when you have all and your faith is come to its
full stature: Nay, and your Decrees which are your rule of faith are so many
and obscure, that you are not agreed your selves in the number or the meaning
of them. 4. It is a notorious truth that all these Churches which you say have
a thousand professions (as they all agree in one Christian profession, so) do
less differ among themselves, than your seemingly united Church does with it
self; whether you respect the number or the weight of differences.

1. For the Number, sint libri judices; all the Christian World besides has
not so many (nor I think half so many) Volumes of Controversies, as your
Writers have written against one another, (as far as is come to the notice of
this part of the World.)

2. And for the Weight, 1. I have showed that you are divided in your very
Fundamentals, the Supremacy; you confess here that your Church is not at all
agreed what the Christian faith is, or who is a Christian: some say, he that
believes the Church, and that God is a rewarder; others say, a Christian must
believe in Christ, etc. 2. Your Commentators differ about the sense of hundreds
or thousands of Texts of Gods own word 3. Your Disputers about Grace and
Free Will, accuse one the other of making God the cause of Sin, and of denying
the Grace of God. 4. Your Moralists differ about many instances of
Excommunicating Kings, and then killing them, and of the Popes power to depose
them; and of perjury, lying, murder, adultery, fornication, false witness, yea
about loving God himself, whether it be necessary to love him once a year, or
whether attrition, that is repentance from bare fear, with penance, may not
serve turn to Salvation, with abundance such. And we confess that other
Christians have their differences! And what wonder while they are so imperfect
in knowledge, and all grace? And now if Concord or Discord must tell us whose
Tradition or Judgment is most regardable, let the Impartial judge whether the
mo^ ^egardable Tradition of the far greatest part of the Church be not against
you? and whether your reproaching them for discord, condemn not your selves
much more than them. If a subject should style himself the Kings Vicegerent,
and claim much of his Prerogative without his Commission and a third part of
the Kingdom should unite in receiving and obeying him, and have otherwise a
thousand contentions among them; Qu. Whether these or the rest of the Kingdom
were the more and better united?

When I next questioned, Whether the vulgar that know not Councils, resolve not
their Sect. 6.
faith into the belief of the Parish Priest? he says no. And says, That the
Priest is but the means by whom we come to believe, and tells us that else we
know not whether there were any Christians 500 years ago, etc.

Ans. But if they will be content with Ministerial teaching, and Historical
proof of things past, we would not differ from them; we do not only assert
these as well as they, but we say that as we have sounder teaching, so we have
far better Historical Tradition of our faith, than that which depends on a
pretended fan^tick Infallibility, or authority of their Pope and Sect; even the
Historical Tradition of the whole Christian World, and of many of the enemies
themselves.

CHAP. VI. What mean you by a GENERAL COUNCIL?
W. I. A General Council I take to be an Assembly of Bishops, and other chief
Prelates, called, Sect. 1.
convened, confirmed, by those who have sufficient spiritual authority to call,
convene and confirm it.

R. B. Here is nothing still but flying and hiding: his cause is such that he
dare not answer. Note that, 1. Here is no mention of what extent it must be at
all, whether these Prelates must be sent from all the Christian world? or
whence? The least Provincial Council that ever was called, may be a General
Council by this description.

2. He tells us of other chief Prelates, and yet never tells what sort of
things he means by chief Prelates, that are no Bishops. And when he has told
us, doubtless he will never prove (nor I hope affirm) that any such Prelates
are of Christ's institution. And if the matter of General Councils be not of
Divine right, whether such Councils can be of Divine right, I leave to censure.
A Council of humane Officers, is but a humane Council; and yet he leaves out,
yea excludes Presbyters who are of Gods institution.

3. He tells us not who it is that must call, convene and confirm them. And he
had reason for it: lest he reprobate all those that were otherwise called. Here
therefore I first asked:

Q. 1. Who is it (ad esse) that must call, convene and confirm it? Till I know
that, I am never the Sect. 2.
nearer knowing what a Council is, and which is one indeed.

W. J. Definitions abstract from inferior Subdivisions: For your satisfaction I
affirm, it belongs to the Bishop of Rome.

R. B. This you must needs say for your cause sake: But he justifies his
definition as having a sufficient Genus [An Assembly] and [Differentia]
[Bishops and chief Prelates convened, etc.]

Ans. You do ill to refuse all disputes but what are exactly Logical, (which is
your custom for advantage to amuse the women) if your Logic be no better,
should not a Relative Assembly be defined by its subject, fundamentum and
terminus? 1. Your Genus is too general; it should have been a nearer Genus. 2.
Your subject is partly false (as taking in besides Bishops, other chief
Prelates, and excluding Presbyters), and partly ambiguous, what [other chief
Prelates] you mean? and specially too narrow, not at all differencing this
Council from any inferior Synod. 3. Here is no end or terminus expressed, and
so no difference put between a Council, and an Assembly of Prelates called, for
any common civil use, as if it were but to choose or attend a Prince. 4. Here
is no just notice of the fundamentum, or the ratio fundandi; the true
fundamentum is totally omitted, which is the mutual consent, 1. of the Churches
choosing and sending their Bishops or Delegates; 2. of the Bishops to go in that
Relation; 3. of all the Bishops to convene and agitate conciliar business for
the proper ends. And a fundamentum is mentioned, which is, 1. Insufficient and
as nothing; being but a Genus [called by those that have sufficient authority,]
instead of a species in your own opinion, who think that the Authority is only
in the Pope. 2. And when you so explain your self, it is false, as shall he
showed. 5. Yea the very formal Relation is not mentioned; which is the relation
which the assembled members have to the Churches which they represent, and to
each other, and to the intended end and work. So that here is a definition that
is no definition, nor has any thing like a definition, yet defended by this
great disputer: Nor can any man tell what a General Council is by it. And how
can we dispute intelligibly, when you can no better explain your terms?

Here I urged, from his making the Popes call, convening and confirmation,
necessary ad esse, that this nullifieth the chief Councils called General; this
he denies to be true. To which instead of transcribing long Histories, I only
say, that whoever reads the true Histories of the calling and convening of
the Councils at Nice, Constantinople, (diverse) at Ephesus, the first and
second, yea that at Calcedon, though Leo desired it of the Emperor, and many
others in those ages, and yet will not confess that most of them were called by
the Emperors special command, sometime requiring the Bishop of Alexandria to
call them, sometime the Bishop of Constantinople, and sometime writing or
sending to all the Patriarchs, or most, to come and send their Bishops, and
usually also to his Civil and Military Officers to concur, and to be Judges; I
shall not think that man fit to be disputed with about such matters, who has
the face to contradict such consent of History and Records.

R. B. Q. 2. Must it not represent all the Catholic Church? Does not your
definition agree to a Provincial or the smallest Council?

W. J. My definition speaks specifically of Bishops and those Prelates, as
contradistinct from the Sect. 4.
inferior Pastors and Clergy, and thereby comprised all the Priests contained
in the species, and consequently makes a distinction from the National or
particular Councils, where some Bishops are only convened, no^ all; that being
only some part, and not the whole speci^, or specifical notion applied to
Bishops of every age: and yet I said not all Bishops, but Bishops and chief
Prelates; because though all are to be called, yet it is not necessary that all
should come.

R. B. O what a disadvantage is an ill Cause! The man is so confounded, that
the further he goes, the worse he makes it.

1. He must needs intimate that it is all the Church that must be represented,
and yet he durst not speak that out.

2. He intimates, that his speaking specifically of Bishops and Prelates, is
equivalent to all Bishops and Prelates.

3. He intimates, that naming Bishops as contradistinct from inferior Pastors
and Clergy, was necessary to difference a General Council from a National or
other; as if a National or Provincial one might not consist of Bishops only; or
as if the inferior Clergy might not be of a General one, as they often have been.

4. He makes the difference here to be, that some bishops are convened, not
all; when yet he after says, that all come not to General Councils.

5. Our question being, What constitut^ a General Council? He says, It is All
the Bishops, and (...) All are not there, though ^alled. As if those that come
not, were any part of the Council.

6. He would persuade us, that yet he well left out the word ALL, though it
must be all that are ^alled because they come not:

To this I further answered him, That then you have had no General Councils,
much less can you Sect. 5.
have any more: for you have none to represent the greatest part of the Church,
unless by a mock representation. (...). If all must be called, your Councils
were not General, a great part of the Church being ^t called.

W. J. We are ^ow bu^ explicating terms -- -- that all were not called, is
denied.

R. B. Then let never modesty forbid you to deny any thing. I have elsewhere
proved against Mr. Hutch^son, that your Councils were generali, but as to the
Roman Empire; and seldom, if ever, so much as that. 1. Had the Emperors (who
certainly called them) any power to call any of other Princes Dominions? 2.
Does any History mention that ever the Emperors did so? 3. Did the Pope of Rome
call to the Councils at Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon* etc. all the
Bishops of all the extra-Imperial Churches? 4. Were the businesses there
agitated, any of theirs? 5. Were any Concilia^ Decrees executed on them? Any
extra-Imperial Bishops put in or out, or suspended by them? 6. Were all the
bishops of the Greek Churches, of the Armenians, and all other Southern and
Eastern Nations, called to the Councils at Trent, Lateran, etc.? What is it
that some will not pretend?

7. Were it not an impudent thing for any man to call together all the Bishops
in the world? Sect. 6.
If it be not desired that they come, why are they called? Ludicrous
hypocrisies beseem not matters of this moment. If it be desired only that they
ch^e some few among the rest, it is the choosing of those few only that should
be required. But if all be intended, the Devil could scarce make a more (...)
motion. What! for all the Bishops on Earth, 1. To forsake their charges, most
of them for many years. 2. To lose so many years time in Travel and Session. 3.
To lose the lives of so, many as are never like to endure Voyages and journies
by Sea and Land so long, with strange air and other difficulties, etc. But why
should I stay to shame such madness? when though W. I. be fain to vent it,
their Sect never intended nor attempted any such things. But suppose it were
but some delegate Bishops that he pleaded for to make an Universal Council, I
have showed in the 2d part of my Book called, A Key for Catholics, how
impossible and wicked the design of a true Universal Council is. For, 1. They
must be so many from all parts of the world as may make it an equal
Representative, and not two or three from the remotest part, and 200 from Italy
and other nearer parts, or else it is a putid mockery. 2. Some Churches have a
100 Bishops over so many Christians, as in other Countries are under one only.
Most report that in all Abassia there is but one Abuna; which though it be not
now so big as it has been, or as Alvarez says, yet is like to be as big as
Brierwood concludes, viz. as France, Spain, Italy and Germany. And should that
one Abuna leave his Country to have no more vote than Pate or Ola^ Magnus had
at Trent. 3. Most of the Christian world have not half so many able Teachers as
they need, especially the remotest parts: and it would be cruelty to the
peoples souls to call away from them proportionable representatives. 4 None are
so fit men for the great business of Councils, as the ablest, boliest,
experienced Bishops; and these are most of them aged, sickly and weak, and
unfit for so long travels. 5. Abassia (...) not Seaports, and the Armenians
and other Nations are out of the reach of such necessary converse, as must duly
warn all of the time and place. 6. The Bishops are under Princes of such
various Religions, minds and interests, as they could never agree to a true
Council Would the Turk that is an enemy to Christianity, give leave to the
Greek Bishops proportionably to come? Would the Countries that are in War with
those that send them, give them a free passage? 7. The time would be so long in
passing from Abassia, Armenia, St. Thomas, Mexico* the Antipodes, and staying
at the Council and returning, that few were like to come home alive; and so the
Bishops are murdered, and the Countries receive not any just account of their
transactions. 8. When they come together, the number would be so great, as that
they could not hear what was said by one another. 9. And many would understand
and speak no one common language with the rest, and so be incapable of that
right understanding and communication as is necessary to the end. 10. And their
judgments and interests would be so cross, as would render the Council too like
a pitched field; and when they had wearied themselves to go home to the further
parts of the world with no better an account, but that they were over-voted by
a greater number of Europeans, who living near and under the Pope were awed by
his power, or by assed by interest, what good would this do the Countries that
sent them. And all this wicked and impossible design arises from the idle
brains of men, without any true usefulness or need, or any ground of Gods word
or reason; only because in one Empire there were often such things as General
Councils, which yet were like to fields of War, and had torn the Imperial
Churches all to pieces, had not some Emperors done much to keep the peace: so
that Pighius says, That General Councils themselves were but a new devise of
Constantine, and not of Gods institution, nor of necessity.

R. B. I next asked of him, If all must be called, and but some come, whether
th^se that never come there (through distance, age, prohibition of Princes,
poverty, etc*) be any parts of the Council? and so Sect. 7.
whether it be General, because those should come that do not? If that will
serve, what if none come when all are called? He answers:

W. J. As it is a true Parliament if a competent number come, when all are
called -- ^o here.

R. B. 1. The validity of a few men's acts, comes from the fundamental
Constitution, which is as the Law to them. But who made such a Law for all the
world? If God did, show it to us* if man, who? and by what power? Whether all
be right and valid that is done in a Parliament, or not, when few are there,
yet it is certain the rest are absent. Parliaments meet and act under Laws; but
Councils meet as Equals upon mere and voluntary consent. The Law may oblige all
the Land by that which a few men do: but if there be a meeting, e. g. as now at
N^mengen, of the Agents of free Princes, who can oblige ten by the acts of two
without their consent? However, if only Europeans be at the Council, it is
certain that Africans, Asians, and Americans are absent: and if absent, their
judgment and consent is not there signified: and therefore if your question be
only de nomine, whether forty bishops may be called a General Council, while
the rest are far off? Or if it be whether the Laws or Canons of a small or
Provincial Council, may oblige some men, though it were not general? These are
nothing to our present business.

2. Moreover, were all the world under the Popes or any other men's Laws, yet
they could not be bound to wickedness, self-murder, neglect of their flocks,
and to impossibilities: Therefore if (e. g) there were forty bishops, or forty
two at Trent in the beginning, and 200 after, and perhaps 20000 absent that
were never obliged to be there, the question is both whether this was an
universal meeting, and whether the 20000 were obliged by the Acts of the 40 or
200

3. And if they were obliged, what is that to notify the, Tradition of all the
absent Churches? Can you know their minds and customs, by saying that they were
obliged by the Decrees?

R. B. Q. 4. May none but Bishops and chief Prelates be members (as you say?)
Sect. 8.


W. J. No other, unless such Inferiors as are sent to supply their places, and
as Deputies of those Bishops or Prelates, etc.

R. B. Note here, 1. He determines no others, but never tells us qua lege, and
who it is that made that Law to all the world. And it is known that the
Apostles, Elders and Brethren were ^senters at Jerusalem, Act 15.

2. Inferiors may come as Deputies of the Bishops; for he knew that the Bishop
of Rome had often sent such to Councils so far off as his gravity would not
suffer him to go to. But are these Priests capable persons or not? If not, how
can a Bishops deputation make them capable? what if a Priest depute a Layman
to consecrate the Eucharist? or a Bishop depute a Priest or Deacon only to
ordain? will the deputation make them capable? but if they are capable, why may
they not be there by their own right? If the business of Councils be as much as
our modern Papists tell us, to transmit the Traditions which the several
Countries have received from their Ancestors, why may not ten learned grave
Priests as truly and credibly tell what are the Traditions of their Country, as
one unlearned (or learned) Bishop.

3. Note here how the highest acts of a Pope or Prelate with them may be done
per alios, by Deputies that are no Bishops. To preside in General Councils was
of old in the Empire the top of the Popes prerogative, and yet he may do that
by a Presbyter; and a Bishop may vote and do all his part in a General Council
by a Presbyter. And is that an office properly Ecclesiastical and Sacred, which
may be exercised by others not of that office? why then may not a Layman be
deputed to preach, baptize, pray, consecrate and administer the Eucharist,
excommunicate, absolve, etc. if deputed? And if so, what is proper to the
office?

I told him of the Council of Basil, where were a multitude of Priests: And he
answers:

W. J. Basil in many things is not allowed of by us; name those others received
as General Councils Sect. 9.
by us that had simple Priests with power of giving Votes as such.

R. B. See Reader, when they have talked of Councils and Traditions of all the
Church, etc. all signifies but what please the Pope, and his dislike can make
Councils and their judgments null at a word. Basil was one of the greatest
Councils that ever was; but they condemned and deposed the Pope, and no wonder
then if the Pope dislike them; and now that is an answer to all such authority,
Basil is not allowed by us. Nor is any thing allowed by you that is against you.

But if any of them would see where Priests have had Votes in Councils, let
them read Blondel in the end of his Def. Sent. Hieron. and he shall have proof
enough. For I will not tire the Reader with vain citations, done by many long
ago. Only I note, 1. If Abbots that are no Bishops have Votes in Councils, why
not Priests? saving the Popes will, what makes the difference? (2d) If
Presbyters may have Votes in National and Provincial Councils, why not in
General ones? the will of the Pope makes and unmakes all. Thus we have no
satisfaction what a General Council is.

CHAP. VII. What mean you by [SCHISME.]
W. J. I understand by Schism, a wilful separation, or division of ones self
from the whole visible Sect. 1.
Church of Christ.

R. B. If this only be Schism it is comfortable news to many a thousand and
million that some call Schismatics. I hope then there are no Schismatics in
England, of those that are called Presbyterians, Erastians, Independents,
Separatists, or Anabaptists: For I know not one of these that separateth from
the whole visible Church of Christ. But I doubt with these Judges the Church of
Rome goes for the whole visible Church of Christ. I asked here.

Q. 1. Is it no Schism to separate from a particular Church, unless from the
whole? Sect. 2.


W. J. No; it is no Schism, as Schism is taken in the Holy Fathers, for that
great and Capital Crime, so severely censured by them, in which sense only I
take it here.

R. B. 1. He first defines without distinguishing, and then tells us that he
means only one sort of Schism.

2. Let the Reader but peruse all the Texts of Scriptures which mention Schism,
and see whether he will not find, that every Text, or almost every one, do use
the Word only of Divisions made in the Church, rather than of dividing, or
separating from the Church; and whether such separating from the whole Church,
be not there called Heresy rather than Schism.

But seeing it is only this Capital Schism that he calls by that name, I have
no mind to draw him now to more censoriousness, and therefore I noted how by
this he absolveth the Protestants from the guilt of Schism.

W. J. Did not your first Protestants in Germany separate as much from the
Armenians, Ethiopians, Sect. 3.
Greeks, as they did from the Romans? If they did not, show the Communion they
had with them.

R. B. Very willingly, Sir: They had the same God, the same Savior, the same
Spirit, the same Faith, Baptism and Hope, and so were of the same Body of
Christ, which is all the Union predicated by St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. They
had also the same Scriptures, the same Rule of Prayer and Practice, (the Lord's
Prayer. and the Decalogue and Precepts of Christ, as well as the same Creed)
the same Love, the same Sacrament of the Eucharist, Praises of God, the Lords
day for Holy Communion, Pastors of the same Order, and had no other Diversities
in such things than St. Paul tells us are in the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. Is
this no Communion?

W. J. Did your Ministers first take either Mission or Jurisdiction to preach,
from any of their Sect. 4.
Bishops or Patriarchs? Did they take the prescription of their Liturgies,
Discipline or Hierarchy from them? Did they upon occasion join in Prayer,
Sacraments or Sacrifice with them?

R. B. 1. Do we hold Communion with none that we take not Mission and
Jurisdiction from? What Absurdities do you thrust upon us? Did the Churches of
Ephesus, Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, Colosse, etc. hold no Communion in
Scripture-times, unless they had Mission and Jurisdiction from each other? Must
the Greeks and Armenians have Mission, etc, from us? If not, why must we have
it from them? Your Church receives no Mission or Jurisdiction from others.
Have you therefore no Communion with them? Your Language favors of so much
Tyranny and Pride, as would tempt Men indeed to take you for Antichristian: As
if Subjection to you, and Communion with you, were all one; or you would have
Communion with no Christians in the World, b^n the relation of Servants or
Subjects to you.

2. When we have Qualification, Election, and (where it may be had) due
Ordination, we know of no other Mission necessary, besides Gods own Word which
charge Christ's Ministers to preach the Gospel, in season and out of season,
etc. God's charging all Ministers to preach, is their Mission when they are
Ministers: Princes leave, and Peoples consent, do give them their opportunity;
and for Jurisdiction, we need and desire none but a Ministerial Power of
guiding Souls toward Heaven by God's Word, preached and applied: And he that
ordains a Minister, thereby gives him all the Jurisdiction which is
necessary to his Office. If a Man be licensed a Physician, must he have also
Mission and Jurisdiction given him after, before he may practice?

3. How could we take Ordination, Mission and Jurisdiction, from Men on the
other side of the World? What need we go so far for it when the Gospel is near
us, which tells us how God would have Ministers more easily called than so?

4. And as for the prescript of our Liturgy, Discipline and Hierarchy, that is
one of the differences between us and you: Must you needs have a Liturgy,
Discipline and Hierarchy of Man's forming? so you have: But we can live in
Christian Communion with so much as Christ and his Apostles by his Spirit have
prescribed us. Is there no Communion to be had with any Church, but that which
has arrived at that height of Pride as to make Liturgies, Discipline, and
Hierarchy for all the Chrstian World; and to suffer none to speak publicly to
God, in any words but those which they write down for them to read to God? We
make no such Laws to any other Church in the World, nor do we receive any such
Laws from any; and yet we have Communion with them, fraternal and not
subjective Communion. There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to
destroy; who are you that make Laws for another's Servants and judge them? Had
the Churches no Communion for the first 400 years when no Liturgies were
imposed? or when the first Law made hereabout was, but that no one should use a
Form of Prayer till he had showed it to the Synod? No nor when Gregory's and
Ambrose's Liturgies were striving for pre-eminence? Had the Church at
Neocesaria no Communion with that at Caesarea, because they had so different
Liturgies, as their quarrel against Basil intimates? And when every Bishop
used what Liturgy he pleased in his own Congregation, Was there then no
Communion between the Churches? We refuse not any meet Liturgy that is found
needful to our Concord: But truly for Hierarchy and Species or Forms of
Churches, and the substantials of Discipline, we earnestly wish that no Church
had any but what God has himself prescribed to them.

5. But how should we join with Men many hundred or thousand miles off us in
Word and Sacraments, otherwise than by useing those of the same species? We do
not locally hold such Communion with the next Parishes to us, nor with many in
the World; for we cannot be in many places at once, much less can we be every
Lords day in every Assembly in Ethiopia and Armenia.

As for [Sacrifice] we know of none acceptable but the Commemmoration of
Christ's Sacrifice, once offered for Sin, and the offering of our selves and
our Thanksgivings, praise, and other duties to God: And why you distinguish the
first from Sacraments I know not.

W. J. And did they profess the same Faith in all points of Faith, and those
the very same Sect. 5.
wherein they dissented from the Church of Rome?

R. B. 1. Ad hominem, it might suffice to say to you, that explicitly or
implicitly they did. 2. But I better answer you, We profess the same Faith in
all points essential to Christianity, and in abundance more: I have told you
before that we agree in all the Old Creeds, and in the truth of the Canonical
Scriptures. 3. But do you Papists agree in all points of Faith? no not by a
thousand: For all is of Faith which God has intelligibly revealed in the Holy
Scriptures to be believed: But there is above a thousand intelligible Texts of
Scripture about the sense of which your Commentators differ. If all Christians
agree in all that is de fide, then all Christians fully understand every
intelligible Word in the Scripture: And then every Woman and Rustic is as wise
in Divinity as the greatest Doctors; (yea far are the Doctors from such Wisdom.)

W. J. If so, they may as well be said not to have separated fom the external
Communion of Sect. 6.
the Roman Church.

R. B. Some will tell you that we did not separate from you, but you from us;
but I must say, that the Roman Church is considered either materially as
Christians, and a part of the Church of Christ, and so we neither did nor do
separate from you; or else formally as P^pal; and so we renounce you, and all
Communion with you, as being no Church of Christ, but a Sect that treasonably
usurpeth his Prerogative: The pars imperans specifieth or informs the
society: Christ only is the Universal Head of all Christians as such, and of
all the Churches with which we profess Concord and Communion: In this Head
Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, and Protestants unite. But the Pope, falsely
pretending to be Christ's Vicar General, is taken for the Universal Head by the
Papists: and, in renouncing this Head, we renounce no other Church but yours.

R. B. Not from you as Christians, but scandalous Offenders, whom we are
commanded to avoid; we separate not from any but as they separate from Christ.

W. J. 1. No, sure, for if you did you must be Jews, Turks, or Infidels. 2. Was
there Sect. 7.
no more in it? Did not the Primitive Persons, who begun your breach and party,
owe subjection to their respective Ecclesiastical Superiors, Diocesans and
Pastors?

R. B. No, none at all as they were Papal, that is, the subordinate Ministers
of the usurping Universal Bishop.

W. J. And is it lawful for a Subject to subtract himself from the obedience of
a lawful Pastor because he is a scandalous Offender?

R. B. Yes, if his Offense be a ceasing to be a lawful Pastor, and taking on
him a false Office by usurpation: Or if he remained lawful, quoad hoc, as
Christian, and add a treasonable addition, we must have no Communion with him,
at least in that unlawful part.

W. J. If you say he remains not in his former Power you contradict our
Savior, commanding Sect. 8.
obedience to the scandalous Pharisees, etc.

R. B. 1. The Pharisees set not up a new usurped Office of Head-ship
constitutive (pretendedly) to the Universal Visible Church; but only abused a
lawful Office that God had made. 2. Yet Christ requires obedience to them no
farther than as they sat in Moses's Chair and delivered the Law; but warned
men to renounce them as Corrupters, and to take heed of their Doctrine. 3. And
this much was but till they showed themselves uncurable, and he set up new
Officers over his Church, and then all men were to forsake the Pharisees
Government.

W. J. You destroy all Ecclesiastical Government, and open a way to tread under
foot all temporal Authority: If you hold these Offenses deprive him of all
Ecclesiastical Power, why not so of Sect. 9.
Kings, and Magistrates, and Parents, and then you have spun a fair Thread, etc.

R. B. Confusion may help to deceive the ignorant. 1. Your Popes, as Universal
Bishops, had never true Power over us. 2. Nor any Bishops as their Ministers as
such. 3. For this treasonable Usurpation we were bound to avoid them as
scandalous Invaders of Christ's Prerogative, which some call Antichristian. 4.
Our English Bishops, and other Pastors, when they came to see that such an
Usurper had no right to govern them, forsook him, but forsook no Governor. 5.
Those Bishops that adhered to him the People justly forsook as Usurpers under
him. 6. Those that forsook him they obeyed as their true Pastors. And now will
it follow, if I be obliged to renounce a Usurping Vice-King and Traitor, as
having no power over me as such, and that I partake not of his Treason, that I
must therefore forsake the King for his personal faults? If the Deputy of
Ireland should say, I am Vice-King of all the Kings Dominions, and I challenge
Obedience from all the Subjects, and the King forbid us to obey him as such, I
may obey him in Ireland till the King depose him, and I must renounce him in
England, and yet I must not tell the King; Sir, why must we not then for your
faults also renounce you? The scandal of Treasonable Usurpation differs from
a mere immorality or miscarriage.

R. B. Qu. 2. Is it no Schism unless wilful? Sect. 10.


W. J. No.

R. B. Again, you further justify us from Schism: If it be wilful it must be
against knowledge; But we are so far from separating wilfully from the whole
Church, that we abhor the thought of it, as impious and damnable.

W. J. Abhor is as much as you please, (for your own particular (I know not
what may be pleaded for you) I am certain that your first beginners did it, and
that knowingly and wilfully; and you, still maintaining what they began, must
by all considering Christians, be judged guilty of the same Crime: for still
you remain separate from all these Christians from which they departed, that
is, from all the visible Churches existent immediately before they sprung up
and in their time, and still continue through the whole World.

R. B. A naked, bold, and shameless assertion without one word of proof. Our
Reformers knew no Head of the Church but Christ; and they neither renounced him
nor any one Member of his Church as such, but only a Traiterous Usurper and his
Sect; indeed while he claimed but as Patriarch some Government of them jure
humano by the Will of Princes, they gave him answerable obedience, and in their
ignorance most gave him too much, and many perceived not his Usurpation: But
when the Empire was down that set him up, or had no power here, and their own
Princes no longer obliged them hereto, he had not so much as such a humane
Authority. And when they that renounced him as a Traitor to Christ, protested
to hold Communion with all Christ's Church on Earth according to their distant
Capacities, and to abhor all separation from them; would not a man have
expected that this Dispute should have given us some proof, that to forsake
this false Head was to separate from all the visible Churches on Earth? I
proved our Union with them before: Yea he presumes to say, That he is certain
that they did it knowingly and wilfully: As if he knew all the hearts of
thousands whose Faces he never saw; when they that should know them better
thought that they were certain that they separated from no Christians, but an
Usurper and his Adherents, as such. And this we have great reason to continue,
as much as Subjects have to separate from Rebels.

R. B. Qu. 3. It is no Schism if men make a division in the Church, and not
from the Church?

W. J. Not as we are here to understand it, and as the Fathers treat it: For
the Church of Christ, being perfectly one, cannot admit of any proper Schism
within it self; for that would Sect. 11.
divide it into two, which cannot be.

R. B. 1. If there be other Schisms besides separating from the whole Church,
why should you not here understand it? unless understanding things as they are
will hurt your Cause?

2. What a stranger does this Disputer make himself to the Fathers, if he know
not that they frequently use the word Schism in another sense than his? I will
not be so vain as to trouble my self or the Reader with Citations: The Indexes
of the Fathers and Councils will satisfy those that will but search them: Was
it a separation from the whole Church which Clemens Romanus, the eldest of them
all, does write his Epistle to the Corinthians against, or rather a particular
Schism between the people and some few eminent men? Read it, and see what
credit these men deserve when they talk of the Eathers Judgments.

3. But his reason is most unreasonable: That [the Church of Christ is so
perfectly one, that it cannot admit of any proper Schism within it self.] Can
the Unity be perfect while all our uniting Graces are imperfect? When every
Member is imperfect in Knowledge, Faith, Love, (Holiness) Obedience, Justice,
Patience, etc. how can the Union be perfect?

4. Reader, do but read their Councils, Church-Histories, (Baronius, Genebrard,
Plati^, Wernerus, to whom I may add above one hundred,) and if thou do not
find them, (and also their polemical and practical Divines) commonly mentioning
[Schisms in the Church of Rome it self,] then believe these deceivers and call
me the deceiver. Do they not lament their Schisms? Were not the Councils of
Constance, Basil, Pisa, etc. called to heal them? Do they not number the
Schisms that fell out in 40 or 50 years time and continued? Dare any man deny
it?

Were these then Proper Schisms or not? No, it is like this man would say that
none of these Writers speak properly when they call it Schism. I would he would
tell in the next what proper word to use.

But either these Schisms were within the Church or without it. (Reader, see
whither falsehood will run at last) If they were within the Church, then W. I.
does but abuse you by his falsehoods, If without the Church then one half the
Roman Church was Unchurched for 40 or 50 years when they followed one Pope,
while the other half followed another. And who knows which of these parts was
the Church? It seems whoever adhered to the wrong Pope was none of the Church.
But, says Wernerus and other Historians, sometimes the wisest were at their
Wits end, and knew not which was the true Pope, nor is it known to this day.
Nay the matter is yet worse: A great General Council deposed Euginius the
Fourth as no Pope, but an incapable wicked Heretic, and yet he kept in, and
became the only Head of their Church, whom the rest succeed. And so all that
Church by this rule was unchurched. Sure necessity must make you recant, and
say, that yet both Parties in your long and odious Schisms were within the
Church, or else what a Wound will ye inflict on it? But an ill Cause will admit
of no defense: If you come to this, mark what will follow: Even that millions
are in the Church that are no Subjects of the Pope, but do reject him. If there
were two real Popes, there were two real Churches, and therefore neither of
them was Universal; and consequently neither of the two were Popes, because not
Universal Bishops, so ill do such Forgeries cohere: But if only one of them was
a true Pope, then all that followed the other, rejected the Pope. Either these
were saved or damned. If saved, then men that reject the Pope may be saved: And
then why ask you us where was a Church that rejected the Pope before Luther?
when you tell us where, at home. If damned, what a happiness befell one
Kingdom, and what a misery the other, by the Title or No-Title of the Popes?
Was it all France and that Party, or Germany and that Party that were damned
all those times? Hell had a great Harvest by it, which soever it was: and it is
pity that one Man should be able to damn so many Nations by pretending that he
was the true Pope: And methinks such a division as this should be called a
proper Schism; unless he will be so jocular as to say, that it was a proper
division and rent, but no proper Schism.

I add this note, Reader; if there be any Sect in the world that are true
Schismatics according Sect. 12.
to W. I.'s own definition, judge whether it be not the Papal Sect? For it is
they that condemn all the World, save themselves, and say that none else are
Churches of Christ, and consequently separate from the whole Church of Christ,
except themselves (who are but a third or fourth part of the whole:) I never
knew any of all our Sectaries do so; no not the Quakers themselves who come
nearest it, (unless perhaps the Seekers, that say the Church is lost) but the
Papists do so: Indeed they separate not always from themselves, though they do
from all others; no more do any other Sect.

R. B. Though I am sure St. Paul calls it Schism when men make divisions in the
Church, though not from it, not making two Churches, but dislocating some
Members, and abating Charity, and causing Contentions where there should be
Peace; yet I accept your continued justification of us, who, if we should be
tempted to be dividers in the Church, should yet hate to be dividers from it;
as believing that he that is separated from the whole Body is also separate
from the Head.

W. J. I am glad you accept of something at the last up-shot: If it be for your
advantage God give you good on it. I speak not of Schism taken in a large sense,
but of that only which is treated by the Fathers, and reckoned up among the
most horrid Sins which a Christian can commit, and that separateth from the
whole Church* See Dr. Ham. of Schism. c. 1. 2, 3.

R. B. This is already answered. I again entreat you then to consider what a
horrid sin it is in the Papal Sect to separate from all the Churches in the
World, and then to divert their Consciences by crying out of Schism against all
that will not join with them in so dangerous a Schism.

2. And I humbly admonish those Protestants that cry out Schism, Schism,
against all that will not do as they do, even in a thing which they call
indifferent, and others account a heinous Sect. 13.
sin, to remember, that even these Papists are so moderate, as not to condemn
other men as Schismatics, unless they separate from the whole Church of
Christ. And I hope to refuse the Tridentiu^ Symbolical Oath, or any other false
or sinful Covenant or Profession, is not to separate from the whole Church of
Christ; for false Oaths, Covenants, or other Sins, are not essential to
Christ's Church.

R. B. Sir, urgent and unavoidable business constrained me to delay my return
to your solutions Sect. 14.
or Explications of your definitions till this June 29. 1660. When you desire
me to answer any such questions, or explain any doubtful passages of mine, I
shall willingly do it: In the mean time you may see while your Terms are
unexplained; and your explications or definitions so insignificant, how fit we
are to proceed any further, till we better understand each other as to our
Terms and Subject; which when you have done your part to, I shall gladly, if
God enable me, go on with you till we come (if it may be) to our desired issue:
But still crave the performance of the double task you are engaged in. Richard
Baxter.

W. I. Sir, I have thus far endeavored to satisfy your Expectation; and to
acquit my self of all obligations: wherein I have sought, as I strongly hope,
first Gods eternal Glory, and in the next place, your Eternal good, with his
for whom I under take this labor, and of all these who attentively and
impartially peruse this Treatise. William Johnson.

R. B. Your intentions I leave to your self; of your performance and my answer
I desire such judges as you describe, even attentive and impartial re^ders: But
O how rare is impartiality, even in them that think they ha^ it.

In the end I added an Appendix in answer to this objection of theirs, that [We
can have no true Chu^rch without Pastors; no Pastors without Ordinations and no
Ordination but from the Church of Rome: Therefore when we broke off from the
Church of Rome, we interrupted our succession which cannot be repaired but by a
return to them.] To this I gave a full answer, of which W. I. takes no notice.

Lastly, I concluded with an address to himself, in which I gave him the
reasons why I published our Writings, and also proved that the Church of Rome
has not successively been the same from the Apostles (much less received no
corruptions) which I proved, first, because it has since received a new
essential part, even a pretended Vice-Christ or head of the Universal Church.

2. Because it has had frequent and long intercisions in that essential head.

3. Because it has had new essential Articles of Faith and Religion. To all
this he gives no answer.

PART II.
Richard Baxter's Vindication of the CONTINUED VISIBILITY of the CHURCH, of
which the Protestants are Members: In answer to William Johnson, alias Terret's
Reply, called by him, Novelty represt.
THE PREFACE.
I Have great reason to suppose, that if I should make this Book as long as it
must be, if I repeated and answered all the words of W. I. it would frustrate
my writing it, by discouraging Sect. 1.
most Readers, whose Leisure and Patience are as short as mine: Therefore I
purpose to cull out all which I take to seem his real strength, and of any
importance to the understanding Reader, and to omit the Vagaries: And
particularly where he and I differ about the words or sense of any Fathers, or
Councils; what need I more than to leave that Matter to the perusal of the
Reader, who cannot rationally rest in my Yea, or W. I's Nay: For how will
either of those tell him what any Book in question does contain? It is the
perusal of the Book it self that must satisfy him. But about the Weight, or
Consequence of any such Citations, we may help his satisfaction.

The Churches alas have not been so innocent since Lording was its way of
Government, as that all that we can find written or done by any great
Patriarchs (Prelates) yea or Sect. 2.
Council, should pass with us for proof that it was well said or done: nor can
we take one Prelate for all Christ's Church, no nor a synod o^ the Clergy in
the Roman Empire. Nor can we be so void of understanding as to read over the
ancient Writers and the Councils, and not to know how much the Major Vote of
the Clergy still followed the Emperors Wills, and the Byas of Interest. We
cannot lie, or believe evident Lies, on pretense of honoring them. He that
reads the Stories, and does not find how much the Will of Constantine
prevailed in one Council, and the contrary Will of Constantius in many: What
the Will of Valens did with most in the E^st, and the Will of Iovian,
Valentinian, and other good Princes did against it: How far the Will of
Theodosius went while he Reigued, against the Arrians, to heal what Valens had
done: And how much the Will of Theodosius junior did for the Eutythians, (and
yet against the Nestorians:) And how far the Will of Martian prevailed against
the said Eutychians when he was dead: How much even the Usurper Basiliscus in a
year or two could do to strengthen the Arrians and Eutyohians: And how quickly
Zeno's Prevalency turned the Scales: I say, he that does read on such Histories
to the end, and yet will think that the Clergy have been still one unanimous
Body, of the same Mind and Opinion in all things, and not turned up and down by
Princes Power, and their own Interest and fears; I leave such a Reader as
desperate, and as one that will be deceived in despite of the clearest
Evidence of Truth.

He that does read these Stories, and does not perceive the great Corruption of
the Clergy, when once their places had a Bait of Wealth and Honor and
Dominion, suitable to a Sect. 3.
proud, worldly, carnal mind; and what a continual War there was among the
Clergy, between a holy spiritual, and a worldly proud domineering
unconscionable Party; and how ordinarily, or often, the carnal worldly Clergy
had the major Vote: how the same (e g.) Bishops at the Council of Ephesians. 2.
could yield to Theodosius and Dioscorus, and condemn the just; and at Calcedon
go the contrary way, and cry out omnes peccavimus, and we did it for fear! How
the same Council at Constantine, that confirmed Greg. Naz. when some more were
added, and got the major Vote, resolved to depose him, and caused him to
depart: How the same Peter of Alexandria, (Athanasius's Successor) that first
made him Bishop of Constantinople, Vid. Liber. Breviar.
for a sum of Money put in Maximus in his place, without once hearing him, or
giving any Reason, or re-calling his first Letters; and how the bribed Egyptian
Bishops did concur: How Theophilus carried it with the Egyptian Monks, and
against Origin, and Chrysostom, and between Theodosius and Eugenius the
Usurper; and how the Synod carried it against Chrysostom; and how Cyril first
made himself a Magistrate to use the Sword at Alexandria; and what past between
Theodoret, Johan. Antioch. and him; and how the Bishops and their Synods in
Ithacius time carried it against St. Martin, and against the Priscillianists;
and how all this while Rome and Constantinople set and kept the Empire in a
Flame, by striving which should be the greatest; and how the Pope on such putid
accounts did molest the African Churches, in the days of Augustine himself; and
their Writers charge them with Schism to this day: I say, he that can read
abundance of such stuff as this, and yet think that any one Citation of the
words of a Prelate, Pope, or Council, ^is as valid as if it were the word of
God, let him go his own way, for he is not for my Company.

Nay if they could prove as much of the Popes Universal Episcopacy within the
Empire Sect. 4.
under the Christian Emperors, as Salm^sius (I think too liberally) grants
them, (de Eccles. suburbicar. circa finem) it is no more with me than to prove
the Power of the Bishop of Alexandria or of An^och in their assigned
Patriarchates, which altered at the Pleasure of the Emperors and Synods, (as
the division made after between the Bishops of Antioch, Jerusalem, and Cesarea
shows, and that which was given to Constantinople from Heraclea, Pontus, and
Asia.)

Christianity was not unknown till Councils, or altered as often as they made
new decrees: Sect. 5.
And it is a great mistake of them that think that there was little of
Christianity, save in the Roman Empire: The Apostles preached elsewhere, and
they preached not in vain. There were Churches in Ethiopia, the Indies, Persia,
Parthia, the outer Armenia, Scythia, Britain, and other parts that were without
the Empire; but we have no large or particular Histories of them, partly
because that they were not so much literate and given to writing as the Romans
and the Greeks were; and partly because they were in Wars with the Empire, or
did not communicate by Correspondence with them; and partly because their Books
were not in any Language which the Greeks or Romans understood. How long was it
ere the Empire had much acquaintance with the Syriack or Samaritane, Persian,
Arabic, or Ethiopick Versions (or Books) after they were extant; and how few
of the many Books that by Travelers are said to be in Abassia, Armenia, or
Syria, are known to us to this day? How little know we of the old Christians,
of St. Thomas, and those parts? And how full and satisfactory a Testimony does
Alvarez profess, that he saw himself (even a large Stone with memorial
Inscriptions of it dug up) that the Christian Religion had been in China,
when otherwise he could not hear of one word by Tradition or History that could
notify such a thing. How little know we now of the case of Nubia and Tend^
while they were great Christian Kingdoms? How little know we at this day of the
state of the Armenians, Georgians, Mengr^tians, Circassians, etc. How little
was known of the great Empire of Abassia till the Portugals opened the way for
Oviedo and his Companions the other day. Iacobus de Vitriaco tells us of more
Christians in those parts of the World than all the Greeks or Latins; when he
was at Jerusalem, where he had notice of them. Brocardus that lived there, also
tells us as of their great numbers, so of their great piety, being better men
than the very Religious of the Church of Rome: and yet how little notice was
there then of their Writings or them? He says they were free from the Heresies
of Nestorianism and Eutychianism which we charge them with in Europe, and yet
the Papists so charge them still, that they may seem to have reason for
condemning them, fearing that their non-subjection to the Pope will not seem
enough with impartial men.

And as to the great Confidence that they seem to place in their succession to
St. Peter, Sect. 6.
and Christ's words to him [on this Rock I will build my Church] and to thee I
give the Keys, etc.] and [feed my sheep.] I have often answered it more fully
than is fit again to recite; but these few hints I would commend to the Reader.

1. That we affirm that Peter was among them as a foreman of a Jury and no
more; and so Christ spoke to the rest in speaking to him; and the same power is
given to the rest: The Church is said to be built on the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head Corner-stone] Is not this as
much as is said of St. Peter? Christ gave them all the power of Holy Ghost and
the remitting and retaining sins, binding and loosing, which is the Keys which
he gave to Peter. And they are all sent forth to feed Christ's Sheep: Now the
Fathers give as high Titles often to others as to the Pope, yea and to Peter; see
what I have cited in my Key for Catholics, page 175. 176. and what Gataker
has cited out of Dionysius, Tertullian, Basil, Jerome, Augustine, Theodoret,
Gildas, Nicephorus, etc. Cin. 395. 396.

2. Peter never exercised any authority over any of the rest of the Apostles:
He called them not; governed them not; There is mention of Paul's reproving
him, Gal. 2. but none of his reproving them. Schisms being among them and
greatly lamented, they are never directed to unite in Peter as the way to
Concord, nor to have recourse to him to end them. Nay, when the over-valuers of
Peter made one party in the Schism among the Corinthians, Paul seeks to take
them off that way, and set Peter in the same rank with himself and Apollos, as
Ministers only by whom they believed, calling them Carnal for saying, I am of
Cephas, never calling them to unite in him as the Head of all: And had this
been necessary, what had this been but to betray the Churches?

3. The Apostles were never properly Bishops, but of a higher rank: Bishops
were the fixed Overseers of particular Churches, and no one had many: But
Apostles only planted them, and governed them for their Confirmation, and so
passed on from one to another, and had care of many such at once. If any one
Church might pretend superiority by virtue of succession it would be Jerusalem,
and next that Ephesus, where it is said that John the Beloved Disciple was as
Bishop, and which has continued to this day.

4. The Apostles as such had no Successors, nor as Bishops in any distinct
Seats: The same Christ that called Peter called the rest, and called especially
the Beloved Disciple, to whom, on the Cross, he commended his Mother, when
Peter had denied him; and he promised to be with them to the end of the World:
But no Bishops on Earth ever pretended to superiority over any other Churches,
as the Successors of the other eleven Apostles. Where are those Seats, or where
ever were they? If the Apostles Successors must rule the Churches as such, tell
us which be the other eleven, and which be their Diocesses, and of what extent?
Nay, it is And in Rev. 21. the new Jerusalem was built on the twelve Apostles
as twelve precious stones.
considerable, that even in the times of domination, there were but five
Patriarchates ever set up, and not twelve, and not one of those claimed Power
by virtue of succession from any Apostle. Constantinople never pretended to it:
Alexandria claimed the honor of succession only from St. Mark, who was no
Apostle: And Jerusalem from James, (whom Dr. Hammond labors to prove to have
been none of the Apostles, but a Kinsman of Jesus:) Only Antioch and Rome
claimed succession from Peter, and Antioch as his first Seat; but they did on
that single account claim Power then over other Churches. And seeing the Church
is built on the Foundation of Apostles and Prophets, and that all the Apostles,
1 Cor. 12. are mentioned equally as the noblest Foundation, Members or Pillars,
and the People chidden sharply by Paul for making Cephas a Head; What reason
have we to believe that Peter only has perpetual Successors fixed to a certain
City, and that no other of all the Apostles have any such: What word of God
will prove that Peter has left his Power at Rome, and no other Apostles, no
not one has left theirs to any Place or Person on Earth? yea and that he left
it more to Rome than to Antioch, when Antioch claims the first succession
from him, and Rome but the second; and when Nilus and others have said so much
to make it probable, that Peter never was at Rome; and when it is certain that
Paul was there, and those old Fathers, that from some word of one of Eusebius
his doubtful Authors, do say, that Peter was at Rome, and Bishop there, do also
say that it was the Episcopal Seat of Paul; and when it is certain that no
Apostle was any-where a Bishop, formaliter but only eminenter, as being not
fixed, nor fixing their Power to any Seat. And Dr. Hammond gives very
considerable conjectures, That if Peter and Paul were both at Rome, they had
diverse Churches there, Paul being the Bishop of the Uncircumcision, and Peter
of the Circumcision only, (from whence we may see that the Spirit of God in his
Apostles judged that there might be more Churches and Bishops in one City than
one, (much more over a thousand Parishes) though as the contrary Spirit
prevails, the contrary Interest and Opinion prevailed with it.

These things premised, the Reader must know, that the state of the
Controversy between Sect. 7.
Mr. Terret, alias Mr. Johnson, and me is this. Finding the Church of Rome in
possession of abundance of Errors and Vanities, he would not only persuade us
that they are of God, and have ever been the same, because it is so with them
now, but also concludes, that these Carbuncles are essential to Christianity
and the Church, and that we cannot prove that we are a Church and Christians,
unless we prove that we have had from the Apostles a continued succession of
their Errors: As if a man could not prove himself to be a man, unless all his
Ancestors from Adam had the French Pox or the Leprosy.

On the contrary I maintain that the Church of Christ (which is his Body) is
essentiated by true consent to the Baptismal Covenant (which is our
Christening) and integrated by all the additional degrees, that this Covenant
is expounded in the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Christian Decalogue. (The Lord's
Supper is but the same Covenant celebrated by other signs not for Essence but
Confirmation) That all that consent to the (celebrated) Baptismal Covenant
heartily, are Members of the invisible Church; and all that profess consent (in
Sincerity or Hypocrisy) are visible Members (coram Ecclesia) That the true
Church of Christ has no other Head than Christ himself; no Vicarious Universal
Head, Pope nor Council; That the Protestants profess themselves Members of no
other Universal Church but that of which Christ only is the Head, and all
Christians (at least not cast out) are Members; that this Christian Church has
been visible to God by real consent, and visible to man by professed consent
from the first being of it to this day: And when they ask us, Where was your
Church before Luther, we say, where there were Christians before Luther. Our
Religion is nothing but simple Christianity: We are o^ no Catholic Church but
the Universality of Christians; We know no other, but lament that the pride of
the Clergy growing up from Parochial to Diocesan, and from Diocesan to
Metropolitical, and Patriarchal, and thence to Papal, has invented any other;
and that the Serpent that tempted Eve has drawn them from the Christian
simplicity. They deny not the successive visibility of Christianity and the
Christian Church: We desire no more; we own we know no other Religion and no
other Church.

But the Roman Artifice here comes in, and when their HUMANE UNIVERSAL HEAD
has made the grand Schism of the Christian World; hence they have learnt to
Sect. 8.
make Christians of no Christians, and no Christians of Christians, as Pride
and Ignorance serving this usurping interest please. Their Doctors are not
agreed whether any more be necessary explicitly to be believed to Salvation,
than that there is a God, and that our works shall be rewarded, without
believing a word of Christ or the Gospel; and whether they that believe not in
Christ are Christians; or whether being no Christians, yet they are Members of
the Christian Church: And the greater part are here on the wider Latitudinarian
side; (as you may see in Fr. S. Clara's Problemes, Deus, Not. Great. and in the
words of this W. I. before answered.)

And yet these charitable men conclude that two or three parts of the true
Christian world (Abassines, Copties, Syrians, Iacobites, Georgians, Armenians,
Greeks, Moscovites, Protestants) are all out of the Church of Christ, though
their own Friars that have lived among some of them in the East, profess that
they are no Heretics, and are better Men than the Papists are, and none worse
of Life than the Roman Party. And whence is this strange difference? Why, it is
because that these are none of them subject to the Pope; which it is supposed
that those are that believe only that there is a God and a Reward. (But how is
this their only explicit Faith, if they must also believe that the Pope is the
Vice-Christ.) And some of them tell you further, that he that should so far
believe his Ghostly Father, the Priest, Vid. S. Clar. ubi sup.
as to hold that he is not bound to love God, because the Priest tells him so,
is not only excusable, but he meriteth by it: So much more necessary to
Salvation is it, to love the Priest, than to love God.

And yet after all this, their own Leaders confess, that it is no Article of
their Faith, that the Pope is Peter's Successor, and that it is not by
Revelation that the Church Governors Sect. 9.
must be known; (as I have showed out of Ri. Smyth, Bishop of Calcedon, and of
England; and in the fore-confuted Writings of W. I*)

The things that I maintain are, I. That the Protestants Religion, and Church,
being only the Christian as such, had an uninterrupted succession as such,
(which the Papists Sect. 10.
deny not.) II. That the Papal Church as such, cannot prove its constant
visibility and succession. Nay, (though it be their part to prove it) we are
ready to prove; 1. That it is a Novelty. 2. That it has been often, and
notoriously interrupted; and their Papacy has not had any continued succession
of Men truly Popes by their own Laws and Rules, and in their own Account.

CHAP. I. The Confutation of W. J's Reply.
THE first regardable Passage in W. I's Reply, is, p. 53, 54. Where he
maintains, that [whatsoever has been ever in the Church by Christ's
institution, is essential to the Sect. 1.
Church;] and nothing merely Integral, or Accidents. Because I had omitted the
word [ever] in the Confutation, he takes that as the Insufficiency of all that
I said against him; and challenges me still to give an Instance of any
Institution not essential to the Church of Christ, that has been ever in it.

But, Reader, is Perpetuity any proof of an Essential? He was forced to
confess, that as other Societies, so the Church has Accidents; but he faith,
no Accidents instituted have been Sect. 2.
ever in it.

It may be we shall have a Quibble here upon the sense of the word [ever,]
whether it was Sect. 3.
from Everlasting, or from the Creation; or before Christ's Incarnation, or
before his Resurrection, or the forming of his Church by the Spirit in the
Apostles? But in Consistency with his own Cause, (which is) That the Papacy
has been ever in the Church, he must take up with this last sense.

Well, Let us see what work these Men make, and how they are taken in the Traps
that they lay for others: But first he shall have some confuting Instances.
Sect. 4.


1. Every word of Christ's own Doctrine and Speeches, recorded in the Gospel
has been ever in the Church, and instituted by Christ; but every word of
Christ's own Doctrine and Speeches, recorded in the Gospel, is not essential to
the Church: Therefore, every thing instituted by Christ, that has been ever in
the Church, is not essential to it.

If you say, that it was not all written till after some years, it was yet all
in the Church, even in the Minds of them that wrote it, and the other Apostles,
and in their Preachings as is like. If you say that all this is essential,
alas, then if false Copies have lost us a word the Church is lost, and those
Churches that received not some words, were Unchurched.

That Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate has been ever in the Church's
Creed; and yet the Name of Pontius Pilate is not essential to Christianity.

2. The Administering the Lord's Supper in both kinds (Bread and Wine) has been
ever in the Church, and of Christ's own Institution: Is this essential to the
Church? Perhaps some will have the impudence to say, that it is not now in it,
because the Pope has cast it out: but it is now in all the rest of the Church.
And we might as well say, the Papacy is not now in, because other Churches do
reject it.

3. Prayer in a known Tongue was ever in the Church, and of Christ's
Institution; and yet you think it not essential to it.

4. The use of the second Commandment as such, (Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, etc.) was ever in the Church; and yet you have left it out of
the Decalogue.

5. The Office of Deacons has been ever in the Church since their Institution,
Act. 6. yet few think them essential to the Church.

6. Christ himself washed his Apostles Feet, and taught them to do the like,
which was used in those hot Countries where it was a needful Act of Ministry:
but yet it is not essential to the Church.

7. Baptism from the beginning, as Instituted by Christ, was Administered by
dipping over Head in Water; but you take not that to be essential to the Church.

8. The Lord's Day's holy Observation, as Instituted by Christ and his
Apostles, has ever been in the Church: and yet many of your Doctors do equal
it with other Holy Days, and make it not essential to the Church.

9. Christ and his Apostles distinguish Essentials from Integrals and Accidents
in their time; therefore they are still to be distinguished: And it is a
strange Society that has not ever had Integrals and Accidents. Christ,
Instituting Baptism, says; He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved:
Thus the Essentials. Yet he says, [Teach them to observe all things whatever I
have Commanded you. But all those are not Essentials; for Christ himself
distinguished Tything Mint, Annise, and Cummin, from the great things of the
Law: And yet says, These ought ye to have done. And St. Paul says, The
Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink; but Righteousness, and Peace and Joy in
the Holy Ghost, etc. And yet more than these were then a Duty.

All things were to be done decently, and in order: And yet, who ever said, but
you, that all this is essential to the Church?

Christ by his Apostles, instituted, that Collections for the Poor should be
made on the first Day of the Week: yet is not that essential to the Church.

10. Afflictions are Accidents of the Church, and of Christ's appointment, and
have been ever there; and yet are not essential to it.

11. All the numbers of Christians, and the higher Degrees of Gifts and Grace,
have been of Christ, and ever in the Church; and yet it is not essential to it,
that Christians be just as many as they have been, or of such measures of Gifts
and Grace; for even Perfection is a Duty.

12. Few of your own do think that extreme Unction is essential to the Church,
and that if it ceased it would be no Church. The like may be said of many other
things.

But see how these Men Unchurch themselves; For if this be true, then the
Church of Rome can be no true Church. For it has cast off that which they call
Essential: Were it Sect. 5.
but the Cup in the Lords Supper, and Public Prayers in a Known Tongue, the
change has Unchurched them. These Consequents fall on them that will Unchurch
most of the Church of Christ.

But Page 55, 56. he says, [That he does not say, that every such thing must
be necessarily believed Sect. 6.
by every Member: No, not the belief of the Pope's Supremacy; but to such only
to whom they are sufficiently propounded.

Answ. 1. And yet these Men tell our People, to affright them, That they cannot
be saved out of their Church, or in our Religion. And now it is not essential
to believe the Pope's Supremacy.

2. But who can ever know what will pass for a [sufficient propounding] while
twenty degrees of Men's Capacities, make twenty degrees of Proposal respectively
sufficient; what Man of Reason can believe that such self-confuting Disputes as
yours, are a sufficient Proposal of the Pope's Supremacy? And sure the
Christian Empire of Abassia then had no sufficient Proposal, when but lately
your Emissaries told them, that they never heard from the Pope till now,
because he could not have access, or send to them. (Q. Whether that Empire be
true Christians through so many Ages, seeing they received not the Scriptures
on the Authoritative Proposal of the Pope, or Papal Church; and yet confessedly
were never bound to believe the Pope's Supremacy?)

3. By this account all Christians essentially differ from each other in their
Religion; and Christianity is a word of such monstrous ambiguity, that it
signifies as many several Religions as there be persons in the World, whose
diverse Capacities makes diversity of proposal become necessary or sufficient
to them.

But he says, that these are all essential to the Church, though not to the
several Members. More difficulties still: 1. How shall we ever know the Church
this way? If the belief Sect. 7.
of the Popes Supremacy be essential to some, and only to some, how many must
they be that so believe? Will one serve, or one thousand, to make all the rest
Church Members that believe it not? Or how many will this Leven extend to? Why
then may not the belief of Italy prove all the World to be the Church.

2. How comes another man's belief to be of such saving use to others; If you
say, that it is not his belief, but their own (who believe not) then all the
World is of your Church that want sufficient proposal: And Unbelievers are
Christians, or of the Christian Church, so be it they never heard of Christ:
and so all the unknown World, and Americans, and most of the Heathens are of
your Christian Church.

And why may not the Pope be saved then without believing his own Supremacy. (I
verily think that there is not one Pope of twenty that believes his own
Infallibility.) Doubtless some illiterate or ill-bred Popes have had but very
defective Proposals of their own Supremacy, it being rather affirmed by
Flatteries than ever proved to them.

Page 57. (Having first called for sense in my words, because the Printer had
put [as] for [is]) he turns his former assertion (whatever has been ever in
the Church by Christ's institution Sect. 8.
is essential to it] into another; [Because Christ has instituted that it
should be for ever in the Church, it is essential:] And this yet more plainly
shameth the asserter than the former; For no man can deny but that Christ has
instituted, 1. That every word of the Canonical Scripture should be ever (after
its existence) in the Church; 2. And that no Ministers should preach any thing
but truth in the Church; 3. And that no man should commit any sin at all; 4.
And that the Eucharist be delivered in both kinds, in remembrance of Christ,
till he come, etc. And yet sure all this is not essential to the Church

Page 58. He would persuade me that I miscite Fr. Sta. Clara, and that he says
not that Infidels may be saved, but only those that have not an explicit Faith
in Christ, (through invincible ignorance) and that he says not that it is most
of the Doctors Opinions, nor that any may be saved who are out of the Church:
and that my Friends will be sorry to see me so defective in my Citations, and
he hopes I will mend it in the next.

Ans. That I will, if plain words transcribed be any amending: but I cannot
amend your deceitful dealing. 1. I did not say that Sta. Clara says* They may
be saved out of the Church, but that such are in your Church, and so may be
saved who indeed are no Christians, and so not of the Church indeed. 2. We know
of no Faith in Christ, but that which you call [Explicite Faith in Christ:]
Common custom calls those Infidels that never heard that there is a Christ,
or who he is, or hearing it does not believe it: And he cannot believe it that
does not hear it. Most of the Infidel and Heathen World profess to believe Gods
veracity, and that all that he says is true; if this be an implicit believing
in Christ, almost all the Heathen World believes in him; use Names and Words
as you see cause: These are Infidels in our use of speech. 3. The place in
Sancta Clara is page 113. besides 109, 110. etc. the words are too large to be
transcribed; he cites many Authors to prove such in the Church and saved;
where after much to that purpose he says, What is clearer than that at this
day the Gospel binds not, where it is not authentically preached; that is,
that at this day men may be saved without an explicit belief of Christ: For in
that sense speaks the Doctor concerning the Jews: And verily whatever my
illustrious Master hold with his Learned Mr. Herera, I think that this was the
Opinion of Scotus and the Common one.] and he cites many for it. Read the rest
your self in the Book, and I defy your pretense that this is unjust Citation.
I cite none of this as if I were handling the question whether any besides
Christians are saved. But whether the Nations that never heard of Christ be
Christians and Members of your Church.

But page 60. he will prove [that nothing which Christ has instituted to be
ever in the Church Sect. 9.
is accidental to the Church: For every accident is separable from the subject,
without destroying the subject whose accident it is: But what Christ has
instituted to be ever in his Church, is inseparable from it.

Ans. 1. What if it were not an Accident, must it therefore needs be Essential?
Are there not Integral parts that are not Essential parts.

2. You that boast so greatly of your Logic faculty should not so absurdly
err, as you do in your major. Do you not hereby deny all proper accidents
which agree as omni and soli, ita and semper? Is not Risibilis an accident of
man and yet inseparable? 2. Is not quantity inseparable from a Body or natural
substance? 3. What the Porphyrians speak of an Intellectual separation, you
ignorantly or deceitfully Smiglecii Log. p. 1. disp. 5^ qu. 9. page 201. Resp.
Illam definitionem Accidentis (potest abesse, etc.) non intelligi de
separatione reali accidentis (etiam quinti praedicabilis) a subjecto, sed de
separatione per intellectum. Quare potest esse accidens realiter inseparabile a
subjecto, and necessario convenire subjecto, and tamen per intellectum erit
separabile, and poterit abesse a subjecto salva subjecti essentia, etc. vid.
caetera.
apply to an actual eventual separation. If Christ had been otherwise put to
death than by crucifying, or elsewhere than at Jerusalem; if his Bones had
been broken, if he had not had the same integral parts and accidents of Body as
he ever had, he had been Christ still: But yet it was Logically impossible that
any of these should have been otherwise than they were, they being fore-decreed
of God. If the Sun should cease moving, illuminating, heating, you may say it
would be still the Sun: But yet it is certain, that these accidents are
eventually inseparable from it. If you will cause Humidity to cease from Water,
or separate Gravity from Earth of Stone, etc. I shall think you have made them
other things. 4. But to instance as you do in such a being as [the CHURCH,]
dishonors your boasted Logic greatly: The ratio formalis of a Church is
Relative; and Relation is an accident; and to say, that accidents may all be
separated from the Church without destroying it, is to say, that Relation may
be separated; that is, the Church from it self, or formal Essence without
destroying it. Do you conquer by such disputing as this? was it by such that
you had your boasted printed victory over such great Logicians as Bishop
Gunning and Bishop Pierson? Can you also prove that all accidents, that is,
Relation, may be separable from Families, Schools, Kingdoms, without destroying
them? I hope you will not say that you mean that the separation destroys not
the humanity of the Members, and that this is the subject you mean: for no more
would Apostasy or Unchurching them destroy Humanity.

3. And (that no part may be sound) your minor is false as well as your major.
What Christ by his Law commands or prescribes to be in the Church that he
instituteth: But all comes not to pass which Christ commands or instituteth.
He commands us higher degrees of Faith, Love and other Duty than we perform.
You say, No Man may change his institution; but does it follow that no man does
change it? No man ought to plead for Error or deceive poor Souls. Does it
follow that therefore you and such others do not so? It is Gods command that we
never sin: It does not follow that we never do sin: When the Apostles strove
who should be greatest, it was Christ's institution that they should not seek
for domination or superiority as the Princes of the Earth do, but be as little
Children, and strive who should be most humble and serviceable, and take the
lowest place; and it was St. Peter's Doctrine, that Bishops must not Lord it
over the Flocks, nor rule them by constraint, but voluntarily; but does it
follow that all this is done by all? no nor by your pretended Head who is made
an essential part of the Church.

I conclude then, 1. That many accidents are not separable without destruction
of the subject. 2. That many more shall never be separated. 3. That relation is
not separable from the Church, (nor numbers neither.) 4. That there are
Integral parts which are neither Accidents nor Essentials. 5. That every thing
is not ever in the Church (nor in any man) which Christ has commanded or
instituted to be ever in it: (And if that may be in a man which Christ
forbids, so may it be in the Church, and so that be absent which he
commands.) 6. That it is a novel Opinion, contrary to common Reason and all
true Theology, and which a Catechized Child should be ashamed of, to hold,
that all that Christ has instituted to be ever in the Church is essential to
it: And so that the Church would be nullified if one word of the Holy
Scriptures perished by the carelessness of Scribes or Printers, or if one decent
order were changed, or if one Office were depraved, etc. 7. It aggravateth the
error to hold that every instituted apex or perfection (for continuance) is
Essential to the Church; and yet even the explicit belief, that Jesus is the
Savior, is not essential to a Churchmember or a Christian. 8. That this
Disputer absolutely nullifieth the Roman Church, which has changed the
Sacrament, and Prayer, and Church Officers, etc. which were instituted by
Christ to be ever in the Church.

But I noted to him, that our question to him was, Whether the holding such
thing to be instituted be essential to the Church, and not whether the
institution it self be so: May not the Sect. 10.
Opinion be but integral or an accident? Here he replies without blushing. 1.
That thus I yield up the Cause, in naming Integrals, for those are not
Accidents.

Ans. 1. My affirming that the Papacy is as much an Accident as a Leprosy is
to a Man, did not make me forget that I was confuteing his assertion, that all
is essential to the Church which is instituted to be for ever, (or indeed,
which had been ever in it; for that was his saying;) And though Integrals be
not Accidents, yet they are not Essentials, was this hard to see? And 2. by his
now putting in the word [instituted] he would make the Reader think that I had
granted that the Papacy was instituted by Christ.

2. He says that [Nothing can be an accident to the Church, which Christ has
instituted to be perpetually in the Church; and consequently the Churches
holding any thing to be so, if true, is essential to the subsistence of the
Church; if false, is essentially destructive of the Church; so that whether
true or false it will never be accidental to the Church.

Ans. 1. What work will Interest and Error make. If so, then every Error, and
every Sin of the Church is essentially destructive of the Church: For Christ
has instituted that the Church shall perpetually hold and teach the truth
only, and obey all his commands without sinning. If he say that the Church
never has nor had Sin or Error; I answer, 1. If an essential part of the
Church have had Sin and Error, then so has the Church had: But an essential
part (in their account) that is their supposed Head has had Sin and Error: To
pass by Peter's denying Christ, dissuading him from suffering till he heard, Get
behind me Satan, Mat. 16. his dissembling, Gal. 2. sure Marcellinus sinfully
offered Incense to an Idol, and Honorius and Tyberius sinned; and it was some
sin in those Popes that defiled Wives and Maids at the Apostolic doors, and
that were Whoremongers, and came in by Whores and Poison, and that were
condemned as Simonists, Heretics, Incarnate Devils, Perjured, Murderers, etc.
and that by Councils. 2. If all the particular Members of the Church have some
Error or Sin, then so has the Church: But all the particular Members have,
etc. If any Man say that he has no Sin, he is a Liar and the truth is not in
him. 1. Joh. 1. And in many things we offend all, Iam. 3. 2. etc.

2. Why then does he accuse us for separating from Rome, if it be as certainly
unchurched, as it is certain that they have had Sin and Error; it is certain
that the Popes were such as aforesaid, or the Councils sinned that condemned
them as such: and it is certain that either the Councils of Constance, Basil,
and Pisa, erred and sinned, which decreed that Councils are above the Pope, and
may condemn and depose him; and that this is de fide, and the contrary Heresy;
or else the Councils of Laterane and Florence erred and sinned that said the
contrary. And so of other Instances.

3. But as I have proved the Antecedent of his Argument false already, so his
consequence (that the Churches holding any thing to be instituted for
perpetuity, is essential, and the denying, destructive of the essence) would
not follow but on two suppositions. 1. That such institutions are not only no
Accidents, but no Integrals. 2. That every commanded truth is essential, which
are both false: For else the institution might be essential, and yet not the
believing it such be essential: And he confesses that such belief is not
essential to every Member; nor can he tell to how many, nor to whom ad esse
Ecclesiae; If he say, To as many as have a sufficient proposal. 1. Then if none
had a sufficient proposal, it would cease to be essential to the Church. 2.
Then if any one sin be committed by the Church against a sufficient proposal,
the Church is nullified. If he said, It is not known how many must believe it
ad esse Ecclesiae, then no man can know whether the Church be nullified or not.

He says, [pag. 6^. So the acknowledgment of it, by all those to whom it is
sufficiently propounded, Sect. 11.
is necessary to make them parts of the true Church, and the denial of it when
so propounded hinders them from being parts.]

Ans. 1. Still this says nothing to the question, how far and in whom it is
essential to the Church. 2. And this unchurcheth every person that erreth and
sins against any one word of Scripture after a sufficient proposal; yet this
same man said, page 36. of his explications, [Whatsoever their neglect be to
know what is propounded, yet so long as they believe explicitly what is
necessary to be believed necessitate medii, and implicitly the rest, they can
be no Heretics; for it is not the ignorance though culpable, etc. And do the
wilfully ignorant acknowledge it? reconcile these if you can.

2. This Unchurcheth your whole Church; For it is sufficiently proposed, even
in express words in the Scripture that there is Bread in the Eucharist after
Consecration, (thrice together in 1 Cor. 11.) and that the Church should
communicate with the Cup, [This do in remembrance of me, even to show the Lords
death till he come,] and that we should not make to our selves any graven
Image, nor bow down to it, nor worship it, and that we should pray publicly in
a known Tongue, and that Bishops should not Lord it over the Flock, etc. and
you err and sin after this sufficient proposal.

Page 36. I had given several Instances (of the Iberians, Indians, Americans,
the primitive Christians, and their own Converts) to prove that the belief of,
and subjection to, the Pope is not necessary to Christianity or Salvation; to
which his answer is very remarkable, Viz. [ I never said that all particular
persons or COMMUNITIES are obliged to have an express belief or acknowledgment
of the Roman Bishops Supremacy, that being necessary to all, neither
necessitate medii nor praecepti: It is sufficient that they believe it
implicitly in subjecting themselves to all those whom Christ has instituted
to be their lawful Pastors; and when the Bishop of Rome is sufficiently
proposed to them to be the Supreme Visible Pastor of those Pastors upon Earth,
that then they obstinately reject not his authority.

Ans. There is some moderation in this, though it utterly overthrow their
cause. 1. This fully proves that the poor Abassines, Armenians, and such
others, (for all the Popish Accusations of them) are neither Heretics nor
Schismatics, for not acknowledging the Pope, whose Supremacy has not been
sufficiently proposed to them: And so that the Church is greater than the Popes
Kingdom.

2. This makes out a receiving of the Popes Supremacy to be no more necessary
than the receiving of every Word of the holy Scripture, or tradition, no^ than
the receiving e. g. of the Cup in the Lords Supper: For all are essentially
necessary (say they) when sufficiently propounded.

3. This undeceiveth us, that thought their Doctrine had been that the
Scripture and Christianity must necessarily be received by the Proposal of the
Papal Church as such, whereas now we perceive that it may be received from the
Church though they know it not to be Papal; And we thought it must have been
received as from a General Council, or the Church universal: but it seems here,
it is needful but that it be from their particular Pastors.

4. By this it seems that there are other Pastors that must be believed,
received and obeyed before the Pope, and Subjection to them is of absolute
necessity to salvation and Churchmembership, when subjection to the Pope is of
no such necessity. How the Pope will take this we know not: but,

5. It leaves us to new doubts as hard as any of the rest; How to know that
such indeed are our lawful Pastors, before we know that there is a Christ or a
Pope, and how to know which are they. We perceive now that Implicit Faith is
not necessarily the believing Pope or Council, but the believing those that
Christ has instituted to be our lawful Pastors.

Qu. 1. But can we know that Christ instituted them before we know that there
is a Christ, or that he is true Christ?

Q 2. Can you be true Pastors without derivation from, and dependence on the
Pope; or be so known by the People? O that you would but come into the light
and tell us how! And then, Q. 3. tell us why the same People may not take
Protestant, Armenian, Abassine Bishops, or Presbyters for true Pastors, by the
same Proof? Q. 4. And does not the Proof, or Knowledge, that Men are our Lawful
Pastors, without knowing that they have Ordination, Jurisdiction, Mission, or
Confirmation (as you distinguish them) from the Pope, or are subject to him;
also prove that, quoad esse, Men may be cur true Pastors without any of these
relations to the Pope? For the esse rei is presupposed to the Proof and
Knowledge (...) And in relations the Fundamentum enters the Definition.

I conclude, that being my self unfeignedly and earnestly desirous to know the
truth, whether the Pope be the appointed Church-Monarch, of Government of all
Christians that dwell on the Face of the Earth; and having diligently read what
you, and abu^ (...) more have written for it, I profess that I never yet heard
or saw any Proposal of it (nor yet of abundance of your Doctrines) which was
sufficient to convince my understanding of it, but much to convince me of the
contrary. And I may suppose this to be the case of most, who need as clear
evidence as I; and therefore that we are none of us, by your Concession,
obliged either necessitate medii, or praecepti, to believe you, or to be your
Subjects.

And I confess I like the preaching of these Men whose labor is only to
subject Men to Christ, and to their Lawful Magistrates, and Domestic
Governors; and to the Teaching-Conduct The way by which men come to believe.
of those that speak to them the Word of God; better than theirs that make it
the Foundation of their Religion, to make all Men on Earth their Subjects.

And yet Teachers we acknowledge necessary to our Faith; but it is not first
necessary to believe them to be sent by Christ, before we believe in Christ.
But, 1. The first Messengers (Apostles) did at once affirm that Christ is the
Savior of the World, and that he sent them to witness his Resurrection,
Miracles, and Works; and to preach his Gospel. And the Tongues, Miracles, etc.
by which they proved it, was a Proof of both at once; but principally of the
former: (For if an un-called Preacher had wrought a Miracle, it would have
proved his Doctrine, but not his Calling.)

2. But ordinary Preachers now give us the Evidences of the truth of the
Gospel, which were heretofore delivered to the Church. (The Doctrine's
self-evidencing Divinity, as it has the Impress of God's Power, Wisdom, and
Love, his Holiness, Justice, and Mercy, with the antecedent Prophesies
fulfilled, and the concomitant and subsequent Miracles, and the continued Seal
of the sanctifying Spirit in all Believers.) And by these we are first drawn
(by the inward operation of the Holy Ghost) to believe in the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit; before we believe that he sent these Men to be our Lawful Pastors:
Yea, without believing them (oft-times) to be our Pastors, or any Pastors at
all. We detest those Self-Preachers that would make the World believe, that we
must believe them to be our Lawful Pastors, and receive them before we believe
in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and receive him. And we detest that
false Doctrine that says, That a Layman may not convert Souls to the Faith of
Christ; and that God's Word and Spirit may not, by his opening that Word, win
Souls that know not yet what Ministry Christ has instituted.

To my Instance of the Iberians (converted by a Maid) and the Indians by
Frumentius Sect. 13.
and Edesius, he answers, 1. That he can prove the Papacy preached to them, as
well as I can Justification by Faith alone, or any other parcicular Point of
our Doctrine. 2. We must both say that all important truths of Christianity
were preached to them; and till you have evinced this of the Supremacy to be
none of those, it is to be supposed it was sufficiently declared to them. 3.
Explicating the Article of the Catholic Church, it is supposed they were told
it consisted of Pastor and People united, and that they must obey their Lawful
Pastors; in which Doctrine the Pope is implicitly included.

Answ. 1. Our Doctrine (as you call it) is Christianity, and I can prove
nothing preached but what made them Christians; which you confess may be
without believing the Pope's Supremacy.

2. A brave Argument: All important truths were preached, Ergo you must prove
that this is not one of them. 1. All important truths cannot in reason be
supposed to be preached by those two Laymen, and by a Maid: All essential
truths we may suppose preached, or else they could not be Christians. We heard
before that you would persuade us that every truth of continued institution, is
not only important, but essential to the Church. Whence you may infer (in your
way) that the Maid and the two Laymen had preached every such truth, and left
not one out; or else there was no Christians and Church. 2. It Is your part to
prove that the Papacy is such an important truth, and not mine to prove the
Negative, (which yet I have often and fully done.)

3. The Article of the Catholic Church was not at first in the Creed, as the
old Copies show: And Baptism was Administered without mentioning that Article.

4. If holding that [People must obey their Lawful Pastors] will serve, then we
are all right* (...) if this be an implicit belief of the Papacy, we are all
Papists; yea, perhaps Mahometans and He^thens are Papists too, by such a belief.

To (...) Instance from Act. 2. he says, 1. Who can tell whether Peter told
them not of his Suprem^ (...) 2. They addressed their Speech first to him, etc.
Sect. 14.


Answ. 1. Who can tell that Peter did preach his own Supremacy? I prove he did
not: Because if he did, it was as necessary to be believed, or not. If not, he
preached it not among things necessary. If yea, then had he so preached it,
that Text, or some other would have mentioned it: Peter or Paul, or some
Apostle would have expressed it on Record; which they have not done, yea have
denied it.

2. Those that Paul preached to, Act. 16. and other places, addressed their
Speech first to him: But does it follow that therefore he was Governor of all
the Apostles? How unhappy are great Conquerours that must fight many bloody
Battles to win one Kingdom of another Man's, in Comparison of the Pope; who
without a blow, or a word of good reason, can hope by such gross Sophismes as
these to get the Monarchy of the whole Earth.

To my Instance of those converted by the English and Dutch in the Indies, he
bids me prove them to be instructed in the true Faith? Sect. 15.


Answ. They that are instructed in the Baptismal Covenant, the Creed, and in
general the truth of all the Sacred Scriptures; and are devoted to God by the
Baptismal Covenant, and taught to conform their Desires to the Lord's-prayer,
and their Practice to the Decalogue; to live soberly, righteously, and godly;
and in love to God and Man, and in good works, and hope of Heaven, are
instructed in the true Faith. But such are they in question, etc. Do you so often
say, that less than all the Creed is necessitate medii to be believed? and many
of you, not so much as Christ himself; and yet is not all that Protestants
teach the true Faith? O Impartiality!

Next to my Instance of the Abassian Empire, he bids me also prove them to be
Orthodox Catholic Christians.

Answ. 1. I must first know what you mean by [Orthodox and Catholick] which
your ill Sect. 16.
faculty of expounding makes me despair of. If by [Orthodox] you mean such as
have no errors, I cannot prove it; but it is shame for such erroneous Men as
you to demand it. But if you mean but such as hold all the Essentials of
Christianity and much more, the former Argument joined with all just
Testimonies of them, (such as you have in Damianus a Goes, Alvarez, Godignus,
etc.) prove it. So if by Catholic you mean a Papist, I cannot prove it, but
the eontrary. But if you mean [Parts of the Universal Church] it is proved as
before.

Note here what vafritious Men these are, that save or ^amn Empires to and fro;
as the interest of their arguing requires. When we prove that the rest of the
Christian Church is twice or thrice as great as all the Papal Church; then they
tell us that Greeks, Abassines, etc. are of their mind; and they feign that the
Greeks, Armenians, Abassines, etc. are all subject to the Pope, and have
submitted to him; Godignus wrote to confute one of their own Writers that
affirms the Abassines to be for the Pope. But when their Cause bids them say
otherwise, then we are challenged to prove them Catholic Christians, and
Orthodox. Had you put me to prove the Papists such, you had put me harder to it.

Our next Point is of [the Visibility of Christ as Head of the Church, where he
says, p. 65. Sect. 17.
[He is most certainly an invisible Pastor, both in Heaven, and on Earth: For
though his Person may be seen there, yet the Exercise of his Pastorship
consisting only in spiritual Influences and internal Graces cannot be seen by
any Corporal Eye whatsoever: Therefore as a Pastor of the Militant Church he is
wholly invisible; so you put a visible Body without a visible Head, all that is
visible in the Pastoral Function being performed by visible Pastors; and all
that is invisible by our Savior. So you by a strange piece of Novelty
constitute a visible Body, without a visible Head; Of Christ as the Head,
whether visible, and whether a more visible Head be necessary.
you destroy the visible Church, and frame a Monster*]

Answ. What abundance of Heresies must I charge on such Men, if I judged them
according to their terms and rigor of judging? 1. Christ, as a visible Head of
the Church, is here denied: Whereas, 1. It is not that he is Visus, but
Visibilis that we assert. 2. And he was seen till about thirty three years of
Age on Earrh: He was seen to do Miracles, suffer, rise, ascend. 3. He was seen
of Paul and Stephen after his Ascension. 4. The poor scattered Flock on Earth
is but a Handful, to the Church Triumphant that see him still in Heaven; and it
is the same Body. 5. He will come visible in Glory to Judgment. 6. Every
Believer, after a few hasty hours, passes to the sight of him. 7. And we shall
all see him in Heaven for ever.

Compare this now with the Visibility of the greatest Earthly Monarchs, who are
never seen to the thousandth Person of their Empires; and rarely to any but
their Courtiers: and some of them rarely to the most of them, but to some very
few, and quickly die and are seen here no more. And yet may not Christ be
called a Visible Head. And yet we say but that he is visible in tantum, and not
everywhere, nor to every one.

2. But it is not his Person that he says is invisible, but worse than that;
it is [the Exercise of his Pastorship] which he erroneously (that I say not
heretically) affirms to consist only in spiritual Influxes, and internal
Graces.] So that here, 1. He denies all Christ's visible teaching and
government, while he was on Earth (were his words to be strictly understood;)
and all his Mission and Commissioning of his Apostles, etc. 2. He denies all
the Sacred Scriptures, which are Christ's visible Doctrine, Laws and Promises;
and so the visible Exercise of his Office, as the King's Laws are of his. 3. He
denies all Christ's visible Administrations by his Officers, Princes and
Pastors; as if it were a good Argument, that Christ does it not, because they
do it: whereas it is he that visibly rules (as to the effect here questioned)
by them; as it is the visible Government of the King which is exercised all
abroad the Kingdom by his Command. 4. He denies Christ's visible Mercies,
Provision, Protection, Deliverances of many sorts; which are all parts of the
Exercise of his Office. 5. He denies all the visible Miracles which Christ
has wrought by others, whilst yet their Church so boasts of them as if they
were their very Foundation, (as I showed out of Knot against Chillingworth, who
ultimately resolves their Faith into them,) and they would have us think that
they are costant things. If you say that Christ is not seen here: I answer, It
is not Christ's Person now whose Visibility he speaks of, but the Exercise of
his Office. 6. He denies all the visible punishments which Christ himself
inflicteth on his sinning People, and on his Enemies, though they are many and
notorious; and as God is known by the Judgments which he executes, Psalm. 9. So
all things and power now are given unto Christ, and he judges the World as
Lord of all: For the Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to
the Son, Joh. 5. 22. 7. He denies Christ's final visible Judgment, if he hold
strictly to his words, That the Exercise of Christ's Pastorship is only in
spiritual Influences and internal Graces. If you say that some of my Instances
are not of his Pastoral, but his Regal Offices, I answer that it is but some
that you so except. 2. It is a mistake, because his Pastoral and Regal Office
are one and the same indeed; not two Offices, but two inadequate Metaphorical
conceptions of one and the same Office of Christ: And it belongs to the
Pastor to provide Food for his Flock, to govern them, to fetch them home, and
to defend them and destroy the Wolves.

He says, all that is visible is done by visible pastors, and all that is
invisible by Christ (in the Pastoral Function,) as if Christ did nothing which
they do, or no more than they do. And he reproacheth Christ's Church as being a
Monster, unless it have some other visible Head: Like Cardinal Bertrand, see
his words in his Book in Biblioth. Patrum, that says; God had not been wise,
if he had not made one Universal Monarch over all the World. And when we have
fully proved that a mere Humane visible Church-Governour over all the round
Earth is impossible, and such Power never was deputed by Christ to any; and
that the far greatest part of the Church never owneth, or did own such: Will it
not then follow, that his reproach of Christ's Church and Government is unjust
and rash?

And would it not follow by the same reason that the Earth, as Gods Kingdom,
(which Christ also is the King of) is a Monster, being a visible Body; unless
it had one mere Humane visible Head? Are not Men as Men, and governable by the
Sword, as visible as Men as Christians, and governable by the Word and Keys? If
so (which is undeniable,) Why is the Christian World any more a Monster without
a Monarch Bishop, than the Humane World without a Monarch King?

But page 66, 67. he asks [Whether Christ performed immediately any visible
Action in relation to the Church?] and says, Men will expect that I show that
Christ, not in his Person, but in the Exercise of his Pastoral Headship, works
visibly by himself.

Answ. If it be not the Person's Visibility that you require, but the Action;
that is considered either as it is Agentis, or as in Pass^, in the Receiver.
The former is seen, if ever, only when it is the seen Mo^us of a Body. If the
latter, I have named you diverse visible Acts of Christ. But why must
[immediate] come in? Does not my hand write visibly unless I do it without a
Pen? How little Government do great Emperors exercise immediately in all their
Empire? even none in the far greatest part in all their Lives, but give out
their Laws and Mandates to others. What Government has your Pope exercised
immediately in Abassia, Armenia, Tartary, Persia, yea or Mexico, much less at
the terra australis incognita, and all that side of the Earth which Lactantius,
Augustine, etc. denied?

He confesses that he cited not Ephesians. 4. to prove the Papacy, but successive
Pastors.

Reader, think seriously, 1. whether the Pope be not an invisible Head, and his
Church a Monster by this man's rules. Does he rule all his Church immediately or
by others? If by others, does not Christ do so, (and better.) And was Pope
Zachary the visible Head at the Antipodes, when he commanded Boniface to
excommunicate Vigilius for holding such a World under us as we call the
Antipodes? And is this Pope a capable Head of all the World that denies the
very Being of them, and holds that there is no such thing as so great a part
of it? O what a Pastor or Apostle is this that excommunicateth men for
affirming the existence of the charge which he undertaketh!

The Answer to W. J's second-Chapter.
Whereas W. I. would persuade men that it is first incumbent on us to prove
where there has Sect. 1.
been a Church in all Ages without the Roman Papacy, I first evidenced that it
is incumbent on them, as having the Affirmative, to prove that the Universal
Church has been headed by the Pope in all Ages: For 1. our Religion is nothing
but Christianity as such: And this they confess has been in all Ages since
Christ's and Churches professing it; so that all our Religion being past
Controversy between us and them, (which is still to be noted) we have no need
to prove that which is not denied, who denies that there have been Christian
Churches?

But it is their addition of the Papal Sovereignty over the Universal Church
which is denied Of our departure from the Romans possessed power.
by us, and must be proved by them according to the common Rules of Disputation.

2. And the denial of their addition is the Renunciative Consequence, and no
direct and proper part of our Positive Religion: True Faith is one thing, and
the Renunciation of all Errors contrary to it is another thing: The one is such
as may be defined; the other in particulars has no bounds: I can soon say that
There is one God the Father Almighty, etc. and in general that I deny any
other; but if I will undertake to name them all that are worshipped as Gods,
and say, e. g. Satan, Jupiter, Sol, etc. are no Gods, I can never know when I
have done; and this is but a consequent of my Faith: so it is to believe that
Mahomet, Amida, Zachea, etc. are no Saviors.

Now if any would bid me prove Where there has been Church in all Ages that
did renounce Arrianism, Macedonianism, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monotheli^es,
etc. I cannot prove that any did expressly renounce these before they were known
in the World; and yet Christianity was the same Religion of the Church without
any change before and after.

So W. I's demand upon his Plea of present possession, is as if he should say,
The man of seventy years of Age which is now gray headed and lame was ever so:
Or the Church which now honors St. Martin, St. Thomas Aquinas, as Saints, is
the true Church of Christ: And if you cannot show, us that your Church has in
all Ages so honored St. Martin, etc. you are not the true Church of Christ.
What if it had been [The Church that keeps Easter Day as now we do, and
Christmas- day on the 25th of December is the true Church of Christ; therefore
you must prove that your Church has ever done so. Could they prove their
Papacy in the Empire as old, it would have the same answer, viz. It was but a
part of the Church, and not the whole, that kept Easter and Christmas as we do
now; for one part kept Easter on another day, till the Nicene Council ended
that Controversy in the East, and Christmas Day on the 6th of January till
after the middle of Chrysostom's time; and so in the present case, had it been
as ancient as they pretend, it was not Universal.

2. But he says that [at least, as Patriarch of the West by the Churches
grant, they were in full quiet possession of that Right or Power which we
confess was lawful.]

Ans. No such matter: We make no such Confession: Those Protestants, who think
that the superiority of Patriarchs is lawful, do hold that it is by humane
Laws; and that if any such Laws were made by that which you call the Church,
that is, by Councils, it was by such Councils as in such matters received their
Power from the Emperors, without which they might not set up one City above
another, nor distribute Provinces and Diocesses, and as was done; and therefore
that while the Imperial Laws enforced them, they had the Law to bind Subjects
to obey them: but when any Kingdom was cut off from the Empire, it was from
under those Laws, and under the Laws of their own Prince, and the former
decrees of Councils were no Laws to them any longer; though they might by
voluntary contract still associate with Foreign Lands.

So that such hold, 1. That while Britain was under the Roman Empire they owed
some respect or obedience to the Pope as Patriarch of the West, as Englishmen
do the Archbishop of Canterbury. 2. That before and after, they owed him no
more obedience than to the Bishop of Rhemes or Arles. 3. That when the Saxon
Kings permitted the first English Bishops voluntarily to subject themselves to
the Patriarch of Rome, they made themselves Debtors of all lawful obedience
which they promised. 4. That when the Saxon and Danish Kings Commanded their
Subjects such lawful obedience to the Bishop of Rome, they owed it him by the
obligation of their Sovereigns Laws. 5. And when those Laws ceased their
obligation ceased; and when those Laws forbad it, it became unlawful. And so
the Roman Patriarch had no power in England when the King and Law did deny it
him, or cease to give it him. This is the judgment of those Protestants that
think such Patriarchs lawful: The other that think them a sinful Usurpation,
think that they were never lawful; yet he urges us with what Conscience we
ceased to obey them.

Page 74. he says [Prove that any Church which now denies it, has been
always visible and Sect. 3.
I am satisfied whether that Church always denied it or no.

Ans. This has some moderation in it. 1. There has no Church but that of
Jerusalem been always visible from the beginning of Christianity; for no other
was at first existent.

2. And that was not visible from the beginning of the World.

3. This Church of Jerusalem as it consists of the most Christians there, now
denies your Papal Power.

4. The Churches of Alexandria, Antioch, and Abassia now deny it, and have been
always visible.

5. The Church of Ephesus, and many others of Greeks that now deny it, have
been always visible since Paul's time; and Constantinople since the first
planting.

6. And I pray you note that the Church of Rome has not been always visible,
for it did not exist till some years after that at Jerusalem. Yea note, that
you cannot pretend that the Bishop of Rome was the Universal Bishop from the
beginning; for you confess Peter was first Bishop of Antioch, and all that
while Rome was not the Mistress Church: And so if you should have the
Supremacy; it must be by a change from the first State: Though indeed Peter
himself never claimed nor exercised any such thing, much less did he ever leave
it to a Successor, and least of all as fixed to one City, any more than St.
John's power was to the Bishop of Ephesus. And indeed Bellarmine himself dare
not deny but that the Seat of the Universal Bishop may possibly be removed from
Rome to some other place. And then (suppose it were to Avignion, or to
Constantinople) where is St. Peter's Successor? How must he be chosen? or how
shall his power above others be known, when all the old pretensions fail?

Page 78. (till then there is nothing but vain words) When I noted that They
that make Sect. 2.
Christ corporally present in every Church in the Eucharist, should not say
that the King of the Church is absent.

He replyeth [We dispute of a proper visible presence, such as is not in the
Eucharist.

Ans. You affirm that Christ is there corporally present under the Forms of
Bread and More of the visibility of Christ.
Wine; and that the Bread which we see is the Body of Christ and no Bread; and
yet that we see not the Body of Christ: Sure we see something or nothing; and
if it be something and not Bread, nor Christ's Body, what is it? But suppose
that it be not Christ's Body which we see, yet while the Bread is turned into
his Body, that which you do see is nearer to him than a Kings Crown or Clothing
is to the King; and yet if you see the King only in his Cloths, his ^ace being
veiled, will you say that he is not a visible King? Does clothing make Kings,
or the species of the Consecrated Bread make Christ to become invisible? 2. Do
you not bow toward him on the Altar? Do you not carry him in procession about
the Streets? and do you not constrain all that meet you to kneel down and
adore? sure you do not think him to be out of sight, or hearing, or far off, to
whom you pray, and whom you so honor as present? As Paul said to the Jews, God
is not far from every one of us; so that Christ, who is adorably present in his
Body on the Altar, and corporally present in every Receivers hand and mouth,
surely has not yet forsaken the Earth, so far as to be incapable of
constituting a visible Kingdom without a Pope.

Page 79. I told him that [When they prove 1. That Christ is so absent from his
Church that there is need of a Deputy to essentiate his Kingdom, and 2. that
the Pope is so deputed, they will have done their work]

He replyeth [I have proved that Christ instituted St. Peter and his Successors
to govern visibly his wholly Universal Church in all Ages]

Ans. Wonderful! when was it, and where? Let the Reader find any such thing in
your writing, for I cannot, no not a word: Had that been done I had
contradicted you no longer; but if it be by an Invisible Proof that your
Visible Head reigns, I cannot judge of it.

He next adds [I press you therefore once more to give an instance of
something which has been ever in the visible Church by Christ's institution,
and yet is accidental to the Church.]

Ans. 1. If I have not given you such Instances and Reasons also to prove that
all that Christ instituted to continue is not essential, let the Reader say
that I have failed you. 2. But if I had not, what is it to your cause; will it
thence follow that you have said a word to prove that Christ instituted the
Universal Head-ship of the Pope? Or rather do you not overthrow it your self by
such arguing, seeing 1. the Headship of Rome has not been ever in the Church
as you confess. 2. It never was in the Universal Church either instituted by
Christ, or received by the Church one hour, but only for a time received by a
corrupt oppressed part of the Church. 3. The Pope has cast out diverse things
instituted by Christ for continuance, as is proved.

I told him, that though the King were absent [it is only the King and Subjects
that are essential to a Kingdom; the Deputy is but an Officer and not
essential.]

He replyeth ['Tis so indeed de facto: But suppose (as I do) that a Vice-King
be by full authority made an ingredient into the essence of the Kingdom, then
sure he must be essential.

Ans. Yes, by very good reason; if he be made essential he is essential: and
now I understand what is your proof; you suppose it to be so. But if it be so
in our case, then the Pope is essentially so the Churches constitutive Head
that whenever he dies the Church is dead, (unless you can say as our Law does
of the King; Papa non moritur) and when the Church has been two or near three
years without it was no Church, and when it had two or three Popes it was no
Church or two or three Churches.

But says W. I. [This is evident in our present Subject; for though all the
Pastors in Christ's Church be only his Officers and Deputies, yet you cannot
deny such Officers are now essential to his visible Church.]

Ans. 1. When I heard the word Evident, I looked for something: But I had
nothing but Whether Pastors are Essential parts of the Church Universal.
[you cannot deny it: and what true Christian ever yet denied it?] But I do not
remember that ever I heard it disputed before; affirmed or denied. He that
would deny it, will say that as all the Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Magistrates
of Corporations, are indeed essential parts of those Corporations, and these
Corporations are the noblest integral parts of the Kingdom, but no essential
parts of it, so that if the Kingdom should be resolved into a King and mere
common Subjects only, it were a Kingdom still: so it is in the Church.
Particular gathered Churches are the noblest integral parts of the Universal
Church, but not essential: And Pastors are essential parts of those particular
Churches: But if all the particulars and Pastors should cease, the Church would
be a Church still, while there is a Christ and mere Christians. But this never
will be in this world; because Christ will not only have a Church, but a
well-formed organized Church.

Those that had rather use the word essential of the Pastors will say, that as
soul and body are the only essential parts of a man, and yet the brain, heart,
and liver may be called essential parts of the body, as distinct from the rest,
because without these it is not corpus org^nicum, and so not humanum; so though
Christ be the only soul of the Church, yet Officers may be essential parts of
his body as organical, capable of such a soul: And though the other will reply,
that this is but a deceiving Metaphor, Christ being not only the soul but the
head, and no organical Members being more than noble Integrals, because if an
Intellectual separation be made, the Church is a Church still in such a
conception. Yet all this is but a Controversy of the aptitude of the word
Essential, in that case; we are agreed that Officers shall be in the Church to
the end. And yet Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 12. calls them but eyes and hands, and
never heads, but reserveth that title to Christ alone; yea even when he
speaks of Apostles. And yet if any Officers were Essential it would be
Apostles, who are called Foundations and Pillars of the House; but none of them
the Head.

2. But what is all this to our Controversy? What if Pastors were Essential to
the Church, viz. that there be some? Does it follow, that the Bishop of Rome is
any more essential to it than the Bishop of Jerusalem or Antioch? If so, then
1. Before Peter is feigned Bishop of Rome, the Church was no Church: All the
while that he dwelt at Jerusalem and Antioch. 2. And then if Rome were burnt,
or the Bishop of it ceased, the Church were no Church.

Sir, our true question is, Whether a traiterous Usurper of Universal
Sovereignty, received by a third part of the Church, and refused by all the
rest, be essential to the Church? Not as whether the heart or head, but a Scab
or Cancer, be essential to the body?

After some vain repetitions, page 82. he repeateth the sum of his fraudulent
Argument, which he calls [The force of his Discourse] viz, [No Congregation of
Christians has been perpetually Sect. 5.
visible, but that which acknowledges the Popes Supremacy: Ergo, No
Congregation of Christians is Christ's true Church save that.]

Ans. I will therefore repeat the sum of my Answer: viz. The word
[Congregation] is ambiguous: 1. Either it means a company met together. 2. Or
a number of such Congregations owning one Superior, being part of the
Universal Church. 3. Or the Universal Church it self.

Accordingly I answer, 1. That in the first sense a Congregation is called the
same, either because the same men live, or because the survivors dwell in the
same place, or because they are of the same profession. In the two first
respects, it is not necessary that any Congregation continue the same; for men
dye, and places may be conquered or ruined. In the third sense, All true
Christian Congregations in the world are of one and the same species (as
Christian) from the beginning to this day.

II. In the second sense of the word [Congregation] I answer like as to the
former: The men dye; the places are mutable: but as to the common Christian
Profession, they are the same that they have been: but as to the extent of
Diocesses, neither you nor we can deny but that they have altered: Scotus,
Petavius, and Doctor Hammond, who hold that Bishops without Presbyters were
first settled, must hold that a Church then was but one Assembly, or no more
than one Bishop could speak to. But de facto all agree that it was not long
before they widened by degrees. And in this sense the Churches of Abassia,
Armenia, Jerusalem, Alexandria, etc. are visible and have been from their
beginning, and some of them before Rome was. The Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna,
Thessalonica, etc. are and have been such. And some Churches are visible which
do not acknowledge the Popes Sovereignty, that sometimes did, viz. The Church
of Britain in England and Scotland at first owned it not, and after did receive
it, and after that cast it off again; but it is visible and has been from its
beginnings. The Churches of Denmark, Sweden, Transylvania, and diverse Countries
of Germany (were not Churches from the beginning of the Christian Church, nor
was Rome it self so, but) ever since their beginnings they have been visible,
sometimes obeying the Pope, and sometimes rejecting him: the Abassines and
several other Extra-imperial Churches, never obeyed him: The most of the
Churches of the Empire (the Eastern and African) sometimes obeyed him as the
chief in the Empire by the Laws of the Empire, amd sometimes they cast him off
when the Eastern Empire cast him off: but they never obeyed him as the
Sovereign Bishop of the whole World.

III. In the third sense of the word [Congregation] as it signifies the
Universal Church, I confess that I can show you no Universal Church now visible
rejecting the Pope; for the Universal leaves out no part, though a corrupt
part; and while Papists own him I cannot say that the Universal Church
disowneth him; but I can prove, 1. That the Primitive Universal Church never
owned any Universal Head or Governor but Christ and his twelve Apostles, whose
indefinite charge may be called Universal. 2. That the Universal Church never
owned the Roman Universal Sovereignty. 3. That the far greatest part of the
Church does not own it at this day; and therefore if the whole may be
denominated from the major part we may say, that now the Universal Church
disowneth him.

And now Reader answer these like Sophisms and you have answered this man of
Art.

1. No Congregation of Christians has been perpetually visible, but that which
acknowledges the Patriarchs in the Empire, (at least heretofore;) Ergo no
other is the true Church of Christ. Answ. 1. But another is part, and the best
part of the Church of Christ. 2. And none that does, or ever did acknowledge
those Patriarchs, was the whole Church. 3. And none of the Church acknowledged
them at first, before they were erected.

So, 2. Inst. [No Congregation of Christians has been perpetually visible, but
that which condemns the Monothelites, the Nestorians, the Eutychians, the
Audians, the Luciferians, the Quartodecimani, etc. Ergo no other is the true
Church.

Answ. 1. Part of the Church condemn them, and part never heard of them: And
before they rose, none of the Church condemned them.

So, another Instance is, [No Congregation of Christians has been perpetually
visible, but that which Administreth the Eucharist only in one kind (without
the Cup) and which uses public Prayers in an unknown Tongue; and which
forbids the reading the Scripture translated without special License, etc.
Ergo no other is the true Church.

Answ. 1. Only a corrupt part now does these; The most discover it, and none
were guilty of it in many Generations, Does there need any other Answer to such
palpable Sophismes? His Argument plainly should run thus; [No Congregation of
Christians has been perpetually visible, but that which now owneth the
Traiterous Usurpation of the Pope, and the Council of Trent, and of Lateran;
and part of whose Religion is for exterminating, or burning all that will not
renounce all belief of Humane Senses, in believing Transubstantiation; and for
casting out Princes that execute not this, and absolving Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance to them; and which has corrupted the Doctrine, Worship,
and Government of Christ; Ergo no other is the true Church.]

Answ. A diseased part of the Church only is guilty of this now; and the whole
Church was far from it heretofore.

But page 83. he tells me that he means neither one present Assembly, nor
yet one as united in one visible Humane Head; but abstracting from that also,
be it but truly and properly one: Sect. 6.
whencesoever the Unity is drawn, it is all alike to the solution of the
Argument.]

Answ. Then sure our business is in a hopeful way, if not as good as ended.
Remember this and fly not from it: Our Unity is in Christ our Head: One King
makes us one Kingdom: All Christians are one Body of Christ. Yea, moreover we
are one in all the seven Points of Unity required by the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4.
viz. We have, 1. One Body, (of Christ, not of the Pope.) 2. One Spirit. 3. One
hope of our Calling, (viz. Eternal Glory.) 4, One Lord, (without a
Vice-Christ.) 5. One Faith, (summarily in the Creed, and integrally in the Holy
Scriptures) 6. One Baptism, (or solemnised Baptismal Covenant.) 7. One God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all: Yea, as to the
Integrals, though our Grace has various degrees, we all receive the inspired
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, Authority and Doctrine; and the ordinary
Pastors and Teachers that are sent by the Holy Ghost, and called by the way
which God has appointed; (though we receive not an Usurper that makes himself
the Governor of the whole World in Title, while he Governs not the tenth
part of it, nor any according to God's Law; and who is often obtruded by Whores
and Murders, and is a wicked Slave of Satan, so judged by his own General
Councils.)

We acknowledge that there are among us different Opinions; but neither for
Kind or Number comparable to the differences of the Papal Sectaries among
themselves. Not for Kind, such as about Murder, Adultery, Perjury, Lying,
False-witness; yea, about the Love of God it self are by the Iansenists charged
on the Jesuits, and proved out of their express words: Nor such as Mr. Clarkson
has collected from the express words of their most famous Doctors of all
Parties: Nor such about King-killing, dissolving Subjects Oaths, etc. as H.
Fowlis has gathered from the express words of your greatest Doctors, And for
Number, all the Sects in the World (of Christians) set together, have not half
the Controversies and contentious Writings against each other, as your
Schoolmen and other Writers of your Church have.

For our parts, we look not that our Union should be perfect, till our wisdom,
and holiness, and patience, and we our selves be perfect. They that know but in
part, will err in part, and differ in part. We believe that [there are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and differences of Administrations,
but the same Lord; and diversity of Operations, but the same God, who works
all in all. For as the Bedy is one, and has many Members; and all the Members
of that one Body, being many, are one Body; so also is Christ: For by one
Spirit we are Baptized into one Body, and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. Thus are we the Body of Christ, (not of the Pope,) and Members in
particular: And God has set some in (this Body) the Church, first Apostles,
(not first a Vice-Christ,) secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers; (but no
Universal Vicar-Head.) All these are Members, and should so live in love that
there be no Schism in the Body.

But page 84. the Man is not satisfied, though I name them, what I mean by
[These Churches united in one Christ.] Sect. 7.


Answ. How should I make a Man know that is unwilling? or how but by naming
them by their Country and Profession? I mean, All the Christians of Abassia,
Armenia, Egypt, Syria, the Georgians, the Iacobites; those falsely called by you
Nestorians, and Eutychians, the Africans, Greeks, Muscovites, the Britains,
Seots, Swedes, Danes, Belgians, Saxons, Helvetians, the rest of the Germans,
Transilvanians, Hungarians, French, etc. which now disown the Papacy; who were
some Countries never under the Pope, some Countries at first under him, and
after rejected him; and some at first from under his Government, next under
him, and after repented; and all of them have been Christians from their first
conversion to this day. Can I speak plainer?

But Number. 42. he grants that All that are true Christians are one Kingdom, or
Church of Sect. 8.
Christ; but denies that these are true Christians. And page 84. He would seem
to give some reason for his denial, saying, [I deny it, if they were
independent on the Bishop of Rome.]

Answ. 1. Even now he abstracted from this: But now they are no Christians,
unless they be Dependendents on the Pope. Such a Denial is an easy Task, and
the sum of all their Writings. But what need there then so many Ambages and
large Volumes, to bring out such a short and crude Assertion? Could you not
have said this without all the rest, [He is no Christian that depends not on
the Pope.] But is it not incumbent on you to prove it? Undoubtedly it is. 1. In
foro Scholastico, as an Affirmer. 2. In foro civili and Ecclesiastico, as an
Accuser. And till you have proved it, what need they, or I care for your words?
Must all Men pass for no Christian, that a Priest or Jesuit will say are none?
Or am I, and all Men, disobliged from loving all those as Christians, whom such
as you will affirm to be no Christians? Love is easily destroyed, if this much
will do it: But it costeth more than so to cause it.

Page 85. He adds, [Let them have been as visible as you please, that is
nothing to me; so were the Arrians, Sabellians, Montanists, etc. Prove they
were no more than one visible Congregation Sect. 9.
of Christians among themselves, and with* Orthodox Christians: that is the
present Controversy.]

Answ. I hope we shall find out the Controversy at last; though it seems as
hard almost as to resolve it: How often must I repeat the same Proof? Again my
Proof is this, [Those that are baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and hold all essential to Christianity; not apostatizing from the
whole, or any essential part, are true Christians: But such are they before
mentioned.]

1. That they are Baptized is not denied; and Baptizing is Christening; and
supposes the profession of all that is essential to Christianity; or else it
could not make them Christians. 2. No man that professes himself a Christian
must be taken to be no Christian, till he be convict by lawful proof; because
as sincerity or heart-consent to the Covenant of Grace is our Christianity as
invisible before God, so Baptism and professed consent to that Covenant is our
visible Christianity before men; every man being the Expositor of his own
belief and resolution: but that these Churches have Apostat^zed from the whole
or any essential part of Christianity, is unproved, and therefore not to be
supposed: As every particular man is to be taken for a Christian who is
baptized and professes it, till his profession be disproved, so much more
whole Countries and Churches that profess Christianity, must not be supposed
without proof to be no Christians. If a Papist will say to all the men in the
City, prove that you are no Thieves, no Adulterers, no Murderers, no Liars, no
Traitors, or else I will take you for such. I think they may more justly say,
prove that we are such, or else we will take you for a standerer.

And that they are of one Church I prove; [All Christians are one Church, but
those are Christians; therefore of one Church.

The major is certain, [They that are the Members and Subjects of one Christ,
are of one Church. All Christians are the Members and Subjects of one Christ,
therefore they are of one Church.]

All that have the seven terms of Union before mentioned out of Ephesians. 4. are of
one Church; but such are these before named.

Here remember, 1. That I plead not for the Christianity of any that are proved
to deny indeed any one essential point of Christianity; but I will not believe
this man, that every thing instituted by Christ (and so every word in the
Bible) is such an essential; nor that our Church or Religion is so strange a
thing as to have no perpetual, integral parts nor accidents; but what will not
some men have a Face to defend? 2. That this same man has already maintained
that no man is bound to be subject to the Pope to whom he is not sufficiently
propounded; and that he confesses, that it is not yet agreed among them that
any more is necessary to Salvation to be explicitly believed, than that there
is a God, and reward for good works: And yet two or three parts of the
Christian World must be no Christians, nor Members of the Church of Christ,
because they are not Members of the Pope.

And let it be still remembered to acquit the Eastern and Southern Churches from
the Papists charge of Heresy, (as being Nestorians and Eutychians,) 1. That
the Accusers are to be taken for Calumniators, till they prove it, by all the
rules of common Justice.

2. That if they could prove Dioscorus e. g. an Eutychian, that is no proof that
all the Bishops that adhered to him were such: for it is apparent by the Acts of
the Councils that Multitudes adhered to him because they thought him no
Eutychian: [and Derodon de supposit^ has undeniably proved, that Dioscorus
said but what his Predecessor Cyril has often said, whom you approved.] and many
because they thought the Judgment unjust that judged him so, and cast him out,
and many for the honor of the Seat, yea many for fear of death by the people
that were affected to him as their Patriarch, though they understood not the
cause in question. He that reads the Bishops at the Council of Calcedon, part
crying out prostrate on the Earth, miseremini, miseremini, non dissentimus;
else, kill us here, we dare not go home, if we desert and rail against our
Patriarch before another be chosen, the people will kill us; and another part
of them confessing that fear made them subscribe at the Council at Ephesians. 2.
and some crying out, Away with them they are Heretics, who cried non
dissentimus; may well judge that all were not Heretics that clamor called so.
3. If they could prove those few Bishops that were openly accused and noted to
be Eutychians, that is no proof that the rest were so. 4. If they could prove
that many then were so, that will not prove that those that now there inhabit
are so. 5. And of Nestorianism there is less public show of proof. 6. And
indeed the main Body of the Common People, yea and Clergy, it is most probable
never understood the Controversies. 7. Yea he that with judgment reads the
Acts, History, and Debates of those times, may well doubt whether Nestorius,
Eutyches, or Dioscorus understood them themselves: and whether the Heresy lay
not mostly in an unskilfulness of interpreting of words and expressions.
Dioscorus solemnly professed that he held neither division of Natures, nor
confusion of them, nor transmutation, and that antecedent to their Union they
were two: These are unskilful expressions: But one would think that he that
held that Union did neither change nor confound them, must needs mean that they
were distinct though not divided: and the Orthodox denied division as well as
he. And if men had in those Councils but distin guished the senses of the word
[Union] or [One] half as exactly as all Metaphysics and Schoolmen use to do,
it is a great doubt whether it would not have reconciled both Eutyches and
Nestorius to the Orthodox, it being most undeniable that there is a sense of
the word in which Christ's Natures may be said to be One, and a sense in which
they cannot be so said: A sense in which he had two Wills, and a sense in which
he had ^ut one: A sense of the word [person] in which it might be said to have
had two persons, and a sense in which it could not be so said: And he that
reads how Hierom was a while Hereticated for refusing the word hypostasis,
and what Controversy was about that word and persona between the Eastern and
Western Bishops, till it was found out by Nazianzene and other peaceable men
that they meant the same thing, may possibly hope that if such men as are
peaceable and skilful in discussing ambiguous terms, and driving unskilful men
to understand others, and speak aptly themselves, had patiently searched the
business to the bottom, they would have found fewer Heretics than were judged
such. And their own Writers have no other Argument to excuse Pope Honorius,
(condemned for a Heretic by a Council as well as Nestorius and Dioscorus) but
that he understood not the words and was misunderstood: And Nestorius (whatever
some say to the contrary) denied Christ to be two persons; These are his words
to Cyrils Papers [In eo (...) laudo quod distinctionem Naturarum secundum
Divinitatis and humanitatis rationem harumque in Una duntax^t persona
proedicas. His Heresy lay in two words, 1. That he said Mary was not to
becalled (...) Deipara, but (...) the Mother of Christ: 2. That he said in the
Synod, He would not say that God was two or three months old; and do not
Cyril's answer to the objections of the oriental Bishops plainly show, that the
aptness of the word Deipara was the Controversy: And he that had but said that
Christus non Qua Deus, sed Qui Deus, and qua Deus Unitus humanitati was born of
Mary, had been like to have reconciled them all.

However, the number so judged was inconsiderable as to all the Christians in
those Countries; and among millions of Christians it is not twenty Bishops
thought guilty that are a proof that the Country or Multitude was so.

8. To conclude, the Papists themselves ordinarily justify them from that
charge, and confess, that the Christians of those Countries are honest harmless
men, that understand not what such Heresies are or detest them; as I have
before showed out of Brochardus that dwelt at Jerusalem, and others. And what
man can tell us that millions of professed Christians are Heretics, that never
declared any such thing themselves. Were it lawful so boldly to censure others,
how much more excusable should we be if we judged the Pope and his Followers
Heretics, who are far more corrupt and erroneous than these whom they accuse,
and deny to be Christians?

But page 86. 87. malignity is so hard put to it for some sorry pretensions
against Christian charity, and for Unchurching the most of the Church of
Christ, that he has nothing to Sect. 11.
say but such stuff as this.

I require the nomination of the determinate Opinions of Societies, as
Hussites, Waldenses, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. not of their persons; and
therefore I say you nominate none, much less prosecute you those with whom you
begun: Now these were Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, Protestants; So that I
speak undeniably of the nomination of Sects and Societies, not of Names and
Sir-names and Genealogies of persons: There were different Sects and
Professions in different Countries, as Armenia, Abassia, etc. I require the
nomination of which of those Sects or Parties you mean in those Times and
Nations, not what were their Names and Sir-names: nor is it sufficient that you
say there were Christians, that is, Christians univocally so called or true
Christians in all Ages, in Armenia, Ethiopia, Egypt etc. who denied the Popes
supremacy; for unless you nominate of what Party, Sect, Opinion, or Profession
they were, how shall any man judge whether they held not some Opinion contrary
to the essentials of Christianity, and by that became no Christians, etc.

Answ. I would not insult over Men in their sin and folly; but I must say that
I reverenee that Wisdom and Justice of God which has made the Evidences of
Christian Truth, and the Rights of his Church, and the Obligations to Love and
Concord so clear; that Learned Malice, trained up in Satan's (...) cannot speak
against it, without such impudencse as this Man here is put to exercise. When
he denied most of the Church to be true Christians, he puts me to prove that
they have been such: I convince him that I am not bound ^o name the Men, and
even the Country it self may prove but a mutable Seat of Religion; but I prove
that Christians that deny the Pope's Supremacy, or are none of his Subjects,
have successively from the beginning inhabited those Countries: And now the Man
is angry that I will not call them by the Names which their malice casts on
them, but only call them Christians of Armenia, Ethiopia, etc. Their factious
Interest taught them to stigmatize better Men with odious Titles, and I must
needs do so too. But, Sir, resume some modesty; if I prove them Christians, do
you prove them unchristned if you can. I prove that they are baptized, and
profess all these Creeds which were the Symbol of Christians for many hundred
years; and they receive the Holy Scriptures: Do you prove that they invalidate
all this Profession, or confess your self a Calumniator. Must I tell you what
By Opinions they all hold, that you may judge whether they are Christians or
not? Cannot you judge by their Baptism, Creeds, and Profession of Christianity,
till you are told their Opinions in controverted things? Why then said you,
that you call not for their Names? How can I tell the Opinions of Men un-named
and unknown, but by their Professions? I know not the Opinions of my Neighbors
at the next Doors; and must I tell you the Opinions of all the People of
foreign Lands. Is this necessary to know a Papist? Cannot I tell you that Men
are Papists that profess subjection to the Pope as the Vice-Christ, unless I
tell you that they are Molinists, or Dominicans, Franciscans, Benedictines,
Jesuits, Jansenists, etc. Their Profession of Christianity is notorious; if you
can prove them no Christians, do. I suppose that one of twenty thousand of them
never studied the Eutychian, or Nestorian Controversies, any more than those
Christians that died before these Names and Men were born; and I suppose that
when these Names came first up, one Pastor of an hundred might side with one of
these Sects, which the Ages following little minded, as to any considerable
number: and I suppose that some that defended Eutyches and Nestorius knew not
what the Heresy was, and erred not so grossly as those Jesuits did about
Murder, Adultery, Perjury, etc. whom Montaltus and the Jesuits Morals describe;
nor your common Doctors cited by Mr. Clarkson; no nor so bad as the Councils of
Rome, Constance and Basil say your Popes have done, nor as others of you say
those Councils did; no nor as the Council at the Laterane, did in decreeing the
Exterminations of all that you call Heretics, and the deposition of Princes
that will not exterminate them, and the disobliging Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance.

But if this arguing of yours be good, suppose it used with your selves: [It is
not enough that you profess your selves Christians and Papists; tell us what
other Opinions you are of, or else how can we know that you are Christians?]
But we are ashamed of such Methods; when the Law of Nations binds all Men,
beyond their Profession, to prove that they are no Traitors, no Thieves,
Fornicators, Liars, etc. then I may yield that Men professing Christianity must
prove further that they are no Heretics, or invalidate not their own
Profession: But yet I will not then grant you, that any are obliged to prove
this but themselves. How can I prove such Negatives of millions in the remote
parts of the Earth? (if they could prove it of themselves) Call them to do it,
if you must have such Negatives proved: But see that you call them one by one;
for my Neighbor's error proves not mine. If I were put to take you and all
the Papists in England for no Christians, unless I could prove you to be no
Sectaries, no Heretics, no Traitors, no Drunkards, Perjured, Fornicators, etc.
How were it possible for me to prove it by any one of you? This is one
difference it seems between the Justice of the Papal Church Government and
Christ's: And perhaps this is the ground of the Racks and Torments of the
Inquisition, to make Men confess what Opinion they are of.

The Answer to W. J's third Chapter.
He begins that which he calls his third Chapter, pap. 88, 89. with again
repeating his Sect. 1.
Question thus; [Were they all united in the profession of one and the same
Faith, and Unity of external Communion; without those two it is impossible to be
united in Christ.]

Answ. I am afraid these Repetitions will tire the Reader, I have proved them
united in one Faith, even the Christian Faith; and in one External Communion in
much more of it than is essential to Christianity, viz. in one Baptism, the
Lord's Supper, prayer, praise, thanksgiving, confession of sins, preaching and
reading the Word of God, observation of the Lord's Day, etc. without differing
in any thing inconsistent with the Unity of the Body of Christ: But if by the
ambiguous word of [Unity of External Communion] you should mean either that
they must meet all in one place, or be all under one Pastor, these you before
disowned: And if you mean that they must all have one Book of Liturgy, you
know that so had not your Roman Church of above 600 years at least, nor yet the
Eastern Churches, nor any considerable number of them; every Bishop making his
Lyturgie, or Prayers, as he saw meet.

If you mean that they must have no differences in any Word, or Ceremony; and
that all are of several Churches, (or half of no Church,) who differ about
Meats, Drinks, Days, etc. I shall not believe you while I believe the
Scripture, (Romans 14. and 15. 1 Cor. 8. Iam. 3. etc.) nor till I renounce
Humanity, or believe that Men of several Complexions, Statures, or Languages,
may not yet be all truly Men! They that bring it to that, that I am no
Christian if I eat not Fish in Lent rather than Flesh, may Unchristian me next
if I eat not my Bread without Cheese, or my Cheese without Bread; or if I take
not the Pope for my Apothecary, or Physician. Lay by the Sword, and Racks, and
Fires, and the World will soon laugh down your arrogant Tyranny.

I demanded his Proof that ever there was a Papist, or almost, one Church of
Papists in the World for 400 years after Christ? And he tells me, that [the
Oration of Pope Celestine 's Sect. 2.
Legates in the Council at Ephesus proves it; and though that Council was
celebrated 430, yet in a moral consideration that passes for 400, etc.]

Answ. What cannot the Jesuits Morals make good? By them 430 years is within
the 400. And by them a Speech of the Pope's Legates goes for proof of the
Judgment of the Council: But what was that Speech it self? First, Note that the
Council was called by Theodosius the Emperor, and not by Celestine, sending
his Literae Augustales to all the Metropolitans, commanding them to appear at
Ephesus. 2. That Cyril, and not Celestine, was sent to at first for help, from
the Church at Constantinople. 3. That Cyril presided: And whereas the Papists
feign that he did it as the Pope's Substitute, the Councils Letters to the
Emperor expresses, that the Pope's three Legates were the Men that represented
his Person, (Bin. p. 756.) And that they commended to Theodosius the Judgment
of the Pope, but as the signification of common consent. 4. And when all is
done, these words of Philip, a Roman Presbyter, is all that this great boast is
of, [Thanking them for so receiving the Pope's Letters,] -- [Non enim ignara
est vestra beatitudo totius fidei caeterorumque omnium Apostolorum caput b^atum
Apostolum Petrum extitisse. And after that Peter, the Foundation and Head, had
the Keys, and lives and judges in his Successors: But he denies not that the
other Apostles also had the Keys, and that the Church was built on the
Foundation of the Apostles: And these high words spoken to keep up the Pope's
greatness in the Empire, were but to maintain his place in Councils; and never
spoken to the Churches without the Empire, nor such Power over them claimed by
him: And the Councils Decrees were past before these Legates came, by whose
consent Cyril was glad to strengthen his Party, having been condemned by Ioh.
Antioch. Nestorius, etc. And does not Hesichius say as much of Andrew, (cited
by me elsewhere?) and many a Protestant that takes Peter to have been among
the Apostles, as the Foreman of a Jury to the rest, would say the same words:
But he intimates that the Pope is Peter's Successor. True, he so supposed him
as a Bishop, but not as an Apostle, and therefore not in equality of Power: And
common reas^n will interpret him in the common sense of all the Councils and
those times, viz. as having the first place in the Imperial Councils, and being
the chief of the Patriarchs in the Empire; but not as being the Bishop of all
the World. There is no probability that this one Man extended his Power further
than the Empire, and so that he was a Papist; and yet you have not proved one
in 400 years and more.

But he says, had not the Council of Ephesus consented, they would have
contradicted one imposing a Superior and a Judge.

Answ. 1. They never took him for a Judge, any further than as the first
Patriarch had the first Seat and Vote. 2. Cyril was there the first; the
Legates coming after the Decrees past. 3. Cyril was glad of the consent of the
West, it being become too much of the cause of the day; Whether Nestorius or he
was the wiser Speaker, and should prevail. 4. What Is this to the Government of
all the World? Show us when that Council subjected any without the Empire, to
the Pope, or to themselves. 5. Yea in the Empire, he is blind that sees not
that Councils were above Popes; and when the major Vote carried it, they
condemned Popes as well as others, (as they did Honorius, and many since.)

Page 90. You have another Instance of his, saying and unsaying. When I named
the Sect. 3.
Churches of Ethiopia, India, the outer Armenia, etc. that were not under the
Popes jurisdiction, he faith, I must mean that they were never under it; for if
they were under him in any Age, and for any time since Christ, you can never
make them an instance of those who were perpetually in all Ages a visible
Congregation of Christians not acknowledging the Popes Supremacy.

Ans. And yet this same man said before, that he did not put me to prove that
in all Ages they did not own the Pope, but that they that own him not now had
been a Church any other way truly united: who can answer him that says and
unsaith, and changes his Cause as the occasion tempts him? I have often told
him, 1. I prove that the extra-imperial Churches never were subject to the
Pope, unless when any of them by conquest fell under the Empire, or on such an
odd accident in some singular instance which I have enumerated in my Naked
Popery. 2. And that no Church in the whole World owned him as the Bishop of all
the World for above 400, if not above 600 years. 3. And that those that owned
him not (as Britain) at the first, and owned him after and disowned him again,
were still Christian Churches united in Christ.

But the man is loath to understand, and page 91. says [You mean all other
extra-imperial Nations or some: If all I find the quite contrary; for the
Goths, successively Inhabitants of Spain, never acknowledged themselves
Subjects of the Empire, who yet are now subject to the Roman Bishop, and
consequently were and are sometime under him.

Ans. I have often and plain enough told you my meaning: This is very cautelously
written: 1. If the Goths in Spain were not subject to the Empire, the old
Inhabitants were before the Goths conquered them, and the Goths themselves,
when by Theodosius's leave they dwelt in Thrace and near it. And though the
Goths became their Masters, they did not exterminate all the Inhabitants, who
had been used to some subjection to the Pope. 2. Yet how little Spain then
depended on the Pope is known even by the current of all the Gothic Councils,
the Toletane, Hispalense, etc. where their Kings called them, and were often
present, and made certain parts of their Canons, and were over and over
magnified, and Canons made for their honor and security, and the due election
of Successors, when there was not a word of subjection to the Pope. 3. And you
do well in affirming no more but that Spain is now and therefore sometime under
the Pope; that they are now so indeed, their Inquisition witnesses, nor was it
ever in my thoughts to deny it. But what of that?

(...) He adds, [And the Swedes and Danes, though now they reject all
obedience to him, yet in the year 1500 they acknowledged him, etc.]

Ans. Very true; and what of all this! no doubt but long before 1500 the Pope
got possession of the Western Churches; we doubt not of it.

But he tells me that to maintain my Cause, I must show that all the
extra-imperial Churches were from under the Pope.

Ans. My Caus^ is not of your stating but my own. I maintain, 1. That the Pope
was never made the Bishop of all the World. 2. And that the Primacy so much
mentioned in the ancient Canons was only over, or in the Imperial Churches, and
was a humane institution; and that the Councils and Emperors never pretended
to give or acknowledge any more. Nor did the Councils themselves, and all the
Patriarchs, pretend to any more, nor dream of Governing all the World. 3. That
the Churches that were from the beginning without the Empire, were none of them
subject to the Pope for above 400 if not 500 or 600 years. 4. That the Empire
of Abassia, and all the Eastern and Southern extra-imperial Churches (Persia,
India, etc.) were never under the Pope to this day, save that the Portug^ls and
Spaniards have lately got some Footing in part of the Indies. 5. That the whole
Greek Church, the Armenians, Georgians, Syrians, Egyptians, etc. never were
under the Pope as Pope, that is, as the Universal Bishop of all the World, but
only as the primate of the Empire. 6. That even in that relation he was not
properly the Governor of any of the Diocesses of the other Patriarchs, nor the
other distinct as Diocesses (Carthage, Iustinian^, etc.) but the prime
Patriarch that had the first Seat in Councils, which put in and out Bishops at
their pleasure (with the Emperors will) even Patriarchs and all. 7. That those
that were under him for some time (as Britain) were diverse of them from under
him before and after.

And yet that the Reader may not mis-understand the matter and this man's
importunity, I must repeat the exceptions laid down in my Naked Popery page
106. 107. and tell him what I grant him.

1. Some Cities that were near to Scythia and Persi^* had Bishops to whom some
Neighbor Scythians and Persians might be voluntary Subjects.

2. Some Cities and Countries were sometime under the Roman Power, and
sometimes under the Enemies: (Persians, Parthians, Armenians, Goths, Vandales,
(as Africa, etc.) when they were of the Empire their Bishops came to Councils;
and when they were under Heathen or Arrian Princes they took it for their
calamity, and were glad of any Communion with the Imperial Churches, and the
Honor and countenance of their Relation; and it is like would come among them
if they could.

3. Some Bishops that lived in Heathen or persecuted Countries, in distress
were glad to seek Countenance and help from the Roman power; as the Britains
did from France, and a Basil and the Eastern Bishops did from the West in
Valens his persecution, while yet they took them not for Governors. And some
weak Princes that lived near the Roman Empire were glad of their Friendship and
afraid of their Enmity, and were willing to hold a communion with them in
Religion, in which their Clergy should have some dependence on Rome, which was
the case of the Saxons in and after Gregory the first's days.

4. Some Western Countries that were converted from infidelity by some
Preachers subject to the Pope became themselves subjects to that Seat as their
Converters, and in obedience to them that first prevailed with them, which was
partly the case of the Saxons, and of some Countries of Germany, and Sweden,
Denmark, Poland, etc.

5. Lastly, when the Eastern Empire and Churches forsook the Church of Rome,
the Pope received a great diminution in the extent of his Primacy (the East
that forsook him being about twice as big as those that remained under him) but
withal a great Intensive increase of his power; for shortly after he claimed
the Government of all the World as Universal Bishop, not only of the Empire,
but the Earth. And after that many that were his Subjects owned him in that
relation: And since then, I deny not but that many Princes, without the Empire,
have been his Subjects: yea he purposely broke Germany and Italy into many
small Principalities, and free Cities, that they might not be strong enough to
resist his claim.

If all these Concessions will do them any good, let them make their best of
them. I must entreat the Reader to remember hence-forward what is our
difference, and not to expect that I repeat this over and over again when his
words invite me to it.

Page 91. he says [The Indians were not always extra-imperial, for in the year
163. they Sect. 6.
subjected themselves to Antonius Pius. And so the Armenians 572. being
greivously persecuted for the Christian Faith by the Persians, they rendered
themselves Subjects to the Roman Empire. And 1145 they and the Indian
Christians subjected themselves to the Pope, and again 1439, and so remain at
the present.]

Ans. 1. This makes against you rather than for you: If your Kingdom extended
not so far as the Empire. But indeed these are impertinent words. As it was but
a small part of the Indies that ever was under the Heathen Romans, so it is not
their Empire that I speak of, but the Christians: for before Consta^ine's day,
the Patriarchs made no pretense to govern all within the Empire, much less all
without. Pighius tells you, That General Councils were the device of
Constantine. I would you had told us, 1. What Indian or Armenian Bishops were
at any General Council before Constantine's days, and where that Council was
and when? 2. And what Indian, or Armenian, or Persian Bishops were imposed or
deposed by the Pope of Rome? This undertaking would have tried your strength:
but you were wiser.

7. And it was but the nearer Armenia that you say yielded to the Roman
Emperor; and I confess that the part that was under hi^ had Bishops at some
few Councils, and are not the men of whom I speak; though even they were soon
separated from Rome, and were no longer under the Roman Papacy.

3. But your Fable of the Armenians and Indians subjecting themselves to the
Pope, and so remaining to this day, may be meet to abuse Women with, that know
not your Cheats by a tale of a counterfeit Patriarch; but neither Merchants,
nor any acquainted with History that know the World, will believe you, any more
than that the Greeks are your Subjects, who at Flor^ce, compelled by necessity,
made far more show of it than ever the other did. In sum, I heartily wish that
all the World were as much the Popes Subjects as the Armenians and Abassines
are, on condition that none were any more your Subjects.

And whereas you say, page 92. No one of th^se has been in all Ages a visible
Congregation besides that of Rome. 1. A repeated contempt is answer enough to a
repeated false Historical Assertion. 2. Again, I tell you, that is no question;
but whether those that now are none of your Subjects were in all Ages
Christians. 3. You have not yet proved that there was one Papist in the World
for 400 years.

You add, [For each of them at one time or other became the same Congregation
to that, by subjecting and conforming themselves to the Bishop of Rome.

Ans. As true as the Turk is subject to you: If some little of the Indian, were
subject to a Heathen Antonius, does that prove that they and all the Christians
there were subject to Constantine, or to the Pope, when they revolted? And when
was Ethiopia and Persia subject to you? And why do you not blush to say that
the. Armenians are now subject to you? You are like to be good Deliverers of
Traditions to us, and Infallible Decreers, and Deciders of Controversies, that
stick not at such notorious fictions? If you had said that England, Scotland,
Sweden, Denmark, are your Subjects, the falsehood had some more pretense,
because you have some among them all.

I next noted, That these Churches profess it to be their Tradition that the
Pope was never their Sect. 7.
Governor. This he denies and calls for proof.

Ans. I give you proof. 1. See the words of your own Writers, e. g. Godignu^ de
rebu^ Aba^inorum reciting the conference of the Emperors Mother and the
Jesuit, wherein she professes it, and the answer of the Jesuit confessing
it, and Godignus confirming it, that they were Christians from the time of the
Eunuch Act. 8. or St. Matthew, and the Pope had nothing to do with them. 2.
When the same Countries do at once profess these two things. 1. That in
Religion they follow the Tradition of their Fathers from the Apostles. 2. And
that the Pope is none of their Governor: set these two together and you must
conclude that they suppose their Tradition to be against the Papacy, or that
they are Sots; and that these two are their Principles, all the Historical
notice that we have of those Countries by Travelers, Merchants, and Writers,
Papists, Greeks, and Protestants assure us; deny it as impudently as you will,
I will not tire the Reader with needless History.

I next added, that [No History or Authority of the least regard is brought by
your own Sect. 8.
Writers to prove these under the Pope.]

He replyeth, Yes, those that say, All were under him.

Ans. That is none but Pope Leo himself and a few of the Empire, who speak of
no All, but the Orbis Romanus, the whole Empire.

I added [ No credible witnesses mention your Acts of Jurisdiction over them,
or their Sect. 9.
Acts of Subjection; which Church History must needs have contained, if it had
been true that they were your Subjects.

He replyeth, [ Is not Genebrard a Witness that Pope Eugenius wrote to the
Emperor of Ethiopia 1437 to send Legates to the Council of Ferrara as the
Greek Emperor had decreed to do, to whose Letters and Legates David their
Emperor sent a respectful answer, and accordingly sent some of his Church to
that Council, as appears by the Acts of the Council, and that 1524 the said
David and Helena his Empress promised obedience to the Bishop of Rome Pope
Clem. 7.]

Ans. I had rather you had called Father Parsons, or Campion, or Garnet, your
credible Witness than Genebrard, a late railing Falsifier. Such Tales as these
be meet for the Ears of none but such as would believe you if you swore that
all the Jews and Turks are Christians. Do you think that your obtruding such
abominable Forgeries, commonly known by the Learned to be such, and confessed
by your own Writers, will not increase our alienation from you? Did you ever
read the subscriptions of that Council when you say that the Acts declare that
some of the Ethiopian Church were there? Why did you not name them? Do we not
know how long a Journey it is to Abassia, and how much more time the Pope must
have had to have sent a message to the Emperor there and received an answer,
than the sudden calling of the Council at Ferrar^ (to break another that had
deposed the Pope as a (...) and wicked man) could consist with? and that
Council sitting a while at Ferrara, removed (by the plague) to Florence, was
wholly taken up with the Greek^, and no mention of any Abassian there: We have
(by Dr. Creightons Edition) a better History of that Council than Binni^, etc.
gives us; but nothing of this. Indeed Binnius reports the now known Fable of an
Armenian coming too late after the subscriptions: but we have often enough heard
of your scenical Patriarchs and Bishops and feigned Nuncios: You can make a
Patriarcch or Bishop of any part of the World at Rome when you will, and then
say that those Churches have submitted to you. These Forgeries are part of your
foundation, as Dr. Willet has showed in his Trerastylo^s Papismi. Why have you
no Bishops no Regiment in Abassia and Armenia? Had it been true that David and
Helena had promised obedience to the Pope, (as Johan. Paleologus, the Greek
Emperor partly did, and forced some of his Bishops to do in his necessity,
hoping for help to have kept out the Turk, till they were come home, and then
renounced the Act;) What had that been to the Question? One Man and Woman is
not the Church; but he that will read but your own Godignus, will see the utter
falsehood of your pretenses to any thing in Abassia.

Next he names, besides Genebrard, six others, (Platina, Nauclerus, etc.) that
he says besides Sect. 10.
the Acts of the Florentine Council, that say that the Armenians and Indians
acknowledge the Sovereignty of the Roman Bishop through the Whole World.

Answ. 1. Though he names but his own late Partners, yet he cites not a word,
page, or book of any one of them. If any one of them have so gross a Fiction,
it is no more honor to them than to himself: But the Council of Florence, (in
whose Acts I should as soon look to find a Fiction as in any, being a packt
Anti-Council of a villainous deposed Pope,) has no such word in any of my
Books, but only that which I cited of a forged too late coming of an Armenian.
And even their own Fiction talks not of his (much less the Indians)
acknowledgment of the Pope's Sovereignty over the whole World.

He next adds, [And as to more ancient times gives not the Arabic
Translation of the first Sect. 11.
Council of Nice a clear Witness, that the Ethiopians were to be under the
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Alexandria, and he under that of Rome?]

Answ. I do not wonder that you use to lead the ignorant in your Disputes into
a Wilderness, or Wood of History, under the Name of Antiquity and Tradition,
when you know your own Refuges. Reader, the famous Council of Nice has been
predicated, and appealed to, and gloried in by almost all Parties save the
Arrians, for many hundred years after it was celebrated; and the Affrican
Bishops (of whom Austin was one) had a long Contest with diverse Popes (for
about twenty years) about the true Copy of the Canons: And now the other day
comes one Alph. Pisanus, and tells us that he has found a Copy of them in
Arabic; and this tells you of the Ethiopians being under Alexandria, by Canon,
and forty things more that were not in the Canons which the Church had for
above a thousand years: and this is very good Authority with a Papist. And so
they can yet determine what shall be in any ancient Council, or Father; as if
they had the doing of all themselves. It is but saying, we have found an old
Paper that says so. Why then do you not receive Eutychius Alexandrinus's
Reports of that Council, (published by Seldom,) which tells us other improbable
things of it, but has far more appearance of Antiquity than your newfound
Canons?

Next I noted that [Their absence from General Councils, and no invitation of
them thereto, (that was ever proved,) is sufficient Evidence.] Sect. 12.


To this he says, [I intend to make a particular Tract to prove this, and to
evidence the falsity of your Allegation, from undeniable Testimonies of classic
Authors, and from the ancient Subscriptions of the Councils themselves.]

Answ. A fine put-off; I do not believe you dare attempt it, for fear of
awakening the World to the consideration of this notorious Evidence against
you: It is now above sixteen years since our writing, and yet I hear not of
your Book. But the Reader need not stay for it; let him but peruse the
Subscriptions in your own Volumes of the Councils, Crab, Surius, Binius,
Nicolinus, and judge whether all the Christian World without the Empire were
ever summoned to General Councils, were present at them, or judged by them; any
Bishops put in, or out by them; and judge as you see proof.

Next I noted that [Their ancient Lyturgies have no Footsteps of any subjection
to the Pope, though the Papists have corrupted them; which in a Digression I
showed out of Usher de succes. Sect. 13.
Eccles. in that instead of Hic panis est Corpus meum in the Ethiopick Canon
Universalis, they have put Hoc est corpus meum.]

To this he replyeth, page 96. No more does the Roman Missal, nor that of
France, o Spain witness their subjection to the Pope.

Answ. That Is strange that you have suffered so much of the old form unchanged.
Gregory that denied the Title of Universal Bishop was the chief Author, and the
claim of the Monarchy of all the Earth was then but in the Egg, (even after 600
years,) and came not into the open World till about the time that Mahomet came;
else undoubtedly your Lyturgick Commemorations and Prayers would have had some
mention of the Universal Bishop, as well as our Prayers mention the King and
Bishops; (especially when it was then the Custom to record and commemorate all
the Patriarchs, and greatest Prelates;) and the Imposition would have come
forth as by his Authority, as the Trent symbolical Oath does; and as our
Lyturgie does by Authority of the King, and Parliament, and Convocation. Surely
this is much against you.

Because he knew not the Scholiastes mentioned by Usher, he questioneth his
Citations about the change of the Ethiopick Lyturgie.

I next added that [Constantin's Letters of Request to the King of Persia for
the Churches there, (mentioned by Eusebius in Vit. Constable.) do intimate that
then the Roman Bishop Ruled not Sect. 4.
there.]

To this he says, [Why so? The Pope might command, and the Emperor entreat.]

Answ. 1. This shows that the Emperors who used to call Councils, called
none out of Persia; for they had no Power there. 2. And withal, Why is there
not a Syllable in any Church History, or credible Author, (that we have heard
of,) that mentions that ever the Pope sent one Command into Persia; or that
ever he corrected, suspended, or deposed any Bishop there, or excommunicated
any there; (though indeed that had been no sign of Governing Power, seeing an
equal may renounce Communion with an equal Heretical Society, or Person.) Why
is there no mention that ever any General Council did any of this? No, nor ever
took any such exterior Churches into their care, any otherwise than as
Neighbors to help them; nor never made any one Governing Canon for them? And I
pray you, How would the Persian King that must be entreated by Constantine,
have taken it to have the Religion of his Kingdom under the Command of one of
Constantine's Subjects? But you have the affirmative, let us see your proof
that ever the Pope Governed the Persian Churches.

Next I noted that [Even at home here the Scots and Britains obeyed not the
Pope, even in the days of Gregory, (above 600) but resisted his changes, and
refused Communion with his Ministers.]

To this he replyeth, [That, 1. This was their error, as our disobedience now
is; and Beda so charge it on them, that it follows not that they had never
been under the Pope. 2. That they also held that which was condemned as a
Heresy, at Nice; yet it follows not that they were not under that Council's
Authority. 3. They also refused Communion with the English Converts.]

Answ. These words signify what you would have us believe; but let us try what
more: 1. Seeing you can bring no word of proof that ever they had been subject
to the Pope before: And, 2. Seeing they were found utterly Aliens to his
subjection: And, 3. Seeing they were found in possession of Opinions, and
Customs quite contrary to the Pope's: 4. And seeing they pleaded Tradition for
this: 5. And seeing they renounced Communion with those that came to subjugate
them: And, 6. Seeing the Pope's Ministers never pretended to any ancient
possession in pleading with them, (as you may see in Beda:) 7. And seeing we
read in Beda, Gildas, and others, that they had heretofore made use of the
assistance of the French Church (by Germanus and Lupus) as more Neighbors,
without any mention of subjection to Rome: Let the Reader that cares what he
believes, now judge whether ever the Scots and Britains were before subject ^o
the Pope.

2. It is false that the Council of Nice condemned their Easter-practice as a
Heresy, though they united on a contrary resolution. And as it is certain that
that Council had no authority out of the Empire, and so not over Britain when
it was out of the Empire; so this British Custom plainly intimates that
Britain had not received the decrees of that Council.

3. That they refused the Communion of the English as half- Papists, it is no
great wonder: And yet I remember no proof of that at all in Beda, but only that
taking the English for Pagan-Tyrants that conquered and oppressed them, they
refused to join with Augustine the Monki in preaching to them: It Is like taking
it for a hopeless attempt in them that were odious to them, and open Enemies,
and not to be trusted.

Next I recite the words of their Reinerius Cont. Waidens. Catal. Bibl. Pat.
To. 4. p. 773. Sect. 16.
[ The Churches of the A^enians, Ethiopians, and Indians, and the rest which
the Apostles, converted are not under the Church of Rome: One would think,
plain words.]

He replyeth, [ No more are you; what then; our question is not of what is done
de facto for the ^present, but what de jure ought to be done, or has been
done: The Author says not, These Nations were never under the Church of Rome,
but are not now.]

Aus. It Is no wonder that you desire to be the expositors of the Scriptures
(and all other Books;) for that is the only device to make them speak what you
would have them. If Gregory the Seventh be the Expositor of St. Paul, no doubt
but St. Paul shall be for the power of Popes to depose Kings and Emperors: If
Innocent the Third be his Expositor, no doubt but by [Bread] 1 Cor. 11. he
means [no Bread] and by [this Cup] [no Wine.] And I confess there is greater
reason that you should be the infallible Expositors of Reynerius than of Christ
or Paul; for he was more your own and under your Government. But this Reynerius
was an unhappy speaker, and if he were here I would ask him, 1. Why do you
speak in such a manner as any ordinary Reader would think that you speak de
jure and de facto, and yet mean de facto only? 2. Why speak you so as an
ordinary Reader would think that you spoke d^ statu statuto, when you mean but
de praeente and statu inordinato? 3. Why speak you of so great a sin as
Rebellion against the Vice-Christ, and Schism from the Universal Church,
without any note of reprehension? 4. Why name you the old extra imperial
Churches only, and not those that since renounced Rome, (as all the Greek
Church,) if you meant but what you charge the Greek Church with? Had you not
more easily fastened a charge of Rebellion on all those Eustern Churches that
sometimes acknowledged some primacy of Rome, than on those that the World
knows were never under him? 5. And why do you say also in general, [and the
rest which the Apostles converted are not under the Church of Rome,] if there
were not some special reason for it? We took your meaning to be [Though those
in the Empire, and many without it that were turned from Infidelity by the
Popes Subjects, be under the Church of Rome, the first by the Laws of the
Empire and Councils, and the latter by voluntary subjection; yet so are not the
Churches which the rest of the Apostles planted without the Empire, a^ those
Apostles were not subject to St. Peter.] 6. And why do you so arrogantly accuse
such vast Churches as Arm^nia, Ethiopia, India, and all the rest of the
Apostles planted, (besides Peter and Paul) and take them all for Rebels and
Schismatics, and yet bring no word of proof for your Accusations? But the
truth is Reynerius (though he revolted from the (...) of his times) was an
honester man than the Pope that shall thus be his Expositor; and yet W. I, is
not the Pope, and therefore I question his partial exposition.

Next I mentioned the Canon of the Council of Calcedon which says, that the
Fathers (in Council) gave Rome the pre-eminence, etc. He replyeth, that 1. [
The Greek word is Sect. 17.
not (...), but it is (...), exhibited or deferred to Rome, as ever before due
to it by the right of the Apostolic See of St. Peter established there.]

Ans. You are hard put to it when you have no better shift than so useless a
Criticism. 1. You know I suppose that (...) may have a signification as remote
from [do^ation] as (...), and that your own common Translation is tribuere; and
I desire no more. 2. Is here ever a word in the Canon that says [It was ever
before due;] not a word. 3. Is not the same word used of the giving of equal
privileges to Constantinople, as ^is of giving or deferring it to Rome? the
same word. And did they mean that this belonged ever to Constantinople, and
that of Divine Right? You dare not say so. 4. Did they not say that [by the
same reason] they judged that Constantinople should have equal privileges,
because it was the Royal City. And was this famous Council (of which you boast
as obeying Leo's Epistle) so sottish and absurd as to argue thus [ because old
Rome had the first Seat assigned to it on this account, because it was the
imperial Seat, and that was because it was ever before its due, as St Peter's
Chair, therefore we judge, that by the same reason Constantinople should have
equal privileges because it is now new Rome, the imperial Seat, though it was
never due to it before as the Seat of any Apostle.] O what cannot some men
believe or seem to believe! And how much does it conern your Church to be the
Expositor and Judge of the sense of all Councils, as well as of God's Word.

He adds that [ the Canon says not that this was the sole reason.]

Ans. 1: But the Canon says, This was the reason, and assigns no other. 2.
And if it made not it the great reason which the Church was to take for the
fundamentum juris, they would never have laid the Right of Constantinople on
the same Foundation as by parity of reason.

The plain truth is, (but interest and partiality cannot endure plain truth) he
that will not be deceived by cited By-words of the Ancients, must distinguish
between the Tit^lus or fundamentum juris, and the Ratio or Motives of the
Statute or Constitution. The first was the Law of Emperors and Councils. This
only gives the Right. The second was prevailingly and principally, that which
the Canon here assigns, that Rome was the great City and the imperial Seat;
but, as a honorary Tittle adding to the Motive, they say sometimes that it was
the Seat of Peter, and sometimes of Peter and Paul, and sometime they mention
Paul alone; and cry, (as at Ephesus) Magno Paul^ Cyrillo! Magne Paulo Celestino
-- But note that they give often the same reason for the Patriarchal honor of
Antioch, (that it was Seeds Petri,) and therefore never took this to be either
the Foundation of the Right, or the chief determining Motive of the
Constitution.

He adds that, [ else it had been a contradiction when the Fathers say that
Dioscorus had extended his Felony against him, to whom our Savior had
committed the charge and care of his Vineyard] that is, of the whole Catholic
Church.

Ans. 1. No doubt but they acknowledged that Christ committed the care of his
Vineyard to Peter, and every one of the Apostles, and to all Bishops as their
Successors, though not in Apostleship; and they acknowledged Rome the primate
in the Empire: and when Dioscor us undertook to excommunicate Leo, they
supposed that he transgressed the Laws of the imperial Church; and therefore
Anatolius in the Council, when the Indices said that Dioscor us condemned
Flavian for saying Christ had two Natures, answered, That Dioscorus was not
condemned propter fidem, but for excommunicating Leo, and for not appearing
when he was sent for. 2. Is here any word that says that the Pope was
Sovereign of all the Earth? Does not the Council in that very Letter to Leo,
say that the Emperor had called the Council, not ascribing it to any Authority
of the Pope. And also that the saying, Mat. 28, Go, teach all Nations, etc. was
delivered to them (which is the care of the vineyard) and not only to the Pope,
Quam nobis olim ipse salvator tradidit ad salutem.

But says W. I. [The true reason why this Canon mentions rather the Imperial
Authority of that City, than the right from St. Peter, was because it suited
better with the pretensions of Anatolius Sect. 1^.
Bishop of Constantinople and his Accomplices for the elevaton of that Sea than
any other, for they had no other, etc.

Ans. It Is true: But did Anatolias and his Accomplices, that is, the Council,
speak sincerely and truly here, or falsely? If truly, that is all that I cite
them for; If falsely, as worldly, unconscionable men that were setting up
themselves, why host we of General Councils? even of this, and of their words
to Leo? How can we tell when to trust them? and whether they that subscribed
against Flavian at Ephesians. 2. and after cried omnes peccavimus, at Calcedon,
when they were under a Martian, and not Theodosius, would not have acquit
Dioscorus, and condemned Leo and Elavian again, if another Theodosius had come.
But if they were credible believe them.

But he tells us that a Law of Theodosius and Valentine put both reasons
together, etc.

Ans. I told you in what sense even now, even as they put the name of Peter's
Seat as a reason Sect. 1^.
of the honor of Antioch, a honorary motive to their Law. And he here
confesses himself, That Alexander and Antioch had the second and third places,
because they were the second and third great Cities of the Empire.

But he says, that [ St. Peter thought it convenient that the highest
spiritual Authority should be placed in that City which had the highest
temporal power.]

Ans. Say you so? 1. Where is that Canon of St. Peter's to be found and proved?
2. If so, then why is not this Canon produced for the regulating of all other
Churches? Why does Canterbury take place of London, contrary to St. Peter's
Judgment? 3. And if so, then you are gone many hundred years ago. Why do you,
contrary to St. Peter's mind, pretend to the highest Ecclesiastical Authority,
since Rome ceased to have the highest Civil Power? Should not Constantinople,
and Vienna, and Paris, be preferred before Rome? You cannot make both your ends
meet.

I added, [ That these Councils gave not the Pope any Authority over the
extra-imperial Nations.]

He replyeth [ If they had it before, and by Christ's institution, they ne^ded
not.]

I answer, So if Constantinople had it before by Christ's institution, they need
not have given it equal privileges; but did they that proceeded by Parity of
reason, believe that either of them had any such Title?

I added some further proof. 1. Those extra-imperial Nations being not called
to the Councils, were not bound to stand to such decrees had they been made.

He replyeth somewhat that is instead of the Book which he promised before; and
calls to me to remember to answer him; and nothing that he has said is more
worthy of an answer; viz. [ How came the Bishops of Persia, of both the
Armenia's, and Gothia (which were all out of the Empire) to subscribe to the
first Council of Nice? How came Phaebamnon, Bishop of the Copti, to subscribe
to the first Council of Ephesus? How came the Circular Letter written by
Eusebius Caesar Palest. in the name of the Council, to be directed to all
Bishops, and in particular to the Churches throughout all Persia, and the great
India? Lastly, if those Bishops were not called to Councils why do Theodoret,
Marianus, Victor, Eusebius, Socrates, all of them affirm, that to the Council
of Nice were called Bishops from all the Churches of Europe, Africa, and Asia,
[and he cites the places in the Margin.]

Ans. 1. Here is but two Councils named in which such invited Bishops are
pretended to have been; the subscriptions to the rest for many hundred years
afforded him no such pretense, no not as to one Country in the World.

2. To the Council of Nice there subscribed (unless you will believe Eutychius
Alexandrinus, the Presbyterians Friend, that tells you of strange numbers) but
318, as full Testimony confirms. And 3. I desire the Reader to note that
these subscriptions have no certainty at all. The Copies of Crab, Binnius,
Pisanus, etc. disagree one from another. And Crab gives the Reader this note
upon them p. 259. that [ the Collector must be pardoned if he err in the
assignation or conscription of Bishops or Bishoprics, especially beyond
Europe, for though they were four old Copies that he used, yet they were every
one so depraved, that the Collector was wearied with the foolish and manifold
variations; for never a one of them agreed with the rest.] This is our notice
of the subscriptions; and as I said Eutychus A^x. quite differs from all.

And 1. whereas he tells us here of the Bishops of Persia, there is no mention
of any man but one Johannes Persidis, and he is said to be Provinciae Persidis;
and the Romans named not extra-imperial Countries by the name of Provinces;
therefore there is little doubt but this was some one that verged on the
Kingdom of Persia, in some City which was under the Romans then, and sometimes
had been part of Persia. I have often mentioned Theodoret's plain Testimony
saying, that James Bishop of Nisibis, (sometimes under the Persian) was at the
Nicene Council, for Nisibis was then under the Roman Emperor.

2. As to the Bish^ps of both the Armenians, the Copies disagree even of the
number; of those of Armenia minor they name two Bishops, of Arm. major, one
has four, another five, another six; and part of the Armenia's being in the
Roman Power, it is most probable that these Bishops were Subjects to the
Empire; or if any at the Borders desired for the honor of Christianity to be
at the first famous General Council, it signifies not that any had power to
summon them, or did so. The Emperor had not, and that the Pope did it, none
pretend that has any modesty; and they are called in the subscriptions, The
Provinces of Armenia.

3. And as for Gothia, the Books name one Man, Theophy^s Gothiae Metropolis,
which no Man well knows what to make of; for the Nation of Goths were not
then Christians. Socrates says that it was in the days of Valens that some of
them turned Christians, and that was the reason that they were Arrians, and
that Wulphilus then translated for them the Scripture. But if they had a Bishop
at the Nicene Council, it is evident that he was in the Empire; for the Goths
then dwelt in Walachia, Moldovia, and Poland, and were no other than the
Sauromatae, that Eusebius, tells us Constantine had Conquered, and tells us
how; even by helping the Masters whom the Servants by an advantage of the War
had dispossessed so that your Instance of Theophilus Gothiae, as without the
Empire, is your error. Myraeus calls part of France, Gothia. Says
Marcellinus, Comes eodem anno, (of Thodos. 1. after the Council Constable. 1.)
Universa gens Gothorum Athanaricho Rege defuncto Romano sese imperio dedit:
This was a great addition. But here Pisanus helps us out, and says, Hunc
Eusebius Pamphylus Scytam dixit in vita Constantini; and Metaphrastes adds
Wulphilu^'s success: Eusebius indeed tells us that there were 250 Bishops (that
differs for the common account, and he was one of them,) and that the Bishop of
Persia was present, (Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 7.) And that there were learned Men
from other Countries, Scythia being one, (and the Bishop of Tomys was called
the Scythian Bishop:) And that Constantine was the Caller of the Council; (not
the Pope:) And that he wrote Letters to the Bishops, to summon them to appear
at the Council: And who will believe that he wrote his Summons to the Subjects
of other Kings? Or if he had, What Is that to the Pope? If Ioh. Persidis were
not a Roman Subject, that word [he was present] seems to distinguish his
voluntary presence from the Summons of others. But says Eusebius. 16. cap. 6.
Writs of Summons were sent into every Province: And the Persian and Armenian
Provinces are here named with the Bishops. Those that have leisure to search
into the Roman History may find what Skirt of Persia, and what Part of Armenia
were in the Empire in those times; and it is notable, that when these Bordering
Parts were lost, these Bishops were never more at any General Council; neither
at Ephesus, Constantinople, Nice 2. etc.

And Eusebius there tells us, as the reason why some came came from the
remotest Countries, viz. some did it out of a desire to see the (famous first
Christian) Emperor, and some out of a conceit, that a Universal Peace should
be established: And so Ioh. Persidis might come with the rest.

And though I find not Pisanus's words of Theophilus in Eusebius, I find ibid.
l. 4. c. 5. That it was no wonder that even a Scythian Bishop should be at
this, and other Councils: For though Rome had formerly been so far from
conquering the Scythians that they paid them Tribute, yet Constantine
disdaining to pay them Tribute, Conquered Scythia, and after that Sauromatia
also: The Indians, Blemayans, Ethiopians, and Persians, sent honorable
Embassies and Presents to Constantinople, (c. 7.) as Neighbors; but he was far
from summoning their Subjects to his Council, but wrote his Letter to the King
of Persia only to favor them at home.

Judge now whether here be a word of summoning any one Bishop out of the
Empire? or a word of the Pope's summoning them, but the contrary? or any
certainty that any ^ut of the Empire were there? And if any were, how
inconsiderable their number was, and on what occasion it was like that they
were voluntarily there? Nay, it is most probable that there was not one there,
by the Circumstances mentioned.

His second Instance is of Phebamnon at the Council of Ephesus.

Answ. 1. Mark what kind of proof this Man pretends to, when he names, 1.
But one Council after Nice. 2. And but one Man, and no Summons; much less that
a Pope summoned all the Christian World.

2. But what is that he means? The Copties are the Egyptian Christians: Egypt
was known to be in the Empire. If he mean that the Abassines are here called
the Coptie, and their Bishop here, he is very shameless, and few Men of
understanding will believe him. It Is plain by the manner and place, in the
Subscriptions, that [Coptie] there, signifies a City; being put in the
Genitive Case singular, as the others are: It Is not [Phebammone Episcopo
Coptorum.] but Phaebammone Copti;] and is put in the midst of the Imperial
Bishops, by Binnius: (But Crab has no Subscriptions at all:) But was there any
City of that Name? Yes, and amongst those Bishops that were most frequent at
the Eastern Councils: Ferrarius out of Strabo, Plutarch, Ptolomy, and others,
says, [Coptos Cana, test Rhamusio, Urbs and Emporium Aegypti sive Thebaidis
ad Nilum, que merces ex India per s^um Arabicum advectae terra jumentis
deferebantur a Thebis 44. mill. pas. in B. 8. Babylonem versus, a Berenice urb^
ad sinum Arabicum 258. ab Alexandria vero supra 300. ubi smaragdi inveniuntur.
Meminit illius Staius, l. 1. Theb. [Coptos and erisoni* lugentia flumina Nili.]

You see now with what Ignorances and cheats the unskilful are deceived by
these Disputes, and the Pope pretends to the Monarchy of the World.

His last proof is out of Theodoret, Mar. Victor, Eusebius and Secrates, That
to the Council of Sect. 23.
Ni^e were called Bishops from all the Churches of Europe, Africa, and Asia.

Answ. Would any Man, not blinded by prejudice, understand this of any other,
than all the Bishops of Europe, Africa, and Asia, which were in the Empire;
when he knows, 1. How much of these three parts of the World were in the
Empire. 2. That the Emperor wrote a Letter to the Bishops to summon them. 3.
That he had no power out of the Empire. 4. How ill it would have been taken to
have summoned, or called the Subjects, before he had requested their Princes to
send them? Certainly Constantine would have written to their several Princes,
and not first to them. 5. His Letters to the King of Persia for the Churches
there, show this, in which yet he never presumed so far as to desire that they
might come to his Councils. 6. No History mentions any such thing, as any
summons to any one extra-imperial Bishop. 7. And to end all doubts, the
Subscriptions show that they were not there; shall we not believe your own
Books, and our own Eyes?

He cites Theodor. l. 1. c. 7. I suppose he means his Eccles. Hist. for in
that he mentions the calling of the Council; but has not a word of what this
Man does cite him for: But cap. 25. he says that [Europae totius, and Africae,
quin etiam maximae partis Asiae imperio potitus est Constantinus:] Yet this is
too largely spoken. Socrates has no such words besides his Recitation of the
words of Eusebius: Eusebius indeed says, That the Bishops were called out of
all these Provinces, and who ever questioned it! Not a Syllable in any of his
cited Authors of any Call, or Summons, to any one Man out of the Empire. These
are the Foundations of the Roman Monarchy.

But I had almost over-past his mention of Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea in
Palestine 's Circular Letter, writ in the Name of the Council, to be directed
to all Bishops; and in particular, Sect. 24.
to the Churches through all Persia, and the Great India.

Answ. 1. If it had been the Pope's Letter, it would with these Men have proved
his Sovereignty of the Earth: But alas, it was Eusebius's Letter.

2. It Is strange, if Eusebius were as great an Arrian as you commonly suppose
him, that the Council should choose him to write the circular Letter, and that
you had not feigned that he did it as the Pope's Vicat.

3. If writing a Letter would prove a Governing Power, I would write a Letter
to Rome presently, that I might be the Governor of the Pope; and then I would
command him to lay by his Ambition, and recall his rebellious and bloody
Decrees, and to let the Christian World have peace.

4. But the man tells me not by one word, where to find any such Epistle of
Eusebius; In Eusebius there is none such; nor in Socrates; nor in Theodoret,
nor in the common Histories of the Councils: whence is it that W. I. fished it
out? At last I found in Pisanus, his new-invented History of that Council, the
Title of Circularis Epistola Scripta ab Eusebio. But not a word that it was
written to the Churches of Persia or India, nor any other by name, much less
without the Empire; nor a word that it was written by him in the name of the
Council. All these are W I's forgeries. But the words and Margin open all the
matter* Socrates and others tells us that Eusebius having staggered in the
beginning of the Council (and being as you commonly say an Arrian) when he saw
how things would go, subscribed to the Council, and lest his own Flocks should
censure him or differ from him, he wrote in his own name a Letter only to his
own flock, giving them the reason and sense of his subscription; and indeed he
seems therein to prevaricate, and to give an Arrian sense of the word] (...)
[saying] To be of one substance with the Father, signifies no other thing,
than that the Son of God was in nothing like the rest of the Creatures, but
altogether like to the Father alone that begat him, nor begotten of any other
than of the Fathers substance and essence; to which thus set forth right and
reason required that we should condescend.] This prevaricating Letter to
Caesarea the Author of Pisanus Story, calls [a Circular Letter] ignorantly,
and W. I. added the rest; and thus these men prove what they list; and this is
their proof of Universal Tradition and the Papal Sovereignty of the World.

He concludes [^ou will not forget to answer these questions in your next.]
And I think I have not forgotten it, nor failed to evince his worse than
forgetfulness; and that the Councils then extended but to the Roman Empire, and
consequently the Papal and Patriarchal pretension^, to no more (and even of the
Popes Western Diocesses, the number of Bishops at those Eastern great Councils
were not considerable, nor yet any Agency of the Pope in and about them.)

W. J's Fourth Chapter answered.
I next added (for he begins his Chapter in the middle of a Section,) 2. That
the Emperors Sect. 1.
called and enforced the Councils who had no power out of the Empire.]

To this he says [ Called they them alone? had they not the Authority of the
Roman Bishop joined with them, or rather presupposed to theirs? prove that the
Emperors called them.]

Ans. Shall I prove it to those that have read the Histories of the Councils,
or to them that have not? If to them that have not, I cannot prove it or any
such matters, but by desiring them to read it: If you tell a Woman that it is
ten thousand years since the World was created, and I tell her it is not 600,
neither of us proves to her what we say, but she will believe him that she
likes best: But to him that has read, or will read, the History, I disdain
the Task: Must I write Books to prove that there were such men as Constantine
or Theodosius in the World? I will be none of that man's Teacher that has read
the full history of the Councils of Nice, First and Second, of Ephesians. First and
Second; of Constantinople First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, etc. of Sirmium,
Armenium, and many such, as cannot see that the Emperors called them without
any previous Call or Authority of the Pope; some (as Nice) the Emperor called
immediately by his own Letters without a word of the Popes interposing
Authority or Call: Most of the Emperors wrote to the Patriarchs and
Metropolitanes to call the Bishops under them: Sometimes to the Patriarch of
Alexandria first (if not only) to call the rest; sometimes to him of
Constantinople; and sometimes to all the five; and if the Pope did at any time
send a Bishop or two and a Priest thither, you thence pretend that the Pope
called the Council.

He adds [ Had not the Emperors power to signify to those extra-imperials
that a Council was to be celebrated, and to invite them at least?]

Ans. Yes, sure, even at the Antipodes; but when the History tells us that he
commanded and often threatened them if they came not, and that he wrote to them,
and the men are named, what signifies your question?

W. I. [ Could not the Bishop of Rome, or other under whose Jurisdiction they
were respectively, notify to them the celebration of the Council, and require
their presence in it? you cannot but see this.]

Ans. I cannot but see your shame when you open it. 1. Could not an Angel from
Heaven have called them? yes no doubt: but no History says that they were so
called, but tells us how in another manner.

2. The word [Jurisdiction] signifies so much of your Error and interest,
that you are resolved at least to keep up the name and supposition; and when
you do but add [over all the World] it makes me remember Christ's temptation
[All this will I give thee;] but it is too strong a temptation for the Pope to
overcome. But you would have gratified me much if you had told me what
Patriarch's Jurisdiction in those times, the Churches in Persia and India, and
the rest that were extra-imperial, did belong to? or where I may find any
notice of the Summons that the Pope or any Patriarch sent them to any of those
ancient Councils.

3. I told him that [ the Diocesses which these Bishops were related to are
described and expressly confined within the verge of the Empire; vid. Blondel.
de primatu.] Sect. 2.


To this, 1. He takes it for a Fob to be referred to Bloudel. Answ. Look then
in your own Cosmographers, and even in Aub^rtus Myraeus his Notitia
Episcopatuum, (abating his Fiction of the submission of the Abassine Emperors,
and suchlike in him; and his Confession that his Book had next to nothing of
the Patriarchate of Alexandria:) He tells you that the Armenia major and minor
were in the Province of Pontus, Scythia in the Province of Thracia, etc. And
that you may know who it was that gave these Jurisdictions, he tells you how
Justinian gave his Name to a City of Bulgaria, subjecting many Bishops of
Dacia, Dardania, Mysia, Pannonia, etc. to that Archbishop; with this addition,
sed and ille ab ipsis consecretur, and eadem jura super eos habeat, quae Papa
Romanus habet super Episcopos sibi subditos. (Was that all the World then?)
Novel. 119. 508.

He next cites Pisanus's Nicene Canons, giving the Pope Universal Power, and
the Bishop of Alex. and Antioch extra-imperial Power; and he promises
hereafter to justify those Canons. But in the mean time, I shall as much
regard his Citations out of Esop's Fables, or out of Genebrard, or Cochleus.

He says, [The Council of Calcedon, c. 28. gives to the Bishop of
Constantinople Authority over the barbarous Nations near those Parts; that is,
such as were extra-imperial, such as that of Russia, and Muscovia.]

Answ. Is not this a confident Man? 1. The Council says only that the [Bishops
of the foresaid Diocesses (naming only, Pontus, Asia, and Thracia,) which are
among the barbarous, shall be ordained by the Throne of Constable. And who knows
not, that the word Diocese signified then a part of the Empire? and that many
of the barbareus, so called then, were within the Empire? such as were the
Scythians, Goths, (or Getae, or Sauromatae,) which Eusebius says were
Conquered by Constantine: But is here any mention of Russia, or Muscovy? 2. And
how long after this was it that all History tells us the Muscovites and
Russians (that were not Goths) were converted to Christianity?

So that here is not a Syllable in all that he has said for Popery, except the
Canons of Pisanus and Turrian, which they must better prove before we take them
to be of any just regard: It is not the word of Baptista Romanus, or any late
Jesuit that can suffice us.

I added lastly that Patriarchal Privileges were ordinarily given by the
Emperors, who added and altered, and sometimes set Rome highest and sometimes
Constantinople. His many vain words against this I will not tire the Reader
with reciting: Every man knows it that knows Church History: Why else in
the days of Mauricius and Phocas was one set highest at one time, and the other
at another time? How else came the Bishop of Constantinople to pretend to
Universal Primacy?

His marvel, that I translate Pontifex Pope, as if never man had so done, as if
we had never read Bellarmine de Pontifice Romano, and others that so speak,
etc. is a vain digression not worthy an answer, nor the rest.

I will here briefly recite some undeniable Reasons which I have given page
100, etc. of my Naked Popery, to prove what we have been all this while upon.

1. That the Papal Power was not held to be jure divino, but humano. 1. It
stood by the same right as did the other Patriarchs; but it was jure humano.

2. The Africans, Aurelius, Augustine, etc. of the Carthage Council, enquired
not of Gods Word, but of the Nicene Canons to be resolved of the Papal Power.

3. The whole Greek Church heretofore and to this day is of that Judgment; for
they first equalled and after preferred Constantinople, which never pretended
to a Divine Right; but they were not so blind as to equal or prefer a humane
right before a Divine.

4. The forecited Ca. 28. of the Council of Calcedon expressly resolves it.

5. Their own Bishop Smith confesses that it is not de fide that the Pope is
St. Peter's Successor jure divino.

II. The Roman Primacy was over but one Empire; besides all the Reasons
foregoing I added, That the Bishop of Constantinople, when he stood for to be
Universal Bishop, yet claimed no more; therefore no more was then in contest,
but Power in the Empire.

III. That Councils then were called General in respect only to the Empire, I
proved by ten Arguments, p. 104. 105. adding five exceptions.

Page 114. he had put a Verse under the name of Pope Leo, with a Testimony,
etc. I showed that there was no such; and he confesses the Error, but he
supposes a confident Friend of his put it into his Papers, and now says the
Verse was Prosper's, and some words to the like purpose are Leo's de Not. Pet.
Prosper (he says) is somewhat ancienter than Leo, and less to be excepted
against.

Ans. 1. He was Leo's Servant, even his Secretary, as Vossius and Rivet have
showed; and so his Words and Leo's are as one's. 2. It is in a Poem where
liberty of phrase is ordinarily taken. 3. No wonder if Caput Mundo be found in
a Poet, either as it is spoken de Mundo Romano, or as Caput signifies the most
excellent, great and honorable: And so Rome it self is often called by
Historians Caput Mundi, before and since Christianity entered it. And it may
well be said that this was Pastoralis Honoris, though not ex Pastorali Regimine
Universali; For one Bishop was a Caput or chief to others Pastorali Honor,
that was not their Governor; as the chief Earl, or chief Judge among us, is to
the inferiors. 3. And the Pope did Nihil possidere armis. 4. And Tenere and
Regere be not all one. He may be said thus [Tenere] in that the Religion which
he professed had possession of more than the Roman Empire, and he was the Chief
Bishop in honor of that profession. The sense seems to be but this, [As
great a honor as it is to be the Bishop of the Imperial City of a Conquering
Empire, it is a greater to be the Prime Bishop of that Christian Religion which
extends further than the Roman Conquests.] He cites a sentence as to the
same sense out of Prosper de Vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 6. viz. [That the
Principality of the Apostolic Priesthood, has made Rome greater through the
Tribunal of Religion, than through that of the Empire.] Which I take to be the
true sense of the Poet: but to be greater by Religion than Empire is no more to
be Ruler of the World, than if I had said so of Melchizedeck, that he was
greater as he was Priest of the most high God, than as he was King of Salem.
But there is in the cited place of Prosper none of these words, nor any about
any such matter at all; but there is somewhat like it in cap. 16. which indeed
is expository. Ad cujus rei effectum credimus providentia Dei Romani regni
latitudinem praeparatam, ut Nationes vocandae ad Unitatem Corporis Christi,
prius jure unius consociarentur imperii; quamvis gratia Christiana non contenta
sit eosdem limits habere quos Roma, multosque jam populos sceptro Crucis
Christi illa subdiderit quos armis suis ista non domuit. Quae tamen per
Apostolici sacerdotii principatum amplior facta est arce Religionis quam solio
potestatis. All this we acknowledge that Prosper then said about 466 years
after Christ, being Pope Leo's Secretary, and seeing the Church in its greatest
outward Glory: The Unity of the Empire prepared for the greatness of the
Church, and those that were United in one Empire were United after in one
Religion, and yet the Gospel went further than the Empire; and Rome it self
became more honorable in being the seat of the most honorable Christian
Bishop, whose Religion extended further than the Empire, than in being the
Imperial Seat of Power.

The words which he cites of Leo, I made the lightest of, because he was a
Pope himself, and pleaded his own cause more highly Sect. (...).
than any of his Predecessors, and lived so late; but yet the words do not
serve the Papists turn; for he at large shows that his meaning was, that Rome
which was domina mundi, before it wa^ Christian, (and yet not the Ruler of the
World) was prepared to be the Seat of Peter and Paul, that even the outer
Nations, by their Neighborhood to the Empire, might be capable of the Gospel;
which is a certain Truth. Ut hujus inenarrabilis gratiae per totum mundum
diffunderetur effectus, Romanum regnum divina providentia praeparavit; cujus ad
eos limits incrementa perducta sunt, quibus cunctarum undique gentium vicina
and contigua esset universitas. Disposito namq divinitatis operi maxim
congruebat, ut multa regna uno conf^derarentur imperio, and cito pervios
haberet populos praedicatio generalis, quos unius teneret regimen civitatis. --
Nec mundi dominam times Romam, qui in Caiphae domo expaveras sacerdotis
ancillam. And mentioning (...) (...) (...) at Rome. he says* ut cos in (...),
(...) caput est Christus, quasi geminum constituerit lumen oculorum, de quorum
meritis atque vi^tutibus, que omnem loquendi superant facultatem, nihil
diversum, nihil debemus sentire discretum; quia illos and electio pares, and
labor similes, and finis fecit aequales.

And in the next Sermon, expounding super hanc petram, thus says, [super hanc,
inquit, (...) ^ternum extruam templum, and ecclesiae meae caelo inserenda
sublimitas, in hujus fidei firmitate consurget. Hanc confessionem portae Inferi
non tenebunt, etc.]

And of Tibi dabo claves -- [Transivit quid^m in Apostolos alios vis illius
potestatis; sed non frustra uni commendatur, quod omnibus intimetur: Petro enim
singulariter hoc creditur, quia cunctis ecclesiae rectoribus Petri forma
proponitur: Manet ergo Petri privilegium ubicunque ex ipsius fertur aequitate
judicium, nec nimia est vel severitas vel remissio. --

So Petrus Chrysologus expounds super hanc petram, Sermon. 74. p. 69. 1. and
many others.

But it is the way of these Men, to take some Sentence that sounds, as they
think, for sufficient Proof of their Foundations.

Leo in his Epistles to Anatolius, and to the Emperor Martian against him, Ep.
54. p. 131. lays all the Privileges of the Churches on the Council of Nice,
[Privilegia ecclesiarum sanctorum Patrum Canonibus instituta, and Venerabilis
Nicenae Synodi fixa decretis, nulla novitate mutari, etc. He says, that no
later Council, though of greater number, can alter any thing done in the
Council of Nice; -- and so none of their Rules for the Church's Regiment. And
in many other Epistles (to Pulcheria, etc.) he over and over accuses him as
breaking the Statutes of the Fathers, and Councils, but not the Institution of
Christ, or his Apostles.

Next he cites Leo's Epist. 82. to Anastas. But it is in the 84th. and he
Sect. 9.
that will but read it will easily see, that it was but in the Empire that L^o
claimed the final Decision and Appeals.

And once more I here appeal to any impartial Man that ever read over Sect. 10.
all the true Epistles and Decretals of the Popes themselves, and finds that
none of them for 400, if not 500 years, were ever sent to any extraimperial
Church, as any way exercising Authority over them; yea, and till after 600
(when Gregory sent into England) they wrote but to their own Missionaries, or
but by way of Counsel, as any Man may do; whether he can believe they then
arrogated the Government of all the World.

In the rest of this Chapter there is nothing worth the answering, but that he
says, (to prove Ethiopia under the Patriarchs of Alexandria,) That, 1. Some
Learned Men think Ethiopia is included in Egypt. 2. That Dr. Heylin and Rosse
did regard Pisanus his Nicene Canons; and their Authority is more than mine.

Answ. 1. You are a Learned Man, who take Thracia to have been without Sect. 11.
the Empire; and must I therefore be of the same mind? If your Learned Men
cannot distinguish between Egypt, an imperial Province, and the vast and
distant Kingdoms of Ethiopia; What Is that to me? Is it enough to confute any
evident truth, that there was found some Man that was against it? 2. Nor is the
Name of Heylin and Rosse of any more Authority to prove the Antiquity of a
late-produced Script, against all the Testimony of the Fathers and Councils
near those times, than your own naked Assertion would have been. Is not this a
pitiful Proof, that Pisanus's Canons are authentic and ancient, because Dr.
Heylin and Rosse regard them? If you had any better Proof, Why did you not
produce it?

An Answer to W. J's fifth Chapter.
The thing that I asserted is, 1. That the Pope had never any Governing Sect. 1.
Power over the whole Earth. 2. Nor anciently over any out of the Empire. 3.
Nor a proper Government of the other Patriarchs, or exempt Provinces within the
Empire: But that he was (principally for the honor of the Imperial Seat, and
next as to honor, the Memorial of St. Peter) voluntarily by Councils and
Emperors, made the prime Bishop of the Empire; Alexandria first, and
Constantinople after, the second; Antioch the third, etc. And that not the
Pope, but the Emperors, and General Councils were the chief Rulers of the
Imperial Churches: But in these Councils the Bishop of Rome had the first Seat,
and Alexandria the second: And that this Bishop of Rome had but one Voice
ordinarily in Councils, but sometimes he claimed a Negative Voice; and
sometimes Councils have condemned, excommunicated, and deposed him: And in his
absence, the Bishop of Alexandria had the same Power as he, when present, had.

Now, W. I. here cites some Testimonies truly, and some falsely, to prove that
which I deny not; that sometimes the last Appeals were made to him, and other
Privileges allowed him, which belonged to the first Bishop of the Empire. I
think it but an injury to the Reader to examine them any further. If he will
read the Histories and Fathers themselves, he needs not my Testimony: If he
will not, my Testimony is no notifying Evidence to him.

And upon the perusal of the rest, I find nothing in this Chapter needing, or
worthy of any further Answer: And I am sensible that fruitless altercation
Sect. 2.
will be ungrateful to wise and sober Men.

An Answer to W. J's. Sixth CHAPTER.
1. I Noted that under the Heathen Emperors, Church-Associations were but by
Voluntary Consent; and yet then they called in none without the Empire.

To this he Replyeth: 1. Denying such Consent. 2. Saying, They could not call
them that were Extraimperial to sit with them.

Answ. 1. I would he had told us how Provinces were distributed while Emperors
were Heathens, if not by Consent: Does he think that the Pope did it all
himself? Did he make Alexandria, Antioch Patriarchates, and divide to all other
Bishops their Seats and Provinces? If he say this, he will but make us the more
wary of such a Disputant; for he will never prove it.

2. And if by Consent they could not call any without the Empire, then none
were Called, which is the Truth.

2. But he comes to his grand Proof, That the four first Councils were Univer^
as to all the World: 1. Because they are called General and Ecumenical
Councils, by themselves, by the Canons, by Histories, by the whole Christian
World; by the Fathers, by Protestants, by our Statute-Books, by our thirty nine
Articles, and by Orthodox Writers. To all which I Answer, Even in Scotland the
Presbyterians have their General Assembly, which yet is somewhat less than all
the World: And as for their Phrase of Totius Orbis, So it is said in the
Gospel, that all the World was Taxed by Augustus. He is very easily persuaded,
that after all the Evidence which I have given, and in particular, after the
sight of all the subscribed Names at Councils, which were within the Empire,
can yet believe that they were the Bishops of all the World, because he reads
the name Ecumenical and Totius Orbis.

3. But he argues from the Reason of the thing. 1. Councils were gathered for
the Common Peace of Christians.

Answ. The Peace of the Christian World is promoted by the Peace of the Empire.
1. As it was the most considerable part then of the whole Christian World. 2.
As the welfare of every part conduces to the welfare of the World. 3. As it is
Exemplary and Counselling to all others, but not by Authoritative Command and
Constraint.

4. Secondly, He says, Else any obstinate Heretics might but have removed to
the Extra-imperial Churches, and been free.

Answ. 1. He might, no doubt, have been free from force, unless his own Prince
were Did not the Arrian Goths live out of the Empire in Power?
of the same mind. 2. But he could not have forced the Imperial Churches to
have owned him as Orthodox, nor to have forborne renouncing Communion with him.
3. And surely if it was Heresy which he was guilty of, it was so before it was
declared so by the Council, and therefore might be so known by that
Extraimperial Church to which he should remove.

5. Thirdly, The same Answer serves to his third Reason: That If any Imperial
Country were won from the Empire, they would be free; not free from other Men's
disowning or renouncing them. I told you before, the plain words of Theodoret,
That James,: Bishop of Nisibis was at the Council of Nice, for Nisibis was then
under the Roman Empire.

6. Fourthly, The same Answer suffices to his fourth Reason: That a Nation
Conquered would have been brought under the Council, and Faith would have
depended on the Fortune of War.

Answ. True, If Faith were no Faith without a General Council's determination;
and if there was no Faith in the World before there was a General Council, nor
any Christian before Constantine's time. What if only a Provincial Council had
Condemned any Heresy? Consider how far the Extraimperialists had been Obliged
by it. The Truth and Reason of the decision would have Obliged them.

7. Fifthly, He says, It would follow, that the Kingdoms that are now fallen
from that Empire should have no Successive descending Obligation to the four
first General Councils.

Answ. Not at all as Subjects to Men dead and gone, nor as if the Canons of
those Councils were a Law properly Divine, and so bound us as mere Subjects of
God; nor yet as Subjects to the present Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria,
Antioch, etc. whose Predecessors made those Canons. But 1. The Word of God
which they declared, bound Men before, and binds them since in all Nations of
the World. 2. And God Obliges us to do all things in as much Love and Concord
as we can. And when the greatest part of the Christian World agree upon any
thing Lawful and convenient, an Obligation for Concord may hence arise on
others, without any Subjection to a Governing Authority. And in these two
respects such Councils may Oblige us, but not as Subjects.

8. Sixthly, His last Reason is, That those Extraimperial Christians who
embraced the Heresies Condemned in any one of those Councils, never alleged
this Reason.

Answ. 1. Those Councils themselves had more Modesty than to say, This is a
Heresy because we have Judged it so, for it was so before by the Judgment of
Gods Word: It had been therefore a frivolous Defense of Heresy, to say, We are
not Subject to the Council, unless they could have said, We are not Subject to
the Law of God. 2. What Extraimperial Nations mean you, that owned Condemned
Heresy? If the Arrian Goths, they Learned it from Valens and the General
Councils of the Empire. If the Nestorians and Eutychians, prove that any
Extraimperial Nations were such: If they were guilty of any Heresy, what
Occasion had they to allege such Reasons to Justify themselves, to Men that
never sent or urged the Authority of such Councils on them. Prove you first
that ever any General Council for five hundred Years did Judge any
Extraimperial Bishops, or Depose any one of them for Heresy. 3. But your Sect
use to accuse the Abassines as Eutychians; and Godiguus and others will tell
you that they deny that they were under the Pope.

9. I told him that some Heretics are not Christians univocally, and others so
called were better Christians than the Papists: The former are not of the
Christian Church, the latter are. It is not an Usurpers calling others
Heretics, that will blot their Names out of the Book of Life.

To this he says, That I should have told him which of them I take for
Univocal Christians, and that they had the Names given them long ago.

Answ. 1. By what Authority can you require me, if you name Men by an hundred
Nicknames, to tell you all over which of these I account Christians? Is it not
enough that I tell you in General, that I account all those Christians that
hold all the Essential parts of Christianity, and renounce none of them. 2. How
long soever Men are Calumniated, that proves not the Calumny Just. It is long
since the General Council at Basil pronounced the Pope an Heretic, and that it
is Heresy to deny that a General Council may Judge him; and yet the Papists
believe not this Council.

. 10. I told him that I had rather be in the case of many that have been burnt
as Heretics, than of the Pope and others that burnt them.

His Answer to this is, He wishes me better, and he brings many Accusations
against the Albigenses; as if we had never disproved those Calumnies; which
has been so long and fully done, as among others by Bishop Usher, D^ Statu and
success. Ecclesiar. and Paul Perrin. It being a Company of Manichees only that
were scattered among the Albigenses and waldenses, that were guilty of the
Heresies mentioned by him (as I have also showed in my Confutation of Mr.
Danvers the Anabaptist.)

. 11. I told him that All those that were true Christians, were of one
Universal Church.

And he again canteth over the Nicknames of some, and would know which of them
I mean. And I told him again, that I mean all that owned the Essentials of
Christianity; Perhaps such a Monothelite as Pope Honorius, might be a
Christian. I told you before that Anatolius in the Council openly said that
Dioscorus was not condemned for Heresy; And I would most Papists were as good
Christians as we have reason to think the Novatians were. The name of
Luciferians, Quartodecimani, Iconoclasts, Waldens^s, Hugonotes, Lutheranes,
Zuinglians, Calvinists, etc. unchristian none; no more than the name of
Papists. And it is worth the noting, 1. How zealous Macedonius, Nestorius and
Dioscorus were against Heretics, and how hot in persecuting them, and stirring
up the Emperors against them, and by this were carried into those Errors for
which they were condemned as Heretics themselves. 2. And how long it was often
in doubt which party should be accounted Heretics, till the countenance of
Emperors turned the Major Vote of the Bishops Right. In the days of
Constantius and Valens the Orthodox went for Heretics with the greater mumber:
And under Valentinian and Theodosius they were Catholics, under Theodosius
junior the Eutychians went for Catholics, and under Martian they were
condemned. The same Bishops went one way at Sirmium and Ariminum, (with old
Osius) who after repented and went the other way; And the same Bishops went one
way at the Second Council of Ephesus, who recanted at the Council of Calcedon:
and how long was the case of the Monothelites in doubt, and the Iconoclasts,
much longer.

. 12. When I told him that it is only our Relation to Christ the Head, that
makes all Christians one Church, he says that Christ is but our Causal and
not Formal Unity, and that Faith and Charity are not necessary to make us
Members.

Answ. As the union of King and Subjects makes one Kingdom, so the union of
Christ and Christians makes one Church; and we call none Christians that
profess not true Faith and Charity (and their seed.)

But he says, the Question is How a Heretic or Schismatic can be a true
Christian.

Answ. Ambiguous words are the game of deceivers, and to open the ambiguity
marreth their cause. The word Heretic I have told you signifies either one
that denies an Essential part of Christianity, or one that only denies an
Integral part; The former are no Christians; the latter may.

. 13. But he will prove that no Heretic is a Christian, or has true Faith,
viz. [Whoever has true faith believes the material object of faith, for the
Divine authority of God revealing it. (That is certain) But so does no Heretic.

That Is very false of both sorts of Heretics. 1. You call the Luciferians, the
Novatians, etc. Heretics; and who can see reason to doubt but they might
believe that all that God says is true?

2. Overdoing is undoing: As you are the greatest causes of Schism by
overdoing as against Schism, so you would justify almost all the Heretics in
the world by your blind overdoing, as against Heretics; and while you would
make most or much of Christ's Church to be Heretics, you would make men believe
that there are none. All that believe that there is a God, believe that he is
Verax, no Liar, but true. All that believe that God is no Liar, but true of his
word, believe all to be true which they judge to be his word. But says W. I,
no Heretic believes any thing on the authority of God revealing, that is,
because God that reveals it is true: And so all those that believe that God
is true, and that any thing is true because he reveals it, are no Heretics.
And who knows other men's hearts better, You or They? You take me (it is like)
for a Heretic, I say that I believe that God cannot Lie, and I believe in
Christ because God the ^evealer is true. You say, Then I am no Heretic. If an
Arrian can but truly say, that he believes all Gods word to be true, but he
takes not Christ's Consubstantial eternal Deity to be Gods word; you will
justify him to be no Heretic: And yet the poor Iconoclasts, the Waldenses,
the Berengarians can find no place in this man's Church, when yet he thus
acquitteth almost all Heretics in the whole world. Nothing but humerous
singularity can pretend any probable reason why an Arrian, a Nestorian, an
Eutychian, a Monothelite, yea a Mohammedan, or other Infidel, may not believe
that God is no Liar, but all that is indeed his word is true.

. 14. But he will not be unreasonable without reason. His Argument is
[Whosoever believes the material object of Faith, for the Divine Authority of
God revealing it, must believe all things which are as sufficiently propounded
to him to be revealed of God, as are the Articles which he believes,
protests to, and believe nothing as revealed, which is as sufficiently
declared to him to be erroneous, and not revealed etc. But every Heretic --
does otherwise -- If he believe some and refuse others equally propounded; it
is not for Divine Authority.

Answ. If you believe this reasoning your self, you deserve little belief from
others. 1. The word [sufficiently] propounded will never sufficiently be
expounded by you, nor ever is like to be. Sometimes by sufficient [as in the
Dominicans controversy of sufficient grace] is meant that which quo posito res
fieri potest, and sine quo non potest: And so taken as necessarium or possible
for the minimum tale, it has no degrees. But usually we take sufficient in
such a latitude as that things may be in many degrees, one more sufficient than
another, that is, more apt and powerful to produce the effect.

And for the first, remember that if you judge so mercifully of Heretics as
that no one is such that has not a proposal in the very first sense
sufficient, you can call no Arrian, nor Photinian, or Gnostick a Heretic, till
you know that the Proposal was to him sufficient. And how much less can you
call the Nestorians or Eutychians, or the Abassines, Syrians, Armenians, etc.
Heretics, when you know them not, and know not the sufficiency of their
proposals? And to know that a proposal was sufficient to Nestorius, Eutyches,
or Dioscorus, does not prove that there was such sufficient proposal to all
others that go under such names either then or now. Who knows not that an
unlearned man has need of clearer and ofter teaching than the Learned; and one
that by Education is prepossest with contrary conceptions has need of more
than the unprejudiced; and one that is corrupted by sensual lusts has need of
more than the temperate? And what man is well able to judge of the measures of
sufficiency as to other then: much less to whole Nations whom we know not.

2. But as to your Minor; which by the word [as sufficiently] shows that you
take sufficiency as it has degrees, here you seem plainly to absolve all the
Heretics in the world, e. g. As if a Monothelite were no Heretic unless it be
as sufficiently, in degree revealed that Christ has two wills, as it is that
he is the Christ and rose again; or, as if an Arrian were no Heretic, unless
it be as sufficiently revealed that Christ is (...), of the same substance with
the Father, as it is that he dyed.

3. And the supposition in your Minor is notoriously false, (that all Heretics
have as sufficient a proposal of all they deny, as of that which they believe.)
For if the meaning of the words revealing be not equally plain and
intelligible, then the proposal is not equally sufficient. But etc

Can any man not blinded by faction believe that God has no more plainly told
us that Christ dyed, rose and ascended, than that he has two distinct wills,
or that he has but one person, or that his mother is to be called The parent
of God, and one that did beget and bring forth God, and that God dyed, yea or
that Christ is God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, and yet (...),
not only from the same substance, but the same substance? Though these are
equally true, they are not equally clear and evident. Do the Quartodecimani,
the Luciferians, the Iovinians deny Truths as sufficiently proposed, as that
there is a God, or a Christ?

If you say that though they be not equally proposed in Scripture, yet they are
by Councils or Traditions.

I Answer 1. Were they no points of Faith, nor the denial Heresy, for 300
years before the first General Council? 2. When they of Constance and Basil are
for the Supremacy of Councils as de fide, and they of Laterane and Florence
against them, when the Council of Basil decreed the Immaculate conception of
the Virgin Mary, and yet you take it for a controversy, etc. are these as
sufficiently proposed, as that there is a God or Christ? 3. When Petavius
cites the words of most of the Doctors or Fathers that wrote before the
Council of Nice, and of Eusebius himself that was of the Council, and
subscribed it, as being for Arrianisme, or dangerously favoring it, did all
these Fathers think that the proposal of (...) was as sufficient as of a God or
Christ.

. 15. He takes upon him to clear his Argument by two deluding instances, which
suppose an equality in the revelation: But he that knows not, 1, that it was
long before all the Canonical books were equally known to be Gods word. 2. And
that yet it is not equally certain what Councils are true, and what Traditions.
3. And that there is great difference between one Text of Scripture and another
in intelligible places (else why do their Expositions so disagree) yea, of
Councils too. 4. And that the Heretics have still pleaded Scripture and
Tradition, and Councils, as well as the Orthodox (as the Eutychians, etc. did
the Council of Nice;) all equally professing to believe Scripture, Tradition,
and true Councils, but not equally understanding them: I say, he that knows
not all this, knows not the matters of Fact which should be known in this
Dispute.

But how he will excuse the Papists from Heresy by his Reasoning, I know not,
e. g. Christ Instituting his. Supper, says equally: 1. This is my Body, and
This is the New Testament. 2. And equally says, Take, Eat and Drink this. The
Papists, 1. Do not believe that literally this Cup is the New Testament, though
equally said. 2. Nor do they believe that they must Drink of it, though equally
Commanded. Ergo, by W. I's Arguing, The Papists believe not that the Bread is
literally Christ's Body, or that it must be Eaten because of Christ's Truth or
Authority that spoke it, else they would have believed both.

. 16. He adds a Supposition like the rest, that a Calvinist is assured that
the Pope is not the Antichrist, by the same Authority which he acknowledges to
be the sufficient proposer of the Articles of his Faith. And yet here may lie
one of his usual Equivocations: The Authority of the Author and prime Revealer
of the Gospel is one; and the Authority of the prime Instrumental Revealers is
another. The first is Gods, the second is the Prophets and Apostles: Tell us
where either of these say that the Pope it not Antichrist. But the Authority of
a distant Messenger and Teacher is of a third rank.: A Drunken or Fornicating
Priest may be such a Messenger or Teacher, and may give an Infidel those
Reasons of the Faith, which by Gods Blessing may bring him to Believe. And it
is possible such a Priest (and a Synod of such) may say that the Pope is not
Antichrist, and another Synod may say he is.

. 17. I came next to Answer a question of his own, Whether I take the Church of
Rome and the Protestants to be one Church? I Answered, that They have two
Heads, and We but one: As they are mere Christians united in Christ, they are
one Church with us; as Papists united in the Pope they are not. And if any so
hold the Papacy, as not really to hold Christianity, those are not of the
Christian Church with us; otherwise they are; though a Corrupt, Diseased,
Erroneous part.

To this he says, who ever called a King and his Viceroy, a Captain and
Lieutenant two Heads? The Pope is a dependent Officer.

Answ. 1. But if you distinguish between a Visible Head and an Invisible, and
say, that the Pope only is the Visible Head of the Church as Visible, and that
Christ is only the Invisible Head by Influx; and that it were a Monstrous Body
if it had not such a Visible Head (as you do:) 2. And if this Visible Head be
an Usurpation, never owned by Christ; then I have reason to distinguish the
Policy which is of Gods making, from that which is an Usurpation, and of Men's
relations accordingly.

If any King should say, I am a Vice-God, or Gods Viceroy to Govern all the
Earth, and that by Gods Appointment, and none can be saved that Obey me not; I
would distinguish between the World, or particular Persons, as Gods Subjects,
and as this Vice-Gods Subjects.

18. But he says, Is it possible for two Persons to be Papists, and one to
destroy his Christianity and the other not?

Answ. Yes, very possible and common: That is, one holds those Errors which
by consequence subvert some Article of the Christian Faith, but as to the Words
not understood, or not understanding the consequences; or only speculatively,
and at the same time holds the subverted Articles (not discerning the
contradiction) fastly and practically; another does the contrary. Even as a
Monothelite, or a Nestorian, or Eutychian may either be one that only as to the
Words, or superficially erreth, and in sense, or practically holds the Truth,
or one that is contrary. This should seem no strange thing to you; for even a
Man that professes only Christianity may do it, but Nomine tenus, not
understanding it; or superficially and not practically, and be no true
Christian indeed.

. 19. When I expressed my hope that even he and I as Christians are of one
Church, he will not believe it, 1. Because I am of a Church by my self; neither
of theirs nor any other part. 2. Because I have no Faith.

Answ. It seems then that mere Christianity is no Faith, and that there are
none of the mere Christian Church but I. But who will believe the latter, and
when will he prove either?

An Answer to W. J's Seventh CHAPTER.
. 1. TO his Question, Why we separated from them? I Answered, that as they are
Christians we separate not from them: As Papists we were never of them, but our
Forefathers thought Repentance of Sin to be no Sin. If by Popery they separate
from Christianity, they are damnable Separatists; if they do not, we are of the
same Church, whether they will or not.

(...) To this he says, That We separate from them as much as the Pelagians,
Donatists, Acacians, Luciferians, Nestorians, and Eutychians did from the
Church.

Answ. 1. The Doctrinal Errors and the Separation are of different
consideration. The Pelagians Erred as some Dominicans say the Jesuits do. The
Donatists, like the Papists, appropriated the Church to their own Bishops and
Party; we do none of this. Lucifer Calaritanus was too Zealous against the
Arrians, not communicating with them upon so short Repentance as others did:
But they went not so far, as Crab says the Roman Council in Sylvester's day^
did, that Received no Repentance before forty Years: Nor so far as the honest
Elebertine Council in the number of Years of Men's exclusion from the Communion.
I take Lucifer for Erroneous and Schismatical, but not comparable to the
Papists, who err far more, and yet separate from most of the Christian World.
These Schismatics named by you Sinned by unjust separation from the Imperial
Churches near them, but they did not separate from all the World save
themselves, as the Papists do. And if you believe History, you will find that
some of them did not separate themselves, till they were Anathematized and cast
out by others. Nestorius retired and Lived four Years in great repute in his
Old Monastery near Antioch. The Novatians were too scrupulous of joining with
Wicked Priests and People: And your Writers say, that Pope Nicholas forbad
hearing Mass from a Fornicator Priest. I had rather be in this of the Pope and
the Novatians mind than of those Catholic Priests.

2. But I think this is a considerable Difference: The Erroneous Schismatics
of those times, much more the proper Heretics, did sinfully withdraw from the
Communion of most of the Universal Church, to profess some Error of their own
in singular Conventicles. But we, who take mere Christianity for our Religion,
do own Communion with the far greatest part of the Church on Earth; yea, with
all as Christian, and sepa^ate not for Error, but only from Error and Sin: We
separate from Pelagians as Pelagians, from Novatians as Novatians, and from
Papists as Papists, but not as Christians.

You say, No more did they then. I Answer, 1. They separated from Truth, and we
from Error, as the Council that condemned him did from Pope Honorius. 2. The
Luciferians and Novatians separated Voluntarily; we are cast out by you from
Christian Communion, and are counted Separatists unless we will Sin with you,
or be burnt as Heretics, 3. Let the Reader still note the cheating ambiguity
of your word [Separation.] The Schismatics named, separated from Brotherly
Communion, but we separate from Tyrannical Usurped Domination; and are called
Schismatics (not because we will not have such Communion with you in all
Christian Truth and Duty, but) because we will not be your Vassals or Subjects,
and Sin as often as you command us.

. 2. Page 155. He says, That Had we deserted the sole Communion of the Papacy*
it might have born some show of Defense; but seeing when we separated from that
we remained separated as much from all particular Visible Churches in the
World, as that; you have no Excuse.

Answ. If the Reader have not a very gross Head, he shall see your Calumny. As
your Church is Essentiated by the Papal Head, so far we renounce the very
Essence of your Church: None of the rest of the Christian World pretend to any
such Universal Head but Christ. Therefore we separate not from their Head, or
any Essential part of their Church, as such. We separate as far as we are able
from the corrupt Accidents and faults of every Church and Christian, and would
fain separate more from our own. As we separate from the Abassines in the point
of their often Baptizing, and from the Muscovites, Greeks, Armenians, as to their
Ignorance and some Mistakes and Vices: And so we would separate from
Drunkenness, Fornication, Covetousness, Simony, false Subscriptions, Lies, etc.
in any, where we find them in the World: But this is not Schism or separating
from the Church. Dare you say that this is not our Duty? Will you join in Sin
with every Sinful Church for fear of Schism?

. 3. But he says, That any Arrian will say so, That he separateth not from the
Church as Christian.

Answ. We have brave Disputing with a Man that cannot, or will not distinguish
between Saying and doing. Does it follow that an Arrian does not separate from
the Church as Christian, because they say they do not? I prove the contrary. He
that separateth from the Church for an Ess^ntial part of Christianity,
separateth from the Church as Christian; but so do the Arrians; Ergo: I prove
the Minor. He that separateth, as denying the Godhead of Christ, separateth
for and from an Essential part of Christianity; but so do the Arrians,
Eunomians, Photinians, Samosatemans, Socinians, etc. Ergo --

. 4. Next I opened their dealing with us, that call us Schismatics, because we
will not willingly Sin with them, and be burnt by them, as if it were our Ashes
that refused their Communion; or because Princes will punish wicked Priests, or
as Solomon cast out Abiathar, and put Zadok in his place, or will not be
Subject to a Foreign Usurper, etc.

To this he says, It is a Rhetorical Exclamation and whole Kingdoms condemned
by the Popes Canons to the Flames, must take such an Answer as that for their
Lives. And he again calls on me to name any Visible Church which we separated
not from, which I am aweary of answering so often.

. 5. He asked me whether Subordination and Obedience to the same State and
Government, is not as well required to our Church as to our Commonwealth? I
Answered, Yes: But as all the World is not one Humane Kingdom, so neither is it
one Humane Church. To this he repeateth his old [Visible and Invisible] taking
it for granted, that the Church must have one mere Humane Visible Head or
Governor (Personal or collective) which yet he knows is the great thing
which I deny, and he had to prove, which if he did; all his work were done.

. 6. I Noted that their own Divines are not agreed whether Heretics and
Schismatics are parts of the Church.

To this he says, That 1. He speaks of Parts of the Church, as I understand
parts: Answ. Who would have thought till now but he had spoken as he thought
himself.

2. He says, That I hold that some Heretics, properly so called, are parts of
the Church of Christ, and united to Christ their Head, believing the Essentials
of Christianity, and so are Christians, though Erring in some Accidents; and
this is contrary to all Christianity, and a Nov^lty never held before by any
Christian.

Answ. But such gross Falsehoods as yours, and such deceits have been used
before by many Papists. 1. Where did I say that such as err only in some
Accidents, are properly called Heretics? I distinguished De re and ratione
nominis, but undertook not to tell from the Etymology of the word, which is the
only proper sense of Heresy; but according to the vulgar use of the word among
us, it is taken for one that denies some Essential: But with such as you I see
it is taken more largely; and I am not sure that at first it was not taken for
any Separation or Schism into distinct Sects. All that I say (you may be
ashamed to call me* so often to repeat it) is, That 1. Many are called Heretics
by Papists, yea^ by Philastrius and Epiphanius, that were true Christians, for
ought is said against them (yea, Philastrius numbereth some certain Truths with
Heresies, when his contrary Errors are liker such.) 2. That they that err in
some Accidents may be true Christians, or else I think there is none at Age in
the World. 3. That there is much lamentable Schism, which is no Separation from
the whole Church. 4. That he shall be saved that holds all the Essentials of
Christianity truly and practically. 5. I have proved that your Definitions
absolve more from (...) and Schism than I do.

But it is here to be noted, That this Man makes multitudes to be under the
Papal Head, that are no Subjects of Christ our Head; and so that the Pope has
a Church of his own that is none of Christ's Church.

. 7. I Noted, That either their Church has defined, that (...) and
S^hismaticks are no parts of the Church, or not: If not; how can he stand to it
and impose it on me? If they have, then their Doctors that say the contrary,
(named by Bellarmine) are all (...) themselves.

He says, None of ours ever held them parts, as you do; that is, united to
Christ by Faith and Charity.

Answ. Is not this Man hard put to it? All this while he has been Disputing
us, and all called by their Usurping censure Heretics, out of the Church
Visible; and calling on me to prove the perpetuity of our Church Visible; and
telling me, that without a more Visible Head than Christ it is not Visible. And
yet now it is but the Invisible* Church as Headed by Christ, and endowed with
true Faith and Charity, which these Doctors of theirs exclude Heretics and
Schismatics from.

. 8. I said, Arrians are no Christians, denying Christ's Essence.

He replyeth, True, and so do all H^reticks.

I Answer, If indeed they did so, not only in words not understood, but in the
und^tood sense, so that this is really their belief, and really Exclusive of
the contrary Truth; I place no such Heretics in the Church.

He proves his charge thus: Whosoever denies Christ's most Infallible Veracity
and Divine Authority denies somewhat Essential to Christ; but so does every
Heretic properly called.

Answ. Away with such Heretics as do so indeed.

For the Minor, he comes to the old obscurity, Whosoever denies that to be
true which is sufficiently propounded to him to be Revealed by Christ, denies
Christ's Verity and Divine Authority; but so does every Heretic.

Answ. I have often enough showed, 1. That the Argument is useless, because no
Man can judge of the Sufficiency of Proposals (till they come to very high
degrees) as to the capacities of other Men.

2. That the Major is false: For a Man that doubts not of Christ's Verity and
Authority, may not understand (and so may deny) many Truths sufficiently
propounded, hindering the understanding of them by sloth, senfuality,
partiality, prejudice, or other faults. Can any Man doubt of this?

3. That his Minor also is false: He may be a Heretic that denies that which
is not sufficiently proposed, if his own crime either blinding his mind, or
forfeiting better proposals, cause the insufficiency.

. 9. I noted how they charge one another with Pelagianisme; And he says, Not
in the point of Original Sin.

Answ. And is all the rest come now to be no Heresy? Was it for nothing else
that they were judged Heretics? The rest should have as fair play, if your
interest were but as much for it?

. 10. But says he [Who ever, before you, said that the Catholick-Church could
be divided it self, when it is a most perfect unity; A grand novelty of yours.

Answ. This is because I said, that some make divisions in the Church, that
divide not from it, much less from the whole. I proved before that in this
sense Paul usually speaks against Schism or Divisions, As when he tells the
Corinthians of the divisions among them, etc. But this man would make Scripture
and common sense and reason to be grand novelties; may there not be divisions
in a House, in a Kingdom, in an Army, in a particular Congregation, as that at
Corinth; and that after which Clement wrote his Epistle to heal? Have there not
been abundance of such at Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople? was there no
Division in the Church of Rome, when part cleaved to one Pope, and part to
another for above forty years? Did the Councils of Constance and Basil meet to
heal their Schisms, upon mistake when there was no such thing? And do all
their Historians erroneously number their Schisms? Reader pardon my often
answering such bold abuses; These are their arguers that hope to subvert
England.

. 11. And his reason is such as would show him a Catharist, viz. The Church is
a most perfect Unity; If so, than all grace is perfect which is necessary to
perfect unity. Then the Popes and Anti-Popes, the warring Papalines and
Imperialists, the Jesuits, Dominicans, and Iansinists are all at perfect
Unity; Then there is no disagreement, of Judgment Will or Practice among any
Papists in the world; no Volumes written against other; Alas, how far are such
words from proving it, or from ending their present Controversies or Wars.
Watson and Preston had scarce perfect unity with Father Parsons and the
Jesuits. Does perfect unity draw all the blood between France and the house of
Austria, or in France, between King Hen. ^d. and the Leaguers. It is enough for
me to believe that all true Christians have a true unity in Christ, with each
as his members, but that this Unity among themselves is sadly imperfect, and so
was when they had all the contentions in many General Councils, and when the
people have often fought it out to blood about Religion, and the choice of
Bishops, at Alexandria, Rome, etc. Is this perfection? It is in heaven that we
hope for perfect unity, where all is perfect.

. 12. I told him, Heresy being a personal crime, the Nations cannot be charged
with it Without better proofs.

He says, if he has. 1. the testimony of one of our Writers. (Answ. Alas poor
Kingdoms of Christians! that can be proved Heretics if Pet. Heylin or any one
of our Writers do but say it.) 2. He tells a story of Prestor John sending to
Rome for instruction (Answ. Confuted so often, and by their own Writers, that
it is a shame to repeat it. Nor does that prove them so much as Papists, much
less Heretics.) 3. That their Canon of the Mass, proves them Eutychians, in
that they name the three former Councils, and not that of Calcedon.) Answ.
Small proof will serve the turn with such willing men. What if Dioscorus made
them believe that That Council did condemn the doctrine of Cyril (which he
verily thought was the same which he defended) and rejected the Nicene Creed
(which he appealed to) and that they divided Christ? Might not the consent of
the neighbor Egyptian Bishops put them out of conceit with that Council,
though they owned no Heresy? Do not your Writers now ordinarily quit them of
such Heresy? Do they that disown the Councils of Constance or Basil, own all
the Errors or Schisms which They condemned? You justify the Abassines when
you tell men that your calumnies have no better show of truth.

. 13. Erasmus laments the Age when it became a matter of the highest wit and
subtilty to be a Christian. This seems about Cyrils days, when men's
salvation and all the Churches peace and safety was thought to be at stake,
upon the controversies, Whether de Christo Locutio formalis an materialis erat
maxim propria. An Deus a Sp. Sancto in Virgin concipi and ab ipsa generari
proprie diceretur. Whether Nestorius was a Heretic for saying that he would
not say God was two or three months old. And when poor Eutyches and Dioscorus
for want of skill thought verily they had spoken but what Cyril taught them,
and became Heretics by it before they were aware; when the grand Question was,
whether the word persona had such a signification, as that Christ's Humane
Nature might be called any part of his Person; or whether the Divine Nature,
which is infinite, can be Pars: And whether if the Humane be Pars personae,
then that Personality which was from Eternity without the Humane, could be the
same with that Personality of which the Humane was a part? Or if the Humane be
no part of the Person, but an Accident, whether it be proper to denominate the
Person and Essence from an Accident, so as to say, God was begotten of Mary?
God was two Months old! God was dead and buried, ascended, etc. And when the
whole Salvation of Men seemed to lie on the curiosity, How far two Natures, or
two wills so nearly united as to have a communication of Names and Epithets,
might be said to be made One? No doubt but in all these the Orthodox were in
the right: But it is pity that when Logic was so denied in the Council of Nice,
and Apollinaris blamed for too much using it, and the Council at Carthage
forbad the use of the Heathens Books, yet so many Men must burn in Hell for
being no better Logicians or more metaphysical; and all Men to the end of the
World must be numbered with them, that do not anathematize them. And that
Millions of Ignorant Men and Women in Abassia, Syria, Armenia, etc. that know
nothing of these Matters, nor ever heard of them, to whom they are as an
unknown Tongue, must all be unchristened and damned as Heretics; yea, for not
owning a Council that most (it is like) never heard of. Alas, how few in
England, Ireland, or any Country know what the Council of Chalcedon did, or
ever heard it?

But yet all these Heretics (two or three parts of the World) have an easy
way of Recovery: It is but to believe as the Pope of Rome believes, though they
know not what, and take him for their Sovereign, and they are safe. But the
final Judgment is more Just.

. 14. Page 169. He adds, The Abassines confess themselves to follow Eutyches
and Dioscorus, and therefore there needs neither Trial nor Conviction.

Answ. 1. Where is your Proof that they so confess? We will not confess that
this is no Slander. 2. Alas, how few of them know who Eutyches and Dioscorus
were! 3. And of those that Honor their Names how few know what they held? 4.
Your own Writers acquit them of that Heresy. 5. The Truth is, the Tradition of
their Country teaches them to Honor Dioscorus for his place sake; but I
cannot learn that the Name of Eutyches is known or Honored much by them. 6. O
that the Papists had not more and greater Errors than either Nestorius or
Eutyches, and that you condemned not your selves in condemning the Abassines.

. 15. Let the Reader Note, that this Man would first have us believe that the
Abassines and others, whom they call Heretics, are Subjects of the Pope, and
of their Church, and yet that they are Heretics, and so that Heretics are no
parts of the Church, and yet that they are parts of their Church.

His shameless calling for proof that any of their Writers acquit them from
these Heresies, shall not tempt me to lose my time in citing them.

. 16. Next we come to his charge, That the Greek Church rejects us as well as
they: Therefore the whole Church rejects us. Therefore we are to be rejected
(Heretics) or else the whole Church is deceived.

Answ. 1. The Translater of Nicephorus at the story of Faelix and Acacius's
damning each other, adds these useful citations in the Margin: In
Ecclesiasticis censoriis and excommunicationibus, causa imprimis valet, Origin.
Cum aliquis exit a veritate, a timore De^, a fide, a Charitate, exit de castris
ecclesi^, etiamsi per Episcopi vocem minim^ abjiciatur; sicuti e contrario
aliquis non recto judicio soras mittitur: Sed si ante non exivit, id est si non
egerit ut mereretur exire, nihil laeditur: Interdum n. qui ^ora mittitur, intus
est: Et qui foris est, intus videtur retineri. 24 Qu. 3. August. Custodi intus
innocentiam tuam, ubi nemo opprimit causam tuam; praevalebit in te falsum
testimonium, sed apud homines; non apud Deum, ubi causa dicenda est: Quando
Deus erit Iudex alius testis quam Conscientia tua non erit: Inter justum
judicem and Conscientiam tuam, noli timere nisi causam tuam. 11. q. 3. Quid
obest homini quod ex illa tabula vult eum delere humana ignorantia, si de libro
viventium non deleat iniqua Conscientia. August. ib.
He that never read Church History, may think that there is some signification
in this Cant of, The whole Church, and the Universal Church: But so will not
he, that knows how the Prelates have usually turned to the stronger side, and
that if the Majority be the whole, the whole Church was Orthodox in
Constantines days, and the whole Church was Arrian in the days of Constantius
and Valens; the whole Church was Eutychian in Theodosius Junior's days, and
long Monothelites, and Iconoclasts, etc.

2. If it prove Men to be Heretics or Schismatics because the Major part
reject them, then the Orthodox were Heretics when the foresaid Arrians
rejected them. But you have been so long used to Usurp Christ's Chair, that you
seem to be grown to believe your selves, that a Man is out of Christ's Church,
if other Men do but say that he is out. As if you knew not that the Church is
to put no Man farther from Christ, but only to declare how far from him they
have put themselves. And if any declare more than is true, it does not separate
the wronged Person from Christ. e. g. I heard but yesterday diverse Persons
Excommunicated, some for Teaching School without License, and some for other
such like things: Does it follow, that these are any further out of the Church
than they put themselves?

3. But tell us, if you can, when the Greek Church, or Patriarch of
Constantinople did presume to Excommunicate us? You will not tell us. How then
does their rejection signify that we are not of the same Church? The Truth is,
the Greek Church never declared their mind concerning us: If you will call one
Man, or twenty Men the Greek Church, you may use your Liberty, but we shall
little regard it. In the days of one Patriarch (Cyril) he declares for us, and
our Reformation: The Papists in Charity get him Murdered. Another (Jeremiah)
declares his dissent from us; but it is one thing to dissent from some things,
and another thing to take Men for none of the Church. If you will charge the
Greeks to be such Separatists, as to unchurch or unchristen all that they in
controverted* Points dissent from: We will not believe you in so ugly a charge,
till you have proved it. The Greeks disown us, and we them, in some lesser
things, but neither they nor we presume to unchristen one another. And if they
or we did, it would unchristen none of us, unless we first unchristened our
selves.

4. But if the Greeks have the supreme authority, as the virtual universal
Church, then the Papists have it not; if the Papists have it, the Greeks have
it not: If neither has it, who has it? Neither of you, nor both are the real
Universal Church, and neither is Virtually the Universal. Therefore if both did
Excommunicate us, we are not therefore Excommunicate by the Church Universal.

5. But may the Church Universal err in Excommunicating, or not? If so, then
you have said nothing: If not, you take a General Council to be indeed the
Church representative: and then how many of your Popes (Essential parts of your
Church) have been Excommunicated, and deposed as Heretics by the Universal
Church? And your Church now is but the Successor of (e. g. Eugenius the
fourth) so rejected: Show us when ever the Greeks did so by our Church or us.

. 17. I told him, the Greek Church claimed but the Primacy or Supremacy in the
Empire, and not the Government of all the World.

At this, he first wondreth, and then takes upon him to disprove it. 1. Because
else Gregory the first had ill reprehended John of Constant. for claiming the
Title of Universal Bishop. 2. Because Jeremy says, 1. He was Vice Christi: 2.
And persuades Lucius, etc. to be Subject to the Church with them.

Answ. 1. It was the Arrogance of the Title that Gregory reprehended, as
sounding like a real Universal Claim, and the reality of an Universal Claim in
the Empire. I proved before, that the Greeks knew that Constant. had no Title,
Iure Divine, by the Can. 28 of Chalcedon, and the notoriety of the thing: And
therefore they could not pretend it to be over all the World, where the Empire
had no Power. And what need there more proof, than that there is no Evidence
brought by you or any, that ever they gave Laws to all the Christian World; or
that ever they called Councils out of it, or that ever they set up and put down
Bishops in it? Indeed they have Excommunicated Roman Popes; but that was within
the Empire, (and so did Alexandria.) Or if since, (as they do still) it is not
as their Governors, but as any Churches may renounce Communion with Heretics,
or Persons incapable of their Communion.

2. And as for Jeremy, 1. Will not Cyril as much prove the contrary? 2. Is one
Man the Greek Church? 3. Did every Apostle, or does every Minister of Christ
proclaim himself Universal Head of the Church, when he says, as 2 Cor. 5. 19.
We beseech you, Vice Christi in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God? It is
one thing to be Preachers in Christ's stead to our particular Flocks, and
another thing to Usurp Christ's proper Office, and be in his stead Universal
Governor of the World. 4. And may not one of us, or any Christian persuade a
Man to be Subject to the Church of Christ? And if Ieremias had a mind to Rule
further than the Empire, now the Empire is Mahome^an, and Subjects Voluntary
and free, what wonder is it? We undertake not to Justify him from all Ambition.

. 18. I told him, out of his Ieremias, and his Protonotary John Zygomolas, that
they confessed Agreement with us [In continuis and causam fidei praecipue
continentibus articulis;] and that [Quae videntur consensum impedire talia
sunt, si velit quis, ut facile ^a corrig^re possit.]

He tells me, That, 1. Yet they consent with them in all save the Popes
Authority. Answ. 1. How far that is from Truth, Thom. a Jesus, and other of your
own will tell you. 2. And the Popes Authority is the ratio formalis of Popery.

2. He says. That Ier. claims as Supreme Authority over the whole Church, as
the Pope does. Answ. 1. I will not believe it till I see the proof: I find he
lays all his Claim from Councils, and therefore may possibly claim power over
those Churches that were in the Empire when the Council of Chalcedon gave that
power; but I find no more: And if he did, they and we may yet be Christians.

3. He says, Any of the Roman Church might write the like to the Lutherans:
But Zygomalas supposes them of two Churches, till united. Answ. He supposes
them not in all things of the same mind, nor of the same particular Churches.
But he that says, that we agree in the Articles of Faith, and differ but in
lesser things of easy reconciliation, either supposes both Parties to be
Christians, and of one Church of Christ, or else that no Men are Christians
that have any Difference, that is no two explicit Believers, perhaps, in the
World.

. 19. I told him, 1. The Patriarch was not the Greek Church: Nor, 2. Their
lesser Errors prove us of two Religions or Churches.

He Replyeth: 1. But he knew the Extent of his own Jurisdiction. Answ. 1. So do
not all Ambitious Men: If he do, then the Papists are all deceived; for he
pretended, say you, a Jurisdiction over the Pope and his Church.

But the Question between him and the Protestants, w^ not about his
Jurisdiction.

2. He says, That If the Errors be tolerable, we are Schismatics in
Separating from them, and should rather have suffered. Answ. To separate from
any sin and error, by not consenting or committing it, no Christian denies to
be our duty: and his supposition that we separated from the Catholic or the
Greek Church, is but his continued fiction. We were not under the Government of
the Greeks, and therefore not obeying them is no separation; and not sinning
with them is no separation: we own them as Christians, and we renounce the sins
of all the world, and hate our own more than any others, so far as we know them.

. 20. To his saying that It is against Christianity to hold condemned Heretics
to be in the Church. I answered 1. That I detest that condemnation when, even
non judices, condemn whole nations without hearing one man, much-lesser all
speak for themselves, or any just witness that ever heard them defend a Heresy.

His Answer is, that I mistake the way of their Churches condemnation: They do
but say whoever holds such errors let him be accursed, or, we excommunicate
such as hold them, etc.

Answ. There is some hope left then for the Nations that are no subjects of the
Pope, unless non-subjection be the Heresy. But has the Pope gone no further
than this? Has he not put whole Nations under Interdicts?

But he says those that profess their heresies, or that communicate with them,
are esteemed heretics: and those that profess to disbelieve their heresy, and
yet live in communion with them and subjection to them, are Schismatics.

Answ. 1. Here Is new confounding doctrine indeed. If their Canon only condemn
indefinitely those that hold a heresy (e. g. Nestorianism, taking it to be
unfit to say God dyed or If a just Law should say, let e. g. an Arrian be
anathematized, a man must be lawfully convict, and judged an Arrian, and
personally sentenced: when it is said, Let such be excommunicated ipso facto
vel ipso: jure, the ^ct must be proved, and a declaratory sentence is necessary
to the subject's obligation, to avoid such.
God was born) must all be taken for heretics that communicate with any of
these, before the person guilty is convict, and judged? Must every private man
be the judge of hi^ neighbor? Every servant, of his Master? Every woman, of
her husband? Every subject, of the King; and be burnt for a heretic, for
communicating with one that was never accused or condemned? We live then with
one another more dangerously than men converse in the time of pestilence. Nay
what if the Priest himself admit such to the Communion, must the poor people be
burned if they communicate with them in the parish Church: and yet be punished
if he do not come to Church and communicate?

2. Lament, Reader, to think what engines Clergy-tyranny has made against
Christian Love, Peace, and Concord, to set the world into a war. If the
Council, for want of understanding a point of doubtful words, pronounce such
words Heresy, all people for fea^ of being burnt and damned, must fly from all
as heretics that they think are for those condemned words. All our Plowmen and
women must be supposed to know that it is heresy e. g. to say that Christ has
but one will, (though the speaker mean objectively one, or else. One by Union
of the divine and humane nature,) or to say that it was not God that was
conceived* and, suffered and dyed, and was passible, (when he means only
formal^ter, not As God, but on^* he that is God;) and then every family must
have an inquisition, and people must f^ from one another, before any judgment.
Does not this give every lad and woman some power of the keys, and every
subject a power of judging Kings and Judges.

3. But mark, Reader, how sin condemns it self, as envy eats its own flesh,
e. g. general Council condemns Pope Eugenius as an Heretic, (or John XXIII.
or others:) T^* whole Church of Rome continued in communion and subjection to
this condemned Her^tick (as they did with Honorius:) Therefore by their own
sentence the whole Church (...) Rome must be taken for Heretics.

And if so, 4. See how they justify us for separating from them, when they
judge us heretics themselves if we communicate with them.

Alas, if a wrangling proud Clergy have but ignorance and pride enough to call
Gods servants Berengarians, Wicklefists, Waldenses, Lutherans, Zuinglians,
Calvinists, Iconoclasts, Luciferians, Quartodecimani, etc. heretics, all
families and neighbourhoods are presently bound to fly from one another, as if
they had the plague, or were enemies.

And must subjection come in for heresy? If you call our King a heretic, must
all his subjects be taken for hereti^ks for having communion and subjection to
him. Will the Popes charge^ yea, or real heresy disoblige us from Subjection.
And yet will you pretend to be loyal subjects.

. 21. I gave him the proof that he before called for, from Thomas a Jesus, and
Paul^, Veriditus (Harris of Dublin against Usher) that their writers vindicate
the Greeks from heresy. To which he says that I could not but know that he
meant of the modern Greeks (as heretics) and not of the ancient fathers, of
which Bernard, Aquinas and Paul Harris speak.

Answ. This Answer has a very bold face if it do not blush. 1. It was the
words of Thomas a sancto Jesus de convers. Gent. a late writer that I recited,
to whose testimony as his he gives not one word of answer: And Thom. in the
words cited expressly speaks of the present Greeks, and it is the very scope
of his writing.

2. Thomas cited ex junioribus Azorius. 1. Iustit. Moral. l. 8. c. 20. To which
he gives not a word of answer.

3. Paul Harris says that when the Greeks had explicated their a Patre per
filium, (viz. in the Council at Florence) they were found to believe very
orthodoxely, and catholickly, ye^ does this man say that Harris speaks of the
ancient Greeks; expressly contrary both to his dris^ and words. Is there any
dealing with these false hereticaters? It Is well that no Council has
anathematized falsehood and calumny for heresies, else we must have no communion
with such, that have no better means to dispute down christian Love and
Concord.

Yea what need I more testimony than that Council of Florence it self, which so
judged; and was supposed to heal the breach by explications. Nor is it true
that Bernard and Aquinas spoke not of the Greeks in their times as owning the
same cause that these do now.

. 22. I told him, if Greeks and Latins, will divide the Church, and damn each
other, they shall not draw us into their guilt.

He says again that the Church cannot be divided, it is so perfectly One.

Answ. If I have not shamed the Saying, let me bear the shame, though we say,
that it cannot have any part totally divided from Christ; for then it were no
part; and therefore none is divided relatively or really from the whole body.
But if the parts may not have sinful divisions from each other, secundum quid,
Paul told the Corinthians amiss, and the Papists Historians much mistook that
talked of about 40 Schisms at Rome, and of the Popes adherents, when part of the
body had one head, and part another, for so long a time, and to such sad
effects.

. 23. Next I cited him the express words of their own Florentine Council,
professing that the Greeks and Latins were found upon conference to mean the
same thing. To which he says. 1. That it was but a few of them, and that
Marcus Ephesus dissented. 2. Tha^ they revolted when they returned home*

Answ. 1. See still how they fight against their selves. The seeming concord of
this Council (which did the Pope who was newly condemned and deposed by a great
general Council, more service than ever any did them) is the great pretense of
their false boasting that the Greek Church is subject to the Pope: And yet he
teaches us truly to say that it was but a few, and that Marcus Ephesians. dissented,
and that they stood not to it when they came home. The known truth is that the
Emperor in distress constrained some to dissemble in hope of relief, of which
when he failed, the submission was at an end. And the Church never consented to
it.

2. But as to the point in hand, it is not the Greeks recovery from an error
that the Council mentions, but the discovery of their meaning which was found
to be Orthodox. And though they yet use not the Romans phrase, they never
retracted the sense in which they were found to be orthodox.

. 24. Next, he citing Nilus that the Greeks broke off from the Latins for the
[filioque] alone, I recited Nilus his title and words at large, professing,
that There is no other cause of dissension between the Latin and Greek Churches
but that the Pope refuses to defer the cognizance and judgment of that which
is controverted, to a general Council, but he will sit the sole Master and
Judge of controversy, which is a thing aliene to the Laws and actions of the
Apostles and Fathers. The cause of the disseren^ (says he) is not the
sublimity of the point exceeding man's capacity; for other matters that have
diverse times troubled the Church, have been of the same kind. This therefore is
not the cause of the dissension; much less the Scripture. But who the fault is
in; any one may easily tell that is well in his wits. Nor is it because the
Greeks (...) claim the Primacy (N. B.) He mentions that the Pope succeeds
Pet^ only as a Bishop or dained by him, as many other Bishops originally
ordained by him do, and that his primacy is n^ governing power, nor given him
by Peter, but by Princes and Councils, which he copiou^ proves.

To this he says. 1. that yet this may stand with the [^ioque] being the first
cause.

Answ. 1. But the question was of the sole cause. 2. He denies it to be any
cause, but only an Occasion, and the Popes usurpat^on to be the only Cause. 3.
Is it not known that the Quarrel and Breach began long before, about the Title
of universal Bishop, though the Greeks did not then excommunicate you?

2. He says that By this it is implied that the Greeks agree with them in all
things, save the Popes Sovereignty.

Answ. Does it follow that because he says that this only is the cause of the
division of your Churches, therefore there are no other disagreements? all
sober Christians have learnt to forbear excommunications and separations when
yet there are many disagreements; and we never denied but the Greeks agree more
with you than they ought, and specially in striving who shall be great.

. 25. To his repeated words, that all these were not distinct congregations,
etc. I told him again, that we are for no congregations distinct from
Christians, as such. To which he replyeth again. 1. That no heretics say they
depart from the Church as Christian. Answ. But if they do so, it is no matter
though they do not say so. Whoever departs from the Church for somewhat
Essential to Christianity departs from it as Christian: but you say your self
that all heretics depart from the Church for somewhat Essential to
Christianity: Ergo, etc.

Object, Then they are Apostates. Answ. Apostates in the common sense are those
that openly renounce Christianity in terms, as such, but those that renounce
any essential part are Apostates really, though but secundum quid, and no^ the
usual sense.

2. He entreats me to name him the first Pope that was the Head of the whole
Church in the world. Answ. 1. There never was any such; for the whole Church
never owned him, Abussia, Persia, India, etc, never was governed by him to this
day; and not past a third or fourth part is under him now. 2. But I must name
the first that claimed it: had I lived a thousand years at every Popes elbow I
would have ventured to conjecture; but it is an unreasonable motion to make to
me that am not 70 years old. I must confess my ignorance, I know not who was
the first man that was for the Sacrament in one kind only (without the cup;)
nor who first brought in praying in an unknown tongue, or Images in Churches;
nor who first changed the custom of adoring without genuflexion on the Lords
days. I leave such Taskes to Polydore Virgil de Invent. rerum. Little know I
who was the first proud Pope, or Heretical, or Simoniacal, or Infidel Pope; it
satisfies me to know that 1. It was long otherwise, 2, And that it came in by
degrees (nemo repent sit pess^mus.) 3. And that it should not be so.

The rest of his charge against the Greeks, etc. requires no answer; instead
of doing it, he tells me he has proved there must be governors of the whole
Church; which if he had done, as to any Universal Head, he might have spared
all the rest of his labor.

. 26. I thought a while that he had answered all my book, but I find that he
slips over that which he had no mind to meddle with, and among others these
following words, (you may judge why.)

P. 115. Many of the Greeks have been of brotherly charity to our Churches of
late: Cyril, I need not name to you, whom your party procured murdered for
being a Protestant. (A worthy Patriarch of Constantinople, who sent us by Sir
Tho. Roe, our Alexandrian Sept. and whose confession is published. And why is
not He as much the Greek Church as Ieremias?) Meletius, first Patriarch of
Alexandria, and then of Constantinople, was highly offended with the fiction of
a submission of the Alexandrian Church to Rome, (under a counterfeit Patriarch
Gabriel's name) and wrote thus of the Pope in his Letters to Sigismund King of
Poland An. 1600. Perspiciat Mojestas tua nos cum majoribus, etc. Your Majesty
may see that we with our Ancestors are not ignorant of the Roman Pope (whom you
pray us to acknowledge) nor of the Patriarch of Constant. and the rest of the
Bishops of the Apostolical Stats. There is one universal Head, which is our
Lord Jesus Christ. Another there cannot be, unless it be a two-headed body, or
rather a monster of a body. You may see, most serene King, (that I may say
nothing of that Florentine Council, as a thing worthy of silence) that we
departed not from the opinions and traditions of the East and West which by
seven General Councils they consigned, and obsigned to us; but that they
departed, who are daily delighted with novelties. In the same letter he
commends Cyril, and what can a Protestant say more against the Vice-Christ
and your novelties, and the false pretended submission of the Greeks.

So much to that which he calls his First part of his Book.

An Answer to W. J's second Part of his Reply.
. 1. IN this which he calls his Second Part there is so much of mere words, or
altercation, and of his false interpretation of some particular histories and
citations, that should I answer it fully, it would be a great snare to the
Reader. 1. To weary him. 2. To lose the matter in controversy in a wood of
words. 3. And to suppose us both to strive about circumstances, and so to cast
it by, that I shall not lose so much of my time to so ill a purpose. All that I
desire of the Reader that would have a particular answer, is, 1. That he
remember the answer that is already given to much of it. 2. That he observe
that almost all his citations signify no more, than 1. That both the Romans
and other Patriarchs were long striving who should be the greatest, and
therefore intermeddling with as many businesses as they could. 2. That the
supreme Church Power being then placed by consent and by the Emperors in
Councils, the five Patriarchs ought to be at these Councils when they were
Universal, as to the Empire. 3. That Rome had the first place in order of these
Patriarchs or Seats. 4. That the eastern Bishop when oppressed by Arrlans and
persecutions, did fly for council and countenance to the Roman Emperors who
held orthodox, and to the Roman Bishops as the first Patriarchs, and as having
interest in the Emperors: he that was one of the greatest, might help the
oppressed to some relief, having an orthodox Emperor; by which means
Constantius was constrained, and Athanasius restored; by the threatening of a
war by the western Emperor, and not by the authority of the Pope. And the like
aid was often sought from Alexandria and Antioch. 5 That this man and the rest of
them straineth all such words as sound any respect to the Bishop of Rome, any
reverence of his place and judgment, any counsel that he gives to any, any
help that any sought of him, as signifying his Government of all the Empire. 6.
That he feigneth all such interest or power in the Empire to be a Monarchical
Government of all the world The Pragmatic. Ferrariensis says, Imperatores
conferrebant omnia beneficia per universum orbem. Is it any doubt what the
orbis universus was?
. 7. That he to these ends leads men into verbal quarrels about the sense of
many passages in history and fathers, where he knows that the vulgar cannot
judge, nor any that are not well versed in all those books, which most
preachers themselves have not sufficient leisure for. 8. That contrary to the
notorious evidence of histories, he maintains that no Councils were called
without the authority of the Roman Bishop, when the Emperors ordinarily called
them, by sending to each Patriarch to summon those of his circuit to such a
place, and the Bishops of Alexandria and Constant. had more hand in calling
them till 700 or 800 if not much longer than the Pope had. 9. If the Reader can
try all our passages here about, by the books themselves (not taking scraps,
but the main drift of Church History) and the particular authors, I will desire
no more of him than to read them himself; if not, neither to believe the report
of W. I. or me, as certain to him: For how can he know which of us reports an
author truly? but to keep to such evidences of Reason and Scripture as he is
capable of judging of.

. 2. When I said that the Emperor (Theodosius 2d.) gave sufficient testimony,
and those that adhere to Dioscorus how little in those days they believed the
Popes infallibility or sovereignty, when they excommunicated him, (and the
Emperor and ^ivil Officers bare Dioscorus.) He does over and over tell me how I
defend Rebels against a Sovereign, and I have laid a Principle emboldening all
Rebels to depos^ Sovereigns, or prove that they have no authority over them.
Answ. Alas poor Kings and Emperors, who are judged such subjects to the
Priests, that he that pleads for your power, pleads for Rebels against your
Sovereign Pope. And that are by these even judged so sheepish, as that by the
name of Rebellion charged on your defenders, they look to draw your selves to
take them for Rebels, who would make you know that you are Princes and not the
subjects of foreigners or your subjects: but yet the instance which I give
shows the sense of Theodosius and others, be it right or wrong.

. 3. Had it not been that the Printer by three or four Errata's (as Sixtus
fifth, etc.) made him some work, he had had little to say but what confutes it
self.

. 4. But cap. 4. p. 289 he would be thought to speak to the purpose, viz. That
out of the Empire the Pope restored Bishops, (and did he depose any?) He was
wiser than to name any; but says, Such were all those Bishops who about the
year 400 in Spain and France, and an. 475 in England, and 595 in Germany, 499
and other Western and Northern Kingdoms, who were taken from under the command
of the Roman Emperor, or were never under it, and were restored by the Bishop
of Romes authority, etc.

Answ. Mere deceit! he can name none deposed or restored by the Pope, but 1.
Such as were in the Empire. 2. Or such as were in the same national Church with
Rome, when the Barbarians claimed power both over Rome and the neighbor
Countries, (as Odoacer and others claimed power to have the choice of a Pope
themselves, or that none should be Pope but by their consent.) 3. Or when the
King of any revolted or conquered nation subjected himself, or his subjects
voluntarily to the Pope, as they have done since the declining of the Empire.
Or 4. when they that had been used in the Empire to the canonical way, in
Councils and under Patriarchs, desired when they were conquered to do as they
had done, and were permitted. As the Patriarch of Constant. that lays no
claim as jure divino, yet under the Turk claims still superiority over all
those Churches that were formerly by Councils put under him, what Princes
soever they be under, supposing that those Councils authority is still valid,
though the Empire be dissolved. 5. Or when the Pope was but a mere Intercessor
or Arbitrator, and no Rector.

. 5. But p. 410 etc. he comes on again with repetitions and additions, to
prove that Foreigners were at the four first General Councils.

Answ. If he prove that all the Churches in the world made up those Councils,
he put hard to prove that indeed they were universal. But I have not yet found
that he has proved it of any one, unless in the fore-excepted cases.

Of the Emperor Arcadius acts for Goths and Scythians. See Theodoret. Hist. l.
5. (...). 30. 31. And Ni^horus ^ith li. ^4. c. 56. Theodosii ^unioris 19. annum
imperantis permissu, in sinitima Thraciae regione habitarunt. per 50 annos. And
li. 11. c. 48. when the Hunns drove the Goths ^ut of their Country, Valens
^ave ^em a place in ^ract.
I. His Theophilus Gothiae metropolis, I spoke of before. He now says, Bishop
of Gothia in the farthest parts of the North beyond Germany.

Answ. But where is his Proof? The Country that he talks of was not long after
converted to Christianity. He knew not that it was the Getae that were then
called Goths, says Ferrarius Polouci test Math. Michovicus. (Steph. Paul.
Diac) populus Sarmatiae Europeae boreale latus maris Euxini incolentes, prius
Getae, test D. Isidor. li. 9. De quibus Auson. Horum metropolis et urbs GOTHIA
archiepis. antequam a Turcis occuparetur. Auson. ep. 3. Hinc possem victos inde
refer Gothos: Regio Gothea, nunc Osia, inter Tyram et Borysthenem. This was
then in the Empire.

. 6. II. His second is Dominus (Domnus) Bosphori, a City of Thracia, Cimmeria,
or India as Cosmographus declares the Bishop of Botra, a City of this name is
found in Arabia and Sala, a Town also of great Phrygia, the higher Pannonia and
Armenia is so called.

Answ. This pitiful stuff may amase the ignorant, Domnus Bospori is the last
subscriber. Bosphorus is said in the subscriptions to be Provinciae Bostrensis,
in a Roman Province. There be diverse straites of the sea called Bosphori, one
between Constant and Calcedon; another the sretum Cimmerium, vel os Moeotidis,
called of the Italians stretto de Cassa, and the straits between Taurica
Chersonesus in Europe, and Sarmatia in Asia, There is the City Bosphorus, an
Archiepiscopal seat, vulgo Vospero. Abest (inquit Ferrarius) a Thracio 500 mil.
pass. ab ostio Tanais 375 in austrum. This was in the Empire, and he himself
names it first a City of Thracia, and yet (the Learned Cosmographer) proves
that it was out of the Empire: are not these meet men to prove all the Earth to
be in the Popes jurisdiction?

. 7. III. His 3d. is Ioh. Persi lis, of whom enough already, he is said to be
of the Province of Persia, which therefore was some skirt of Persia then in the
Empire, and a Town in Syria was called Persa, what proof then is here of any
one man out of the Empire? So much for Nice.

. 8. IV. He next tells us of three Bishops of Scythia at the first Council at
Constant.

Answ. And what of that? 1. Is it not said, that they were of the Province of
Scythia? And 2. Does not Eusebius. in vit. Constable. tell you when Scythia (that is
part of it) was conquered by Constantine? And Tomis was known to be in the
Empire: It was a City of the Inferior Mysia, where Ovid was Banished, and by
Socrates made the sole Bishopric of Scythia then.

Binnius desires pardon if the Subscriptions be not true, so little certainty
is here pretended. And what Crab says, I before cited, the 4 or 5 Copies so
greatly disagreeing.

. 9. V. Says W. I. And Etherius Anchialensis: now Anchialos, is a City in
Thracia, not far from Apollonia.

Answ. 1. There Is no mention in Crab or Binnius of Etherius Anchialensis, but
of Aetherius Tersonitanus or Tonsonitanus; and of Sabastianus Anchialensis. 2.
And if there were three from Scythia (which is not likely, because Socrates
said they had none but of Tamis,) this was one of them. 3. And does not this
Man well prove the Pope and Councils Power to extend beyond the Empire, when he
instanceth in such a City of Thracia, where Constantinople it self was? But
whether it was the Bishop of Anchialos, an Archbishopric on the side of the
Euxine Sea, called Kenkis by the Turks; or else Anchiale, a City of Cilicia,
thought by Stephanus to be Tarsus, by Pliny to be near it (though the first is
likeliest) it is known that both were in the Empire.

. 10. VI. He next comes to Ephesians. 1. Council. And there we have again Phebaemon
Coptorum Episcopus.

Answ. Reader, pardon my repeated detection of his repeated Errors. 1. It is in
Crab or Binnius, Copti; which I have told you was a City of the Province of
Thebais: And those now called Copti are Egyptians; yea, Binnius, p. 741.
reciting the very words of every Bishop at that Council, says, Phaebaemon
Coptorum Thebaidis Episcopus dixit. And was not Thebais in the Empire? The
Copti's now are supposed so called from the City Coptos.

. 11. VII. His next instance is, Theodulus Esulae, Episc. Anciently a City of
Arabia.

Answ. There is no such Man as Theodulus in the first subscriptions in Crab or
Binnius; nor no such place as Esula: But Binnius has Ampela, alias Abdela
Helusae; and after, p. 742. Theodulus Elusae: and p. 758. Helusae. In the
recitation in Council. Chalcedon, of the Ephesia^ Subscriptions, it is Theodulus
Ticeliae civitatis Ep. so little certainty is here.

2. Esulae is in Italy, and Esula is Isola, a City of Greece on the Borders of
Calabria: See Ferrarius, that there were diverse Eleusa's within the Empire.

. 12. VIII. His next is, Theodorus Gadarorum, Episcopus: Of that Name is a City
in Cava Syria.

O happy proof of the Popes Universal Monarchy and Councils! It is Chadarorum
in Binnius: But Gadara or Gadora, is indeed a City of Coelosyria, where Christ
gave the Devil power over the Swine: And did not this Learned Man know that the
Gadarens were within the Empire?

. 13. IX. Next he comes to the Council of Chalcedon, and there begins with
Antipater Bostrorum Episc. which he says, is in Arabia, ut supra.

Answ. Ut supra, what was said of it before? He dreamed of Bosphorus somewhere
far off before, and now it is Bostrorum. But there is no such Man as I can find
mentioned in Crab or Binnius: But there is Constantinus Episcopus Bostrorum,
Subscribing for himself and thirteen Bishops under him: The first is the Bishop
of Gerassa, a Town near the Lake of Genasaret, under this Archbishop. And does
not this great Disputer know that the Archbishop of Bostra was in the Empire,
though it were in Arabia Petraea? And was the City where the Emperor Philip
was Born, and called thence Philippopolis; and, as Ferrarius says, was
formerly under the Patriarch of Antioch, but after under him of Jerusalem? Such
is the Historical proofs of the Roman Universality.

. 14. X. The next cited, is Olympius Scythopoleos, which is a City of Scythia
in Coelosyria.

Answ. 1. There is no such Man that I can find in Binnius, who has the largest
Catalogue: There be diverse Olympii, but none Scythopoleos. But there is twice
Olympius Sozopoleos, which, it is like, was the Man, as being the nearest Name;
of which Name there was one in Pisidia under Antioch; and another in Thrace
under Adrianople.

2. Myraeus tells you the nine Bishops under Scythopolis, vulgo Bethsan, Urbs
in Iudeae and Galileae confinibus, ad Iordanem fluvium, nobilis exstitit, says
he, p. 23.
But the Bishop of Scythopolis may be found in some Councils: And where is
that? In Palestine by the Lake Genasareth, but forty seven Miles from
Jerusalem, and sixteen from Samaria, an Archbishops Seat, under the Patriarch
of Jerusalem. Here is another of his Proofs.

. 15. XI. The next is, Eustathius Gentis Saracenorum, of Saraca: There is a
City so called in Arabia faelix.

Answ. And what then? Must the word [Gen^s Sarra^orum] prove that he was out of
the Empire, when part of Arabia Niceph. l. 16. c. 43. Arabes servitutes
conditiones a Romany accepisse.
was in it? But says Perrarius, Horuin ^bs in consilio Gal^ membratur; sed in
Palestina idque ratione vio^nitatis, ob quam idem ^pens diversis regionibus
confinibus attribui consuevit. And was Palestine without the Empire? You see I
cite none to shame your falsehood, but your own Writers.

. 16. XII. The next is, Constantinus Episcopus Bostrorum in Arabia Remember
that Historians (Socrates, Zozomene, Niceph, etc tell us, that the Arabians had
Bishops in the Villages, and therefore great numbers.
faelix.

Answ. Memoria faelix was greatly wanting to him, to forget so suddenly that he
had just before cited a false named Bishop of the same City; and now he gives
us the true one as another Man: Sure a Papist does not believe that one City
had two Bishops at that Council. I showed you before that Bostra See in Myraei
Natiti. Epis. the nineteen Bishops under Bostra, page 26.
was in the Empire.

. 17. XIII. Yet there is one more, and that is, Subscribit quidam pro Giaco
Gerassae Episcopo. Gerafa is a City of Coelosyria.

Answ. I mentioned him before I noted your instance. And is he therefore out of
the Empire because in Coelosyria? An excellent collection. I told you out of
Ferrarius, that it is by the Lake of Gennasareth, under this Archbishop of
Bostra: And surely that was as undoubtedly in the Empire, as Jerusalem was.

. 18. And now I have done with all his strange proofs, that Extraimperial
Bishops were at the four first General Councils (or any long after) and
consequently that the Pope is the Monarchical Bishop of all the World, and not
a National Primate only. And if a Man can tell me where to find a cause so
betrayed by the shameful failing of so great a Hector, I am yet to learn it.
And this is the Man that before promised us a peculiar Treatise to prove this
very thing; but instead of it, was fain shamefully to put us off with thirteen
Names, without one proof, but gross Mistakes.

. 19. But I will say more for him than he has said for himself: When I read an
odd Epistle in Crab and Binnius of the Nestorians at the Ephesine Council to
Callimones the King, as commanding them to meet at Ephesus, and as a very
Christian Prince: I wondered who it was, having never read of any such King of
Persia; and began to suspect that the King of Persia might send some Ioh.
Persidis also thither. But I found neither Name, nor Character, nor History,
nor the Cities of the Oriental Bishops named encouraged me to any such
thoughts. But at last Binnius himself, and his Author helped me out of my
Ignorance; saying, per Callimorem Persidis Regem Persidis Regem is not in ^rah.
Theodosium designant. Appellant autem eum ob id hoc nomint, quod Persus
debellassit, religionemque ibidem per tyrannidem extinctam, restituisset. And
having thus done the main business, I think it needless to add to what I said
before to his citations of contests in the Empire.

. 20. Only about this one Council of Ephesus, which he mentions; I desire the
Reader to note a few particulars. 1. That it is expressly said to be called by
the Emperor Theodosius II. 2. That the Emperor Governed it, both by sending
Officers to oversee them there, and by determining of the Effects. 3. That no
Patriarch had so little to do in it as the Bishop of Rome. 4. That Cyril
presided as Rome's Vicar, is an untrue pretense. 5. The Synod as such ruled the
greatest Patriarchs, though Cyil's Interest, vehemence, and copious Speech did
prevail. In the beginning in Crab, p. 587. you shall find such a Mandate as
this: to Philip the Presbyter Pope, Coelestines Vicar (and therefore Cyril was
not his Vicar) and to Arcadius, Iuvenal, Flavian, and other Bishops their
Legates, to Constantin^le. Ante omnia sciat Sanctitas vestra quod cum Johanne
Antiocheno and cum Apostarum Consilio communionem nullo modo habere debeatis
(and after more Instructions) Permittimus vestrae Sanctitati his factis
polliceri quidem ipsis communionem, etc. If the Bishop of Rome had but given
such Mandates and Permissions to them, as they did to his Vicar and others, it
would have been taken for a proof of his Government over them.

5. That it was to the Emperor that they sent Legates, and not to Rome, and
that for the effectual Judgment which Party should prevail: The Orientals say,
in their first Petition, Nostrae preces sunt (...) Iudicium (...) pitate
accipiamus: And both sides solicited him long hereto; but he kept both at
Chalcedon, and would not let them so much as come long into the City, to avoid
their contentions.

6. That what was done at last, as to decision and depositions, was done by the
Emperor: He commanded the Deposition of the Leaders of both Parties at first,
thinking that the way to Peace, viz. Nestorius, Cyril, and Memnon. In the
second Petition of the Orientals, it is said, Advenit ru^us magnificentissimus
magister Johannes, qui tunc comes omnium largitionum, significantes quod a
vestra majestate trium depositiones decretae sunt, tollend aque e medio sub^ta
offendicula, solamque fidem in Nice^ expositum a Sanctis and beatis patribus ab
omnibus confirmandam. And accordingly Johan. Comes did put them all out, till
the Emperors mind changed upon second thoughts, and rejected Nestorius alone.

7. That these Oriental Bishops were all his Subjects as they often profess; as
in their third Petition in ^rab, page 592. Non illorum tantum sed and noster
Rex ^s: Non enim parva porti^ Regni tui est Oriens in qua semper recta sides
resulsit, and cum hac etiam alia Provinciae and Dioceses e quibus Congregati
fuimus.

8. This Johan. Comes, in his Letters to the Emperor, gives such an Account
of the Fury and Contentiousness of some of the Bishops, especially of Cyrils
Orthodox-party, and of their fierceness and fighting one with another, as
should grieve the heart of a Christian to read it. And had not he and
Candidianus kept the Peace, and Ruled them (more than the Pope did) the two
Councils (for two they were) might have tried who should prevail by Blood
Cyril's Council Accused Nestorius for keeping Soldiers about him, and not
Appearing, John's Council (which was for Nestorius) Accuse the Egyptian
(meaning Cyril) for Heresy, Turbulency, setting the World together by the
Ears, raising Seditions in the Church, and expending that Money which was the
Poors in maintaining Soldiers to strengthen them, Petit. 3. Crab. p. 592.

. 21. And that the Pope Governed not out of the Empire, nor any of the
Patriarchs or Christian Prince then, is intimated in these words of the
Orientals first Petition; having praised him for propagating Religion in Persia
(by the Sword) You may not send two Religions into Persia, O King; and while we
are at Discord among our selves, our matters will not seem great (or be much
esteemed) there being none among them to be the Judges (or to Judge) nor will
any Communicate in two sorts of words and Sacraments: So that the Persians were
not Subject to the Imperial Church Judicatories, when it is said, There is none
among them to Judge (or determine) which of the two Faiths is right.

. 22. And whereas he lays so much on the Council of Chalcedons applauding
Pope Leo's Letter, it is notorious that in all these Councils that were
militating party against party, every side magnified them that were for them,
and strengthened them; (as at Ephesus one cries up Cyril, and the other John,
etc.) Yet even those Bishops are sain to Apologize for Receiving his Letter; it
being Objected, that his Epistle was an Innovation; saying, Let them not Accuse
to us the Epistle of the Admirable Prelate of the City of Rome, as an Offense
of Innovation; but if it be not agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, let them
Reprove (or confute) it: If it be not the same with the Judgment of the former
Fathers, if it contain not an Accusation of the Impious; if it defend not the
Nicene Faith, etc. So that they rested not on the Authority of the Author, but
the Truth of the Matter, which was to be exposed to Trial.

. 23. Note also, That whereas the great Proof of the Papal Monarchy, is, that
Rome is called often, Caput Mundi, and omnium Ecclesiarum, and seeds Petri: That
Nazianzene often calls Constantinople, Caput totius mundi; and it is usual for
Councils to call Jerusalem, Matter omnium Ecclesiarum; as Constant. Consil. 2.
Bin. p. 529. Aliarum omnium Matter. And Antioch is ordinarily called, Seeds
Petri, and the City Theopolis. Theodoret says, That John, chosen Bishop of
Antioch, Ad primatum Apostolicum suffragiis delectus fuit. Hist. l. 3. c. 17.

. 24. Note, That whereas W. I. makes himself Ignorant, that ever any Council
was called without the Pope; and they pretend that his Vicars presided in them,
almost all the General Councils for six or seven hundred Years, are Witnesses
against them: And of the first General Council at Constable. Binnius Notes say (p.
515.) Damas^m Pontificem neque per se, neque per suos Legatos eidem praefuisse
fatemur.

. 25. But there is yet another part of our work behind: W. I. will next prove,
That the Fathers of those General Councils, in all their Decrees,
Constitutions, and Canons, intended to Oblige all Christians through the whole
World, and thereby demonstrated themselves to have Jurisdiction of the whole
Church; and never so much as insinuated, that their Authority was limited
within the Precincts of the Empire.

Answ. 1. I have proved the contrary at large already. 2. They might well
commend their Decrees or Judgments to all Christians, on two accounts. 1. For
Concord sake; it being desirable that all Christians should, as much as may be,
be of one mind and way. 2. Ratione rei decret^: And so all Churches are bound
to receive the same Truth that one is bound to, If the Bishop of the poorest
City Excommunicate a Man justly for Heresy, all the Bishops in the World that
know it, are bound to deny Communion to that Man; (and so Cyprian commended the
Bishop of Rome for denying Communion to Felicissimus;) partly because they are
bound to keep Concord with all Christians, and Order; and partly, because they
are bound to avoid Heretics: And yet such a Bishop is not Governor of all
other Bishops; (nor Cyprian* of the Bishop of Rome.) But let us hear your
Proofs.

. 26. I. Thus (says W. I.) the Council of Ephesus says, Their Decrees were
for the good of the whole world.

Answ. I do not mean to search so large a Volumn to find where, seeing you tell
me not where. When as he is unworthy to be Disputed with that knows not, how
commonly then the Roman Empire was called Totus Orbis; and even the Scripture
says, That all the World was Taxed by Augustus. How often does Nazianzene
complain, that the Bishops and Councils had distracted and divided the whole
World? And also, that all that is for the good of the whole World, is not an
Act of Government of the whole World; e. g. The Works of Augustine,
Chrysostom, etc.

. 27. II. Says he, Thus the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 7. declares the Church
of Antioch to have under its Government Arabia.

Answ. But do you think that no part of Arabia was in the Empire? Look but in
the Maps of the Empire, if you have no other notice. And you will be put hard
to it, to prove that they meant the rest of Arabia.

. 28. III. And act. 16. c. 28. (says he) That the Bishop of Constable. should have
under him certain Churches in Barbarous Nations, which you must prove to have
been under the Empire.

Answ. 1. I thought you must have proved, that it was out of the Empire; who
undertook to prove it as you affirm it? 2. But seeing Papists lay Men's
Salvation upon such skill in History, Cosmography, and Chronology, which this
great Disputer had so little of himself, we must study it better for the time
come: And I did fully prove to you before, that the Sauromat^, many of the
Scythians and Goths were conquered, and in the Empire; and Barbarians were in
the Empire.

And by the way Note, 1. That this ^uncil of Chalcedon, even writing to Leo
Bishop of Rome, tell him, That They were called by the Grace of God and
Sanction of the most Pious Emperors, not mentioning any call of Leo's. 2. That
the Emperor Martian, in his Decree against Heretics, and for this Council,
says, All Men must believe as Athanasius, Theophylus, and Cyril believed (not
naming the Bishop of Rome;) and that Cyril, Praefuit Concilio Ephesino, not
saying that the Bishop of Rome did it, or Cyril, as his Vicar: And that the
Council-Bishops, contemptuously against the Romans, cried out, They that
gainsay, let them walk to Rome; and stood to their last Canon against the
Popes dissent.

. 29. IV. Next he says, Nicephorus, l. 5. c. 16. says, That Leo the Emperor
Wrote to the Bishops of all Provinces together (Circularibus per Orbem literis
ad Ecclesias missis, Leo haec sic ad omnes Episcopos misit) which he accounts
were above a thousand, to have them subscribe to the Council of Chalcedon.

Answ. Some Men perceive not when they consute themselves. 1. I tell you, Totus
Orbis was a common Title of the Empire. 2. Had Leo any power out of the Empire?
His commands show that they were his Subjects that he wrote to. 3. Were any
called, or wrote to under the Name of Provinces, but the Roman Provinces? 4. Do
you think that there were not more than a thousand Bishops in the Empire? Yea,
many thousands (if poor Ireland had as many hundred as Ninius speaks of.) 5.
But remember hence, that if all Bishops were written to, then the Bishop of
Rome was written to, to Subscribe the 28 Canon of the Council of Chalcedon;
which he refused* (as Papists say.)

But indeed the Epistle that Niceph. there mentions, c. 16. was but to
enquire of all the Bishops, whether they stood to the Council of Chalcedon or
no, and what Bishop of Alexandria they were for, to save the calling of a new
Council; and it is plain* he wrote only to his Subjects.

. 30. V. Next he says, The Bishops of the second Armenia, which seem to have
been out of the Empire, wrote an Answer; and Adelphus, Bishop of Arabia,
Subscribes, among* the rest, to this Epistle.

Answ. 1. He tells me ^ot where to find any of this. In Nicephorus, there I
find it not* 2. But if he know not that part of both the Armenias were Roman
Provinces, he may see it in the Titles of the Nicene Council, and in the Maps
and Histories of the Empire: And of Arabia I spoke before.

. 31. VI. He says, The Bishop of the second Messia, which you must prove to
have been then under the Empire, writ that the Council of Nice delivered the
Faith, toti terrarum Orbi, and style the Bishop of Rome the Head of Bishops,
and that the Council of Chalcedon was gathered by Pope Leo's Command.

Answ. Here is neither Matter nor Authority worthy an Answer. 1. He cites no
Author for what he says. 2. Whether he means Messua, or Messia, or Messina,
they were all in the Empire: But what he means I know not. Since I find in
his Errat. [Messia r. Toti] But where, or what Toti means, my Cosmographers
tell me not: If it be Tottaium that he means, it was a City of Bithynia under
the Archbishop of Nice.

But it seems he durst not say it was in the Empire, but instead of proving it
in, I must prove it out, without knowing Place or Author. 2. He that yet
understands not the Romans Terrarum Orbem, and he that reading History, can
believe that Pope Leo called the Council at Chalcedon, is not to be convinced
by me, if he maintain that the Turks called it.

He tells us (out of no cited Author) of an Epistle subscribed by Dita, Bishop
of Odyss^ in Scythia, which I have nothing to do with, till I know the Epistle:
But he should have known that Odyssus is a City of Mysia, near the Euxine Sea,
within the Empire.

. 32. VII. His last Instance is considerable, viz. Of the Bishops of Spain,
France, and Germany. To which I say, 1. That none but Rome much meddled in the
Empire after their Conquest: Nor Rome much in comparison of Alexandria,
Constantinople, and Antioch. 2. I easily confess, that those Churches within
the Empire had been settled in their several powers by the Councils at Nice and
Constable. did plead the same Canonical Settlement to keep their possession when
they were conquered. And that e. g. Rome under Theodorick and other Arrians,
was willing to keep their Relation to the Orthodox Churches of the Empire, for
their strength: And Neighbors that were under Heathens or Arrians, were glad
of a little countenance from Councils of great Bishops in the Empire (as Basil
and the Easternes under Valens, were from the West, without Subjection to the
Pope.)

. 33. Page 116. After some trifling Quibbles, he Answers my Charge, That
their Church is not one, but two; having at times two Heads: The Pope to some,
and a Council to others.

To this he says, 1. That this belongs to them that take Councils to be above
the Pope, and not to him, who is of a contrary Opinion.

Answ. It is to your Party in general: I did not say, that W. I. was two
Churches; but that those called Papists are so.

2. He says, That they also can answer me with a wet finger; for the Pope is
in the Council, and not excluded.

Answ. Such wet-fingerd Answers serve to deceive the Ignorant. The Question is
not of the Popes Natural Person, but of his Political: Two summa potestates
make two Polities. The Pope in a General Council is not the summae potestas, if
a Council be above him, and may Judge and Depose him. To be a Member of a
Council that has the Sovereignty, is not to have the Sovereignty: Did you not
know this?

. 34. I urged him as his proper work, to answer these Questions: Whether the
Church, of which the Subjects of the Pope are Members, has been Visible ever
since Christ's days on Earth? And therein, 1. Whether the Papacy, that is,
their Universal Papal Government over* all the Earth, has so long continued?
2. Whether all the Catholic Church did still submit to it? 3. Whether those
that did submit to it, took it to be necessary to the Being of the Church, and
Men's Salvation, or only to the more Orderly and Better being.

But he would not be driven to touch at any of these, or prove the perpetual
Visibility of the (...). And (...) over my last (...) over many of his Im^,
(...) the (...) that I refer him but to the p^sing of the Histories which (...)
co^th, with the General Answers which I have before given: And he will find, 1.
That the Pope was but a National Primate. 2. And that by Humane Institution. 3.
And under a General Council. 4. Striving upon every Advantage to be greater. 5.
Under the power of Princes. 6. And when he lost his power over all the other
four Patriarchs, the West falling from the Empire, he sought to bring the
Western Princes under him, and claimed a Government over all the World.

The Third Part:
A Defense of my Arguments to prove, That the Church of which the Protestants
are members, has been visible ever since the days of Christ on Earth.
. 1. I Began with an Explication of the terms, but this Disputer says, that
this is of no concern to his Argument, nor much to my answer. Answ. It pleases
not those that are all darkness; such Explications as you gave me are indeed of
little Use.

1. He says, I make Believers and true Christians Synonyma's, whereas one may
be a Believer as (an unbaptized Catechumene, but is not a Christian till
baptized.

Answ. As a Pope once told one, how little wit in a place of power would serve
to govern the world; so I see by this man, How little Reason will serve to set
up a Jesuit for an ^nanswerable disputant among the ignorant. The word
[Christian] as well as [Believer] signifies, 1. A heart-consenter to the
Baptismal Covenant. 2. Or a Professor of that consent. And 1. Regularly by
Baptism. 2. Or without it when it cannot be ^ad. 1. As soon as a man Believes
and Consents, he is a Christian before God. 2. As soon as he solemnly
professes it, he is an incomplete Christian before men. 3. As soon as he
professes it in Baptism he is orderly and regularly a Christian before the
Church.

Even as two secretly ma^rying, are married before God; and when they publish
their mutual Consent and Covenant (as suppose it were where a priest is not to
be had) they are irregularly married before men, but solemn Matrimony makes it
a Legal Marriage in fore.

And this distinction holds of the word [Beleiver] as well as of [Christian]. A
Beleiver, a Disciple, and a Christian were Synonyma's before Popery was born.

. 2. Next he says that my words [Subject to Christ their Head] are equivocal.
Because Subject may signify but [inferior] and Head but a principal member.

Answ. What is not equivocal to a Jesuit? 1. Did I not put this first The
Church is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: 2. When I said It is the whole company
of Believers subject to Christ their head, are not the words significative
enough of a governing Head? And did I not add, the constitutive parts are
Christ and Christians, as the pars imperans and subdita: are there more
notifying words in use? If there are, tell'them me if you can: or, was not this
a cavil that had more of Will and Interest, than of Conscience?

. 3. I said Protestants are Christians protesting against and disallowing
Popery. To this he cavils 1. That the name had another original. 2. That the
Greeks, Arrians, Antitrinitarians, Socinians, Hussites, Anabaptists, Familists,
Millenaries, Quakers, are not Protestants.

Answ. 1. Did I undertake to tell you the first Rise of the name, or only to
tell whom I mean in my dispute. If I had, the German protestation immediately
against a particular. Edict, was principally and finally against Popery, and in
that sense is the name continued. But it is not the Name but the Church and
Religion that I dispute of. You know that the Name Reformed Catholic
Christians pleases us better than the Name of Protestants. Were not Christians
after they were first called so at Antioch, of the same Religion as before,
when they were called but Disciples and Believers, yea and Nazarens by their
adversaries?

2. Who would have thought that you had taken Arrians, Antitrinitarians,
Socinians, or any that deny an Essential part of Christianity, for true
Christians? Did you not here often profess the contrary, and those that are no
Christians are not in my definition; those that are Christians, as Greeks,
Millenaries, and Hussites and most Anabaptists with us, are Protestants, but
not mere Protestants: they have somewh^t more and worse, which gives them
another name? but if Christians protesting against Popery, they are of the same
Church universal, as we are.

. 4. When I call Popery the Leprosy of some Christians, he must know whether
all the Church was not Leprous then. 2. And whether men could with a safe
Conscience have Communion with any.

Answ. 1. He that says he has no sin is alyar, says St. John. All
Christians, and therefore all Churches are defiled with sin. 2. All are not
equally defiled, I have told you that the Papists are not the third part of the
Christian world, and for many hundred years there were none. 3. We must not
separate from all Churches that have sin, but we must not wilfully sin for
their Communion, and we must join locally with the best we can, and in spirit
join with all, as far as they join with Christ; is not this plain and
sufficient to your cavills?

. 5. He says p. 423. that our external profession in the particulars of our
Belief, or rather Disbelief against the Roman Church, shows our general
profession of Christianity to be false, as the Arrian was.

Answ. What is easier than to say so. But where is your proof?

. 6. After a repetition of his talk against Christ as no visible Head, he
cavills at the form of my first Argument; which was this:

The body of Christians on Earth subjected to Christ their Head, has been (in
it is parts) visible ever since the days of Christ on Earth.

But the body of Christians on Earth subjected to Christ their Head is the
Church, of which the Protestants are members.

Therefore the Church of which the Protestants are members has been visible
ever since the days of Christ on Earth.

And first he says that it is out of form, because it has never an universal
proposition. Answ. This is the man that would not dispute but in mere
Syllogism, what need I an universal proposition? If you be to prove that Cephas
was Peter, or Peter was an Apostle of the first place, must you have an
universal proposition? What Universal must there be above The Body of
Christians, etc. 2. He says that the word [Those] Form requires, should have
been [All those] when as there is never a [Those] at all in the argument. Is
not this an accurate reformer of Syllogisms; that amendeth terms that were not
written, and talks like a dreamer of he knows not what? but what is the
[All] that the man would have had? is it [all those bodies of Christians] when
we are all agreed that Christ has but one political body? if I had been to
prove that the world that Protestants are parts of, has been visible since
Adam; or that the God the Protestants worship is Almighty, must I have said,
[All those worlds and all those Gods?] Nay had I said but [whatsoever worlds]
or [whatsoever God] it had sounded ill among men that are agreed that there is
but one; sure an expository medium that was but notius was enough.

Next he says that I put more in the medium of the major, than in the medium
of the minor, and so it has four terms.

Answ. Wonderful! This is the man that disputed with our two great Logicians
and public professors of Cambridge, Bishop Gunning, and Bishop Peirson, and as
a triumpher printed the dispute, and challenged men in London to Syllogistical
combats. And now see how he talks? 1. He calls that my medium that is no
medium at all, but the Praedicate. 2. He says it is not in my Minor, where
that Praedicate was not, nor ought to be but another. 3. He takes an expository
parenthesis, which is no part of the proposition, for an addition that makes
^our terms: When I prove the Church visible, to prevent his cavils I put in a
parenthesis, as a margin, (in it is parts) because the whole world or Church is
not seen by any mortal man, no not by the Pope that pretends to rule it all,
and this no man controverteth. If he had said that there is less in the
conclusion than in the premises, he had spoken sense, though impertinet; while
there is as much as was in the question.

2, He says, I make the praedicate of the minor the subject of the conclusion,
and then says [This is a hopeful beginning.]

Answ. O rare triumphant disputer, why should I not make the praedicate of the
Minor the subject of the conclusion? What Law or Reason is against it, when i^
is the subject of the question? My Argument is a re definita ad rem
denominatam, as questioned: the definition or res qua definita is my medium.
How ridiculo^s has this Aristarchus made himself in his Logic? would not this
disputing have been very edifying to such as the Lady that he and I were once
to deal with, when he would have bargained that never a word should be spoken
by me, nor written, but in a Syllogism? as bad as Popery is, I hope it has
some men of more ingenuity and honesty, then wilfully to delude the ignorant,
at these low and sordid rates.

. 7. But from his play he turns in earnest to deny my Major, and says [that
Protestants are no parts of that Church on Earth of which Christ is Head. And
yet many of their Doctors say, that they that have no explicit belief that
Jesus is the Christ, but believe only a God, the rewarder of works are members
of the Church; but no Christians are, save Papists. Just the Donatists, and
worse than the Quakers and Anabaptists.

My Argument [Those that profess the true Christian Religion in all it is
Essentials, are members of that Church which is the Body of Christians on
Earth, subjected to Christ the Head.] But Protestants profess, etc.

Here 1. he wants form also; [All] is wanting: as if a definition, were not
Universal or equipollent?

But if [All] be in, he denies it, because they may destroy the faith by an
Error.

Answ. He that so erreth as to deny any one Essential part, does not truly
profess to hold that Essential part, and so not the Essence; as he that denies
Christ to be God or Man, and yet will say in general that he is the Messiah,
his meaning is that one that is not God, or not Man is the Messiah* which is
not a profession of all Essential to Christianity; but if he truly profess all
that is Essential, and ignorantly think some error Consistent with those
Essentials, which by consequence crosses some of them, and would abhor that
error if he knew it inconsistent, this man is still a Christian, or else it is
doubt whether there be one in the world; if those Doctors say true, that say,
that Theology is so harmonious a frame, that the least moral Error does by
consequence cross and subvert fundamental truths: Certainly abundance of such
do so, as are collected by Montaltus and Mr. Clarkson out of your Jesuits and
school Doctors, and as you find in one another.

But he bids me prove my Major, mark, Reader, what I am put to prove; 1. Either
that Profession denominateth [a professor] (it being only Christians as visible
by profession in question) 2. Or that all the Essential parts do constitute the
Essence. And shall I obey a trifler so far as to trouble you with more
Syllogismes for this.

. 8. But he denies the Minor, and says, that Protestants profess not the true
Christian Religion in all it is Essentials.

I proved it thus, Those that profess so much as God has promised Salvation
upon in the Covenant of Grace, do profess so much as God has, etc. Here the
trifler wants [all] again, and then denies the) Minor.

I proved the Minor by several arguments. 1. All that prosesse faith in God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifyer; and Love to
Him, and Absolute obedience to all his Laws, of Nature and Holy Scriptures,
with willingness and diligence to know the true meaning of all these Laws as
far as they are able, and with Repentance for all known sins; do profess so
much as God has promised Salvation upon, (which I proved by many texts of
Scripture) But so do the Protestants, etc.

Here the trifler wants form again, The Covenant of Grace was left out, when I
cited the Covenant of Grace it self, viz, Io^. 3. 16. 17. Mark 16, 16. Heb. 5.
9. Romans 8. 28. 1. Act. 26. 18. And after all this what is it that he denies?
Why this; that the Protestants have willingness, and diligence to know the true
meaning of all the Law of Nature and Scripture.

Answ. This is, the man of form, that slily puts in [Having willingness]
instead of professing it. When he saw and knew that it was not what says men
have (which God only knows) but what they [pro^ess] that we dispute of. And
whether we profess such willingness to understand, if our words, our oaths, and
all our books and confessions published to the world will not prove it, let
this man's word go for a disproof; we come now to the Transubstantiation
reasoning, where all men Eyes, and Ears, are to be denied.

. 9. But he adds a reason, because else they would take the expositions of
the universal Church, and not follow novel int^pretations and private
judgments.

Answ. This Cant must delude the ignorant that never read the history of the
Church, nor know the present State of the World. 1. Do not we profess to
prefer that which is most ancient, before that which is novel? But these men
must have us. e. g. believe that the cup may be left out of the Sacrament of
Eucharist, which a Sect lately and sacrilegiously introduced, or else we have a
novel and private interpretation of the Sacrament; when the most brazen faced
of them cannot deny, that their own way herein is novel, and, the contrary as
old as Christ's institution; and that they are singular, as differing from the
far greatest part of Christians upon Earth. The same I might say of most
other of our differences.

2. When did the Universal Church write a Commentary on the Bible? where shall
we find their exposition of it? How little of the Bible have General Councils
expounded? if you mean not them what mean you? sure all your Laity have not
expounded it, nor all your Clergy; yea their Commentaries, yea and Translations
fight with one another! where is your Universal Commentary: if you had such a
work; will your talk make us ignorant that Papists are not a third part of the
Christian world? but if it be Councils you mean, which of them is it that we
must believe, and why? That at Constance, and Basil, and Pisa, or that at
Florence, or the Later^ne that de fide contradict them? The first and second at
Ephesus, or that of Calcedon which contradicts the first indeed, and the
second professedly? The 28th. Canon of Calcedon, or the Popes that abhor it:
The General Councils at Ariminum, Syrmium, etc. when the world was said to
groan to find it self turned Arrian: should we at the 2d. Council of Ephesus
have followed the greater number, when there was not one refuser of
Eutychianism save the Popes Legates, and Binnius says that sola navicula
Petri, only Peter's Ship escaped drowning: did Rome follow the most, when Melch.
Canus tells us, that most of the Churches and the Arms of Emperors have fought
against the Roman privileges? Is it a convincing way to have such a Pope as
Eugenius* 4th. at the same time to differ from the greater part of the
Christian world, and also be damned by his own Church or General Council; and
to say, you do not receive all that is necessary to Salvation, nor are willing
to know the truth because you take not the expositions of the Universal Church.
When you have blinded us so far as to take a domineering sect that lives not
by the Word, but by the Sword and Blood, to be the Universal Church, and all
your Decretals to be the Churches* expositions of Scripture, and all the
Scripture and Fathers that are against you to be novelties, and your many
novelties to be all the ancient truth (such as Pet. Moulin de novitate Papismi
has laid open) by that time we may think that the Church* wants an Essential
Art^ole of Christianity, which takes not all the Popes expositions of
Scripture.

But seeing this is the great damning Charge against the Protestants faith, I
pray you tell us next, 1. Did all the Christian Church want an Essential part
of their Christianity, in all those Ages before the Universal Church gave them
any expositions of the Scripture? what exposition had they besides each
Churches Pastor's for the first 300 years. And what exposition did the Council
of Nice make, save about the deity of Christ (and Easter day or such things
that indeed were delivered not as expositions of Scripture but Traditions OF
rules of order)? And what exposition made any of the old General Councils, save
about the Natures, and Person, and Wills of Christ, and Church policy, which
Suarez, de legi^. says, God made no Law for) where are their Commentaries?

3. Where shall we find any Commentary that the Fathers agreed in, though the
Trent-Oath is that you will not exp^nd the Scripture but according to the
Fathers consent. Your writers tell us that most whose works be come to us, for
the first 300 years* were Millenaries, Dionys. Petavius has gathered the words
of Arrian doctrine from most of them (lib. de Trinit.) till after the Council
of Nice; yea that the chief of the Anti-Arrians, even Athanassus himself. Of
which see also Derod^n de supposit^.
was for three Gods, telling us that as Peter, Paul, and John were three names,
but one in Essence, that is in Specie, so is the Father, Son and Holy Ghost:
when your Doctors tell us, that Justin, Clem. Alexander, Dionysius Alexand.
Talianus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Eysebius, and I know not how many more
taught Heresy: and Chrysostom, Basil, and many others that we hoped had been
Christians, are noted as fautors of Origin: and even many of the Martyrs were
Heretics, when through the reign of Theodosius, Senior; Arcadius and Honorius,
Theodosius, Junior; Valentinian, (to say nothing of Constantius and Valens,
etc. of the Arrians) yea and of Marcian, Leo, Zeno, Anastaslus, Iustine, almost
all the Churches of the Empire continued charging each others with Heresy: and
Councils charging and condemning Councils; Bishops deposing, and cursing
Bishops; and Monks as their Soldiers fighting it out to blood; when the
obeying or cursing the Council of Calcedon divided the Bishops for many Princes
reigns: and when one part called the other Nestorians, and the other called
them Eutychians, almost every where, and when after that the Monothelites cause
was in many Emperors Reign uppermost one while, and down another; and navicula
Petri that alone escaped before, was thus drowned by Honorius (if Councils belie
him not and Popes) with the rest. When the very same Bishops (as at Ephesus and
Calcedon) went one way in one Council and another way in the next, and
subscribed to one Edict e. g. of Basiliscus, and quickly to the contrary of
another, and cried (...), we did it through fear. How should we then know by
Fathers, Bishops and Councils, what was their concordant Commentary of the
Scripture?

4. I ask you, what exposition of the Universal Church is it that we profess to
differ from for our novelties; name them if you can. Either by the Universal
Church, you mean properly [all Christians] or [most]. If All, alas, when and
where shall we find their agreement in any more than we hold with them? If
most, do we not know that the most (two parts to one) are against the Popes
Sovereignty; which is Essential to your Church? Do not the Greeks once a year
excommunicate or curse you? To tell us now That above two parts of the
Christian world are none of the Church, because they differ from the Universal
Church, and that the third part is that Universal, which he that believes not
is no Christian, are words that deserve indignation and not belief, and without
the medium of Swords and Flames, and tormenting inquisitions on one side, and
great Bishoprics and Abbeys, Wealth, Ease and Domination on the other, had
long ago been scorned out of the Christian world.

. 10. But he also denies that we believe with a saving divine faith any of the
said mysteries, and that our Profession general and particular affirms it.

Answ. It Is like the Devil the Accuser of the brethren will deny it too: of our
Hearts we will not enter a dispute: of our Professions, let our books be
witnesses: Reader, can thou believe that we profess not to believe any
Christian verity with a Divine faith? yea; but the man means that it is not a
Divine faith if it be not from the belief of the Pope and his Party. And how
then shall we believe the Popes own authority?

. 11. II. My ad. Argument to prove that we hold all the Essentials of
Christianity, was [Those that profess as much (and much more) of the Christian
Faith and Religion as the Catechumens were ordinarily taught in the ancient
Churches, and the Competentes at Baptism did profess, do profess the true
Christian Religion in all it is Essentials: but so do the Protestants, etc. To
this he calls for Form again, as if here were no Universal, and then denies
the Major, but his words show that indeed it is the Minor: Because the
Catechumens professed to believe implicitly all that was taught as matter of
Faith by the Catholic Church, in that Article, I believe the Holy Church;
which the Protestants do not.

Answ. An unproved fiction on both parts. 1. Show us in Fathers, Councils, or
any true Church-Records; that Catechumens were then used to make any other
exposition of those words than we do. Did they ever profess that a Pope or a
General Council cannot err de fide? did they not call many of those Councils
General, though violent and erroneous which they cursed? The great doubt then
was, which party was the true Church; and Christians then judged not of Faith
by the Churchmen, but of the Church by the Faith* else they had not so often
rejected and Hereticated many Popes, Patriarchs, and the far greater part of
the Bishops, as they did.

2. And Protestants deny no article which ab omnibus, ubique et semper, as
Lerinens. speaks, was accounted necessary to ^ation: yea it is one reason why
they cannot be Papists, because most of the Catholic Church are against the
Papacy, and all were against it or without it for many hundred Years after
Christ.

Let the Reader peruse Cyril, Hieros. Catech. August. and all others, that give
us an account of the Churches Catechism, and see whether he can find in it, I
believe that the Bishop of Rome is made by Christ the Governor of all the
World, and is Infallible in himself, or with his Council; and that we must
believe all that they say is the Word of God, because they say it, or else we
cannot be saved.

But it is an easy way to become the Lords of all the World, if they can
persuade all Men to believe that none but their Subjects can be saved.

3. And what an useless thing to they make Gods Word, that they may set up
their own Expositions in its stead? We know that the Word supposes, that the
Ignorant must have Teachers: Without Teaching Children cannot so much as learn
to Speak. And Oportet discentem credere fide humana, that is, he must suppose
his Teacher wiser than himself, or else how can he judge him fit to Teach him?
But what is Teaching, but Teaching the Learner to know the same things that the
Teacher does, by the same Evidence? Is it only to know what the Teacher
holds? without knowing why? If so, must we know it by Word, or Writing? If by
Word only, when and where shall every Man and Woman come to be Catechized by
the Universal Church? That is, by all the Christian World. Or is every Priest
the Universal Church? Or is he Infallible? And how come Words spoken, to be
more intelligible than words written? Does writing make them unintelligible?
Why then are their Councils and Commentaries written? But if Writing will
serve, why not God's writing as well as theirs? If God say, Thou shall Love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart: Are not these words intelligible till a Pope
Expound them? When the Pope permitted his Casuists to expound them so, as that
Loving God once a Month, or once a Year, will serve for Salvation; and that
Attrition, which is Repeating only out of Fear, with the Sacrament of Penance,
will also serve. Cannot a Man be saved, that Believes, Repents, and Loves
God upon the bare Commands of God and Scripture, without hearing what all the
Christian World or Councils say? If I make to my self no Graven Image, so as to
bow down and Worship toward it, by virtue of the second Commandment, will this
damn me, because I receive not the Papists obliteration or contradiction of
this Commandment as an Exposition? If all the Docrees of Councils be as
necessary as the Creed and Scripture, why were not the Councils read in the
Church still (three hundred Years before there was any General Council.) as
well as the Scriptures? And why do not Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine, etc.
Exhort Me^ and Women to read the Councils as much as the Scriptures? At least,
methinks, you should allow the Scripture an Equality with Councils. But if God
have spoken that which is nonsense or unintelligible till Councils or lopes
Expound it, Scripture is far from having such Equality. Then Paul and Peter
spoke not intelligibly, but P. Paul 4 and 5. and the Council of Trent did: Then
Councils may save them that know not Scripture, but Scripture cannot save them
that know not the Councils: And do all the Papists, Men and Women, know the
Councils?

In short, If a Tyrannical Sect of Priests can get this Monopoly, or Peculiar
of expounding all Gods Laws and Word; so that the Scripture will not save any
but by their Expositions, it will become more the word of the Pope or Council,
than of God: And when all is done, every Priest must be the pope and Council to
us that never saw them, and must be the immediate Object of our Infallible
belief. And if the Pope can so communicate to so great a swarm, the sweetness
of participating in his Universal Dominion and Infallibility, no wonder if
Self-love bid them serve his Usurpation.

But by that time every Woman must be sure, 1. That the Pope is Christ's Vicar
General indeed. 2. That with a Council he is Infallible. 3. And that Gods
Revelation must be received only on this Deliverers Authority. 4. And the sense
of all on his Exposition. 5. And know how Men believed the first three hundred
Years before such Popes or Councils ever were. 6. And can tell certainly which
Councils be true, and which false; and which of them must be believed, and
which not. 7. And is sure that every Priest does Infallibly Report all this to
her. 8. And does give a true. Exposition of each Council, before another
Council do Expound them. 9. And be sure that she has all that those Councils
have made necessary, and have not had a sufficient proposal of more. I say, by
that time all this certainty be attained, the Popish Faith will appear to be
harder work than they think, that hear Deceivers say, Believe as the Church
believes, and you shall be saved.

Judge how far the Pope Exalts himself above God, when it is thus confidently
told us, That we, (nor no Men) believe with a Divine and Saving Faith any one
word of God; if we believe it merely because God has given it us in the Sealed
Scriptures, and add not the Expositions of the Papal Church.

. 12. My next Argument was, Those that explicitly profess the belief of all
that was contained in the Churches Creeds, for six hundred Years after Christ,
(and much more Holy truth) and implicitly to believe all that is contained in
the Holy Scriptures, and to be willing and diligent for the explicit knowledge
of all the rest, with a resolution to Obey all the will of God, which they
know, do profess the true Christian Religion in all its Essentials: But so do
the Protestants, etc.

Here again the Formalist wants Form: An Enumeration of particulars in a
Description, is not equal to an Universal with him, unless he read [All.] And
then he denies the Major: 1. Because our General Profession is contradicted in
particulars.

Answ. 1. Bare Accusation without Proof, is more easy than honest. 2. There is
a contradiction direct, and understood, which proves that the Truth is not
believed; and a contradiction by consequence not understood, which stands with
a belief of the Truth. The latter all Men in the World have, that have any
Moral Error. 3. O what self-condemning Men are these! How certainly has a
Papist no true Faith, if abundance of contrary Errors nullify Faith.

His second Reason is, You distinguish not between implicitly contained in
general Principles, and explicitly contained in the Creed and Scriptures.

Answ. A very Logical Answer. To what purpose should I do it?

His third is the strength, Creeds and Scriptures are not enough; Traditions
and General Councils, in matters of Faith, must be believed.

Answ. 1. I would matters of Practice were more at Liberty that Princes were
not bound to Murder or exterminate all their Subjects as Heretics, that will
not be Heretics and inhumane; and to Rebel perfidiously against those Princes
that are Sentenced by his Holiness for not doing it. 2. Alas, who can be saved
on these Men's terms? If the belief of all the Creeds, and all the Scriptures,
be not a Faith big enough to save him? And yet, perhaps, you may hear again,
that Men may be saved without any of all this, save believing that there is a
Rewarding God, and that the Pope and his Subjects are the Infallible Church
Universal. And it is but proving [an insufficient proposal] and we are
delivered from Traditions, Councils, Scriptures, Creeds and all. And never was
the proposal of Councils more insufficient, than when Councils were most
frequent; when in the Reign of Constantius, Valens, Valentinian, Theodosius,
Arcadius and Honorius, good Theodosius junior, Marcian, Leo, Zeno, Anastasius,
Justin, Justinian, and long after; Anathematizing one General Council, and
crying up another; and setting Council against Council, was too much of the
Religion of those times.

4. Again, he denies, that Protestants, not excused by Invincible Ignorance,
believe any Article with a Saving Faith.

Answ. Easy Disputing: Cannot a Quaker say so too, by us and you? But how
unhappy a thing is Knowledge then; and how blessed a thing is Invincible
Ignorance, which may prevent so many Men's Damnation?

. 13. I proved the Major by the express Testimony of many Papists, ad hominem:
To which he says, It is to no purpose: For our Question is not, of what is to
be believed expressly only, but of what is to be believed both expressly and
implicitly of all Christians respectively.

Answ. Reader, Judge with what Ingenuity these Men Dispute! And how they make
nothing of giving up all their cause, and yet Cant on with any of the most
senseless words! He had largely enough told us before, that the belief of
General Truths explicitly, is the Implicit belief of the contained
particulars, though unknown to the Believer. I am now proving, that Protestants
explicit Faith leaves out no Article necessary to be explicitly believed: To
this end I cite Bellarmine and Costerus (and after many others) consessing what
I say in plainest words, even the sufficiency of our enumeration. He denies
none of my proof, as to explicit belief: And do we need any more? Is not all
that which he calls explicit belief, the mere denomination of the Explicit,
from the particulars employed in it? Can any Man want an Implicit belief, that
wants no Explicit belief? If I am not bound explicitly to believe that the
Pope and his Council is the Universal Church, or the Infallible deliverer of
Traditions, or Expounder of Scripture, or my rightful Governors; how am I
bound, or how can I be said to believe Implicitly their unknown Doctrine or
Articles of Faith?

What is my Implicit belief of Scripture-Particles, but my General belief that
all the Scripture is Gods Word, and true? And what is Implicit belief of
Popish Traditions in particular, but the explicit belief that all Popish
Traditions in general are true? If therefore these Disputers confess the
sufficiency of our explicit neccessary belief, and yet damn us for the
insufficiency of our implicit belief, they shamefully contradict themselves,
and give up their cause.

. 14. Next I thus Argued, If sincere Protestants are Members of the True
Church, as intrinsecally informed (or as Bellarmine speaks, Living Members)
then professed Protestants are Members of the true Church, as extrinsecally
denominated (or as it is Visible) consisting of Professors: But the Antecedent
is true; Ergo, so is the Consequent.

To this (when I had given the Reason of the Consequence undeniable) and said,
I prove the Antecedent or Minor, he says, You prove, say you, your Antecedent
or Minor, which is a Syntax in Logic, and deserves a Ferula, for no Minor can
be an Antecedent.

Answ. For this Man's sake, I will know a Man better than by his Hectoring,
before I will go to School to a boaster. Reader, 1. What is that Error in
Logic that is called a Syntax? I thought Order or Concord had been no Error: I
confess my self not wise enough to understand this great Logician. And his
Ferula is too ready, which must be used for Syntaxes, when it is more used for
violation of Syntax. 2. Risum teneatis: Can no Antecedent be a Minor (so did
Dr. Peter Heylin tell me before him, in his Certamen Epistolare:) I suppose I
shall never hear a third say so. What Is the matter, that the Boys Laugh at
this, and say, that to deny the Antecedent of an hypothetical Proposition, and
to deny the minor is all one? Is it that Boys have made all our usual Logicks,
and now these two Logic Doctors have Reformed them? Or has this Man pretended
to be a Champion in that Art, in which he is below the Novices? He had hit it
if he had held to his offer to Dispute before a Lady (a Girl) only in
Syllogism by the Pen; for this with her might have past for current and
invincible Logic.

. 15. I proved the Minor thus: All that by Faith in Christ are brought to the
unfeigned Love of God above all, and special Love of his Servants, and
unfeigned willingness to Obey him, are Members of the True Church, as
intrinsecally informed. But such are all sincere Protestants, etc.

This Minor the Man denies, and says, That Protestants have not these things.

Answ. 1. Mark how hard this Man is put to it to renounce his Charity: He
cannot do it without denying what he grants. A sincere Professor of any
Religion, is one that really is what he professes to be: He denies not that
Protestants profess to Love God, etc. And yet he denies the Minor, that
sincere Protestants do love God: As if he that sincerely professes to Love
God, does not Love him. These are Papist's Syllogisms.

2. Note, That this Man seems to know all Protestants Hearts better than they
do themselves, and can prove them all Hypocrites that Love not God.

3. But by this you see how he reproacheth all those Protestants that turn
Papists, as having all been but before but graceless ungodly Hypocrites: And
what wonder then if they turn?

4. But it may be his word [formally] is a cheat. A Protestant is a Christian
renouncing Popery: It is his Christianity which contains his Love to God: His
renouncing Popery, is but his freedom from their sin. And, perhaps, the Man
has a mind to call this the Form of Protestants: But I hope his Talk shall not
deprive us of the Love of God, or of our Neighbor. In the mean time, any Man
that can truly say, that he is not an ungodly Hypocrite without the Love of God
and Man, has Argument enough to Answer any Papist in himself.

5. Again, Reader, mark how much these Men magnify themselves, and how much
they vilify the Word and Works of God. Let a Man see all Gods wonderful
Goodness in his Works, and in his Mercies to himself and all Mankind; let him
read and believe all the wonderful Love of the Father, and Grace of the Son
that is described in all the Scriptures: Let him believe the Promises there
Recorded of Everlasting Glory, and All this is insufficient to cause him
savingly to Love God or Man: But let him but add the belief, that the Pope is
the Governor of all the Earth, and that he and his Council must be believed in
all their Traditions and Expositions, and then the work will be done, and he
may Love God unseignedly, and be Loved by him. The Holy Ghost will not work by
the Scripture, unless we take the Pope for the Expositor: Yea, more; if a Man
never heard of Scripture, or if he believe not in Christ, for want of the Popes
sufficient proposal, he may Love God, and be saved, so he do but believe that
the Pope, with his Council, is a sufficient proposer. And is there any account
in Reason to be given of this strange Phenomenon, why a Man can Love God, if
he believe in the Pope of Rome, and yet cannot Love him by all his Works and
Mercies, with the belief of all the Scriptures? Or is it as very a Miracle as
Transubstantiation, and Sanctification by Holy Water, or the Opus operatum, and
one of those Miracles that prove the Church of Rome to be all the Church on
Earth.

. 16. But he repeateth again the threadbare Reason, Had they this, they would
never have disobeyed and disbelieved all the Churches in the World.

Answ. That is, the Pope and his Priests, who are against the far greatest part
of the Christian World, and Yearly Anathematized by the Greeks; who, when they
had lost the Primacy of the Eastern part of one Empire, have tried to make up
the loss, by laying Claim to all the Earth. O! of what consequence is Obedience
to an Ambitious Pope or Priest, in comparison of Obedience to all the written
Laws of God?

. 17. I proved the Minor two ways: 1. If this (the Love of God, etc.) be in our
profession, then the sincere are such indeed: But this is in our profession:
Ergo: --

Of this he denies the Minor, It is not in our profession. What, not that we
Love God, and are willing to understand and obey his Word? Is he not driven up
to the Wall, even to another denial of all Men's Eyes and Ears? Do not I profess
it while I write these words? And have not I professed it in sixty Volumns and
more? And do not Protestant Libraries contain such professions, and their
Pulpits ring of them every Lords Day? What is a Profession; but Words and
Writings? And are not these Audible and Visible to the World? And yet the
denying (not of the sincerity) but the very Being of them, is the Papists
confutation of us.

. 18. Secondly, I proved it from our knowledge and sense of our own Acts. When
I know and feelmy Love, shall I believe a Pope that never saw me, that tells
me, I do not know or feel it?

To this, his easy Answer serves: He says, I do not feel that I truly Love
God or his Servants, if I be a Formal Protestant, my Heart deceives me.

Answ. No wonder if all these Priests are Infallible, that know all our Hearts
so much better than we. But who shall be Judge? The true searcher of Hearts? If
the Fruits must be the Evidence, I should rather fear that such Murderers of
hundred thousands as killed the Waldenses, Albigenses, French, English, Dutch,
etc. were like to be without Love, than all those meek and Godly Protestants
that I have known; for no Murderer has Eternal Life.

But forma is sometime taken for figura, and for outward appearance only: And
such formal Protestants, as have but the clothing of Christianity, have not
indeed the Love of God.

. 19. He adds, What would you say to an Arrian, a Turk, or Jew, that would
urge the like knowledge or feeling?

Answ. The same that I would do to a bloody Papist: And'I would tell him, that
if a Bediam think that he is a Prince, or a Fool that he is Wise, or a Beggar
that he is a Lord, or an illiterate Man that he is Learned, it does not follow,
that no Man can know that he is a Prince, or a Lord, or Wise, or Learned. I
would tell him, that there can be no effect without the adequate cause; nor is
there a cause where there is no effect: And lie that perceives not God's
amiableness in the necessary demonstrations of it, cannot Love that Goodness he
perceives not; nor can any desire or seek the Heaven, which he believes not.
And I would tell him, that he that believes not in a Redeemer or a Sanctifier,
cannot Love him, nor can he Love Believers and Godly Men, as such, who knows
not that they, as such, are Lovely: And that if really he Love God and
Holiness, and the hopes of Heaven before this World, it will work in his
seeking them above the World. If you had Argued rationally against our Love of
God, and Holiness, from any proved defect in the necessary cause (which is in
you) we had been Obliged thankfully to hear and try your words. But let Reason
judge e. g. whether that man be like to love this world best, and be loath to
leave it, who looks to go at death into the flames of Purgatory, or he that
looks to go to the glorious presence of his Redeemer. And whether he be like
to Love God best, that look eth to be tormented by him in those flames, or he
that looks to pass into heavenly perfect Love: Christ tells us that
forgiving much causes Love; If a man were to torment you so long, would it
make you love him? or at least is it a good proof that Protestants Love not
God, because they believe not that he will torment them in flames, but
presently comfort them.

. 20. II. My ad. Argument to prove the perpetual visibility of our Church, was
this, [The Church whose Faith is contained in the Holy Scripture, as its rule
in all points necessary to Salvation, has been visible ever since the days of
Christ on Earth.

But the Church whose Faith is contained in the Holy Scriptures as it is rule in
all points necessary to Salvation, is it of which the Protestants are members.

Therefore the Church of which the Protestants are members, has been visible,
etc.

Here he wants Form again, because the praedicate of the Minor is the Subject
of the conclussion, and then he distinguishes of the Mayor; of containing
Involutely in General principles, he grants it, but if expressly he denies it.

Answ. 1. The mavelous Logician it seems is but for one mood or figure, but
by what authority or Reason?

2. He denies that the Churches Faith in all points necessary to Salvation is
expressly contained in the Scripture. I proved the contrary ad hominem, before,
out of Bellarmine and Costerus plain words; and shall by and by further prove
it. Mark again the Papists value of the Holy Scriptures, he that explicitly
believes all that it expressly delivers, and no more, say these men, cannot
be saved: and yet if they believe none of it, but a rewarding Deity say most,
or some more of the Creed say others, men may be saved if they do but believe
that all is Gods word and truth which the Pope and his Priests or Council say
is such.

Next he distinguishes of [all things necessary to Salvation to be by all
distinctly known and expressly believed,] and so he grants the
Scripture-sufficiency: Very good! Now all that is so necessary to a distinct
knowledge and express belief is there. But of [all things to be Believed
implicitly and distinctly known.] he denies it, These distinctions supposed
(says he) I deny your Consequence.

Answ. Here is all new still. 1. He calls my Conclusion my Consequence; (and
recites it) 2. What he means by [things to be distinctly known by all, and
yet Believed but implicitely] is past my understanding, having to do with that
man that has all this while described implicit Belief, by the express Belief
of some mere General truth. And must men know all that distinctly, which they
Believe not distinctly but in their general? the man sure was confounded, or
confounds me! The General to be Believed is the Pope and Councils authority
in propounding and expounding Gods word, (This is their saving Faith:) the
Belief of all that they propose is implicitly contained in this; but must all
this be distinctly known by all, and yet not distinctly Believed? The first
would damn all that know not every one of their Councils decrees de fide: the
ad. will show that they Believe nothing at all; for he that knows distinctly
what the Pope says, and yet Believes it not distinctly, cannot Believe the
general of his veracity.

But perhaps he spoke distributively of two sorts of Faith, viz. both the
Implicit and the Explicit, Salvian. de Gubern. l. 3. p. 62. si scire vis quid
tenendum sit, habes literas sacras. Perfecta ratio est hoc tenere quod legeris.
and so meant to deny the Scripture-sufficiency only to the first; if so, I
showed the flat contradiction of it before. Where there is all that is
necessary to be Believed expressly, eo nomine, there is all that is necessary to
be Believed implicitly, because to be Believed implicitly, with this man is
but to be the unknown consequent or enclose of that which is Believed expressly.

. 21. For the proof of my Major (the Scripture-sufficiency as to all things
commonly necessary to Salvation) after Bellarmine and Costerus, I have cited
the plain words at large of 1. Ragus. in Council, Basil. Bin. p. 299. 2. Gerson
de exam. doct. p. 2. cont. 2. 3. Durandus in Praefat. and Hierom. in him. 4.
Aquinas 22. 9. 1. a 10. ad 1. and de Verit. disp. de fide q. 10. ad 11. 5.
Scatus in Prolegom in sect. 1. 6. Greg. Armin. in Prol. e. g. q. 1. art. 2.
Resp. fol. 3. and 4. 7. Guil. Parisiens. de Legib. c. 16. p. 46. 8. Bellarmine
again de verbo Dei li. 10. c. 10. ad arg. 5. etc. And then I most fully proved
it out of the ancient Church-Doctors.

But to all these he gives such frivolous Answers, that it irketh me to weary
the Reader by repeating and answering them. And he that will faithfully peruse
the Authors words, I think will either need no other confutation of him, or is
incapable of understanding one when he sees it.

The fore-confuted contradiction of sufficient explicit, and yet not
sufficient implicit is the chief: and next a vain supposition, that, to say
that Scripture is sufficient to all Theological points and conclusions, is less
than to say, it is sufficient to necessary Articles of Faith; and if any of
them speak of the Churches exposition, he denies the Scripture-sufficiency as
a rule: and yet their Councils need exposition too.

. 22. III. My 3d. Argument for our Churches perpetual visibility was: If the
Roman Church (as Christian, though not as Papal) has been visible ever since
the days of the Apostles, then the Church of which the Protestants are members
has been visible ever since the days of the Apostles: but the Antecedent is
their own. Therefore they may not deny the Consequent.

Here he wants Form again, because [as Christian] is in the Antecedent and not
in the sequel.

Answ. He might have seen that it is but an Expository term in a parenthesis,
and so the same exposition in the consequent is supposed.

Next he says, that it is a fallacy, a secundum quid ad simpliciter.

Answ. so then the Church as Christian is not the Christian Church, but
secundum quid; but we that know no other, profess to be of no other, nor to
prove the visibility of any other, than the Church as Christian. Let them prove
more that pretend to any other.

Next he says, that [the Protestants have been visible as Christians] is all
that can be pretended: and yet that also he denies, for they believe not one
Article with an infallible, supernatural, divine Faith.

Answ. 1. The question is, whether they profess not so to do: nay rather,
whether their objective Faith, (that is, all the Creed and Holy Scriptures) be
not infallible, of supernatural Revelation and Divine; he that denies this
seems an Infidel. But if all the members of the Church must have an actual
subjective Faith that is of supernatural, divine infusion: Then 1. No hypocrite
is a Churchmember; 2. And no man can know who is a Churchmember besides
himself. 3. And so the Church of Rome is invisible; this is clear.

2. I must not too often write the same things; if the Reader will peruse a small
Tract of mine called [The certainty of Christianity without Popery] he shall
soon see whether the Papists Faith or Ours be the more certain and divine: Of
which also I have said, more in my Treatise called The safe Religion, and Mr.
Pool in his nullity of the Roman Faith.

. 23. I here showed that having proved our visibility as Christian, I need not
prove a visibility as Papal, any more than he that would prove his humane
Genealogy, having some leprous Ancestors, need to prove that all were leprous.

Here he denies Popery to be Leprosy, and again falsely tells us, that if it
were so, all the visible Church in the world was leprous; which needs no more
confutation than is often given it.

. 24. He tells me how an. 1500 the Pope was in possession, and we dispossessed
him without order, etc.

Answ. An old Cant, but 1. I have fully proved that he never was in possession
of the Government of the Christian world. 2. Nor in the Empire or any other
Princes dominion, but by humane donation and consent; as the Archbishop of
Canterbury is in England. 3. And that they that gave him that power, may on
just reason take it away. And that the Bishop of another Princes Country,
cannot stand here by his authority, when he has lost the Government of England
himself.

. 25. IV. My 4th. Argument added more than my Thesis required, viz. If there
have been since the days of Christ, a Christian Church that was not subject to
the Roman Pope as the Vicar of Christ and universal Head and Governor of the
Church, then the Church of which the Protestants are members has been visible,
both in it is Being and in it is freedom from Popery. But the Antecedent is true:
Ergo so is the Consequent.

To this 1. he wants the word [ever] in the Antecedent. And yet before abated
it, but he knows that [since] was put for [ever since.] 2. He says, I
suppose that the sole denial of the Popes supremacy constitutes the Church
whereof the Protestants are members. Answ. In despite of my, frequent
professions to the contrary; who still tell him, that our Christianity and
Relation to Christ and one another makes us Church Members: and our freedom
from the Papacy is our renunciation of an Usurper.

. 26. I proved my Antecedent 1. from the express words of the Council of
Calcedon can. 28 which he answers as before, where he is consuted.

. 27. 2. My 2d. proof was from the silence of the ancient writers Tertullian,
Cyprian, Athan. Nazianzene, Nissene, Basil, Optatus, Augustine, etc. that used
not this argument of Popes power over all the world as of Divine Right, to
confute the Heretics that they had to do with; when two words had
expeditiously done all, if this had then been Believed.

Here he says, Their authors have proved that the Fathers did so.

Answ. Soon said, and as soon denied. The books are in our hands, as well as
yours. I will now instance but in Cyprian and the African Churches in his
days, and in Augustine, and the same Churches in his days.

1. Did Cyprian and his Council believe Stephens Universal Monarchy, when he
opposed his judgment with so much vehemence, and set the Scripture against his
plea from tradition? Let him that will read his Epistles of this (too long to
be recited) believe it if he can. And when he twitted his arrogance in Council,
with nemo nostrum se dicit Episcopum Episcoporum.

2. The plea of Aurelius, Augustine and the rest of the African Bishops I have
formerly recited, of which Harding says, that the Africans seduced by
Aurelius, continued twenty years in Schism from Rome: and did Augustine and all
the rest then believe the Popes Sovereignty even in the Empire?

I did plainly show that if the Donatis^s, Novatians, and all such Sects had
believed the Roman Sovereignty and Infallibility, they had not so differed from
them; if they did not believe it, the Fathers would have taken the nearest way,
and wrote their Volumnes to convince them that this Papal Rule was it that must
end all their controversies, (instead of writing voluminously from Scripture
and the nature of the cause:) which they did not.

. 28. My 3d. proof was this [The Tradition witnessed by the greater part of the
Universal Church says, that the Papal Vicarship or Sovereignty is an
innovation and usurpation, and that the Catholic Church was many hundred years
without it. Therefore there was then no such Papat Church.

Here the man is angry, and says, It is an abominable untruth set down by a
forehead of brass. -- A man in his right wits would not have the confidence to
utter so loud a falsehood, -- and all the world will see that I am one of the
most unsufferablest out-facers of Truth and asserters of open Falsehood that
ever set pen to paper: yea, it brings in the talk of Rebellion against his
Majesty, etc.

Answ. The apprehensions of men are very different, when reading (it is like)
the same books leaves me past doubt on one side, and him so vehemently
confident on the other. My proof is this, 1. The greatest part of the Universal
Church does now deny the Papal Universal Sovereignty. 2. The greatest part of
the Universal Church do suppose and say that they hold herein to the ancient
truth which was delivered down from the Apostles. 3. Therefore the greatest
part of the Universal Church do hold that the ancient truth delivered from the
Apostles does teach them to deny the Popes Universal Sovereignty; and
consequently that it is an innovation and usurpation.

I. As to the first, it is a matter of present fact, such as whether most of
England speak English. 1. That the great Empire of Abassia renounce the Pope,
(and plead tradition for it) Godignus the Jesuit (besides others) fully
testifies, and justifies Pet. Maffeius, Ribade, Nica and other Jesuits
against (...) new author that falsely says they were subject to the Pope. He
tells us that they take the Romans for Nestorian Heretics, p. 318. 328. etc.
and that they resolved never to be subject to the Pope, that he that told them
otherwise misinformed them, yea says one of the Jesuits, page 330. I think
the Emperor had rather be under the hardest yoke of the Saracens, than under
the mild and gentle Empire It is Empire that they claim over Emperors.
of the Roman Pope. It Is true that many errors they have, and many more are
charged on them, which they deny, and believing that Dioscorus was the true
follower of Cyril and the Council of Ephesians. and that Leo and the Council of
Calcedon were Nestorians (of which more anon) they are for Dioscorus against
Leo and the Council. But few if any of them understand the bottom of that
controversy. And the Emperor told the Jesuit that he falsely charged errors on
them, and his mother says [seeing your Faith and ours do nothing differ, but
are the same, why do you write to trouble quiet minds without cause? The
Jesuit answers, I certainly affirm to your Majesty, that if you had no other
Errors, this one, that you are separated from the Pope of Rome, the Vicar of
Christ on Earth, is enough and too much to your everlasting destruction.

II. To this she replied, that she and her Country were subject to the
Apostles Peter and Paul, and first to Christ himself. The Jesuit answered, I
deny that they are subject to Christ, that are not subject to his Vicar. --
Says she, neither I nor mine deny obedience to St. Peter, we are now in the
same Faith that we were in from the beginning, If that were not right, why for
so many Ages and Generations was there no man found that would warn us of our
error? -- He answered, The Pope of Rome that is the Pastor of the whole* Church
of Christ, could not in the years past send Tea^hers into Abassia, etc -- She
answered, To change the old Customs and Rites, and receive new ones, is a
matter full of danger and offense. He answered, that their Faith was old and
had nothing new, etc. p. 323, 324, 325. The Emperor also spoke to the like
purpose. p. 319. 320, 321.

So that it is confessed by the Jesuits and best information from Abassia. 1.
That they abhor or refuse the Papal Government. 2. And that for this they
plead Tradition and Antiquity.

And the same is notorious of the Greek, Armenian, and other Oriental Churches.
How large they were in the East when Iacobus de Vitriaco was there I have
formerly showed out of his words, who says that those Eastern Christians were
more than either the Greek or Latin Church: and as the Greeks anathematize the
Pope every year, so the rest are known to reject him. To say that these are
Heretics and not the Church, is but to beg the question, and fitter for
contempt than an answer. That all such rejecters of the Papacy are the far
greatest part of professed Christians is past doubt. 2. And that Greeks,
Armenians. etc. plead Tradition and the judgment and custom of their
forefathers for what they hold, is so far past question, that I will not
vainly wast time in citing authors to prove it. Even the Papists confess it
when they tell us that these Churches join with them in pleading for tradition.

Is not then the consequence clear, which W. I. is so angry at? I know not what
can be said against it, unless that both the Greeks and Protestants do confess
that once they were under the Pope: but the Greeks say that they were never
under him as a Governor of the whole Christian world, set up by God, but as
the Primate of one Empire set up by man, upon such reasons (the Seat of the
Empire) as are alterable as well as unnecessary. I have proved this fully
before, 1. From the words of the Council of Calcedon. 2. From their equalling
and after preferring the Patriarch of Constantinople, who pretended not to a
Divine Right and that as over all the world; and they were not so blind as to
set up a humane Law, above that which they believed to be divine; many other
proofs I gave.

And even the Protestants hold that in rejecting the Papacy they follow the
Tradition of the Church of Christ, however some Countries where they live and
their progenitors fell under the Papal error or terror.

There are some late Papists that think that what is held in this age was
certainly held in the former, and that no Countries Tradition can be false:
Which is contrary to all experience. But if other Countries Tradition may be
false, so may the Roman.

Niceph. says of the Armenians, [They do these things from Tradition, which
rests on no Reason; and their ancient Legislators and Doctors, do
calumniously boast that Gregory the Bishop of great Armenia delivered them by
hands, etc l. 18. c. 54.

And the Abassians that received the Gospel from the Eunuch and St. Matthew,
being before too much addicted to some Jewish ceremonies and never cured of
them, retain them as by Tradition to this day.

And it is known how Tradition differed about Easter Day and the Millenaries
opinion.

By all this it is evident that most of the Christian world take the Religion
which they hold, to be that which by Tradition the Church received for the
Apostles: and therefore most being against the Papacy, think Tradition is
against it. And the Tradition of two parts of the Christian world, especially
those next Jerusalem, is more regardable as such, than the Tradition of the
third part only that is contrary; unless better Historical proof make a
difference.

. 29. 4. My 4th. proof was [Many Churches without the virge of the Roman Empire
never subjected themselves to Rome (and many, not of many hundred years after
Christ): Ergo there were visible Churches from the beginning to this day, that
were not for the Roman Vicarship.

To this he says, If I can prove (as I have proved) that any one
Extra-imperial Church was subject to the Bishop of Rome, and you cannot show
some evident reason why that was subject rather than all the rest, I convince
by that the subjection of all. Now it is evident that the Churches of Spain,
France, Britain, of France, and Germany, when divided from the Roman Empire,
were as subject as the rest, etc.

Answ. 1. Yes, and much more, Rome it (...) was then under Theodorick, and
other Arrian Theodorick and his Successors were willing that Rome, when it was
their regal seat, should claim the greatest power over the Churches of other
Princes Dominious.
Goths; and those Rulers gave them their liberty herein, and being Heretics,
no wonder if the Bishops chose to continue their former correspondency and
Church Order, to strengthen themselves. Here is then a special reason why Rome
it self and the rest of the Churches should so voluntarily continue. 1. Their
old custom, when under the Empire, had so settled them. 2 Their strength and
safety invited them. 3. It was their voluntary act.

2. But what is this to those many hundred years before, when the Empire was not
so dismembered? Though even till after Gregory's days (an. 6^) the Britains
obeyed you not; yet I told you that when Pagans or Arrians conquered any parts
of the Empire, the Christians would still be as much under the old Christian
power as they could: which made the Major Armenia, when subdu^d by the
Persians, crave the Romans Civil Government, and revolt to the Emperor and kill
their Magistrates, even when they were not governed by the Pope at all.

. 30. Here he repeateth what he had frivolously said before of the Council of
Nice (with an odd supposition as if India were in America) and then betaketh
himself to prove out of the Fathers the Roman Sovereignty; but with such vain
citations that I dare not tire the Reader, with repeating and particularly
answering them. 1. They being at large answered by Chamier, Whittakers, and
many other Protestants long ago; and many of them or most by my self in my key,
and my former answer to him. 2. Because it is needless to him that will peruse
the Authors and Histories themselves, and useless to him that will not. 3. This
general answer is sufficient. 1. Part of them are the words of spurious books,
as St. Denis, an interpolate book of Cyprian, some new found Chaldaick, Nicene
Canons, etc. 2. Part of them say nothing of the Pope, but only of St. Peter, as
being the first of the Apostles, but not as the Governor of the rest. 3. Part,
or almost all of them, speak only of an Imperial Primacy, that mention the
Pope. 4. Part of them speak only of an honorary precellencie of Rome and the
Church there. 5. Some speak only de facto, that at that time the Church of Rome
had kept out the Arrian, Nestorian, and Eutychian Heresies, more than the ^ast
did (which was because they had more orthodox Emperors,) and therefore that
those sects that then differed from them were not in the Right, nor in the
Church. 6. Some are only the commendations of Eastern Bishops persecuted by the
Arrians in the East, that fled to Rome for shelter. 7. As high words are often
given by Doctors and Councils themselves of Cyril and other Bishops of
Alexandria, and of Bishops of Jerusalem, Antioch and Constantinople, as those
that are acquainted with Church-writings know. There needs no longer
confutation of his Citations.

. 31. My fifth proof was, that The Eastern. Churches within the Empire were
never subjects of the Pope.] He denies this Antecedent; I proved it (as
formerly from the Africans Letters to Celestinus, and the words of Basil, etc:)
So farther: 1. Because the Pope chose not the Patriarchs of Alexandria,
Antioch, Jerusalem, or Constantinople, nor the Bishops under them, 2. He did
not ordain them, nor appoint any Vicar to do it, nor did they hold their power
as under him: To both these he says, [It was not necessary, etc.] But their
Patriarchal power was from him.]

Answ. Prove that and you do something, but no man verst in Church-writings can
believe you; I remember not to have met with any learned Papist that affirms
it, (that the Pope set up the other four Patriarchs): it is notorious in
history, that as the Churches of Jerusalem and Antioch were before the Church
of Rome, so Alexandria, Antioch and Rome were made Patriarchates together, and
no one of them made the rest; and the other two were added since.

He proves it because, he restored and deposed those Patriarchs as occasion
required.

Answ. 1. Tell this to those that never read such writings, Princes and
Councils did set them up, and cast them out as they saw cause; it were tedious,
(and needless to any but the ignorant) to recite the multitude of instances,
through the reign of all the Christian Emperors till Phocas time; how little
had the Pope to do in most of their affairs? 2. They frequently set up and
deposed one another, (far ofter than the Pope did any;) Does that prove that
they were Governors of each other accordingly? 3. Councils then judged all the
Patriarchs Roman and all, as is notorious. 4. The Pope sometime when he saw his
advantage, and saw one side striving against another; would set in to show his
ambition, as the prime Patriarch, to strengthen himself by such as needed him,
and usually was against him that was likest to overtop him (as neighbor
Princes in War are afraid of the strongest) and that was usually the Bishop of
Constantinople.

3. I said They received no Laws of his to rule by. He replyeth The Laws and
Canons of the Church they received, and those were consirmed by his authority.

Answ. But did he make them any Laws himself? by the Church your mean
Councils: and those made Laws for him; therefore he was their subject. He had
but a voice, and was not so much as a speaker in the Parliament: some Councils
you confess he neither presided in, nor any for him (as Binnius confesses of
Council Constable.) He had little to do in any And yet will prove the Canons at
Trent. and the Council void because the Pope did not call it or preside in it,
but Callinicus of Constantinople.
of the Councils for 500 or 600 years, less by far than the other Patriarchs.

4. I said They were not commanded or judged by him. He replyeth I have
evidenced they were commanded and judged by him. Answ. Reader, the solution of
such historical controversies is by reading the histories themselves. Read
thoroughly the histories of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomene, Theodoret, Evagrius,
Procopius, Victor, Nicephorus, etc. and judge as you see cause: especially if
you will also read but the works of Tertullian, Cyprian, Nazianzene, Basil,
Hilary, and the true Acts of the old Councils.

5. I added the equalizing the Patriarch of Constantinople, which he denies
against the express words of the Council.) I might add the after prefering the
Bishop of Constantinople, The often contempts and excommunications of him, the
altering of Church power ordinarily by the Emperors; is Iustinian's making
Iustiniana prima and secunda, to be absolute and under no Patriarch, as was
Carthage; and says Pet. a Marca and many others, Heraclea, Pontus and Asia
long. The managing of many Councils without him, and passing Canons (as Calced.
28.) against him: The whole Council of Ephesians. 2. going against his Legates, and
that under a most pious and excellent Prince Theodos. 2. that used Cyril and
made him President, Ephesians. 1. and Dioscorous Ephesians. 2d. and countenance this
Council against the Pope.

When Zeno carried on his Henoticon and Anastasius his Reconciliation, how
little did he, or any of the Eastern Churches stick at the Popes dissent? No
nor Justinian when he turned to the Heresy of the Apththartodocitae, and when
he dragged Vigilius, as some Historians say, with a rope; instances might be
multiplied.

. 32. My 6th proof of the novelty of the Papal Sovereignty was from the
testimony of their own greatest Bishops, where I cited Greg. 1st. his words so
plain and large against a Universal Bishop or Pastor, as plainer can scarce be
spoke, and answered Bellarmine words against it; and I shall take the impartial
Reader to need no more answer to W I. than even to read the words of Gregory
themselves; only noting, that this John of Constantinople that claimed the
title of Universal Bishop, was a man of more than ordinary mortification and
contempt of worldly things; for his poverty and great fasting called, Johannes
jejunus, and therefore not like to do it, out of any extraordinary worldliness
and pride. And also that Gregory was of so little power himself (being then out
of the Empire under other powers for the most part) that he did not blame John
as for claiming that which he has right to, but that which no Bishop at all
had right to. The case is most plain.

. 33. My 7th. proof was, The Papists themselves confess that multitudes of
Christians, if not most by far; have been the opposers of the Pope, or none of
his Subjects: Therefore there have been visible Churches of such.

To this [He grants the antecedent of Christians net Univocally so called,
but of no others.]

Answ. Here he intimates that most of the professed Christians of the world
were not univocally Christians by profession, but equivocally only: and who
will easily believe such Teachers, as unchristen most of the Christian World.
Any Sect may take that course; their sense is this, none are Christians indeed
but only those that are subjects to the Pope; therefore all the Christian World
are his Subjects: Just so the Donatists, and some Foreign Anabaptists, take it
but for granted, that none are Christians but those that are Baptized at Age;
and then the Inference will be plausible, that all the Christian World is
against Infant Baptism.

. 34. To Ae^eas Sylvius (Pope Pius 2d.) words, That small regard was had to the
Church of Rome, before the Nicene Council: He replyeth, that he means, not so
small, as not to be the Head of all other Churches; else the Council of Nice
had introduced a new Government.

Answ. His words are plain, and all History of those times confirm them. No one
Church, before the Council of Nice, had any Government over others, but what
was for mere Concord, by free consent; at least, before Constantine gave it
them. And in the Council of Nice, there is not a word that intimates, that the
Pope was Ruler of all the World of Christians; but his power is mentioned, as
limited to his Precincts; and the like given to Alexandria. Yet Innovation, in
giving power to Patriarchs, is no wonder in Councils: How else came
Constantinople and Jerusalem to be Patriarchs? Was it not by Innovation?

. 34. Next he says, I cite Goldastus; but where, the Lord knows.

Answ. I perceive the Man is a stranger to Goldastus, who has gathered a
multitude of Old Writers against the Papacy, for Princes Rights, and bound them
in many great Volumns, De Monarchia, and Constitut. Imperial. I cited no
particular words, but all these great Volumns of many Authors of those times,
show the opposition to Papal Claims.

. 35. His saying, That the Schismatical Greeks were not Univocal Christians, is
no more regardable than the Greeks Anathematizing Papists.

. 36. My plain Testimony of their Reynerius, Armeniorum Ecclesiae and Aethiopum
and Induorum and caeterae quas Apostoli converterunt non subsunt Ecclesiae
Romanae. He first cavils at my saying [were not under.] instead of [are not]
not seeing that I only recited the Assertion, as uttered by Reynerius so long
ago; and must I not say, that he says, then they were not under, if he so long
ago say, They are not?

2. But he would persuade the Credulous, that this speaks of them but as
Schismatics; as Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, are not now under Rome,
but have been.

Answ, But those that will be satisfied with forced abuse of words, may believe
any thing that a Priest will say. The context confuteth you: You do not pretend
that India turned from you, and was under you. By the Churches Planted by the
Apostles, he plainly means those without the Empire, as being none of the
Provinces put under the Bishop of Rome nor of old claimed by the Pope.

. 37. I cited Melch. Canus words, Loc. l. 6. c. 7. fol. 201. Not only the
Greeks, but almost all (or most) of the rest of the Bishops of the whole World
have vehemently sought to destroy the Privileges of the Roman Church; and
indeed they had on their side both the Arms of Emperors, and the greatest
number of Churches; and yet they could never prevail to abrogate the Power of
the one Roman Pope.

To this, he says, That 1. Canus speaks of different times, not conjunctly. 2.
And he takes them not for univocal Christians. And here he finds a Root of
Rebellion, q. d. Most of the Countries Rebelled against the King, Ergo, he had
no Authority over them.

Answ. Our Question here was only of the matter of Fact: Whether, de facto,
most of the Bishops and Churches have not been against the Papacy? This Canus
asserteth, therefore I seek no more. And when you have proved them no
Christians, or Rebels, I shall consider your Proofs. 2. Had he meant only the
most of the Bishops and Churches, per vices, it had signified nothing to his
purpose: For that had been no strength, but might have been some inconsiderable
Town at a time. 3. But that all Church History may help us better to understand
his words; that tell us often it was [at once] specially when Binnius said, that
at Ephesians. 2. Council. Only Peter's Ship escaped drowning.

As to his Cavil at my Translation, Whether [Ab aliis plerisque totius orbis
Episcopis] be not to be Translated, if not [almost all the rest] at least [most
of the rest of the Bishops of the whole World] rather than [very many others] I
leave to the ordinary Readers Judgment.

And as for either Canus or his own saying, that all these (the Greeks and most
of the Bishops of the whole World, the greater number of Churches, and the
Armed Emperors, were all Schismatics, Heretics, and no Christians but
Equivocally; it is no weak proof of the falseness of their Cause and Tyranny,
that cannot stand without unchristening most of the Bishops and Churches in the
World, with such Emperors: Canus his confession of the Historical Truth may be
pleaded by me, while I hate their Robbing Christ of the greatest part of his
Church, because they are not the Popes.

. 38. My Eighth Proof of the Novelty of the Papal Sovereignty, was from
Historical Testimony, that the Papal sovereignty was no part of the Churches
Faith, nor owned by the Ancients: This is done at large by Bloudel de Primatu.
and Pet. Moulin, de Novitate Papismi, usher, Field, of the Church, lib. 5.
Chaucer, Whittaker, Io. White, and many other. I instanced only in many
Historians, Regino, Herman, Contract. Marian; Scotus, Beneventus de Rambaldis,
and others; that say, Phocas first constituted (says one, or) Boniface
obtained of Phocas (say others) that the Church of Rome should be the Head of
all Churches.

To this, 1. He thinks I have forgot my first Thesis, because he forgot that
when I had proved by three Arguments my Thesis, in the fourth, to satisfy
their importunity, I proved it with the Addition, that there has been a
Christian Church still visible that Obeyed not the Pope; and so added ten more
Arguments to prove this Negative or Exclusive part.

After he comes to this again, and would have [ut Caput esset] to be no more
than an acknowledgment of a controverted Title: But at least the Primus
constituit confuteth that; and it is not ut diceretur, haberetur, or denuo
esset. He cites Platina, as if it were a wonder for the Popes Household Servant
to say, that it was his Right.

2. But I specially note, that both what is said of Phocas, and by him, of
Justinian, Gratian, etc. who constitute and command this Primacy and Subjection
to it, show that it was but Imperial, as to bounds and Authority.

I before mentioned Suarez himself, in his Excellent Book, De Legibus, saying,
That God has made no Laws of Church-policy: And if so, not of the Papacy.

. 39. I noted their Novelty out of Platina, in Gregor. saying, What should I
say more of this Holy Man? whose whole Institution of the Church-Office,
specially the Old one, was Invented and Approved by him: which Order I would we
did follow; then Learned Men would not at this day abhor the reading of the
Office.

Hence I Note, 1. That all their Church-Office was new, being Gregory's
Invention (though, no doubt, much of the Matter had been in use before that
form.) 2. Therefore the maintainers of Tradition cannot prove, that, because
they thus Worship God now, therefore they always did so. 3. Gregory's Invented
Office (hardly received in Spain) was so altered in Platina's time, that
Learned Men abhorred the Reading of it. 4. Why might they not corrupt
Church Government (where Ambition had a thousand times greater baits) as well
as Church-Offices? This is their Antiquity and constancy: This W. I. thought
meet in silence to pass by.

40. My Ninth Proof of the Novelty of the Papal Sovereignty, was, If the
Generality of Christians in the first Ages, and many (if not most) in the
latter Ages have been free from the Essentials of the Papists Faith, then their
Faith has had no Successive Visible Church professing it in all Ages: (but the
Christians, that are against it, have been Visible.) But the Antecedent is
true: The Antecedent I proved in twelve Instances.

To this he says, It follows not, that though our Church, as Papal, had no
Successive Visibility; the Church, whereof the Protestants are Members, had
ever since Christ's time on Earth, a Successive Visibility: When you have proved
this Consequence, I Oblige my self to answer your Instances; and so he durst
not meddle with that matter, but puts it off.

Answ. Reader, see here what an Issue our Dispute is brought to: Can you wish a
plainer? I proved that our Religion, being nothing else but Christianity, our
Church has been still Visible. because it is confessed, that the Christian
Church has been still Visible. But the Papists must have us prove also, that
our Church-hath been still Visible, as without Popery. I now prove Popery a
Novelty; and does not that then fully prove my Consequence, that the Christian
Church was Visible without it? And I prove, that this Novelty of Popery is yet
received but by the third part of Christians (of whom I am persuaded ten to one
are either compelled to profess what they believe not, or understand it not:)
Therefore the Christian Church was once wholly, and is yet mostly without
Popery. I know not when a Cause is given up, if here he give not up his Cause.

. 41. Twelve new Articles of the Papal Faith I named: 1. That the Pope is above
a^ General Council; Decreed at Later. and Florence. 2. Contrarily, That the
Council is above the Pope, and may Judge him, etc. Decreed at Basil and
Constance: True before, as a point of Humane Order, but not made ever an
Article of Faith. 3. That the Pope may Depose Princes, and give their Dominions
to others, if they exterminate not all their Subjects that deny
Transubstantiation; Decreed at Later. sub. Innoc. 3. 4. That the Body and
Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, is truly,
and really, and substantially in the Eucharist; and that there is a change of
the whole substance of Bread, into the Body, and of the whole substance of
Wine, into the Blood, which they call Transubstantiation: Decreed at Trent, and
proved new by Ed. Albertinus, Bishop Cousin's History of Trans. and by my self.
5. That the Eucharist is rightly given and taken under one kind (without the
Cup:) Decreed at Constance and Trent. 6. That we must never take and Interpret
Scripture, but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. See the
Trent-Oath; whereas, 1. We have no certainty whom to take for Fathers (a great
part being called both Fathers and Heretics by the Papists.) 2. And they
greatly disagree among themselves. 3. And have not unanimously given us any
sense at all of a quarter of the Bible (if of the hundredth part.) 7. That
there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained, are helped by the
Suffrages of the Faithful. 8. That the Holy Catholic Church of Rome is the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches, (and yet it is the Catholic, that is, the
whole it self.) 9. That Traditions are to be received with equal pious
Affection and Reverence as the Holy Scripture. 10. That the Virgin Mary was
conceived without Original sin: Decreed at Basil. 11. That the people may not
read the Scripture Translated into a known Tongue, without a special License.
12. That the Books of Maccabees, and other such, are part of the Canon of
Faith; (against which, see Bishop Cousins, and Dr. Io. Reignolds.)

See in Dr. Challenor's Credo Eccles. Cath. sixteen of their Novelties.

See Dallaus, De cultu Latinorum, their Worship proved new.

All this W. I. passes over.

. 42. My Tenth Argument was, If multitudes (yea, the far greatest part) of
Christians in all Ages, have been Ignorant of Popery, but not of Christianity;
then there has been a Succession of Visible Professors of Christianity, that
were no Papists: But the Antecedent is true: Ergo, etc.

Here I brought full proof of the Antecedent: 1. From the Ignorance which they
themselves accuse the Aethiopians, Armenians, Greeks, Russians, etc. of; and
the Protestants also. 2. The known Ignorance of the far most of the Vulgar, in
their own Church. 3. The Papists charge on the Council of Chalcedon and others,
about their power. 4. The difference of the Councils of Constance and Basil,
and Later. and Florence, about their Essentials. 5. The large proof brought by
Dr. Field, Append. l. 3. Potter, p. 68. (Bishop Morton Apol.)

To this, he Answers as to the last, by notorious giving up his cause, neither
granting nor denying, That there has been a Succession of Visible Professors
of Christianity that were no Papists; which he says, is all that I prove.

Answ. And what need I more? Is not the Succession of the Church, as Christian,
granted by him? Therefore, if I prove it also Successively Christian without
Popery, I know not what else the Man would have.

But he says, Arrians may say so too.

Answ. Arrians are not Christians. If his meaning be, that, besides our
rejecting Popery, we have some other Heresy which unchristeneth us. 1. That Is
nothing against my Argument, which is but Christians Visibility... 2. Why did
he never tell us what that Heresy is? Would he not, if he could? And was he
not concerned to do it? 3. It Is known, that it is our rejecting Popery, that is
the Heresy they charge us with; as to any other, we defy their Accusation.
And 4. If any individual person be Accused, let it be proved: Our Religion
Objective is justified by themselves from Heresy, and all positive Error: For
it is nothing but the Sacramental Covenant, briefly explained in the Creed,
Lords Prayer, and Decalogue; in the Essentials, and in that and the Integrals
all the Canonical Scriptures: So that our proof of our Churches Visibility, as
Christian, and not Papal, is all that Reason can require of us: And so this
Task is done.

. 43. After these Arguments, I added some Testimonies of Historians, which show
how Melch-Canus words, de facto, are to be understood; and how the word
[Catholick Church] was then taken; and how small a party the Papal Sovereignty
had in the very worst times, viz.

Rog. Hoveden, and Mat. Paris, in H. 2d. show, that it was, Avitas leges
consuetudinis Angliae, which the Pope here Damned, and Anathematized all that
favored and observed them. Here is Tradition, Antiquity, and the immutability
of Rome.

The German History, collected by Reuberus, Pistorius, Freberus, and Goldastus,
fully show, That the Papal Tyranny only kept under by a Turbulent Faction, the
greater part by fraud and force, which never consented to them.

The Apology of Hen. 4. the Emperor, in M. Freberus, To. 1. p. 178. says,
Behold Pope Hildebrand's Bishops, when doubtless they are Murderers of Souls
and Bodies; such as deservedly are called the Synagogue of Satan: -- Yet they
write, that on his and on their party, is the Holy Mother Church. When the
Catholic, that is, the Universal Church, is not in the Schism of any Where was
it then? when for 40 Years there was nothing but Schism among various Popes at
once.
Side (or Party) but in the Universality of the Faithful agreeing together by
the Spirit of Peace and Charity -- And p. 179. See how the Minister of the
Devil is besides himself, and would draw us with him him into the Ditch of
perdition: Who writes, that God's Holy Priesthood is with only thirteen (N.
B.) or few more Bishops of Hildebrand's; and that the Priesthood of all the
rest through the World are separated from the Church of God (our Mr. W. I.
would say, that only these thirteen Bishops were Univocal Christians;) when
certainly, not only the Testimony of Gregory and Innocent, but the Judgment of
all the Holy Fathers agree with that of Cyprian -- that he is an Aliene,
profane, an Enemy, that he cannot have God for his Father, that holds not the
Unity of the Church: -- And p. 181. But some that go out from us, say, and
write, that they defend the party of t^r Gregory; not the whole, which is
Christ's, which is the Catholic Church of Christ (so the Catholic Church and
the Popes Sect are distinct.) And p. 180. But our Adversaries (that went from
us (N. B.) not we from them) use thus to commend themselves -- We are the
Catholics; We are in the Unity of the Church. So the Writer calls them
[Catholicks] and us, that hold the Faith of the Holy Fathers, that consent with
all good Men, that love Peace and Brotherhood, -- Us he calls Schismatics, and
Heretics, and Excommunicate, because we resist not the King. -- He adds, out
of Isidore, Etymol. l. 8. The Church is called Catholic, because it is not as
the Conventicles of Heretics, confined in certain Countries, but diffused
through the whole World: Therefore they have not the Catholic Faith, that are
in a part, and not in the whole, which Christ has Redeemed, and must Reign
with Christ: They that confess in the Creed, that they believe in the Holy
Catholic Church, and being divided into Parties, hold not the Unity of the
Church; which Unity, Believers being of one Heart and Soul, properly belongs to
the Catholic Church. So far this Apol. of the Emperor.

Here you see what the Catholic Church is; and that the Papalines were then a
little Sect of thirteen, or a few more, Bishops. And now, Reader, open thine
Eyes and Judge, whether the Emperor, and all the rest of the Western Churches,
besides all the rest (a greater part) of the Christian Word, are therefore no
Univocal (but Equivocal) Christians, because a Papal Faction, and an
Equivocating Jesuit may call them so.

All this the prudent Disputer thought best to Answer by silence.

. 44. I added (because of their noise of Heresies charged on the Abassines,
Syrians, Armenians, Greeks, Protestants, etc.) 1. That they differ in greater
matters, yea, de fide, than many things which they call Heresies are. 1. I
repeated the differences of their Councils (Constable. and Basil against Later. and
Florence, etc.) 2. Pighius words, Hierarch. Eccl. l. 6. That these Councils
went against the undoubted Faith and Judgment of the Orthodox Church it self.
3. That St. Thomas Aquinas, and other Doctors, differ from the second Council
of Nice, in holding the Cross and Image of Christ to be Worshipped with
Latreia. 4. I added a large Testimony of the Theological Faculty of Paris,
under their Great Seal, against one Ioh. de Montesono ordinis praedic. recited
in the end of Lombard; Printed at Paris, 1557. p. 426. where they show, that
(though Tho. Aquinas was a Canonized Saint) we may believe that part of his
Doctrine was Heretical. And the same they say of Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine,
Lombard, Gratian, Anselm, Hugo de St. Victore, etc. To all this he Answers by
silence.

. 45. At last (in vain) I importuned him to prove the perpetual Visibility of
their Papacy (but could not prevail) citing their Authors that make the Pope to
be the Church, and the whole strength of Councils --

. 46. I added a few Miscellaneous Testimonies against their Foundations.

1. The first Council of Ephesians. under Cyril, in Epist. ad Nestor. in Pet. Crab.
Tom. 1. fol. 315. Petrus and Johannes aequales sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis.

2. Bishop Bromhal's citation of Comment. in Epist. synodal. Basil. p. 31. and
40. Impris. Colon, 1613. saying, The Provinces Subject to the four great
Patriarchs, from the beginning did know no other Supreme, but their own
Patriarchs: -- And if the Pope be a Patriarch, it is by the Church, etc.

3. Cassander, Epist. 37. D. Zimenio (p. 1132.) says, of Monlucius, the Bishop
of Valentia (highly praised by Thuanus, etc.) that he said, Si sibi permittatur
in his tribus capitulis, uti forma publicarum precum de ritibus Baptismi, de
forma Eucharistae, sivae missae, Christianam formam ad normam priscae ecclesiae
institutam, etc. confidere se quod ex quinquagint a millibus quos habet in sua
Diocesi a praesenti discipliniae ecclesiae adversos, quadraginta millia ad
Ecclesiasticum unionem, sit reducturus. Here you see what their Antiquity and
Tradition is.

4. A closer passage I noted out of Cassander, Epist. 42. p. 1138. To all this
I find no Reply.

. 47. In the conclusion, I Answered a late paper that I received from him,
wherein he Humbly entreats me to declare my Opinion more fully, whether any
professed Heretics, properly so called, are true parts of the Universal
Visible Church of Christ, so that they compose one Universal Church with the
other Visible parts.

I wrote him so plain and full an Answer to this, that I shall only refer the
Reader to the perusal of it, instead of any defense.

To this he concludes with such a Discourse, that would make a Man lament that
such distracted stuff should be thought sufficient to deceive poor Souls. He
rants at me for distinguishing: He must have had me directly Answer his
Question with Yea or Nay; and instead of Answering, ad rem, to have entered an
Idle controversy with him, which of all the sorts commonly called Heretics,
are properly so called. And when no Man can resolve us, whether [properly so
called] must be expounded by Etymology, or by the Canou; and by what Canon? Or
by the Fathers Catalogues, and by which Fathers (Epiphanius, Philastrius,
Augustine, etc.) or by common custom, or by the Pope? How should ever this idle
controversy of [properly so called] have ever come to any Resolution, unless
by making himself the Judge.

Yet does the Man absurdly say to me, We are not agreed what the Universal
Visible Church is: What of that? Are we not agreed there is such a thing? Think
you or I what we will of the definition of it, it is sufficient to give an
Answer, pro or con, to my Question, whether Heretics be true Members of the
Church: And it will be time enough to explicate what you mean by the Universal
Church, when your Answer is impugned -- See you not again, that whatsoever you
or I understand by [Heretick properly so called] we both agree that there are
Heretics properly so called; and that is enough to Answer my Question, etc.

Answ. It would be irksom to Answer such a Man (if I knew whether this came
from Ignorance or Dishonesty) were it not for the necessity of the simple. Is
it not a wearisome thing to talk with a Man that must have a Disputation upon
terms, whose sense we are disagreed of, and that abhors explication of
doubtful words? As if, when the Question is, Whether Canis, properly so called,
do generate, or do give suck? And I distinguish of Canis Coelestis and
Terrestris, and of Canis Mas and foemina, and say, that only Canis Terrestris
Generateth, and only Canis foemina gives suck. He should have ranted at me for
distinguishing, and said, We are agreed, that Canis there is, properly so
called; and therefore you should Answer without distinguishing. Let him that
studyeth deceit, dwell in darkness, and choose Confusion, but he shall not so
draw me from the Light, and cheat me into a foolish Game at Words.

. 48. But seeing he will not endure a distinction of Heresies, nor tell us how
we may These Men that are so quick in damning and avoiding Men, as Heretics,
for a word not understood, can keep Communion with wickedness freely. Pope
Gregory 2d. wrote to Boniface, who asked him, whether he should eat and drink
with Debauched Priests and Bishops, that he should Admonish them to amend; but
if they would not, yet not avoid Familiarity with them, it being likelier to
reclaim them. And ordinarily Drunkards were endured.

Read the Epistles of Pope Zachary to Boniface, seconding Gregory's, bidding
him not avoid wicked Livers, that are Orthodox, but all Heretics: And one
Heresy was holding that there are Antipodes.


know which are properly so called; I must suppose that he would have me Judge
by the Ancient Catalogues or Rolls, or else by the Popes, or by the Council's
nominations.

Reader, I will give thee but a little touch out of the Ancient Catalogue of
St. Philastrius, and Judge whether all his Heretics are damned or unchristened.

I. Of the Heretics since the Apostles: The eleventh were those that kept not
Easter at the right time, (for which Victor would have the Asian Churches
Excommunicate; but Irenaeus as well as Socrates and Zozomene, etc. thought much
otherwise of the case.) Our Old Britains and Scots then were all out of the
Church.

II. His twelfth Heresy is that of the Millenaries, and so a great part of the
Holy Fathers, before the Council of Nice, were Heretics.

III. His twenty seventh Heresy is, of those called Artotyritae, for Offering
Bread and Cheese at the Oblation.

IV. His 28 Heresy is, of the Ascodrogitae, that in the Church set New
Vessels, and put New Wine into them.

V. The 29th. sort of Heretics are called Passalorinchitae, that put their
Fingers on their Mouths, and imposed silence on themselves (it is like with
limitation, else they could not converse with Men.)

VI. 30. Some thought, that all Prophets ended not with Christ.

VII. The 33d. is the Excalceatorum, that were for going without shoes (like
some Friars.)

VIII. The 34th. was that of Novatus, who (erroneously) thought, that those
that denied Christ, or Sacrificed, or Offered to the Heathens Idols after
Baptism, might be pardoned indeed by God, but not received again into the
Church: Differing but one step from many Church-Canons, that deny Communion to
many Sinners for many Years; yea, till they are dying, and to some at Death.

IX. The 41. Heretics thought, the Epistle to the Hebrews was not Written by
Paul, but by Barnabas, or Clement; and the Epistle to Laodicea, by St. Luke.

X. The 42. are the (Orthodox) Meletiani, that Communicated with the
Catholics, and some Heretics too.

XI. The 46. Heresy doubted of the diversity of the Heavens.

XII. The 47. Heresy being Ignorant that there is another common Earth
invisible, which is the Matrix of all things, do think that there is no Earth
but this one.

XIII. The 48 Heresy thought, that Water was the common Matter, and was
always, and not made with the Earth.

XIV. The 49 Heresy denied, that the Soul was made before the Body, and the
Body after joined to it; and did believe, that God's making them Male and
Female first, was to be understood of the Bodily Sexes: So Jacob Behmen.
When it was the Soul that was made Male and Female; and the Soul was made the
sixth day, and the Body the seventh.

XV. The 50 Heresy thought, that not only Grace, but also the Soul it self,
was by God breathed into Man.

XVI. The 51 Heresy is Origen's, that thought our Souls were first Celestial
Intellects, before they were incorporate Souls.

XVII. The 52. thought, that Brutes had some Reason.

XVIII. The 54. thought, Earthquakes had a Natural cause.

XIX. The 55 Heresy Learned of Trismegistus, to call the Stars by the Names of
Living Creatures (as all Astronomers do.)

XX. The 56 Heresy thought, that there were not many Languages before the
Confusion at Babel.

XXI. The 57 Heresy thought, that the name of a [Tongue] proceeded first of
the Jews, or of the Pagans.

XXII. The 58 Heresy doubted of the Years and time of Christ.

XXIII. The 59 Heresy thought (as did many of the Ancient Fathers) that Angels
begat Giants of Women, before the Flood.

XXIV. The 61 was, that Christians were after Jews and Pagans.

XXV. The 62 Heresy says, that Pagans are Born Naturally, but not Christians;
that is, that the Soul and Body of man are not daily Created by Christ, but by
Nature.

XXVI. The 63 Heresy said, that the number of Years from the Creation, was
uncertain, and unknown.

XXVII. The 64 thought, that the Names of the Days of Weeks, Sunday, Monday,
(Lunae, etc.) were made by God first, and not by Pagans; as being named from
the Planets (an Error no doubt.)

XXVIII. The 66 Heresy was, that Adam and Eve were blind, till God opened
their Eyes to see their Nakedness.

XXIX. The 67 Heresy imputes the sins of Parents to their Children (of which,
see my Disputations of Original sin.)

XXX. The 68 Heresy was, of some troubled about the Book of Deuteronomy.

XXXI. The 69 Heresy thought, that those that were Sanctified in the Womb,
were Conceived in fin.

XXXII. The 70 Heresy did mistake about the division of the World, thinking it
was Described first by the Greeks, Egyptians, and Persians, when it was done by
Noah, etc.

XXXIII. The 71 Heresy thought, that there was a former Flood, under Deucalion
and Pyrrha.

XXXIV. The 72 Heresy says, that Men are according to the twelve Signs in the
Zodiac, not knowing that those twelve Signs of the Zodiac are diverse
Climates, and habitable Regions of the Earth.

XXXV. It Is well that he makes it the 74 Heresle, that Christ descended into
Hell, to offer Repentance there to Sinners, contrary to in Inferno quis
confitebitur tibi?

XXXVI. The 75 Heresy doubted of the Nature of the Soul, thinking it was made
of Fire, etc. (as many Greek Fathers did.)

XXXVII. The 77 Heresy is, about God's hardening Pharaoh, etc. where the
Dominioans are described.

XXXVIII. The 79 Heresy is, that the Psalms were not made by David (it was
David that said, By the Rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we
remembered Sion; and that described all the Temple-matters before the Temple was
made, and the Captivity, and the Return.) And this Heresy denies the equality
of the Psalms, as if they were not all written and placed in the Order that the
things were done (dangerous Heresy.)

XXXIX. The 80 Heresy thought, that God's words to Cain [Thou shall Rule over
him] were properly to be understood, whereas the meaning was, Thou shall Rule
over-thy own Evil thoughts, that are in'thy own free will.

XL. The 81 Heresy did not well understand the Reason of God's words to Cain,
giving him Life.

XLI. The 82 Heresy did think, that the Stars in the Heavens had their fixed
place and course, not understanding that the Stars are every Night brought out
of some secret place, and set up for their use (as a Man lights up Candles
for his House) and at Morning return to their secret place again, Angels being
Presidents and Disposers of them (as Servants of the Candles in a House.)

XLII. The 83 Heresy doubted (as some late Expositors) of the Book of.
Canticles, lest it had a carnal sense.

XLIII. The 85 Heresy thought, that the Soul of Man was Naturally God's Image,
before ^ace.

XLIV. The 87 Heresy thought that really four living creatures mentioned in
the Prophets praised God.

XLV. The 88 Heresy thought the Levitical feasts were literally to be
understood, not Council. Roman. sub Zacha. an. 743. anathematizeth Clerk or
Monk that presumes, comam laxare, to wear long hair.
knowing that it was the eight feasts of the Church that was meant.

XLVI. The 90 Heresy preferred the Translation of Aquila before the Septuagint.

XLVII. The 91 preferred a Translation of thirty men before the Septuagint.

XLVIII. The 92 Heresy preferred another Translation of six men before the
Septuagint.

XLIX. Another Heresy prefers the Translation of Theodotion and Symachus
before the Septuagint.

L. The 94th. Heresy prefer the Scriptures found in a vessel after the
Captivity, before the Septuagint.

LI. The 96 Heresy thought that Melchizedek had no Father or Mother, not
perceiving that it was spoken of him as Learning that which his Father and
Mother never taught him.

LII. The 97 Heresy hold that the Prophet Zechary of Fasts, is to be properly
understood, when it is but for the four Fasts of the Church, viz. Christmas,
Easter, Epiphany, Pentecost.

LIII. The 98 Heresy, holds that Solomon's great number of Wives and
Concubines is literally to be understood, but it is of diversity of gifts in
the Church.

LIVE. The 100th. Heresy thought that the measuring cord in Zachary was to be
understood of measuring Jerusalem literally, when it meant the choice of
Believers.

LV. The 101 Heresy not understanding the mystical sense of the Cherubim and
Seraphim in Isaiah, are troubled about it and in doubt: (which mystical sense
is mystically there opened.

LVI. The last Heresy think that one of the Cherubims came to Isaiah, and with
a coal Pope Zachary tells Boniface (Bin. To. 3. p. 209.) How dangerous it is
and bad for Christians to eat Jayes, and Rooks, and Badgers, and Hares, and
Wood-horses. And he tells him when Lard must be eaten, viz. not before its
dried in the smoke or boiled on the fire: or if it be eaten unboiled, it must
not be till after Easter. Also how there must be three great lamps, set in a
secret place of the Church after the similitude of the Tabernacle, which must
be kept burning, and others at Baptisms lighted by them.
touched his Lips, and that it was an Angel or Animal with fire; when it is two
Testaments, and the fire is Gods Grace.

Reader, would thou have yet more unchristened and damned than all these? I
will not go over all Epiphanius his catalogue lest I tire thee. Do thou not
perceive in this heretieating spirit, a great deal of man's Pride and Ignorance
(that I say not fury) and of Gods curse, and Satan's triumph?

. 49. But all this is but jesting in comparison of the confusion and bloody
stir that Councils and their adherents made about Heresy; condemning and
cursing one another. The History of which is one of the greatest scandals on
the Christian Religion that everbefell it since its Being. I purpose, if God
enable me, to write more seasonably of this subject; and not to drown it in
such a rambling dispute as with this man. In the mean time if you get a book of
David De rodons de supposito, proving Nestorius Orthodox, and Cyril, and the
first Council of Ephesus as well as the 2d. to be Heretics, even Eutychians,
with Celestine and many other Popes and Ancients, it will show you that which
is not commonly observed: though for my part I am persuaded that as Nestorius
(by the will of one woman) was wronged (but Gods judgment was just for his over
fierceness against others as Heretics) so Cyril, Eutychus, Dioscorus, (all of
a mind no doubt) on one side, and the Orthodox on the other; did all three
Parties (for the generality of them) differ but in second notions and words,
for want of skill to discuss ambiguity, or of patience and impartiality to hear
each others explications.

. 50. And if yet Heretics are all out of the Church, think what a case the
Church is in when the Abassines, Copti's, Arminians, Syrlans, (Iacobites,
Nestorians, Eutychians,) and the Greeks and Protestants are Hereticated by the
Papists; and the Papists cursed and excommunicated by the Greeks and others: and
Marcellinus, Honorius, Liberius, and many other Popes Hereticated by Fathers,
or Councils; yea John 23, Eugenius 4th. and others condemned as Heretics of
the most odious sort by Councils, and the Pope being an Essential part of the
Church, the Church consequently hereticated or damned with them: and so all
this man's arguments are to prove that the Popes and their party were none of
the Church as being properly called heretics, if Councils know who are
properly so called.

. 51. But if yet this be not enough by that time, you have considered how many
Councils have hereticated one another, and so the Church Hereticated the
Church, you will think that they left no Church on Earth.

. 52. But if you go yet further and mark how the Councils at Lateran and Trent
have hereticated all that believe their own or other men's senses (that bread is
bread and wine is wine,) and judged such to extermination or flames, you may
doubt whether they have not hereticated and damned Man as Man, making Humanity
and Sense a Heresy.

. 53. In all this I advise all to be truly tender of every truth of God, and
enemies to all Error; but, Reader, if thou discernest not, that when Satan
could not turn all men from practical Faith and Holiness, by worldly interest
and fleshy lusts; how he made it his last game to make Religion a game at
words, or rather a word-warre, or a Logomachie, and to destroy the Love of God
and Man, the life of Christianity and Concord, Peace and Humanity it self, by
pretense of Orthodoxness and Truth, and contending for the Faith: and how the
Proud, and Worldly, and Ignorant part of the Clergy, become the Plague and
Firebrands of the Church, by pretending zeal against Heresies and Errors; and
if thy Soul lament not the doleful mischiefs which the Church has by this
plague endured, thou see not with my Eyes, nor feel with my Heart: which I
speak with freedom and constrained grief, while I doubt not but these
firebrands that have Hereticated Papias, Justin, Irenaeus, Clem. Alexand.
Origene, Dionys. Alexand. Tertullian, Cyprian, Tatianus, Athenagoras,
Lactantius, Chrysostom, Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomene, Ruffinus, Cassianus,
Hillary Pictav. Hillary Are^at. and abundance more such, will Hereticate me
also, were it but for lamenting their rage.

. 54. But our Champion W. I. (having vented his Spleen on the by, about
ministers favoring of Rebels, with some false insinuations as if he thought we
had never read the Councils, and Epistles, and Wars, nor all the express
citations of the Papists Doctrine of King-killing gathered in folio by Hen.
Fowlis of Pop. Treasons) comes to prove by argument that [Hereticks properly
so called are no members of the Church.]

Before I answer them, I entreat him to tell me, 1. Whether then those many
Papists Doctors are members of the Church that maintain the contrary. 2.
Whether their Church be well agreed in it self. 3. Why the Baptism of Heretics
(that change not the form) is counted valid, and Cyprian accounted Erroneous
for denying it? Yea and the ordination of Heretics too. But yet I grant him
that Heretics are out of the Church that knowingly deny any Essential part of
Christianity.

. 55. His first Argument is from Tit. 3. 10, 11.

Answ. 1. Paul bid, 2 Thessalonians. 3. avoid disorderly walkers, and yet to admonish
them as brethren.

2. But I grant it of such Heretics as Paul there speaks of; make him the
judge of your [properly so called] and we shall agree. Yea I grant it of such
as John 23. Eugenius 4th. and many other Popes have been; and I doubt whether I
may not grant it you of a true knowing Papist as such.

. 56. His 2d. Argument is from 1 John 2. 19, They went out from us, etc.

Answ. 1. But it is said they were not of us. 2. Some go out from particular
concordant Churches, that go not from the whole Church. 3. But we grant it, for
all that, of such proper Heretics as St. John mentions. Call no other
Heretics and we agree with you.

. 57. His next Argument is from 2 John v. 9, 10, 11.

Answ. Of such also we never deny it, but all that speak against any less
necessary point of Scripture or Tradition, be not the denyers of Christianity,
called the doctrine of Christ. If they be, all men living are like to be
Heretics, but specially the Papists.

. 58. Next he refers me to their dispute against Dr. Gunning and Dr. Peirson
called Schism unmasked; which I have perused to little purpose. And then he
cites diverse Fathers, which I have not the vanity to answer to a man that will
not first agree what we mean by Heretics, it being true of many so called by
the Fathers, and false of others; even such as Philastrius has named. I
believe the Novatians erred, and yet as far as I can discern by history, if
serious piety be the way to heaven, I think it probable that proportionably to
their different numbers, there are more of the Novatians in heaven than of
their adversaries.

. 59. He repeateth his Reason, because all Heretics evacuate the formal object
of Faith.

Answ. 1. I dare say I have sufficiently answered that. 2. I grant that none is
a Christian that does not believe that God cannot lie, and that his word is all
true.

. 60. But he says, Though Heretics perversely persuade and delude themselves,
that they assert for the infallible authority of God to such Articles as they
believe, yet they attribute not an infallible authority to God; because what
they Believe not, is sufficiently proposed.

Answ. If this be not fully answered, let it prevail. Must the Christian world
be Hereticated by such sottish stuff as this. 1. When will he make me know how
his sufficient proposal may be discerned. 2. And how the Hereticaters can know
the sufficiency of the proposals to others? Even many Kingdoms of men that they
never saw: seeing variety of Capacities, Opportunities, Educations,
Temptations, etc. makes that insufficient to one that is sufficient to
another. 3. When will he prove that the plainest Scripture is no sufficient
proposal, till the credit of the Papal Clergy make it so: and yet that the
obscure volumnes of militant Councils (that curse one another) are sufficient
proposals. 4. Or that the word of a Jesuit is a sufficient notice to us, what
is in the Councils? or what is their sense. 5. Or who shall expound dark
Councils to us, when there are no Councils in our age in Being. 6. How shall we
know that a culpable neglect of a sufficient proposal (through prejudice or
temptation) may never stand with Faith? If so, is there any man living that is
not an Infidel or Heretic? I challenge any man living to dare to make good,
that he never erred or does err in any point revealed in Scripture or
Councils, against sufficient proposal (taking [sufficiency] as it is commonly
in the controversy of [sufficient Grace]. What if a man through culpable
negligence, know not how many years it was from Adam to the flood, or know not
who was the Father of Arphaxad, etc. when these are sufficiently proposed? Does
this prove that he believes not Gods Veracity? As if there were no other sin
that could frustrate any one sufficient proposal.

7. But it is the fate of rash condemners to condemn themselves most
notoriously; If the plain words of Scripture, in the institution of the Cup in
the Eucharist, against praying in an unknown tongue, etc. If the sensible
evidence of Bread and Wine to all sound Senses that are near, be not a
sufficient proposal, what is? Surely not such self-contradicting disputes as
this of W. I. and others like him; nor the Cant of [the Church and all the
world] by a partial Sect: but if Scripture, the Tradition and Judgment of the
most of Christians, Reason and Sense, can make up a sufficient proposal; out of
their own mouths are these men condemned as Heretics, to be avoided by all
good Christians. But I have more Charity for some of them, then herein they
exercise to themselves, (or others.)

And in particular I will be so far from partiality, as to profess that though
Pope Honorius was an anathematized Heretic in the judgment of the 6th. and
other General Councils, and of his Successors Popes, I am not one of those that
take him really for such, in W. I's. sense; as held a Doctrine that did
unchristen him. Nay I take his Epistles to Sergius read in the 6th. General
Council, to be two of the honestest peaceable Epistles that I have read from a
Pope, except some of Leo's, and few more; and I think that his counsel for to
avoid contention, to forbear both the name of [two operations] and of [one
operation] and leave it to Grammarians, and hold to plain Scripture-words, was
honest counsel. And the hereticating of him and the rest by that Council
increases not my veneration, but my great dislike of Hereticating Councils and
the factions of the Bishops: it was not long after (under the Emperor
Philipicus) when another General Council so great, as it is said it consisted of
Innumerable Bishops at Constantinople, revoked, undid, and destroyed all this
that was done against Honorius and the Monothelites at the said 6th. Council;
so ordinarily did General Councils condemn each other.

But what I say in excuse of Honorius, I must say also in excuse of Sergius
Constant. For he said but the same that Honorius did, viz. that he would have
had the controversy, and the names of [Two] or [One] Operation laid by; and
yet Binnius can call Sergius a lying Heretic, while he (with others) excuses
Honorius for the same.

And on this occasion, I will conclude with a note out of the two Epistles of
Cyrus to Sergius, read in the same 6th. General Council; which has this title:
Deo honorabili me^ Domino benigno, Principi Pastorum, Patri Patrum, Universali
Patriarchae Sergio a Cyro humil^ vestro. I would know whether the Pope can show
that ever any one of his Predecessors had higher titles given him than these.
And if these prove not an universal Sovereignty of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, whether the like or less will prove it for Rome? if you say
that it was but an Heretic that gave it him: I answer 1. That Is nothing to the
matter in hand. 2. He was but such a harmless Heretic as Honorius. 3. The
Council reprehended not the title. Many such instances might be given of as
high titles given to Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, as Rome
pretends for the proof of its Universal-church-monarchy. And if it prove no
such power in others, it proves it not in the Pope.

FINIS.

