THE Saints Everlasting Rest: OR, A TREATISE Of the Blessed State of the SAINTS
in their enjoyment of GOD in Glory.

Wherein is showed its Excellency and Certainty; the Misery of those that lose
it, the way to Attain it, and Assurance of it; and how to live in the continual
delightful Forecasts of it, by the help of Meditation.

Written by the Author for his own use, in the time of his languishing, when
God took him off from all Public Employment; and afterward Preached in his
weekly Lecture: And now published by Richard Baxter, Teacher of the Church of
Kederminster in Worcestershire.

My flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26.

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19.

Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth. For ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.2, 3,
4.

Because I live, ye shall live also, John 14.19.

Jan. 15. 1649. Imprimatur, Joseph Caryl.

London, Printed by Rob. White, for Thomas Underhill and Francis Tyton, and are
to be sold at the Blue-Anchor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard, near the little
North-door, and at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the
Inner-Temple-gate. 1650.

To my dearly beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of the Borough and Foreign OF
KEDERMINSTER, Both Magistrates and People.
My dear Friends,
IF either I or my labors have any thing of public use or worth, it is wholly
(though not only) yours. And I am convinced by Providence, That it is the Will
of God it should be so. This I clearly discerned in my first coming to you, in
my former abode with you, and in the time of my forced absence from you. When I
was separated by the miseries of the late unhappy war, I durst not fix in any
other Congregation, but lived in a military unpleasing state, lest I should
forestal my return to you; for whom I took my self reserved. The offers of
greater worldly accommodations, with five times the means which I receive with
you, was no temptation to me once to question whether I should leave you: Your
free invitation of my return, your obedience to my Doctrine, the strong
affection which I have yet toward you above all people, and the general hearty
return of Love, which I find from you, do all persuade me, that I was sent
into this world, especially for the service of your souls. And that even when I
am dead, I might yet be a help to your salvation; the Lord has forced me quite
besides my own resolution, to write this Treatise and leave it in your hands.
It was far from my thoughts ever to have become thus public, and burdened the
world with any writings of mine: Therefore have I often resisted the requests of
my reverend Brethren, and some Superiors, who might else have commanded much
more at my hands. But see how God over rules and crosses our resolutions.

Being in my quarters far from home, cast into extreme languishing (by the
sudden loss of about a Gallon of blood* after many years foregoing weakness)
and having no acquaintance about me, nor any Books, but my Bible, and living in
continual expectation of death, I bent my thoughts on my Everlasting Rest: And
because my memory through extreme weakness was imperfect, I took my pen, and
began to draw up my own funeral Sermon; or some helps for my own Meditations of
Heaven, to sweeten both the Rest of my life, and my death. In this condition,
God was pleased to continue me about five months from home, where being able
for nothing else, I went on with this work, which so lengthened to this, which
here you see. It is no wonder therefore, if I be too abrupt in the beginning,
seeing I then intended but the length of a Sermon or two: Much less may you
wonder, if the whole be very imperfect, seeing it was written, as it were, with
one foot in the grave, by a man that was betwixt living and dead, that wanted
strength of nature to quicken Invention or Affection, and had no Book but his
Bible, while the chief part was finished; nor had any mind of humane
ornaments, if he had been furnished. But, O how sweet is this Providence now to
my review! which so happily forced me to that work of Meditation, which I had
formerly found so profitable to my soul! and showed me more mercy in depriving
me of other helps, then I was aware of! and has caused my thoughts to feed on
this Heavenly Subject, which has more benefited me, then all the studies of my
life!

And now, dear Friends, such as it is, I here offer it you; and upon the bended
knees of my soul, I offer up my thanks to the merciful God, who has fetched
up, both me and it, as from the grave, for your service: Who reversed the
sentence of present death, which by the ablest Physicians, was past upon me!
who interrupted my public labors for a time, that he might force me to do you
a more lasting service, which else I had never been like to have attempted!
That God do I heartily bless and magnify, who has rescued me from the many
dangers of four years war, and after so many tedious nights and days, and so
many doleful fights and tidings, has returned me, and many of your selves, and
reprived us till now to serve him in peace! And though men be ungrateful, and
my body ruined beyond hope of recovery, yet he has made up all in the comforts
I have in you! To the God of mercy, do I here offer my most hearty thanks, and
pay the vows of acknowledgment which I often made in my distress, who has not
rejected my prayers, which in my dolor I put up, but has by a wonder delivered
me in the midst of my duties; and has supported me this fourteen years in a
languishing state, wherein I have scarce had a waking hour free from pain; who
has above twenty several times delivered me, when I was near to death: And
though he has made me spend my days in groans and tears, and in a constant
expectation of my change, yet has he not wholly disabled me to his service;
and hereby has more effectually subdued my pride, and made this world
contemptible to me, and forced my dull heart to more importunate requests, and
occasioned more rare discoveries of his Mercy, then ever I could have expected
in a prosperous state. For ever blessed be the Lord, that has not only
honored me to be a Minister of his Gospel, but has also set me over a people
so willing to obey, and given me that success of my labors, which he has
denied to many more able and faithful; who has kept you in the zealous
practice of godliness, when so many grow negligent, or despise the Ordinances
of God; who has kept you stable in his Truth, and saved you from the spirit of
Giddiness, Levity, and Apostasy of this age; who has preserved you from those
scandals, whereby others have so hainously wounded their profession; and has
given you to see the mischief of Separation and Divisions, and made you eminent
for Unity and Peace, when almost all the Land is in a flame of contention, and
so many, that we thought godly, are busily demolishing the Church* and striving
in a zealous ignorance against the Lord. Beloved, though few of you are rich,
or great in the world, yet for this riches of mercy toward you, I must say, Ye
are my Glory, my Crown, and my Joy: And for all these rare favors to my self
and you, as I have often promised to publish the praises of our Lord, so do I
here set up this stone of remembrance, and write upon it, Glory to God in the
highest: Hitherto has the Lord helped us: My flesh and my heart failed, but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

But have all these Deliverances brought us to our Rest? No: We are as far yet
from it, as we are from Heaven. You are yet under oppression and troubles, and
I am yet under consuming sickness: And feeling that I am like to be among you
but a little while, and that my pained body is hastening to the dust: I shall
here leave you my best advice for your immortal souls, and bequeath you this
counsel as the legacy of a dying man, that you may here read it, and practice
it, when I am taken from you: And I beseech you receive it as from one that you
know does unfainedly love you, and that regards no honors or happiness in
this world, in comparison of the welfare and salvation of your souls; yea,
receive it from me, as if I offered it you upon my knees, beseeching you for
your souls sake, that you would not reject it, and beseeching the Lord to bless
it to you; yea, as one that has received authority from Christ to command you,
I charge you in his name, as ever you will answer it, when we shall meet at
judgment, and as you would not have me there be a witness against you, nor all
my labors be charged against you to your condemnation, and the Lord Jesus your
Judge to sentence you as rebellious, that you faithfully and constantly practice
these ten directions.

1. Labor to be men of knowledge and sound understandings. A sound judgment is a
most precious mercy, and much conduces to the soundness of heart and life. A
weak judgment is easily corrupted; and if it be once corrupt, the will and
conversation will quickly follow. Your understandings are the inlet or
entrance to the whole soul; and if you be weak there, your souls are like a
Garrison that has open or il-guarded Gates; and if the enemy be once let in
there, the whole City will quickly be his own. Ignorance is virtually every
error; therefore let the Bible be much in your hands and hearts: Remember what
I taught you on Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Read much the writings of our old solid Divines;
such as Perkins, Bolton, Dod, Sibbs, especially Doctor Preston: You may read an
able Divine, when you cannot hear one; especially, be sure you learn well the
Principles of Religion. Begin with the Assemblies lesser Catechism, and then
learn the greater; and next Master Balls, with the Exposition; and then Doctor
Ames his Marrow of Divinity (now Englished) or Ushers. If you see men fall on
Controversies, before they understand these, never wonder if they are drowned
in errors. I know your poverty and labors will not give you leave to read so
much as others may do; but yet a willing mind will find some time, if it be
when they should sleep, and especially it will spend the Lords day wholly in
these things. O be not ignorant of God in the midst of such light! as if the
matters of your salvation were less worth your study, then your trading in the
world.

2. Do the utmost you can to get a faithful Minister, when I am taken from you;
and be sure you acknowledge him your Teacher, Overseer, and Ruler, 1 Thessalonians.
5.12, 13. Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.7, 17. and learn of him, obey him, and submit to
his doctrine (except he teach you any singular points, and then take the advice
of other Ministers in trying it.) Expect not that he should humor you, and
please your fancies, and say, and do as you would have him; that is mere
Independencie, for the people to rule themselves and their Rulers. If he be
unable to Teach and Guide you, do not choose him at first; if he be able, be
ruled by him, even in things that to you are doubtful, except it be clear, that
^e would turn you from the truth; if you know more then he, become Preachers
your selves; if you do not, then quarrel not when you should learn; especially
submit to his private oversight, as well as public Teaching. It is but the
least part of a Ministers work, which is done in the Pulpit: Paul taught them
also from house to house, day and night with tears, Acts 20.20, 31. To go daily
from one house to another, and see how you live, and examine how you profit,
and direct you in the duties of your families, and in your preparation for
death, is the great work. Had not weakness confined me, and public labors
forbidden me, I should judge my self hainously guilty in neglecting this. In
the Primitive times, every Church of so many souls as this Parish, had many
Ministers, whereof the ablest speakers did preach most impublike, and the rest
did the more of the less public work (which some mistake for mere Ruling
Elders:) But now Sacriledg and Covetousness will scarce leave maintenance for
one in a Church; which is it that has brought us to a loss in the nature of
Government.

3. Let all your Knowledge turn into Affection and Practice; keep open the
passage between your heads, and your hearts, that every Truth may go to the
quick. Spare not for any pains in working out your salvation: Take heed of
loitering, when your souls lie at the stake; Favor not your selves in any
slothful distemper; Laziness is the damnation of most that perish among us. God
forbid you should be of the mad opinion of the world, That like not serving God
so much, nor making so much ado to be saved; All these men will shortly be of
another mind. Live now as you would wish you had done at death and judgment.
Let no scorns dishearten you, nor differences of opinion be an offense to you:
God, and Scripture, and Heaven, and the Way thither, are still the same. It
will do you no good to be of the right Religion, if you be not zealous in the
exercise of the Duties of that Religion. Read often the fifth and sixth Chapters
of the third part of this Book.

4. Be sure you make conscience of the great Duties that you are to perform in
your families. Teach your children and servants the knowledge and fear of God;
do it early and late, in season and out of season. Pray with them daily and
fervently; remember Daniels example, Dan. 6. and the command, 1 These. 5.17.
Read the Scripture, and good Books to them; restrain them from sin; keep not a
servant that will not learn, and be ruled. Neighbors, I charge you as you will
shortly answer the contrary, before the Lord your Judge, That there be never a
family among you that shall neglect these great Duties. If you cannot do what
you should, yet do what you can; especially, see that the Lords day be wholly
spent in these exercises. To spend it in idleness, or sports, is to consecrate
it to your flesh, and not to God, and far worse then to spend it in your Trades.

5. Beware of extremes in the controverted points of Religion. When you avoid
one Error, take heed you run not into another; specially if you be in heat of
disputation or passion. As I have showed you, I think, the true mean in the
doctrine of Justification and Redemption, so I had intended to have writ a
peculiar Treatise with three Columns, showing both extremes, and the truth in
the middle, through the body of Divinity; but God takes me off. Especially
beware of the Errors of these times: Antinomianism comes from gross ignorance,
and leads to gross wickedness; Socinians are scarce Christians; Arminianism is
quite above your reach, and therefore not fit for your study in most points.
The middle way which Camero, Ludov. Crocius, Am^raldus, Davenant, etc. go, I
think, is nearest the Truth. Separation comes from Pride and Ignorance, and
directly leads to the dissolution of all Churches. That Independency which
gives the people to govern by vote, is the same thing in another name.
Anabaptists play the Devils part in accusing their own children, and disputing
them out of the Church and Covenant of Christ; and affirming them to be no
Disciples, no Servants of God, nor holy, as separated to him; when God says
the contrary, Levit. 25.41, 42. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, etc. Acts 15.10. 1 Cor.
7.14. I cannot digress to fortify you against these Sects: You have seen God
speak against them by Judgments from Heaven. What were the two Monsters in New
England but miracles? Christ has told you, By their fruits ye shall know them.
We mis-interpret, when we say, he means by fruit, their false doctrine; that
were but idem per idem. Heretics may seem holy for a little while, but at last
all false doctrines likely end in wicked lives. Where has there been known a
society of Anabaptists, since the world first knew them, that proved not
wicked? How many of these or Antinomists, etc. have you known, who have not
proved palpably guilty of lying, perfidiousness, covetousness, malice,
contempt of their godly Brethren. licenciousness, or seared Consciences? They
have confident expressions to shake poor ignorant souls, whom God will have
discovered in the day of trial: But when they meet with any that can search out
their fallacies, how little have they to say? You know I have had as much
opportunity to try their strength, as most: And I never yet met with any in
Garrison, or Army, that could say any thing which might stagger a solid man. You
heard in my late public dispute at Bewdley, January 1. with Mr. Tombs, who is
taken to be the ablest of them in the Land, and one of the most moderate, how
little they can say even in the hardest point of Baptism; what gross
absurdities they are driven to, and how little tender Conscientious fear of
erring is left among the best.

6. Above all, see that you be followers of Peace and Unity, both in the
Church, and among your selves. Remember what I taught you on Heb. 12.14. He
that is not a son of Peace, is not a son of God. All other sins destroy the
Church consequentially; but Division and Separation demolish it directly.
Building the Church is but an orderly joining of the materials; and what then
is disjoyning, but pulling down? Many Doctrinal differences must be tolerated
in a Church: And why? but for Unity and Peace? Therefore Disunion and
Separation is utterly intolerable. Believe not those to be the Churches
Friends, that would cure and reform her by cutting her throat. Those that say,
No Truth must be concealed for Peace have usually as little of the one, as the
other. Study Gal. 2.2. Romans 14.1. etc. Acts 21.24, 26. 1 Timothy 1.4. and 6.4. Tit.
3.8, 9. I hope sad experience speaks this lesson to your very hearts, if I
should say nothing. Do not your hearts bleed to look upon the state of England?
and to think how few Towns or Cities there be (where is any forwardness in
Religion) that are not cut into shreds, and crumbled as to dust by Separations
and Divisions? To think what a wound we have hereby given to the very Christian
name? How we have hardened the ignorant? Confirmed the Papists? And are our
selves become the scorn of our enemies, and the grief of our friends? And how
many of our dearest, best esteemed Friends, are fallen to notorious Pride, or
Impiety? yea, some to be worse then open Infidels? These are Pillars of Salt;
see that you remember them. You are yet eminent for your Unity, Stedfastness,
and Godliness; hold fast that you have, that no man take your Crown from you.
Temptations are now come near your doors; yet many of you have gone through
greater, and therefore I hope will escape through these: Yet least your
temptations should grow stronger, let me warn you, That though of your own
selves men should arise, speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after
them, Acts 20.30. yea, though an Angel from Heaven should draw you to
divisions, see that you follow him not. If there be erroneous practices in the
Church, keep your selves innocent with moderation and peace: Do your best to
reform them; and rather remove your dwellings, if you cannot live innocently,
then rend the Church. It must be no small Error that must force a Separation.
Justin a holy learned Martyr (In Dialog* cum Tryphone) (who was converted
within thirty one years of John's death, and wrote his first Apology within
fifty one; and therefore it is like saw John's days,) professes, That if a Jew
should keep the Ceremonial Law (so he did not persuade the Gentiles to it as
necessary) yet if he acknowledge Christ, he judges that he may be saved, and he
would embrace him, and have communion with him as a Brother: And Paul would
have him received that is weak in the faith, (and not unchurch whole Parishes
of those that we know not, nor were ever brought to a just trial,) You know I
never conformed to the use of Mystical, Symbolical Rites, my self, (but only
to the determination of Circumstantials necessary in genere,) and yet I ever
loved a godly, peaceable Conformist, better then a turbulent, Nonconformist. I
yet differ from many in several Doctrines of greater moment then Baptism, etc.
(As my Aphorisms of Justification show, which I wrote to cut the unobserved
Sinews of Antinomianism, and open the true Scripture Mean in that point, and
which I am more confirmed in the truth of now, then ever, by the weakness of
all that I can yet hear against it;) and yet if I should zealously press my
judgment on others, and seek to make a party for it, and disturb the Peace of
the Church, and separate from my Brethren, I should fear lest I should prove a
firebrand in Hell, for being a firebrand in the Church. And for all the
interest I have in your Judgments and Affections, I here charge you, That if
God should give me up to any factious Church-rending course (against which I
daily pray) that you forsake me, and follow me not a step.

And for Peace with one another, follow it with all your might: If it be
possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18.
(mark this) When you feel any sparks of discontent in your breast, take them as
kindled by the Devil from Hell, and take heed you cherish them not. If the
flames begin to break forth in Censoriousness, Reproaches, and hard Speeches of
others; be as speedy and busy in quenching it, as if it were fire in the
Thatch of your houses: For why should your houses be dearer to you then the
Church, which is the house of God? or, then your souls, which are the Temples
of the Holy Ghost? If any heart-burnings arise, do not keep strange, but go
together, and lovingly debate it, or pray together, that God would reconcile
you; or refer the matter to your Minister or others; and let not the Sun go
down on your wrath. Has God spoke more against any sin, then unpeaceableness?
If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father
forgive you (which made Endovicus Crocius say, That this is the measure and
essential property of the lest degree of true Faith, Syntag. lib. 4. cap. 16.)
If you love not each other, you are no Disciples of Christ; nay, if you love
not your enemies, and bless not them that curse you, and pray not for them that
hurt and persecute you, you are no Children of God. The Wisdom from above, is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. Jam. 3.17. O
remember that piercing example of Christ, who washed his Disciples feet, to
teach us, that we must stoop as low to one another. Sure God does not jest with
you in all these plain Scriptures? I charge you in the Name of Christ, if you
cannot have peace otherwise, That you suffer wrongs and reproaches, that you go
and beg peace of those that should beg it of you, yea, that you beg it on your
knees of the poorest beggar, rather then lose it. And remember Romans 16.17, 18.

7. Above all, be sure you get down the pride of your hearts. Forget not all
the Sermons I preached to you against this sin. No sin more natural, more
common, or more deadly. A proud man is his own Idol; only from pride comes
contention. There is no L^ving in peace with a proud person: Every disrespect
will cast them into a Fever of discontent. If once you grow wise in your own
eyes, and love to be valued and preferred, and love those best that think
highliest of you, and have secret heart-risings against any that disregard you,
or have a low esteem of you, and cannot endure to be flighted, or spoke evil
of* never take your selves for Christians, if this be your case. To be a true
Christian without Humility, is as hard as to be a man without a Soul. O poor
England! How low art thou brought by the Pride of Ignorant Zealots! Dear
Friends! I can foretell you, without the gift of prophecy, That if any among you
do fall from the Truth, mark which are the proudest, that cannot endure to be
contradicted* and that vilify others, and those will likely be they: And if
ever you be broke in pieces, and ruined, Pride will be the cause.

8. Be sure you keep the mastery over your flesh and senses. Few ever fall from
God, but flesh-pleasing is the cause: Many think that by [flesh] the Scripture
means only our in-dwelling sin, when alas, it is this sensitive appetite that
it charge us to subdue. Nothing in the world damneth so many as
flesh-pleasing, while men generally choose it as their Happiness in stead of
God. O remember who has said, If ye live after the flesh ye shall die; and
Make no provision for the flesh* to satisfy its desires, Rom 8.5 6, 7. and
13.14. Think of this when you are tempted to drunkenness, and gluttony, and
lustfulness, and worldliness; and when you would fain have your dwellings, and
states more delightful. You little think what a sin it is, even to please your
flesh, further then it tends to help you in the service of God.

9. Make conscience of the great duty of reproving, and exhorting those about
you: Make not your souls guilty of the oaths, ignorance, and ungodliness of
others, by your silence. Admonish them lovingly and modestly, but be sure you
do it, and that seriously. This is the first step in Discipline. Expect not
that your Minister should put any from the Sacrament, whom you have not thus
admonished once and again. Punish not before due process.

10. Lastly, Be sure to maintain a constant delight in God, and a seriousness
and spirituality in all his Worship. Think it not enough to delight in Duties,
if you delight not in God: Judge not of your duties by the bulk and number, but
by this sweetness. You are never stable Christians till you reach this. Never
forget all those Sermons I preached to you on Psalm 37.4. Give not way to a
customary dullness in duty: Do every duty with all thy might; especially, be not
slight in secret Prayer and Meditation: Lay not out the chief of your zeal upon
externals, and opinions, and the smaller things of Religion. Let must of your
daily work be upon your hearts: Be still suspicious of them; understand their
mortal wickedness, and deceitfulness, and trust them not too far. Practice that
great duty of daily watching; pray earnestly, That you be not lead into
temptation. Fear the beginings and appearances of sin. Beware lest Conscience
once lose its tenderness. Make up every breach between God and your consciences
betime. Learn how to live the life of Faith; and keep fresh the sense of the
love of Christ, and of your continual need of his Blood, Spirit, and
Intercession: And how much you are beholden and engaged to him. Live in a
constant readiness and expectation of death; and be sure to get acquainted with
this Heavenly Conversation, which this Book is written to direct you in; which
I commend to your use, hoping you will be at the pains to read it, as for your
sakes I have been to write it: And I shall beg for you of the Lord, while I
live on this Earth, That he will persuade your souls to this blessed Work, and
that when death comes it may find you so employed, that I may see your faces
with joy at the Bar of Christ, and we may enter together into the Everlasting
Rest. Amen.

Your most affectionate, though unworthy Teacher, Rich. Baxter.
Kederminster, Jan. 15. 1649.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Rous Baronet, with the Lady Jane Rous his
Wife.
Right Worshipful,
THis First Part of this Treatise was written under your Roof, and therefore I
present it not to you as a gift, but as your own: Not for your Protection, but
for your Instruction and Direction; (for I never perceived you possessed with
that evil spirit, which makes men hear their Teachers as their Servants, to
censure their Doctrine, or be humored by them, rather then to learn.) Nor do I
intend this Epistle for the publishing of your Virtues: You know to whose
judgment you stand or fall. It is a small thing to be judged by man's judgment:
If you be sentenced as Righteous at the Bar of Christ, and called by him the
Blessed of his Father; it matters not much, by what name or title you are here
called. All Saints are low in their own esteem, and therefore thirst not to be
highly esteemed by others: He that knows what Pride has done in the World, and
is now doing, and how close that heinous sin does cleave to all our Natures,
will scarce take him for a friend, who will bring fuel to the fire, nor that
breath for amicable, which will blow the coal. Yet he that took so kindly a
woman's box of ointment, as to affix the History to his Gospel, that wherever
it was read, that good Work might be remembered, has warranted me by his
example, to annex the mention of your Favors to this Treatise, which have many
times far exceeded in cost that which Judas thought too good for his Lord. And
common ingenuity commands me thankfully to acknowledge, That when you heard I
was suddenly cast into extreme weakness, you sent into several Counties to seek
me in my quarters, and missing of me, sent again, to fetch me to your house,
where for many months I found a Hospital, a Physician, a Nurse, and real
Friends, and (which is more then all) daily and importunate Prayers for my
recovery; and since I went from you, your kindnesses still following me in
abundance: And all this for a man that was a stranger to you, whom you had
never seen before, but among Soldiers, to burden you: And for one that had no
witty insinuations for the extracting of your favors, nor impudency enough to
return them in flatteries; yea, who had such obstructions betwixt his heart and
his tongue, that he could scarce handsomely express the least part of his
thankfulness; much less able to make you a requital. The best return I can make
of your love, is in commending this Heavenly Duty to your Practice; wherein I
must entreat you to be the more diligent and unwearied, because as you may take
more time for it then the poor can do, so have you far stronger temptations to
divert you; it being extremely difficult for those that have fullness of all
things here, to place their happiness really in another life, and to set their
hearts there, as the place of their Rest; which yet must be done by all that
will be saved. Study Luke 12.16. to 22. and 16.19, 25. Matthew. 6.21. How little
comfort do all things in this world afford to a departing soul? My constant
prayer for you to God shall be, That all things below may be below him in your
heart, and that you may thoroughly master and mortify the desires of the flesh,
and may daily live above in the Spirit, with the Father of Spirits, till you
arrive among the perfected Spirits of the Just.

Your much obliged Servant Rich. Baxter.

The Contents of the First Part.
CHAP. I. THE Text explained. page 1, 2, 3 Qu. Does this Rest remain to a
determinate number of persons Elect? Or only to believers in general? p. 4 Qu.
Is it theirs only in possibility, or in certainty? p. 5
Chap. 2. The definition of Rest: And of this Rest. p. 6 Qu. Whether to make
the obtaining of Rest, and avoiding misery, the end of our duties, be not
Legal, or Mercenary? Answered. p 8 9
Chap. 3. Twelve things which are presupposed to this Rest. p. 12, etc. Chap.
4. What this Rest contains. 1. Cessation from all that motion, which is the
means to attain the end. p. 20 2. Perfect freedom from all evil. p. 21 3. The
highest-degree of personal Perfection* p. 22 4. Our nearest fruition of God,
the chief Good. p. 23 5. A sweet and constant action of all the powers in this
fruition. p 28 As 1. Of the Senses and Tongue, and whole Body. p. 29 2. Of the
Soul. And 1. Understanding; As 1. Knowledge. p. 30 2. Memory. p. 33 2.
Affections, As by Love. p. 35 2. By Joy. p. 39 This Love and Joy will be
mutual. p. 41
Chap. 5. The four great antecedents, and preparatives to this Rest. p. 44 1.
The coming of Christ. p. 45 2. Our Resurrection. p. 51 3. Our justification in
the great Judgment. p. 57 4. Our solemn Coronation and Inthroning. p. 65
Chap. 6. This Rest tried by nine Rules in Philosophy or Reason, and found by
all to be the most excellent state in general. p. 69 Chap. 7. The particular
excellencies of this Rest. p. 76 1. Its the fruit of Christ's blood, and enjoyed
with the purchaser. ibid. 2. It is freely given us. p. 78 3. It is the Saints
peculiar. p. 81 4. In association with Angels, and perfect Saints. p. 83 5. Yet
its Joys immediate from God. p. 87 6. It will be a seasonable Rest. p. 91 7.
And a suitable Rest, 1. To our Natures. 2. Desires. 3. Necessities. p. 97 8. A
perfect Rest: 1. In the sincerity of it. 2. And universality. p. 101 1. Of good
enjoyed. 2. And of the evil we are freed from* ibid.
We shall Rest, 1. From sin, and that 1. Of the Understanding. p. 102 2. From
sin of Will, Affection and Conversation. p. 105
2. From suffering. Particularly 1. From all doubts of Gods love. p. 106 2.
From all sense of his displeasure. p. 107 3. From all Satan's Temptations. p.
108 4. From temptations of the world and flesh. p. 110 5. From Persecutions and
abuses of the world. p. 112 6. From our own divisions and dissentions. p. 116
7. From participating in our brethrens sufferings. p. 121 8. From all our own
personal sufferings. p. 125 9. From all the labor and trouble of duty. p. 128
10 From the trouble of Gods absence. p. 129
9. As it will be thus perfect, so Everlasting. p. 129, etc.
Chap. 8. The People of God described: The several parts of the description
opened: and therein many weighty controversies briefly touched: And lastly, the
description applied, by way of examination. p. 134. to 164
The Contents of the Second Part.
CHAP. I. THE Certain truth of this Rest proved by Scripture. p. 167 Chap. 2.
Persuasions to study and preach the divine authority of Scripture. p. 174 Chap.
3 Certain distinctions concerning Scripture. p. 184 Sixty Positions concerning
Scriptures. ibid.
Chap. 4. The 1. Argument to prove Scripture the Word of God. p. 191 That
arguing from Miracles, testified by man, is no Popish resolving our faith into
humane testimony. p. 206 The excellency of this argument from Miracles. p. 208
What the sin against the Holy Ghost is? ibid. The necessity of using humane
Testimony. p. 210 The use of Church Governors and Teachers, and how far they
are to be obeyed. p. 211 The excellent use of Antiquities for matter of fact.
p. 213
Chap. 5. The 2. Argument to prove Scripture Gods Word. p. 214 Chap. 6. The 3.
Argument to prove Scripture Gods Word. p. 221 Chap. 7. The 4. Argument to prove
Scripture Gods Word. p. 235 Of extraordinary Temptations. p. 237 Of
Apparitions. p. 238 Of Sate^ is possessing and tormenting men's bodies. p. 241
Of Witches, and the devils compacts with them. p. 243 The necessity of a
written Word. p. 245
Chap. 8. This Rest remains to none but the People of God. p. 252 Chap. 9.
Whether separated Souls enjoy Rest before the Resurrection; Proved that they do
in a great measure, by 20. Arguments. p. 257
The Contents of the Third Part.
CHAP. I. THE first Use. Showing the unconceivable misery of the wicked in
their loss of this Rest. p. 265 The greatness of their loss. 1. They lose all
the personal perfection of Soul and Body, which the Saints have. p. 268 2.
They lose God himself. p. 270 3. They lose all those spiritual, delightful
affections by which the blessed do feed on God. p. 272 4. They lose the society
of Angels and Saints. p. 273
Chap. 2. The aggravations of the wickeds loss of Heaven. p. 276 1. Their
understandings will be cleared, to know its worth. p. 277 2. And also enlarged,
to have deeper apprehensions of it. p. 279 3. Conscience will fully apply it to
themselves. ibid. 4. Their effections will be more lively, and enlarged. p 281
5. Their memories strong, to feed their torment. p. 283 Ten things concerning
their loss of this Rest, which it will for ever torment them to remember. p.
285 to 298
Chap. 3. Aggravations from the losses which accompany the loss of Rest. p. 299
1. They shall lose their present presumptuous conceit of Gods favor to them,
and of their part in Christ. p. 300 2. They shall lose all their Hopes. p. 303
3. They shall lose their present ease and peace. p. 311 4. They shall lose all
their carnal mirth. p. 315 5. And all their sensual contentments and
delights. p. 316
Chap. 4. The greatness of the damneds torments opened. p. 319 By eight
aggravations of them. to p. 328 The certain truth of these torments. ibid. The
intollerableness of this loss and torment discovered, by ten questions. p. 332
Chap. 5. The second Use. Reproving the general neglect of this Rest, and
exciting to the utmost diligence in seeking it. p. 339 1. To the worldly
minded, that cannot spare time. p. 340 2. To the profane, ungodly,
presumptuous multitude. p. 343 3. To lazy, formal, self-deceiving Professors.
p. 344 And of these, 1. To the opinionative hypocrite. 2. And the worldly
hypocrite. ibid. p. 345 4. To the godly themselves, for their great negligence,
Magistrates, Ministers, and People. p. 35^
Chap. 6. An exhortation to the greatest seriousness in seeking Rest. p. 349
Twenty lively rational considerations to quicken us up to the greatest
diligence that is possible. to p. 350 Ten more very quickening considerations.
p. 365 Ten more very quickening, by way of question. p. 369 Ten more peculiar
to the godly, to quicken them. p. 374
Chap. 7. The third Use. Persuading all men to try their title to this Rest,
and directing them in this trial. p* 380 Self-examination defined, and
explained. p. 386 The nature of Assurance, or certainty of Salvation opened:
How much, and what the Spirit does to the producing it: And what Scripture,
what Knowledge, what Faith, what Holiness and Evidences, what Conscience or
internal sense, and what Reason or discourse do in this work. p. 388 What the
seal of the Spirit is? What the testimony of the Spirit? and what the testimony
of Conscience? p. 391 Against the common distinction of certainty of Evidence,
and of adherence. p. 392 That we are justified and beloved of God, is not
properly to be believed; much less immediately, and by all men. ibid. That
Assurance may be here attained, though not perfect Assurance. p. 393
Hindrances that keep from examination; 1. Satan. p 39^ 2. Wicked men. p 397 3.
Hindrances in our own hearts. p. 398
Hindrances of Assurance in those that do examine. p. 400 Further causes of
want of Assurance among the most of the godly themselves. p. 402 1. Weakness
and small measure of Grace. p. 403 2. Looking more what they are, then what
they should do to be better. ibid. 3. Mistaking or confounding Assurance, and
the joy of Assurance. p. 405 4. Ignorant of Gods way of conveying Assurance. p.
406 5. Expecting a greater measure then God usually gives here. p. 407 6.
Taking up comfort in the beginning on unsound, or uncertain grounds, when yet
perhaps they have better grounds, and do not see them; and then when the
weakness of their grounds appear, they cast away their comforts too, as if all
were naught. p. 408 7. Imperfection of Reason, and natural parts. p. 409 8.
The secret maintaining some known sin. p. 410 9. Growing lazy in the spiritual
part of duty, and not keeping graces in constant action. p. 411 10. Prevalency
of Melancholy in the body. p. 414

Chap. 8. An Exhortation to examine our title to Rest. p. 415 Several Motives.
to p. 428
Chap. 9. A direction how to manage the work of Self-examination thoroughly,
that it may succeed. p. 428 Two marks whereby you may infallibly Judge. p. 434
Chap. 10. The fourth Use. The Reasons of the Saints afflictions in this life.
p. 439 Some Considerations to help us to bear them joyfully, drawn from their
reference to this Rest. p. 441 Some objections of the afflicted answered. p. 452
Chap. 11. An Exhortation to those that have got Assurance of this Rest, or
title to it, to do all that possibly they can to help others to the like. p.
458 Here is showed, 1. wherein the duty does consist. p. 459 Directions are
added for right performance. p. 464 Besides the great duty of private
exhortation, we must help them to enjoy, use and improve the public
Ordinances. p. 475 2. The common Hindrances of faithful endeavors to save
men's souls. p. 482 Some objections against this duty, answered. p. 488 Motives
to persuade all Christians to this duty. p. 491
Chap. 12. An advice to some, more especially to help others to this Rest:
Pressed largely on Ministers and Parents. p. 501 And 1. To men of ability. 2. Or
interest. 3. Physicians. 4. Rich men, and men of Command. p. 504 5. To
Ministers: Five means which they must use. p. 506 6. To Parents, and masters of
Families. Several Considerations to urge them to the performance. p. 527 Some
of their objections answered. p. 537 Directions to Parents for teaching their
Children. p. 546 The sum, or Fundamentals of Divinity, which Children and
others must first be taught. p. 548 Some further Directions, only named. p. 550

The Contents of the Fourth Part.
CHAP. I. REproving our expectation of Rest on earth, with diverse Reasons
against it. p. 559 ^hap. 2. Reproving our lothness to die, and go to our Rest.
p. 574 The heinous aggravations of this sin. p. 575 Considerations against it,
and to make us willing, and objections answered. p. 583
^hap. 3. A Directory for a heavenly life. 1. Reproof of our unheavenliness,
and Exhortation to set our hearts above. p. 598 Twelve moving considerations to
heavenly-mindedness. p. 604
^hap. 4. Seven great Hindrances of heavenliness to be avoided. p 645 ^hap. 5.
Ten general Helps to a heavenly life. p. 668 ^hap. 6. The great duty of
heavenly meditation described, and the Description explained. p. 686 ^hap. 7.
Directions, 1. Concerning the fittest Time for this Meditation. p. 696 2.
Concerning the fittest Place. p. 712 3. Concerning the preparation of the heart
to it. p. 714
Chap. 8. Of Consideration, and what power it has to move the soul. p. 718
Chap. 9. What faculties and affections must be acted in this Contemplation. p.
724 By what objects, and considerations, and in what order. ibid. More
particularly: 1. The exercise of Judgment. p. 725 2. The acting of Faith. p.
728 3. The acting of Love. p. 731 4. The acting of Desire. p 736 5. The acting
of Hope. p. 739 6. The acting of Courage, or holy Boldness and Resolution. p.
742 7. The acting of Joy. p. 744
Chap. 10. By what Actings of the soul to proceed to this work of heavenly
Contemplation, beside Cogitation. p. 749 As 1. Soliloquy -- Its parts and
method. p 750 2. Speaking to God. p. 754
Chap. 11. Some advantages for raising and affecting the soul in its
Meditations of Heaven -- In general, by making use of sense, or sensitive
things. p 756 Particularly, 1. By raising strong suppositions from sense. p.
759 2. By comparing the objects of Sense, with the objects of Faith. p. 761
Twelve helps by comparison to be affected with the Joys of Heaven. p. 76^
Chap. 12. Direction how to manage and watch over the heart, whi^^ we are in
this work of Contemplation. p. 781 Chap. 13. An abstract, or brief sum of
all, for the help of the weak. p. 787 Chap. 14. An example of the acting of
Judgment, Faith, Love, Joy, and Desire, by this duty of Heavenly Meditation. p.
790 The Conclusion, commending this duty, from its necessity and excellency. p.
83^

THE SAINTS Everlasting REST.
CHAP. I. HEBR. 4.9. There remains therefore a Rest to the people of God.
SECT. I.
IT was not only our interest in God,. 1.
and actual fruition of him, which was lost in Adams Covenant Breaking fall;
but all spiritual knowledge of him, and true disposition toward such a
felicity. Man has now a heart too suitable to his estate: A low state, and a
low spirit. And (as some expound that of Luke 18.8.) when the Son of God comes
with Recovering Grace, and discoveries and tenders of a spiritual and eternal
Happiness and Glory, he finds not faith in man to believe it. But as the poor
man that would not believe that any one man had such a sum as an hundred pound,
it was so far above what he possessed: So man will hardly now believe, that
there is such a Happiness as once he had, much less as Christ has now
procured. When God would give the Israelites his Sabbaths of Rest, in a Land of
Rest, he had more ado to make them believe it, then to overcome their enemies,
and procure it for them: And when they had it, only as a small intimation and
earnest of a more incomparably glorious Rest through Christ, they stick there,
and will yet believe no more then they do possess, but sit down and say, as the
Glutton at the feast, Sure there is no other Heaven but this. Or if they do
expect more by the Messiah, it is only the increase of their earthly felicity.
The Apostle bestows most of this Epistle against this distemper, and clearly
and largely proves unto them, That it is the end of all Ceremonies and Shadows,
to direct them to Jesus Christ the Substance; and that the Rest of Sabbaths and
Canaan, should teach them to look for a further Rest, which indeed is their
Happiness. My Text is his Conclusion after diverse Arguments to that end; a
Conclusion so useful to a Believer, as containing the ground of all his
comforts, the end of all his duty and sufferings, the life and sum of all
Gospel-promises, and Christian-priviledges, that you may easily be satisfied
why I have made it the subject of my present Discourse. What more welcome to
men, under personal afflictions, tiring duty, successions of sufferings, then
Rest? What more welcome news to men under public calamities, unpleasing
employments, plunderings, losses, sad tidings etc. (which is the common case)
then this of Rest? Hearers, I pray God your attentions, intention of spirit,
entertainment, and improvement of it, be but half answerable to the verity,
necessity and excellency of this Subject, and then you will have cause to bless
God, while you live, that ever you heard it, as I have, that ever I studied it.

SECT. II.
. 2.
THe Text is, as you may see, the Apostles Assertion in an entire proposition,
with the concluding illative, The Subject is Rest; The Predicate, It yet
Remains to the people of God. Its requisite we say somewhat briefly; 1. For
Explication of the terms. 2. Of the Subject of them.

Therefore] i. e. It clearly follows from the former Argument [ There Remains]
1. In order of speaking; As the Consequence follows the Antecedent, or the
Conclusion the Premises; So there Remains a Rest, or it remains that there is
another Rest. 2. But rather in order of being: As the bargain remains after the
earnest, the performance after the promise, the Antitype after the Type, and
the ultimate end after all the means; so there remains a Rest: [ To the People
of God] God has a twofold people within the Church: One his only by a common
vocation Heb. 10.30. Micah 2.8. 2 Pet. 2.20. Joh 2.23. Heb 6.4, 5, 6. Heb.
10.29, 30
, by an external acceptance of Christ, and covenanting, sanctified by the
blood of the Covenant so far, as to be separated from the open enemies of
Christ, and all without the Church, therefore not to be accounted common and
unclean in the sense as Jews and Pagans are; but holy, and Saints in a larger
sense, as the Nation of the Jews, and all Proselited Gentiles were holy before
Christ's coming: These are called Branches in Christ not bearing fruit, Joh.
15.2, 6.
and shall be cut off, etc. for they are in the Church, and in him, by the
foresaid profession, and external Covenant, but no further. There are in his
Kingdom things that offend, Mat: 13.41.
and men that work iniquity, which the Angels at the last day shall gather out,
and cast into the Lake of fire: There are fishes good and bad in his net, and
tares with wheat in his field: The son of Perdition is one of those given to
Christ by the Father, Joh. 17.12.
though not as the Rest; these be not the people of God my Text speaks of. 2.
But God has a Peculiar People, that are his by special vocation, cordial
acceptance of Christ, internal, sincere covenanting, sanctified by the blood
of the Covenant, and Spirit of Grace, so far, as not only to be separated from
open Infidels, but from all unregenerate Christians being Branches in Christ,
bearing fruit; and for these remains the Rest in my Text.

1. To be Gods people by a forced Subjection, i. e. under his dominion, is
common to all persons, even open enemies, yea Devils; this yields not comfort.

2. To be his by a verbal Covenant and profession, and external Call, is common
to all in and of the visible Church, even Traitors, and secret enemies; yet
has this many privileges, as the external seals, means of grace; common
mercies, but no interest in this Rest.

3. But to be his by election, union with Christ, and special interest (as
before mentioned) is the peculiar property of those that shall have this Rest.

SECT. III.
. 3.
Quest. BUt is it to a determinate number of persons by name, or only to a
people thus and thus qualified, viz. persevering Believers, without determining
by Name who they are?

Ans. I purposely in this Discourse omit controversies; only in a word thus:
1. It is promised only to persevering Believers, and not to any particular
persons by name. 2. It is purposed with all the conditions of it, and means to
it, to a determinate Number, called the Elect, and known by name; which I prove
thus.

1. There Is few will deny, that God foreknows from eternity who these are, and
shall be, numerically, personally, by name.

2. To purpose it only to such, and to know that only these will be such, is in
effect to purpose it only to these.

3. Especially, if we know, how little Knowledge and Purpose in God do differ.

4. However, we must not make his knowledge active, and his purpose idle, much
less to contradict each other, as it must be, if from eternity he purposed
salvation alike to all, and yet from eternity knew that only such and such
should receive it.

5. To purpose all persevering Believers to salvation, and not to purpose faith
and perseverance absolutely to any particular persons, is to purpose salvation
absolutely to none at all.

SECT. IV.
. 4.
Quest. TO] Is it to the people of God upon Certainty, or only upon possibility.

Ans. If only possible, it cannot thus be called theirs.

Theirs by Purpose before conversion.
1. While they are only elect, not called, it is certain to them (we speak of a
certainty of the object) by Divine purpose; for they are ordained to eternal
life first, Acts 13.48.
and therefore believe; and not first believe and therefore elected.

2. When they are called according to his purpose, Theirs in Law-title or by
promise, after conversion.
then it is certain to them by a certainty of promise also, as good as if they
were named in that promise; for the promise is to Believers, which they may
know themselves to be; and though it be yet upon condition of overcoming* Quum
aequilibrium illud hoc u^um praestat juxta Arminium, ut redda^ salutem hominum
^em contingentem, and libratane in ancipiti, isne rem tantam imp^^se affectasse
dicendus est, qui vult esse collo catam in loco tam lubrico, ac veluti tenui
filo pendentem, adco ut v^l levissimo moment^ impellatur ad perniciem? Amyral,
Desens. doctr. Calvini, page 115.
and abiding in Christ, and enduring to the end, yet that condition being
absolutely promised it still remains absolutely certain upon promise: And
indeed, if Glory be ours only upon a condition, which condition depends
chiefly on our own wills; it were cold comfort to those that know what man's
will is, and how certainly we should play the Prodigals with this, as we did
with our first stock. But I have hitherto understood, that, in the behalf of
the Elect, Christ is resolved, and has undertaken, for the working and
finishing of their faith, and the full effecting his peoples salvation: and not
only gives us a (feigned) sufficient grace, not effectual, leaving it to our
wills to make it effectual, as some think. So that though still the Promise of
our Justification and Salvation be Conditional, yet God having manifested his
purpose of enabling us to fulfill those Conditions, he does thereby show us a
Certainty of our Salvation both in his Promise and his Purpose.

CHAP. II. This Rest Defined.
SECT. I.
. 1.
NOw let us see: 1. What this Rest is. 2. What these people of God, and why so
called. 3. The truth of this from other Scripture Arguments. 4. Why this Rest
must yet Remain. 5. Why only to this people of God. 6. What use to make of it.

1. And though the sense of the Text includes in the word Rest, all that ease
and safety which a Soul, wearyed with the burden of sin and suffering, and
pursued by Law, Wrath, and Conscience, has with Christ in this life; the Rest
of Grace: yet because it chiefly intends the Rest of eternal Glory, as the end
and main part, I shall therefore confine my Discourse to this last.

DEFINITION.
Definit.
REst is [The end and perfection of motion.] The Saints Rest here in Question is
[The most happy estate of a Christian, having obtained the end of his course.]

SECT. II.
2.
1. I Call it the [estate] of a Christian, (though Perfection consists in Action
as the Philosopher thinks) to note both the Active and Passive fruition,
wherein a Christians blessedness lies, and the established continuance of both.

SECT. III.
2. I Call it the [most happy] estate, to difference it,. 3.
not only from all seeming happiness which is to be found in the enjoyment of
creatures; but also from all those beginnings, foretastes, earns, first fruits,
and imperfect degrees, which we have here in this life, while we are but in the
way: It is the Chief Good, which the world has so much disputed, yet mistaken
or neglected; without which, the greatest confluence of all other good leaves a
man miserable; and with the enjoyment of which, all misery is inconsistent.

SECT. IV.
3. I Call it the estate of [a Christian] where I mean only the sincere,. 4.
Regenerate, Sanctified Christian, whose Soul having discovered that excellency
in God through Christ, which is not in the world to be found, thereupon closes
with him, and is cordially set upon him. I do not mean every one, that being
born where Christianity is the Religion of the Country, takes it up as other
fashions, and is become a Christian he scarce knows how, or why: Nor mean I
those that profess Christ in words, but in works deny him. (I shall describe
this Christian to you more plainly afterward.) It is an estate, to which many
pretend, and that with much confidence, and because they know it is only the
Christians; therefore they all call themselves Christians: Col. 1.12. Act.
26.18. Act. 20.32. Joh. 15.19. Mat. 10.38. Luke 14 27. Heb. 10.36.6.15.
But multitudes will at last know, to their eternal sorrow, that this is only
the Inheritance of the Saints, and only those Christians shall possess it, who
are not of the world, and therefore the world hates them; who have forsaken all
for Christ, and having taken up the Cross, do follow him, with patient waiting,
till they inherit the promised Glory.

SECT. V.
4. I Add,. 5.
That this Happiness consists in obtaining [the End] where I mean the ultimate
and principal end, not any end secundum quid so called, subordinate, or less
principal. Not the end of conclusion, in regard of time; for so every man has
his end: But the end of Intention, which sets the Soul a work, and is its prime
motive in all its actions. That the chief Happiness is in the enjoyment of this
End, I shall fully show through the whole Discourse, and therefore here omit.

. 6. Q. Whether to make Salvation our end be not mercenary? or Legal? As if the
very seeking of life at all, were the surest way to miss of it. Clean contrary
to the whole tenor of Scripture.
SECT. VI.
BUt it is a great doubt with many, whether the obtainment of this glory may be
our end? nay, concluded, that its mercenary; yea, that to make Salvation the
end of Duty, is to be a Legalist, and act under a Covenant of Works, whose
Tenor is, Do this and Live. And many that think it may be our end, yet think it
may not be our ultimate end, for that should be only the glory of God. I shall
answer these particularly and briefly.

SECT. VII.
. 7.
1. It Is properly called mercenary, when we expect it as wages for work done
Viz. by way of merit, strictly so called.
; and so we may not make it our end: Otherwise it is only such a mercenariness
as Christ commands. For consider what this end is; It Is the fruition of God
in Christ: and if seeking Christ be mercenary, I desire to be so mercenary.

2. It Is not a note of a Legalist neither: It has been the ground of a
multitude of Late mistakes in Divinity, to think that [ Do this and Live] is
only the language of the Covenant of Works. It Is true, in some sense it is;
but in other, not. The Law of Works only says [ Do this (that is, perfectly
fulfill the whole Law) and Live] (that is, for so doing): But the Law of Grace
says, [ Do this and Live] too; that is, Believe in Christ, seek him, obey him
sincerely as thy Lord and King; forsake all, suffer all things, and overcome;
and by so doing, or in so doing, as the Conditions which the Gospel propounds
for Salvation, you shall live. If you set up the abrogated duties of the Law
again, you are a Legalist: if you set up the duties of the Gospel in Christ's
stead, in whole or in part, you err still. Christ has his place and work: Duty
has its place, and work too: Set it but in its own place, and expect from it,
but its own part, and you go right. Yea more (how unsavory soever the phrase
may seem); you may, so far as this comes to, trust to your Duty and Works, that
is, for your own part: and many miscarry in expecting no more from them, (as to
pray and to expect nothing the more,) that is, from Christ in a way of Duty:
For if duty have no share, why may we not trust Christ as well in a way of
disobedience as duty? In a word, you must both use and trust duty in
Subordination to Christ, but neither use them nor trust them in Co-ordination
with him: So that this derogates nothing from Christ, for he has done and will
do all his work perfectly, and enableth his people to Theirs; Yet he is not
properly said to do it himself; he Believed for us legally, or so far as the
Law required Faith; but not as it is the Condition or Command of the New
Covenan^.
believes not, repents not, etc. but works these in them; that is, enableth,
and exciteth them to do it.

SECT. VIII.
IF I should quote all the Scriptures that plainly prove this,. 8.
I should transcribe a great part of the Bible: I will bring none out of the
Old Testament, for I know not whether their Authority will here be
acknowledged: But I desire the contrary minded, I spe^k the mo^e of this,
because I find that many moderate men who think they have found the mean
between the Antinom^an and the Legalist, yet do foully err in this point. As Mr
F. in the Marrow of Modern Divinity, a book applauded by so many eminent
Divines, in their commendatory Epistles before it; And because the doctrine
[That we must Act from Life but not For Life, or in thankfulness to him that
has saved us, but not for the obtaining of Salvation] is of such dangerous
consequence, that I would advise all m^n to take heed of it, that regard their
Salvation.
whose consciences are tender of abusing Scripture, and wresting it from the
plain sense, to study what tolerable interpretation can be given of these
following places, which will not prove, that Life and Salvation may be, yea
must be the end of Duty. Joh 5.39, 40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might
have life. Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. Mat. 7.13. Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate. Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Romans
2.7, 10. To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life; Glory, honor and peace to every man that
works good, etc. 1 Cor. 9.24. So run, that you may obtain. 2 Timothy 2.5. A man
is not crowned, except he strive lawfully. 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer with him,
we shall reign with him. 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold
on eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. That they do good works, laying up a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.
Phil. 3.14. If by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the Dead, I
press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling, etc. Rev. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree
of life, 1 Cor 15. ult. 2 Cor. 4.17. and 5.10, 11.
and enter in by the gates into the City. Mat. 25. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit, etc. for I was hungry, and ye, etc. Mat. 9. Blessed are the
pure in heart, etc. they that hunger and thirst, etc. Be glad and rejoice, for
great is your reward in Heaven. I here undertake to prove, that this
forementioned doctrine reduced to practice will certainly be the damnation of
the pract^ser; But I hope many Antinomians do not practice their own doctrine.
Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. Yea, the
escaping of Hell is a right end of Duty to a Believer. Hebr. 4.1. Let us fear,
least a promise being left us, of entering into his Rest, any of you should
seem to come short of it. Luke 12.5. Fear him that is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell, yea, (whatsoever others say) I say unto you, Fear him. 1 Cor.
9.27. I keep under my body, and bring it in subjection; lest, when I have
preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. Multitudes of Scriptures,
and Scripture Arguments, might be brought, but these may suffice to any that
believe Scripture.

SECT. IX.
. 9.
3. FOr those that think this Rest may be our end, but not our ultimate end,
that must be Gods glory only; let them consider, What God has joined, man
must not separate. The glorifying himself, and the saving his people, (as I
judge) are not two Decrees with God; but one Decree, to glorify his mercy in
their salvation: So I think they should be with us, one Intention: We should
aim at the glory of God (not alone considered, without our salvation, but) in
our salvation. Therefore I know no warrant for putting such a Question to our
selves, as some do, Whether we could be content to be damned, so God were
glorified Christ has put no such questions to us, nor bid us put such to our
selves. Christ had rather that men would enquire after their true willingness
to be saved, then their willingness to be damned.
? Sure I am, Christ himself is offered to faith in terms, for the most part
respecting the welfare of the sinner, more then his own abstracted glory: he
would be received as a Savior, Mediator, Redeemer, Reconciler, Intercessor,
etc. And all the precepts of Scripture, being backed with so many promises and
threatenings, every one intended of God as a motive to us, do imply as much. If
any think they should be distinguished as two several ends, and Gods glory
preferred; so they separate them not asunder, I contend not.

SECT. X.
5. IN the Definition,. 10.
I call a Christians Happiness, the end of [his Course] thereby meaning, as
Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7. the whole scope of his life. For as Salvation may and must be
our end, so not only the end of our faith (though that principally) but of all
our actions; for as whatsoever we do, must be done to the glory of God, whether
eating, drinking, etc. so must they all be done to our Salvation. That we may
believe for Salvation, some will grant, who yet deny that we may do, or obey
for it. The Scriptures before cited do prove both.
I would it were well understood, for the clearing of many controversies, what
the Scripture usually means by Faith. Doubtless the Gospel takes it not so
strictly as Philosophers do; but, in a larger sense, for our obedience to all
Gospel precepts. To believe in his name, and to receive him, are all one: Joh.
1.12.
but we must receive him as King, as well as Savior: therefore believing does
not produce subjection as a fruit, See more of this hereafter.
but contain it as an essential part, except we say that Faith receives Christ
as a Savior first, and so justifies before it take him for King (as some
think,) which is a maimed, unsound, and no Scripture faith. I doubt not, but
the Soul more sensibly looks at Salvation from Christ, then Government by him,
in the first work; yet (whatever precedaneous act there may be) it never
conceives of Christ to Justification, nor knows him with the knowledge which is
eternal life, till it conceive of him, and know him for Lord and King.
Therefore there is not such a difference between Faith and Gospel-obedience, or
Works, as some judge: Obedience to the Gospel is put for Faith, and Disobedience
put for Unbelief usually in the New Testament.

6. Lastly, I make Happiness to consist in this end [obtained]: for it is not
the mere promise of it that immediately makes perfectly happy; nor Christ's mere
purchase, nor our mere seeking: but the Apprehending and obtaining, which sets
the Crown on the Saints head; when we can say of our work, as Christ of the
price paid, It is finished; and as Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of Salvation. 2 Timothy
4.7, 8.

CHAP. III. What this Rest presupposes.
SECT. I.
. 1.
FOr the clearer understanding yet of the nature of this Rest, you must know, 1.
There are some things necessarily presupposed to it: 2. Some things really
contained in it.


1. All these things are presupposed to this Rest.

1. A person in motion, seeking Rest.

SECT. II.
. 2.
2. AN End toward which he moves for Rest: Which End must be sufficient for his
Rest; else when it is obtained, it deceives him. This can be only God, the
chief good.

SECT. III.
. 3.
3. A Distance is presupposed from this End; else there can be no motion toward
it. This sad distance is the woeful case of all mankind since the fall: It was
our God that we principally lost; and were shut out of his gracious presence.
Though some talk of losing only a temporal, earthly, felicity; sure I am, it
was God we fell from, and him we lost, and since said to be without him in the
world; and there would have been no death, but for sin; and to enjoy God
without death, is neither an earthly, nor temporal enjoyment: Nay, in all men
at Age, here is supposed, not only a distance from God, but also a contrary
motion: For sin has not overthrown our Being, nor taken away our Motion; but
our well-being, and the Rectitude of our motion. When Christ comes with
Regenerating, Saving Grace; he finds no man sitting still, but all posting to
eternal Ruin, and making have toward hell; till, by conviction, he first
bring them to a stand; and by conversion, turn first their hearts, and then
their lives, sincerely to himself.

SECT. IV.
4. HEre is presupposed,. 4.
a knowledge of the true ultimate End, and its excellency; for so the motion of
the Rational Creature proceeds: I speak all this of men of age converted by
the Word, not of those sanctified in Infancy.
An unknown end, is no end; it is a contradiction. We cannot make that our end,
which we know not, nor that our chief End, which we know not, or judge not, to
be the chief Good. An unknown Good moves not to desire or endeavor. Therefore
where it is not truly known, That God is this End, and contains all good in
him, there is no obtaining Rest.

SECT. V.
5. HEre is presupposed,. 5.
not only a distance from this Rest, but also the true knowledge of this
distance: If a man have lost his way, and know it not, he seeks not to return;
If he lose his gold, and know it not, he seeks it not. Therefore they that
never knew they were without God, never yet enjoyed him; and they that never
knew they were naturally and actually in the way to Hell, did never yet know
the way to Heaven. Nay, there will not only be a knowledge of this distance,
and lost estate, but also affections answerable: Can a man be brought to find
himself hard by the brink of hell, and not tremble? or to find he has lost
his God, and his Soul, and not cry out, I am undone? Or, can such a stupid Soul
be so recovered? This is the sad case of many thousands; and the reason why so
few obtain this Rest: They will not be convinced, or made sensible, that they
are, in point of title, distant from it; and, in point of practice, contrary to
it. They have lost their God, their Souls, their Rest, and do not know it; nor
will believe him that tells them so. Who ever traveled toward a place, which
he thought he was at already? or sought for that which he knew not he had lost?
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick, Mat. 9.12.

SECT. VI.
. 6.
6. HEre is also supposed, A superior moving Cause, and an influence
therefrom; else should we all stand still, and not move a step forward toward
our Rest; no more then the inferior wheels in the Watch would stir, if you
take away the spring, or the first mover. This primum movens is God: What hand
God has in evil Actions; or whether he afford the like influence to their
production? I will not here trouble this Discourse, and the Reader to dispute.
The case is clear in Good Actions: If God move us not, we cannot move:
Therefore is it a most necessary part of our Christian Wisdom, to keep our
subordination to God, and dependence on him; To be still in the path where he
walks, and in that way where his Spirit does most usually move. Take heed of
being estranged or separated from God, or of slacking your daily expectations
of renewed help, or of growing insensible of the necessity of the continual
influence and assistance of the Spirit. When you once begin to trust to your
stock of habitual Grace, and to depend on your own understanding or
resolution, for duty and holy walking, You are then in a dangerous declining
State. In every duty remember Christ's words, Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do
nothing. And 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.

SECT. VII.
. 7.
7. HEre is supposed An Internal principle of life in the person: God moves not
man like a stone, but by enduing him first with life, (not to enable him to
move without God, but) thereby to qualify him to move himself, in
subordination to God the first mover. What the nature of this spiritual life
is, is a Question exceeding difficult: Whether, as some think (but (as I judge)
erroniously) it be Christ himself in Person, or Essence? or the holy Ghost
personally? (Or as some will distinguish (with what sense I know not) it is the
person of the holy Ghost, but not personally;) Whether it be an Accident, or
Quality? or whether it be a spiritual substance, as the soul it self? Whether
it be only an Act? or a disposition? or a habit? (as its generally taken.)
Whether a habit infused? or acquired by frequent Acts, to which the soul has
been morally persuaded? or whether it be somewhat lower then a habit, i. e. A
power, viz. potentia proxima intelligendi, credendi, volendi, etc. in
spiritualibus? Some think, That the pravity of nature contains a want of the
^otentia, as well as of the habit. Some say, The potentia prima; Others, The
Potentia secunda. Some think, The work of the spirit does but make an
impression on the internal sense, answerable to that qualicas (...) quae
passionem officit in sensibus, etc. It seems yet to me, that Grace is that
Potentia secunda, per quam prima naturalis in actum producitur. Vid. de hoc.
Parkeri Theses.
Which some think, the most probable, and that it was such a power that Adam
lost, and that the natural man (as experience tells us) is still devoyd of.
Whether such a power can be conceived, which is not Reason it self? and whether
Reason be not the Soul it self? and so we should make the soul diminished and
increased, as bodies: Whether spirits have Accidents, as corporal substances
have? A multitude of such difficulties occur, which will be difficulties while
the Doctrine of Spirits and Spirituals is so dark to us; and that will be while
the dust of mortality and corruption is in our eyes. This is my comfort, that
death will shortly blow out this dust, and then I shall be resolved of these,
and many more. In the mean time I am a Sceptick, and know little in this whole
doctrine of spirits, and spiritual workings, further then Scripture clearly
reveals.

SECT. VIII.
8. HEre is presupposed before Rest,. 8.
an Actual Motion; Rest is the end of Motion. No Motion, no Rest. Christianity
is not a sedentary profession and employment; Nor does it consist in mere
Negatives. It is for not feeding, not clothing, etc. that Christ condemns. Not
doing good, is not the least evil; sitting still will lose you Heaven, as well
as if you run from it. It Is a great Question, Whether the elicit Acts of the
Will are by Motion, or by subitaneous mutation? But its a Logomachy.

SECT. IX.
9. HEre is presupposed also,. 9.
as motion, so such motion as is rightly ordered and directed toward the end.
Not all motion, labor, seeking, that brings to Rest. Every way leads not to
this end; But he whose goodness has appointed the end, has in his wisdom, and
by his sovereign authority, appointed the way. Our own invented ways may seem
to us more wise, comely, equal, pleasant; but that is the best Key that will
open the Lock, which none but that of Gods appointing will do. Oh the pains
that sinners take, and wordlings take, but not for this Rest! Oh the pains and
cost that many an ignorant and superstitious soul is at for this Rest, but all
in vain! How many have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge? Who being
ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God: Nor
known, That Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes? Romans 10.2, 3, 4. Christ is the door, the only way, to this Rest.
Some will allow nothing else to be called the way, Dr Crispe.
lest it Derogate from Christ: The truth is, Christ is the only Way to the
Father: Yet faith is the way to Christ; and Gospel Obedience, or Faith and
Works, the way for those to walk in, that are in Christ. There be (as before)
many ways requisite in Subordination to Christ, but none in Co-ordination with
him. So then, it is only Gods way, that will lead to this end and Rest.

SECT. X.
10. THere is supposed also,. 10.
as motion rightly ordered, so strong and constant motion, which may reach the
end. If there be not strength put to the bow, the Arrow will not reach the
mark: The Lazy world, that think all too much, will find this to their cost one
day. They that think less ado might have served, do but reproach Christ for
making us so much to do. They that have been most holy, watchful, painful to
get faith and assurance, do find when they come to dye, all too little: We see
daily the best Christians when dying, Repent their Negligence; I never knew any
then repent his holiness, and diligence. It would grieve a man's soul to see a
multitude of mistaken sinners, lay out their wit, and care, and pains, for a
thing of naught, and think to have eternal Salvation with a wish. If the way to
Heaven be not far harder then the world imagines, then Christ and his Apostles
knew not the way, or else have deceived us: For they have told us, That the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; That the gate is strait, and the way
narrow, and we must strive if we will enter, Mat 11.12. M^^. 7.13. Luke 13.24.25
for many shall seek to enter, and not be able; (which implies the faintness of
their seeking, and that they put not strength to the work, and that the
righteous themselves are scarcely saved. 1 Pet 4 18
If ever Soul obtain Salvation in the worlds common, careless, easy way; then
I Will say, there is a nearer way found out then ever God in Scripture has
revealed to the sons of men. But when they have obtained Life and Rest, in this
way, let them boast of it; till then, let them give us leave (who would fain go
upon sure grounds in point of eternal Salvation) to believe, that God knows the
way better then they, and that his Word is a true and infallible discovery
thereof.

I have seen this Doctrine also thrown by with contempt by others, who say;
What, do you set us a working for heaven? Does our duty do any thing? Has not
Christ done all? Is not this to make him a half Savior? and to preach Law?

Ans. It is to preach the Law of Christ; his Subjects are not Lawless; It is to
preach Duty to Christ: No more exact requirer of duty, or hater of sin, then
Christ. Christ has done, and will do all his work, and therefore is a perfect
Savior; but yet leaves for us a work too: He has paid all the price, and left
us none to pay; yet he never intended his purchase should put us into absolute,
immediate personal title to glory in point of Law, much less into immediate
possession: What title we may have from his own, and his Fathers secret
counsel, is nothing to the Question. He has purchased the Crown to bestow,
only on Condition of believing, denying all for him, suffering with him,
persevering and overcoming. He has purchased Justification to bestow only on
condition of our believing, yea repenting and believing See Doctor Jennison on
this Subject.
. That the first Grace has any such Condition, I will not Affirm; but all
following mercies have: Though it is Christ that enableth also to perform the
Condition. It is not a Savior offered, but received also, that must save: It
is not the blood of Christ shed only, but applied also, that must fully
deliver: Nor is it applied to the Justification, or Salvation of a sleepy Soul:
Nor does Christ carry us to heaven in a chair of security. Where he will
pardon, he will make you pray, Forgive us our trespasses; and where he will
give Righteousness, he will give hungering and thirsting: It is not through any
imperfection in Christ, that the Righteous are scarcely saved; no nor that the
wicked perish, as they shall be convinced one day. In the same sense as the
prayer of the faithful, if fervent, avails for outward mercies, in the same
sense it prevails for Salvation also; James 5.16.
For Christ has purchased both. And as Baptism is said to save us, so other
duties too: 1 Pet. 3.21.
Therefore say not, It is not duty, but Christ: For it is Christ in a way of
duty. As duty cannot do it without Christ, so Christ will not without duty: But
of this enough before.

And as this motion must be strong, so constant, or it will fall short of Rest.
Gal. 3 3.
To begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh, will not bring to the end of the
Saints. The certainty of the Saints perseverance, does not make admonition to
constancy unuseful. Men as seemingly holy as the best of us, have fallen off.
He that knew it unpossible, in the foundation, Mat. 24.13. Mark 13.13 22.
to deceive the Elect, yet saw it necessary to warn us, that he (only) that
endures to the end shall be saved: Read but the promises Rev. 2. and 3. to him
that overcomes.

SECT. XI.
. 11.
11. THere is presupposed also to the obtaining of this Rest, a strong desire
after it. The Souls motion is not that which we call violent or constrained,
(none can force it) but natural, viz. according to our new nature. As every
thing inclines to its proper Center, so the Rational Creature is carried on in
all its motion, with desires after its end. This end is the first thing
intended, and chiefest desired, though last obtained. Observe it, and believe
it, who ever thou art; there was never Soul that made Christ and glory the
principal end; nor that obtained Rest with God, whose desire was not set upon
him, and that above all things else in the world whatsoever: Christ brings the
heart to heaven first, and then the person: His own mouth spoke it; Where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also, Mat. 6.21. A sad conclusion to
thousands of professed Christians. He that had truly rather have the enjoyment
of God in Christ, then any thing in the world, shall have it; and he that had
rather have any thing else, shall not have this, (except God change him.) It Is
true, the Remainder of our old nature will much weaken and interrupt these
desires, but never overcome them.

SECT. XII.
. 12. Prove. 4.6. Mat. 11.30. 1 John 5.3.
12. LAstly, here is presupposed, painfulness and weariness in our motion. This
arises not from any evil in the work or way; for Christ's yoke is easy, his
burden light, and his commands not grievous: But 1. From the opposition we meet
with. 2. The contrary principles still remaining in our nature, which will make
us cry out, O wretched men, Romans 7.24. 3. The weakness of our graces, and so of
our motion: Great labor, where there is a suitable strength, is a pleasure;
but to the weak, how painful! With what panting and weariness does a feeble man
ascend that hill, which the sound man runs up with ease! We are all, even the
best, but feeble. An easy, dull profession of Religion, that never
encountereth with these difficulties and pains, is a sad sign of an unsound
heart. Christ indeed has freed us from the Impossibilities of the Covenant of
Works, and from the burden and yoke of Legal Ceremonies, but not from the
difficulties and pains of Gospel duties.

4. Our continued distance from the End, will raise some grief also: for desire
and hope, implying the absence of the thing desired, and hoped for, do ever
imply also some grief for that absence; which all vanish when we come to
possession. All these twelve things are employed in a Christians Motion, and so
presupposed to his Rest.

CHAP. IV. What this Rest contains.
SECT. I.
BUt all this is only the outward Court, or at least not the holiest of all:
Now we have ascended these steps, may we look within the vail? May we show what
this Rest contains, as well as what it presupposes? But alas, how little
know I of that, whereof I am about to speak! Shall I speak before I know? But
if I stay till I clearly know, I shall not come again to speak. That glimpse
which Paul saw, 2 Cor. 12.4.
contained that which could not, or must not be uttered, or both. And if Paul
had had a tongue to have uttered it, it would have done no good, except his
hearers had ears to hear it. If Paul had spoke the things of Heaven in the
language of Heaven, and none understood that language, what the better?
Therefore I Will speak, while I may, that little, very little which I do know of
it, rather then be wholly silent: The Lord reveal it to me, that I may reveal it
to you: and the Lord open some light, and show both you and me his Inheritance;
Not as to Balaam only, whose eyes the vision of God opened, to see the
goodliness of Jacobs tents, and Isreal's tabernacles, where he had no portion;
but from whence must come his own destruction: Number 24.15, 16 5. Deuteronomy. 34.1, 2,
3, 4. Math. 13.44, 45, 46. Act. 7.55, 56.
Nor as to Moses, who had only a discovery, in stead of possession, and saw
the Land, which he never entered: But as the pearl was revealed to the Merchant
in the Gospel, who rested not till he had sold all he had, and bought it: and
as Heaven was opened to blessed Stephen, which he was shortly to enter, and the
glory showed him, which should be his own possession.

SECT. I.
THere is Contained in this Rest.. 1. 1. Cessation from all that action which
has the nature of means:


1. A Cessation from Motion or Action; not of all action, but of that which
has the nature of a Means, and implies the absence of the End. When we have
obtained the Haven, we have done sailing. When the workman has his wages, it
is employed, he has done his work. When we are at our journeys end, we have
done with the way. All Motion ends at the Center; and all Means cease, when we
have the End. Therefore prophesying cease, tongues fail, and knowledge shall
be done away; that is, so far as it had the nature of a Means, 1 Cor. 13.8. 1.
Knowledge. 2. Faith. (How far.)
and was imperfect: And so faith may be said to cease; not all faith, (for how
shall we know all things past which we saw not but by believing? how shall we
know the last Judgment, the resurrection of the body, before hand, but by
believing? how shall we know the life everlasting, the Eternity of the joys we
possess, but by believing?) But all that faith which as a Means referred to the
chief End, Prayer.
shall cease. There shall be no more prayer, because no more necessity, but the
full enjoyment of what we prayed for. Whether the soul pray for the bodies
resurrection, for the last judgment, etc. or whether soul and body pray for the
eternal continuance of their joys, is to me yet unknown: Otherwise we shall not
need to pray for what we have; and we shall have all that is desirable. So
Fasting, Weeping, Watching, Preaching, and Sacraments.
Neither shall we need to fast, and weep, and watch any more, being out of the
reach of sin and temptations. Nor will there be use for Instructions and
Exhortations: Preaching is done; The Ministry of man cease; Sacraments
useless; The Laborers called in, because the harvest is gathered; the tares
burned, and the work is done; The Unregenerate past hope; the Saints past fear,
for ever: Much less shall there be any need of laboring for inferior ends, as
here we do; seeing they will all devolve themselves into the Ocean of the
ultimate End, and the lesser good be wholly swallowed up of the Greatest.

SECT. II.
2.. 2. 2. Perfect freedom from Evil.
THis Rest contains a perfect freedom from all the Evils that accompanied us
through our course, and which necessarily follow our absence from the chief
good. Besides our freedom from those eternal flames, and restless miseries,
which the neglecters of Christ and Grace must remedilesly endure; an
inheritance which both by birth and actual merit, was due to us, as well as to
them. As God will not know the wicked, Sin.
so as to own them; so neither will Heaven know iniquity to receive it: for
there enters nothing that defiles, or is unclean; Rev. 21.27.
all that Remains without. And doubtless there is not such a thing as Grief and
Sorrow known there: Sorrow and suffering.
Nor is there such a thing, as a pale face, a languid body, feeble joints,
unable infancy, decrepit age, peccant humors, dolorous sickness, griping fears,
consuming cares, nor whatsoever deserves the name of evil. Indeed a gale of
Groans and Sighs, a stream of Tears, accompanied us to the very Gates, and
there bid us, farewell, for ever: We did weep and lament, when the world did
rejoice; Joh. 16.20, 21, 22.
but our Sorrow is turned into Joy, and our Joy shall no man take from us. God
were not the chief and perfect good, if the full fruition of him did not free
us from all Evil. But we shall have occasion to speak more fully of this in
that which follows.

SECT. III.
. 3. 3. Personal perfection in the highest degree, both of Soul and Body.
3. THis Rest contains, the Highest Degree of the Saints personal perfection;
both of Soul and Body. This necessarily qualifies them to enjoy the Glory, and
thoroughly to partake the sweetness of it. Were the Glory never so great, and
themselves not made capable by a personal perfection suitable thereto, it would
be little to them. There Is necessary a right disposition of the Recipient, to a
right enjoying, and affecting: This is one thing that makes the Saints Joys
there so great; Here, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart conceived
what God has laid up for them that wait for him: For the Eye of flesh is not
capable of seeing it, nor this Ear of hearing it, nor this Heart of
understanding it; But there the Eye, and Ear, and Heart are made capable; else
how do they enjoy it? The more perfect the sight is, the more delightful the
beautiful object. The more perfect the Appetite, the sweeter the Food. The more
musical the Ear, the more pleasant the Melody. The more perfect the Soul, the
more Joyous those Joys, and the more Glorious to us is that Glory. Nor is it
only our sinful imperfection, that is here to be removed; nor only that which
is the fruit of sin; but that which adhered to us in our pure naturals. Genesis
2.15. Dan. 12.3.
Adams dressing the Garden, was neither sin nor the fruit of sin: Nor is either
to be less Glorious then the Stars, or the Sun ^n the Firmament of our Father:
Yet is this the dignity to which the Righteous shall be advanced. There is far
more procured by Christ, then was lost by Adam. It Is the misery of wicked men
here, that all without them is mercy, excellent mercies; but within them a
heart full of sin shuts the door against all and makes them but the more
miserable. When all is well within, then all is well indeed. The near Good, is
the best; and the near evil and enemy, the worst. Therefore will God, as a
special part of his Saints Happiness, perfect themselves, as well as their
condition.

SECT. IV.
4. THis Rest contains,. 4. 4. Chiefly the nearest fruition of God the chief
Good.
as the principal part, our nearest fruition of God the Chiefest Good. And
here, Reader, wonder not If I be at a loss; and if my apprehensions receive but
little of that which is in my expressions. If to the beloved Disciple that
durst speak and enquire into Christ's secrets, and was filled with his
Revelations, and saw the new Jerusalem in her Glory, and had seen Christ, 1 John 3.2. O qui perpetua mundum ratio ne gubernas, Tetrarum coelique sa^or, qui
tempus ab aevo; Ire jubes stablisque man^ns das cu^cta moveri; Principium
^ector, dux, semita, terminus idem; Tu requies tranquilla piis; te cernere,
finis. Boethius. Vide Gerson. part. 3. Alphabet. divini Amoris; cap. 14. egregie
de attributis etc excellentiis divinis expatiantem.
Moses and Elias in part of theirs; If it did not appear to him what we shall
be, but only in general, that when Christ appears, we shall be like him, no
wonder if I know little. When I know so little of God, I cannot know much what
it is to enjoy him. When it is so little I know of mine own soul, either it is
quiddity, or quality, while it is here in this Tabernacle; how little must I
needs know of the Infinite Majesty, or the state of this soul, when it is
advanced to that enjoyment? If I know so little of Spirits and Spirituals, how
little of the Father of Spirits? Nay, if I never saw that creature, which
contains not something unsearchable; nor the worm so small, which afforded not
matter for Questions to puzzle the greatest Philosopher that ever I met with,
no wonder then if mine eye fail when I would look at God, my tongue fail me in
speaking of him, and my heart in conceiving. As long as the Athenian
Superscription does so too well suite with my sacrifices, [ To the unknown
God,] and while I cannot contain the smallest rivelet; It Is little I can
contain of this immense Ocean. We shall never be capable of clearly knowing,
till we are capable of fully enjoying, nay nor till we do actually enjoy him.
What strange conceivings, has a man born blind, of the Sun, and its light? or
man born deaf, of the nature of sounds and music? So do we yet want that
sense, by which God must be clearly known. I stand and look upon a heap of
Ants, and see them all with one view, very busy to little purpose; They know
not me, my being, nature, or thoughts, though I am their fellow creature: How
little then must we know of the great Creator, though he with one view
continually beholds us all. Yet a knowledge we have, though imperfect, and such
as must be done away: A Glimpse the Saints behold, though but in a glass; Which
makes us capable of some poor, general, dark apprehensions of what we shall
behold in Glory. If I should tell a Worldling but what the holiness and
Spiritual Joys of the Saints on earth are, he cannot know it; for grace cannot
be clearly known without grace: how much less could he conceive it, Should I
tell him of this Glory? But to the Saints I may be somewhat more encouraged to
speak; for Grace gives them a dark knowledge, and slight taste of Glory.

As all Good whatsoever is comprised in God, and all in the creature are but
drops of this Ocean: So all the Glory of the blessed is comprised in their
enjoyment of God; and if there be any mediate Joys there, they are but drops
from this. If men and Angels should study to speak the blessedness of that
estate in one word, what can they say beyond this, That it is the nearest
enjoyment of God? Say they have God, and you say they have all, that is worth a
having. O the full Joys offered to a believer in that one sentence of Christ's,
I would not for all the world, that one verse had been left out of the Bible:
Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my Glory which thou have given me, John 17.24. Every word full
of Life and Joy. If the Queen of Sheba had cause to say of Solomon's Glory,
Happy are thy men, 1 Kings 1^.8.
happy are these thy servants that stand continually before thee, and that hear
thy wisdom; then sure they that stand continually before God, and see his
Glory, and the Glory of the Lamb, are somewhat more then happy: To them will
Christ give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God, Rev. 2.7. And to eat of the hidden Manna, verse. 17. Yea, he will make
them Pillars in the Temple of God, and they shall go no more out; and he will
write upon them the Name of his God, Some in^erpret most of those Scriptures in
the Revelations of the Churches glory on earth, and then it would hold a minori.

Tu es Recreator omnium qui dixisti, Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, etc.
Anima enim quae est in te, radicata in centro suo, and recreata, and qui^tata
est; quae vero in te non est, mult^s Vanis phan^asmatibus fatigatur.

Tu sufficientis simus es; Qui te habet totum habet qui non; mendicus est and
pauper; quia quicquid preter te est, non re^icit, non sufficit. Gerson, part 3.
Alphabet. amoris divini. cap. 14.


and the name of the City of his God, [New Jerusalem,] which comes down out of
heaven from his God, and his own New Name, Rev. 3.12. Yea more (if more may be)
he will grant them to sit with him in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. These are they who
come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb; Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and
serve him day and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall
dwell among them: And the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed
them, and lead them unto living fountains of water; and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, Rev. 7.14, 15, 17. And may we not now boast with the
Spouse, This is my Beloved, O daughters of Jerusalem? and this is the Glory of
the Saints! Oh blind deceived world; Can you show us such a Glory? This is the
City of our God, where the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his poople, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God, Rev. 21.3. The Glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb is
the light thereof, Verse. 24. And there shall be no more curse, but the Throne
of God, and the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him, and they
shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. These sayings are
faithful and true, and these are the things that must shortly be done, Rev.
22.3, 4, 6. And now we say (as Mephihosheth) Let the world take all besides, if
we may but see the face of our Lord in peace. If the Lord lift up the light of
his countenance on us here, it puts more gladness in our hearts, then the
worlds increase can do, Psalm. 4.6, 7. How much more when in his Psalm 36.9 Acts
2 28,
light we shall have light, without darkness; and he shall make us full of Joy
with his countenance. Psalm 33.1.
Rejoice therefore in the Lord, O ye righteous, and shout for joy, all ye that
are upright of heart, and say with his servant David, The Lord is the portion
of mine inheritance: The Lines are fallen to me in pleasaent places; yea, I
have a goodly heritage: I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at
my right hand, I shall not be moved: Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices; my flesh also shall rest in hope: For he will not leave me in the
grave, nor suffer me (for ever) to see Corruption: He will show me the path of
life, (and bring me into) his presence where is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand, where are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11. Whom
therefore have I in heaven but him, or in earth that I desire besides him? My
flesh and my heart (have failed, and will) fail me; but God is the strength of
my heart, and (will be) my Portion for ever: He shall guide me with his
counsel, and afterward receive me to glory: And as they that are far from him
perish; so is it Good (the chief Good) for us to be near to God, Psalm. 73.24,
25, 26, 27, 28.

The Advancement is exceeding high: What unreverent damnable presumption would
it have been, once to have thought or spoke of such a thing, if God had not
spoke it before us? I durst not have thought of the Saints preferment in this
life, as Scripture sets it forth, had it not been the express truth of God.
What vile unmannerliness, to talk of [being sons of God, John 1.12. 1 John 1.3.
1 John 4.15, 16
] [speaking to him,] [having fellowship and communion with him,] [dwelling in
him, and he in us;] if this had not been Gods own Language? How much less durst
we have once thought, of [being brighter then the Sun in Glory? of being
coheirs with Christ? of judging the world? of sitting on Christ's Throne? of
being one with him?] if we had not all this from the mouth, and under the hand
of God? But has he said it, and shall it not come to pass? Has he spoken it,
and will he not do it? Yes, as true as the Lord God is true, thus shall it be
done to the man whom Christ delights to honor. The eternal God is their
Refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms: And the beloved of the Lord
shall dwell in safety by him, and the Lord shall cover them all the day long,
and he shall dwell between their shoulders, Deuteronomy. 33, 27, 12. Surely goodness
and mercy shall follow them all the days of their lives, and then they shall
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23.6. Oh Christians! believe and
consider this. Is Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and all creatures called upon to
praise the Lord? Psalm 148.
What then should his people do? Surely they are nearer him, and enjoy more of
him, then the bruits shall do. All his works praise him, but (above all) let
his Saints bless him, Psalm. 145.10. Oh let them speak of the glory of his
Kingdom, and talk of his power: To make known to the sons of men his mighty
Acts, and the Glorious Majesty of his Kingdom, Verse. 11.12. Let his praise be
in the Congregation of his Saints: Let Israel rejoice in him that made him; let
the children of Zion be joyful in their King: Let the Saints be joyful in
Glory; let them sing aloud upon their beds: Let the high praises of God be in
their for the Lord takes pleasure in his people, and will beautify the meek
with salvation, Psalm. 149.1, 2* 5, 6, 4. This is the light that is sown for the
Righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. Yea, this honor
have all his Saints, Psalm 149.9. If the estate of the Devils, before their
fall, were not much meaner then this, (and perhaps lower then some of their
fellow Angels) surely their sin was most accursed and detestable. Could they
yet aspire higher? And was there yet room for discontent? What is it then that
would satisfy them? Indeed the distance that we sinners and mortals are at
from our God, leaves us some excuse for discontent with our estate. The poor
soul out of the depth cries, and cries aloud, as if his Father were out of
hearing: sometime he chides the interposing clouds, sometime he is angry at the
vast gulf that is set between, sometime he would fain have the vail of mortality
drawn aside, and thinks death has forgot his business; he ever quarrels with
this Sin that separates, and longs till it be separated from his Soul, that it
may separate God and him no more: Why, poor Christian, be of good cheer; the
Time is Near, when God and thou shall be Near, and as Near as thou can well
desire: Thou shall dwell in his family, is that enough? It Is better to be a
doorkeeper in his house, then enjoy the portion of the wicked. Thou shall ever
stand before him, about his Throne, in the room with him, in his presence
chamber. Would thou yet be nearer? Thou shall be his child, and he thy
Father; thou shall be an heir of his Kingdom; yea more, the Spouse of his Son;
and what more can thou desire? Thou shall be a member of the body of his Son,
he shall be thy Head; thou shall be one with him, who is one with the Father.
Read what he has desired for thee of his Father; John 17.21, 22, 23. That they
all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be
one in us; and the Glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may
be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one, that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved
them, as thou have loved me. What can you desire yet more? except you will (as
some do) abuse Christ's expression of oneness, to conceive of such a union as
shall Deifie us; Which were a sin one step beyond the aspiring Arrogance of
Adam, and, I think, beyond that of the Devils. A Real Conjunction (improperly
called Union) we may expect. And a true Union of Affections, A Moral Union,
(improperly still called Union,) And a true Relative Union, such as is between
the members of the same political body and the Head, yea such as is between the
husband and the wife, I take not the word Real, as opposite to feigned, but to
Relative.
who are called one flesh. And a real communion, and Communication of Real
Favors, flowing from that Relative Union. If there be any more, it is
acknowledged unconceiveable, and consequently unexpressable, and so not to be
Spoken of. If any can conceive of a proper Real Union and Identity, which shall
neither be a unity of Essence, nor of person with Christ (as I yet cannot) I
shall not oppose it: But to think of Such a Union, were high Blasphemy. Nor
must you think of a Union (as some do) upon natural Grounds, See Mr Wallis
Answer to the L. Brook fully on this.
following the dark mistaking principles of Plato and Plotinus. If your
thoughts be not guided and limited by Scripture in this, you are lost.

Q. How do we enjoy God?
Quest. But how is it we shall enjoy God?

Ans. That Is the fifth and last we come to.

SECT. V.
. 5. 5. A sweet and constant Action of all the powers of the Soul in the
fruition of God.
5. THis Rest contains A Sweet and constant Action of all the Powers of the
Soul and Body in this fruition of God. It is not the Rest of a stone, which
cease from all motion, when it attains the Center. The Senses themselves (as
I judge) are not only Passive in receiving their object, but partly Passive, and
partly Active. Whether the external Senses, such as now we have, shall be
continued and employed in this work, Of the Senses.
is a great doubt. For some of them, it is usually acknowledged, they shall
cease, because their Being imports their use, and their use implies our
estate of Imperfection: As there is no use for eating and drinking, so neither
for the taste. But for other Senses the Question will be harder: For Job says,
I shall see him with these eyes.

But do not all senses imply our imperfection? If Job did speak of more then a
Redemption from his present distress (as it is like he did, I think the Apostle
speaks of flesh and bl^od in a proper sense, and not of sin.
) yet certainly these eyes will be made so Spiritual, that whether the name of
Sense, in the same sense as now, shall befit them, is a question. This body
shall be so changed, that it shall no more be flesh and blood, (for that cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.) but a spiritual body, verse. 44. That
which we sow, we sow not that body that shall be; But God gives it a body as
it has pleased him, and to every seed his own Body, 1 Cor. 15.37, 38. As the
Oar is cast into the fire a stone, but come forth so pure a metal, that it
deserves another name, and so the difference betwixt it and the Gold exceeding
great; So far greater will the change of our bodies and senses be: even so
great, as now we cannot conceive. If Grace make a Christian differ so much from
what he was, that the Christian could say to his Companion, Ego non sum ego, I
am not the man I was; how much more will Glory make us differ? We may then say
much more, This is not the body I had, and these are not the senses I had. But
because we have no other name for them, let us call them Senses, call them Eyes
and Ears, Seeing and Hearing: But thus much conceive of the difference; That as
much as a Body Spiritual, above the Sun in Glory, exceeds these frail,
noisome, diseased Lumps of flesh or dirt, that now we carry about us; so far
shall our sense of Seeing and Hearing exceed these we now possess: For the
change of the senses must be conceived proportionable to the change of the
body. And doubtless as God advances our sense, and enlarges our capacity; so
will he advance the happiness of those senses, and fill up with himself all
that capacity. Yea, the Body.
And certainly the body should not be raised up, and continued, if it should
not share of the Glory: For as it has shared in the obedience and sufferings,
so shall it also do in the blessedness: And as Christ bought the whole man, so
shall the whole partake of the everlasting benefits of the purchase: The same
difference is to be allowed for the Tongue. The Tongue in praising.
For though perhaps that which we now call the tongue, the voice, or language,
shall not then be: Yet, with the forementioned unconceiveable change, it may
continue. Certain it is, it shall be the everlasting work of those Blessed
Saints, to stand before the Throne of God and the Lamb, and to praise him for
ever and ever. As their Eyes and Hearts shall be filled with his Knowledge, with
his Glory, and with his Love; so shall their mouths be filled with his
praises. Go on therefore, Oh ye Saints, while you are on Earth, in that Divine
Duty. Learn, Oh learn that Saint-beseeming work; for in the mouths of his
Saints, his praise is comely. Pray, but still praise; Psalm. 33.1, 2, and 147.1.
Hear, and Read, but still praise: Praise him in the presence of his people;
for it shall be your Eternal work: Praise him, while his Enemies deride and
abuse you: You shall praise him, while they shall bewail it and admire you. Oh
Blessed Employment! to sound forth for ever, Thou art worthy O Lord to receive
Honor, Glory, and Power, Revel. 4.11. And worthy is the Lamb who was slain, to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing; for he has Redeemed us to God by his blood out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and Nation; and has made us unto our God Kings and
Priests, Revel. 5.12, 9, 10. Alleluja: Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power unto the Lord our God: Praise our God all ye his servants, and ye that
fear him, small and great. Alleluja: for the Lord God omnipotent reigns,
Revel. 19.1, 5, 6. Oh Christians! this is the Blessed Rest; A Rest without
Rest: For they Rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, Revel. 4.8. Sing forth his praises
now, ye Saints; It is a work our Master Christ has taught us. And you shall
for ever sing before him, the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb, Great
and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, Just and true are thy ways,
thou King of Saints, Revel. 15.3.

SECT. VI.
. 6. 2. Of the soul.
ANd if the Body shall be thus employed, Oh how shall the Soul be taken up? As
its powers and capacities are greatest, so its action strongest, and its
enjoyment sweetest. As the bodily senses have their proper aptitude and action,
whereby they receive and enjoy their objects: so does the Soul in its own
action enjoy its own object: By knowing, by thinking and Remembering, by
Loving, and by delightful joying; this is the Souls enjoying. By these Eyes it
sees, and by these Arms it embraces. If it might be said of the Disciples with
Christ on Earth, much more that behold him in his Glory, Blessed are the Eyes
that see the things that you see, and the Ears that hear the things that you
hear: for many Princes and great ones have desired (and hoped) to see the
things that you see, and have not seen them, etc. Mat. 13.16, 17.

God shall be enjoyed by our knowledge.
Knowledge of it self is very desirable, even the knowledge of some evil (though
not the Evil it self:) As far as the Rational Soul exceeds the Sensitive, so
far the Delights of a Philosopher, in discovering the secrets of Nature, and
knowing the mystery of Sciences, exceeds the Delights of the Glutton, the
Drunkard, the unclean, and of all voluptuous sensualists whatsoever: so
excellent is all Truth. What then is their Delight, who know the God of Truth?
What would I not give, so that all the uncertain questionable Principles in
Logic, Natural Philosophy, Metaphysics, and Medicine, were but certain in
themselves, and to me? And that my dull, obscure notions of them were but quick
and clear! Oh, what then should I not either perform, or part with, to enjoy a
clear and true Apprehension of the most True God? How noble a Scalig. Exercit.
107 sect. 3. Dicit Voluntatem nihil aliud esse quam intellectum extentum, ad
hab^ndum and fa^iendum id quod cognoscit. Vide D. Makowski Colleg. in d^sp. 18.
vit^ Pibonis de Justif. Passiva. And for my part I think not, That the Soul is
divisible into several faculties, but rather as Dorbell is etc. Dr Jackson, Mr
Pemble, etc. the Understanding and Will be the same with the Soul and one
another; Or distinct Acts of the same Soul; not faculties.
faculty of the Soul is this Understanding? It can compass the Earth: It can
measure the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Heaven: It can foreknow each Eclipse to a
minute, many years before: Yea, but this is the top of all its excellency, It
can know God who is infinite, who made all these; a little here, and more, much
more hereafter. Oh the wisdom and goodness of our Blessed Lord! He has created
the Understanding with a Natural Byas, and inclination to Truth, as its object;
and to the Prime Truth, as its Prime Object: and lest we should turn aside to
any Creature, he has kept this as his own Divine Prerogative, not communicable
to any Creature, viz. to be the Prime Truth. And though I think not (as Lord
Brook, Union of the Soul and Truth.
some do) that there is so near a close, between the Understanding and Truth,
as may produce a proper Union or Identity: Yet doubtless it is no such cold
touch, or disdainful embrace, as is between these gross earthly Heterogeneals.
The true, studious, contemplative man, knows this to be true; who feels as
sweet embraces between his Intellect and Truth, and far more, then ever the
quickest sense did in possessing its desired object. But the true, studious,
contemplative Christian, knows it much more; who sometime has felt more sweet
embraces between his Soul and Jesus Christ, then all inferior Truth can afford.
I know some Christians are kept short this way, especially the careless in
their watch and walking; and those that are ignorant or negligent in the daily
actings of Faith, who look when God casts in Joys while they lie idle, and
labor not to fetch them in by believing: But for others, I appeal to the most
of them; Christian, do thou not sometime, when, after long gazing heavenward,
thou have got a glimpse of Christ, do thou not seem to have been with Paul in
the third Heaven, whether in the body or out, and to have seen what is
unutterable? Art thou not, with Peter, almost beyond thy self? ready to say,
Master, it is good to be here? Oh that I might dwell in this Mount! Oh that I
might ever see what I now see! Did thou never look so long upon the Sun of
God, till thine Eyes were dazzled with his astonishing glory? and did not the
splendour of it make all things below seem black and dark to thee, when thou
look down again? Especially in thy day of suffering for Christ; (when he
usually appears most manifestly to his people:) Did thou never see one
walking in the midst of the fiery furnace with thee, like to the Son of God? If
thou do know him, Hosea 6.2, 3.
value him as thy life, and follow on to know him, and thou shall know
incomparably more then this. Or if I do but renew thy grief to tell thee of
what thou once did feel, but now have lost; I counsel thee to Remember whence
thou art fallen, and Repent, and do the first works, and be watchful, and
strengthen the things which remain; Rev. 2 5. and 3.2.
and I dare promise thee, (because God has promised,) thou shall see, and
know, that which here thine Eye could not see, nor thy Understanding conceive.
Believe me Christians, yea, believe God, You that have known most of God in
Christ here, it is as nothing to that you shall know; It scarce, in comparison
of that, deserves to be called Knowledge. The difference betwixt our knowledge
now, and our knowledge then, will be as great, as that between our fleshly
bodies now, and our spiritual glorified bodies then. For as these bodies, so
that knowledge must cease, that a more perfect may succeed. Our silly childish
thoughts of God, which now is the highest we reach to, must give place to a
manly knowledge. All this says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Knowledge shall vanish away: For we know in part, etc. But when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I was a
child, I spoke as child, I thought as a child, I understood as a child; but
when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now we see through a glass
darkly, but then face to face: Now I know in part, but then I shall know, even
as also I am known.

Marvel not therefore, Christian, at the sense of that place of Scoti glossa
est vera, v^z (...) Cognoscam te A^^^do and Frucado. Vide Scotum in 4. ^
sentea. distruct. 48. Q* 1 p. 256
John 17.3. how it can be life eternal to know God, and his Son Christ: You
must needs know, that to enjoy God and his Christ, is eternal Life; and the
souls enjoying is in knowing. They that savor only of earth, and consult with
flesh, and have no way to try and judge but by sense, and never were acquainted
with this Knowledge of God, nor tasted how gracious he is, these think it is a
poor happiness to know God: let them have health and wealth, and worldly
delights, and take you the other. Alas poor men! they that have made trial of
both, do not grudg you your delights, nor envy your happiness, but pity your
undoing folly, and wish, O that you would come near, and taste, and try, as
they have done, and then Judge; Then continue in your former mind, if you can.
For our parts, we say with that knowing Apostle (though the speech may seem
presumptuous) 1 John 5.19, 20. We know that we are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness: And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us
an understanding, that we may know him that is True; and we are in him that is
True, in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God, and eternal Life. Here one
verse contains the sum of most that I have said. The Son of God is come (to be
our Head and Fountain of Life) and so has given us an understanding (that the
Soul may be personally qualified and made capable) to know him (God) that is
True, (the Prime Truth,) and we are (brought so near in this enjoyment, that)
we are in him that is True (not properly by an essential or personal union, but
we are in him, by being) in his Son Jesus Christ. This (we have mentioned) is
the (only) True God (and so the fittest object for our understanding, which
chooses Truth) and (this knowing of him, and being in him, in Christ) is
eternal life.

SECT. VII.
ANd doubtless the Memory will not be Idle,. 7. 2. Memory.
or useless, in this Blessed work. If it be but by looking back, to help the
soul to value its enjoyment, Our knowledge will be enlarged, not diminished;
therefore the knowledge of things past shall not be taken away. And what is that
knowledge, but Remembrance? Doubtless from that height, the Saint can look
behind him and before him. And to compare past with present things, must needs
raise in the Blessed Soul an unconceiveable esteem and sense of its Condition.
To stand on that Mount, whence we can see the Wilderness and Canaan both at
once, to stand in Heaven, and look back on Earth, and weigh them together in
the balance of a comparing sense and judgment, how must it needs transport the
soul, and make it cry out, Is this the purchase that cost so dear, as the blood
of God? No wonder: O blessed price! and thrice blessed Love, that invented and
Condescended! Is this the end of Believing? Is this the end of the Spirits
workings? Have the Gales of Grace blown me into such a Harbor? Is it hither
that Christ has enticed my Soul? O blessed way, and thrice blessed end! Is
this the Glory which the Scripture spoke of, and Ministers preached of so much?
Why now I see the Gospel indeed is good tidings, even tidings of peace, and
Good things; Luke 1 19. and 2, 10. Acts 13.32.
tidings of great Joy to all Nations! Is my mourning, my fasting, my sad
humblings, my heavy walking, groanings, complainings, come to this? Is my
praying, watching, fearing to offend, come to this? Are all my afflictions,
sickness, languishing, troublesome physic, fears of Death, come to this? Are
all Satan's Temptations, the worlds Scorns and Jeers, come to this? (And now if
there be such a thing as Indignation left, how will it here let fly?) O vile
nature, that resisted so much, and so long, such a blessing! Unworthy Soul! Is
this the place thou came so unwillingly toward? Was Duty wearisom? Was the
world too good to lose? Did thou stick at, leaving all, denying all, and
suffering any thing, for this? Wast thou loath to dye, to come to this? O false
Heart! that had almost betrayed me to Eternal flames, and lost me this Glory! O
base flesh, that would needs have been pleased, though to the loss of this
felicity! Did thou make me to question the truth of this Glory? Did thou
show me Improbabilities, and draw me to distrust the Lord? Did thou question
the Truth of that Scripture which promised this? Why my soul! art thou not now
ashamed, that ever thou did question that Love that has brought thee hither?
That thou wast Jealous of the faithfulness of thy Lord? That thou suspectest
his Love, when thou should only have suspected thy self? I hat thou did not
Live continually transported with thy Saviors Love? and that ever thou
quenchedst a motion of his Spirit? Art thou not ashamed of all thy hard
thoughts of such a God? Of all thy mis-interpreting of, and grudging at those
providence, and repining at those ways that have such an end? Now thou art
sufficiently convinced, that the ways thou calledst Hard, and the Cup thou
calledst Bitter, were necessary: That thy Lord had sweeter ends, and meant thee
better then thou would believe: And that thy Redeemer was saving thee, as
well when he crossed thy desires, as when he granted them; and as well when he
broke thy Heart, as when he bound it up. Oh no thanks to thee, unworthy Self,
but shame, for this received Crown: But to Jehovah and the Lamb be Glory for
ever.

Thus, as the memory of the wicked will eternally promote their torment, to
look back on the pleasures enjoyed, the sin committed, the Grace refused,
Christ neglected, and time lost: So will the Memory of the Saints for ever
promote their Joys. And as it is said to the wicked, Remember that thou in thy
life time receivedst Thy good things: Luke 16 25.
So will it be said to the Christian, Remember that thou in thy life time
receivedst thine evils; but now thou art comforted, as they are tormented. And
as here the Remembrance of former good is the occasion of increasing our grief,
( I remembered God, and was troubled; I called to Remembrance my Songs in the
night, Psalm. 77.3, 6.) So there the Remembrance of our former sorrows adds
life to our Joys.

SECT. VIII.
BUt Oh the full,. 8. 3. Affections. 1. Love.
the near, the sweet enjoyment, is that of the Affections, Love and Joy: It Is
near; for Love is of the Essence of the Soul, and Love is the Essence of God:
For God is Love, 1 John 4.8, 16. How near therefore is this Blessed Closure?
The Spirits phrase is, God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in
God, and God in him, Verse. 16. The acting of this affection wheresoever,
carries much delight along with it: Especially when the object appears
deserving, and the Affection is strong. But O what will it be, when perfected
Affections, shall have the strongest, perfect, incessant actings, upon the most
perfect object, the ever Blessed God? Now the poor soul complains, Oh that I
could love Christ more! but I cannot, alas, I cannot: Yea, but then thou can
not choose but love him: I had almost said, forbear if thou can. Now thou
know little of his Amiableness, and therefore love little: Then thine eye
will affect thy heart, and the continual viewing of that perfect beauty, will
keep thee in continual ravishments of Love. Now thy Salvation is not perfected,
nor all the mercies purchased, yet given in: But when the top stone is set on,
thou shall with shouting cry, Grace, Grace: Now thy Sanctification is
imperfect, and thy pardon I know it is commonly said, That Justification has no
degrees; but yet it is taken for several Acts, whereof that of Christ absolving
and acquitting us at the last Judgment is the most complete Justification.
and Justification not so complete as then it shall be: Now thou know not
what thou enjoyest, and therefore love the less; But when thou know much
is forgiven, and much bestowed, thou will Love more. Does David, after an
imperfect deliverance, sing forth his Love? Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord,
because he has heard my voice, and supplications. What think you will he do
eternally? And how will he love the Lord, who has lifted him up to that Glory?
Does he cry out, O how I love thy Law! Psalm. 119.97.
My delight is in the Saints on earth, and the excellent, Psalm. 16.3. How will
he say then, O how I love the Lord! and the King of Saints, in whom is all my
delight? Christians, does it not now stir up your love, to remember all the
experiences of his Love? To look back upon a life o^ mercies? Does not kindness
melt you? and the Sunshine of Divine Goodness warm your frozen hearts? What
will it do then, when you shall live in Love, and have All, in him, who is All?
O the high delights of Love! of this Love! The content that the heart finds
in it! The satisfaction it brings along with it! Surely Love is both work and
wages.

And if this were all, what a high favor, that God will give us leave to love
him! That he will vouchsafe to be embraced by such Arms, that have embraced
Lust and Sin before him! But this is not all: He returns Love for Love; nay,
a thousand times more: As perfect as we shall be, we cannot reach his measure
of Love. Christian, thou will be then brim full of Love; yet love as much as
thou can, thou shall be ten thousand times more beloved. Do thou think thou
can overlove him? What! love more then Love it self? Were the Arms of the Son
of God open upon the Cross, and an open passage made to his Heart by the Spear,
and will not Arms and Heart be open to thee in Glory? Did he begin to love
before thou lovedst, and will he not continue now? Did he love thee an enemy?
thee a sinner? thee who even loathedst thy self? and own thee when thou did
disclaim thy self? And will he not now unmeasurably love thee a Son? thee a
perfect Saint? thee who returnest some love for Love? Thou wast wont
injuriously to Question his Love: Doubt of it now if thou can. As the pains
of Hell will convince the rebellious sinner of Gods wrath, who would never
before believe it: So the Joys of Heaven will convince thee thoroughly of that
Love, which thou would so hardly be persuaded of. He that in love wept over
the old Jerusalem near her Ruins; with what love will he rejoice over the new
Jerusalem in her Glory? O methinks I see him groaning and weeping over dead
Lazarus, till he force the Jews that stood by to say, Behold how he loved him:
Will he not then much more by rejoicing over us, John 11.33.35, 36. Cant. 1.5.
and 5.2. and 6.9. and 4.9, 10, etc.
and blessing us, make all (even the damned, if they see it) to say, Behold how
he loves them? Is his Spouse while black, yet comely? Is she his Love, his
Dove, his undefiled? Does she ravish his heart with one of her eyes? Is her
Love better then wine? O believing soul, study a little, and tell me, What is
the Harvest which these first fruits foretell? and the Love which these are but
the earnest of? Here, O here, is the Heaven of Heaven! This is the Saints
fruition of God! In these sweet, mutual, constant actings and embracements of
Love, does it consist? To Love, and be beloved: These are the Everlasting Arms
that are underneath, Deuteronomy. 33.27. His left hand is under their heads, and with
his right hand does he embrace them, Cant. 2.6. Reader, stop here, and think a
while, what a state this is; Is it a small thing in thine eyes to be beloved of
God? to be the Son the Spouse, the Love, the delight of the King of Glory?
Christian, believe this, and think on it; Thou shall be eternally embraced in
the Arms of that Love, which was from everlasting, and will extend to
everlasting: Of that Love, which brought the Son of Gods Love from Heaven to
Earth, from Earth to the Cross, from the Cross to the Grave, from the Grave to
Glory: That Love, which was weary, hungry, tempted, scorned, scourged,
buffetted, spit upon, crucified, pierced; which did fast, pray, teach, heal,
weep, sweat, bleed, dye: That Love will eternally embrace thee. When perfect
created Love, and most perfect uncreated love meet together, O the blessed
meeting! It will not be like Joseph and his Brethren, who lay upon one another
necks weeping; It will break forth into a pure Joy, and not such a mixture of
joy and sorrow as their weeping argued: It will be Loving and rejoicing, not
loving and sorrowing: Yet will it make Pharoahs (Satan's) court to ring with the
News, that Joseph's Brethren are come; that the Saints are arrived safe at the
bosom of Christ, out of the reach of hell for ever. Neither is there any such
love as David's and Jonathans; shutting up in sorrows, and breathing out its
last into sad lamentations for a forced separation: No; Christ is the powerful
attractive, the effectual Loadstone, who draws to it all like it self; All that
the Father has given him, shall come unto him; even the Lover, as well as the
Love, does he draw; and they that come unto him, he will in no wise cast out,
John chap. 6. verse. 37, 39. For know this, Believer, to thy everlasting
comfort; that if these Arms have once embraced thee, neither sin, nor hell, can
get thee thence for ever. The Sanctuary is inviolable, and the Rock
impregnable, whither thou art fled, and thou art safe locked up to all Eternity.
Thou have not now to deal with an unconstant creature, but with him, with whom
is no varying, nor shadow of change, even the Immutable God. If thy happiness
were in thine own hand, as Adams, there were yet fear; But it is in the keeping
of a faithful Creator. Christ has not bought thee so dear, to trust thee with
thy self any more. His Love to thee will not be as thine was on earth to him,
seldom and cold, up and down, mixed (as Aguish bodies) with burning and
quaking, with a Good day and a bad: No; Christian, he that would not be
discouraged by thine enmity, by thy loathsome, hateful nature, by all thy
unwillingness, unkind Neglects, and churlish resistances; he that would
neither cease nor abate his Love for all these, Can he cease to love thee, when
he has made thee truly Lovely? He that keeps thee so constant in thy love to
him, that thou can challenge tribulation, distress, persecution, famine,
nakedness, peril, or sword, to separate thy Love from Christ if they can, Romans
8.35. How much more will himself be constant? Indeed he that produced these
mutual embracing Affections, will also produce such a mutual constancy in both,
that thou may confidently be persuaded, as Paul was before thee, That neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord, Verse. 38, 39. And now are we not left in the Apostles admiration? What
shall we say to these things? Infinite Love must needs be a mystery to a finite
capacity. No wonder if Angels desire to pry into this mystery: 1 Pet. 1.12.
Ephesians. 3.18.
And if it be the study of the Saints here, to know the height, and breadth,
and length, and depth of this Love, though it passes knowledge: This is the
Saints Rest in the Fruition of God by Love.

SECT. IX.
LAstly,. 9. 2. By Joy.
The Affection of Joy has not the least share in this Fruition. It Is that,
which all the rest lead to, and conclude in: even the unconceiveable
Complacency which the Blessed feel in their seeing, knowing, loving, and being
beloved of God. The delight of the Senses Here, cannot be known by expressions,
as they are felt! How much less this Joy? This is the white stone, which none
knows but he that receives: Rev. 2.17. Prove. 14.10.
And if there be any Joy which the stranger medleth not with, then surely this,
above all, is it. All Christ's ways of mercy tend to, and end in the Saints
Joys. He wept, sorrowed, suffered, that they might rejoice: He sends the
Spirit to be their Comforter; He multiplieth promises, he discovers their
future happiness; that their Joy may be full: Joh. 15.11. and 16.24. and 17.13.
He abounds to them in mercies of all sorts; he makes them lie down in green
pastures, and leads them by the still waters; yea, opens to them the
fountain of Living Waters; That their Joy may be full: That they may thirst no
more; and that it may spring up in them to everlasting life: Yea, he causes
them to suffer, Psa 94.12, 13
that he may cause them to rejoice; and chasteneth them, that he may give them
Rest; and makes them (as he did himself) to drink of the brook in the way, 1
These. 5.16 Psa 32.11. and 33.1, etc.
that they may lift up the head, Psalm. 110.7. And lest after all this they
should neglect their own comforts, he makes it their duty, and presses it on
them, commanding them to rejoice in him always, and again to rejoice. And he
never brings them into so low a condition, wherein he leaves them not more
cause of Joy then of Sorrow. And has the Lord such a care of our comfort Here?
where, the Bridegroom being from us, we must mourn? Mat. 9.15.
Oh, what will that Joy be, where the Soul being perfectly prepared for Joy,
and Joy prepared by Christ for the Soul, it shall be our work, our business,
eternally to rejoice. And it seems the Saints Joy shall be greater then the
Damneds torment; for their Torment is the torment of creatures, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels: But our Joy is the Joy of our Lord; even our Lords
own Joy shall we enter: Mat. 25.
And the same Glory, which the Father gives him, does the Son give to them,
Joh. 17.22. And to sit with him in his Throne, even as he is sit down in his
Fathers Throne, Revel. 3.21. What say thou to all this, Oh thou sad and
drooping Soul? Thou that now spendest thy days in sorrow, and thy breath in
sighings, and turnest all thy voice into groanings; who know no garments but
sackcloth, no food but the bread and water of Affliction; who minglest thy
bread with tears, and drinkest the tears which thou weepest, what say thou
to this great change? From All Sorrow to more then All Joy? Thou poor Soul, who
prayest for Joy, waitest for Joy, complainest for want of Joy, longest for Joy;
why, then thou shall have full Joy, as much as thou can hold, and more then
ever thou thoughtest on, or thy heart desired: And in the mean time walk
carefully, watch constantly, and then let God measure out thy times and degrees
of Joy. It may be he keeps them till thou have more need: Thou may better
lose thy comfort, then thy safety: If thou should dye full of fears and
sorrows, it will be but a moment and they are all gone, and concluded in Joy
unconceiveable: As the Joy of the Hypocrite, so the fears of the upright, are
but for a moment. And as their hopes are but golden dreams, which, when death
awakes them, do all perish, and their hopes dye with them; so the Saints doubts
and fears are but terrible dreams, which* when they dye, do all vanish; and
they awake in Joyful Glory. For Gods Anger endures but a moment, but in his
favor is Life; weeping may endure for a night, (darkness and sadness go
together,) but Joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5. Oh blessed morning,
thrice blessed morning! Poor, humble, drooping Soul, how would it fill thee
with Joy now, if a voice from Heaven should tell thee of the Love of God? of
the pardon of thy sins? and should assure thee of thy part in these Joys? Oh,
what then will thy Joy be, when thy actual Possession shall convince thee of
thy Title, and thou shall be in Heaven before thou art well aware; When the
Angels shall bring thee to Christ, and when Christ shall (as it were) take thee
by the hand, and lead thee into the purchased possession, and bid thee welcome
to his Rest, and present thee unspotted before his Father, and give thee thy
place about his Throne? Poor Sinner; what say thou to such a day as this?
Will thou not be almost ready to draw back, and to say, What, I Lord? I the
unworthy Neglecter of thy Grace! I the unworthy dis-esteemer of thy blood, and
slighter of thy Love! must I have this Glory? Make me a hired servant, I am no
more worthy to be called a son: But Love will have it so; therefore must thou
enter into his Joy.

SECT. X.
ANd it is not Thy Joy only;. 10. God will joy in us, as well as we in him.
it is a Mutual Joy, as well as a Mutual Love: Is there such Joy in Heaven at
thy Conversion, and will there be none at thy Glorification? Will not the
Angels welcome thee thither? and congratulate thy safe Arrival? Yea, it is the
Joy of Jesus Christ: For now he has the end of his undertaking, labor,
suffering, dying, when we have our Joys; When he is Glorified in his Saints, 2
These. 1, 10.
and admired in all them that believe. We are his seed, and the fruit of his
Souls travel, which when he sees, he will be satisfied, Isa. 53.10, 11. This
is Christ's Harvest, when he shall reap the fruit of his labors, and when he
sees it was not in vain, it will not repent him concerning his sufferings; but
he will rejoice over his purchased inheritance, and his people shall rejoice in
him.

Yea, the Father himself puts on Joy too, in our Joy; As we grieve his Spirit,
and weary him with our iniquities; so is he rejoiced in our Good: Oh how
quickly Here, does he spy a Returning Prodigal, even afar off? how does he run,
and meet him? and with what compassion falls he on his neck, and kisseth him?
and puts on him the best robe, and ring on his hands, and shoes on his feet,
and spares not to kill the fatted Calf, that they may eat and be merry: This is
indeed a happy meeting; But nothing to the Embracements, and the Joy, of that
last and great Meeting.

Yea, more yet; as God does mutually Love and Joy, so he makes this His Rest,
So the Lord is said to Rejoice and to take pleasure in his people, Psalm. 147
11. and 149 4.
as it is our Rest. Did he appoint a Sabbath because he rested from six days
work, and saw all Good and very Good? What an eternal Sabbatism then, when the
work of Redemption, Sanctification, Preservation, Glorification are all
finished, and his work more perfect then ever, and very Good indeed? Oh
Christians, write these words in letters of Gold, Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God
in the midst of thee, is mighty: He will Save; He will Rejoice over thee with
Joy: He will Rest in his Love; He will Joy over thee with Singing. Oh, well may
we then Rejoice in our God with Joy, and Rest in our Love, and Joy in him with
Singing. See Isai. 65.18, 19.

And now, look back upon all this: I say to thee, as the Angel to John, What
have thou seen? Or, if yet thou perceive not, draw nearer, Come up hither; Come
and see: Do thou fear thou have been all this while in a Dream? Why, these
are the true sayings of God. Do thou fear (as the Disciples) that thou have
seen but a Ghost in stead of Christ? a Shadow in stead of Rest? Why, come near,
and feel; a Shadow contains not those Substantial Blessings, nor rests upon the
Basis of such Foundation-Truth, and sure word of Promise, as you have seen
these do. Go thy way now, and tell the Disciples, Luke 24 37, 38, 39.
and tell the humble drooping Souls thou meetest with, That thou have, in this
glass, seen Heaven; That the Lord indeed is risen, Mark 16.7.
and has here appeared to thee; and behold he is gone before us into Rest: and
that he is now preparing a place for them, and will come again and take them to
himself, that where he is, there they may be also, Joh. 14.3. Yea, go thy ways,
and tell the unbeleeving world, and tell thy unbeleeving heart, if they ask,
What is the hope thou boastest of, and what will be thy Rest? Why, this is my
Beloved, and my Friend, and this is my Hope, and my Rest. Call them forth, and
say, Behold what Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be the
Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. and that we should enter into our Lords own Rest.

SECT. XI.
. 11.
BUt alas, my fearful heart dare scarce proceed: Methinks I hear the Almighties
voice saying to me, as Elihu, Job 38.2. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by
words without knowledge?

But pardon, O Lord, thy Servants sin: I have not pryed into unrevealed things;
nor with audacious wits curiously searched into thy counsels: but indeed I have
dishonored thy Holiness, wronged thine Excellency, disgraced thy Saints Glory,
by my own exceeding disproportionable pourtraying. I bewail from heart, that my
conceivings fall so short, my Apprehensions are so dull, my thoughts so mean,
my Affections so stupid, and my expressions so low and unbeseeming such a
Glory. But I have only heard by the hearing of the Ear, Oh let thy Servant see
thee, and possess these Joys, and then I shall have more suitable conceivings,
and shall give thee fuller Glory, and abhor my present self, and disclaim and
renounce all these Imperfections. Job 42 3.
I have now uttered that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I
knew not. Yet I believed, and therefore spoke. Remember with whom thou have to
do: what can thou expect from dust, but Levity? or from corruption, but
defilement? Our foul hands will leave, where they touch, the marks of their
uncleanness; and most on those things that are most pure. Levit. 10.2, 3 Numb.
20.12. Deuteronomy, 32.51.
I know thou will be sanctified in them that come nigh thee, and before all the
people thou will be glorified: And if thy Jealousy excluded from that Land of
Rest thy servants Moses and Aaron, because they sanctified thee not in the
midst of Israel, what then may I expect? But though the weakness and
unreverence be the fruit of mine own corruption; yet the fire is from thine
Altar, and the work of thy commanding. I looked not into thine Ark, nor put
forth my hand unto it without thee. Oh therefore wash away these stains also in
the blood of the Lamb; and let not Jealousy burn us up: lest thou affright thy
people away from thee, and make them in their discouragement to cry out, 2 Samuel
6.8. 1 Samuel 6.20.
How shall the Ark of God come to us? Who is able to stand before this holy
Lord God? Who shall approach and dwell with the consuming fire? Imperfect, or
none, Mat. 16.48.
must be thy Service here. Oh take thy Sons excuse, The Spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak.

CHAP. V. The four great Preparatives to our Rest.
SECT. I.
HAving thus opened you a window toward the Temple, and showed you a small
Glimpse of the Back-parts of that Resemblance of the Saints Rest, which I had
seen in the Gospel Glass; It follows that we proceed to view a little the
Adjuncts and blessed properties of this Rest. But, alas, this little which I
have seen, makes me cry out with the Prophet, Isa. 6.5, 6, 7. Woe is me, for I
am undone, because I am a man of unclean Lips, and dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hoasts.
Yet if he will send and touch my lips with a coal from the Altar of his Son,
and say, thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged, I shall then speak
boldly: and if he ask, Whom shall I send? I shall gladly answer, Here am I,
Send me, Verse. 8. And why does my trembling heart draw back? Surely the Lord is
not now so terrible and inaccessible, nor the passage of Paradise so blocked
up, as when the Law and Curse reigned? Wherefore finding, Beloved Christians,
that a new and Living way is consecrated for us, through the vail, the flesh of
Christ, Heb. 10 20 19 22.
by which we may with boldness enter into the Holiest, by the blood of Jesus; I
shall draw ne^r with the fuller Assurance: and finding the flaming Sword
removed, shall look again into the Paradise of our God: and because I know that
this is no forbidden fruit; and withal that it is good for food, and pleasant
to the Spiritual Eyes, Genesis 3.6.
and a tree to be desired to make one truly wise and happy; I shall take
(through the assistance of the Spirit) and eat thereof my self, and give to you
(according to my power) that you may eat. For you, Christians, is this food
prepared, this wine broached, this fountain opened; And the message my Master
sends you, is this Hearty Welcome, which you shall have in his own words, Cant.
5 1.
Eat, O Friends, Drink, yea, Drink abundantly, O Beloved! And surely it is
neither manners, nor wisdom, for you, or me, to draw back, or to demur, upon
such an Invitation.

And first let us consider of the eminent Antecedents, The Antecedents of our
Rest.
the great Preparations; that notable Introduction to this Rest: For the Porch
of this Temple is exceeding Glorious, and the gate of it is called Beautiful.
And here offer themselves to our distinct observation, these four things, as
the four Corners of this Porch.

1. The most Glorious Coming and Appearing of the Son of God.

2. His powerful and wonderful raising of our Bodies from the Dust, and uniting
them again with the Soul.

3. His public and solemn Proceedings in their Judgment, where they shall be
justified and acquit before all the world.

4. His solemn Celebration of their Coronation, and his Inthronizing of them in
their Glory. Follow but this fourfold Stream unto the Head, and it will bring
you just to the Garden of Eden.

SECT. I.
1. ANd well may the Coming of Christ be reckoned in to his peoples Glory,. 1.
1. The Coming of Christ.
and annumerated with those ingredients that compound this precious Antidote of
Rest: For to this end is it intended; and to this end is it of apparent
Necessity. For his peoples sakes he sanctified himself to his office: For their
sakes he came into the world, suffered, dyed, rose, ascended: And for their
sakes it is that he will Return. Whether his own exaltation, or theirs, were
his Viz. Of the man Christ, next the Glory of the Godhead.

Romans 14.9. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. Tit. 2.14.


primary Intention, is a Question (though of seeming usefulness, yet) so
unresolved (for ought I have found) in Scripture, that I dare not scan it, for
fear of pressing into the Divine Secrets, and approaching too near the
inaccessible Light. I find Scripture mentioning both ends distinctly and
conjunctly, but not comparatively. This is most clear, that to this end will
Christ come again, to receive his people to himself, that where he is, there
they may be also, John 14.3. The Bridegrooms departure was not upon divorce: He
did not leave us with a purpose to return no more; He has left pledges enough
to assure us: We have his Word in pawn, his many Promises, his Sacraments,
which show forth his death till he Come; and his Spirit, to direct, sanctify,
and comfort, till he Return. We have frequent tokens of Love from him, to show
us, he forgets not his Promise, nor us. We behold the forerunners of his
coming, foretold by himself, daily come to pass. We see the figtree put forth
her branches, Mat. 24.3^ 48.
and therefore know the Summer is nigh. We see the fields white unto Harvest:
And though the Riotous World say, Our Lord will be long a coming; Yet let the
Saints lift up their heads, for their Redemption draws nigh. Alas, fellow
Christians, what should we do, if our Lord should not Return? What a case are
we here left in? Mat. 10 16. Psalm 57.4. Mat. 3 7.
What? Leave us among Wolves, and in the Lions den, among a generation of
Serpents, and here forget us? Did he buy us so dear, and then cast us off so?
To leave us sinning, suffering, groaning, dying daily, and come no more at us?
It cannot be; Never fear it: It cannot be. This is like our unkind dealing with
Christ, who when we feel our selves warm in the world, care not for coming at
him: But this is not like Christ dealing with us. He that would come to suffer,
will surely come to Triumph: And he that would come to purchase, will surely
come to possess. Alas, where else were all our hopes? What were become of our
faith, our prayers, our tears, and our waiting? What were all the patience of
the Saints worth to them? Were we not left of all men most miserable?
Christians, has Christ made us forsake all the world, and be forsaken of all
the world? to hate all, and be hated of all? and all this for him, that we
might have him in stead of all? and will he, think you, after all this, forget
us, and forsake us himself? Far be such a thought from our hearts! But why
stayed he not with his people while he was here? Why? must not the Comforter be
sent? John 16.7. John 17.4 Heb. 12 2 Luke 24 2^. John 14.3. Heb 7.25.26. Gal.
3.14. Ephe. 4 8, 9.
Was not the work on earth done? Must he not receive the Recompense of Reward?
and enter into his Glory? Must he not take possession in our behalf? Must he
not go to prepare a place for us? Must he not intercede with the Father? and
plead his sufferings? and be filled with the Spirit to send forth? and receive
authority? and subdue his enemies? Our abode here is short; If he had stayed on
earth, what would it have been to enjoy him for a few days, and then dye? But
he has more in Heaven to dwell among; even the spirits of the Just of many
Generations, there made perfect. Beside, he will have us live by faith, and not
by sight. Oh, fellow Christians, what a day will that be? when we who have been
kept prisoners by sin, by sinners, by the grave, shall be fetched out by the
Lord himself? When Christ shall come from heaven to plead with his enemies, and
set his Captives free? It will not be such a Coming as his first was, in
meanness, and poverty, and contempt; He will not come to be spit upon, and
buffeted, and scorned, and crucified again: He will not come (oh careless
world) to be slighted and neglected by you any more. And yet that coming, which
was necessarily in Infirmity and Reproach, for our sakes, wanted not its Glory.
If the Angels of heaven must be the messengers of that Coming, as being tidings
of Joy to all people; Luke 2.20.
And the Heavenly Host must go before, or accompany for the Celebration of his
Nativity, and must praise God with that solemnity, Glory to God in the Highest,
and on Earth Peace, Good will toward men: Oh then with what shoutings will
Angels and Saints at that day proclaim, Glory to God, and Peace and Good will
toward men? If the stars of heaven must lead men from Remote parts of the world
to come to worship a child in a manger, how will the Glory of his next
appearing constrain all the world to acknowledge his Sovereignty? If the King of
Israel riding on an Ass, Luke 19.38.
be entertained into Jerusalem with Hossana's, Blessed be the King that comes
in the Name of the Lord; Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the Highest. Oh with
what Proclamations of blessings, Peace and Glory, will he come toward the New
Jerusalem? Mat 8.27. Mark 4 41.
If when he was in the form of a Servant they cry out, What manner of man is
this, that both wind and sea obey him? What will they say, when they shall see
him Coming in his Glory, and the Heavens and the Earth obey him? Then shall
appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of
the Earth mourn, Mat 24.30.
and they shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power
and great Glory. Oh Christians, it was comfortable to you to hear from him, to
believe in him, and hope for him; What will it be thus to see him? The promise
of his coming and our deliverance was comfortable: What will it be to see him,
with all the Glorious attendance of his Angels, come in person to deliver us?
The mighty God, the Lord has spoken, and called the Earth from the Rising of
the Sun, to the going down thereof: Out of Sion the perfection of Beauty, God
has shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: A fire shall
devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. He shall
call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth, that he may judge his people.
Gather my Saints together to me, those that have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice, and the Heavens shall declare his Righteousness, for God is Judge
himself. Sclah. Psalm. 50. from verse. 1. to 6. This Coming of Christ is
frequently mentioned in the Promises, as the great Support of his peoples
spirits till then. And when ever the Apostles would quicken ^o duty, or comfort
and encourage to patient waiting, they usually do it by mentioning Christ's
Coming. Why then do we not us^ more this cordial consideration, when ever we
want support and comfort? To think and speak of that Day with Horror, does well
beseem the impenitent Sinner, but ill the believing Saint. Such may be the
voice of a Believer, but it is not the voice of Faith. Christians, what do we
believe, and hope, and wait for, but to see that Day? This is Paul's
encouragement to moderation, to Rejoicing in the Lord always; The Lord is at
hand, Phil. 4.4, 5. It is to all them that Love his Appearing, that the Lord,
the Righteous Judge, shall give the Crown of Righteousness at that Day, 2 Timothy
4.8. Do thou so long to have him come into thy Soul with comfort, and life,
and take thy self but for a forlorn Orphan while he seems absent? And do
thou not much more long for that Coming which shall perfect thy Life, and Joy,
and Glory? Do thou so rejoice after some short and slender enjoyment of him
in thy heart? Oh how will thou then Rejoice? How full of Joy was that Blessed
Martyr Mr Glover with the Discovery of Christ to his Soul, after long doubting
and waiting in sorrows? so that he cries out, He is come, He is come? If thou
have but a dear friend returned, that has been far and long absent; how do all
run out to meet him with Joy? Oh says the Child, That the sight of Christ in
glory will be no blessedness to the damned Vide Scotum in 4 (...) di^t. 48. Q
1. p. 256. Contra (...).
My Father is come! says the Wife, My Husband is come! And shall not we, when
we behold our Lord in his majesty returning, cry out, He is come, He is come?
Shall the wicked, with unconceiveable horror, behold him, and cry out, Oh
yonder is he whose blood we neglected, whose Grace we resisted, whose counsels
we refused, whose Government we cast off? And shall not then the Saints, with
unconceiveable gladness, cry out, Oh yonder is he whose Blood redeemed us,
whose Spirit cleansed us, whose Law did Govern us? Yonder comes he in whom we
trusted, and now we see he has not deceived our Trust: He for whom we long
waited, and now we see we have not waited in vain. Oh cursed Corruption, that
would have had us turn to the world, and present things, and give up our hopes,
and say, Why should we wait for the Lord any Longer? Now we see, that Blessed
are all they that wait for him. Believe it, fellow Christians, this Day is not
far off. For yet a little while, and he that comes, will come, and will not
tarry. And though the unbeleeving world, and the unbelief of thy heart, may
say, as those Atheistical Scoffers, Where is the Promise of his Coming? Do not
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation? Yet let us
know, The Lord is not slack of his Promise, 2 Pet. 3 3, 4, 8, 9.
as some men count slackness: One day is with him as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day. I have thought on it many a time* as a small Emblem
of that day, when I have seen our prevailing Army drawing toward the Towns and
Castles of the Enemy: Oh with what glad hearts do all the poor prisoners within
hear the news, and behold our approach? How do they run up to their prison
windows, and thence behold us with Joy? How glad are they, at the roa^ing
report of that Cannon, which is the Enemies terror? How do they clap each other
on the back, and cry, Deliverance, Deliverance! While in the mean time the late
insulting, scorning, cruel Enemies begin to speak them fair, and beg their
favor, But all in vain; for they are not at the dispose of Prisoners, but of
the General. Their fair usage may make their conditions somewhat the more
easy: but yet they are used as Enemies still. Oh, when the Conquering Lion of
the Tribe of Judah shall appear with all the Hoasts of Heaven; when he shall
surprise the careless world as a thief in the Night: Mat. 24.27.
When as the Lightening which appears in the East, and shines even to the
West, so they shall behold him coming! What a change will the sight of this
Appearance work, both with the World, and with the Saints? Now, poor deluded
World, where is your Mirth and your Jollity? Now, where is your Wealth, and
your Glory? Where is that profane and careless heart, that slighted Christ and
his Spirit, and out-sate all the offers of Grace? Now where is that tongue that
mocked the Saints, and jeered the holy ways of God, and made merry with his
peoples Imperfections, and the^ own Slanders? What? was it not you? Deny it if
you can? your heart condemns you, 1 John 3.20, 21
and God is greater then your heart, and will condemn you much more. Even when
you say, Peace and Safety, then Destruction comes upon you, as Travel upon a
woman with child; and you shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. Perhaps if you had
known just the day and hour when the Son of God would have come, then you would
have been found praying, or the like: But you should have watched, and been
ready, because you know not the hour. But for that faithful and wise servant,
whom his Lord, when he comes, Math. 24.43, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47.
shall find so doing; Oh blessed is that servant: Verily I say unto you (for
Christ has said it) he shall make him ruler over all his Goods. And when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, he shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 5.4. Oh how should it then be the character of a Christian, to
wait for the Son of God from Heaven, whom he raised from the Dead, even Jesus
which delivered us from the wrath to come? 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. And with all faithful
diligence, to prepare to meet our Lord with joy. And seeing his Coming is of
purpose to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, 2
These. 1.10. Oh what thought should Glad our hearts more, then the thought of
that day? A little while indeed we have not seen him, but yet a little while,
and we shall see him. For he has said, I will not leave you comfortless, John
14 18.
but will come unto you. We were comfortless, should he not come. And while we
daily gaze and look up to Heaven after him, let us remember what the Angels
said, This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come, in
like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. While he is now out of sight,
Acts 1.11.
It is as a sword to our Souls, while they daily ask us, Where is your God? But
then we shall be able to answer our enemies, Psalm 42:
See, O proud sinners, yonder is our Lord. And now, Christians, should we not
put up that Petition heartily, Let thy Kingdom come? for the Spirit and the
Bride say, Come; and let every Christian, that hears and reads, say, Come;
And our Lord himself says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come Lord
Jesus, Revel. 22.17, 20.

SECT. II.
THe second stream that leads to Paradise,. 2. 2. Ou^ R^surrection.
is that Great work of Jesus Christ, in raising our Bodies from the dust, and
uniting them again unto the Soul. A wonderful effect of infinite Power and
Love. Many Heathens believed a Resu^rection; as Z^^roastres, and Theopompus,
and Plato. And the Stoics opinion was, that the WORLD would be dissolved by
fire or water, and all things brought to a better state; or to the first Golden
age again. Read Seneca Natural quest. lib. 3. cap. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

U^rumque si (d^luvium and constagratio) came D^o visam est o^diri meli ora,
vet^ra siniri; cap. 27. Omne ex integro animal generabitur; dabiturque terris
ho no inscius scelerum et melioribus auspiciis na^us. c. 30

Optima and noxa carentia (...) na^, si ex ha^ ^^^quando fae^e i^ illad
eva^imus sublime and excelsum; Tranquilitas animi and expulsis erreribus
abs^lu^a (...). Senec. Epistol. lib. 1. ep. 75.


Yea, wonderful indeed, says Unbelief, if it be True. What, says the Atheist
and Sadducee, shall all these scattered bones and dust become a man? A man
drowned in the Sea is eaten by fishes, and they by men again, and these men by
worms, what is become of the body of that first man? shall it rise again? Thou
fool! (for so Paul calls thee,) do thou dispute against the power of the
Almighty? Will thou pose him with thy Sophistry? Do thou object difficulties
to the Infinite Strength? Thou blind Mole! Thou silly Worm! Thou little piece
of creeping, breathing clay! Thou dust! Thou nothing! Know thou who it is,
whose Power thou do Question? If thou should see him, thou would
presently dye. If he should come and dispute his cause with thee, could thou
bear it? Or if thou should hear his voice, could thou endure? But come thy
way; let me take thee by the hand, and do thou a little follow me: and let me
with Reverence (as Elihu) plead for God; and for that power whereby I hope to
arise. See thou this great massy body of the earth? What bears it? and
upon what foundation does it stand? See thou this vast Ocean of waters. What
Limits them? and why do they not overflow and drown the Earth? Whence is that
constant Ebbing and Flowing of her Tides? Will thou say from the Moon, or other
Planets? and whence have they that power of effective influence? Must thou not
come to a Cause of Causes, that can do all things? and does not Reason require
thee, to conceive of that cause as a perfect Intelligence and voluntary Agent,
and not such a blind worker and empty notion as that Nothing is which thou
call Nature? Look upward: See thou that Glorious body of Light, the Sun*
How many times bigger is it then all the Earth? and yet how many thousand miles
does it run in one minute of an hour? and that without weariness, or failing a
moment? What think thou? Is not that power able to effect thy Resurrection,
which does all this? Do thou not see as great works as a Resurrection every
day before thine eyes? but that the Commonness makes thee not admire them. Read
but the 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. Chapters of Job, and take heed of disputing against
God again for ever. Dic mihi Philosophe, quid plene cognoscis? puto non audere
te dicere quod parvulam vel minimam crea turam. Scio quod non perfect
cognos^is minimum atomum in Sole; nec minimum pulveremterrae, nec minimam
guttam aquae. In omni namque corpusculo, infiaitae figurae lineares,
superficiales, and corporales, dive^sae numero, quan tilate, and qualitate and
speci^ continentur. Quare etiam correspandenter conclusiones Geometricae
infinitae, etiam sese ordinabiliter consequentes, ita quod post rior sciri non
potest nisi per priorem. In omni quoque ^orpu^culo infinitae species numerorum,
et infinitae conclusi^nes Arithmeticae continentur, etc. Harum autem
conclusionum infinitarum demonstrative scibilium quot scis? etc. Bradwardine de
Causa Dei, l. 1. cap. 1. corol. 32.
Know thou not that with him all things are possible? Can he make a Camel go
through the eye of a needle? Can he make such a blind Sinner, as thou, to see?
and such a proud heart, as thine, to stoop? and such an Earthly mind, as
thine, Heavenly? And subdue all that, thy fleshly foolish wisdom? And is not
this as great a work, as to Raise thee from the Dust? Wast thou any unlikelier
to Be, when thou wast Nothing, then thou shall be when thou art Dust? Is it not
as easy to raise the Dead, as to make Heaven, and Earth, and all, of Nothing?
But if thou be unperswadeable, all I say to thee more is, as the Prophet to the
Prince of Samaria, (2 King. 7.20.) Thou shall see that day with thine Eyes, but
little to thy Comfort; for that which is the day of relief to the Saints, shall
be a day of Revenge on thee: There is a Rest prepared, but thou can not enter
in, because of unbelief, Heb. 3.19. But for thee, O Believing Soul, never think
to comprehend in the narrow capacity of thy shallow brain, the Counsels, and
ways of thy Maker: No more then thou can contain in thy fist the vast Ocean.
He never intended thee such a Capacity, when he made thee, and gave thee that
measure thou have; no more then he intended to enable that worm, or this post,
or stone, fully to know thee. Therefore when he speaks, dispute not, but
believe. As Abraham, who considered not his own body now dead, when he was
about an hundred years old, nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb; He staggered
not at the Promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in faith, giving
Glory to God: And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also
able to perform. And so against Hope, believed in Hope, Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21.
So look not thou on the dead bones, and dust, and difficulties, but at the
Promise: Martha knew her Brother should rise again at the Resurrection; But if
Christ say, he shall rise before, it must be believed. Come then, fellow
Christians let us contentedly commit these Carcasses to the dust: That prison
shall not long contain them. Let us lie down in peace and take our Rest: It
will not be an Everlasting Night, nor endless sleep. What if we go out of the
troubles and stirs of the world, and enter into those Chambers of Dust, and the
doors be shut upon us, and we hide our selves, as it were, for a little moment,
until the indignation be over-past? Isa. 26.20, 21.
Yet, behold, the Lord comes out of his place, to punish the Inhabitants of
the Earth for their iniquity: Some lately come near the Jews belief in this;
Judaei enim dicunt futurum esse ut Israelitae soli ex morte in vitam
vevo^^ntur; Christiani vero populique alii omnes non resurgant.

Bux^o^f. Synagog. Judaic. cap. 1 page 25. Ita hi Christianos solos
resurrecturos asserunt.


and then the Earth shall disclose us, and the Dust shall hide us no more. As
sure as we awake in the Morning, when we have slept out the Night; so sure
shall we then awake. And what if in the mean time we must be loathsome Lumps,
cast out of the sight of men, as not fit to be endured among the Living? What
if our Carcasses become as vile as those of the Beasts that perish? What if our
bones be dug up, and scattered about the pit brink, and worms consume our
flesh? Yet we know our Redeemer lives, and shall stand the last on earth, and
we shall see him with these eyes. And withal, it is but this flesh that suffers
all this; which has been a Clog to our Souls so long: And what is this comely
piece of flesh, which thou art loath should come to so base a state? It is not
an hundred years since it was either Nothing, or an invisible Something. And is
not most of it for the present, if not an Appearing Nothing, seeming something
to an imperfect sense; yet at best a Condensation of Invisibles, which that
they may become sensible, are become more gross, and so more vile? Where is all
that fair mass of flesh and blood which thou had, before sickness consumed
thee? Annihilated it is not: only resolved into its Principles: show it me if
thou can. Into how small a handful of dust, or ashes, will that whole mass,
if buried or burnt, return? And into how much smaller can a Chemist reduce that
little, and leave thee all the rest Invisible? What if God prick the Bladder,
and let out the wind that puffs thee up to such a substance? and resolve thee
into thy Principles? Does not the seed thou sowest dye, before it spring? and
what cause have we to be tender of this body? Oh, what care, what labor, what
grief, and sorrow, has it cost us? How many a weary, painful, tedious hour? Oh
my Soul, Grudg not that God should disburden thee of all this! Fear not lest he
should free thee from thy fetters! Be not so loath that he should break down
thy prison, and let thee go! What though some terrible Earthquake go before! It
is but that the foundations of the prison may be shaken, and so the doors fly
open: The terror will be to thy Jailer, but to thee Deliverance. Oh therefore
at what hour of the night soever thy Lord come, Acts 16.25, 26, 27. 2 Cor. 5 2,
3, 4
let him find thee, though with thy feet in these stocks, yet singing praises
to him, and not fearing the time of thy deliverance. If unclothing be the thing
thou fear; Why it is, that thou may have better clothing put on. If to be
turned out of doors be the thing thou fear; Why remember, that when this
Earthly house of thy Tabernacle is dissolved, thou have a building of God, 2
Cor. 5 1.
an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. How willingly do our
Soldiers burn their Huts, when the siege is ended? being glad that their work
is done, that they may go home and dwell in houses? Lay down then cheerfully
this bag of loathsome filth, this Lump of Corruption: thou shall undoubtedly
receive it again in Incorruption. Lay down freely this terrestrial, this
natural body: believe it, thou shall receive it again a celestial, a spiritual
body. And though thou lay it down into the dirt with great dishonor; thou shall
recieve it into Glory with honor: And though thou art separated from it through
weakness; it shall be raised again, and joined to thee, in mighty power. When
the Trumpet of God shall sound, the Call; Come away, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44, 45.
arise ye Dead; Who shall then stay behind? Who can resist the powerful
Command of our Lord? When he shall call to the Earth and Sea; O Earth, give up
thy Dead; O Sea, give up thy Dead: Then shall our Sampson break for us the
bonds of Death. And as the Ungodly shall, like Toads from their holes, be drawn
forth whether they will or no; so shall the Godly, as prisoners of hope, awake
out of sleep, and come with Joy to meet their Lord. The first that shall be
called, are the Saints that sleep; and then the Saints that are then alive
shall be changed. For Paul has told us by the Word of the Lord, That they
which are alive, and remain to the Coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God: and the Dead in
Christ shall rise first. Then they which are alive, and remain, 1 These. 4.15,
16, 17, 18.
shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore, O Christians, comfort
one another with these words. This is one of the Gospel Mysteries: That we
shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, at the last
Trump: for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed. For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption; and
this Mortal, Immortality. Then is Death swallowed up in victory. 1 Cor. 15 51.
to 57.
O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God
which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Triumph, now, O
Christian, in these Promises; thou shall shortly Triumph in their Performance.
For this is the Day that the Lord will make; Psalm. 1 18
we shall be glad, and rejoice therein. The Grave that could not keep our Lord,
cannot keep us: He arose for us, and by the same Power will cause us to arise.
For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again; even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, 1 These. 4.14.
will God bring with him. Can the Head live, and the body or members remain
Dead? Oh, write those sweet words upon thy heart, John 14 19.
Christian; Because I Live, Ye shall Live also. As sure as Christ lives, we
shall live: And as sure as he is risen, we shall rise. Else the Dead perish.
Else what is our Hope? 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, 17, 18 19, 30, 31, 32.
what advantageth all our duty or suffering? Else the sensual Epicure were one
of the wisest men: and what better are we then our beasts? Surely our knowledge
more then theirs, would but increase our sorrows: and our dominion over them is
no great felicity: The Servant has oft-times a better life then his Master,
because he has few of his Masters Cares. And our dead Carcasses are no more
comely, nor yield a sweeter savor, then theirs. But we have a sure ground of
Hope. And besides this Life, we have a Life that is hid with Christ in God: and
when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in Glory, Col. 3.3, 4. 2 Pet. 1.9.
Oh let not us be as the purblinde world, that cannot see afar off: Let us
never look at the Grave, but let us see the Resurrection beyond it. Faith is
quick-sighted, and can see as far as that is; yea, as far as Eternity.
Therefore let our hearts be glad, and our Glory rejoice, Psalm 16.
and our flesh also shall rest in hope: for he will not leave us in the Grave,
nor suffer us still to see Corruption. Yea, therefore, let us be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know
our Labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

It Is a Question much debated, Whether a Resurrection be only an effect of
Christ's Death and Resurrection? And whether there should have been any
Resurrection, if Christ had not come? Some that maintain the Negative of the
last Question, do also I do also my self incline to the Negative; but I think
the Soul should have suffered for ever, though the Body had not risen; and that
upon the grounds explained in my Theses of Justification.
maintain, That the Sin under the Covenant of Nature, or Works, did deserve
only the separation of Soul and Body; and not Eternal Torments. Whence also
follows, that the Soul is (or, at least, then was) Mortal; or that it has no
Being, or no Sense, when it is separated from the Body. As also, that Christ
dyed to Redeem us only from the Grave, and not from Hell. And so their
Doctrine of Universal Redemption, in this sense asserted, does neither so much
honor the merits of Christ, nor advance his mercy, as they pretend: For it
makes him to raise us only from the Grave, and bring all the world into a
Capacity of Eternal Torment: He fore-knowing the same time, that most would
certainly reject him, and so perish. But, as I confess these of weight and
difficulty; so, having professed in this Discourse, to handle matters less
controverted; I pretermit them.

This suffices to the Saints Comfort, That Resurrection to Glory, is only the
fruit of Christ's Death; and this fruit they shall certainly partake of. The
Promise is sure: All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and come
forth, Joh. 5.28. And this is the Fathers will which has sent Christ, that of
all which he has given him, he should lose nothing, but should Raise it up at
the last Day, Joh. 6.39. And that every one that believes on the Son may have
Everlasting Life, and he will raise him up at the last Day, Verse. 40. If the
prayers of the Prophet could raise the Shunamites Dead Child: and if the dead
Soldier revive at the touch of the Prophets bones: 2 King 13.21
How certainly shall the will of Christ, and the power of his death raise us?
That voice that said to Jairus Daughter, Arise, and to Lazarus, Arise, and come
forth, can do the like for us. If his death immediately raised the dead bodies
of many Saints in Jerusalem; If he gave power to his Apostles to raise the
Dead: Then what doubt of our Resurrection? And thus, Christian, thou see that
(Christ having sanctified the Grave by his burial, and conquered Death, and
broke the Ice, for us,) a dead Body, and a Grave, is not now so horrid a
spectacle to a believing Eye: But as our Lord was nearest his Resurrection and
Glory, when he was in the Grave, even so are we. And he that has promised to
make our bed in sickness, will make the dust as a bed of Roses: Death shall not
dissolve the Union betwixt him and us; nor turn away his affections from us:
But in the morning of Eternity, he will send his Angels, yea, come himself, and
roll away the stone, and unseal our Graves, and reach us his hand, and deliver
us alive to our Father! Why then does the approach of Death, so cast thee down,
O my Soul? and why art thou thus disquieted within me? Psalm 42.
The Grave is not Hell: if it were, yet there is thy Lord present; and thence
should his Merit and Mercy fetch thee out. John 11.4.
Thy sickness is not unto death (though I dye) but for the Glory of God; Psa.
102.10.
that the Son of God may be glorified thereby. Say not then, He lifts me up
to cast me down, and has raised me high that my fall may be the Lower; But he
casts me down that he may lift me up, and lays me low that I may rise the
higher. An hundred experiences have sealed this Truth unto thee, That the
greatest dejections are intended but for advantages to thy greatest dignity,
and thy Redeemers Glory.

SECT. III.
THe third part of this Prologue to the Saints Rest,. 3. 3. Our Justification
at Judgment.
is the public and solemn process at their Judgment where they shall first
themselves be acquit and justified; and then with Christ judge the World.
Public I may well call it: for all the world must there appear. Young and old,
of all estates, and Nations, that ever were from the Creation to that day, Romans
2.16. and 14.10.
must here come and receive their doom. The judgment shall be set, and the books
opened and the book of Life produced; and the Dead shall be judged out of those
things which were written in the books, Rev. 20.12, 13, 14, 15.
according to their works: and whosoever is not found written in the book of
Life, is cast into the lake of fire. O Terrible! O Joyful Day! Terrible to
those that have let their Lamps go out, Mat. 25.5, 6, 7
and have not watched, but forgot the coming of their Lord! Joyful to the
Saints, whose waiting and hope was to see this day! Then shall the world behold
the goodness and severity of the Lord: Romans 11.22. Matt. 25.
on them who perish, severity; but to his chosen, goodness. When every one must
give account of his stewardship: And every Talent of Time, Health, Wit,
Mercies, Afflictions, Means, Warnings, must be reckoned for: When the sins of
youth, and those which they had forgotten, and their secret sins, shall all be
laid open before Angels and men: When they shall see all their Friends, wealth,
old delights, all their confidence and false hopes of Heaven to forsake them:
When they shall see the Lord Jesus whom they neglected, whose Word they
disobeyed, whose Ministers they abused, whose Servants they hated, now sitting
to judge them: When their own Consciences shall cry out against them, and call
to their Remembrance all their misdoings; Remember at such a time, such or such
a sin: at such a time Christ sued hard for thy Conversion; the Minister pressed
it home to thy heart; thou wast touched to the quick with the Word; thou did
purpose and promise returning, and yet thou casts off all. When an hundred
Sermons, Sabbaths, Mercies, shall each step up and say, I am witness, against
the Prisoner, Lord; I was abused, and I was neglected! Oh which way will the
wretched sinner look? Oh who can conceive the terrible thoughts of his heart?
Now the world cannot help him; his old companions cannot help him; the Saints
neither can nor will: only the Lord Jesus can; but Oh there is the Soul-killing
misery, he will not: Nay, without violating the truth of his Word, he cannot;
though otherwise, in regard of his Absolute power, he might. The time was,
Sinner, when Christ would, and you would not; and now, Oh how fain would you,
and he will not. Then he followed thee in vain with entreaties, Oh poor Sinner,
what do thou? Will thou sell thy Soul and Savior for a lust? Look to me, and
be saved; Return, why will thou dye? But thy Ear and heart was shut up against
all. Why now, thou shall cry, Lord, Lord, open to us; Mat. 7.22, 23.
and he shall say, Depart, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity: Now, Mercy,
Mercy, Lord: Oh but it was Mercy you so long set light by, and now your day of
Mercy is over. What then remains but to cry out to the mountains, fall upon us,
and to the hills, O cover us from the presence of him that sits upon the
Throne; But all in vain: For thou have the Lord of Mountains and hills for thine
enemy, whose voice they will obey, and not thine. Sinner, make not light of
this: for as true as thou live (except a through change and coming in to
Christ prevent it) (which God grant) thou shall shortly, to thy unconceiveable
horror, see that day. Oh Wretch! Will thy cups then be wine, or gall? Will they
be sweet, or bitter? Will it comfort thee to think of all thy merry days? and
how pleasantly thy time slipped away? Will it do thee good to think how rich thou
wast? and how honorable thou wast? or will it not rather wound thy very Soul to
remember thy folly? and make thee, with anguish of heart, and rage against thy
self, to cry out, Oh Wretch! where was thine understanding? Did thou make so
light of that sin, that now makes thee tremble? How could thou hear so
lightly of the Redeeming Blood of the Son of God? How could thou quench so
many motions of his Spirit? and stifle so many quickening thoughts, as were
cast into thy Soul? What took up all that Life's time which thou had given
thee to make sure work against this day? What took up all thy heart, thy love
and delight, which should have been laid out on the Lord Jesus? Had thou room
in thy heart for the world, thy friend, thy flesh, thy lusts? and none for
Christ? Oh Wretch! whom had thou to love but him? What had thou to do, but
to seek to him, and cleave to him, and enjoy him? Oh, wast thou not told of
this dreadful day a thousand times; till the Commonness of that doctrine made
thee weary? How could thou slight such warnings? and rage against the
Minister, and say, he preaches Damnation? Had it not been better to have heard
and prevented it, then now to endure it? Oh now for one offer of Christ, for
one Sermon, for one day of Grace more! But too late, alas too late! Poor
careless Sinner, I did not think here to have said so much to thee; for my
business is, to refresh the Saints: But if these lines do fall into thy hands,
and thou vouchsafe the reading of them; I here charge thee, 2 Timothy 4.1.
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing, and his Kingdom; that thou make have and get alone, and set
thy self sadly to ponder on these things: Ask thy heart, Is this true, or is it
not? Is there such a day? and must I see it? Oh what do I then? Why trifle I?
Is it not time, full time, that I had made sure of Christ and comfort long ago?
should I sit still another day, who have lost so many? Had I not at that day
rather be found one of the Holy, faithful, watchful Christians, then a
worldling, a good fellow, or a man of honor? Why should I not then choose it
now? Will it be best then, and is it not best now? Oh think of these things. A
few sad hours spent in serious fore-thoughts, is a cheap prevention. It Is worth
this, or It Is worth nothing. Friend, I profess to thee, from the Word of the
Lord, That of all thy sweet sins, there will then be nothing left, but the
sting in thy Conscience, which will never out through all eternity; except the
blood of Christ believed in, and valued above all the world, do now, in this
day of grace, get it out. Thy sin is like a Beautiful Harlot; while she is
young and fresh, she has many followers: but when old and withered, every one
would shut their hands of her; she is only their shame; none would know her:
So will it be with thee; now thou will venture on it, what ever it cost thee:
but then, when men's rebellious ways are charged on their Souls to death; O that
thou could rid thy hands of it! O that thou could say, Lord it was not I!
Then Lord, Matt. 25.
when saw we thee hungry naked, imprisoned? How fain would they put it off?
Then sin will be sin indeed; and Grace will be Grace indeed. Then say the
foolish Virgins, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are ou^: Oh for some of
your faith and holiness, which we were wont to mock at! But what is the answer,
Go buy for your selves; Mat. 25.8, 9.
we have little enough: would we had rather much more. Then they will be glad
of any thing like Grace: and if they can but produce any external familiarity
with Christ, or Common gifts, how glad are they? Lord, we have eat and drunk in
thy presence, prophesied in thy name, cast out devils, done many wonderful
works; we have been baptized, heard Sermons, professed Christianity: But, alas,
this will not serve the turn: He will profess to them, I never knew you: Mat.
7. 22, 23.
Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. Oh dead hearted sinner! is all this
nothing to thee? As sure as Christ is true, this is true. Take it in his own
words: Math. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in his Glory: and before him
shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as
a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats: and he shall set the sheep on the
right hand, and the goats on the left: and so on, as you may read in the Text.

But why tremblest thou, Oh humble gracious Soul? Cannot the enemies and
slighters of Christ be foretold their doom, but Thou must quake? Ezekiel. 13.22.
John 10.27. Genesis 7.1.23 Genesis 19.22
Do I make sad the Soul that God would not have sad? Does not thy Lord know his
own sheep, who have heard his voice and followed him? He that would not lose
the family of one Noah in a common deluge, when him only he had found faithful
in all the earth: He that would not overlook one Lot in Sodom; nay, that could
do nothing till he were forth: Will he forget thee at that day? Thy Lord
knows now to deliver the godly out of temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9.
and to reserve the unjust to the day of Judgment to be punished: He knows
how to make the same day the greatest for terror to his foes, and yet the
greatest for joy to his people. He ever intended it for the great
distinguishing and separating day: wherein both Love and Fury should be
manifested to the highest. Matt. 13.
Oh then let the Heavens rejoice, Psa 96.11, 12 13. Psa 98.7 8 9. Psa. 97.8.
Psalm. 76.8, 9.
the Sea, the Earth, the Floods, the Hills, for the Lord comes to judge the
Earth: With Righteousness shall he judge the World, and the People with Equity.
But especially let Sion hear, and be glad, and her children rejoice: For when
God arises to judgment, it is to save the meek of the Earth. They have judged
and condemned themselves many a day in heartbreaking confession, and therefore
shall not be judged to condemnation by the Lord: For there is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 11 31. Romans 8 1. Romans 8.33. Romans 3.19.
Romans 6.14. Romans 8.2.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. And who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Shall the Law? Why, whatsoever the Law
says, it says to them that are under the Law: but we are not under the Law,
but under Grace: For the Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus,
has made us free from the Law of sin and death: Or shall Conscience? Romans 5 1.
Heb. 10.22
Why, we were long ago justified by faith, and so have peace with God; and have
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience: and the Spirit bearing witness
with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Romans 8.16.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? If our Judge condemn us not, who
shall? He that said to the Adulterous woman, John 8.11.
Has no man condemned thee? neither do I condemn thee; He will say to us (more
faithfully then Peter to him) Though all men deny thee, Mark 14.31.
or condemn thee, I will not. Thou have confessed me before men, Matt. 10 32.
and I will confess thee before my Father, and the Angels of Heaven. He whose
first coming was not to condemn the world, John 3, 17.
but that the world through him might be saved; I am sure intends not his
second coming to condemn his people, but that they through him might be saved.
He has given us Eternal Life in Charter and Title already, yea, and partly in
possession; and will he after that condemn us? When he gave us the knowledge of
his Father and himself, John 17.3. John 5, 24.
he gave us Eternal Life: And he has verily told us, That he that hears his
word, and believes on him that sent him, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. Indeed if our Judge
were our enemy, as he is to the world, then we might well fear. If the Devil
were our Judge, or the Ungodly were our Judge, then we should be condemned as
Hypocrites, as Heretics, as Schisinatiques, as proud, or covetous, or what
not? Romans 8.34, 35 Mat. 28.18.
But our Judge is Christ who dyed, yea rather who is risen again, and makes
request for us. For all power is given him in Heaven and in Earth; Joh. 13. 3.
Joh. 5. 27. and Verse. 22, 23.

That Christ's judging power according to his humane nature is not the
principal, primitive supreme; but only the supreme delegate derived power, is
certain, sicut Scotus in l. 4. sent. did. 48. Q. 1. p. 256.


and all things delivered into his hands: and the Father has given him
authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. For though
God judge the world, yet the Father (immediately without his Vicegerent Christ)
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son: that all men should
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. Oh what inexpressible joy may
this afford to a Believer? That our Dear Lord, who loves our Souls, and whom
our Souls love, shall be our Judge? Will a man fear to be judged by his dearest
friend? By a Brother? By a Father? Or a Wife by her own Husband? Christian, Did
he come down, and suffer, and weep* and bleed, and dye for thee; and will he
now condemn thee? Was he judged, and condemned, and executed in thy stead; and
now will he condemn thee himself? Did he make a Bath of his blood for thy sins?
and a garment of his own Righteousness, for thy nakedness? and will he now open
them to thy shame? Is he the undertaker for thy Salvation? and will he be
against thee? Has it cost him so dear to save thee? and will he now himself
destroy thee? Has he done the most of the work already, in Redeeming,
Regenerating, and Sanctifying, Justifying, preserving and perfecting thee? and
will he now undo all again? Nay, has he begun, and will he not finish? Has he
interceded so long for thee to the Father? and will he cast thee away himself?
If all these be likely, then fear, and then rejoice not. Oh what an
unreasonable sin is unbelief, that will charge our Lord with such
unmercifulness and absurdities? Well then, fellow Christians, let the terror of
that day be never so great, surely our Lord can mean no ill to us in all. Let
it make the Devils tremble, and the wicked tremble; but it shall make us to
leap for Joy. Let Satan accuse us, we have our answer at hand, our surety has
discharged the debt. If he have not fulfilled the Law, then let us be charged
as breakers of it: If he have not suffered, then let us suffer: but if he have,
we are free. Nay, our Lord will make answer for us himself, These are mine, and
shall be made up with my Jewels: for their transgressions was I stricken, Isa.
53.5, 8, 10 11.
and cut off from the earth: for them was I bruised and put to grief, my Soul
was made an offering for their sin, and I bore their transgressions: They are
my seed, and the travel of my Soul: I have healed them by my stripes; I have
justified them by my knowledge. They are my sheep; who shall take them out of my
hands? Joh. 10.28
Yea, though the humble Soul be ready to speak against it self ( Lord, when did
we see thee hungry, and feed thee, etc.) yet will not Christ do so. This is the
day of the Believers full Justification. They were before made just: and
esteemed Just: and by Faith justified in Law: and this evidenced to their
consciences. But now they shall both by Apology be maintained Just, and by
Sentence pronounced Just actually, by the lively voice of the Judge himself;
which is the most perfect Justification. Their Justification by Faith, is a
giving them Title in Law, to that Apology, and Absolving Sentence, which at
that Day they shall Actually receive from the mouth of Christ. By which
Sentence, their sin, Some I have heard preach, that Christ justifies, 1. our
persons, and then our Actions; but in proper sense I take it for very unsound
doctrine to say That God justifies our works, and of dangerous consequence.
Luke 10 17, 18 19, 20.
which before was pardoned in the sense of the Law, is now perfectly pardoned,
or blotted out, by this ultimate Judgment. Act. 3.19. Therefore well may it be
called, the Time of Refreshing, as being to the Saints the perfecting of all
their former Refreshments. He who was vexed with a quarrelling Conscience, an
Accusing World, a Cursing Law, is solemnly pronounced Righteous by the Lord the
Judge. Though he cannot plead, Not Guilty, in regard of fact; yet being
pardoned, he shall be acquit by the proclamation of Christ. And that is not all:
But he that was accused, as deserving Hell, is pronounced a member of Christ, a
Son of God, and so adjudged to Eternal Glory. The Sentence of pardon, past by
the spirit and conscience within us, was wont to be exceeding sweet: But this
will fully and finally resolve the question; and leave no room for doubting
again for ever. We shall more rejoice that our names are found written in the
Book of Life, then if men or Devils were subjected to us. And it must needs
affect us deeply with the sense of our mercy and happiness, to behold the
contrary condition of others: To see most of the world tremble with Terror,
while we triumph with Joy: To hear them doomed to everlasting flames, and see
them thrust into Hell; when we are proclaimed heirs of the Kingdom: To see our
neighbors that lived in the same Towns, came to the same Congregation, sat in
the same seats, dwelt in the same houses, and were esteemed more honorable in
the world then our selves; to see them now so differenced from us, and by the
Searcher of hearts eternally separated. This, with the great magnificence and
dreadfulness of the day, does the Apostle pathetically express in 2 Thessalonians. 1.6,
7, 8, 9, 10. It is Righteous with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you: and to you who are troubled, Rest with us: when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels; In flaming fire, taking
vengeance on then that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his power, etc. And now is not here enough to
make that day a welcome day, and the thoughts of it delightful to us? But yet
there is more. We shall be so far from the dread of that Judgment, that our
selves shall become the Judges. Christ will take his people, as it were, into
Commission with him; and they shall sit and approve his Righteous Judgment: Oh
fear not now the reproaches, scorns and censures of those that must then be
judged by us: Did you think, Oh wretched worldlings, that those poor despised
men, whom you made your daily derision, should be your Judges? Did you believe
this, when you made them stand as offenders before the Bar of your Judgment? No
more then Pilate, when he was judging Christ, did believe that he was
condemning his Judge; Or the Jews, when they were whipping, imprisoning, killing
the Apostles, did think to see them sit on twelve Thrones Judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel. Do you not know (says Paul) that the Saints shall judge the
world? 1 Cor. 6.2, 3
Nay, Know you not that we shall judge Angels? Surely were it not the Word of
Christ that speaks it, this advancement would seem incredible, and the language
arrogant. Yet even Henoch the seventh from Adam prophesied of this, saying,
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoke against him, Jude 14. Thus shall the Saints be
honored, Psalm 49.14.
and the Righteous have dominion in the morning. O that the careless world were
but wise to consider this; and that they would remember this latter end! Deuteronomy.
32.29.
That they would be now of the same mind, as they will be, when they shall see
the Heavens pass away with a noise, and the elements melt with fervent heat;
the earth also, and the works that are therein to be burnt up! 2 Pet. 3.10.
When all shall be on fire about their ears, and all earthly Glory consumed. For
the Heavens and the Earth which are now, are reserved unto fire against the day
of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, 2 Pet. 3.7. But alas, when all is
said, the wicked will do wickedly; Dan. 12.10.
and none of the wicked shall understand; But the wise shall understand.
Rejoice, therefore, O ye Saints; yet watch, and what you have, hold fast till
your Lord come, Revel. 2.25. and study that use of this Doctrine which the
Apostle propounds, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness? Looking for, and hasting to the coming of the day of God; wherein
the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements melt with
fervent heat. But go your way, keep close with God, and wait till your change
come, and till this end be; for you shall Rest, and stand in the Lot at the end
of the days, Dan. 12.13.

SECT. IV.
THe fourth Antecedent and highest step to the Saints Advancement,. 4. 4 Our
solemn Coronation.
is, Their solemn Coronation, Inthronizing, and Receiving into the Kingdom.
Rev. 1.5.
For as Christ, their head, is anointed both King and Priest: so under him are
his people made unto God both Kings and Priests, (for Prophecy, that cease,)
to Reign, and to offer praises for ever, Revel. 5.10. The Crown of
Righteousness, which was laid up for them, shall by the Lord the Righteous Judge
be given them at that day, 2 Timothy 4.8. They have been faithful to the death,
Rev. 2.10.
and therefore shall receive the Crown of Life: And according to the
improvement of their Talents here, so shall their rule and dignity be enlarged,
Mat. 25.21, 23. So that they are not dignified with empty Titles, but real
Dominions. For Christ will take them and set them down with himself in his own
Throne; Rev. 3.21.
and will give them power over the Nations, even as he received of his Father,
Revel. 2.26, 27, 28. And will give them the morning Star. The Lord himself will
give them possession with these applauding expressions; Well done good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
Ruler over many things; Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, Matt. 25.21, 23.
And with this solemn and blessed Proclamation shall he Inthrone them; Come ye
Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. Every word full of Life and Joy. [ Come] This is the holding
forth of the golden Scepter; to warrant our approach unto this Glory. Come now
as near as you will; fear not the Bethshemites Judgment: for the enmity is
utterly taken away. This is not such a [ Come] as we were wont to hear: Come
take up your Cross, and follow me; though that was sweet, yet this much more. [
Ye Blessed] Blessed indeed, when that mouth shall so pronounce us: for though
the world has accounted us accursed, and we have been ready to account our
selves so; yet certainly those that he blesses, are blessed, and those whom he
curses only are cursed; and his Blessing shall not be Revoked: But he has
Blessed us, and we shall be Blessed. [ Of my Father] Blessed in the Fathers
Love, as well as the Sons: for they are one. The Father has testified his
Love, in their Election, Donation to Christ, sending of Christ, accepting his
Ransom, etc. as the Son has also testified his. [ inherit] No longer bondmen,
Gal. 4.1, 5, 6, 7.
nor servants only, nor children under age, who differ not in possession, but
only in title from servants: But now we are heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 2.5.
Coheirs with Christ. [ The Kingdom] No less then the Kingdom? Indeed to be King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is our Lords own proper title: But to be Kings,
and reign with him, is ours: The fruition of this Kingdom, is as the fruition
of the light of the Sun, each have the whole, and the rest never the less. [
Prepared for you] God is the Alpha, as well as the Omega of our Blessedness.
Eternal Love has laid the foundation. He prepared the Kingdom for us, and then
prepared us for the Kingdom. This is the preparation of his Counsel and Decree;
for the execution whereof Christ was yet to make a further preparation. [ For
you] Not for Believers only in general, who without individual persons are no
body: Nor only for you upon condition of your believing: But for you
personally and determinately; for all the Conditions were also prepared for
you. [ From the foundation of the world] Not only from the Promise after Adams
fall, (as some) but (as the phrase usually signifies, though not always) from
Eternity. These were the eternal thoughts of Gods love toward us; and this is
it he purposed for us.

But a great difficulty rises in our way. In what sense is our Improvement of
our Talent, Mat 25 20 21 Rev. 2 and 3. Mat. 25 34. 35
our well doing, our overcoming; our harboring, visiting, feeding, etc. Christ
in his little ones; alleged as a Reason of our Coronation and Glory? Is not it
the purchased possession, and meet fruit of Christ's blood? If every man must be
judged according to his works, and receive according to what they have done in
the flesh, whether good or evil; and God will render to every man according to
his Deeds; Romans 2.6, 7
and give eternal life to men, if they patiently continue in well doing, and
give right to the tree of Life, Rev. 22.14.
and entrance into the City, to the doers of his Commandments; and if this last
Absolving Sentence be the completing of our Justification, Romans 2.13.
and so the doers of the Law be justified; Why then what is become of Free
Grace? of Justification by Faith only? of the sole Righteousness of Christ to
make us accepted? Then the Papists say rightly, That we are Righteous by our
personal Righteousness, and Good Works concur to Justification.

I did not think to have said so much upon Controversy* But because the
difficulty is very great, and the matter very weighty, as being near the
foundation I did here Answer this Question, but finding it too large put it in
the End; And since, having yet more enlarged it, have published it alone in a
small V^lume. Read Mr Ric. Hookers Discourse of Justification, how far Works
concur.
I shall, in another Book, add, to what is said before, certain brief
Positions, containing my thoughts on this Subject; which may tend to the
clearing of these and many other difficulties hereabouts.

But that the plain constant language of Scripture may not be perverted or
disregarded, I only premise these Advertisements by way of caution, till thou
come to read the full Answer:

1. Let not the names of men draw thee one way or other, nor make thee partial
in Searching for Truth: Dislike the men for their unsound doctrine; but call
not doctrine unsound, because it is theirs; nor sound, because of the repute of
the Writer.

2. Know this, That as an unhumbled Soul is far apter to give too much to Duty
and personal Righteousness, then to Christ: So a humble self-denying Christian
is as likely to err on the other hand, in giving less to duty then Christ has
given, and laying all the work from himself on Christ, for fear of robbing
Christ of the honor: and so much to look at Christ without him, and think he
should look at nothing in himself; that he forgets Christ within him. As Luther
said of Melancthons self-denying humility, Soli Deo omaia deberi tam obstinate
asserit, ut mihi plane vidcatur saltem in hoc errare quod Christum ipse fingat
longius abesse cordi suo, quam sit revera -- Certe nimis nullus in hoc est
Philippus. He so constantly ascribes all to God, that to me he seems directly
to err at least in this, that he feigneth or imagines Christ to be further off
from his own heart, then indeed he is -- Certainly he is too much Nothing in
this.

3. Our giving to Christ more of the work then Scripture does, or rather our
ascribing it to him out of the Scripture way and sense; does but dishonor, and
not honor him; and depress, but not exalt his Free Grace: While we deny the
inward sanctifying work of his Spirit, and extol his free Justification, which
are equal fruits of his merit, we make him an imperfect Savior.

And thus we have, by the line and plummet of Scripture, fathomed this
fourfold stream, and seen the Christian safely landed in Paradise; and in this
four-wheeled fiery Charet conveyed honorably to his Rest. Now let us a little
further view those Mansions, consider his privileges, and see whether there be
any Glory like unto his Glory; Read, and judge, but not by outward appearance,
but judge Righteous Judgment.

CHAP. VI. This Rest most Excellent, discovered by Reason.
SECT. I.
THe next thing to be handled is, The excellent properties of this Rest, and
admirable Attributes, which, as so many Jewels, shall adorn the Crown of the
Saints. And first before we speak of them particularly, let us try this
Happiness by the Rules of the Philosopher, and see whether they will not
approve it the more transcendently Good: Not as if they were a sufficient
Touchstone; but that both the Worldling and the Saint may see, when any thing
stands up in competition with this Glory for the pre-eminence, Reason it self
will conclude against it. Now, in order of good, the Philosopher will tell you,
that by these Rules you may know which is Best.

SECT. I.
1. THat which is desired and sought for it self,. 1.
is better then that which is desired for something else: or the End, as such,
is better then all the Means. This concludes for Heavens pre-eminence: All
things are but means to that end. If any thing here be excellent, it is because
it is a step to that: and the more conducible thereto, the more excellent. The
Salvation of our Souls is the end of our Faith, 1 Pet. 1.5, 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. 2 Timothy 2.10.
of our Hope, our Diligence, of all Mercies, of all Ordinances, as before is
proved: It is not for themselves, but for this Rest, that all these are desired
and used. Praying is not the end of Praying; nor Preaching the end of
Preaching; nor Believing the end of Believing; these are but the way to him who
is the way to this Rest. John 14 6.
Indeed Christ himself is both the way and the Rest, the means and the end;
singularly desirable as the way, but yet more as the end. If any thing then
that ever you saw or enjoyed appear lovely and desirable, then must its end be
so much more.

SECT. II.
. 2.
2. IN order of Good the last is still the Best: For all good tends to
perfection: The end is still the last enjoyed, though first intended. Now this
Rest is the Saints last estate: Their beginning was as a Grain of Mustard Seed,
but their perfection will be an estate high and flourishing. They were taken
with David from the sheepfold, to reign as Kings for ever. Their first Day was
a day of small things; but their last will be an everlasting perfection: They
sowed in tears, Psa. 126.5.
but they reap in Joy. If their prosperity here, their res secundae, were
desirable; much more their res ultimae, their final Blessedness. Rondeletius
saw a Priest at Rome, who would fall down in an Ecstasy when ever he heard
those words of Christ, Rondeletius in Method Curan. cap. de Catal. page 98.
Consummatum est, It is finished: but observing him careful in his fall ever to
lay his head in a soft place, he suspected the dissimulation, and by the
threats of a cudgel quickly recovered him. But methinks the fore-thoughts of
that Consummation, and last estate we speak of, should bring a considering
Christian into such an unfeigned Ecstasy, that he should even forget the things
of the flesh, and no care or fear should raise him out of it. Surely that is
well, which ends well; and that is Good, which is Good at last; and therefore
Heaven must needs be Good.

SECT. III.
. 3.
3. ANother Rule is this, That whose absence or loss is the worst or the
greatest evil; must needs it self be best, or the greatest Good. And is there a
greater loss, then to lose this Rest? If you could ask the Restless Souls that
are shut out of it, they would tell you more sensibly then I can. For as none
know the sweetness like those who enjoy it, so none know the loss like those
that are deprived of it. Wicked men are here senseless of the loss, because they
know not what they lose, and have the delights of flesh and sense to take them
up, and make them forget it: But when they shall know it to their Torment, as
the Saints do to their Joy, and when they shall see men from the East and West
sit down with Abraham, Luke 13 29.
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and themselves shut out; when they
shall know both what they have lost, and for what, and why they lost it, surely
there will be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. He that loses Riches may have
more; and he that loses honor, may repair it; or if not, yet he is not undone:
He that loses life, Mark 8.35.
may save it: But what becomes of him that loses God? and who or what shall
repair his loss? We can bear the loss of any thing below: if we have it not, we
can either live without it, or dye, and live eternally without it: But can we
do so without God in Christ? Mat. 6.33.
As God gives us outward things, as auctuaries, as overplus, or above measure,
into our bargain; so, when he takes them from us, he takes away our
superfluities rather then our necessaries; and pareth but our nails, and
touches not the quick: But can we so spare our part in Glory? You know whose
Question it is, Mat 16.26.
What shall it profit a man to win all the world* and lose his own Soul? will
it prove a saving match? Or, what shall a man give for the ransom of his Soul?
Christians, compare but all your losses with that loss, and all your sufferings
with that suffering, and I hope you will lay your hand upon your mouth, and
cease your repining thoughts for ever.

SECT. IV.
. 4.
4. ANother Rule is this, That which cannot be given by man, or taken away by
man, is ever better then that which can; And then I hope Heaven will carry it.
For who has the Key of the everlasting Treasures? And who is the Disposer of
the Dignities of the Saints? Who says, Come ye Blessed, and go ye Cursed? Is
it the voice of God, or of mere man? If every good and perfect gift comes from
above, Jam. 1.17.
from the Father of Lights; whence then comes the gift of Eternal Light with
the Father? Whose privilege soever it is, to be Key-keepers of the visible
Churches here below; sure no mere man, but the Man of Sin, will challenge the
Keys of that Kingdom, and undertake to shut out, or take in, or to dispose of
that Treasure of the Church. We may be beholden to men, as Gods instruments,
for our Faith, but no further: For what is Paul, or who is Apolio? but
Ministers by whom we believed, 1 Cor. 3.5.
even as the Lord gave to every man? Surely every step to that Glory, every
gracious gift and act, every deliverance and mercy to the Church, shall be so
clearly from God; that his very name shall be written in the forehead of it,
and his excellent Attributes stamped upon it, that he who runs may read, it was
the work of God: and the Question may easily be answered, whether it be from
Heaven, or of men? Much more evidently is that Glory the gift of the God of
Glory. What? can man give God? or earth and dust give Heaven? Surely no! And as
much is it beyond them to deprive us of it. Tyrants and persecutors may take
away our Goods, but not our chief Good, our Liberties here, but not that state
of Freedom; our Heads, but not our Crown. You can shut us up in Prisons, and
shut us out of your Church and Kingdom; but now shut us out of Heaven if you
can. Try in lower attempts: Can you deny us the light of the Sun, and cause it
to forbear its shining? Can you stop the influences of the Planets? or deny us
the dew of Heaven? or command the Clouds to shut up their womb? or stay the
course of the flowing streams? or seal up the passages of the deep? how much
less can you deprive us of our God, or deny us the light of his countenance, or
stop the influences of his Spirit, or forbid the dew of his Grace to fall, or
stay the streams of his Love, and shut up his overflowing ever-flowing Springs,
or seal up the bottomless depth of his bounty? You can kill our Bodies (if he
permit you) but try whether you can reach our Souls. Nay, it is not in the
Saints own power to give to, or take away from themselves this Glory. So that
according to this Rule, there is no state like the Saints Rest. For no man can
give this Rest to us, and none can take our Joy from us, Joh. 16.22.

. 5.
SECT. V.
5. ANother Rule is this, That is ever better or best, which makes the owner
or possessor himself better or best. And sure according to this Rule, there is
no state like Heaven. Riches, honor, and pleasure, make a man neither better
nor best: Grace here makes us better, but not best: That is reserved as the
Prerogative of Glory. That Is our Good, that does us Good: and that does us
Good, which makes us Good: Else it may be Good in it self, but no good to us.
External Good is at too great a distance to be our Happiness. It is not bread
on our Tables, but in our stomachs that must nourish: nor blood upon our
clothes or skin, but in the Liver, heart and veins which is our Life. Nay, the
things of the world are so far from making the owners Good, that they prove,
not the least impediments thereto; and snares to the best of men. Riches and
honor do seldom help to humility; but of pride they occasionally become most
frequent fomentors. The difficulty is so great of conjoyning Graciousness with
Greatness, that it is next to an impossibility: And their conjunction so rare,
that they are next to inconsistent. To have a heart taken up with Christ and
Heaven, when we have health and abundance in the world, is neither easy nor
ordinary. Though Soul and Body compose but one man, yet they seldom prosper
both together. Therefore that is our chief Good, which will do us Good at heart:
and that is our true Glory, that makes us all Glorious within: and that the
Blessed day, which will make us holy and blessed men: which will not only
beautify our House, but cleanse our Hearts: nor only give us new Habitations,
and new Relations, but also new Souls, and new Bodies. The true knowing living
Christian complains more frequently and more bitterly of the wants and woes
within him, then without him. If you over-hear his prayers, or see him in his
tears, and ask him, what aileth him? he will cry out more, Oh my dark
understanding! Oh my hard, my unbeleeving heart! rather then, Oh my dishonor!
or Oh my poverty! Therefore it is his desired place and state which affords a
relief suitable to his necessities and complaints. And surely that is only
this Rest.

SECT. VI.
6. ANother Rule is,. 6.
That the Difficulty of obtaining shows the Excellency. And surely if you
consider but what it cost Christ to purchase it; what it costs the Spirit to
bring men's hearts to it; what it costs Ministers to persuade to it; what it
costs Christians, (...) dicere so ^^bat, (...) esse ad inferos viam, nam ill^^
homines adir^ claus^s oculis. Laer^. l 4 c. 7 Quod ille dixit quia mo ^ientibus
clauduntur oculi; nos dicere possumus de m^n^is caecitate et socordia.
after all this, to obtain it; and what it costs many a half-Christian that
after all goes without it; You will say that here is Difficulty, and therefore
Excellency. Trifles may be had at a Trivial rate: and men may have damnation
far more easily: It is but, lie still, and sleep out our days in careless
laziness: It is but, take our pleasure, and mind the world, and cast away the
thoughts of Sin, and Grace* and Christ, and Heaven, and Hell, out of your
minds; and do as the most do, and never trouble our selves about these high
things, but venture our Souls upon our presumptuous conceits and hopes, and let
the vessel swim which way it will; and then stream, and wind, and tide, will
all help us apace to the gulf of perdition. You may burn an hundred houses
easier then build one: and kill a thousand men easier then make one alive. The
descent is easy, the ascent not so. Facile est descensus Averni, etc.
To bring diseases, is but to cherish sloth, please the appetite, and take what
most delights us: but to cure them will cost bitter pills, loathsome potions,
tedious gripings, absteinious accurate living; and perhaps all fall short too.
He that made the way, and knows the way better then we, has told us, it is
narrow and strait, and requires striving: And they that have paced it more
truly and observantly then we, do tell us, it lies through many tribulations,
and is with much ado passed through. Conclude then, it is sure somewhat worth
that must cost all this.

SECT. VII.
. 7. Quicqu^d preter te est, non ^^fi^it, non suf. fi^it; si a^ tempus
suff^cit, non tamen pe p^^^e satiat, quin ad huc ampl^us (...) ^st, (...) super
^mne visibile, a^dibile, adorabile, gustabile, tangibile, sensibile. Gerson.
par. 3 Alp^. bet. di^ini amoris. cap. 14.
7. ANother Rule is this, That is Best, which not only supplieth necessity, but
affords abundance. By necessity is meant here, that which we cannot live
without; and by abundance, is meant, a more perfect supply, a comfortable, not
a useless abundance. Indeed it is suitable to a Christians state and use, to be
scanted here, and to have only from hand to mouth: And that not only in his
corporal, but in his spiritual comforts; Here we must not be filled full, that
so our emptiness may cause hungering and our hungering cause seeking and
craving, and our craving testify our dependence, and occasion receiving, and
our receiving occasion thanks-returning, and all advance the Glory of the
Giver. But when we shall be brought to the Wellhead, and united close to the
overflowing Fountain, we shall then thirst no more, because we shall be empty
no more. Surely if those Blessed Souls did not abound in their Blessedness,
they would never so abound in praises. Such Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and
Praise to God, would never accompany common mercies: All those Alleluja's are
not sure the language of needy men. Prove. 18.23.
Now, we are poor, we speak supplications: And our Beggars tone discovers our
low condition: All our Language almost is complaining and craving; our breath
sighing, and our life a laboring. But sure where all this is turned into
eternal praising and rejoicing, the case must needs be altered, and all wants
suppplied and forgotten. I think their Hearts full of Joy, and their mouths
full of thanks, proves their estate abounding full of Blessedness.

SECT. VIII.
8. REason concludes that for the Best,. 8.
which is so in the Judgment of the Best and wisest men. Though, it is true, the
Judgment of imperfect man, can be no perfect Rule of Truth or Goodness: Yet God
reveals this Good to all on whom he will bestow it; and hides not from his
people the end they should aim at and attain. If the Holiest men are the Best
and Wisest, then their Lives tell you their Judgments; and their unwearied
labor and sufferings for this Rest, shows you, they take it for the perfection
of their Happiness. If men of greatest experience be the wisest men, and they
that have tried both estates; then surely, it is vanity and vexation that is
found below, and solid Happiness and Rest above. If dying men are wiser then
others; who by the worlds forsaking them, and by the approach of Eternity,
begin to be undeceived; then surely Happiness is hereafter, and not here: For
though the deluded world in their flourishing prosperity can bless themselves
in their fools paradise, and merrily jest at the simplicity of the Saints; yet
scarce one of many, even of the worst of them, but are ready at last to cry out
with Balaam, Oh that I might dye the death of the righteous, and my last end
might be like his. Never take heed therefore what they think or say now, for as
sure as they shall dye, they will one of these days think and say clean
contrary. As we regard not what a drunken man says, because it is not he, but
the drink, and when he has slept he will awake in another mind: so why should
we regard what wicked men say now, who are drunk with security and fleshly
delights? When we know before hand for certain, that when they have slept the
sleep of death, at the furthest, they will awake in another mind. Only pity
the perverted understandings of these poor men who are beside themselves;
knowing, that one of these days, when too late experience brings them to their
right minds, they will be of a far different Judgment. They ask us, What, are
you wiser then your forefathers? then all the Town besides? then such and such
Great men, and learned men? And do you think in good sadness we may not with
better reason ask you, What? are you wiser then Henoch, and Noah? then Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Samuel? then David and Solomon? then Moses and the Prophets? then
Peter, Paul, all the Apostls, and all the Saints of God, in all Ages and
Nations, that ever went to Heaven? yea, then Jesus Christ himself? Men may be
deceived, but we appeal to the unerring Judgment of Wisdom it self, even the
wise All-Knowing God, whether a day in his Courts be not better then a thousand
elsewhere? Psalm 84.10.
and whether it be not better to be doorkeepers there, then to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness? Nay, whether the very Reproaches of Christ (even the
scorns we have from you for Christ's sake and the Gospel) be not greater riches
then all the Treasures of the World? Heb. 11.25, 26
If Wisdom then may pass the sentence, you see which way the cause will go: and
Wisdom is justified of all her children. Mat 11.19.


SECT. IX.
. 9.
9. LAstly, Another Rule in Reason is this, That Good which contains all other
Good in it, must needs it self be best. And where do you think in Reason, that
all the streams of Goodness do finally empty themselves? Is it not in God, from
whom by secret springs they first proceed? Where else do all the Lines of
Goodness concenter? Are not all the sparks contained in this fire? and all the
drops in this Ocean? Surely the time was, when there was nothing besides God:
and then all Good was only in him. And even now the creatures essence and
existence is secondary, derived, contingent, improper, in comparison of his,
who Is, and Was, and Is to Come; whose Name alone is called, I AM. What do
thine eyes see, or thy heart conceive desirable, which is not there to be had?
Sin indeed there is none; but dare thou call that good? Worldly delights
there are none; for they are Good but for the present Necessity, and please but
the brutish Senses. Brethren, do you fear losing or parting with any thing you
now enjoy? What? do you fear you shall want when you come to Heaven? shall you
want the drops, when you have the Ocean? or the light of the Candle, when you
have the Sun? or the shallow Creature, when you have the perfect Creator? Cast
thy bread upon the waters, and after many days, Eccles. 11.1.
thou shall There find it. Lay abroad thy tears, thy prayers, pains, boldly
and unweariedly; as God is true, thou do but set them to usury, Mat. 19.29.
and shall receive an hundred fold. Spare not, man, for State, for Honor, for
Labor; If Heaven do not make amends for all, God has deceived us; which who
dare once imagine? Cast away Friends, House, Lands, Life, if he bid thee: Leap
into the Sea, Mark 8.35.
as Peter, if he command thee: Lose thy life, and thou shall save it
everlastingly; when those that saved theirs, shall lose them everlastingly:
Venture all, man, upon Gods Word and Promise: There Is a Day of Rest coming will
fully pay for all. All the pence and the farthings thou expendest for him, are
contained, with infinite advantage, in the massy Gold and Jewels of thy Crown.
When Alexander had given away his Treasure, and they asked him where it was; he
pointed to the poor, and said, in scriniis, in my chests. And when he went upon
a hopeful expedition, he gave away his Gold; and when he was asked, what he
kept for himself, he answers, spem majorum and meliorum, The hope of greater
and better things. How much more boldly may we lay out all, and point to
Heaven, and say it is, in scriniis, in our everlasting treasure: and take that
hope of greater and better things, in stead of all. Nay, lose thy self for God,
and renounce thy self; and thou shall at that day find thy self again in him.
Give him thy self, and he will receive thee, upon the same terms as Socrates
did his Scholar Aeschines (who gave himself to his Master, because he had
nothing else) accipio, sed ea lege ut te tibi m^liorem reddam quam accepi: that
he may return thee to thy self better then he received thee. So then, this Rest
is the Good which contains all other Good in it. And thus you see, according
to the Rules of Reason, the transcendent Excellency of the Saints Glory in the
General. We shall next mention the particular Excellencies.

CHAP. VII. The Excellencies of our Rest.
SECT. I.
YEt let us draw a little nearer, and see more immediately from the pure
fountain of the Scriptures what further Excellencies this Rest affords. And
the Lord hide us in the Clefts of the Rock, and cover us with the hands of
indulgent Grace, while we approach and take this view: and the Lord grant we
may put off from our feet the shoes of unreverence and fleshly conceivings,
while we stand upon this holy ground.

SECT. I.
. 1. 1. It is the fruit of the Love and Blood of Christ, whom we shall there
also behold and enjoy.
1. ANd first, it is a most singular honor and ornament, in the style of the
Saints Rest, to be called the Purchased Possession: That it is the fruit of the
Blood of the Son of God; yea, the chief fruit: yea, the end and perfection of
all the fruits, and efficacy of that Blood. Surely Love is the most precious
ingredient in the whole composition: and of all the flowers that grow in the
Garden of Love; can there be brought one more sweet and beautiful to the
Garland, then this Blood? Greater Love then this there is not, to lay down the
life of the Lover. John 15.13.
And to have this our Redeemer ever before our Eyes, and the liveliest Sense
and freshest Remembrance of that dying-bleeding-Love still upon our Souls! Quid
mirum si caput p^o membris accepit curationem, quam tamen in se ipso non habuit
necessariam* Nonne and in membris nustris saepe pro unius infirmita^e alteri
adhibetur curatio? Dolet caput, and in brachio sit coctura; dolent renes and
fit in tibia; ^ta hodie pro totius corpo^is putredine Cauterium quodam infixum
est in capite Christo. Berna. Sermon. 30 de tem^ore.

Fatescat ergo maeror tristitia fugiat; eliminetur dolor; rancor abscedat, ut
liceat vacare et videre cum Moysi visionem hanc grand^m; qualiter Deus in
venire virginis concipiatur; decipiatur diabolus, recipiatur perditum;
ind^bitum accipiatur! Totum me trahit affectio, sed oration deficit; Dives
cogitatio vocis paupertate consunditur. Bernard. Sermon. 24. in die Natal. Quid
aeque mentem cogitantis impinguat? Nomen I^su M^l in ore; in aure Melos; in
cord Jubilus. Omnis cibus qui non conditur hoc sale infatuatus est. Scriptura
quae non fuerit interlita olco tantae devotionis, est insipida. Bernard. Sermon:
23.


Oh how will it fill our Souls with perpetual Ravishments? To think that in the
streams of this Blood we have swam through the violence of the world, the
snares of Satan, the seducements of flesh, the curse of the Law, the wrath of
an offended God, the accusations of a Guilty Conscience, and the vexing doubts
and fears of an unbeleeving heart, and are passed through all, and here arrived
safely at the breast of God! Now we are stupefied with vile and senseless hearts,
that can hear all the story of this Bloody Love, and read all the dolors and
sufferings of Love, and hear all his sad complaints, and all with dullness, and
unaffected. He cries to us, Behold and see; Is it nothing to you, O all ye that
pass by? Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow? ( Lamen. 1.12.) and we will
scarce hear or regard the dolorous voice; nor scarce turn aside to view the
wounds of him, who turned aside, and took us up, to heal our wounds at this so
dear a rate. But Oh then our perfected Souls will feel as well as hear, and
with feeling apprehensions flame again in Love for Love. Now we set his picture
wounded and dying before our eyes, but can get it no nearer our hearts, then if
we believed nothing of what we read. But then when the obstructions between the
eye and the understanding are taken away, and the passage opened between the
head and the heart; surely our eyes will everlastingly affect our heart: and
while we view with one eye our slain-revived Lord, and with the other eye our
lost-recovered Souls, and transcendent Glory, these views will eternally pierce
us, and warm our very Souls. And those eyes, through which folly and lust has
so often stole into our hearts, shall now be the Casements to let in the Love
of our dearest Lord for ever. Now, though we should (as some do) travel to
Jerusalem, and view the Mount of Olives where he prayed and wept; and see the
Dolorons way by which he bare his Cross, and enter the Temple of the Holy
Grave; yea, if we should with Peter have stooped down and seen the place where
he lay, and behold his Relicts; yet these Bolted doors of sin and flesh would
have kept out the feeling of all that Love. But, (Oh! Non cap o me pre lativa,
quia illi May^tas naturam ^uim naturae ^^ae carnts and so gaints subv^lat; and
me ins^^um in divilias gloriae suae, non ad horam, sed in sempternum includit;
Fit scater men's do^inus men's; Et tim^^ domini fratris vincit affectus. Domine
Jesu Christ; L^benter audio te ^egnantem in coelis; libenti^s nascentem in
terris; liboutis sime crucem, clavos and lanceam sustinentem. Haec siquidem
effusio rapit affictum meum; and istorum memoria incalescit cor meum, Berna,
Sermon 23. in die Nata.
that is the Joy,) we shall then leave these hearts of stone and Rock behind
us* and the sin that here so close besets us, and the sottish unkindness that
followed us so long, shall not be able to follow us into that Glory. But we
shall behold, as it were, the wounds of Love, with eyes and hearts of Love for
ever. Suppose (a little to help our apprehensions) that a Saint, who has
partaked of the Joys of Heaven, had been translated from as long an abode in
Hell, and after the experience of such a change, should have stood with Mary
and the rest by the Cross of Christ, and have seen the Blood, and heard the
Groans of his Redeemer: What think you? Would love have stirred in his Breast or
no? Would the voice of his dying Lord have melted his heart, or no? Oh that I
were sensible of what I speak! With what astonishing apprehensions then, will
Redeemed Saints everlastingly behold their Blessed Redeemer? I will not meddle
with their vain audacious Question, who must needs know, whether the glorified
body of Christ do yet retain either the wounds or scars. But this is most
certain, that the memory of it will be as fresh, and the impressions of Love as
deep, and its workings as strong, as if his wounds were still in our eyes, and
his complaints still in our ears, and his blood still streaming afresh. Now his
heart is open to us, and ours shut to him: But when his heart shall be open,
and our Hearts open, Oh the Blessed Congress that there will then be! What a
passionate meeting was there between our new-risen Lord, and the first sinful
silly woman that he appears to? How does Love struggle for expressions? and the
straightened fire shut up in the breast, strive to break forth? John 20 16. Mat. 28
9.
Mary! says Christ: Master! says Mary: and presently she clasps about his
feet: having her heart as near to his heart, as her hands were to his feet.
What a meeting of Love then will there be, between the new glorified Saint, and
the Glorious Redeemer? But I am here at a loss: my apprehensions fail me, and
fall so short. Only this I know; it will be the singular praise of our
inheritance, that it was bought with the price of that blood: and the singular
Joy of the Saints to behold the purchaser and the price, together with the
possession. Neither will the views of the wounds of Love renew our wounds of
sorrow: He, whose first words after his Resurrection were to a great sinner,
John 20.13.
Woman, why weepest thou? knows how to raise Love and Joy by all those views,
without raising any cloud of sorrow, or storm of tears at all. He that made the
Sacramental Commemoration of his Death to be his Churches Feast; will sure make
the real enjoyment of its blessed purchase, to be marrow and fatness. And if it
afforded Joy to hear from his mouth, This is my Body which is given for you,
and This is my Blood which was shed for you; What Joy will it afford, to hear,
This Glory is the fruit of my Body and my Blood? and what a merry feast will it
be, when we shall drink of the fruit of the Vine new with him in the Kingdom of
his Father, as the fruit of his own Blood? David would not drink of the waters
which he longed for, 2 Samuel 23.16, 17.
because they were the blood of those men, who jeoparded their lives for them;
and thought them fitter to offer to God, then to please him. But we shall value
these waters more highly, and yet drink them the more sweetly, because they are
the Blood of Christ, not jeoparded only, but shed for them. They will be the
more sweet and dear to us, because they were so bitter and Dear to him. If the
buyer be judicious, we estimate things by the price they cost. If any thing we
enjoy were purchased with the life of our dearest friend, how highly should we
value it? Nay, if a Dying Friend deliver us but a token of his Love, how
carefully do we preserve it? and still remember him when we behold it, as if
his own name were written on it? And will not then the Death and Blood of our
Lord, everlastingly sweeten our possessed Glory? Methinks England should value
the plenty of the Gospel, with their Peace and Freedom at a higher rate, when
they remember what it has cost! How much precious blood! How many of the Lives
of Gods worthies, and our most dear friends! besides all other cost. Methinks
when I am with freedom preaching, or hearing, or living, I see my dying friends
before mine eyes, whose blood was sh^d for this; and look the more respectively
on them yet living, whose frequent dangers did procure it. Oh then, when we are
rejoicing in Glory, how shall we think of the blood that revived our Souls? and
how shall we look upon him, whose sufferings did put that Joy into our hearts?
How carefully preserve we those prizes, which with greatest hazard we gained
from the enemy? Goliahs sword must be kept as a Trophie, 1 Samuel 21.9.
and laid up behind the Ephod: and in a time of need, David says, There Is none
to that. Surely when we do divide the spoil, and partake of the prize which our
Lord so dearly won; we shall say indeed, There Is none to that. How dear was
Jonathans Love to David, which was testified by stripping himself of the Robe
that was upon him, and giving it David, 1 Samuel 18.4.
and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle: and
also by saving him from his fathers wrath? How dear for ever will the Love of
Christ be then to us, who stripped himself, as it were, of his Majesty and
Glory, and put our man Garment of flesh upon him, that he might put the Robes
of his own Righteousness and Glory upon us? and saved us, not from cruel
injustice, but from his Fathers deserved wrath? Well then Christians, as you
use to do in your Books, and on your Goods, to write down the price they cost
you; so do on your Righteousness, and on your Glory; write down the price, The
Precious Blood of Christ By the redundancy of which merit (after satisfaction
thereby made unto his Fathers Justice for our debt) there is further a purchase
made of Grace and Glory, and of al good things in our behalf. M Reinoldes Life
of Christ, Page 402. Isa. 27.4. Lam. 3.33. Ezekiel. 18.23.32.
.

Yet understand this rightly; Not that this highest Glory was in strictest
proper sense purchased, or that it was the most immediate Effect of Christ's
death: We must take heed that we conceive not of God as a Tyrant, who so
delights in cruelty, as to exchange mercies for stripes, or to give a Crown
on condition he may torment men. God was never so pleased with the sufferings
of the Innocent, much less of his Son, as to sell his mercy properly for
their sufferings. Fury dwells not in him; nor does he willingly correct the
sons of men; nor take pleasure in the death of him that dies. But the
sufferings of Christ were primarily and immediately to satisfy the justice that
required blood, and to bear what was due to the sinner, and to receive the blow
that should have fallen upon him, and so to restore him to the life he lost,
and the happiness he fell from. But this dignity, which surpasses the first,
is, as it were, from the redundancy of his merit, or a secondary fruit of his
death. The work of his Redemption so well pleased the Father, that he gave him
power to advance his chosen to a higher dignity then they fell from; and to
give them the glory which was given to himself, and all this according to his
counsel, and the good pleasure of his own will.

SECT. II.
2. THe Second Pearl in the Saints Diadem, is that, It Is Free. This seems as
Pharoahs second Kine,. 2. 2 It is Freely given us.
to devour the former; and as the Angel to Balaam, To meet it with a drawn
sword of a full opposition. But the seeming discord, is but a pleasing
diversity composed into that harmony which constitutes the Melody. These two
Attributes Purchased and Free, are the two chains of Gold which by their
pleasant twisting, do make up that wreath for the heads of the Pillars in the
Temple of God. 1 King. 7.17.
It was dear to Christ, but free to us. When Christ was to buy, silver and
gold was nothing worth; Prayers and Tears could not suffice; nor any thing
below his Blood: But when we come to buy, the price is fallen to just nothing;
Our buying, is but receiving: we have it freely without money, and without
price. Nor do the Gospell-conditions make it less Free; or the Covenant tenor
before mentioned, contradict any of this. If the Gospell-conditions had been
such as are the Laws; or payment of the debt required at our hands; the
freeness then were more questionable. Yea, if God had said to us; [ Sinners, if
you will satisfy my Justice but for one of your sins, I will forgive you all
the rest,] it would have been a hard condition on our part, and the Grace of
the Covenant not so Free, as our disability does necessarily require. But if
all the Condition be our cordial acceptance, surely we deserve not the name
of Purchasers. Thankful accepting of a free acquittance, is no paying of the
Debt. If life be offered to a condemned man, upon condition that he shall not
refuse the offer, I think the favor is never the less free. Nay, though the
condition were, that he should beg, and wait before he have his pardon, and
take him for his Lord who has thus redeemed him: All this is no satisfying of
the justice of the Law: Especially when the condition is also given, as it is
by God to all his chosen; surely then here is all free: If the Father freely
give the Son, and the Son freely pay the debt, and if God do freely accept that
way of payment, when he might have required it of the principal; and if both
Father and Son do freely offer us the purchased life upon those fair
conditions; and if they also freely send the Spirit to enable us to perform
those conditions, then what is here that is not free? Is not every Stone that
builds this Temple, Freestone? Oh, the everlasting admiration that must needs
surprise the Saints, to think of this Freeness! What did the Lord see in me,
that he should judge me meet for such a State? That I who was but a poor,
disea^ed, despised wretch should be clad in the brightness of this Glory? That
I a silly creeping breathing worm, should be advanced to this high dignity.
That I, who was but lately groaning, weeping* dying, should now be as full of
joy as my heart can hold! Yea, should be taken from the grave, where I was
rotting and stinking, and from the dust and darkness where I seemed forgotten,
and here set before his Throne? that I should be taken with Mordecai from
captivity, to be set next unto the King! and with Daniel from the Den, to be
made ruler of Princes and Provinces! and with Saul from seeking Asses, to be
advanced to a Kingdom! Oh, who can fathom unmeasurable Love? Indeed if the
proud hearted, selfe-ignorant, selfe-admiring sinners should be thus advanced,
who think none so fit for preferment as themselves; perhaps instead of admiring
free Love, they would with those unhappy Angels be discontented yet with their
estate. But when the selfe-denying, selfe-accusing, humble soul, who thought
himself unworthy the ground he trod on, and the air he breathed in, unworthy
to eat, drink, or live, when he shall be taken up into this Glory! He, who
durst ^carce come among, or speak to, the imperfect Saints on earth, because he
was unworthy; he who durst scarce hear, or scarce read the Scripture, or scarce
pray and call God, Father; o^ scarce receive the Sacraments of his Covenant,
and all because he was unworthy! For this soul to find it self rapt up into
heaven and closed in the arms of Christ, even in a moment! Do but think with
your selves what the transporting, astonishing admiration of such a soul will
be. He that durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but stood a far off,
smiting on his breast, and crying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner; now to be
lift up to heaven himself! He who was wont to write his name in Bradfords
style, The unthank^full, the hard-hearted, the unworthy sinner! And was wont to
admire that patience could bear so long and justice suffer him to live: Sure he
will admire at this alteration, when he shall find by experience that
unworthiness could not hind^r his salvation which he thought would have
bereaved him of every mercy. Ah Christian, There Is no talk of our worthiness,
nor unwornesse; If worthiness were our condition for admittance, we might sit
down with S. John and weep, Rev. 5.4, 5.
because none in heaven or earth is found worthy. But the Lion of the tribe of
Judah is worthy and has prevailed, and by that title must we hold the
inheritance. We shall offer there the offering that David refused, even praise
for that which cost us nothing. Here our Commission runs, Freely, ye have
received, Freely give: But Christ has dearly received, yet Freely gives. The
master heals us of our leprosy freely, but Gehazi who had no finger in the
cure, will surely run after us, and take something of us, and falsely pretend, it
is his masters pleasure. The Pope and his servants will be paid for their
Pardons and Indulgencies; But Christ will take nothing for his. The fees of the
Prelates Courts were large; and our Co^mutation of Penance must cost our purses
dear; or else we must be cast out of the Synagogue, and soul and body delivered
up to the Devil. But none are shut out of that Church for want of money, nor is
poverty any eyesore to Christ: An empty heart may bar them out, but an empty
purse cannot: His Kingdom of Grace has ever been more consistent with despised
poverty, then wealth and honor: and riches occasion the difficulty of
entrance, far more then want can do. For that which is highly esteemed among
men, Jam. 2.5.
is despised with God, And so is it also, The poor of the world, rich in faith,
whom God has chosen to be heirs of that Kingdom, 1 Cor. 9.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13.
which he has prepared for them that love him. I know the true labourer is
worthy of his hire: And they that serve at the Altar, should live upon the
Altar: And it is not fit to muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn: And I
know it is either hellish malice, or penurious baseness, or ignorance of the
weight of their work and burden, that makes their maintenance so generally
Incompetent, and their very livelihood and subsistence, so envied and grudged
at: and that it is a mere plot of the Prince of darkness for the diversion of
their thoughts; that they must be studying how to get bread for their own and
childrens mouths, when they should be preparing the bread of life for their
peoples souls. But yet let me desire the right aiming Ministers of Christ, to
consider, what is expedient as well as what is lawful; and that the saving of
one soul is better then a thousand pound a year; and our gain though due, is a
cursed gain, which is a stumbling block to our peoples souls: Let us make the
Free-Gospell as little burdensome and chargeable as is possible. 1 Cor. 9.18*
19. Romans 14.13, 15, 20, 21.
I had rather never take their Tithes while I live, then by them to destroy the
souls for whom Christ dyed; and though God has ordained that they which preach
the Gospel, Romans 15.1, 2. 1 Cor. 914 12
should live of the Gospel! yet I had rather suffer all things, then hinder
the Gospel: and it were better for me to dye, then that any man should make
this my glorying void. ver. 15. 1 Timothy 5 17.
Though the well-leading Elders be worthy of double honor, especially the
laborious in the word and doctrine; yet if the necessity of Souls, and the
promoting of the Gospel should require it, 1 Cor. 4.10, 11, 12
I had rather preach the Gospel in hunger and rags, then rigidly contend for
what is my due: And if I should do so, yet, have I not whereof to Glory; 1 Cor.
9.16.
for necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel,
though I never received any thing from men. How unbeseeming the messengers of
this Free Grace and Kingdom is it, rather to lose the hearts and souls of their
people, then to lose a groat of their due? And rather to exasperate them
against the message of God, then to forbear somewhat of their right? And to
contend with them at law, for the wages of the Gospel? And to make the
glad-tidings, to their yet carnal hearts seem to be sad tidings, because of
this burden? This is not the way of Christ and his Apostles, nor according to
the self denying, yielding, suffering Doctrine which they taught. Away with all
those actions, that are against the main end of our studies and calling, which
is to win souls: and fie upon that gain, which hinders the gaining of men to
Christ. I know flesh will here object necessities, and distrust will not want
arguments: but we who have enough to answer to the diffidence of our people,
let us take home some of our answers to our selves; and teach our selves first,
before we teach them. How many have you known that God suffered to starve in
his Vineyard?

But this is our exceeding consolation, That though we may pay for our Bibles
and Books, and Sermons, and it may be pay for our free^dom to enjoy and use
them: yet as we paid nothing for Gods eternal Love, and nothing for the Son of
his Love, and nothing for his Spirit, and our grace and faith, and nothing for
our pardon; so we shall pay nothing for our eternal Rest. We may pay for the
bread and wine, but we shall not pay for the body and blood, nor for the great
things of the Covenant which it seals unto us. And indeed we have a valuable
price to give for those, but for these we have none at all. Yet this is not
all. If it were only for nothing and without our merit, the wonder were great;
but it is moreover against our merit, and against our long endeavoring of our
own ruin. Oh, the broken heart that has known the desert of sin, does both
understand and feel what I say. What an astonishing thought it will be, to
think of the unmeasurable difference between our deservings, and our
receivings! between the state we should have been in, and the state we are in!
To look down upon Hell, and see the vast difference that free grace has made
betwixt us and them! to see the inheritance there, which we were born to, so
different from that which we are adopted to! Oh, what pangs of love will it
cause within us, to think, yonder was my native right: my deserved portion:
those should have been my hideous cries; my doleful groans; my easless pains;
my endless torment: Those unquenchable flames I should have layen in; that
never dying worm should have fed upon me: yonder was the place that sin would
have brought me to; but this is it that Christ has bought me to. Yonder death
was the wages of my sin; but this Eternal life is the Gift of God, through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Did not I neglect Grace, and make light of the offers of
Life, and slight my Redeemers Blood a long time, as well as yonder suffering
souls? Did I not let pass my time, and forget my God, and soul, as well as
they? And was I not born in sin and wrath as well as they? Oh, who made me to
differ? Was my heart naturally any readier for Christ then theirs? Or any whit
better affected to the Spirits persuasions? Should I ever have begun to love,
if God had not begun to me? or ever been willing, if he had not made me
willing? or ever differed, if he had not made me to differ? Had I not now been
in those flames, if I had had mine own way, and been let alone to mine own
will? Did I not resist as powerful means, and lose as fair advantages as they?
And should I not have lingered in Sodom t^ll the flames had seized on me, if
God had not in mercy carried me out? Oh how free was all this Love? and how
free is this enjoyed Glory? Doubtless this will be our everlasting admiration,
That so Rich a Crown should fit the head of so vile a Sinner! That such high
advancement, and such long unfruitfulness and unkindness, can be the state of
the same person! and that such vile rebellions can conclude in such most
precious Joys! But no thanks to us; nor to any of our duties and labors; much
less to our neglects and laziness: we know to whom the praise is due, and must
be given for ever. And indeed to this very end it was, that infinite Wisdom did
cast the whole design of Man's Salvation into this mould of PVRCHASE and
FREENES, that the Love and Joy of man might be perfected, and the Honor of
Grace most highly advanced; that the thought of Merit might neither cloud the
one, nor obstruct the other; and that on these two hinges, the gates of Heaven
might turn. So then let [ DESERVED] be written on the door of Hell, but on the
door of Heaven and Life, [ THE FREE GIFT].

SECT. III. 3.

THirdly. It is the Saints peculiar.
The third comfortable Attribute of this Rest is, That it is the Saints prop
and peculiar possession. It belongs to no other of all the sons of men; not
that it would have detracted from the greatness or freeness of the gift, if God
had so pleased, that all the world should have enjoyed it: But when God has
resolved otherwise, that it must be enjoyed but by few; to find our names
among that number, must needs make us the more to value our enjoyment. If all
Egypt had been light, the Israelites should not have had the less; but yet to
enjoy that light alone, while their neighbors live in thick darkness, must make
them more sensible of their privilege. Distinguishing, separating Mercy,
affects more then any Mercy. If it should rain on our grounds alone; or the
Sun shine upon our alone habitations; or the blessing of Heaven divide between
our flocks, and other men's, as between Jacobs and Labans; we should more
feelingly acknowledge Mercy, then now, while we possess the same in common.
Ordinariness dulleth our sense; and if Miracles were common, they would be
slighted. If Pharaoh had passed as safely as Israel, the Red Sea would have
been less remembered. If the firstborn of Egypt had not been slain, the
firstborn of Israel had not been the Lords peculiar. If the rest of the World
had not been drowned, and the rest of Sodom and Gomorrah burned, the saving of
Noah had been no wonder, nor Lots deliverance so much talked of. The lower the
weighty end of the balance descends, the higher is the other lifted up; and
the falling of one of the sails of the Windmill, is the occasion of the rising
of the other. It would be no extenuation of the Mercies of the Saints here; if
all the world were as holy as they, and the communication of their Happiness is
their greatest desire; yet it might perhaps dull their thankfulness, and
differencing grace would not be known. But when one shall be illightened, and
another left in darkness; one reformed, and another by his lusts enslaved; it
makes them cry out with the Disciple, John 14.22. Luk 4.24, 25, 26, 27.
Lord what is it, that thou will reveal thy self to us, and not unto the world?
When the Prophet shall be sent to one Widow only of all that were in Samaria,
and to cleanse one Naaman of all the Lepers; the Mercy is more observable. O
that will sure be a day of passionate sense on both sides; when two shall be in
a Bed, and two in the field, the one taken, and the other forsaken. For a
Christian who is conscious of his own undeserving, and il-deserving, to see his
companion in sin perish; his Neighbor, Kinsman, Father, Mother, Wife, Child,
for ever in Hell, while he is preferred among the Blessed! To see other men's
sins eternally plagued, while his are all pardoned! To see those that were wont
to sit with us in the same seat, and eat with us at the same Table, and join
with us in the same Duties, now to lie tormented in those flames, while we are
triumphing in Divine Praises! That Lot must leave his sons in law in the flames
of Sodom, and the wife of his bosom as a Monument of Divine Vengeance, and
escape with his two Daughters alone. Here is choosing, distinguishing Mercy!
Therefore the Scripture seems to affirm, That as the damned souls shall from
Hell, see the Saints Happiness to increase their own torments; so shall the
Blessed from Heaven, behold the wickeds misery, to the increase of their own
Joy. And as they looked on the dead bodies of Christ's two Witnesses slain in
their streets, and they that dwell on the Earth rejoiced over them and made
merry; and as the wicked here behold the calamities of Gods people with
gladness, so shall the Saints look down upon them in the burning lake, and in
the sense of their own happiness, and in the approbation of Gods just
proceedings, Rev. 11.9.10.
they shall rejoice and sing. Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast,
and shall be, because thou have thus judged: For they have shed the blood of
Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink for they are
worthy. Alleluja, Salvation, Rev. 16.5.6. Rev. 19 7.2.
and Glory, and Honor, and Power to our God; for true and righteous are his
Judgments. And as the command is over Babylon, Rev. 18.20.
so will it be over all the condemned souls, Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and
ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her. By this time
the impenitent World will see a reason for the Saints singularity, while they
were on Earth; and will be able to answer their own demands, Why must you be
more holy then your neighbors? even because they would fain be more happy then
their neighbors. And why cannot you do, and live as the World about you? Even
because they are full loath to speed as those others, or to be damned with the
World about them. Sincere singularity in Holiness, is by this time known to be
neither Hypocrisy nor Folly. If to be singular in that Glory be so desirable,
surely to be singular in godly living is not contemptible. As every one of them
now knows his own sore, and his own grief, so shall every one then feel his own
Joy: and if they can now call Christ their own, 2 Chro. 6.29. Psalm. 67.6. and
33.12. and 78.71. and 16.5.
and call God their own God, how much more then upon their full possession of
him? For as he takes his people for his inheritance; so will he himself be the
inheritance of his people of ever.

SECT. IV.. 4.

A Fourth comfortable adjunct of this Rest is, that it is in the fellowship of
the Blessed Saints and Angels of God. It is a Rest with Angels and perfect
Saints.
Not so singular will the Christian be, as to be solitary. Though it be proper
to the Saints only, yet is it common to all the Saints. For what is it, but an
Association of Blessed spirits in God? A corporation of perfected Saints
whereof Christ is the head? the communion of Saints completed? Nor does this
make those joys to be therefore mediate, derived by creatures to us, as here:
For all the lines may be drawn from the center, and not from each other, and
yet their collocation make them more comely, then one alone could be. Though
the strings receive not their sound and sweetness from each other, yet their
concurrence causes that harmony, which could not be by one alone. For those
that have prayed, and fasted, and wept, and watched, and waited together; now to
joy and enjoy and praise together: methinks should much advance their pleasure.
Whatsoever it will be upon the great change that will be wrought in our natures
perfected; sure I am according to the present temperature of the most
sanctified humane affections, it would affect exceedingly: And he who
mentions the qualifications of our happiness of purpose that our joy may be
full, and makes so often mention of our consociation and conjunction in his
praises, sure does hereby intimate to us that this will be some advantage to
our joys. Certain I am of this, Fellow Christians; that as we have been
together in the labor, duty, danger and distress; so shall we be in the great
recompense and deliverance; and as we have been scorned and despised, so shall
we be crowned and honored together, and we who have gone through the day of
sadness, shall enjoy together that day of Gladness: and those who have been
with us in persecution and prison, shall be with us also in that palace of
consolation. Can the willful world say, Socrates Critoni vehement^r suad^nti ut
si vitam ipse suam negligeret, certe liberis estiam^^ parvulis and amicis ab
ipso pendentibus se servaret incolumem: Liberi, inquit, Deo, qui mihi cos
dedit, curae erunt: amicos hinc discedens inveniam, vobis ant similes aut etiam
meliores, ne vestra quidem consuetudinediucariturus, quando quidem vos brevi
eodem est is commigraturi. Eras. apoth. lib. 3. ex Platone Zenop.
If our forefathers and friends be all in Hell, why we will venture there too?
and may not the Christian say on better grounds, seeing my faithful friends are
gone before me to Heaven, I am much the more willing to be there too. Oh the
Blessed day, Dear friends, when we that were wont to enquire together, and hear
of heaven, and talk of heaven together, shall then live in Heaven together;
When we who are wont to complain to one another, and open our doubts to one
another, and our fears whether ever we should come there or no; shall then
rejoice with one another, and triumph over those doubts and fears! when we who
were wont formerly in private to meet together for mutual edification, shall
now most publicly be conjoined in the same consolation! Those same disciples
who were wont to meet in a private house for fear of the Jews; are now met in
the Celestial habitations without fear: and as their fear then did cause them
to shut the door against their enemies, so will Gods Justice shut it now. Oh
when I look in the faces of the precious people of God, and believingly think
of this day, what a refreshing thought is it? shall we not there remember,
think you, the pikes which we passed together here? our fellowship in duty and
in sufferings? how often our groans made as it were one sound, our conjunct
tears but one stream, and our conjunct desires but one prayer? and now all our
praises shall make up one melody; and all our Churches one Church; and all our
selves but one body: for we shall be one in Christ, even as he and the father
are one. Its true, we must be very careful in this case, that in our thoughts
we look not for that in the Saints which is alone in Christ, and that we give
them not his own prerogative; nor expect too great a part of our comfort in the
fruition of them: we are prone enough to this kind of Idolatry. But yet he who
Commands us so to love them now, will give us leave in the same subordination
to himself to love them then, when himself has made them much more lovely. And
if we may love them, we shall surely rejoice in them; for love and enjoyment
cannot stand without an answerable Joy. If the forethoughts of sitting down
with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, may be
our lawful Joy; then how much more that real fight, and actual possession? It
cannot choose but be comfortable to me to think of that day, when I shall join
with Moses in his song, with David in his Psalms of praise; and with all the
redeemed in the song of the Lamb for ever: When we shall see Henoch walking
with God; Noah enjoying the end of his singularity; Joseph of his Integrity;
Job of his patience, Hezekiah of his uprightness; and all the Saints the end of
their faith. Will it be nothing conducible to the completing of our comforts,
to live eternally with Peter, Paul, Austin, Chrysostom, Jerome, Wickliffe,
Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Zanchius, Pareus, Piscator? with
Hooper, Bradford, Latimer, Glover, Saunders, Philpot? with Reignolds, Whitaker,
Cartwright, Brightman, Bayne, Bradshaw, Bolton, Ball, Hildersham, Pemble,
Twisse, Ames, Preston, Sibbes? O faelicem diem (said old Grynoeus,) quum ad
illud animorum concilium proficiscar, and ex hac turba and Colluione discedam!
O happy day when I shall depart out of this crown and sink, and go to that same
counsel of souls! I know that Christ is all in all: and that it is the
presence of God that makes Heaven to be Heaven. But yet it much sweeteneth the
thoughts of that place to me, to remember that there are such a multitude of my
most dear and precious friends in Christ; with whom I took sweet counsel, and
with whom I went up to the house of God; who walked with me in the fear of God,
and in integrity of their hearts: in the face of whose conversations, there was
written the name of Christ; whose sweet and sensible mention of his
Excellencies, has made my heart to burn within me: To think of such a friend
died at such a time, and such a one at another time, such a precious Christian
slain at such a fight, and such a one at such a fight (oh what a number of them
could I name) and that all these are entered* into rest; and we shall surely go
to them, but they shall not return to us. Its a Question with some, Whether we
shall know each other in Heaven or no? Surely there shall no knowledge cease
which now we have, but only that which implies our imperfection: And what
imperfection can this imply? Nay our present knowledge shall be increased beyond
belief: It shall indeed be done away, but as the light of the candle and stares
is done away by the rising of the Sun; which is more properly a doing away of
our ignorance then of our knowledge. Indeed we shall not know each other after
the flesh; 2 Cor. 5.16.
not by stature, voice, color, complexion, visage, or outward shape; if we had
so known Christ we should know him no more: not by parts and gifts of learning,
nor titles of honor and worldly dignity; nor by terms of affinity and
consanguinity, nor benefits, nor such Relations; not by youth, or age; nor, I
think, by sex. But by the Image of Christ, and spiritual relation, and former
faithfulness in improving our Talents, beyond doubt, we shall know and be
known. Nor is it only our old acquaintance: but all the Saints of all ages,
whose faces in the flesh we never saw, whom we shall there both know and
comfortably enjoy. Luther in his last sickness being asked his Judgment whether
we shall know one another in Heaven, answered thus: Quod accidit Adam? nunquam
ille vider at Evam etc. i. e. How was it with Adam? He had never seen Eve: yet
he asks not who she was? or whence she came, but says, She is flesh of my
flesh, and bone of my bone. And how knew he that? Why, being full of the Holy
Ghost, and endued with the true knowledge of God, he so pronounced. After the
same sort shall we be renewed by Christ in another life, and shall know our
parents, wives, Melchi. Adam in vita Lutheri.
children, etc. much more perfectly then Adam did then know Eve. Yea and Angels
as well as Saints, will be our blessed acquaintance and sweet associates. We
have every one now our own Angels, there beholding our Fathers face: And those
who now are willingly ministering Spirits for our good, will willingly then be
our companions in joy for the perfecting of our good: Act. 12.15. Matt. 18.10.
Luke 16.22. Luke 15.10. Heb. 1.7. etc.
And they who had such joy in heaven for our conversion, will gladly rejoice
with us in our glorification. I think Christian, this will be a more honorable
assembly then you ever here beheld: and a more happy society then you were ever
of before. Surely Brook, and Pim, and Hambden, and White, etc. are now members
of a more knowing, unerring, well ordered, right-ayming, self-denying,
unanimous, honorable, Triumphant Senate, then this from whence they were taken
is, or ever Parliament will be. It is better be doore-keeper to that Assembly,
whether Twisse, etc. are translated, then to have continued here the Moderator
of this. Psalm. 119.63.
That is the true Parliamentum Beatum, the Blessed Parliament, and that is the
only Church that cannot err. Then we shall truly say as David, I am a
companion of all them that fear thee: when we are come to Mount Sion, and to
the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels; Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
to the General Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in
Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
Sprinkling; We are come thither already in respect of title, and of earnest and
first fruits; but we shall then come into the full possession. O Beloved, if it
be a happiness to live with the Saints in their imperfection, when they have
sin to imbitter, as well as holiness to sweeten their society; what will it be
to live with them in their perfection, where Saints are wholly and only
Saints? If it be a delight to hear them pray or preach; what will it be to hear
them praise? If we thought our selves in the Suburbs of Heaven, when we heard
them set forth the Beauty of our Lord, and speak of the excellencies of the
Kingdom; what a day will it be, when we shall join with them in praises to our
Lord, in, and for that Kingdom. Now we have corruption, and they have
corruption; and we are apter to set awork each others corruption, then our
Graces; and so loose the benefit of their company while we do enjoy it, because
we know not how to make use of a Saint: But then it will not be so. Now we
spend many an hour which might be profitable, in a dull silent looking on each
other, or else in vain and common conference: But then it will not be. Now the
best do know but in part, and therefore can instruct and help us but in part:
But then we shall with them make up one perfect man. So then I conclude, This
is one singular excellency of the Rest of Heaven, That we are fellow citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19.

SECT. V. 5.

FIfthly, It is Immediate from God, and in him.
another excellent property of our Rest will be, That the Joys of it are
immediately from God. Nor does this contradict the former, as I have before
made plain. Whether Christ (who is God as well as man) shall be the Conveyor of
all from the Divine Nature to us? And whether the giving up the Kingdom to the
Father, do imply the ceasing of the Mediators Office? And consequently, the
laying aside of the humane Nature? (though I believe the Negative in these
last, yet) are Questions which I will not now attempt to handle. But this is
sure; we shall God face to face; and stand continually in his presence; and
consequently derive our life and comfort immediately from him. Whether God will
make use of any Creatures for our service then? or if any, of what Creatures?
and what use? is more then I yet know. It seems by that Romans 8.21. that the
Creature shall have a day of Deliverance, and that into the glorious Liberty of
the sons of God: But whether this before, or at the great and full Deliverance?
or whether to endure to Eternity? or to what particular employment they shall
be continued? are Questions yet too hard for me. When God speaks them plainer,
and mine understanding is made clearer, then I may know these. But its certain
that, at least, our most and great Joys will be immediate, if not all. Now we
have nothing at all immediately; but at the second, or third, or fourth, or
fifth hand; or how many, who knows? From the Earth, from Man, from Sun and
Moon, from the influence of the Planets, from the Ministration of Angels, and
from the Spirit, and Christ; and doubtless the farther the Stream runs from the
Fountain, the more impure it is. It gathers some defilement from every unclean
Channel it passes through* Though it savors not in the hand of Angels, of the
imperfection of sinners, yet it does of the imperfection of Creatures; and as
it comes from man, it savors of both. How quick and piercing is the Word in it
self? Yet many times it never enters, being managed by a feeble Arm. O what
weight and worth is there in every passage of the Blessed Gospel? Enough, one
would think, to enter and force the dullest Soul, and wholly possess its
thoughts and affections; and yet how often does it fall as water upon a stone?
And how easily can our hearers sleep out a Sermon time ^ and much, because
these words of Life do die in the delivery, and the Fruit of our Conception is
almost Still-born. Our peoples Spirits remain congealed, while we who are
entrusted* with the Word that should melt them, do suffer it to freez between
our Lips. We speak indeed of Soul-concerning Truths, and set before them Life
and Death; But it is with such Self-seeking affectation, and in such a lazy,
formal, customary strain, (like the pace the Spaniard rides) that the people
little think we are in good sadness, or that our Hearts do mean as our Tongues
do speak. I have heard of some Tongues that can lick a co^l of fire till it be
cold. I fear these Tongues are in most of our Mouths, and that the Breath that
is given us to blow up this fire, till it flame in our Peoples Souls, is rather
used to blow it out. Such Preaching is it that has brought the most to hear
Sermons, as they say their Creed and Pater Nosters, even as a few good words of
course. How many a cold and mean Sermon, that yet contains most precious
Truths? The things of God which we handle are Divine; but our manner of handling
too Humane: And there is little or none that ever we touch, but we leave the
print of our fingers behind us; but if God should speak this Word himself, it
would be a piercing, melting Word indeed. How full of comfort are the Gospel
Promises? yet do we often so heartlesly declare them, that the broken,
bleeding-hearted Saints, are much deprived of their Joys. Christ is indeed a
precious Pearl, but often held forth in Leprous hands: And thus do we disgrace
the Riches of the Gospel, when it is the Work of our Calling to make it
honorable in the eyes of men; and we dim the glory of that Jewel, by our dull
and low expressions, and dunghill conversations, whose luster we do pretend to
discover; while the hearers judge of it by our expressions, and not its proper,
genuine worth. The truth is, the best of men do apprehend but little of what
God in his Word expresses, and what they do apprehend, they are unable to
utter. Humane language is not so copious as the hearts conceivings are; and
what we possibly might declare, yet through our own unbelief, stupidity,
laziness, and other corruptions, we usually fail in; and what we do declare,
yet the darkness of our peoples understandings, and the sad senslesness of
their hearts, does usually shut out, and make void. So that as all the Works of
God are perfect in their season, as he is perfect; so are all the works of man
as himself, imperfect: And those which God performs by the hand of man, will
too much savor of the instrument. If an Angel from Heaven should preach the
Gospel, yet could he not deliver it according to its glory; muchless we who
never saw what they have seen, and keep this Treasure in Earthen Vessels. The
comforts that flow through Sermons, through Sacraments, through Reading, and
Company, and Conference, and Creatures, are but half comforts; and the Life
that comes by these, is but a half life, in comparison of those which the
Almighty shall speak with his own mouth, and reach forth to us with his own
hand. The Christian knows by experience now, that his most immediate Joys are
his sweetest Joys; which have least of man, and are most directly from the
Spirit. That's one reason, as I conceive, why Christians who are much in secret
prayer, and in meditation and contemplation (rather then they who are more in
hearing, reading and conference) are men of greatest life and joy; because they
are nearer the Wellhead, and have all more immediately from God himself. And
that I conceive the reason also, Why we are more undisposed to those secret
duties, and can easilier bring our hearts to hear, and read, and confer, then
to secret Prayer, Self-examination, and Meditation; because in the former is
more of man, and in these we approach the Lord alone, and our Natures draw back
from the most spiritual and fruitful Duties. Not that we should therefore cast
off the other, and neglect any Ordinance of God: To live above them while we
use them, is the way of a Christian: But so to live above Ordinances, as to
live without them, is to live without the compass of the Gospel Lines, and so
without the Government of Christ. Let such beware least while they would be
higher then Christians, they prove in the end lower then men. We are not yet
come to the time and state where we shall have all from Gods immediate hand. As
God has made all Creatures, and instituted all Ordinances for us; so will he
continue our need of all. We must yet be contented with Love Tokens from him,
till we come to receive our All in him. We must be thankful if Joseph sustain
our lives, by relieving us in our Famine with his Provisions, till we come to
see his own face. There Is joy in these remote receivings; but the fullness is in
his own presence. O Christians, you will then know the difference, betwixt the
Creature and Creator, and the content that each of them affords. We shall then
have Light without a Candle; and a perpetual day without the Sun: For the City
has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory of
God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, Revel. 21.23. Nay,
There shall be no night there, and they need no candle, nor light of the Sun;
for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever,
Revel. 22.5. We shall then have rest without sleep, and be kept from cold
without our clothing, and need no Fig Leaves to hide our shame: For God will
be our Rest, and Christ our clothing, and shame and sin will cease together.
We shall then have health without Physic, and strength without the use of
food; for the Lord God will be our strength, and the light of his countenance
will be health to our souls, and marrow to our bones. We shall then (and never
till then) have enlightened understandings without Scriptures, and be governed
without a written Law: For the Lord will perfect his Law in our hearts, and we
shall be all perfectly taught of God; his own will shall be our Law, and his
own face shall be our light for ever. Then shall we have joy, which we drew not
from the promises, nor was fetched us home by Faith or Hope: Beholding and
possessing, will exclude the most of these. We shall then have Communion
without Sacraments, when Christ shall drink with us of the fruit of the Vine
new, that is, Refresh us with the comforting Wine of immediate fruition, in the
Kingdom of his Father. To have necessities, but no supply, is the case of them
in Hell; to have necessity supplied by the means of Creatures, is the case of
us on Earth; to have necessity supplied immediately from God, is the case of
the Saints in Heaven; to have no necessity at all, is the prerogative of God
himself. The more of God is seen and received with, and by the means, and
Creature here, the nearer is our state like that in glory. In a word, We have
now our Mercies, as Benjamin had Joseph's cup; Genesis 44.12.
we find them at a distance from God, and scarcely know from whence they come,
and understand not the good will intended in them, but are often ready to fear
they come in wrath, and think they will but work our ruin. But when we shall
feed at Joseph's own house, yea, receive our portion from his own hand; when he
shall fully unbowel his love unto us, and take us to dwell in Goshen by him;
when we shall live in our Fathers house and presence, and God shall be All, and
in All; then are we indeed at home in Rest.

SECT. VI.. 6.

SIxthly. It will be a seasonable Rest. Mark 12.2. Luke 20.10. Psalm. 1.3. Isa.
50.4.
Again, a further excellency is this: It will be unto us a seasonable Rest. He
that expects the fruit of his Vineyard in season, and makes his people as
Trees planted by the waters, fruitful in their season; he will also give them
the Crown in season. He that will have the words of Joy spoken to the weary in
season, will sure cause that time of Joy to appear in the meetest season. And
they who knew the season of Grace, and did repent and believe in season, Gal 6
9.
shall also if they faint not, reap in season. If God will not miss the season
of common Mercies, even to his enemies; Jere. 5 4. and 33.20.
but will give both the former and latter rain in their season; and the
appointed weeks of the Harvest in its season, and by an inviolable Covenant
has established day and night in their seasons: Then sure the Harvest of the
Saints, and their day of gladness shall not miss its season. Doubtless he that
would not stay a day longer then his promise, Exodus 12 40, 41.
but brought Israel out of Egypt that self same day that the 430 years were
expired; neither will he fail of one day or hour of the fittest season for his
peoples glory. And as Christ failed not to come in the fullness of time, even
then when Daniel and others had foretold his coming; so in the fullness and
fitness of time will his second coming be. He that has given the Stork* Jere.
8.7.
the Crane, the Swallow, to know their appointed time, will surely keep his
time appointed. When we have had in this world a long night of sad darkness,
will not the day-breaking, and the arising of the Sun of Righteousness be then
seasonable? When we have endured a hard Winter in this cold Climate, will not
the reviving Spring be then seasonable? When we have (as Paul) sailed slowly
many days, Acts. 27.7, 9.
and much time spent, and sailing now grown more dangerous; and when neither
Sun nor Stars in many days appear, and no small tempest lies on us, and all
hope that we shall be saved, is almost taken away, do you think the Haven of
Rest is not then seasonable? When we have passed a long and tedious Journey,
and that through no small dangers; is not Home then seasonable? When we have
had a long and perilous War, and have lived in the midst of furious Enemies,
and have been forced to stand on a perpetual watch, and received from them many
a wound; would not a Peace with Victory be now seasonable? When we have been
captivated in many years imprisonment, and insulted over by scornful foes, and
suffered many pinching wants, and hardly enjoyed bare necessaries; would not a
full deliverance to a most plentiful State, even from this prison to a Throne,
be now seasonable? Surely, a man would think who looks upon the face of the
World, that Rest should to all men seem seasonable. Some of us are languishing
under continual weakness, and groaning under most grievous pains, crying in the
morning, Would God it were evening, and in the evening, Would God it were
morning; weary of going, weary of sitting, weary of standing, weary of lying,
weary of eating, of speaking, of waking, weary of our very friends, weary of
our selves: O, how often has this been mine own case; and is not Rest yet
seasonable? Some are complaining under the pressures of the times; weary of
their Taxes, weary of their Quartering, weary of Plunderings, weary of their
fears and dangers, weary of their poverty and wants; and is not Rest yet
seasonable? Whither can you go, or into what company can you come, where the
voice of complaining does not show, that men live in a continual weariness? but
especially the Saints, who are most weary of that which the world cannot feel.
What godly society almost can you fall into, but you shall hear by their moans
that somewhat aileth them? some weary of a blind mind, doubting concerning
the way they walk in, unsettled in almost all their thoughts; some weary of a
hard heart, some of a proud, some of a passionate, and some of all these, and
much more some weary of their daly doubtings, and fears concerning their
spiritual estate; and some of the want of spiritual Joys, and some of the
sense of Gods wrath and is not Rest now seasonable? when a poor Christian has
desired, and prayed, and waited for deliverance many a year, is it not then
seasonable? When he is ready almost to give up, and says, I am afraid I shall
not reach the end, and that my faith and patience will scarce hold out; is not
this a fit season for Rest? If it were to Joseph a seasonable message, which
called him from the Prison to Pharohs Court: Or if the return of his Benjamin,
the tidings that Joseph was yet alive, and the sight of the Chariots, which
should convoy him to Egypt, were seasonable for the Reviving of Jacobs Spirits;
then me thinks, the message for a release from the flesh, and our convoy to
Christ, should be a seasonable and welcome message. Dan. 6.19, etc.
If the voice of the King were seasonable to Daniel, early in the morning
calling him from his Den, that he might advance him to more then former
dignity; then me thinks that morning voice of Christ our King, calling us from
our terrors among Lions, to possess his Rest among his Saints, should be to us
a very seasonable voice. Will not Canaan be seasonable after so many years
travel, and that through a hazardous and grievous Wilderness? Indeed to the
world its never in season: they are already at their own home; and have what
they most desire: they are not weary of their present State; the Saints sorrow
is their Joy; and the Saints weariness is their Rest; Their weary day is
coming, where there is no more expectation of Rest: But for the thirsty soul to
enjoy the fountain; and the hungry to be filled with the bread of Life; and the
naked to be clothed from above, for the children to come to their Fathers
house, and the dis-joyned members, to be conjoined with their Head; me thinks
this should be seldom unseasonable. When the Atheistical world began to insult,
and question the Truth of Scripture promises, and ask us, Where is now your
God? where is your long looked for glory? where is the promise of your Lords
coming? O, how seasonable then, to convince these unbelievers, to silence these
scoffers, to comfort the dejected, waiting believer, will the appearing of our
Lord be? we are often grudging now, that we have not a great share of comforts;
that our deliverances are not more speedy and eminent; that the world prospers
more then we; that our prayers are not presently answered; not considering,
that our portion is kept to a fitter season; that these are not always Winter
fruits, but when Summer comes we shall have our Harvest. We grudg that we do
not find a Canaan in the Wilderness; or cities of Rest in Noah's Ark; and the
songs of Sion in a strange Land; that we have not a harbor in the main Ocean;
or find not our home in the middle way; and are not crowned in the midst of
the fight; and have not our Rest in the heat of the day; and have not our
inheritance before we are at age; and have not Heaven, before we leave the
Earth; and would not all this be very unreasonable? I confess in regard of the
Churches service, the removing of the Saints may sometimes appear to us
unseasonable; therefore does God use it as a Judgment* and therefore the Church
has ever prayed hard before they would part with them, and greatly laid to
heart their loss? Therefore are the great mournings at the Saint departures,
and the sad hearts that accompany them to their graves; but this is not
especially for the departed, but for themselves and their children, as Christ
bid the weeping women; Therefore also it is that the Saints in danger of death,
have often begged for their lives with that Argument; What profit is there in my
blood when, I go down to the Pit? Psalm. 30.9. Will thou show wonders to the
dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee? shall thy loving kindness be
declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction? shall thy wonders be
known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness? Psalm.
88.10. for in death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall
give thee thanks? Psalm. 6.5. And this was it that brought Paul to a straight,
because he knew it was better for the church that he should remain here; I must
confess it is one of my saddest thoughts, to reckon up the useful instruments,
when God has lately called out of his Vineyard, when the Loyterers are many,
and the Harvest great, and very many Congregations desolate, and the people as
sheep without shepherds, and yet the laborers called from their work,
especially when a door of Liberty and opportunity is open, we cannot but lament
so sore a judgment, and think the removal in regard of the Church,
unseasonable: I know I speak but your own thoughts; and you are too ready to
overrun me in application: I fear you are too sensible of what I speak, and
therefore am loath to stir in your sore. I perceive you in the posture of the
Ephesian Elders, and had rather abate the violence of your passions: our
applications are quicker about our sufferings then our sins; and we will
quicklier say, This loss is mine, then This fault is mine. But O consider, my
dear friends, has God any need of such a worm as I? cannot he a 1000 ways
supply your wants? you know when your case was worse, and yet he provided. Has
he work to do and will he not find instruments? And though you see not for the
present where they should be had; they are never the further off for that.
Where was the world before the creation? and where was the promised seed, when
Isaac lay on the Altar? Where was the Land of Promise, when Isreal's burden was
increased? or when all the old stock save only two were consumed in the
Wilderness? Where was David's Kingdom when he was hunted in the Wilderness? or
the Glory of Christ's Kingdom when he was in the Grave? or when he first sent
his 12. Apostles? How suddenly did the number of Laborers increase immediately
upon the Reformation by Luther? and how soon were the rooms of those filled up,
whom the rage of the papists had sacrificed in the flames? Have you not lately
seen so many difficulties overcome, and so many improbable works accomplished,
that might silence unbelief, one would think, for ever? But if all this do not
quiet you (for sorrow and discontent are unruly passions) yet at least remember
this; suppose the worst you fear should happen, yet shall it be well with all
the Saints; your own turns will shortly come; and we shall all be housed with
Christ together; where you will want your Ministers and friends no more. And
for the poor world which is left behind, whose unregenerate state causes your
grief; why consider; shall man pretend to be more merciful then God? Has not
he more interest then we both in the Church and in the world? and more bowels
of compassion to commiserate their distress? There is a season for Judgment as
well as for mercy: and if he will have the most of men to perish for their sin,
and to suffer the eternal tormenting flames; must we question his goodness, or
manifest our dislike of the severity of his judgments? I confess we cannot but
bleed over our desolate congregations; and that it ill beseems us to make light
of Gods indignation: but yet we should (as Aaron when his sons were slain) hold
our peace, Levit. 10.3. Psalm. 39.9.
and be silent, because it is the Lords doing: And say as David, If I (and his
people) shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
he will bring me again, and show me them, and his Habitation: But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do with me as
seems good unto him. I conclude then, that whatsoever it is to those that are
left behind, yet the Saints departure to themselves is usually seasonable. I
say, usually, because I know that a very Saint may have a death in Secundum
quid.
some respect unseasonable, though it do translate him into this Rest. He may
dye in Judgment as good Josiah: he may die for his sin: 1 Cor. 11.30, 32.
For the abuse of the Sacrament many were weak and sickly, and many fallen
asleep, even of those who were thus Judged and chastened by God, that they
might not be condemned with the world: He may die by the hand of public
Justice; or die in a way of public scandal: He may die in a weak degree of
grace, and consequently have a less degree of glory. He may die in smaller
improvements of his talents, Luke 19.17, 18, 19.
and so be Ruler but of few Cities. The best Wheat may be cut down before its
ripe; Therefore it is promised to the Righteous as a blessing, that they shall
be brought as a shock of Corn into the Barn in season. Job 5.26.
Nay its possible he may die by his own hands; Though some Divines think such
Doctrine not fit to be taught, least it encourage the tempted to commit the
same sin; Mr. Capell Temp.
but God has left preservatives enough against sin, without our devising more
of our own; neither has he need of our lie in his glory. He has fixed that
principle so deep in Nature, that all should endeavor their own preservation;
that I never knew any whose understanding was not crazed or lost, much subject
to that sin: even most of the Melancholy are more fearful to die then other
men. And this terror is preservative enough of that kind, That such committing
of a heinous known Sin, is a sad sign, where there is the free use of Reason:
That therefore they make their Salvation more questionable: That they die most
woeful scandals to the Church: That however, the sin it self should make the
godly to abhor it, were there no such danger or scandal attending it, etc. But
to exclude from salvation of all those poor creatures, who in Fevers,
Phrensies, Madness, Melancholy, etc. shall commit this sin, is a way of
prevention which Scripture teaches not, and too uncomfortable to the friends
of the deceased. The common argument which they urge, drawn from the necessity
of a particular repentance, for every particular known sin; as it is not
universally true, so, were it granted, it would exclude from salvation all men
breathing: For there was never any man (save Christ) who died not in some
particular sin, either of Commission, or Omission, great or small, which he
has no more time to repent of, then the sinner in Question; But yet, this may
well be called, Secundum quid.
untimely death: But in the ordinary course of Gods dealings, you may easily
observe, that he purposely makes his peoples last hour in this life, to be of
all other to the flesh most bitter, and in the Spirit most sweet, and that they
who feared death through the most of their lives, yet at last are more willing
of it then ever; and all to make their Rest more seasonable. Bread and drink
are always good; but at such a time as Samarias siege, to have plenty of food in
stead of Doves dung, in one nights space; or in such a thirst as Ishmaels or
Sampsons, to have supply of water by miracle in a moment; these are seasonable.
So this Rest is always good to the Saints, and usually also is most seasonable
Rest.

SECT. VII. 7.

SEventhly. It will be a Rest suitable.
A further excellency of this Rest is this; As it will be a seasonable, so a
suitable Rest: Suited, 1. To the Natures. 2. To the desires. 3. To the
necessities of the Saints.

1. To their Natures. To our Natures.
If sutableness concur not with excellency, the best things may be bad to us:
For it is that which makes things good in themselves to be good to us. In our
choice of friends we often pass by the more excellent, to choose the more
suitable. Every good agrees not with every nature. To live in a free and open
air, under the warming Rays of the Sun, is excellent to man, because suitable:
But the flesh which is of another nature, does rather choose another element;
and that which is to us so excellent, would quickly be to it destructive. The
choicest dainties which we feed upon our selves, would be to our Beast, as an
unpleasing, so an insufficient sustenance. The Iron which the Ostrich well
digests, would be but hard food for man: Even among men, contrary appetites
delight in contrary objects. You know the Proverb, One man's meat, is another
man's poison. Now here is suitableness and excellency conjoined. The new nature
of the Saints, does suit their Spirits to this Rest: And indeed their holiness
is nothing else, but a spark taken from this Element, and by the Spirit of
Christ kindled in their hearts, the flame whereof as mindful of its own Divine
original, does ever mount the soul aloft, and tend to the place from whence it
comes: It works toward its own Center, and makes us Restless, till there we
Rest. Gold and earthly Glory, temporal Crowns and Kingdoms could not make a
rest for Saints. 1 Pet. 1.18, 23.
As they were not Redeemed with so low a price, so neither are they endued with
so low a nature. These might be a portion for lower spirits, and fit those
whose natures they suit with; but so they cannot a Saint-like nature. As God
will have from them a Spiritual Worship, suitable to his own Spiritual Being;
so will he provide them a spiritual Rest, suitable to his peoples spiritual
nature. As Spirits have not fleshly substances, so neither delight they in
fleshly pleasures: These are too gross and vile for them. When carnal persons
think of Heaven, their conceivings of it are also carnal; and their notions
answerable to their own natures: And were it possible for such to enjoy it, it
would sure be their trouble, and not their Rest, because so contrary to their
dispositions. A Heaven of good-fellowship, of wine and wantonness, of gluttony
and all voluptuousness, would far better please them, as being more agreeing to
their natures. But a heaven of the knowledge of God and his Christ; a delightful
complacency in that mutual love: an everlasting rejoicing in the fruition of
our God; a perpetual singing of his high praises; this is a heaven for a Saint,
a spiritual Rest, suitable to a spiritual nature. Then, dear friends, we shall
live in our own element. We are now as the fish in some small vessel of water,
that has only so much as will keep him alive; but what is that to the full
Ocean? we have a little Air let in to us, to afford us breathing; but what is
that to the sweet and fresh gales upon Mount Sion? we have a beam of the Sun to
lighten our darkness, and a warm Ray to keep us from freezing; but then we
shall live in its light, and be revived by its heat for ever. O blessed be that
hand which fetched a coal, and kindled a fire in our dead hearts, from that same
Altar, where we must offer our Sacrifice everlastingly. To be locked up in Gold
and in Pearl, would be but a wealthy starving; to have our Tables with Plate
and ornament richly furnished without meat, is but to be richly famished; to be
lifted up with humane applause, is but a very airy felicity; to be advanced to
the Sovereignty of all the Earth, would be but to wear a Crown of Thorns; to be
filled with the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, would be but to further the
conviction of our unhappiness: But to have a nature like God, his very Image,
holy as he is holy, and to have God himself to be our happiness, how well do
these agree? Whether that in 2 Pet. 1.4. be meant (as is commonly understood)
of our own inherent renewed nature, figuratively called Divine, or rather of
Christ's Divine Nature without us, properly so called; whereof we are also made
partakers, I know not: But certainly were not our own in some sort Divine, the
enjoyment of the true Divine Nature could not be to us a suitable Rest.

2. It is suitable also to the desires of the Saints: To our Desires.
For such as their natures, such be their desires; and such as their desires,
such will be their Rest. Indeed, we have now a mixed Nature; and from contrary
principles, do arise contrary desires: As they are flesh, they have desires of
flesh, and as they are sinful, so they have sinful desires. Perhaps they could
be too willing whilst these are stirring, to have delights and riches, and
honor, and sin it self. But these are not their prevailing Desires, nor such as
in their deliberate choice they will stand too; therefore is it not they, but
sin and flesh. These are not the desires that this Rest is suited to, for they
will not accompany them to their Rest. To provide contents to satisfy these,
were to provide food for them that are dead. For they that are in Christ, Gal.
5.24.
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof. But it is the
Desires of our renewed Nature, and those which the Christian will ordinarily
own, which this Rest suited too. Whilst our desires remain corrupted and
misguided, it is a far greater Mercy to deny them, yea, to destroy them, then
to satisfy them: But those which are Spiritual, are of his own planting, and
he will surely water them, and give the increase. Is it so great a work to
raise them in us; and shall they after all this, vanish and fail? To send the
Word and Spirit, Mercies and Judgments, to raise the sinners desires from the
Creature to God, and then to suffer them so raised, all to perish without
success; this were to multiply the Creatures misery: And then were the work of
Sanctification, a designed preparative to our torment and tantalizing; but no
way conducible to our happy Rest. He quickened our hungering and thirst for
Righteousness, that he might make us happy in a full satisfaction. Christian,
this is a Rest after thine own heart; it contains all that thy heart can
wish; that which thou longest for, prayest for, laborest for, there thou shall
find it all. Thou had rather have God in Christ, then all the world; why
there thou shall have him. O what would thou not give for assurance of his
love? why there thou shall have assurance beyond suspicion; Nay, thy desires
cannot now extend to the height of what thou shall there obtain. Was it not an
high favor of God to Solomon, to promise to give him whatsoever he would ask?
why every Christian has such a promise. Desire what thou can, and ask what
thou will as a Christian, and it shall be given thee; not only to half of the
Kingdom, but to the enjoyment both of Kingdom and King. This is a life of
desire and prayer; but that is a life of satisfaction and enjoyment. O
therefore, that we were but so wise, as to limit those desires, which we know
shall not be satisfied; and those which we know not, whether or no they will be
satisfied, and especially those which we know should not be satisfied; and to
keep up continually in heat and life, those desires which we are sure shall
have full satisfaction. And O that sinners would also consider, That seeing God
will not give them a felicity suitable to their sensual desires, it is
therefore their wisdom, to endevor for desires suitable to the true felicity,
and to direct their Ship to the right Harbor, seeing they cannot bring the
Harbor to their Ship.

To our necessities.
3. This Rest is very suitable to the Saints necessities also, as well as to
their natures and desires. It contains whatsoever they truly wanted; not
supplying them with the gross created comforts, which now they are forced to
make use of; which like Saul's Armor on David, are more burden then benefit: But
they shall there have the benefit without the burden; and the pure Spirits
extracted (as it were) shall make up their Cordial, without the mixture of any
drossie or earthly substance. It was Christ, and perfect Holiness, which they
most needed, and with these shall they here be principally supplied. Their
other necessities are far better removed, then supplied in the present carnal
way. It is better to have no need of meat, and drink, and clothing, and
creatures, then to have both the need, and the Creature continued. Their
Plaster will be fitted to the quality of the sore. The Rain which Elias prayer
procured, was not more seasonable after the three years drought, then this Rest
will be to this thirsty Soul. It will be with us, Luke 8.43.
as with the diseased man, who had lien at the waters, and continued diseased
thirty eight years, when Christ did fully cure him in a moment; Mark 5.25.
or with the woman, who having had the issue of blood, and spent all she had
upon Physicians, and suffered the space of twelve years, was healed by one
touch of Christ. So when we have lien at Ordinances, and Duties, and Creatures,
all our life time, and spent all, and suffered much, we shall have all done by
Christ in a moment. But we shall see more of this under the next head.

SECT. VIII. 8.

Eighthly. It will be a perfect Rest.
Another excellency of our Rest will be this, That it will be absolutely
perfect and complete; and this both in the sincerity and universality of it. In
the sincerity of it.
We shall then have Joy without sorrow, and Rest without weariness: As there is
no mixture of our corruption with our Graces, so no mixture of sufferings with
our solace: there is none of those waves in that Harbor, which now so toss us
up and down: We are now sometime at the Gates of Heaven, and presently almost
as low as Hell; we wonder at those changes of Providence toward us, being
scarcely two days together in a like condition. To day we are well, and
conclude the bitterness of death is past; to morrow sick, and conclude we shall
shortly perish by our distempers; to day in esteem, to morrow in disgrace; to
day we have friends, to morrow none; to day in gladness, to morrow in sadness;
na^* we have Wine and Vinegar in the same Cup, and our pleasantest Food has a
taste of the Gall. 1 Cor. 12.7.
If Revelations should raise us to the third Heaven, the messenger of Satan
must presently buffet us, and the prick in the flesh will fetch us down: But
there is none of this unconstancy, nor mixtures in Heaven. 1 John 4.18.
If perfect Love cast out fear, then perfect Joy must needs cast out sorrow;
and perfect happiness exclude all the relics of misery. In the Universality
of it.
There will be an universal perfecting of all our parts and powers, and a
universal removal of all our evils. In regard of good enjoyed.
And though the positive part be the sweetest, and that which draws the other
after it, even as the rising of the Sun excludes the darkness; In regard of the
evils we shall be freed from.
yet is not the negative part to be slighted, even our freedom from so many and
great Calamities. Let us therefore look over these more punctually, and see
what it is that we shall there Rest from. In general, It is from all evil.
Particularly, First, from the evil of Sin; secondly, and of suffering.

We shall Rest from sin. Revel. 21.27.
First, It excludes nothing more directly then sin; whether original, and of
Nature; or actual, and of Conversation: For there enters nothing that
defiles, nor that works abomination, nor that makes a lie; when they are
there, the Saints are Saints indeed. He that will wash them with his heart
blood, rather then suffer them to enter unclean, will now perfectly see to
that; he who has undertaken to present them to his Father, Ephesians. 5.27.
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but perfectly holy, and without
blemish, will now most certainly perform his undertaking. What need Christ at
all to have died, if Heaven could have contained imperfect souls. 1 John 3* 8.
For to this end came he into the world, that he might put away the works of
the devil. His Blood and Spirit have not done all this, 2 Cor. 6.14.
to leave us after all defiled. For what communion has light with darkness?
and what fellowship has Christ with Belial? He that has prepared for sin the
torments of Hell, will never admit it into the Blessedness of Heaven. Therefore
Christian, never fear this; if thou be once in Heaven, thou shall sin no more.
Is not this glad news to thee, who have prayed, and watched and labored against
it so long? I know if it were offered to thy choice, thou would rather choose
to be freed from sin, then to be made heir of all the world: Why wait till
then, and thou shall have thy desire: That hard heart, those vile thoughts,
which did lie down and rise with thee, which did accompany thee to every duty,
which thou could no more leave behind thee, then leave thy self behind
thee, shall now be left behind for ever. They might accompany thee to death,
but they cannot proceed a step further. From sin in the understanding.
Thy understanding shall never more be troubled with darkness: Ignorance and
Error are inconsistent with this Light. Now thou walk like a man in the
twilight, ever afraid of being out of the way: Thou see so many Religions in
the World, that thou fear thy one cannot be only the right among all these
If a man should defer his Study of any Art or Science, till the Writers thereof
did fully, and unitedly consent, It would be as vain a thing, as if a man did
purpose his journey from London to York, but should make a vow not to set
forward till all the Clocks in London strike together. Fulbecks Directions to
study the Law, page 26.

The Writers in all ^ciences differ not from the uncertainty of the Sciences,
but their own imperfection; yea, in History, which reports matter of Fact.
Livy against P^l^b^us* Plutarch against Livy, Sigonius against Plutarch,
Ziphilinus against Dio, whom he interpreted and abridgeth. Non est litigiosa
Juris Scientia sed Ignorantia, Cicero de Finibus, (...) 2. The best and most
grave Man will confess, That he is ignorant of many things, says Cicero.
Tuscul. 3. Selon was not ashamed to say, That in his old age he was a Learner.
And Ju^^^an the Lawyer said, That when he had one Foot in the Grave, yet he
would have the other in the school.


: Thou see the Scripture so exceeding difficult, and every one pleading it
for his own cause, and bringing such specious Arguments for so contrary
Opinions, that it intangleth thee in a Labarinth of perplexities: Thou see so
many godly men on this side, and so many on that, and each zealous for his own
way, that thou art amazed, not knowing which way to take. And thus do doubtings
and fears accompany darkness, and we are ready to stumble at every thing in our
way. But then will all this darkness be dispelled, and our blind
understandings fully opened, and we shall have no more doubts of our way: We
shall know which was the right side, and which the wrong; which was the Truth,
and which the Error. O what would we give to know clearly, all the profound
Mysteries in the Doctrine of Decree, of Redemption, of Justification, of the
nature of Grace, of the Covenants, of the Divine Attributes, etc. What would
we not give to see all dark Scriptures made plain, to see all seeming
contradictions reconciled! Why when Glory has taken the vail from our eyes,
all this will be known in a moment; we shall then see clearly into all the
controversies about Doctrine or Discipline that now perplex us. The poorest
Christian is presently there a more perfect Divine, then any is here. We are
now through our Ignorance, subject to such mutability; that in points not
fundamental, we change as the Moon; that it is cast as a just reproach upon us;
that we profess our Religion with Reserves, and resolvedly settle upon almost
nothing; that we are to day of one opinion, and within this week, or month, or
year, of another; and yet alas! we cannot help it: The reproach may fall upon
all mankind, as long as we have need of daily growth: Would they have us
believe before we understand? or say, we believe when indeed we do not? shall
we profess our selves resolved, before we ever thoroughly studied? or say, we
are certain, when we are conscious that we are not? But when once our Ignorance
is perfectly healed, then shall we be settled, resolved men; then shall our
reproach be taken from us, and we shall never change our judgment more; then
shall we be clear and certain in all, and cease to be Scepticks any more. Our
Ignorance now does lead us into Error, to the grief of our more knowing
Brethren, to the disturbing of the Churches quiet, and interrupting her
desirable harmonious consent, to the scandalizing of others, and weakening of
our selves. How many an humble faithful Soul, is seduced into Error, and little
knows it? Loath they are to err, God knows, and therefore read, and pray, and
confer, and yet err still, and confirmed in it more and more: And in lesser
and more difficult points, how should it be otherwise? He that is acquainted
amongst men, and knows the quality of Professors in England, must needs know,
the generality of them are no great Scholars, nor have much read, or studied
Controversies, nor are men of profoundest natural parts, nor have the Ministers
of England much preached Controversies to them, but were glad if their hearers
were brought to Christ, and got so much knowledge as might help to Salvation, as
knowing that to be their great work. And can it be expected, That men void of
Learning, and strength of parts, unstudied and untaught, should at the first on
set know those Truths, which they are almost incapable of knowing at all? when
the greatest Divines of clearest Judgment, acknowledge so much difficulty, That
they could almost find in their hearts, sometimes to profess them quite beyond
their reach? Except we will allow them to lay aside their divine Faith, and
take up an humane, and see with other men's eyes, the weight and weakness of
Arguments, and not with their own; It cannot be thought, That the most of
Christians, no, nor the most Divines, should be free from erring in those
difficult points, where we know they have not Head-peeces able to reach.
Indeed, if it were the way of the Spirit to teach us miraculously, as the
Apostles were taught the knowledge of Tongues, without the intervening use of
Reason; or if the Spirit infused the acts of Knowledge, as he does the immediate
knowing Power, then he that had most of the Spirit, would not only know best,
but also know most; but we have enough to convince us of the contrary to this.
But O that happy approaching day, when Error shall vanish away for ever! When
our understandings shall be filled with God himself, whose light will leave no
darkness in us! His face shall be the Scripture, where we shall read the Truth;
and himself instead of Teachers and Councels, to perfect our understandings,
and acquaint us with himself, who is the perfect Truth. No more Error, no more
Scandal to others, no more Disquiet to our own spirits, no more mistaking zeal
for falsehood, because our understandings have no more sin. Many a Godly man
has here in his mistaken zeal, been a means to deceive and pervert his
Brethren, and when he sees his own Error, cannot again tell how to undeceive
them. But there we shall all conspire in one Truth, as being one in him, who is
that Truth.

And as we shall rest from all the sin of our understandings, From sin of Will,
Affection, and Conversation.
so of our wills, affection and conversation: We shall no more retain this
rebelling principle, which is still withdrawing us from God, and addicting us
to backsliding: Doubtless we shall no more be oppressed with the power of our
corruptions, nor vexed with their presence: No Pride, Passion, Sloathfulness,
Senselesness shall enter with us; no strangness to God, and the things of God;
no coldness of affections, nor imperfection in our love; no uneven walking, nor
grieving of the Spirit; no scandalous action, or unholy conversation; we shall
Rest from all these for ever. Then shall our understandings receive their Light
from the face of God, as the full Moon from the open Sun, where there is no
Earth to interpose betwixt them; then shall our wills correspond to the Divine
Will, as face answers face in a Glass; and the same his will shall be our Law
and Rule, from which we shall never swerve again. Now our corruptions, as the
Anakims, dismay us; and as the Canaanites in Israel, Josh 23.13.
they are left for pricks in our sides, and thorns in our eyes; and as the
bondwoman and her son in Abraham's house, Genesis 21.9.
they do but abuse us, and make our lives a burden to us: But then shall the
bondwoman and her son be cast out, and shall not be heirs with us in our Rest.
As Moses said to Israel, Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here
this day, every one whatsoever is right in his own eyes: For ye are not as yet
come to the Rest, and to the Inheritance, which the Lord your God gives you.
Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9. I conclude therefore with the words next to my Text. Heb. 4.10.
For he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own works,
as God from his. So that there is a perfect Rest from sin.

9.
SECT. IX.
From suffering.
2. IT is also a perfect Rest from suffering. When the cause is gone, the effect
cease. Our sufferings were but the consequents of our sinning, and here they
both shall cease together. I will show particularly ten kinds of suffering
which we shall there rest from.

From doubts of Gods Love.
1. We shall Rest from all our perplexing doubts and fears: It shall no more be
said, That Dr. Preston of effectual Faith, page 24.
doubts are like the Thistle, a bad weed, but growing in good ground; they
shall now be weeded out, and trouble the gracious soul no more. No more need of
so many Sermons, Books, and marks, and signs to resolve the poor doubting
soul: The full fruition of Love it self has now resolved his doubts for ever.
We shall hear that kind of language no more, What shall I do to know my state?
How shall I know that God is my father? That my heart is upright? That
Conversion is true? That Faith is sincere? O, I am afraid my sins are
unpardoned: O, I fear that all is but in hypocrisy; I fear that God will
reject me from his presence; I doubt he does not hear my prayers: How can he
accept so vile a wretch? So hard-hearted, unkind a sinner? Such an
under-valuer of Christ as I am? All this kind of language is there turned into
another tune; even into the praises of him, who has forgiven, who has
converted, who has accepted, yea, who has glorified a wretch so unworthy. So
that it will now be as impossible to doubt and fear, as to doubt of the food
which is in our bellies, or to fear it is night, when we see the Sun shining:
If Thomas could doubt with his finger in the wounds of Christ, yet in Heaven I
am sure he cannot; If we could doubt of what we see, or hear, or taste, or
feel; yet I am sure we cannot of what we there possess. Sure this will be
comfort to the sad and drooping soul, whose life was nothing but a doubting
distress, and their language nothing but a constant complaining. If God would
speak peace, it would ease them; but when he shall possess them of this peace,
they shall rest from all their doubts and fears for ever.

SECT. X. 10.

2. WE shall rest from all that sense of Gods displeasure, From all sense of
Gods displeasure.
which was our greatest torment; whether manifested mediately or immediately.
For he will cause his fury toward us to rest, and his jealousy to cease, and
he will be angry with us no more, Ezekiel. 16.42. Surely Hell shall not be mixed
with Heaven: There is the place for the glorifying of Justice, prepared of
purpose to manifest wrath; but Heaven is only for Mercy and Love. Job 3. and
13.26 and 16.12, 13, 14. and 7.20.
Joh does not now use his old language, Thou writest bitter things against me,
and take me for thine enemy, and set me up as a mark to shoot at, etc. O,
how contrary now to all this? David does not now complain, That the arrows of
the Almighty stick in him; that his wounds stink, and are corrupt; that his
sore runs and cease not; Psalm. 38.
that his moisture is as the drought of Summer; Psalm. 69.3.
that there is no soundness in his flesh, because of Gods displeasure; nor rest
in his bones, because of sin; that he is weary of crying, his throat is dried,
his eyes fail in waiting for God; that he remembers God, and is troubled; that
in complaining his spirit is overwhelmed; Psalm. 77.2, 3.
that his soul refuses to be comforted, that Gods wrath lies hard upon him;
Psalm. 88.7.
and that he afflicts him with all his waves. O, how contrary now are David's
Songs. Now he says, I spoke it in my haste, and this was my infirmity. Here
the Christian is often complaining: O, if it were the wrath of man, I could bear
it; but the wrath of the Almighty, who can bear? O, that all the world were
mine enemies, so that I were assured that he were my Friend! If it were a
stranger, it were nothing; but that my dearest Friend, my own Father, should be
so provoked against me, This wounds my very soul! If it were a Creature, I
would contemn it; but if God be angry, who may endure? If he be against me, who
can be for me? And if he will cast me down, who can raise me up? But O that
blessed day, when all these dolorous complaints will be turned into admiring
thankfulness! and all sense of Gods displeasure swallowed up in that Ocean of
infinite Love! when Sense shall convince us, that fury dwells not in God: And
though for a little moment he hide his face, yet with everlasting compassion,
will he receive and embrace us; when he shall say to Sion, Arise and shine, for
thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, Isa. 60.2.

11.
SECT. XI.
From Satan's Temptations.
3. WE shall rest from all the Temptations of Satan, whereby he continually
disturbes our peace. What a grief is it to a Christian, though he yield not to
the temptation, yet to be still solicited to deny his Lord? That such a thought
should be cast into his heart? That he can set about nothing that is good, but
Satan is still dissuading him from it, distracting him in it, or discouraging
him after it? What a torment, as well as temptation is it, to have such horrid
motions made to his soul? such Blasphemous Idea's presented to his fantasy?
Sometime cruel thoughts of God; sometime under-valuing thoughts of Christ;
sometime unbelieving thoughts of Scripture; sometime injurious thoughts of
Providence; to be tempted sometime to turn to present things; sometime to play
with the baits of sin; sometime to venture on the delights of flesh; and
sometime to flat Atheism it self? Especially, when we know the treachery of our
own hearts, that they are as Tinder, or Gunpowder, ready to take fire, as soon
as one of these sparks shall fall upon them. O, how the poor Christian lives in
continual disquietness, to feel these motions? But more, that his heart should
be the soil for this seed, and the too fruitful mother of such an offspring?
And most of all through fear, least they will at last prevail, and these cursed
motions should procure his consent. But here is our comfort; as we now stand
not by our own strength, and shall not be charged with any of this; so when the
day of our deliverance comes, we shall fully Rest from these Temptations: Satan
is then bound up; the time of tempting is then done; the time of torment to
himself, and his conquered captives, those deluded souls, is then come; and the
victorious Saints shall have Triumph for Temptation. Now we do walk among his
snares; 1 Timothy 3.7.
and are in danger to be circumvented with his methods and wiles; 2 Timothy 2.26.
but then we are quite above his snares, and out of the hearing of his enticing
charms. He has power here to tempt us in the Wilderness; Ephesians. 6.11.
but he enters not the Holy City: He may set us on the pinnacle of the Temple
in the earthly Jerusalem; but the new Jerusalem he may not approach. Perhaps he
may bring us to an exceeding high Mountain; but the Mount Sion, and City of the
living God he cannot ascend. Or if he should, yet all the Kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them, will be but a poor despised bait to the soul,
which is possessed of the Kingdom of our Lord, and the Glory of it. No, no;
here is no more work for Satan now. Hopes he might have of deceiving poor
Creatures on Earth, who lived out of sight, and only heard and read of a
Kingdom, which they never beheld, and had only Faith to live upon, and were
encompassed with flesh, and drawn aside by sense. But when once they see the
Glory they read of, and taste the joys they heard of and possess that Kingdom
which they then believed and hoped for, and have laid aside their fleshly
sense: its time then for Satan to have done; its in vain to offer a Temptation
more. What? draw them from that glory? draw them from the Arms of Jesus Christ?
draw them from the sweet praises of God? draw them from the blessed Society of
Saints and Angels? draw them from the bosom of the Fathers Love? and that to a
place of Torment among the damned, which their eyes behold? why, what charms,
what persuasions can do it? to entice them from an unknown Joy, an unknown God,
were somewhat hopeful; but now they have both seen and enjoyed, there is no
hope. Surely it must be a very strong temptation, that must draw a blessed
Saint from that Rest. We shall have no more need to pray, Matthew. 6.13. and
26.41.
Lead us not into Temptation; nor to watch and pray, that we enter not into
Temptation; nor shall we serve the Lord as Paul did, Acts 20.19. in many tears
and Temptations; no: but now they who continued with Christ in Temptation,
shall by him be appointed to a Kingdom, even as his Father appointed to him;
that they may eat and drink at his Table in his Kingdom, Luke 22.28, 29, 30.
Blessed therefore are they that endure temptation; for when they are tried,
they shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him, Jam. 1.12. Revel. 3.10.
And then they shall be saved from the hour of temptation. Then the malignant
Planet Saturn shall be below us, and loose all its influence, which now is
above exercising its enmity: and Satan must be suffering, who would have drawn
us into suffering. As Bucholtzer wittily, Vbi Saturnus non supra nos sed infra
nos conspicietur, luens poenas pro sua in nos soevitia and malitia.

12.
SECT. XII.
From temptations of the World and Flesh.
4. WE shall Rest also from all our Temptations which we now undergo from the
world and the flesh, as well as Satan: And that is a number unexpressible, and
a weight (were it not that we are beholding to supporting grace) utterly
intolerable. O the hourly dangers that we poor sinners here below walk in!
Every sense is a snare: Every member a snare: Every creature a snare: Every
mercy a snare: And every duty a snare to us. We can scarce open our eyes, but
we are in danger: If we behold them above us, we are in danger of envy: If them
below us, we are in danger of contempt: If we see sumptuous buildings, pleasant
habitations, Honor and Riches, we are in danger to be drawn away with covetous
desires; If the rags and beggary of others, we are in danger of
self-applauding thoughts and unmercifulness. If we see beauty, its a bait to
lust; if deformity, to loathing and disdain. We can scarcely hear a word
spoken, but contains to us matter of temptation. How soon do slanderous
reports, vain jests, wanton speeches by that passage creep into the Heart? How
strong and prevalent a Temptation is our appetite? and how constant and strong
a watch does it require? Have we comeliness and beauty? What fuel for pride? Are
we deformed? What an occasion of repining? Have we strength of Reason, and
gifts of Learning? O how hard is it not to be pufft up? 2 Cor. 11.3. and 1.12,
etc.
To seek our selves? To hunt after applause? To despise our brethren? To
mislike the simplicity that is in Christ? Both in the matter and manner of
Scripture? In Doctrine, in Discipline, in Worship, and in the Saints? to affect
a pompous, specious, fleshly service of God? and to exalt Reason above Faith?
Are we unlearned, and of shallow heads, and slender parts? How apt then to
despise what we have not? And to undervalue that which we do not know? and to
err with confidence, because of our Ignorance? and if conceitedness and pride
do but strike in, to become a zealous enemy to Truth? and a leading troubler of
the Churches peace, under pretenses of truth and holiness? Are we men of
eminency, and in place of Authority? How strong is our Temptation to slight our
brethren? to abuse our trust? to seek our selves? to stand upon our honor and
privileges? To forget our selves, our poor brethren, and the public good? How
hard to devote our power to his Glory, from whom we have received it? How prone
to make our wills our law? and to cut out all the enjoyments of others, both
religious and civil, by the cursed rules and model of our own interest and
policy? Are we Inferiors and subject? How prone to grudg at others
pre-eminence? and to take liberty to bring all their actions to the bar of our
incompetent Judgment? and to censure, and slander them, and murmr at their
proceedings? Are we rich, and not too much exalted? Are we poor, and not
discontented? and make our worldly necessities a pretense for the robbing God
of all his service? If we be sick, O how impatient? If in health, how few and
stupid are our thoughts of eternity? If death be near, we are distracted with
the fears of it: If we think it far off, how careless is our preparation? Do we
set upon duty? Deuteronomy. 12.30. and 7.25. Hosea 9.8. Psalm. 69.22. Prove. 20.25. and
22.25. and 29.6, 25. 1 Timothy 6.9. Job 8.8, 10.
Why, there are snares too: either we are stupid and lazy; or rest on them, and
turn from Christ; or we are customary, and notional only: In a word, not one
word that falls from the mouth of a Minister or Christian, but is a snare: not
a place we come into; not a word that our own tongues speak; not any mercy we
possess; not a bit we put into our mouths, but they are snares: Not that God
has made them so; but through our own corruption they become so to us. So that
what a sad case are we poor Christians in? And especially they that discern
them not? for its almost impossible they should escape them? It was not for
nothing that our Lord cries out, What I say to one, I say to all; Watch. We are
like the Lepers at Samaria, if we go into the City, there is nothing but famine:
if we sit still we perish.

But for ever Blessed be Omnipotent Love, which saves us out of all these: and
makes our streights, but the advantages of the glory of his saving Grace: And
blessed be the Lord, who has not given our souls for a prey: Our soul is
escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fouler; Psalm. 124.6, 7.
the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Now our Houses* our Clothes, our
Sleep, our Food, our Physic, our Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Friends,
Goods, Lands, are all so many Temptations; and our selves the greatest snare to
our selves. But in Heaven, the danger and trouble is over; there is nothing but
what will advance our joy. Now every old companion, and every loose-fellow is
putting up the finger, and beckning us to sin, and we can scarce tell how to
say them nay: What, say they, will not you take a cup? will you not do as your
neighbors? must you be so precise? do you think none shall be saved but
Puritans? what needs all this strictness, this reading, and praying, and
preaching? will you make your self the scorn of all men? Come, do as we do;
take your cups, and drink away sorrow. O how many a poor Christian has been
haunted and vexed with these Temptations? and it may be Father, or Mother, or
nearest Friends will strike in, and give a poor Christian no rest: And alas,
how many to their eternal undoing, have hearkened to their seducements? But
this is our comfort, dear Friends, our Rest will free us from all these. As
Satan has no entrance there, so neither any thing to serve his malice; but all
things shall there with us conspire the high praises of our great Deliverer.

13.
SECT. XIII.
From abuses and persecutions of the world. Revel 6.9, 10.
5. ANd as we Rest from the Temptations, so also from all abuses and
persecutions which we suffer at the hands of wicked men. We shall be scorned,
and derided, imprisoned, banished, butchered by them no more; the prayers of
the souls under the Altar will then be answered, and God will avenge their
blood on those that dwell on the Earth. This is the time for crowning with
thorns, buffetting, spitting on; that is the time for crowning with glory: 2 Timothy 3.12. Romans 8.17. Matthew 10.22 and 24.9 2 These. 1.9* 10. John 15.19. and
17.14.
Now the Law is decreed on, That whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution; then they that suffered with him, shall be glorified
with him. Now we must be hated of all men for Christ's Name sake, and the
Gospel; then will Christ be admired in his Saints that were thus hated. Now
because we are not of the world, but Christ has taken us out of the world,
therefore does the world hate us; then because we are not of the world, John 7
7. and 15.18, 20. and 5.23. and 17.22. 1 Cor. 4 9.13. Lam. 3.45. Heb. 10.43.
Isai. 8.18. Luke 6.22. Agesilaus dicere solitus est, se vehementer admirari,
eos non haberi in Sacrilegorum numero, qui laederen^ eos qui Deo supplicarent,
vel Deum venerarentur. Quo innuit, eos non tantum Sacrilegos esse, qui Deos
ipsos, aut templorum ornatum spoliarent; sed eos maxim qui Deorum Ministros
and praecones contumeliis afficiunt, Aemyl. Prob. Luke 16.24. Psalm. 83.4.
but taken out of their calamity, therefore will the world admire us. Now as
they hated Christ, they will also hate us; then as they will honor Christ, so
will they also honor us. We are here as the scorn and offscouring of all
things; as men set up for a gazing-stock to Angels and men, even for signs and
wonders among professing Christians: They put us out of their Synagogues, and
cast out our name as evil, and separate us from their company. But we shall
then be as much gazed at for our glory, and they will be shut out of the Church
of the Saints, and separated from us, whether they will or no. They now think
it strange, that we run not with them to all excess of riot, speaking evil of
us, 1 Pet. 4.4. they will then think more strange, that they ran not with us,
in the despised ways of God, and speak evil of themselves; and more vehemently
befool themselves for their carelessness, then ever they did us for our
heavenliness. A poor Christian can scarce go along the streets now, but every
one is pointing the finger in scorn, but then they would be glad of the Crumbs
of his Happiness. The rich man would scarce have believed him, that would have
told him, That he should beg for water from the tip of Lazarus finger. Here is
a great change! We can scarce now pray in our Families, or sing praises to God,
but our voice is a vexation to them. How must it needs torment them then, to
see us praising and rejoicing, while they are howling and lamenting? How full
were their prisons a while ago, and how bitter their rage? How did they scatter
the carcasses in the fields? and delight themselves in the blood of Saints? How
glad would they have been, if they could have brought them to ruin, and
blotted out their name from off the Earth? How did they prepare, like Haman,
their Gallows? and if God had not gainsaid it, Psalm. 2.4.
the execution would have been answerable. But he that siteth in Heaven, did
laugh them to scorn, the Lord had them in derision. O how full were their
hearts of blood, and their hands of cruelty! I am persuaded the next generation
that knew them not, will scarcely believe the fury of their rage. Blessed be
the Guardian of the Saints, who has not suffered the prevalency of that Wrath,
which would (I believe) have made the Gunpowder Treason, the Turkish Slavery,
the Spanish Inquisition, the French Massacres, to have seemed acts of clemency.
But the Lord of Hosts has brought them down, and his Power and Justice has
abated their fury, and raised to his Name an everlasting Trophee, and set up a
Monument of Remembrance in England, which God forbid should ever be forgotten.
Judges 5.23.
So let all thine (uncurable) enemies perish, O Lord. Psalm 9.12.
When the Lord makes inquisition for blood, he will remember the precious
blood which they have shed; and the Earth shall not cover it any more. Their
hopes are, that they shall yet again have a prevailing day. It is possible,
though improbable. If they should, we know where their rage will stop. They
shall pursue but as Pharaoh, to their own destruction; and where they ^all,
there shall we pass over safely, and escape them for ever. John 7.34.36. and
8.21, 22. Revel. 12.16.
For our Lord has told them, That whither he goes, they cannot come. When
their flood of persecution is dried up, and the Church called out of the
Wilderness, and the new Jerusalem come down from Heaven, and Mercy and Justice
are fully glorified, Heb. 11.
then shall we feel their fury no more. There is no cruel mockings and
scourgings, no bonds, or imprisonments, no stoning or sawing asunder, tempting
or slaying with the sword, wandering in Sheepskins or Goat skins, in Deserts or
Mountains, Dens or Caves of the Earth; no more being destitute, afflicted or
tormented: We leave all this behind us, when once we enter the City of our
Rest; the names of Lollard, Hugonots, Puritan, Roundheads, are not there used;
the Inquisition of Spain is there condemned; the Statute of the six Articles is
there Repealed, and the Law De Haereti^is comburendis more justly executed; the
date of the Interim is there expired; Subscription and Conformity no more
urged; Silencing and Suspending, are there more then suspended; there are no
Bishops or Chancelors Courts; no Visitations, nor High Commission Judgments; no
Censures to loss of Members, perpetual Imprisonment or Banishment. Christ is
not there clothed in a Gorgeous Robe, and blindfolded, Matthew. 27.29, 30.
nor do they smite him, and say, Read, who struck thee: Nor is truth clothed in
the Robes of Error, and smitten for that which it most directly contradicts;
nor a Schismatic wounded, and a Saint found bleeding; nor our Friends smite
us, whilst they mistake us for their enemies: There is none of all this
blind, mad work there. Dear Brethren, you that now can attempt no work of God
without resistance, and find you must either lose the love of the World, and
your outward comforts, or else the Love of God, and your eternal Salvation;
consider, You shall in Heaven have no discouraging company, nor any but who
will further your work, and gladly join heart and voice with you, in your
everlasting joy and praises. Till then, possess your souls in patience: Luke
21.19. Job 31.36. Heb. 11.25. James 1.2. Dan. 3.17.
Bind all reproaches as a crown to your heads; Esteem them greater riches then
the worlds treasures: Account it matter of Joy, when you fall into tribulation.
You have seen in these days, that our God can deliver us; but this is nothing
to our final conquest: 2 These. 1 7. 1 Pet. 3.17. and 4.14, 15.
He will recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are
troubled Rest with Christ. Only see to this, Brethren, That none of you suffer
as an evil doer, as a busie-body in other men's matters, as a resister of the
commands of lawful Authority, as ungrateful to those that have been Instruments
of our good, Jude 8. 2 Pet. 2.10.
as evil-speakers against Dignities, as opposers of the Discipline and
Ordinances of Christ, as scornful revilers of your Christian Brethren, as
reproachers of a laborious, judicious, conscientious Ministry, etc. But if any
of you suffer for the Name of Christ, 1 Pet. 4.14.
happy are ye; for the Spirit of God, and of Glory rests upon you: And if any
of you begin to shrink, and draw back, because of opposition, and are ashamed,
either of your Work, or your Master; let such a one know to his face, That he
is but a base-spirited, cowardly wretch, and cursedly undervalueth the Saints
Rest, and most foolishly over-valueth the things below, and he must learn to
forsake all these, or else he can never be Christ's Disciple; and that Christ
will renounce him, and be ashamed of him, Luke 14.26, 27, 33.
before his Father, and the Angels of Heaven. But for those that have held fast
their integrity, and gone through good report, and evil report, and undergone
the violence of unreasonable men, Let them hear the word of the Lord; Your
Brethren that hated you that cast you out for my Names sake* said, 2 These. 3.2.
Let the Lord be glorified; (they had good words and godly pretenses) but he
shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed, Isai 66.5. Your Redeemer
is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall thoroughly plead your cause,
that he may give rest to his people, and disquietness to their enemies, Jere.
50.34.

14.
SECT. XIIII.
From our Divisions and Dissentions.
6. WE shall then Rest also from all our sad Divisions, and unchristian like
quarrels with one another. As he said, who saw the Carcasses lie together, as
if they had embraced each other, who had been slain by each other in a Duel.
Quanta se invicem amplectuntur amicitia, qui mutua implacabili inimicitia
periere? How lovingly do they embrace one another, being dead, who perished
through their mutual implacable enmity? So, how lovingly do thousands live
together in Heaven, who lived in Divisions and Quarrels on Earth? or as he
said, Who beheld how quietly and peaceably the bones and dust of mortal enemies
did lie together. Non tanta vivi pace essetis conjuncti: You did not live
together so peaceably. So we may say of multitudes in Heaven, now all of one
mind, one heart, and one employment, You lived not on Earth in so sweet
familiarity. There is no contention, because none of this Pride, Ignorance, or
other Corruption. Paul and Barnabas are now fully reconciled. There they are
not every man conceited of his own understanding, and in love with the issue of
his own Brain; but all admiring the Divine perfection, and in love with God,
Melch Adam. in vita Grynai.
and one another. As old Grynaeus wrote to his friend, Si te non amplius in his
terris videam, ibi tamen conveniemus ubi Lutherus cum Zuinglio optime jam
convenit: If I see you no more on Earth, yet we shall there meet, where Luther
and Zuinglius are now well agreed. There is a full reconciliation between
Sacramentarians and Vbiquitarians, Calvinists and Lutherans, Remonstrants and
Contra-Remonstrants, Disciplinarians and Anti Disciplinarians, Conformists and
Non-Conformists, Antinomians and Legalists are terms there not known.
Presbyterians and Independents are perfectly agreed: There is no Discipline
erected by State Policy, nor any disordered popular rule: No Government but
that of Christ: All things are established Jure Divino. No bitter Invectives,
nor voluminous reproaches: The Language of Two books full of the language of
Hell, in bitterrest scorns at the Ministry and Discipline, thought to be
written by one Overton.
Martin is there a stranger; and the sound of his echo is not heard. No
Recording our Brethrens infirmities: nor raking into the sores which Christ
died to heal. How many Sermons zealously Preached; how many Books studiously
compiled, will then by the Authors be all disclaimed? Quemadmodum vero in
multas and varias sectas scissa est Catabaptistarum haerefis, ita in hoc omnes
unanimiter consentiunt, ut praedicatoribus veritatis negotium exhibeant and eos
erga auditores tanquam seductores suspectos reddant. Epistol. Leo. Judae. ante
Bullingerum contra Catabap.
How many backbiting slanderous speeches? How many secret dividing
contrivances, must then be laid on the score of Christ, against whom and his
Saints they were committed? The zealous Authors dare not own them: They would
then with the Athenians burn their books, Acts 19.19. and rather lose their
labor, then stand to it. There Is no ploting to strengthen our party: nor deep
designing against our Brethren. And is it not shame and pity, that our course
is now so contrary? Surely if there be sorrow or shame in Heaven, we shall then
be both sorry and ashamed to look one another there in the face; and to
remember all this carriage on earth. Even as the Brethren of Joseph were to
behold him, when they remembered their former unkind usage. Is it not enough
that all the world is against us, but we must also be against one another? Did
I ever think to have heard Christians so to Si Calvinus quam a natura insitam
habebat vehementiam, ca ipse adversus perditos sophistas usus est, ut interdum
etiam modum non tenuisse videri possit; rogo moderatissimos istos homines
quibus nimium incalescere videntur quicunque ipsorum more non frigent, ut pro
quo, and in quem dicatur, paulo attentius expendant; neque haereticos istos
spiritus ex ing^ni^ suo metiantur. Beza, in Epistola praefat. ante Calvini
Tractatus Theologicos.
reproach and scorn Christians? and men professing the fear of God, to make so
little conscience of censuring, vilifying, slandering, and disgracing one
another? Could I have believed him that would have told me five years ago; that
when the scorners of Godliness were subdued, and the bitter prosecutors of the
Church overthrown, that such should succeed them who suffered with us, who were
our intimate friends; with whom we took sweet counsel and went up together to
the house of God? Did I think it had been in the hearts of men professing such
zeal to Religion, and the ways of Christ, to draw their Me quoque non latet,
turbulentos homines m^vendis seditionibus, Satanae esse ^^abella, ut in
Evangelii odium placidos alioqui homines inflammet. Ita nostro seculu, sub
Evangelii nascentis initia, barbaros homines armavit, qui l^gibus, judicijs,
and omni politiae bellum ex professo indicerent. -- Sed ab Evangelio recedere,
ut seditionibus obviam catur, nimis perversum est. Calvin de Scandalis.
swords against each other, and to seek each others blood so fiercely? Alas, if
the Judgment be once perverted, and error have possessed the supreme faculty,
whither will men go, and what they will do? Nay, what will they not do? O what
a potent instrument for Satan is a misguided Conscience! It will make a man
kill his dearest friend, yea, father or mother, yea, the holiest Saint, and
think he does God service by it: And to facilitate the work, it will first blot
out the reputation of their holiness, and make them take a Saint for a Devil,
that so they may vilify or destroy him without remorse. O what hellish things
are Quod multos videmus hoc vel illa errore captos, a recta via abduci, nunquam
nisi justa Dei vindicta accidit. Vere Augustinus superbiam nominat, Haerese^^n
omnium matrem: Nullus enim unquam extitit erroris Magister, quem non prava
ambitio in suum praecipitiu^ extulerit. Scimus Deum parvulis fidum esse
doctorem. Proinde qui arrogantia turgent, eos non mirum est ab hac Schola
pulsos, vagis suis speculationibus sursum and deorsum raptari. Quotquot hac
nostra aetate a pura Evangelii doctrina pro^apsi falsorum dogmatum ^aeperunt
esse Auth^res, reperiemus onmes, superbiae morbo correptos, ingenu tormenta
sibi and aliis fabricass. Calvin. de scandalis.
Ignorance and Pride, that can bring men's souls to such a case as this! Paul
knew what he said, when he commanded that a Novice should not be a Teacher,
lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. He discerned that such young Christians that have got but a little
smattering knowledge in Religion, do lie in greatest danger of this Pride and
Condemnation. Who but a Paul could have foreseen that among the very Teachers
and Governors of so choice a Church as Ephesus, that came to see and hear him,
that pray and weep with him, there were some that afterward should be
notorious Sect-masters Altera pestis est opinionum varietas and dissentio in
ecclesia: Quae ut his temporibus Jesuitarum impulsu valde incruduit, ita tamen
n^que nova vobis neque mira videri debet. Vt enim palatorum sic judiciorum
magna est varietas: Et ut multae facies hominum, sic and corda diversa: ut
Hieron. adv. Pelag. l. 3. Dr. Humfredus Jesuitis. part. 2 in Epistola
Dedicatoria. Multos subvertunt, abducentes ipsos praetextu cognitionis, ab eo
qui universa cre. vit, etc. Velut qui altius quid ac majus habeant quod
ostendant Deo, etc. Probabiliter quidem inducentes per verborum artific um
simplices ad quaerendi modum: Verum improbe perdentes ipsos, in eo quod
maled^cam and impiam ipsorum mentem efficient, etc. Nam error per scipsum non
ostenditur, ut ne denudatus deprehendatur, sed amiculo splendido callide
ornatus, ut etiam ipsa v^ritate veriorem seipsum exhibere videatur
imperitioribus* per externam apparentiam. Irenaeus advers haeres page 1.
Proaem. Dilig^nter insistendum, nequid ex post quae grassatur ex vicinia, fide
libus curae nostrae commissis, c^nv^ctu, colloqu^is, and quotidianis, quae
vitari non possunt, disceptationibus affl^tur. Serpit enim facile contagio, and
nisi malo obviam iretur, falsorum doctorum asius, and haereticorum consortium
infi^m^^um fidem proculdubio vitiarent. Evangelii ergo praecones sese exerceant
in refutatione pontificiorum, Anabaptistaru^ and Socimanorum, etc. ab illis
enim magnop^re m^tu^ndum, tum quia ^ll^s permixti ^^vimus, tum quia eorum
plerique miro quodam studio ardent, doctrinae suae disseminandae Amyraldus de
pace inter Evangelicos constituend. page 246.
? That of their own selves men should arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them? Acts 20.30. Who then can expect better from any
Society now, how knowing and holy soever? To day they may be Orthodox,
unanimous, and joined in Love; and perhaps within a few weeks be divided, and
at bitter enmity, through their doting about Questions that tend not to edify.
Who that had seen how loving the godly in England did live together, when they
were hated and scorned of all, would have believed that ever they would have
been so bitter against one another. That when those who derided us for
Preaching, for Hearing, for constant Praying in our Families, for singing
Psalms, for sanctifying the Lords day, for repeating Sermons, for taking Notes,
for desiring Discipline, etc. had their mouths stopped; we should fall upon
one another for the very same duties; and that Professors of Religion should
oppose and deride almost all that worship of God out of Conscience, which
others did before them through profaneness? Did I not think, that of all
other, the scorning at the worshippers of Christ, had been a sure sign of a
wicked wretch? But I see now we must distinguish between scorners and scorners,
or else I fear we shall exclude almost all. I read indeed in Pagan VVriters,
That these Christians were as cruel as Bears and Tigers against one another:
Ammian. Marcel in vita Juliani.
Ammianus Marcellinus gives it as the Reason of Julians policy, in proclaiming
Liberty for every party, to Profess, and Preach their own Opinions, because he
knew the cruel Christians would then most fiercely fall upon one another; and
so by O^ quam beati erunt in illo die Judicii Magistratus illi qui subditos non
modo honestis legibus, judiciis and disciplina praeclare rexerunt: sed etiam
omnium maxim in hoc studium incubu^runt ut incorrupta Religio apud suos
exculta sit; doctrina caelestis per ^idos, ^ruditos and constantes Ministros
sit tradita, and ingens hominum multitudo per spi^ritum and verbum renata in
conspectum Christi prodeat, quae tali Magi^stratui aeternas gratias agat. E
contra quam infoelices qui, etc. Religionem per varias corrupt^as p^ss^ sunt
adulterari. Wigandus in Epist. ante Com. in Proph. John 13 8. 9, 10, 12, 14.
Liberty of Conscience, and by keeping their Children from the Schools of
Learning, he thought to have rooted out Christianity from the Earth. But I had
hoped this accusation had come from the malice of the Pagan Writer: Little did
I think to have seen it so far verified! Lord, what Devils are we unsanctified,
when there is yet such a Nature remaining in the sanctified? Such a Nature has
God in these days suffered to discover it self in the very Godly; that if he
did not graciously and powerfully restrain, they would shed the blood of one
another; and no thanks to us if it be not done. But I hope his design is but to
humble and shame us by the discovery, and then to prevent the breaking forth.

Object. But is it possible such should be truly Godly? Then what sin will
denominate a man ungodly?

Answ. Or else I must believe the doctrine of the Saints Apostasy; or believe
there are scarce any godly in the world. O what a wound of dishonor has this
given, not only to the stricter profession of holiness, but even to the very
Christian name? Were there a possibility of hiding it, I durst not thus mention
it. O Christian, If thou who read this be guilty, I charge thee before the
living God, That thou sadly consider, how far is this unlike thy Copy? Suppose
thou had seen the Lord Jesus, girded to the service, stooping to the Earth,
washing his Disciples dirty feet, and wiping them, and saying to them, This I
have done to give you an example, That if I your Lord and Master have washed
your feet, you also ought to wash one another: Would not this make thee
ashamed and tremble? Shall the Lord wipe the feet, and the fellow servants be
ready to cut the throat? would not thy proud heart scorn to stoop to thy
Masters work? Look to thy self; it is not the name of a professor, nor the zeal
for thy opinions, that will prove thee a Christian, or secure thee from the
heat of the consuming fire. Matthew. 5.44.
If thou love not thine enemy, much more thy Christian friend, thou can not
be Christ's Disciple. It is the common mark whereby his Disciples are known to
all men, John 13.35. and 14.27.
That they love one another. Is it not his last great Legacy, My peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you? Mark the expressions of that command. If it
be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, Heb. 12.14. O the deceitfulness of the
heart of man! That those same men, who lately in their self-examination could
find nothing of Christ so clear within them, as their love to the Brethren,
and were confident of this, when they could scarce discover any other grace,
should now look so strangely upon them, and be filled with so much bitterness
against them! That the same men, who would have traveled through reproaches
many miles, to hear an able faithful Minister, and not think the labor ill
bestowed, should now become their bitterest enemies, and the most powerful
hinderers of the success of their labors, and travel as far to cry them down.
It makes me almost ready to say, O sweet, O happy days of persecution! Which
drove us together in a closure of Love! who being now dried at the fire of
Liberty and Prosperity, are crumbled all into dust by our contentions. But it
makes me seriously, both to say, and to think. O sweet, O happy day of the Rest
of the Saints in Glory! When as there is one God, one Christ, one Spirit, so we
shall have one Judgment, one Heart, one Church, one Employment for ever! When
there shall be no more Circumcision and Uncircumcision, Col 3.11.
Jew and Gentile, Anabaptist or Poedobaptist, Brownist, Separatist,
Independent, Presbyterian, Episcopal, but Christ is All, and in All. We shall
not there scruple our Communion, nor any of the Ordinances of Divine Worship:
There will not be one for singing, and another against it; but even those who
here jarred in discord, shall all conjoyn in blessed concord, and make up one
melodious Quire. I could wish they were of the Martyrs mind, who rejoiced that
she might have her foot in the same hole of the Stocks, in which Master
Philpots had been before her: But however, I am sure they will joyfully live in
the same Heaven, and gladly participate in the same Rest. Those whom one house
could not hold, nor one Church hold them, no nor one Kingdom neither; yet one
Heaven, and one God may hold. One House, one Kingdom, could not hold Joseph and
his Brethren, but they must together again, whether they will or no; and then
how is the case altered? Then every man must strait withdraw, while they weep
over and kiss each other. O how can thou now find in thy heart, if thou bear
the heart or face of a Christian, to be bitter or injurious against thy
Brethren, when thou do but once think of that time and place, where thou
h^p^^t in the nearest and sweetest familiarity, to live and rejoice with them
for ever? I confess their infirmities are not to be loved, nor sin to be
tolerated because its theirs: But be sure it be sin, which thou op^posest in
them; and do it with a Spirit of meekness and compassion, that the world may
see thy love to the Person, while thou opposest the Offense. Alas, that Turks
and Pagans, can agree in wickedness, better then Christians in the Truth! That
Bears and Lions, Wolves and Tigers can agree together, but Christians cannot!
That a Legion of Devils can accord in one body, Matthew. 5.9. Luke 8.30.
and not the tenth part so many Christians in one Church! Well; the fault may
be mine, and it may be theirs; or more likely both mine and theirs: But this
rejoices me, That my old Friends who now look strangely at me, will joyfully
triumph with me in our common Rest.

SECT. XV.
15.
7. WE shall then rest from all our dolorous hours, and sad thoughts which we
now undergo, From our participation of the sufferings of our Brethren.
by participating with our Brethren in their Calamities. Alas if we had nothing
upon our selves to trouble us, yet what heart could lay aside sorrows; that
lives in the sound of the Churches sufferings? If Job had nothing upon his body
to disquiet him, yet the message of his Childrens overthrow, must needs grieve
the most patient soul. Except we are turned into steel or stone, and have lost
both Christian and humane affection, Quibus est communis Amor, his idem dolor
est commune malum. Nazianz.
there needs no more then the miseries of our Brethren, to fill our hearts with
successions of sorrows, and make our lives a continued lamentation. The Church
on Earth is a mere Hospital, which way ever we go we hear complaining, and into
what corner soever we cast our eyes, we behold objects of pity and grief: some
groaning under a dark understanding, some under a senseless heart, some
languishing under unfruitful weakness, and some bleeding for miscarriages and
wilfulness: and some in such a Lethargy that they are past complaining: some
crying out of their pining Poverty; some groaning under pains and Infirmities;
and some bewailing a whole Catalogue of Calamities, especially in days of
common Sufferings, when nothing appears to our sight, but ruin: Families
ruined; Congregations ruined; Sumptuous Structures ruined; Cities ruined;
Country ruined; Court ruined; Kingdoms ruined; Who we^ps not when all these
bleed? As now our friends distresses are our distresses, so then our friends
deliverance will be part of our own deliverance. How much more joyous now to
Join with them in their days of Thanksgiving and gladness, then in the days of
Humiliation in sackcloth and ashes? How much then more joyous will it be to
join with them in their perpetual praises and triumphs, then to hear them
bewailing now their wretchedness, their want of light, their want of life, of
joy, of assurance, of grace, of Christ, of all things? How much more
comfortable to see them perfected, then now to see them wounded, weak, sick,
and afflicted? To stand by the bed of their languishing as silly comforters,
being overwhelmed and silenced with the greatness of their griefs, conscious of
our own disability to relieve them, scarce having a word of comfort to refresh
them: or if we have, alas, they be but words, which are a poor relief, when
their sufferings are real: Feign we would ease or help them, but cannot: all we
can do, is to sorrow with them, which alas, does rather increase their sorrows.
Our day of Rest will free both them and us from all this. Now we may enter many
a poor Christians cottage, and there see their Children ragged, their purse
empty, their Cubbard empty, their belly empty, and poverty possessing and
filling all: How much better is that day, when we shall see them filled with
Christ, clothed with Glory, and equalized with the richest and greatest
Princes? O the sad and heart-piercing spectacles that mine eyes have seen in
four years space! In this fight, a dear friend fall down by me; from another, a
precious Christian brought home wounded or dead; scarce a month, scarce a week
without the sight or noise of blood. Surely, there is none of this in Heaven.
Our eyes shall then be filled no more, nor our hearts pierced with such lights
as at Worcester, Edg-hil, Newbury, Nantwich, Montgomery, Horn Castle, York,
Naseby, Langport, etc. We shall then have the conquest without the calamity.
Mine eyes shall never more behold the Earth, covered with the carcasses of the
slain. Our black Ribbands and mourning* Attire will then be turned into the
white Robes and Garments of gladness. O, how hardly can my heart now hold, when
I think of such, and such, and such a dear Christian Friend, slain or departed?
O, how glad must the same heart needs be, when I see them all alive and
glorified? But a far greater grief it is to our Spirits, to see the spiritual
miseries of our Brethren: To see such a one with whom we took sweet council,
and who zealously joined with us in Gods worship, to be now fallen off to
sensuality, turned drunkard, worldling, or a persecutor of the Saints. And
these trying times have given us too large occasion for such sorrows: To see
our dearest and most intimate friends, to be turned aside from the Truth of
Christ, and that either in or near the Foundation; and to be raging confident
in the grossest Errors? To see many near us in the flesh continue their neglect
of Christ and their souls, and nothing will waken them out of their security?
To look an ungodly Father or Mother, Brother or Sister in the face? To look on
a carnal Wife, or Husband, or Child, or Friend? And to think, how certainly
they shall be in Hell for ever, if they die in their present unregenerate
estate? O what continual dolors do all these sad sights and thoughts, fill our
hearts with from day to day. And will it not be a blessed day when we shall
rest from all these? what Christian now is not in Paul's case, and cannot speak
in his Language, 2 Cor. 11.28, 29. Besides those things that are without, that
which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and I am
not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? What heart is not wounded to think
on Germanies long desolations? O the learned Universities! The flourishing
Churches there, that now are left desolate! Look on Englands four years blood,
a flourishing Land almost made ruined; hear but the common voice in most
Cities, Towns, and Countries through the Land; and judge whether here be no
cause of sorrow. Especially, look but to the sad effects; and men's spirits
grown more out of order, when a most wonderful Reformation, by such wonderful
means might have been well expected: And is not this cause of astonishing
sorrows? Look to Scotland; look to Ireland; look almost every where, and tell
me what you see. Blessed that approaching day, when our eyes shall behold no
more such sights; nor our ears hear any more such tidings. How many hundred
Pamphlets are Printed, full of almost nothing, but the common calamities? So
that its become a gainful trade to divulge the news of our Brethrens
sufferings. And the fears for the future that possessed our hearts, were worse
then all that we saw or suffered. O, the tidings that run from Edghil fight, of
York fight, etc. How many a face did they make pale? and how many a heart did
they astonish? nay have not many died with the fears of that, which if they had
lived, they had neither suffered nor seen? Camer. in vit. Melancth.
Its said of Melancthon, That the miseries of the Church made him almost
neglect the death of his most beloved Children; to think of the Gospel
departing, the Glory taken from Israel, our Sun setting at Noon day, poor souls
left willingly dark and destitute, and with great pains and hazard blowing out
the Light that should guide them to salvation: What sad thoughts must these be?
See Neh. 1.4. and 2.3.
To think of Christ removing his Family; taking away both worship and
worshippers, and to leave the Land to the rage of the merciless. These were sad
thoughts. Psalm. 137.
Who could then have taken the Harp in hand, or sung the pleasant Songs of
Zion? Isai. 60.11, 12, 13, 14.
But blessed be the Lord who has frustrated our fears; and who will hasten
that rejoicing day, when Sion shall be exalted above the Mountains; and her
Gates shall be open day and night, and the glory of the Gentiles be brought
into it; and the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve her, shall perish: When
the sons of them that afflicted her, shall come bending unto her; and all they
that despised her, shall bow themselves down at the soles of her feet; and
60.21, 22.
and they shall call her, The City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy One of
Israel. When her people also shall be all Righteous, even the Work of Gods
hands, the Branch of his planting, who shall inherit the Land for ever, that he
may be glorified. and 66.10, 11.
When that voice shall sound forth, Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad with
her, all ye that love her: Rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her:
That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation; that ye
may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. Thus shall we
Rest from our participation of our Brethrens sufferings.

SECT. XVI. 16.

8. WE shall Rest also from all our own personal sufferings, From all our own
personal sufferings.
whether natural and ordinary, or extraordinary from the afflicting hand of
God. And though this may seem a small thing, to those that live in continual
ease, and abound in all kind of prosperity; yet me thinks, to the daily
afflicted soul, it should make the fore-thoughts of Heaven delightful: And I
think we shall meet with few of the Saints, but will say, That this is their
own case. O, the dying life that we now live? As full of sufferings, as of days
and hours! We are the Carcasses that all Calamities prey upon: As various as
they are, each one will have a snatch at us; and be sure to devour a morsel of
our comforts: When we bait our Bulls and Bears, we do but represent our own
condition; whose lives are consumed under such assaults, and spent in
succession of fresh encounters. All Creatures have an enmity against us, ever
since we made the Lord of all our enemy. And though we are reconciled by the
blood of the Covenant, and the price is paid for our full deliverance; yet our
Redeemer sees it fit, to leave this measure of misery upon us, to make us know
for what we are beholden, and to mind us of what we would else forget; to be
serviceable to his wise and gracious designs, and advantageous to our full and
final Recovery. He has sent us as Lambs among Wolves; and sure there is little
Rest to be expected. As all our Senses are the inlets of sin; so are they
become the inlets of our sorrow. Grief creeps in at our eyes, at our ears, and
almost every where: It seiseth upon our head, our hearts, our flesh, our
Spirits, and what part does escape it? Fears do devour us, and darken our
Delights, as the Frosts do nip the tender Buds: Cares do consume us, and feed
upon our Spirits, as the scorching Sun does wither the delicate Flowers. Or, if
any Saint or Stoic have fortified his inwards against these, yet is he naked
still without; and if he be wiser then to create his own sorrows, yet shall he
be sure to feel his share: he shall produce them as the meritorious, if not as
the efficient cause. What tender pieces are these dusty bodies? what brittle
Glasses do we bear about us? and how many thousand dangers are they hurried
through? and how hardly cured, if once cracked? O the multitudes of slender
Veins, of tender Membranes, Nerves, Fibers, Muscles, Arteries, and all subject
to Obstructions, Exesions, Tensions, Contractions, Resolutions, Ruptures, or
one thing or other to cause their Grief! Every one a fit subject for pain, and
fit to communicate that pain to the whole. What noble part is there that
suffers its pain or ruin alone? whatever it is to the sound and healthful,
methinks to such as my self, this Rest should be acceptable, who in ten or
twelve years time have scarce had a whole day free from some dolor. O the weary
nights and days! O the unserviceable languishing weakness! O the restless
working vapors! O the tedious nauseous medicines! besides the daily
expectations of worse! and will it not be desirable to Rest from all these?
There will then be no crying out, O my Head, O my Stomach, or O my Sides, or O
my Bowels: No, no, sin and flesh, and dust and pain, will be all left behind
together. O what would we not give now for a little ease, much more for a
perfect cure? how then should we value that perfect freedom? If we have some
mixed comforts here, they are scarce enough to sweeten our crosses; or if we
have some short and smiling intermissions, it is scarce time enough to breathe
us in, and to prepare our tacklings for the next storm. If one wave pass by,
another succeeds: And if the night be over, and the day come, yet will it soon
be night again. Some men's Fevers are continual, and some intermittent; some
have Tertians, and some Quartans; but more or less, all have their fits. O the
blessed tranquillity of that Region, where there is nothing but sweet continued
Peace! No succession of Joy there, because no intermission. Our lives will be
but one Joy, as our time will be changed into one Eternity. O, healthful place,
where none are sick! O, fortunate Land, where all are Kings! O, place most
holy, where (...) are Priests! How free a State, where none are servants, save
to their supreme Monarch? For it shall come to pass, that in that day (...)
Lord shall give us Rest, from our sorrow, and our fear, and (...) the hand
bondage wherein we served, Isai. 14.3. The poor man shall no more be tired with
his incessant labors: No more use of Plough, or Flail, or Sithe, or Sicle: No
stooping of the Servant to the Master, or the Tenant to the Landlord: No
hunger, or thirst, or cold, or nakedness: No pinching Frosts, nor scorching
Heats. Rom 8.19, 20, 21, 22.
Our very Beasts who suffered with us, shall also be freed from their bondage;
our selves therefore much more; Our faces shall no more be pale or sad; Revel.
21.3, 4.
our groans and sighs will be done away; and God will wipe away all tears from
our eyes, Revel. 7.15, 16, 17. No more parting of friends asunder, nor voice of
Lamentation heard in our dwellings: No more breaches, nor disproportion in our
friendship, nor any trouble accompanying our relations: No more care of Master
for Servants, of Parents for Children, of Magistrates over Subjects, of
Ministers over people. No more sadness for our Study lost, our Preaching lost,
our Entreaties lost, the Tenders of Christ's blood lost, and our dear Peoples
Souls lost. (...). Pares Angelis. Haymo expounds this too boldly, and I think
falsely.

Quod viri in suo sexu resurgent foeminae in sexu muliebri. Erunt habentes
membra genitalia, non autem voluntatem coeundi. Hom. in Dominic. 18. in Matthew.
22. I see no ground to conceit such a difference of Sex hereafter. Mr. Herbert.


No more marrying, nor giving in marriage, but we shall be as the Angels of
God. O, what room can there be for any evil, where the whole is perfectly
filled with God? Then shall the ransomed of the Lord return and come to Sion
with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: They shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away, Isai. 35.10. Hold out then a
little longer, O my soul, bear with the infirmities of thine earthly
Tabernacle; endure that share of sorrows, that the love of thy Father shall
impose; submit to his indignation also, because thou had sinned against him; it
will be thus but a little while; the sound of thy Redeemers feet are even at
the door; and thine own deliverance nearer then many others. And thou who have
often cried in the language of the Divine Poet, [ Sorrow was all my soul; I
scarce believed, till Grief did tell me roundly, that I lived] shall then feel,
That God and Joy is all thy Soul, the fruition of whom, with thy freedom from
all these sorrows, will more sweetly and more feelingly make thee know, and to
his eternal praise acknowledge, That thou live.

And thus we shall Rest from all Afflictions.

17.
SECT. XVII.
From all the labor and trouble of Duties.
9. WE shall Rest also from all the trouble and pain of Duty. The Conscientious
Magistrate now ctyes out, O the burden that lies upon me! The conscientious
parents that know the preciousness of their childrens souls, and the constant
pains required to their godly education cry out, O, the burden! The
conscientious Minister above all, when he reads his charge. 2 Timothy, 4.1. and
views his pattern, Mark. 3.20.21. etc. Act. 20.18, 31. When he has tried a
while what it is to study, and pray, and preach, according to the weight and
Excellency of the work; to go from house to house, and from neighbor to
neighbor, and to beseech them night and day with tears; and after all to be
hated and persecuted for so doing; no wonder if he cry out, O, the burden! and
be ready (...) to run away with Jonas, and with Jeremy to say, I will not make
mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name: For his word is a reproach to
us, and a derision daily; But that he has made his word as a fire shut up in
our bones and heart, that we are weary of forbearing and cannot stay. Jer.
20.8, 9. How long may we study and labor before one soul is brought clear over
to Christ? And when it is done, how soon do the snares of sensuality or error
entangle them? How many receive the doctrine of delusion, before they have time
to be built up in the Truth? And when Heresies must of necessity arise, how few
of them do appear approved? The first new, strange apparation of light does so
amaze them, that they think they are in the third Heavens, when they are but
newly passed from the suburbs of Hell; and are presently as confident, as if
they knew all things, when they have not yet half light enough to acquaint them
with their ignorance; But after 10 or 20 years study they become usually of the
same judgment with those they despised. And seldom does a Minister live to see
the ripeness of his people; but one sows and planteth, another waters, and
a third reapeth and receives the increase. Yet were all this Duty delightful,
had we but a due proportion of strength, But to inform the old ignorant
sinner, to convince the stubborn and worldly wise, to persuade a wilful
resolved wretch, to prick a stony heart to the quick, The Work of the Ministry.
to make a rock to weep and tremble, to set forth Christ according to our
necessity and his Excellency, to comfort the soul whom God dejecteth, to clear
up dark and difficult Truths, to oppose with convincing Arguments all
gainsayers, to credit the Gospel with exemplary Conversations, when multitudes
do but watch for our halting: O, who is sufficient for these things? So that
every Relation, State, Age, has variety of Duty: Every conscientious Christian
cries out, O the burden! or, O my weakness that makes it so burdensome! But our
remaining Rest will ease us of the burden. Then will that be sound Doctrine,
which now is false; that the Law has no more to do with us; that it becomes
not a Christian to beg for pardon, seeing all his sins are perfectly pardoned
already; that we need not fast, nor mourn, nor weep, nor repent; and that a
sorrowful Countenance beseems not a Christian; Then will all these become
Truths.

SECT. XVIII. 18.

10. ANd lastly, From all those troublesome Affections which necessarily
accompany our absence from God.
we shall Rest from all those sad affections, which necessarily accompany our
absence from God. The trouble that is mixed in our desires and hopes, our
longings and waitings, shall then cease. We shall no more look into our
Cabinet, and miss our Treasure; look into our hearts, and miss our Christ; nor
no more seek him from Ordinance to Ordinance, and enquire for our God of those
we meet; our heart will not lie in our knee, nor our souls be breathed out in
our requests; but all concluded in a most full and blessed Fruition: But
because this with the former, are touched before, I will say no more of them
now. So you have seen what we shall Rest from.

SECT. XIX. 19.

NInthly. It will be an Everlasting Rest.
The ninth and last Jewel in our Crown* and blessed Attribute of this Rest, is,
That it is an Eternal Rest. This is the Crown of our Crown; without which all
were comparatively, little or nothing. The very thought of once leaving it,
would else imbitter all our joys; and the more would it pierce us, because of
the singular excellencies, which we must forsake. It would be a Hell in Heaven
to think of once loosing Heaven: As it would be a kind of Heaven to the
damned, had they but hopes of once escaping? Transu hora, transit and poena:
ne^ accedunt sibi; s^d cedunt potius and succedum. Non sic gloria, non sic
remuneratio; non sic merces ipsa laboris; nescit Vicissitudinem; nescit finem;
manet tota simul, and manet in aeternum: Sufficit nunc cuique diei malitia sua;
nec laborem suum poterit reservare sequenti: Sed omnium merces laborum in una
illa die reddetur, cui alter a non succedit: Guttatim poena bibitur: liquando
sumitur: per minutias transit: Sed in remuneratione torrens est voluptath, and
fluminis impetus: torrens inundans laetitiae, flumen gloriae, and flumen pacis.
Flumen plane est: sed quod affluat; non quod fluat vel es fluat. Flumen
vocatur, non quod transeat vel pertranseat, sed quod abundet. Nobis non favum
mellis; purissimum vero and liquidissimum mel reposuit Deus; ipsam laetitiam,
gloriam, pacem, amaenitatem, faelicitotem, jucunditatem, and exultationem the
saurizavit nobis Deus noster: haec omnia unum: ut sit participatio Jerusalem
in idipsum; and hoc unum and idipsum non nisi Ipse: erit enim Deus omnia and i^
omnibus. Haec merces; haec corona nostra; hoc bravium nostrum, ad quod utique
sic curramus u^ comprehendamus. Bernard. Sermon. 145. de temp.
Mortality is the disgrace of all sublunary delights. It makes our present life
of little value, (were it not for the reference it has to God, and Eternity)
to think that we must shortly lay it down. How can we take delight in any
thing, when we remember how short that delight would be? That the sweetness of
our Cups and Morsels is dead as soon as they are once but pa^^ our taste?
Indeed if man were as the beast, that knows not his suffering or death, till he
feel it, and little thinks when the knife is whetting, that it is making ready
to cut his throat; then might we be merry till death forbids us, and enjoy our
delights till they shall forsake us: But alas, we know both good and evil; and
evil foreknown, is in part endured: And thus our knowledge increases our
sorrows. Eccles. 1.18. How can it choose, but spoil our pleasure, while we see
it dying in our hands? how can I be as merry as the jovial World, had I not
mine eye fixed upon eternity? when methinks I foresee my dying hour, my friends
waiting for my last gasp, and closing mine eyes, while tears forbid to close
their own: Methinks I hear them say, He is dead. Methinks I see my Coffin made,
my Grave in digging, and my Friends there leaving me in the dust: And where now
is that we took delight in? O, but methinks I see at the same view, that Grave
opening, and my dead revived Body rising: Methinks I hear that blessed voice,
Arise and live, and die no more. Surely, were it not for eternity, I should
think man a silly piece; and all his life and honor, but contemptible. I should
call him with David, A vain shadow; and with the Prophet, Nothing, and less
then nothing, and altogether lighter then vanity it self. It utterly disgraceth
the greatest glory in mine eyes, if you can but truly call it Mortal. I can
value nothing that shall have an end; except as it leads to that* which has no
end; or as it comes from that love, which neither has beginning nor end. (I
speak this of my deliberate thoughts.) And if some ignorant or forgetful soul,
have no such sad thoughts to disturb his pleasure: I confess, he may be merrier
for the present: But where is his mirth when he lies dying? Alas, its a poor
happiness that consists only in the Ignorance or Forgetfulness of approaching
misery. But, O blessed eternity! where our lives are perplexed with no such
thoughts, nor our joys interrupted with any such fears! where we shall be
pillars in Gods Temple, and go out no more. Revel. 3.12.
O, what do I say when I talk of Eternity? Can my shallow thoughts at all
conceive, what that most high expression does contain? To be eternally blessed,
and so blessed! Why surely, this if any thing is the resemblance of God:
Eternity is a piece of Infiniteness. Then, O death where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy victory? Days, and Nights, and Years, Time, and End, and Death,
are words which there have no signification; nor are used, except perhaps to
extol eternity, as the mention of Hell, to extol Heaven. No more use of our
Calendars or Chronology: All the years of our Lord, and the years of our lives,
are lost and swallowed up in this Eternity. While we were servants, we held by
lease, and that, but for the term of a transitory life; but the Son abides in
the House for ever. Gal. 6.8.
Our first and earthly Paradise in Eden, had a way out, but none that ever we
could find, in again: But this eternal paradise has a way in, (a milky way to
us, but a bloody way to Christ) but no way out again: For they that would pass
from hence to you (says Abraham) cannot. Luke 16.26.
A strange phrase, would any pass from such a place, if they might? Could they
endure to be absent from God again one hour? No; but upon supposal that they
would, yet they could not. O, then my soul, let go thy dreams of present
pleasures: And loose thy hold of Earth and Flesh. Fear not to enter that
estate, where thou shall ever after cease thy Fears. Sit down, and sadly once a
day, bethink thy self of this Eternity: Among all thine Arithmetical numbers,
study the value of this infinite Cipher; which though it stand for nothing in
the vulgar account, does yet contain all our Millions, as much less then a
simple Unit: Lay by thy perplexed and contradicting Chronological Tables, and
fix thine eye on this Eternity; and the Lines which remote thou could not
follow, thou shall see altogether here concentred: Study less those tedious
Volumns of History; which contain but the silent Narration of Dreams, and are
but the pictures of the actions of shadows: And in stead of all, study
frequently, study thoroughly this one word [ Eternity;] and when thou have
learned thoroughly that one word, thou will never lo^k on Books again. What!
Live and Never die? Rejoice and Ever rejoyce^ O what sweet words are those,
Never and Ever? O happy souls in Hell, should you but escape after millions of
ages! and if the Origenists Doctrine were but True! O, miserable Saints in
Heaven, should you be dispossessed after the age of a million of Worlds! But O
this word [ Everlasting] contains the accomplished perfection of their Torment
and our Glory. O, that the wicked sinner would but soundly study this word [
Everlasting!] Methinks it should startle him out of his deadest sleep! O that
the gracious soul would believingly study this word [ Everlasting!] Methinks it
should revive him in his deepest Agony! And must I, Lord, thus live for ever?
Then will I also love for^ever. Must my Joys be immortal? And shall not my
thanks be also immortal? Surely, if I shall never lose my glory, I will also
never cease thy praises. Should thou but renew my Lease of these first
Fruits; would I not renew thy Fine and Rent? But if thou will both perfect, and
perpetuate me, and my Glory; as I shall be thine, and not mine own; so shall my
Glory be thy Glory: And as all did take their Spring from thee, so all shall
devolve into thee again; and as thy glory was thine ultimate end in my glory,
so shall it also be mine end, when thou have crowned me with that Glory which
has no end. And to thee, O King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise
God, shall be the Honor and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17.

20.
SECT. XX.
ANd thus I have endeavored to show you a glimpse of the approaching Glory: But
O how short are my expressions of its excellency? Reader, if thou be an humble,
sincere believer, and waitest with longing and laboring for this Rest, thou will shortly see and feel the truth of all this; then will thou have so high an
apprehension of this blessed state, that will make thee pity the ignorance, and
distance of Mortals; and will tell thee then, all that is here said, is spoken
but in the dark, and falls short of the truth a thousand fold. In the mean
time, let this much kindle thy desires, and quicken thine endevors. Up and be
doing, run, and strive, and fight, and hold on, for thou have a certain
glorious prize before thee. God will not mock thee; do not mock thy self, nor
betray thy soul by delaying or dallying, and all is thine own. What kind of
men do thou think Christians would be in their lives and duties, if they had
still this Glory fresh in their thoughts? What frame would their spirits be in,
if their thoughts of Heaven were lively, and believing? Would their hearts be
so heavy? And their countenance so sad? Or would they have need to take up
their comforts from below? Would they be so loath to suffer? And afraid to die?
Or would they not think every day a year till they did enjoy it? The Lord heal
our carnal hearts, lest we enter not into his REST, because of our unbelief.

CHAP. VIII. The People of God described.
1.
SECT. I.
HAving thus performed my first task of Describing and explicating the Saints
Rest, it remains, that now I proceed unto the second, and show you what these [
People of God] are, and why so called; for whom this Blessed Rest remains.
And I shall suit my speech unto the quality of the subject. While I was in the
Mount, I felt it was good being there, and therefore tarried there the longer;
and were there not an extreme disproportion between my conceivings, and that
Subject, yet much longer had I been. And could my capacity have contained, what
was there to be seen, I could have been contented to have built me a Tabernacle
there: Can a prospect of that happy Land, be tedious? or a discourse of
eternity be too long? except it should detain us from actual possession, and
our absence move us to impatiency. But now I am descended from Heaven to Earth,
from God to man; and must discourse of a Worm not six foot long, whose life is
but a span, and his years as a post that hastes by; my discourse also shall be
but a span, and in a brief touch I will post it over. Having read of such a
high and unspeakable Glory, a stranger would wonder for what rare Creature this
Mighty Preparation should be, and expect some illustrious Sun should now break
forth; but behold only a shell full of Dust, animated with an invisible
rational soul, and that rectified with as unseen a restored power of Grace; and
this is the Creature that must possess such Glory. You would think, it must
needs be some deserving piece, or one that brings a valuable price: But
behold, One that has nothing, and can deserve nothing, and confesses this;
yet cannot of himself confess it neither, yea, that deserves the contrary
misery, and would if he might, proceed in that deserving; but being apprehended
by Love, he is brought to him that is All, and has done, and deserved All, and
suffered for all that we deserved; and most affectionately receiving him, and
resting on him, he does, in, and through him, receive All this. But let us see
more particularly yet, what these People of God are.

[They are a small part of lost mankind, Description.
whom God has from Eternity predestined to this Rest, for the Glory of his
Mercy; and given to his Son, to be by him in a special manner Redeemed, and
fully recovered from their lost estate, and advanced to this higher Glory; all
which, Christ does in due time accomplish accordingly by himself for them, and
by his Spirit upon them.] To open all the parts of this half-description to the
full, will take up more time and room then is allowed me; therefore briefly
thus.

1. I meddle only with [ Mankinde] not with Angels; nor will I curiously
enquire, whether there were any other World of men created and destroyed before
this had Being; nor whether there shall be any other, when this is ended. All
this is quite above us, and so nothing to us. Nor say I [the sons of Adam]
only, because Adam himself is one of them.

2. And as its no more excellent a creature then Man that must have this
possession; so is it that man who once was lost, and had scarcely left himself
so much as man. The heirs of this Kingdom were taken, 2 Timothy 2.26.
even from the Tree of execution, and rescued by the strong hand of love from
the power of the Prince of Darkness, who having taken them in his snares, did
lead them captive at his will: They were once within a step of Hell, who must
be now advanced as high as Heaven. And though I mention their lost condition
before their predestination, yet I hereby intend not to signify any precedence
it has, either in it self, or in the divine consideration. Though I cannot see
yet, how Dr. Twisses Arguments against the corrupted mass being the object of
predestination, can be well Answered upon the common acknowledged grounds; Yet
that Question I dare not touch, as being very suspicious that its high
Arrogance in us to dispute of precedence in the Divine Consideration; and that
we no more know what we talk of, then this paper knows what I write of: When
we confess, that all these Acts in God are truly one, and that there is no
difference of time with him; Its folly to dispute of priority or posteriority
in nature.

3. That they are but a small part of this lost Generation, is too apparent in
Scripture and experience. Its the little flock to whom its the fathers good
pleasure to give the Kingdom. If the sanctified are few, Luke. 12.32.
the saved must needs be few. Fewer they are then the world imagines; yet not
so few as some drooping Spirits deem, who are doubtful that God will cast off
them, who would not reject Him for all the world; and are suspicious that God
is unwilling to be their God, when yet they know themselves willing to be his
people.

4. It is the design of Gods eternal decree to glorify his Mercy and Grace to
the highest in this their salvation; and therefore needs must it be a great
salvation. Every step of mercy to it was great, how much more this end of all
those mercies; which stands next to Gods ultimate end, his Glory? God cannot
make any low or mean work to be the great business of an eternal purpose.

See John 17.2. a clear place.
5. God has given all things to his Son, but not as he has given his chosen to
him; The difference is clearly expressed by the Apostle. He has made him Head
over all things, to his Church* Ephesians. 1.21.22. And though Christ is in some
sense, A Ransom for All, yet not in that special manner, as for his people. He
has brought others under the Conditional Gospel Covenant; but them under the
Absolute. He has according to the tenor of his Covenant, procured Salvation
for All, If they will believe; but he has procured for his Chosen even this
That faith is properly called the Condition of the Covenant, and Justifies as
a Condition, Besides what I have said in my Aphorisms of Justification* I refer
you to Mr. Wotton de Reconcil. part. 1. l. 2. c. 19. where you have the
attestation of our chief Divines* John 6.39.
Condition of believing.

6. Nor is the Redeeming of them by death his whole task; but also the
effecting of their full Recovery: He may send his Spirit to persuade others,
but he intends absolutely his prevailing only with his Chosen. And as truly as
he has accomplished his part on the cross for them, so truly will he
accomplish his part in Heaven for them, and his part by his Spirit also upon
them. That faith is properly called the Condition of the Covenant, and
Justifies as a Condition, Besides what I have said in my Aphorisms of
Justification* I refer you to Mr. Wotton de Reconcil. part. 1. l. 2. c. 19.
where you have the attestation of our chief Divines* John 6.39.
And of all that the Father has thus given him, he will lose nothing.

SECT. II. 2.

BUt this is but a piece of their description, Description.
containing Gods work for them, and on them; Lets see what they are also in
regard of the working of their own Souls toward God, They that would see this
work of God on the soul handled most exactly, Judiciously, scholastically, and
briefly, let them read Mr. Thomas Parkers excellent Theses de Traductione
peccaetoris ad vitam, If you cannot get the book, it is in the end of Ames.
against Grevincho. but maimed of 15 Theses left out.
and their Redeemer again. [These people of God then, are that 2 part of the ^
externally called, 3 who being by the 4 Spirit of Christ 5 thoroughly, though 6
imperfectly regenerate, are hereupon 7 convinced and 8 sensible of that 9 evil
in sin, 10 that misery in themselves, that 11 vanity in the creature, and that
12 necessity, 13 sufficiency and 14 excellency of Jesus Christ, that they 15
abhor that evil, 16 bewail that misery, and 17 turn their hearts from that
vanity, and most 19 affectionately 18 accepting of Christ for their 20 Savior
and 21 Lord, to bring them unto 22 God the chief Good, and present them 23
perfectly just before him, do accordingly enter into a 24 Cordial Covenant with
him, and so 25 deliver up themselves unto him, and herein 26 persevere to their
lives End.]

I shall briefly explain to you the branches of this part of the description
also. The 1. description explained.


1. I say they are a part of [the Externally Called, They are externally called.
] because the Scripture has yet showed us no other way to the Internal call,
Romans 10.14.
but by the external. What the external call is.
For how shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a preacher? All divulging of the substance of the Gospel,
whether by Solemn Sermons, by writing, printing, reading, conference, or any
other means that have a rational sufficiency for information and conviction;
are this preaching: though not all alike clear and excellent. The knowledge of
Christ is none of Quicquid illud est quod extrinsecus oculis and mentibus
hominum objicitur, destitutum est icta vi Spiritus quae sola potest homines
abducere a peccato and ad vitae spem efficaciter revocare. Amyrald. Defens.
Calvin. p. 154. Whether the Spirit without means do call. In what sense the
Spirit enlighteneth? Quomodo causa illa supernaturalis intellectum liberet a
nativis quibus occupatur tenebris, men's humana non comprehendit. Effectum summo
Dei beneficio persentiscimus; rationem operationis non tenemus. Amyrald.
defens. Doctr. Calvin* page 200. Some confidently do with Grotius appeal to
Antiquity in the points of universal sufficient Grace, and Free Will and
natures integrity: Concerning which see Chamier: Bogermans* Annotations on
Grotij Piet. and Vshers Eccles. Brittan. Primord. What the ancient Church
thought and did against Pelagius. So Johan. Latius. de Pelag. Comment. Nichol.
Bodicher. in Socin. Remonstr. Videlius, etc.
Natures principles: The book of the Creatures is no means alone, much less a
sufficient means to teach the knowledge of Christ. What is the means of this
call. Whether nature and Creatures be sufficient.
It may discover mercy, but gives not the least hint of the way of that mercy:
It speaks nothing of God incarnate; of two natures in one person; of Jesus the
Son of Mary; of Christ's Suretiship, and suffering for us, rising, ascending,
mediating, returning; of two Covenants and their several conditions, and the
reward of keeping them, and penalty of breaking them, etc. Its utterly silent
in these things. And to affirm that the Spirit calls or teaches men where the
word is not, and where the Creature or nature speaks not, is, I think, a
groundless fiction. There is the light of the eye, and the light of the Sun, or
some other substitute external light necessary to our seeing any object: The
Scripture and certain revelations from Heaven (when and where such are) is the
sun or external light: the understanding is our eye or internal light: This eye
is become blind, and this internal light in the best is imperfect; but the
external light of Scripture is now perfected: Therefore the work of the Spirit
now, is, not to perfect Scripture, or to add any thing to its discovery, or to
be in stead of a Scripture where it is wanting, much less where the Scripture
is: But to remove the darkness from our understanding, that we may see clearly
what the Scripture speaks clearly: Before the Scripture was perfected, the
Spirit did enlighten the Prophets and penmen of Scripture both ways: But now I
know no teaching of the Spirit, save only by its illuminating or sanctifying
work; teaching men no new lesson, nor the old without book; but to read with
understanding, what Scripture, Nature, Creatures and providence teach. The
asserting of any more is proper to the Enthusiasts, if the spirits teachings
did without Scripture or tradition reveal Christ, surely some of those millions
of poor blind Pagans would have before this believed, and the Christian faith
have been propagated among them: Or if the Spirit did teach them any step
toward Christ, upon the receiving whereof, he would teach them more, and so
more and more till they resist this teaching (which is the evading doctrine of
some) then sure some of those Kingdoms of Infidels would have harkened to the
spirits teaching, and being taught would have taught others; especially if
there be a sufficiency in that grace for the obtaining of its end. Therefore
how to apprehend a verity in their doctrine of universal sufficient grace to
believe, I know not: Yet will I not affirm that the faith that is absolutely
necessary among poor Indians, is of the same extent in all its acts and
dimensions, with that required among us; no more then that required of the
world before Christ's coming, was. Upon what terms then God will deal with
those dark parts of the world, I cannot yet reach to know. The scripture speaks
of no other way to life but Christ, and of no way to Christ but faith: But we
are not their Judges, they stand or fall to their own master: But sure that
great difference betwixt them and us, must arise from Gods own pleasure: For
they have not abused Christ and Gospel, which they never heard of: Object. from
Romans 2 16. Answered.
nor can it be, that they should be judged by that Gospel, which neither before
nor since the fall was taught them: Christ himself says plainly, that if he
had not come to them and spoke the words that no man else could speak, and done
the works that no man else could do, John 15.22.24. expounded.
they had not had sin: He says not, (as some would pervert the sense) your sin
had not been so great; But none at all; not speaking of their other sins, but
their unbelief which he had now in hand; teaching us clearly, That where there
is not competent means to convince men of the truth of the Gospel, there not
believing is no sin: For it was to them never forbidden, nor the contrary duty
ever required. And the Apostle tells us those that have sinned without Law,
shall be judged without Law. That place therefore Romans 2.16. seems abused,
while they would make the sense to be, that God will judge the secrets of all
men according to the Gospel, as the sentencing Law, when the Apostle seems to
intend but thus much, According to my Gospel, that is, as I have in my
preaching the Gospel taught you; respecting the verity of what he speak. Yet I
think that they will be Judged according to Gospel-indulgence, as they have
been partakers of some mercies from Christ in this life.

They are but part of the externally called. Romans 8.30.
2. That these people of God are but [a Part] of those that are thus externally
called, is too evident in Scripture and experience. Many are called but few
chosen: But the internally effectually called are all chosen: For, whom he
called them he justified, and whom he justified them he glorified. The bare
invitation of the Gospel, and men's hearing the Word, is so far from giving
title to, or being an evidence of Christianity and its privileges, that where
it prevails not to a through-Conversion, it sinks deeper and casts under a
double damnation.

They are Regenerate by the spirit of Christ,
3. The first differencing work I affirm to be [Regeneration by the Spirit of
Christ;] taking it for granted that this Regeneration is the same with
effectual Vocation, with Conversion, with Sanctification, (understanding
Conversion and Sanctification, of the first infusion of the principle of
Spiritual life into the soul, and not for the addition of degrees, or the
sanctifying of the conversation, This Regeneration, effectual Vocation, the
first Conversion, and first Sanctification, are all one thing proved.

See Bishop Downams appendix to the Covenant of Grace, in Confutation of Mr.
Pemble, where this division is asserted.


in which last sense its most frequently taken in Scripture.) Its a wonder to
me that such a multitude of Learned Divines should so long proceed in that
palpable mistake as to divide and mangle so groundlesly, the Spirits work upon
the soul; to affirm that 1. precedes the work of vocation, 2. this vocation
infuseth faith, (only, say some, but faith and repentance, say others) 3. then
must this faith by us be acted. 4. by which act we apprehend Christ's person,
and by that apprehension we are united to him; 5. from which union proceeds the
benefits. 1. Of Justification. 2. Of Sanctification. 6. this Sanctification
infuseth all other gracious Habits, and has two degrees. 1. Regeneration, 2.
Renascentiam, or the new birth. What a multifarious division is here of that
one single entire work, which is called in Scripture, the giving of the Spirit;
of holiness; of the seed of God in us? Which seed or life does no more enter by
piecemeal into the soul, then the soul into the body: And though to salve the
Absurdity, they tell us the difference is in nature and not in time; yet that
is impossible; For there is man's act of believing intervenes, who must have
time for all his actions; See Ames. medul. cap. 26. 8. Doctor Ames. against
Grevincho. has fully confuted himself. page 260.261, etc. The whole tenth
Chap. is exceeding well worth the reading to prove the vital seed or habit to
go before the Act of Faith. See Pemble vind. Great. page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
etc. The first Sanctification is before Justification and threfore mentioned
first in the Description. See Mr. Rich. Hooker in his Discourse of
Justification asserting this same order. And Pet. Martyr on Romans c. 3. p. 157.
shows fully how the spirit goes before faith, and yet in the increase
follows after it.
besides the division in order of nature is groundlesly asserted: It much
perplexeth them to resolve that doubt, whether in sanctification faith and
Repentance be infused over again, which were before infused in vocation? or
whether all other graces are infused without them? Dr. Ames seems to resolve
it in the Affirmative, that they are infused again, but with this difference.
1. That faith in our vocation is not properly considered as a quality, but in
relation to Christ. 2. Nor is Repentance there looked at, as a change of the
disposition, but as a change of the purpose and intent of the mind: but in
sanctification a real change of qualities and dispositions is looked at.
Answer. Strange doctrine for an Anti-Arminian. However you consider it, sure
the habit or disposition is infused, before those Acts are excited: Act. 26.18.
Or else what need we assert any habits at all? If the spirit excites those holy
acts of faith and repentance in an unholy Soul, without any change of its
disposition, at the first, why not ever after as well as then? and so the soul
be disposed one way, and act another: and so the Libertines doctrine be true,
That it is not we that believe and repent, but the Spirit. Or if these two
solitary habits be infused in vocation, why not the rest? And why again in
sanctification? Doubtless that internal effectual [ Call] of the spirit,
metaphorically so called, is properly a real operation: and that work has the
understanding and will for its object; both being the Subject of faith in which
the Habit is planted, and faith now generally acknowledged to be an act of
both: And surely an unholy understanding and will cannot believe; nor is faith
an act of a dead, but of a living soul: Especially considering that a true
spiritual knowledge, is requisite, either as a precedent act, or essential part
of true faith.

All which does also warrant, my putting of* this Renewing work of the spirit
in the first place; and placing Sanctification (in the sense before explained)
before justification. The Apostle places clearly vocation before
justification, Romans 8.30. Which vocation I have showed, is the same thing in a
metaphorical term, with this first Sanctification or Regeneration: Though I
know the stream of Interpreters do in explaining that Text, make Sanctification
to be included in Glorification; when yet they can show no real difference
between it, and effectual vocation before-named. Certainly if Sanctification
precede faith, and faith precede Justification, then Sanctification must needs
precede Justification: But if we may call that work of the spirit which
infuseth the principle of life, or holiness, into the soul, [ Sanctification;]
then sanctification must needs go before faith. Act. 26.18. explained,
For faith in the habit is part of that principle, and faith in the act is a
fruit of it: Gods order is clearly set down in Acts 26.18. He first opens men's
eyes, and turns them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, (and if they be yet unholy, I know not what holiness is,) that they may
receive remission of sins (there is their Justification) and inheritance among
the sanctified (that which before was called, opening their eyes, and turning
them is here called Sanctifying) by faith that is in me: (the words [ by Faith]
is related to the Receiving of Remission of Sins and the Inheritance, but not
to the word, [ Sanctified]) so also 2 These. 2.13. God has before chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience (obeying the
Gospel is faith) and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 2 These. 2 13.
opened
(there is Justification) so that you see, to make faith precede sanctification,
and to bring in the habits of all other graces; and for Justification to go
between faith and them, is quite against the Scripture order. Indeed if
Grevinchovius say true that there is no Habits infused, and the spirit work only
(as the Arminians affirm) by an internal and external Swasion, and no real
physical alteration, or infusing of new powers and habits, then all this must
be otherwise ordered Which controversy I pretend not here to determine,
acknowledging its difficulty requires a better judgment for its explication
then mine; yet I hitherto judge it an error.
.

In ascribing Regeneration to the spirit, I include the word.
In ascribing this Regeneration to [the Spirit,] I do not intend to exclude the
word; yet I cannot allow it to be properly the Instrumental cause, as the
common opinion is. Were it an instrument, the Energy or Influx of the principal
efficient must be first received into it, and by it conveyed to the soul; but
that is an impossibility in Nature: The voice of the Preacher, or Letters of
the Book, But not as the proper instrumental cause of Regeneration.
are not subjects capable of receiving Spiritual Life to convey to us; the like
also may be said of Sacraments: None of the conditions of an Instrumental
efficient cause, are found in them. The Principal and Instrumental, produce one
and the same effect: But the word works not in the same way of causality with
the Spirit; Different way of working of the Spirit and Word.

(If any had rather say, that the Word is Causa efficiens minus principalis
procatarctica, I contend not.)

See Dr. Twisse Vind. Great. p. 231. l. 1. part. 2. and l. 2. part. 1. p. 160.
Whether Word and Sacraments work in genere causae efficientis, vel finalis? The
Word, how it sanctifies?

Vide Pa^keri Theses de Traductione peccat. de hoc dubio.


yet does it not follow, that it is therefore useless or does nothing to the
work; for both kinds of causality are necessary: The Spirit works as the
principal and only efficient, and has no intervening instrument, that can
reach the soul; but does all his work immediately, seeing it self alone can
touch its object, and so work by proper efficiency: But the Word and Sacraments
work morally, only by propounding the object in its qualifications, as a man
draws a Horse by showing him his Provender: And though there be some difficulty
in resolving, whether the propounding the object to the understanding by
instruction, and to the will and affections by persuasion, do work under the
efficient, or under the final cause; yet according to the common Judgment, we
here take the last for granted. The Word then does sanctify by exciting of
former principles to action; which is a preparation to the receiving of the
principle of Life; and also by present exciting of the newly infused gracious
principle, and so producing our Actual converting and believing: But how it can
otherways concur to the infusing of that principle, I yet understand not.
Indeed, if no such principle be infused, then the Word does all, and the Spirit
only And that only by a way of swasion, which is properly by the Word, or by
the first work of Nature giving him Reason.
enable the speaker; or if any more, its hard to discover what it is. For
whether there be any internal swasion of the Spirit immediately, distinct from
the external swasion of the Word, and also from the Spirits efficacious
changing Physical operation, is a very great question, and worth the
considering: But I have run on too far in this already.

This Spiritual Regeneration then, Necessity of this Regeneration.
is the first and great qualification of these People of God, which (though
Habits are more for their Acts then themselves, and are only perceived in
their Acts, yet) by its causes and effects we should chiefly enquire after. To
be the people of God without Regeneration, is as impossible, as to be the
natural children of men without Generation; seeing we are born Gods enemies, we
must be newborn his sons, or else remain enemies still. O that the
unregenerate world did know or believe this! In whose ears the new birth sounds
as a Paradox, and the great change which God works upon the soul, John 3.3.
is a strange thing: Who because they never felt any such supernatural work
upon themselves, do therefore believe that there is no such thing; but that it
is the conceit and fantasy of idle brains: Who make the terms of Regeneration,
Sanctification, Holiness, and Conversion, a matter of common reproach and
scorn, though they are the words of the Spirit of God himself; and Christ has
spoke it with his own mouth, That except a man be born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Alas how I mean that this is not a sufficient way to
their salvation; but yet it may conduce to the good of others, to restrain
their vicious actions, and somewhat more.
preposterous and vain is it, to persuade these poor people, to change some
actions while their hearts are unchanged, and to amend their ways while their
natures are the same? The greatest Reformation of Life that can be attained to,
without this new Life wrought in the Soul, may procure their further Delusion,
but never their Salvation.

That general conceit that they were regenerated in their Men's conceit, that
they are all Regenerate by their Baptism confuted. Baptism can be no means of
an Infants Regeneration. Nam signa corporea in animas incorporeas agere, and
signum imprimere, ex vulgatissima regula Physica non possunt* Lamb. Danaeus
Cont. Bellar. ad Tom. 2. Cont. 4. p. 238.

Regeneration not the end, why Christ would have men baptized.


Baptism, is it which furthers the deceit of many: When there is an utter
impossibility that Baptism should either principally or instrumentally work any
Grace on the Soul of an Infant, without a miracle; for if it do, it is either
by a Physical and proper efficiency, or else morally: Not Physically (which is
more perhaps, then the Papists say) Because then, first, the water must be
capable of receiving the Grace; secondly, And of approaching the soul in the
application and conveyance; both which are impossibilities in Nature: Nor can
it work morally where there is not the use of Reason, to understand and
consider of its signification. The common shift is apparently vain, to say,
That it works neither Physically, nor Morally, but Hyperphysically; for though
it may proceed from a supernatural cause, and the work be such as nature cannot
produce, yet the kind of operation is still either by a proper and real
efficiency (which is the meaning of the phrase of Physical operation) or else
improper and moral; So that their Hyperphysical working, is no third member,
nor overthrows that long received distinction; if it were, yet is not the water
the capable instrument of this Hyperphysical operation. God is a free agent,
and by mere concomitancy, may make Baptism the season of Regenerating whom he
please; but that he never intended that Regeneration should be the end of
Baptism, I think may be easily proved; and those Dr. Burg^s, and Mr. Tho.
Bedford. of Baptismal Regeneration.
two empty Treatises of Baptismal Regeneration, as easily answered. For men of
age, the matter is out of question, seeing Faith and Repentance is every where
required of them, to make them capable of Baptism; and to make it the end of
the Ordinance to effect that in Infants, which is a prerequisite condition in
all others, is somewhat a strange fiction, and has nothing that I know
considerable to underprop it. Yet will it not follow, that because Baptism
cannot be an instrument of Regenerating Infants, that therefore they have no
right to it; no more then, because Circumcision could not confer with Grace,
therefore they should omit it. They are as capable of the ends of Baptism, as
they were then of the ends of Circumcision The Institution being supposed.
Though some Question, whether Christ's Baptism was a legal Ceremony or a Gospel
Ordinance. Aaron and his sons were to be washed at the entering upon the
Priesthood* And Christ says, I^ becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness; and it
was the Righteousness of the Law, that he came to fulfill, and not the
Righteousness or Condition of the Gospel. And we find not, that he himself
received the Sacrament of his Supper. But these are doubtful. Vid. Grotti votum
ad Artic. 9.
. Christ himself was not capable of all the ends of Baptism: and yet being
capable of some; for those was he baptized: So may Infants be as capable of
some, though not of all.

This Regeneration I call [Through] to distinguish it from those slight
tinctures* and superficial changes, which other men may partake of; and yet
[Imperfect] to distinguish our present, from our future condition in Glory; and
that the Christian may know, that it is sincerity, not perfection, which he
must enquire after in his soul.

SECT. III. 3.

THus far the Soul is passive. The Soul is convinced ^ e.
Let us next see by what acts this new Life does discover it self, and this
Divine Spark does break forth; and how the soul touched with this Loadstone of
the Spirit, Knows.
does presently move toward God. The first work I call Conviction, Assenteth to
the Truth of Scripture-threats.
which indeed comprehends several Acts. 1. Knowledge. 2. Assent. It comprehends
the knowledge of what the Scripture speaks against sin, and sinners; and that
this Scripture which so speaks, is the Word of God himself. Whosoever knows not
both these, is not yet thus convinced, (though it is a very great Question,
Whether this last be an act of Knowledge, or of Faith? I think of both. And
knows its own sin and guilt, and misery.
) It comprehends a sincere Assent to the verity of this Scripture; as also some
knowledge of our selves, and our own guilt, and an acknowledgment of the verity
of those Consequences, which from the premises of sin in us, and threats in
Scripture, Therefore not any other, but this Knowledge is the first Grace, in
regard of the order of their acting; though in the vi^al Seed they are together.
do conclude us miserable. It has been a great Question, and disputed in whole
Volumns, which Grace is the first in the Soul; where Faith and Repentance are
usually the only competitors. I have showed you before, that in regard of the
principle, the power or habit (whichsoever it be that is infused) they are all
at once, being indeed all one; and only called several Graces, from the
diversity of their subject, as residing in the several faculties of the soul;
the life and rectitude of which several faculties and affections, are in the
same sense several Graces, as the Germane, French, British Seas, are several
Seas. And for the Acts, it is most apparent, that neither Repentance, nor Faith
(in the ordinary strict sense) is first, but Knowledge. There is no act of the
Rational Soul about any object preceding Knowledge. Their evasion is too gross,
who tell us, That Knowledge is no Grace, or but a common act: When a dead Soul
is by the Spirit enlivened, its first act is to know: and why should it not
exert a sincere act of Knowing, as well as Believing, and the sincerity of
Knowledge be requisite as well as of Faith, especially, when Faith in the
Gospel-sense, is sometime taken largely, containing many acts, whereof Knowledge
is one? in which large sense, indeed Faith is the first Grace. This Conviction
implies also, the subduing and silencing in some measure of all their carnal
Reasonings, which were wont to prevail against the Truth, and a discovery of
the fallacies of all their former Argumentations.

The Soul is sensible of what it is convinced.
2. As there must be Conviction, so also Sensibility: God works on the Heart, as
well as the Head; both were corrupted, and out of order. The principle of new
Life does quicken both. All true Spiritual Knowledge does pass into Affections.
That Religion which is merely traditional, does indeed swim loose in the Brain;
and the Devotion which is kindled but by Men and Means, is hot in the mouth,
Necessity of sensibility.
and cold in the stomach. The Work that had no higher rise, then Education,
Example, Custom, Reading, or Hearing, does never kindly pass down to the
Affections. The Understanding which did receive but mere notions, cannot
deliver them to the Affections as Realities. The bare help of Doctrine upon an
unrenewed Soul produces in the Understanding, but a superficial apprehension,
and half Assent, and therefore can produce in the Heart but small sensibility.
As Hypocrites may know many things (yea, as many as the best Christian) but
nothing with the clear apprehensions of an experienced man; so may they with as
many things, be slightly affected, but they give deep rooting to none. To read
and hear of the worth of Meat and Drink, may raise some esteem of them; but not
such as the hungry and thirsty feel, (for by feeling they know the worth
thereof.) To view in the Map of the Gospel, the precious things of Christ, and
his Kingdom, may slightly affect: But to thirst for, and drink of the living
waters; and to travel, to live in, to be heir of that Kingdom, must needs work
another kind of Sensibility. It is Christ's own differencing Mark (and I had
rather have one from him, then from any) that the good ground gives the good
Seed deep rooting; but some others entertain it but into the surface of the
soil, and cannot afford it depth of Earth. The great things of Sin, of Grace,
and Christ, and Eternity, which are of weight one would think to move a Rock,
yet shake not the heart of the carnal Professor, nor pierce his soul unto the
quick. Though he should have them all ready in his Brain, and be a constant
Preacher of them to others, yet do they little affect himself: When he is
pressing them upon the hearts of others most earnestly, and crying out on the
senslesness of his dull hearers; you would little think how insensible is his
own soul, and the great difference between his tongue and his heart: His study
and invention, procures him zealous and moving expressions; but they cannot
procure him answerable affections. It is true, some soft and passionate Natures
may have tears at command, when one that is truly gracious has none; yet is
this Christian with dry eyes, more solidly apprehensive and deeply affected,
then the other is in the midst of his tears; and the weeping Hypocrite will be
drawn to his sin again with a trifle, which the groaning Christian would not be
hired to commit, with Crowns and Kingdoms.

The things that the Soul is thus convinced and sensible of, What the Soul is
convinced and sensible of.
are especially these in the Description mentioned.

Of the evil of sin. Nall^ offensa D^i est venialis de se, nisi (...) per
resp^ctum ad divinam miserecordiam, quae non vult de facto quamlibet offensam
imputare ad mortem; cum illud posset justissime. Et ita concluditur quod
peccatum mortale and veniale in esse tasi non distinguuntur intrinsece and
essentialiter, sed solum per respectum ad divinam gratiam, etc. Gerson. de vita
Spirit. Corol. 1. So Papists then confess the damning merit of every sin.
1. The evil of sin. The sinner is made to know and feel, that the sin which was
his delight, his sport, the support of his credit, and estate, is indeed a more
loathsome thing then Toads or Serpents; and a greater evil then Plague or
Famine, or any other calamity: It being a breach of the righteous Law of the
most high God, dishonorable to him, and destructive to the sinner. Now the
sinner reads and hears no more the reproofs of sin, as words of course, as if
the Minister wanted something to say, to fill up his Sermon; but when you
mention his sin, you stir in his wounds; he feels you speak at his very heart,
and yet is contented you should show him the worst, and set it home, though he
bear the smart. He was wont to marvel what made men keep such a stir against
sin; what harm it was for a man to take a little forbidden pleasure: he saw no
such hainousness in it, that Christ must needs die for it, and most of the
world be eternally tormented in Hell: He thought this was somewhat hard
measure, and greater punishment then could possibly be deserved, by a little
fleshly liberty, or worldly delight, neglect of Christ, his Word, or Worship,
yea, by a wanton thought, a vain word, a dull duty, or cold affection. But now
the case is altered; God has opened his eyes to see that unexpressable
vileness in sin, which satisfies him of the reason of all this.

Of its own misery, by reason of sin. Quisquis desolationem non novit, nec
consolationem agnoscere potest. Et quisquis consolationem ignorant esse
necessariam, superes^ ut non habeat gratiam Dei. Inde est quod homines seculi
negotiis and flagitiis implicati, dum miseriam non sentiunt, non attendunt
misericordiam. Bernard. Sermon. XXXI. de temp.
2. The Soul in this great work is convinced and sensible, as of the evil of
sin, so of its own misery by reason of sin. They who before read the threats of
Gods Law, as men do the old stories of foreign wars, or as they behold the
wounds and blood in a picture or piece of Arras, which never makes them smart
or fear; Why now they find its their own story, and they perceive they read
their own doom, as if they found their names written in the curse, or heard the
Law say as Nathan, Thou are the man. The wrath of God seemed to him before, but
as a storm to a man in the dry house; or as the pains of the sick to the
healthful standerby; or as the Torments of Hell to a child, that sees the
story of Dives and Lazarus upon the wall: But now he finds the disease is his
own, and feels the pain in his own bowels, and the smart of the wounds in his
own soul. In a word, he finds himself a condemned man, and that he is dead and
damned in point of Law, and that nothing was wanting but mere execution to make
him most absolutely and irrecoverably miserable. Whether this be the work of
the Law or Gospel.
Whether you will call this a work of the Law or Gospel (as in several senses
it is of both, the Law expressing, and the Gospel intimating and implying our
former condemnation. Necessity of this sense of sin and misery.
) Sure I am it is a work of the Spirit, wrought in some measure in all the
regenerate: And though some do judge it an unnecessary bondage, yet it is beyond
my conceiving, how he should come to Christ for pardon that first found not
himself guilty and condemned; or for life, that never found himself dead. The
whole need not the Physician, Why some gracious souls can scarce perceive, and
others scarce remember this work of Humiliation.
but they that are sick. Yet I deny not, but the discovery of the Remedy as
soon as the misery, must needs prevent a great part of the trouble, and make
the distinct effects on the soul, to be with much more difficulty discerned:
Nay, the actings of the soul are so quick, and often so confused, that the
distinct order of these workings, may not be apprehended or remembered at all:
And perhaps the joyful apprehensions of mercy may make the sense of misery the
sooner forgotten.

3. So does the spirit also convince the soul, Of the Creatures vanity and
insufficiency.
of the creatures vanity and insufficiency. Every man naturally is a flat
Idolater: our hearts turned from God, in our first fall; and ever since the
Creature has been our God: This is the grand sin of Nature: when we set up to
our selves a wrong end, we must needs err in all the means. Every natural man
is an Idolater, and does not indeed take the Lord for his God.
The Creature is to every unregenerate man his God and his Christ. He ascribes
to it the Divine prerogatives, and allows it the highest room in his soul; Or
if ever he come to be convinced of misery, he flies to it as his Savior and
supply. Indeed God and his Christ have usually the name; and shall be still
called both Lord and Savior: But the real expectation is from the Creature,
and the work of God is laid upon it; (how well it will perform that work, the
sinner must know hereafter. Pride is the great sin against the first and great
Commandment.
) It is His Pleasure, his profit, and his Honor, that is the natural man's
Trinity; and his Carnal self, that is these in unity. Indeed it is that Flesh
that is the Principal Idol; the other three are deified in their relation to
our selves. It was our first sin, to aspire to be as Gods; and its the greatest
sin that runs in our blood, and is propagated in our nature from Generation to
Generation. When God should guide us, Man naturally is his own Idol.
we guide our selves; when he should be our Sovereign, we rule our selves. The
Laws which he gives us, we would correct and find fault with; and if we had
the making of them, we would have made them otherwise: When he should take care
of us, (and must, or we perish) we will care for our selves; when we should
depend on him in daily receivings, we had rather keep our stock our selves, and
have our portion in our own hands; when we should stand to his disposal, we
would be at our own; and when we should submit to his providence, we usually
quarrel at it; as if we knew better what is good, or fit for us, then he; or
how to dispose of all things more wisely: If we had the disposal of the events
of Wars, and the ordering of the affairs of Churches and States, or the choice
of our own outward condition, it would be far otherwise then now it is; and we
think we could make a better disposal, order and choice, then God has made.
This is the Language of a carnal heart, though it do not always speak it out.
When we should study God* we study our selves; when we should mind God, we
mind our selves; when we should love God, we love our carnal selves; when we
should trust God, we trust our selves; when we should honor God, we honor our
selves; and when we should ascribe to God, and admire him, we ascribe to, and
admire our selves: And instead of God, we would have all men's eyes and
dependence on us, and all men's thanks returned to us, and would gladly be the
only men on Earth, extolled, and admired by all. And thus we are naturally our
own Idols: Regeneration works back the heart to God again*

It convinces, first, That the Creature cannot be our God; secondly, Nor our
Jesus. Providence, and especially Affliction, do ^sually much further this
Conviction.


But down falls this Dagon, when God does once renew the soul: It is the great
business of that great work, to bring the heart back to God himself. He
convinces the sinner. 1. That the Creature or himself, can neither be his God,
to make him happy. 2. Nor yet his Christ, to recover him from his misery, and
restore him to God, who is his happiness. This God does, not only by
Preaching, but by Providence also: Because words seem but wind, and will
hardly take off the raging senses; therefore does God make his Rod to speak,
and continue speaking, till the sinner hear and has learned by it this great
lesson. This is the reason, why affliction does so ordinarily concur in the
work of Conversion: These real Arguments which speak to the quick, will force a
hearing, when the most convincing and powerful words are slighted. When a
sinner made his credit his God, and God shall cast him into lowest disgrace; or
bring him that idolized his riches, into a condition, wherein they cannot help
him; or cause them to take wing and fly away, or the rust to corrupt, and the
thief to steal his adored god in a night, or an hour; what a help is here to
this work of Conviction? When a man that made his pleasure his god, whether
ease, or sports, or mirth, or company, or gluttony, or drunkenness, or
clothing, or buildings, or whatsoever a raging eye, a curious ear, a raging
appetite, or a lustful heart could desire; and God shall take these from him,
or give him their sting and curse with them, and turn them all into Gall and
Wormwood; what a help is here to this Conviction? When God shall cast a man
into languishing sickness, and inflict wounds and anguish on his heart, and
stir up against him, his own Conscience, and then, as it were, take the sinner
by the hand, and lead him to credit, to riches, to pleasure, to company, to
sports, or whatsoever was dearest to him, and say, Now try if these can help
you; can these heal thy wounded conscience? can they now support thy tottering
cotage? can they keep thy departing soul in thy body? or save thee from mine
everlasting wrath? will they prove to thee eternal pleasures? or redeem thy
Soul from the eternal flames? cry aloud to them, and see now, whether these
will be instead of God, and his Christ unto thee. O how this works now with the
sinner! When sense it self acknowledges the truth? and even the flesh is
convinced of the Creatures vanity? and our very deceiver is undeceived? Now he
despises his former Idols, and calls them all but silly Comforters, Wooden,
Earthen, Dirty gods, of a few days old, and quickly perishing: He speaks as
contemptuously of them, as Baruck of the Pagan Idols, or our Martyrs of the
Papists god of Bread, which was yesterday in the Oven, and is to morrow on the
Dunghill: He chideth himself for his former folly, and pitieth those that have
no higher happiness. O poor Craesus, Caesar, Alexander, (thinks he) how small?
how short was your happiness? Ah poor riches! base honors! woeful pleasures! sad
mirth! ignorant learning! defiled, dunghill, counterfeit righteousness! poor
stuff to make a god of! simple things to save souls! Woe to them that have no
better a portion, no surer saviors, nor greater comforts then these can yield,
in their last and great distress and need! In their own place they are sweet
and lovely; but in the place of God, how contemptible and abominable? They that
are accounted excellent and admirable, within the bounds of their own calling;
should they step into the throne, and usurp Sovereignty, would soon in the eyes
of all, be vile and insufferable.

Of the need of Christ, and his sufficiency, and worth.
4. The fourth thing that the Soul is convinced and sensible of, is, The
Absolute Necessity, the Full Sufficiency, and Perfect Excellency of Jesus
Christ. It is a great Question, Whether all the forementioned works are not
common, and only preparations unto this? Quest. Are not all the forementioned
works common, till this last? Answ. No.
They are preparatives, and yet not common: Every lesser work is a preparative
to the greater; and all the first works of Grace, to those that follow: so
Faith is a preparative to our continual living in Christ, to our Justification,
and Glory. There are indeed common Convictions, and so there is also a common
Believing: But this as in the former terms explained, is both a sanctifying and
saving work; I mean a saving act of a sanctified Soul, excited by the Spirits
special Grace. That it precedes Justification, contradicts not this; for so
does Faith it ^elf too: Nor that it precedes Faith is any thing against it; for
I have showed before, that it is a part of Faith in the large sense; and in the
strict sense taken Faith is not the first gracious act, much less that act of
fiducial recumbency, which is commonly taken for the justifying act: Though
indeed it is no one single act, but many that are the condition of
Justification.

Of the necessity of Christ.
This Conviction is not by mere Argumentation, as a man is convinced of the
verity of some inconcerning consequence by dispute; but also by the sense of
our desperate misery, as a man in famine of the necessity of food, or a man
that has read or heard his sentence of condemnation, is convinced of the
absolute necessity of pardon; or as a man that lies in prison for debt, is
convinced of the necessity of a surety to discharge it. Now the sinner finds
himself in another case, then ever he was before aware of; he feels an
insupportable burden upon him, and sees there is none but Christ can take it
off; he perceives that he is under the wrath of God, and that the Law proclaims
him a Rebel and Outlaw, and none but Christ can make his peace; he is as a man
pursued by a Lion, that must perish if he find not present sanctuary; he feels
the curse does lie upon him, and upon all he has for his sake, and Christ
alone can make him blessed; he is now brought to this Dilemma; either he must
have Christ to justify him, or be eternally condemned; he must have Christ to
save him, or burn in Hell for ever; he must have Christ to bring him again to
God, or be shut out of his presence everlastingly. And now no wonder, if he cry
as the Martyr Lambert, None but Christ, none but Christ. It is not Gold but
Bread, that will satisfy the hungry; nor any thing but pardon that will
comfort the condemned. Phil. 3* 7, 8, 9.
All things are now but dross and dung; and what we accounted gain, is now but
loss, in comparison of Christ. For as the sinner sees his utter misery, and
the disability of himself, and all things to relieve him; so he does perceive,
that there is no saving mercy out of Christ: The truth of the threatening, and
tenor of both Covenants, do put him out of all such hopes. Revel 5.3, 4, 5, 6.
Heb. 9.22. and 13.12.
There is none found in Heaven or Earth, that can open the sealed Book, save
the Lamb; without his blood there is no Remission; and without Remission there
is no Salvation. Could the sinner now make any shift without Christ, or could
any thing else supply his wants, and save his soul; Acts 4.1^.
then might Christ be disregarded: But now he is convinced, that there is no
other name, and the necessity is absolute.

2. And as the Soul is thus convinced of the necessity of Christ, Of Christ's
sufficiency.
so also of his full sufficiency. He sees though the Creature cannot, and
himself cannot, yet Christ can. Though the fig leaves of our own unrighteous
righteousness, are too short to cover our nakedness, yet the Righteousness of
Christ is large enough: Ours is disproportionable to the justice of the Law;
but Christ's does extend to every title. If he intercede, there is no denial;
such is the dignity of his person, and the value of his merits, that the Father
grants all he desires: John 11.42.
He tells us himself, that the Father hears him always. His sufferings being
a perfect satisfaction to the Law, Heb. 7.25.
and all power in Heaven and Earth being given to him, he is now able to supply
every of our wants, and to save to the uttermost all that come to him.

Quest. How can I know his death is sufficient for me, if not for all? And how
is it sufficient for all, if not suffered for all?

Answ. Because I will not interrupt my present discourse with controversy, I
will say something to this Question by it self in another Tract, if God enable
me.

And of his excellency.
3. The Soul is also here convinced of the perfect excellency of Jesus Christ;
both as he is considered in himself, and as considered in relation to us, both
as he is the only way to the Father, and as he is the end being one with the
Father: Before he knew Christ's excellency, as a blind man knows the light of
the Sun; but now as one that beholds its glory.

And thus does the Spirit convince the Soul.

4.
SECT. IIII.
Now of the change of the Wi^^, and Affection.
3. AFter this sensible conviction, the Will discovers also its change; and
that in regard of all the four forementioned objects.

It turns from sin with abhorrency.
1. The sin which the understanding pronounces evil, the will does accordingly
turn from with abhorrency. Not that the sensitive appetite is changed, or any
way made to abhor its object; but when it would prevail against the conclusions
of Reason, and carry us to sin against God, when Scripture should be the rule,
and Reason the Master, and Sense the Servant: This disorder and evil, the will
abhors.

Abhors and lamenteth its miserable state.
2. The misery also which sin has procured, as he discerns, so he bewaileth:
It is impossible that the soul now living, should look either on its trespass
against God, or yet on its own self-procured calamity, without some compunction
and contrition. He that truly discerns that he has killed Christ, and killed
himself, will surely in some measure be pricked to the heart. If he cannot
weep, Renounceth all his former Idols and Vanities.

Sin is, first, Directly against God as God

Secondly, Directly only against his Laws.

Of the first sort, is only gross idolatry.


he can heartily groan; and his heart feels what his understanding sees.

3. The Creature he now renounceth as vain, and turns it out of his heart
with disdain. Not that he undervalueth it, or disclaimeth its use; but his
idolatrous abuse, and its unjust usurpation.

There is a twofold sin; One against God himself, as well as his Laws; when he
is cast out of the heart, and something else does take his place: This is it
that I intend in this place. The other is, when a man does take the Lord for
his God, but yet swerveth in some things from his commands; of this before. It
is a vain distinction that some make, That the soul must be turned, first from
sin; secondly, from the Creature to God: For the sin that is thus set up
against God, is the choice of something below in his stead; and no Creature in
it self is evil but the abuse of it is the sin. In what sense we turn from the
Creature.
Therefore to turn from the Creature, is only to turn from that sinful abuse.

Yet has the Creature here a twofold consideration. First, As it is vain and
insufficient to perform what the Idolater expects; and so I handle it here.
Secondly, As it is the object of such sinful abuse, and the occasion of sin;
and so it falls under the former branch, of our [turning from sin,] and in this
sense their division may be granted: but this is only a various respect; for
indeed it is still only our sinful abuse of the Creature, in our vain
admirations, undue estimations, too strong affections, and false expectations,
which we turn from.

There is a twofold Error very common in the descriptions of the work of
Conversion. A twofold Error in the descriptions of Conversion.
The one, of those who only mention the sinners turning from sin to God,
without mentioning any receiving of Christ by Faith. The other of those, who on
the contrary, only mention a sinners believing, and then think they have said
all. Nay, they blame them as Legalists who make any thing but the bare
believing of the love of God in Christ to us, to be part of this work; Our
turning from sin, is as essential to true Conversion as our believing in Christ.
and would persuade poor souls to question all their former comforts, and
conclude the work to have been only legal and unsound, because they have made
their changes of heart, and turning from sin and Creatures, part of it; and
have taken up part of their comfort from the reviewing of these, as evidences
of a right work. Indeed, should they take up here without Christ, or take such
change in stead of Christ, in whole or in part; the reprehension were just, and
the danger great. But can Christ be the way, where the Creature is the end? Is
he not only the way to the Father? And must not a right end be intended,
before right means? Can we seek to Christ for to reconcile us to God, while in
our hearts we prefer the Creature before him? Heb. 11.6.
Or, does God dispossess the Creature, and sincerely turn the heart therefrom,
when he will not bring the soul to Christ? Is it a work that is ever wrought in
an unrenewed soul? You will say, That without Faith it is impossible to
Besides, though the person please not God, nor his actions so as for God to
justify them, or to take delight in them as gracious; yet some actions of
wicked men, tending to Reformation, may please God in some respect secundum
quid; as Ahabs Humiliation.
please God. True; but what Faith does the Apostle there speak of? He that
comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. The belief of the Godhead must needs precede the belief of
the Mediatorship; and the taking of the Lord for our God, must in order precede
the taking of Christ for our Savior; though our peace with God do follow this:
Therefore Paul when he was to deal with the Athenian Idolaters, teaches them
the knowledge of the Godhead first, and the Mediator afterward. But you will
say, May not an unregenerate man believe that there is a God? True; and so may
he also believe there is a Christ: But he can no more cordially accept of the
Lord for his God, then he can accept of Christ for his Savior. In the soul of
every unregenerate man, the Creature possesses both places, and is both God
and Christ. Can Christ be believed in, where our own Righteousness, or any
other thing is trusted as our Savior? A flat necessity, both of coming to God,
as the End, or our chief Good; and to Christ as the way to the Father.
Or does God ever thoroughly discover sin, and misery, and clearly take the
heart from all Creatures, and Self-righteousness, and yet leave the soul
unrenewed? The truth is, where the work is sincere, there it is entire; and all
these parts are truly wrought: And as turning from the Creature to God, and not
by Christ, is no true turning; so believing in Christ, while the Creature has
our hearts, is no true believing. And therefore in the work of
Self-examination, whoever would find in himself a through-sincere work, must
find an entire work; even the one of these as well as the other. In the review
of which entire work, there is no doubt but his soul may take comfort. And it
is not to be made so light of, as most do, nor put by with a wet finger, That
Scripture does so ordinarily put Repentance before Faith, and make them jointly
conditions of the Gospel: Which Repentance contains those acts of the Wills
aversion, from sin and Creatures, before expressed. It is true, if we take Faith
in the largest sense of all Viz. As it is put for all obedience to the Commands
proper to the Gospel. Which part of this turning goes first.
, then it contains Repentance in it; but if we take it strictly, no doubt there
is some acts of it go before Repentance, and some follow after.

Yet is it not of much moment, which of the acts before mentioned, we shall
judge to precede; Whether our aversion from sin, and renouncing our Idols, or
our right receiving Christ; seeing it all composeth but one work, which God
does ever perfect where he begins but one step, and lays but one stone in
sincerity. And the moments of time can be but few, that interpose between the
several acts. Yet though the disposition to all gracious acts, The terminus a
quo considerable, before the terminus ad qu^m in order of nature.
be given at once, I conceive in our Actual turning, the term from which, in
order of nature, is considerable before the term to which we turn.

If any object, That every Grace is received from Christ, and therefore must
follow our receiving him by Faith.

I answer, There be receivings from Christ before believing, and before our
receiving of Christ himself. Object.
Such is all that work of the Spirit, Answ.
that brings the soul to Christ: There is a passive receiving before the
active. Both power and act of Faith are in order of Nature before Christ,
actually received; and the power of all other gracious acts, is as soon as that
of Faith. Though Christ give pardon and Salvation, upon condition of believing;
yet he gives not a new heart, a soft heart, Faith it self, nor the first true
Repentance on that condition: No more then he gives the Preaching of the
Gospel, the Spirits motions to believe, etc. upon a pre-requisite condition of
believing.

SECT. V. 5.

4. ANd as the Will is thus averted from the forementioned objects; As the
Will turns from evil, so at the same time to God, and the Mediator.
so at the same time does it cleave to God the Father, and to Christ. Its first
acting in order of Nature, is toward the whole Divine Essence; and it consists
especially in [electing and desiring God for his portion and chief Good:]
Having before been convinced, To the Godhead in order of Nature.
That nothing else can be his happiness, he now finds it is in God; and there
looks toward it. But it is yet rather with desire, then hope; For alas, the
sinner has already found himself to be a stranger and enemy to God, under the
guilt of sin, and curse of his Law; and knows there is no coming to him in
peace, till his case be altered: And therefore having before been convinced
also, That only Christ is able, and willing to do this; and having heard this
mercy in the Gospel freely offered, his next act is, To the Mediator as the
way; which is by Faith.
Secondly, [to accept most affectionately of Christ, for Savior and Lord.] I
put the former before this; because the ultimate end is necessarily the first
intended; and the Divine Essence is principally that ultimate end; yet not
excluding the humane nature in the second person: But Christ as Mediator is the
way to that end; John 14.6.
and throughout the Gospel is offered to us in such terms, as import his Being
the means of making us happy in God. And though that former act of the soul
toward the Godhead, do not justify, as this last does; yet is it (I think) as
proper to the people of God as this: nor can any man unregenerate, truly choose
God for his Lord, his portion, and chief good. Therefore do they both mistake:
They who only mention our turning to Christ, and they who only mention our
turning to God, in this work of Conversion, as is touched before. Paul's
preaching was, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Acts 20.21. and 5.31. and 11.18. and 26.20.
And life eternal, consists first in knowing the only true God, and then,
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3.

What justifying Faith is.
Though Repentance, Assent, Good works, etc. are required to our full
Justification, as subservient to, or concurrent with Faith; Its proper Act is
the Acceptance of Christ offered.
yet is the true nature of this justifying Faith it self contained in this
[most affectionate accepting of Christ, for Savior and Lord.] And I think it
necessarily contains all this in it: Some plead it is the Assenting act; some a
Fiducial adherence, or recumbency. I call it [ So Doctor Prestons judgment is,
and Master Woollis against the Lord Brook, p. 94. It is an Accepting of Christ
offered, rather then the belief of a Proposition affirmed So that excellent
Philosopher and Divine.

Love to Christ, whether it be not Essential to justifying Faith. See more of
this in the Positions of Justification. Love to Christ, must be the strongest
Love.


Accepting,] it being principally an act of the Will; but yet also of the whole
soul. This [Accepting] being that which the Gospel presses to, and calls the
[receiving of Christ:] I call it [an Affectionate accepting,] though Love seem
another act, quite distinct from Faith, (and if you take Faith for any one
single act, so it is;) yet I take it as essential to that Faith which
justifies: To accept Christ without Love, is not justifying Faith. Nor does
Love follow as a Fruit, but immediately concur; nor concur as a mere
concomitant, but essential to a true accepting. For this Faith is the receiving
of Christ, either with the whole soul, or with part; ^^t with part only, for
that is but a partial receiving: And (...) clear Divines of late conclude, That
justifying Faith resides, ^^rn in the Understanding and the Will; therefore in
the whole soul, and so cannot be one single act. All those Affections that are
for the receiving and entertainment of Good, called the concupiscible, must
receive and entertain Christ. I add, it is the [most] affectionate accepting
of Christ; because he that loves Father, Mother, or any thing more then him,
Luke 14.26.
is not worthy of him, nor can be his Disciple; and consequently not justified
by him. And the truth of this Affection is not to be judged so much by feeling
the pulse of it, Doctor Sibbs, Souls Conflict.
as by comparing it with our affection to other things. He that loves nothing
so much as Christ, does love him truly; though he find cause still to bewail
the coldness of his Affections. I make Christ himself the Object of this
Accepting, it being not any Theological Axiom concerning himself, but himself
in person. I call it [an Accepting him for Savior and Lord. Justifying Faith
is the Accepting Christ both for Savior and Lord. So that our Subjection to
Christ, as our Lord, is part of that Faith which justifies. How this differs
from the abhorred doctrine of the Socinians, you may see in the Aphorisms of
Justification.
] For in both relations, will he be received, or not at all. It is not only to
acknowledge his sufferings, and accept of pardon and glory; but to acknowledge
his sovereignty, and submit to his Government, and way of saving; and I take
all this to be contained in justifying Faith.

The work which Christ thus accepted of, What Christ does for us upon our
Acceptance.
is to perform, is, to bring the sinners to God, that they may be happy in him;
and this both really by his Spirit, and relatively in reconciling them, and
making them sons; and to present them perfect before him at last, and to
possess them of the Kingdom. This will Christ perform; and the obtaining of
these, are the sinners lawful ends, in receiving Christ: And to these uses does
he offer himself unto us.

5. To this end, Covenanting with Christ, is an essential part of our actual
Conversion, and of our Christianity.

Next, Christ delivers himself to the sinner, and he delivers himself up to
Christ.


does the sinner now enter into a cordial Covenant with Christ. As the
preceptive part is called the Covenant, ^o he might be under the Covenant
before; as also under the offers of a Covenant on Gods part. But he was never
strictly, nor comfortably in Covenant with Christ till now. He is sure by the
free offers that Christ does consent; and now does he cordially consent
himself; and so the Agreement is fully made; and it was never a match indeed
till now.

6. With this Covenant concurs [a mutual delivery:] Christ delivers himself
in all comfortable Relations to the sinner; and the sinner delivers up
himself to be saved and ruled by Christ. This which I call, the delivering of
Christ, is His act in and by the Gospel; without any change in himself: The
change is only in the sinner, to whom the conditional promises become
equivalent to Absolute, when they perform the conditions. Now does the soul
resolvedly conclude, I have been blindly led by flesh and lust, and the world,
and devil, too long already, almost to my utter destruction: I will now be
wholly at the dispose of my Lord, who has bought me with his blood, and will
bring me to his glory.

Lastly, The believer persevereth in this Covenant, and all the forementioned
grounds of it, to the death.

Heb. 10.29. Matthew. 24.13. Revel. 2.26, 27. and 3.11, 12. John 15.4, 5, 6. and
8.31. and 15.9. Col. ^.23. Romans 11.22.


7. And lastly, I add, [That the believer does herein persevere to the end.]
Though he may commit sins, yet he never disclaimeth his Lord, renounceth his
Allegiance, nor recalleth, nor repents of his Covenant; nor can he properly
be said to break that Covenant, while that Faith continues* which is the
condition of it. Indeed, those that have verbally Covenanted, and not
cordially, may yet tread under foot the blood of the Covenant, as an unholy
thing, wherewith they were sanctified by separation from those without the
Church: But the elect cannot be so deceived. Though this perseverance be
certain to true believers; yet is it made a condition of their Salvation, yea,
of their continued life and fruitfulness, and of the continuance of their
Justification, though not of their first Justification it self. But eternally
blessed be that hand of Love, which has drawn the free promise, and subscribed
and sealed to that which ascertains us, both of the Grace which is the
condition, and the Kingdom on that condition offered.

6.
SECT. VI.
The Application of this Description, by way of Examination.
ANd thus you have a naked enumeration of the Essentials of this People of God:
Not a full pourtraiture of them in all their excellencies, nor all the notes
whereby they may be discerned; which were both beyond my present purpose. And
though it will be part of the following Application, to put you upon trial; yet
because the Description is now before your eyes, and these evidencing works are
fresh in your memory, it will not be unseasonable, nor unprofitable for you, to
take an account of your own estates, and to view your selves exactly in this
glass, before you pass on any further. And I beseech thee, Reader, as thou have
the hope of a Christian, yea, or the reason of a man, to deal thoroughly, and
search carefully, and judge thy self as one that must shortly be judged by the
righteous God; and faithfully answer to these few Questions which I shall here
propound.

I will not enquire whether thou remember the time or the order of these
workings of the spirit; There may be much uncertainly and mistake in that; But
I desire thee to look into thy Soul, and see whether thou find such works
wrought within thee; and then if thou be sure they are there, the matter is not
so great, though thou know not when or how thou came by them.

And first; have thou been thoroughly convinced of an universal depravation,
through thy whole soul? and an universal wickedness through thy whole life? and
how vile a thing this sin is? and that by the tenor of that Covenant which thou
have transgressed, the least sin deserves eternal death? do thou consent to
this Law, that it is true, and righteous? Have thou perceived thy self
sentenced to this death by it? and been convinced of thy natural undone
condition? Have thou further seen the utter insufficiency of every Creature,
either to be it self thy happiness, or the means of curing this thy misery, and
thee happy again in God? Have thou been convinced, that thy happiness is only
in God as the end? And only in Christ as the way to him? (and the end also as
he is one with the Father;) and perceived that thou must be brought to God by
Christ, or perish eternally? Have thou seen hereupon an absolute necessity of
thy enjoying Christ? And the full sufficiency that is in him, to do for thee
whatsoever thy case requires, by reason of the fullness of his satisfaction,
the greatness of his power, and dignity of his person, and the freeness and
indefiniteness of his promises? Have thou discovered the excellency of this
pearl, to be worth thy selling all to buy it? Has all this been joined with
some sensibility? As the convictions of a man that thirsts, of the worth of
drink? and not been only a change in opinion, produced by reading or education,
as a bare notion in the understanding? Has it proceeded to an abhorring that
sin? I mean in the bent and prevailing inclination of thy will, though the
flesh do attempt to reconcile thee to it? Have both thy sin and misery been a
burden to thy soul? and if thou could not weep, yet could thou heartily
groan under the insupportable weight of both? Have thou renounced all thine own
Righteousness? Have thou turned thy Idols out of thy heart? So that the
Creature has no more the sovereignty? but is now a servant to God and to
Christ? Do thou accept of Christ as thy only Savior? and expect thy
Justification, Recovery, and glory from him alone? Do thou take him also for
Lord and King? and are his Laws the most powerful commanders of thy life and
soul? Do they ordinarily prevail against the commands of the flesh, of Satan,
of the greatest on earth that shall countermand? and against the greatest
interest of thy credit, profit, pleasure or life? So that thy conscience is
directly subject to Christ alone? Has he the highest room in thy heart and
affections? So that though thou can not love him as thou would, yet
nothing else is loved so much? Have thou made a hearty Whether thy Infant
Baptism will serve or no, I am sure thy Infant Covenant will not now serve thy
turn: But thou must Actually enter Covenant in thy own person.

John 15.4, 5, 6. Matthew 24.13. Heb. 10.38, 39.


Covenant to this end with him? And delivered up thy self accordingly to him?
and take thy self for His and not thine own? Is it thy utmost care and
watchful endeavor, that thou may be found faithful in this Covenant? and
though thou fall into sin, yet would not renounce thy bargain, nor change thy
Lord, nor give up thy self to any other government, for all the world? If this
be truly thy case, thou art one of these People of God which my Text speaks of:
And as sure as the Promise of God is true, this Blessed Rest remains for thee.
Only see thou abide in Christ, and continue to the end; For if any draw back,
his soul will have no pleasure in them.

But if all this be contrary with thee; or if no such work be found within
thee; but thy soul be a stranger to all this; and thy conscience tell thee, it
is none of thy case; The Lord have mercy on thy soul, and open thine eyes, and
do this great work upon thee, and by his mighty power overcome thy resistance:
For I speak not this to the dark and clouded Christian, who cannot discern that
which is indeed within him.
in the case thou art in, there is no hope. What ever thy deceived heart may
think, or how strong soever thy false hopes be, or though now a little while
thou flatter thy soul in confidence and security; Yet will thou shortly find
to thy cost (except thy through conversion do prevent it) that thou art none of
these people of God, and the Rest of the Saints belongs not to thee. Thy dying
hour draws near apace and so does that great day of separation, when God will
make an everlasting difference between his people and his enemies: Then woe, and
for ever woe to thee, if thou be found in the state that thou art now in: Thy
own tongue will then proclaim thy woe, with a thousand times more dolor and
vehemence, then mine can possibly do it now. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that thou were wise to consider this, and that thou would remember thy
latter end! That yet while thy soul is in thy body, and a price in thy hand,
and day light, and opportunity, and hope before thee, thine ears might be open
to instruction, and thy heart might yield to the persuasions of God; and thou
might bend all the powers of thy soul about this great work; that so thou
might Rest among his People, and enjoy the inheritance of the Saints in
Light! And thus I have showed you, who these People of God are.

SECT. VII. 7.

ANd why they are called the People of God; Why called People of God.
you may easily from what is said, discern the Reasons.

1. They are the People whom he has chosen to himself from eternity. By
Election.


2. And whom Christ has redeemed with an absolute intent of saving them;
Special Redemption.
which cannot be said of any other.

3. Whom he has also renewed by the power of his grace, Likeness to him.
and made them in some sort like to himself, stamping his own Image on them, 1
Pet. 1.16.
and making them holy as he is holy.

4. They are those whom he embraces with a peculiar Love, Mutual Love.
and do again love him above all.

5. They are entered into a strict and mutual Covenant, Mutual Covenanting.
wherein it is agreed, for the Lord to be their God, and they to be his People.

6. They are brought into near relation to him, Near Relations.
even to be his Servants, his Sons, and the Members, and Spouse of his Son.

7. And lastly, Future Cohabitation.
They must live with him for ever, and be perfectly blessed in enjoying his
Love, and beholding his Glory. And I think these are Reasons sufficient, why
they particularly should be called his People.

The Conclusion.
ANd thus I have explained to you the subject of my Text, and showed you
darkly, and in part, what this Rest is; and briefly, who are this People of
God. O that the Lord would now open your eyes, and your hearts, to discern, and
be affected with the Glory Revealed! That he would take off your hearts from
these dunghill delights, and ravish them with the views of these Everlasting
Pleasures! That he would bring you into the state of this Holy and Heavenly
People, for whom alone this Rest remains! That you would exactly try your
selves by the foregoing Description; That no Soul of you, might be so damnably
deluded, as to take your natural or acquired parts, for the Characters of a
Saint! O happy, and thrice happy you, if these Sermons might have such success
with your Souls, That so you might die the death of the Righteous, and your
last End might be like his! For this Blessed Issue, as I here gladly wait upon
you in Preaching, so will I also wait upon the Lord in Praying.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS Everlasting REST.

The Second Part.

Containing the Proofs of the Truth and Certain futurity of our REST.

And that the Scripture promising that Rest to us, is The perfect infallible
Word and Law of God.

For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21.

Verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title shall
in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Mat. 5.18.

They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. If they hear not Moses
and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the
dead. Luke 16.29, 31.

Ego solis iis Scripturarum libris qui jam Canonici appellantur, didici hunc
timorem honoremque defer, ut nullum eorum authorum scribendo* aliquid
errasse, firmissime credam. Aug. Ep. 9. ad Hieron.

Major est hujus Scripturae Authoritas, quam omnis humani ingenii
perspicacitas. August. li. 15. super Genes. ad liter.

London Printed by Rob. White, for T. Underhill, and F. Tyton, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Bible in great Woodstreet, and at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. 1649.

To my dearly beloved Friends, The Inhabitants of BRIDGNORTH, Both Magistrates
and People. Richard Baxter Devoteth this Part of this TREATISE.
In Testimony of his unfeigned love to them, who were the first, to whom he was
sent (as fixed) to publish the Gospel. And in thankfulness to the Divine
Majesty, who there privileged and protected him.
HUmbly beseeching the God of Mercy, both to save them from that spirit of
Pride, Separation, and Levity, which has long been working among them; and
also to awake them thoroughly from their negligence and security, by his late
heavy judgments on them: And that as the flames of War have consumed their
houses, so the Spirit of God may consume the sin that was the cause: And by
those flames they may be effectually warned to prevent the everlasting flames:
And that their new-built houses may have newborn Inhabitants: And that the
next time God shall search and try them, he may not find one house among them,
where his Word is not daily studied and obeyed, and where they do not fervently
call upon his Name.

TO THE READER.
IT was far from my thoughts, when I first begun it, to have so enlarged this
as to be a Part entire: Most of it dropped from my Pen, besides my first purpose.
Had I intended to say so much of the Authority of Scripture, I should have
stayed till I had the benefit of a Library, that I might have furnished it
better with Humane Testimony, which I here insist on as so necessary. Though
our History of the first and second Century be lamentably imperfect, yet much
for the ends here mentioned may be produced. I would not have young Students
begin with the large Volumns of later Fathers; but I could wish they would read
betime the Writers of the three first Centuries, especially those that argue
for the Christian Faith, or mix matters of Fact with their Doctrinals; as
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origin against Celsus, Tertullians Apolog. etc. As
Also Philo, Josephus, Eusebius, and others for History. Me thinks it is
preposterous to see men study so long the meaning of Gods Word, before they
know whether it be Gods Word, or not: As the Italians Melancthon mentions,
That would prove Christ was in the Bread, before they believed well that he was
in Heaven. It is no questioning the Truth of Scripture, to persuade men to the
rightest course, to be assured of its Truth. I confess my self much offended at
some men's doctrine, who cry down Reason and Tradition here, as if they were
enemies to God, and his Word; and cry up nothing but Scripture and the Spirit.
Just like the Antinomians in the doctrine of Certainty of Salvation; who cry up
the Witness of the Spirit, and cry down the trying by Signs and Evidences of
Sanctification: As if these were contrary, which are coordinate! If I had
wanted either Reason, Tradition, or the help of the Spirit, I should never have
believed the Truth of the Scripture. I confess, for my part, I cannot boast of
any such Testimony or Light of the Spirit (nor Reason neither) which without
Tradition, would have made me believe, that the Book of Canticles is Canonical,
and writ by Solomon; and the Book of Wisdom, Apocryphal, and writ by Philo (as
some think;) or that Saint Paul's Epistle to the Loadiceans (which is in the end
of Bruno, and others,) were not Canonical, as well as John's second and third.
Some men as soon as they hear talk of Reason and Tradition here, they zealously
cry out, It is Socinianism and Popery. Scripture is [Gods written infallible
Law:] Reason is [the Eye] by which I must read it* The Spirit is [the Physician
to cure the blindness of this Eye,] (and in a common sense, The very Life and
Spirits:) The Church is the chief (but not the only) [House where these
Records are kept.] Tradition has chiefly three Offices: It is to the unlearned
where Scripture is, [The Proclaimer of it.] It is to the learned, [the Hand]
that delivers it to them. It is to some that never heard of Scripture, [a
Herald to proclaim] the doctrine which it contains* And why must these needs
be set together by the ears? May they not? yea, must they not stand together?
and further each other? The name of Antichrist, Socinianism, Arminianism (for
the things I renounce my self) has almost affrighted some men out of their
Faith, and others out of their Wits. Is it any derogation from the Law, to say,
A man must receive it from the hand that brings it? and read it with his
eyes? etc. A learned, godly Divine is offended with Canterbury, for these
words, [Reason and ordinary Grace superadded, by the help of Tradition, do
sufficiently enlighten the Soul to discern, That Scriptures are the Oracles of
God;] and he says, [Here is the Socinians sound or right Reason before the
Illumination of the Spirit; and to please the Arminians ordinary or universal
Grace comes in; and the name of Tradition to please the Popish party: And what
all these are like to do, without the special Grace of the Holy Spirit, I leave
it to any Protestant to judge.] But what? will any Christian deny, that there is
such a thing as ordinary Grace? or, that Tradition is necessary to deliver us
the Scriptures? or, has every man special Grace who believes Scripture to be
Gods Word? Is it not possible for an unregenerate man to believe that? What
kind of Preaching would such a man use to Indians, Turks, or Infidels? Are not
men sanctified by the Word? and must they be sanctified by a Word which they
believe not, that so they may believe it? Indeed, he that says we may not
only know but know perfectly, or know to Salvation without special Grace, is
mistaken. But usually a common Grace, and common Knowledge, go before Special.
The same godly Divine against these words of Master Chillingworth [The
Scripture is not to be believed finally for it self, but for the matter
contained in it: So that if men did believe the Doctrine contained in the
Scripture, it should no way hinder their Salvation, not to know whether there
were any Scripture, or no] says, [I thought it had been necessary to have
received those material Objects or Articles of our Faith, upon the Authority of
God, speaking in the Scriptures: I thought it had been Anabaptistical to have
expected any Revelation but in the Word of God. etc.] I should rather for my
part think thus, That the immediate Revelation of Scripture from God, was not
to me, but to the first Witnesses and Penmen: The way of Conveyance to us is
another thing; and is a Revelation too. The best way is by Scripture, (which
without Tradition no man would ever see, or hear of.) Where this is not to be
had* there mere Tradition may save; and is a Revelation sufficient to
Salvation, and not Anabaptistical. (Though Traditional unwritten doctrines to
make up the defects of Scripture, I abhor.) And I should ask the Dissenter,
first, Whether men were not saved before Moses without Scripture? And as Doctor
Usher well observes, One reason why they might then be without it, was the
facility and certainty of Tradition: For Methuselah lived many hundred years
with Adam, and Sem lived long with Methuselah; and Isaac lived fifty years
with Sem: So that three men saw all from the Beginning of the World, till
Isaacs fiftieth year. Secondly, And were not many saved by the Apostles
doctrine many years before the New Testament was written? And Jews before,
while the old was almost lost? Thirdly, What if some Ethiopians, Armenians, or
Papists, should by mere Tradition believe in Christ, (and who dare say, That
they may not?) should they not be saved? He that says, No, contradicts
Christ, who says, That whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, (which
way soover he came by it.) Will you hear Irenaeus in this? who lived before
Popery was born. Lib. 3. cap. 4. Quid enim and siquib. de aliqua modica
quaestione disceptatio esset? Nonne oporteret in antiquissimas recurrere
Ecclesias (Mark, he says not Ad Romanam Ecclesiam, vel ad unam principem) in
quibus Apostoli conversati sunt, and ab eis de praesenti quaestione sumere quod
certum and re liquidum est? Quid autem si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas
reliquissent nobis? nonne oportebat ordinem sequi Traditionis, quam tradiderunt
iis quibus committebant Ecclesias? Cui Ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes
barbarorum eorum qui in Christum credunt, sine charactere vel atramento
Scriptam habentes per spiritum in cordibus suis salutem, and veterem
Traditionem diligenter custodientes, etc. Hanc fidem, qui sine literis
crediderunt, quantum ad Sermonem nostrum barbari sunt; quantum autem ad
sententiam and consuetudinem and conversationem, propter fidem perquam
sapientissimi sunt, and placent Deo, etc. Sic per illam veterem Apostolorum
Traditionem ne in conceptionem quidem mentis admittunt quodcunque
(Haereticorum) portentiloquium est.

I have been the larger in proving an Immortal Life after this, because I find
none doubt of the Authority of Scripture, but they doubt of the Immortality of
the Soul too (among us.) This joined with the Evident Vanity of all other
Religions, is an excellent medium to confirm us in the Christian Religion: For
if we must be happy or miserable for ever, sure there is some true Religion
teaching the way to Happiness. That all other Religions are false, any man that
lives out of the dust and smoke of prejudice, may see with one eye. That there
is a future Happiness or Misery, is evident to Nature, or else how would all
Nations so universally acknowledge it? The Ancient Barbarians believed the
Immortality of the Soul, as of the Getae Herodotus witnesses, Lib. 4. And of
the Egyptians, Diodorus Siculus, l. 1. Biblioth. numb. 93. The very Inhabitants
of Guiny, Virginia, Guiana, Peru, Chyna, Mexico, etc. do believe a happiness
and misery hereafter. As Descrip. Reg. Afric. Guineae, cap. 21.44. Acosta, lib.
5. c. 7, 8. Hug. Linscot. part. 1. cap. 25. Jo. Lerius, cap. 16. Sir Walter
Rawleigh, etc. witness. What Poet speaks not De Tartaro, Campis Elisiis,
manibus? And Philosophers of best note, except Galen, Epicurus, Plinius, etc.
As for Pythagoras, and his Master Pherecides, the Druides, the Indian
Brachmanes, Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, they all acknowledge it. Lege
Marsil, Ficinum de Immort. Animae. Yea, Aristotle himself as is evident, De
anima, lib. 1. context. 65, 66. Lib. 2. context. 21. Lib. 3. context. 4, 6, 7,
19, 20.

Yet we must not take the same course with all men, to convince them of
Scripture Authority. We must first deal with an Atheist, In habitu
Philosophico, before we plead, or directly prove Scripture Authority; of which,
see learned Ludovicus Crocius, Syntagm. l. 1. p. 126.

The validity of that Humane Testimony, which here we have most use for,
depends not on any Authority thereto conferred from God, (as Romanists fondly
imagine,) but on men as sensible, rational, and of common honesty. The
Testimony of the enemies, is more strong then of friends. Strabo witnesses,
Lib. 16. Geogra. of Moses, and the ancient Israelites, That they were truly
righteous and godly men. So does Josephus testify of John Baptist, and James:
And Pliny of the Primitive Christians, Lib. 10. Epist. 101.

But I pass these, as not intending a full handling of this subject. The best
that I know already extant on it, is Grotius and Du Plessis; and I would some
able man would do yet more. For my own part, I have had so many rare convincing
experiences of the fulfilling of Promises to me, and answering Prayers, by
wonders of unusual Providence, That serve mightily to conform me, by seconding
my Arguments: And were it fit to speak so much of my own matters, I would
produce them for the confirming of others.

Were it not to digress, I should here express my admiration, That so many
learned men should lean toward Rome, merely upon a conceit, That there is a
flat necessity of some Vltimately Decisive, Judicial Expounder of Scripture,
and that must needs be their Church. For they think it abominable, that every
man should be Judge. At present I would but know of them, First, Whether they
speak of Fundamental plain places of Scripture? or of more obscure, and of less
moment? For the former; First, Where there is such Plainness, there needs a
Teacher to the Ignorant, but not a Judge: Among Christians, Fundamentals are no
Controversies. Secondly, And if the Judge mistake in Fundamentals, if we obey
him, we must renounce our Faith. Secondly, If the Pope, or his Council of
Prelates be Judge; how shall all people in the Kingdoms of the World know, what
Exposition they give? Hear their voices they cannot: If by their written
Canons* who shall expound them to the people? If another Pope or Council, who
shall expound their Exposition? and so in Infinitum. I do not see, but God
speaks as plainly as the Council of Trent; and as easy to be understood.
Thirdly, Does the Pope and Prelates know the meaning of Scripture by rational
means? or by Euthusiasm? or by some Superior Judge? If by rational means, why
may not as learned Doctors know it as well by the same? If by some other Judge,
Who is it? If they believe Scripture, or the Sense of it, upon their own
Authority, who will regard such self idolizing wretches? Fourthly, If there be
a means left of God, for a true deciding all Controversies, and resolving all
difficulties in Scripture; then why are not all resolved? and why are we not
perfect in knowledge? The plain Truth is, Christ is the only proper Judge
himself, and has left us his Laws, and Magistrates to see that we obey them,
and Ministers to teach us the meaning of them. Every man of these is bound to
judge rightly of the Sense of these Laws; every particular man, that he may obey
them: And if he mistake, he sineth, and must answer it to God, and (in some
cases) to Magistrates and Overseers. The Magistrate is to judge rightly, when
any is punishable; and if he err, he must answer it to the Supreme, and he to
God. The Ministers are to judge rightly of the Sense of Scripture, that they may
teach them others, and admonish, and censure accordingly; and if they mistake,
they are in Synods to consult for Information, and in cases of difficulty,
beyond their own reach, to obey the Decrees of such a lawful Synod: But to
expect a final decisive Judgment of all Controversies on Earth, is vain: And
that Synods should be too bold in determining, what God has left doubtful, and
utterly uncertain, is destructive to the Unity and Peace of the Church, rather
then conducible. And for men to believe any of their Conclusions, or obey any
of their Canons, when we are sure, That they are contrary to the Word of God;
this were to change our Master, and take them for Christ, the Prophet, who are
but his Ambassadors and Vshers in his School. When we have disputed and
contended our selves aweary, and wrangled the Church into flames and ashes; yet
that which God has spoken obscurely, and so left difficult in it self, will
remain obscure and difficult still: And that which is difficult, through the
weakness and incapacity of the Readers will be far better cleared by a rational
Explication, then by a ^are Canon. O when will the Lord once persuade his
Churches ^o take his Scripture Laws for the only Canon of their Faith! and
that in their own naked Simplicity and Evidence! without ^he Canons and
Comments of men; which are no parts of our Creed, but helps to our
understandings, and bounds to our practice (...) matters circumstantial, which
God has left to man's determina^ion! When will the Lord persuade us, not to be
wise above what (...) written? but to acknowledge that to be beyond us, which is
un^evealed in the Word! and that to be doubtful, which is darkly ^evealed. Then
the Contentions of the Church, about the Myste^ies of the Divine Decrees, the
nature of Internal Grace, and way, and manner of the Spirits working, etc. will
be more calmly managed.

Two things have set fire on the Church, and been the plagues of it his
thousand years and more.

First, Englarging our Creed, and making more Fundamentals, ^hen God has done.
(Master Parker, and Ludovicus Crocius have fully proved, That the Creed for a
long time contained no more ^hen Christ's words in Matthew. 28. do teach, To
believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and no more were they baptized
unto.)

Secondly, Delivering our Creeds, and Confessions in our own Humane phrase.

When men have learned more manners and humility,
then to ac^use the Language of God, as too general and obscure; and have more
dread of God, and compassion on themselves, then to make those Fundamentals,
which God never made so: And when they reduce their Creed and Confessions,
first, To their due extent, or length; secondly, And to Scripture phrase; and
take this only for a Touchstone of the Orthodox, then, and not tell then,
shall the Church have peace about Doctrinals: If my judgment much fail not. It
seems to me no heinous Socinian motion, which is so cried out against of
Chillingworths making, viz. That every man subscribe to the whole Scripture, as
Gods Word, with a promise to do his best for the right understanding of it. No
doubt, many a Heretic would so subscribe, and lurk under a false
interpretation; and so he may do also by their Humane Canons. But I forget my
self in thus digressing.

Reader, As thou love thy Comforts, thy Faith, thy Hope, thy Safety, thine
Innocence, thy Soul, thy Christ, thine Everlasting Rest; Love, Read, Study,
Stick close to Scriptures. Farewell.

Jan. 18. 1649.
THE SAINTS Everlasting REST. PART II.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
WE are next to proceed to the confirmation of this Truth,. 1. Confirmation
from other Scriptures.
which though it may seem needless, in regard of its own clearness and
certainty, yet in regard of our distance and infidelity, nothing more
necessary. But you will say, To whom will this endeavor be useful? They who
believe the Scriptures are convinced already; The Truth confirmed from other
Scriptures.
and for those who believe it not, how will you convince them? Answ. But sad
experience tells us, that those tha^ believe, do believe but in part, and
therefore have need of further confirmation; and doubtless God has left us
Arguments sufficient to convince unbelievers themselves, or else how should we
preach to Pagans? Or what should we say to the greatest part of the world, that
acknowledge not the Scriptures? Doubtless the Gospel should be preached to them;
and though we have not the gift of miracles to convince them of the truth, as
the Apostles had, yet we have arguments demonstrative and clear, or else our
preaching to them would be vain, we having nothing left but bare affirmations.

Though I have all along confirmed sufficiently by testimony of Scripture what
I have said, yet I will here briefly add thus much more; That the Scripture
does clearly assert this Truth in these six ways.

Affirming the Saints to have been predestinate to this glory.
1. It affirms, That this Rest is foreordained for the Saints, and the Saints
also foreordained to it. Heb. 11.16. God is not ashamed to be called their
God, for he has prepared for them a City. 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor heart conceived what God has prepared for them that love him:
which I conceive must be meant of these preparations in heaven; for those on
earth are both seen and conceived, or else how are they enjoyed? Mat. 20.23. To
sit on Christ's right and left hand in his Kingdom, shall be given to them for
whom it is prepared. And themselves are called Vessels of mercy, before
prepared unto glory. Rom 9.23. And in Christ we have obtained the inheritance,
being predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things
after to the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11. And whom he thus
predestinateth, them he glorifieth. Romans 8.30. For he has from the beginning
chosen them to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the truth. 2 These. 2.13.

And though the intentions of the unwise and weak may be frustrated, and
without counsel purposes are disappointed ( Prove. 15.22.) yet the thoughts of
the Lord shall surely come to pass, and as he has purposed, it shall stand.
Isa. 14.24.
The Counsel of the Lord stands, for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to
all generations: Therefore, blessed are they whose God is the Lord, and the
people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance. Psalm. 33.11, 12. Who can
bereave his people of that Rest which is designed them by Gods eternal purpose?

SECT. II.
SEcondly, That it is procured for them by the blood of Christ.
the Scripture tells us, that this Rest is Purchased, as well as Purposed for
them; or that they are redeemed to this Rest. In what sense this may be said to
be purchased by Christ, I have showed before, viz. Not as the immediate work of
his sufferings (which was the payment of our debt, by satisfying the Law) but
as a more remote, though most excellent fruit; even the effect of that power,
which by his death he procured to himself. He himself for the suffering of
death, was crowned with glory; yet did he not properly die for himself, nor was
that the direct effect of his death. Paul Hobson.
Some of those Teachers who are gone forth of late, do tell us, as a piece of
their new discoveries, that Christ never purchased Life and Salvation for us,
but purchased us to Life and Salvation I confess the later is the more proper
expression, and oftener used in the Scriptures.
: Not understanding that they affirm and deny the same thing in several
expressions. What difference is there betwixt buying liberty to the prisoner,
and buying the prisoner to liberty? betwixt buying life to a condemned
malefactor, and buying him to life? Or betwixt purchasing Reconciliation to an
enemy, and purchasing an enemy to Reconciliation? But in this last they have
found a difference, and tell us, that God never was at enmity with man, but man
only at enmity with God, and therefore need not be reconciled: Directly
contrary to Scripture, which tells us that God hates all the workers of
iniquity, Exodus 23.22. Psalm. 11.5. Psalm. 5.5. Isa. 63.10. Lam. 2.5.
and that he is their enemy. And though there be no change in God, nor any
thing properly called Hatred, yet it suffices that there is a change in the
sinners relation, and that there is something in God which cannot better be
expressed or conceived, then by these terms of enmity and hatred: And the
enmity of the Law against a sinner, may well be called the enmity of God.
However, this differenceth betwixt enmity in God, and enmity in us; but not
betwixt the sense of the forementioned expressions. So that whether you will
call it purchasing life for us, or purchasing us to life, the sense is the
same, viz. By satisfying the Law, and removing impediments, to procure us Title
to, and Possession of this Life.

It is then by the blood of Jesus that we have entrance into the Holiest. Heb.
10.19. Even all our entrance to the fruition of God, both that by faith and
prayer here, and that by full possession hereafter. Therefore do the Saints
sing forth his praises, who has Redeemed them out of every Nation by his
blood, and made them Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 5.9.10.

Whether that, (...) in Ephesians. 1.14. which is translated, the Redemption of the
purchased profession, do prove this or not; yet I see no appearance of truth in
their exposition of it, Paul Hobson.
who (because they deny that salvation is purchased by Christ) do affirm that
its Christ himself who is there called the Purchased possession. Therefore did
God give his Son, and the Son give his life, and therefore was Christ lift up
on the Cross, as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, John. 3.15, 16.
So then I conclude, either Christ must loose his blood and sufferings, I^a.
53.11.
and never see of the travail of his soul, but all his pains and expectation
be frustrate, or else there remains a Rest to the people of God.

3.
SECT. III.
It is promised to them.
THirdly, And as this Rest is purchased for us, so is it also promised to us: As
the Firmament with the Stars, so are the sacred pages bespangled with the
frequent intermixture of these Divine engagements. Christ has told us that it
is his will, that those who are given to him should be where he is, that they
may behold the Glory which is given him of the Father, John 17.24. so also Luke
12.32. Fear not little flock, it is your fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. q. d. Fear not all your enemies rage, fear not all your own
unworthiness, doubt not of the certainty of the gift* for it is grounded on
the good pleasure of your Father, Luke 22.29. I appoint to you a Kingdom as my
Father has appointed unto me a Kingdom: That ye may eat and drink at my Table
in my Kingdom. But because I will not be tedious in the needless confirming an
acknowledged truth, I refer you to the places here cited. 2 These. 1.7. Heb.
4.1, 3. Mat. 25.34. and 13.43. 2 Timothy 4.18. Jam. 2.5. 2 Pet. 1.11. 2 These. 1.5.
Acts 14.22. Luke 6.20, and 13.28, 29. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Mat. 5.12. Mark 10.21. and
12.25. 1 Pet. 1.4. Heb. 10.34 and 12.23. Col. 1.5. Phil. 3.20, 21. Heb. 11.^6.
Ephesians. 1.^0. 1 Cor. 15. Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, etc.

SECT. IIII. 4.

FOurthly, The means and motions toward it do prove that there is such an end.
All the means of Grace, and all the workings of the Spirit upon the soul, and
all the gracious actions of the Saints, are so many evident Mediums to prove,
that there remains a Rest to the people of God. If it be an undeniable
maxim, that God and nature do nothing in vain; then is it as true of God and
his Grace. All these means and motions, implie some End to which they tend, or
else they cannot be called means, nor are they the motions of Wisdom or Reason.
And no lower End then this [Rest] can be imagined. God would never have
commanded his people to repent and believe, to fast and pray, to knock and
seek, and that continually, to read and study, to conferr and meditate, to
strive and labor, to run and fight, and all this to no purpose. Nor would the
Spirit of God work them to this, and create in them a supernatural power, and
enable them and excite them to a constant performance; were it not for this end
whereto it leads us. Nor could the Saints reasonably attempt such employments,
nor yet undergo so heavy sufferings, were it not for this desirable end. But
whatsoever the folly of man might do, certainly Divine Wisdom cannot be guilty
of setting awork such fruitless motions. Therefore wherever I read of duty
required, whenever I find the Grace bestowed, I take it as so many promises of
Rest. The Spirit would never kindle in us such strong desires after Heaven, nor
such a love to Jesus Christ, if we should not receive that which we desire and
love. He that sets our feet in the way of Peace ( Luke 1.79.) will undoubtedly
bring us to the end of Peace. How nearly is the means and end conjoined, Mr.
Buroughs thinks this is meant of the violence of persecution* but Lukes phrase
co^^uteth that
Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it
by force, or (as Luke 16.16.) every man presses into it. So that the violence
apprehends the Kingdom. Those whom he causes to follow him in the
regeneration, he will sure provide them Thrones of judgment, Mat. 19.28.

5.
SECT. V.
So do the beginnings, f^^^tasts* earnests and seals
FIfthly, Scripture further assures us, that the Saints have the beginnings,
foretasts, earnest, and Seals of this Rest here: And may not all this assure
them of the full possession? The very Kingdom of God is within them, Luke
17.21. They here (as is before said) take it by force. They have a beginning of
that knowledge which Christ has said is eternal life, John 17.3. I have fully
manifested that before, that the Rest and Glory of the people of God, does
consist in their Knowing, Loving, Rejoicing, and Praising; and all these are
begun (though but begun) here: therefore doubtless so much as we here know God;
so much as we Love, Rejoice and Praise, so much we have of Heaven on earth, so
much we enjoy of the Rest of Souls. And do you think that God will give the
Beginning, where he never intends to give the End? Nay God does give his people
oftentimes, such foresights and foretasts of this same Rest, that their spirits
are even transported with it, and they could heartly wish they might be present
there. Paul is taken up into the third Heaven, and sees things that must not
be uttered. The Saints are kept by the power of God through faith unto that
salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time, wherein they can greatly
Rejoice even in temptations: 1 Pet. 1.5, 6. And therefore the Apostle also
tells us, That they who now see not Christ, nor ever saw him; yet love him, and
Believing do Rejoice in him, with joy unspeakable and full of Glory: Receiving
the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls, 1 Pet. 1.8.9. Observe
here. First, How God gives his people this foretasting joy. Secondly, How this
joy is said to be full of Glory, and therefore must needs be a beginning of the
Glory. Thirdly, How immediately upon this there follows, Receiving the end of
their Faith, the Salvation of the soul. And Paul also brings in the Justified,
Rejoicing in hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5.2. And I doubt not but some poor
Christians amongst us, who have little to boast of appearing without, have
often these foretasts in their souls. And do you think God will Tantalize his
people? Will he give them the first fruits, and not the crop? Does he show them
Glory to set them a longing, and then d^ny them the actual fruition? Or does
he lift them up so near this Rest, and give them such rejoycings in it, 2 Cor.
1.22. and 5.5.
and yet never bestow it on them? It cannot be. Nay does he give them the
earnest of the inheritance? Ephesians. 1.14. And Seal them with the Holy Spirit of
promise? Ephesians. 1.13. And yet will he deny the full possession? These absurdities
may not be charged on an ordinary man, much less on the Faithful and Righteous
God.

SECT. VI.. 6.

SIxthly, Some have entered it already.
And Lastly, The Scripture mentions particularly and by name, those who have
entered into this Rest. As Henoch, who was taken up to God. So Abraham,
Lazarus, the thief that was crucified with Christ, etc. And if there be a Rest
for these, sure there is a Rest for all believers.

CHAP. II. Motives to study and preach the Divine Authority of Scripture.
1.
SECT. I.
THus much may suffice where the Scripture is believed, to confirm the truth of
the point in hand, viz. The certain futurity of the Saints Rest. And for Pagans
and Infidels who believe not Scripture, it is besides the intention of this
discourse to endeavor their conviction. I am endeavoring the consolation and
edification of Saints, and not the information and conversion of Pagans. Yet do
I acknowledge the subject exceeding necessary even to the Saints themselves: for
Satan's assaults are often made at the foundation, and if he can persuade them to
question the verity of Scripture, they will soon cast away their hopes of
Heaven.

But if I should here enter upon that task [to prove Scripture to be the
infallible word of God] I should make too broad a digression, and set upon a
work as larg as the maine, for whose sake I should undertake it; Neither am I
insensible of how great difficulty it would prove to manage it satisfactorily,
and how much more then my ability is thereto requisite.

Yet lest the tempted Christian should have no relief nor any Argument at hand
against the temptation, I shall adventure upon a confirming Argument or two:
but I shall premise first a word of entreaty to my brethren of the Ministry,
to preach this a little more to their people:
And, that (not any body) but some of the choicest, whom God has especially
furnished for such a task, would be pleased in a full Treatise to undertake it.
To which end I give them some of the Reasons of my request: entreating the Lord
to enable and persuade some of them to the work.

1. I desire them to consider, whether any thing yet published, be near
complete, or such as the weight of the subject requires? Whether much more may
not be said, and is I mean not an absolute necessity, as if what is said were
not convincing
necessary to be said, then is yet said by any that has writ on this subject?

2. Whether if Christians who have opportunity, do their duty, would it not be
a singular part of their work to endeavor the I believe Mr. Eliot in New
England will have more comfort in his work for those Indians, then we in
England in our controversies, and contentions about inferior things.
conversion of Pagans and Infidels? And (as I said before) without some
Arguments to demonstrate to them the verity of Scripture; how are we furnished
for such a work? Or what have we to say but naked affirmation? Yea how can we
maintain the credit of Christianity, if we were put to dispute the case with an
unbeliever?

3. Whether the assertion of some of our Divines (that a natural man without
the extraordinary By [Testimony] I mean not the cure of the understandings
disability, for that's necessary either by common grace to work a common Faith,
or by special grace for special Faith. Doct. Presion on Attributes page 57.
Testimony of the Spirit, cannot be persuaded of the verity of Scripture,
notwithstanding all Arguments that can be produced) be not very derogatory to
the Authority of Scripture, and do not justify the world in their unbelief?
for it is not their sin to deny assent to that which has not sufficient
evidence. As if we confessed to them, we have not Arguments to convince you,
but you must be convinced by the Spirit without Arguments; as if the Spirit did
not deal with us as rational creatures: and did persuade without Argument, and
not by it! As if many wicked men did not believe the truth of Scripture! Yet I
confess there is great difference, betwixt natural and Spiritual belief.

4. Is not this the groundwork of the whole Fabric of Christianity? And the
very I mean, it is now to us the only ordinary sufficient means of revealing
Christ.
foundation of our faith? And therefore should it not be timely, and soundly
laid, and frequently and clearly taught?

Religio (...) Chi^^^^ p^r Apost^los tradi^a and Scripta est, and super scripta
Prophetarum and Apostolorum fundata. Dr. Sutlive Contra Bellarm. de Monach,
page 11. See Dr Jackson of Saving Faith, Sect. 2. cap. 2. page 143. etc.
5. Is not Faith a rational Act of a rational Creature? And so the Understanding
proceeds discursively in its production? And is not that the strongest Faith
which has the strongest Reasons to prove the Testimony to be valid upon which
it rests, and the clearest apprehension and use of those Reasons? And the
truest Faith which has the truest Reasons truly apprehended and used? And must
not that on the contrary be a weak or false faith which receives the Verity and
Validity of the Testimony from weak or false Grounds, though the Testimony of
it self be the truest in the world? Our Divines use to say concerning love to
Christ, that it is not to be measured by the degree of Fervor, so much as by
the Grounds and Motives: so that if a man should love Christ upon the same
Reasons as a Turk loves Mahomet, it were no true love: if he love him upon
false grounds, it must needs be a false love; and if upon common grounds, it
can be but a common love. And is it not then as clear, that to believe in Jesus
Christ upon the grounds that a Turk believes in Mahomet, or to believe
Scripture upon the same reasons that the Turk believes the Alcoran, is no true
Faith? Supposing that both have the like verity of their Reasons.

6. Is the generality of Christians able to give any better then some such
common reason to prove the verity of Scripture? Nay, are the more exercised,
Understanding sort of Christians able by sound Arguments to make it good, if an
Enemy, or a Temptation put them to it? Nay, are the ordinary sort of Ministers
in England able to do this? Let them that have tried, judge.

7. Can the Superstructure be firm where the Foundation is Sandy? And can our
Affections and Actions be sound and strong, when our belief of Scripture is
unsound or infirm? Sure this Faith will have influence into all. For my own
part, I take it to be the greatest cause of coldness in Duty, weakness in
Graces, boldness in Sinning, and unwillingness to die, etc. that our Faith is
either unsound or infirm in this point. Few Christians among us for ought I
find, have any better then the Popish implicit faith in this point; See this
more fully in Dr. Preston on the Attributes, page 61, 62, 63, 64.
nor any better Arguments then the Papists have to prove Scripture the Word of
God. They have received it by Tradition; godly Ministers and Christians tell
them so; it is impious to doubt of it, and therefore they believe it. And this
worm lying at the root, causes the languishing and decay of the whole: yet is
it usually undiscerned, Yet we acknowledge it belongs to the Church; first, To
be a Witness and Keeper of the Scriptures: secondly, To judge and discern
betwixt Scriptures which are true and genuine, and which are false and
supposititious or Apocryphal: thirdly, To divulge and preach the Scriptures:
fourthly, To expound and interpret them. Dr. Whitaker, De Sacra scriptura Q. 3.
contr. 1. cap. 2. page 203, 204.
for the root lies secret under ground: But I am apt to judge, that though the
most complain of their uncertainty of salvation, through want of assurance of
their own Interest, and of the weakness of the applying Act of Faith, yet the
greater cause of all their sorrows, and that which shakes the whole building,
is the weakness of their faith about the truth of Scripture, though perhaps the
other be more perceived, and this taken notice of by few. There may be great
weakness and unsoundness of belief, where yet no doubtings are perceived to
stir. Therefore though we could persuade people to believe never so
confidently, that Scripture is the very Word of God, and yet teach them no more
reason why they should believe this then any other book to be that Word; as it
will prove in them no right way of believing, so is it in us no right way of
teaching.

8. There is many a one who feels his faith shake here, who never discovers it;
To doubt of our Evidences, is taken for no great disgrace, and therefore men
more freely profess such doubts; nay, and some perhaps who are not much
troubled with them, because they would be thought to be humble Christians. But
to question the truth of Scripture is a reproachful Blalphemy, and therefore
all that are guilty here speak not their doubts.

9. Is not the greatest battery by all sort of enemies, especially made against
this Foundation? The first place that the I would fain know of any Papist why
their Church believes the Scripture to be the Word of God? If the Laiety must
believe it upon the authority of the Church, and this Church be the Pope and
his Clergy, then it follows that the Pope and Clergy believe it on their
Authority, As Paraeus in Th^mat. Seculari xv. Et quia Papa solus vel cum
praelatis est Ecclesia, ideo Papa and praelati Scripturis credunt propler
seipsos: l^icos voluit cr^dere Scripturis propter Papam and praelatos.
Papist assaults you, in is here, How know you the Scripture to be the Word of
God? The Seekers (who are the Jesuits By blows, though they yet know not their
own father) will accoast you with the like question; How know you that your
Scripture and your Ministry is of God? The Familists and Libertines do spit
their venom here: And some Christians by experience are able to testify that
Satan's temptations are most violent here; Yea, and our own carnal deluded
Reason is aptest of all to stumble here.

They talk of a Toleration of all Religions, and some desire that the Sicut in
Polonia ubi non solum preces recitant ^ala and criminosa contra Christianos and
little magistratus continentes, sedetiam and a^dacter and s^^e on ^^
christianorum metu imprimunt quaecunque volunt, ut testatur Buxtorsius
Synagogae Judaicae. c. 5 p 170.
Jews may have free commerce amongst us: it will then be time for us, I think,
to be well armed at this point. Let the ordinary Professors of our Time, who
are of weak judgments, and fiery spirits; look to it, how they will stand in
such assaults; least, as now, when they cannot answer a Separatist, they yield
to him, and when they cannot answer an Antinomian, they turn Antinomians; so
then, when they can much less answer the subtle Arguments of a Jew against
Christ and the Gospel, they should as easily turn Jews, and deny Christ, and
the verity of the Gospel.

The Libertines among us think it necessary that we should have such a
Toleration to discover the unsound, who hold their faith upon Tradition and
Custom. I am no more of their minds in this, then of his, who would have a
fair Virgin to lie with him, and try his Chastity, and make its victory more
honorable: But if we must needs have such a trial, its time to look to the
grounds of our belief, 1 Pet. 3.15.
that we may be ready to give a reason of our Hope.

10. However, though I were mistaken in all this, yet certain I am that the
strengthening of our faith in the verity of Scripture, would be an exceeding
help to the joy of the Saints* and would advance their confident hopes of Rest.
For my self, if my faith in this point had no imperfection, if I did as verily
believe the Glory to come, as I do believe that the Sun will rise again when it
is set; O, how would it raise my desires and my joys? what haste should I
make? how serious should I be? how should I trample on these earthly vanities,
and even forget the things below? How restless should I be till I were assured
of this Rest? and then how restless till I did possess it? How should I delight
in the thought of death, and my heart leap at the tidings of its approach? How
As Graserus when he saw his legs begin to swell with a Dropsy, said, Euge Deo
sit laus and gloria, quod jam mea instet liberatio and horula gratissima.
Melch. Adam. in vita Graseri.
glad should I be of the bodies decaies? to feel my prison moulder to dust?
Surely this would be the fruit of a perfect belief of the truth of the Promise
of our eternal Rest. Which though it cannot be here expected, yet should we use
the most strengthening means, and press on till we had attained.

SECT. II. 2.

THus much I have purposely spoken, as to stir up Christians to look to their
faith, so especialiy to provoke some choice servant of Christ, among the
multitudes of Books that are written, to bestow their labors on this most
needful Subject: and all Ministers to preach it more frequently and clearly to
their people. Some think it is Faiths honor to be as credulous as may be, and
the weaker are the rational grounds, the stronger is the faith; and therefore
we must believe and not dispute. Indeed when its once known to be a Divine
Testimony, then the most credulous soul is the best; But when the doubt is,
whether it be the Testimony of God or no? a man may easily be over-credulous;
Else why are we bid believe not every spirit, but try them whether they be of
God or not? And how should the false Christ's, and false Prophets be known, who
would deceive, were it possible, the very Elect? to be given up of God to
believe a lie, is one of the sorest of Gods Judgments.

Some think, Impias argumentationes si ratio refutare non possit, fides
irridere debet, quae ratiocinationes evertit, and in captivitatem redigit omnem
intellectum in Christi obsequium. August.
the only way to deal with such temptations to Blasphemy, is to cast them
away, and not to dispute them. And I think the direction is very good, so it be
used with some distinction and caution. The Rule holds good against real
Blasphemy, known to be such; but if the person know it not, how shall he make
use of this Rule against it? Further, it is supposed, that he who knows it to
be Blasphemy, has Arguments whereby to prove it such; else how does he know
it? Therefore here lies the sin; when a man is by sufficient evidence
convinced, (or at least has Evidence sufficient for conviction) that it is a
Divine Testimony, and yet is still cherishing doubts, or harkening to
temptations which may feed those doubts: when a man (like Balaam) will take no
answer. But he who will therefore cast away all doubts, before he has
Arguments sufficient against them, or could ever prove the thing in Question,
he does indeed cast aside the temptation, but not overcome it, and may expect
it should shortly return again: It is a methodicall cure which prevents a
relapse. Such a neglecter of temptations may be in the right, and may as well
be in the wrong, but however, it is not right to him, because not rightly
believed. Faith always implies a Testimony, and the knowledge usually of the
matter and Author of that Testimony: Divine Faith has ever a Divine Though
(...) extend (...) far as (...).
Testimony, and supposes the knowledge of the matter (when the Faith is
particular) but always of the Author of that Testimony. An implicit Faith in
God, that is, a believing that all is true which he testifies, though we see
no reason for it from the evidence of the matter, this is necessary to every
true Believer: But to believe implicitly, that the Testimony is Divine, or that
Scripture is the Word of God, this is not to believe God, but to resolve our
faith into some humane Testimony; even to lay our foundation upon the sand
where all will fall at the next assault.

Its strange to consider, how we all abhor that piece of Popery, as most
injurious to God of all the rest, which resolves our faith into the Authority
of the Church: And yet that we do for the generality of professors content our
selves with the same kind of faith! Only with this difference: The Papists
believe Scripture to be the Word of God, because their Church says so: Sequor
te non qu^ du^is, sed quo trahis, inquit Scaliger ad C^rdanum in Exercit.
and we, because our Church, or our Leaders say so. Yea, and many Mininisters
never yet gave their people better grounds; but tell them (which is true) that
it is damnable to deny it, but help them not to the necessary Antecedents of
Faith.

If any think that these words tend to the shaking of men's faith, I answer:
First, Only of that which will fall of it self: Secondly, And that it may in
time be built again more strongly: Thirdly, Or at least that the sound may be
surer settled. He that doubts of this, let him see Dr. Jackson of Saving Faith
page 146.147. And Mr Pinkes Sermons of the Sincerity of Love to Christ
Its to be understood that many a thousand do profess Christianity, and
zealously hate the enemies thereof upon the same grounds, to the same ends, and
from the same inward corrupt principles, as the Jews did hate and kill Christ:
It is the Religion of the Country, where every man is reproached that believes
otherwise; they were born and brought up in this belief, and it has increased
in them upon the like occasions: Had they been born and bred in the Religion of
Mahomet, they would have beeen as zealous for him* The difference betwixt him
and a Mohammedan is more, that he lives where better Laws and Religion dwell,
then that he has more knowledge or soundness of apprehension.

Yet would I not drive into causless doubtings the soul of any true Believer,
or make them believe their faith is unsound, because it is not so strong as
some others; Therefore I add, some may perhaps have ground for their belief,
though they are not able to express it by argumentation; and may have
Arguments in their hearts to persuade themselves, though they have none in
their mouths to persuade another: yea and those Arguments in themselves may be
solid and convincing. Some may be strengthened by some one sound Argument, and
yet be ignorant of all the rest, without overthrowing the truth of their Faith.
Some also may have weaker apprehensions of the Divine authority of Articulus 6.
fidei Judaicae sic se habet. Credo perfecta fide quod omne quodcunque prophetae
docuerunt and locuti fuerunt, veritas sincera sit. O^tvus autem sic. Credo
perfecta fide quod lex tota perinde ut ea bodierno tempore in manibus nostris
est, it a per Deum ipsummet Mosi tradita sit. vid. Buxtorf. Synagogae Judaicae.
cap. 1. page 4.5.
Scripture, then others, and as weaker grounds for their Faith, so a less
degree of assent; And yet that assent may be sincere and saving, so it have
these two qualifications. First, If the Arguments which we have for believing
the Scripture, be in themselves more sufficient to convince of its truth, then
any Arguments of the enemies of Scripture, can be to persuade a man of the
contrary: And do accordingly discover to us, a high degree at least of
probability. Secondly, And if being thus far convinced, it prevails with us to
choose this as the only way of life, and to adventure our souls upon this way,
denying all other, and adhering (though to the loss of estate and life) to the
Truth of Christ thus weakly apprehended. This (I think) God will accept as a
true Belief.

But though such a faith may serve to salvation, yet when the Christian should
use it for his consolation, he will find it much fail him: even as legs or
arms of the weak or lame, which when a man should use them, do fail him
according to the degrees of their weakness or lameness: so much doubting as
there remains of the Truth of the word, or so much weakness as there is in our
believing, or so much darkness or uncertainty as there is in the evidence which
persuades us to believe; so much will be wanting to our Love, Desires, Labors,
Adventures, and especially to our joys.

Therefore I think it necessary to speak a little (and but a little) to
fortify the believer against temptations, and to confirm his faith in the
certain Truth of that Scripture which contains the promises of his Rest.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
1.
ANd here it is necessary that we first distinguish, betwixt 1. The subject
matter of Scripture, or the doctrine which it contains; 2. And the words or
writings containing or expressing this doctrine. The one is as the blood, the
other as the veins in which it runs. Secondly, We must distinguish betwixt 1.
the substantial and fundamental part of Scripture^ doctrine, without which
there is no salvation, and 2. the circumstantiall, and less necessary part, as
Genealogies, Successions, Chronology, etc. Thirdly, Of the substantial
fundamental part 1. Some may be known and proved even without Scripture, as
being written in nature it self; 2. some can be known only by the assent of
Faith to Divine Revelation. Fourthly, Of this last sort, 1. some things are
above Reason (as it is without Divine Revelation) both in respect of their
Probability, existence and futurity: 2. others may be known by mere Reason,
without Divine Testimony, in regard of their Possibility and Probability; but
not in regard of their existence or futurity.

Fifthly, Again matter of Doctrine must be distinguished from matter of fact.

Sixthly, Matter of fact is either 1. such as God produces in an ordinary way:
or 2. extrordinary and miraculous. Seventhly, History and Phophesie must be
distinguished. Eighthly, We must distinguish also the books and writings
themselves: 1. between the maine scope and those parts which express the chief
contents, and 2. particular words and phrases, not expressing any
substantialls. Ninthly, Also its one question 1. whether there be a certain
number of books, which are Canonical, or of Divine Authority? and 2. another
question, what number there is of these? and which particular books they are?
Tenthly, The direct express sense, must be distinguished from that which is
only employed or consequentiall. Eleventhly, We must distinguish Revelation
unwriten from that which is written. Twelfthly, and Lastly, We must distinguish
that Scripture which was spoke or written by God immediately, from that which
was spoke or writ immediately by man, and but mediatly by God. And of this last
sort 1. Some of the instruments or penmen are known: 2. Some not known. Of
those known 1. Some that spoke much in Scripture, were bad men: 3. others were
godly. And of these some were 1. More eminent and extraordinary, as Prophets
and Apostles, 2. Others were persons more inferior and ordinary.

Again, as we must distinguish of Scripture, and Divine Testimony, so must we
also distinguish the apprehension or Faith by which we do receive it.

1. There is a Divine Faith, when we take the Testimony to be Gods own, and so
believe the thing testified as upon Gods word. Secondly* There is a Human
Faith, when we believe it merely upon the credit of man.

2. Faith is either first, implicit, when we believe the thing is true though
we understand not what it is, or secondly, explicit, when we believe, and
understand what we believe. Both these are again Divine or humane.

3. It is one thing to believe as Probable, another thing to believe it as
certain.

4. Its one thing to believe it to be true conditionally, another to believe it
absolutely.

5. We must distinguish betwixt the bare assent of the understanding to the
truth of an Axiom, when it is only silenced by force of Argument (which will
be stronger or weaker as the Argument seems more or less demonstrative) and
secondly, that deep apprehension and firm assent which proceeds from a well
stablished, confirmed Faith, backed by experience.

6. Its one thing to assent to the truth of the Axiom, another to taste and
choose the good contained in it, which is the work of the Will.

SECT. II.
2.
The word Foundation being a Metaphor is to be banished dispute till first
explained.
THe Use I shall make of these distinctions, is to open the way to these
following Positions, which will resolve the great Questions on foot, How far
the belief of the Written Word is of necessity to salvation? and Whether it be
the foundation of our faith? And whether this foundation have been always the
same?

Pos. 1. The Object of belief Is the will of God revealed; or a Divine
Testimony; where two things are absolutely necessary; first, The Matter:
secondly, The Revelation. 2. All this Revealed Will is necessary Ad been esse
and fidei perfectionem.
to the completing of our faith; Necessitate praecepti.
and it is our duty to believe it. But its only the substance and tenor of the
Covenants, and the things necessarily supposed to the knowing and keeping of
the Covenant of Grace, which are of absolute necessity to the being of Faith,
and to Salvation. A man may be saved though he should not believe many things,
which yet he is bound by God to believe. 3. Yet this must be only through
ignorance of the Divineness of the Testimony: For a flat unbelief of the
smallest truth, when we know the Testimony to be of God, will not stand with
the being of true Faith, nor with Salvation. For Reason lays this ground
[That God can speak nothing but Truth] and Faith proceeds upon that
supposition. 4. This Doctrine so absolutely necessary has not been ever from
the beginning the same, but has differed according to the different Covenants
and Administrations. That Doctrine which is now so necessary, was not so before
the Fall: And that which is so necessary since the coming of Christ, was not so
before his coming. Then they might be saved in believing in the Messiah to come
of the seed of David: but now its of necessity to believe, that this Jesus the
Son of Mary is He, and that we look not for another. I prove it thus. That
which is not revealed can be no object for Faith, much less so necessary: But
Christ was not Revealed before the Fall; nor this Jesus Revealed to be He
before his coming, therefore these were not of necessity to be believed, or (as
some Metaphorically speak) they were then to fundamental Doctrines. Perhaps
also some things will be found of absolute necessity to us, which are not so to
Indians and Turks. 5. God has made this substance of Scripture-Doctrine to be
thus necessary Primario and propter se Secundario and propter aliud.
primarily and for it self. 6. That it be revealed is also of absolute
necessity; but secondarily, and for the Doctrines sake, as a means without
which Believing is neither possible nor a duty. And though where there is no
Revelation. Faith is not necessary as a duty; yet it may be necessary (I think)
as a means, that is, our natural misery may be such as can no other way be
cured (but this concerns not us that have heard of Christ) 7. Nature,
Creatures, and Providence, are no sufficient Revelation of this tenor of the
Covenants. 8. It is necessary not only that this Doctrine be Revealed, but
also that it be Revealed with Grounds or Arguments rationally sufficient to
evince the verity of the Doctrine or the Divineness of the Testimony, that from
it we may conclude the former. 9. The Revelation of Truth is to be considered
in respect of the first immediate delivery from God, or secondly, in respect of
the way of its coming down to us. It is delivered by God immediately either by
writing, (as the two Tables) or by informing Angels (who may be his Messengers)
or by inspiring some choice particular men; So that few in the world have
received it from God at the first hand. 10. The only ways of Revelation that
(for ought I know) are now left, are Scripture and Tradition: For though God
has not tied himself from Revelations by the Spirit, yet he has ceased them,
and perfected his Scripture Revelations; so that the Spirit only Reveals what
is Revealed already in the Word; by illuminating us to understand it. 11. The
more immediate the Revelation, caeteris paribus, the more sure: and the more
succession of hands it passes through, the more uncertain, especially in
matter of Doctrine. 12. When we receive from men by Tradition the Doctrine of
God as in the Words of God, there is less danger of corruption, then when they
deliver us that Doctrine in their own words, because here taking liberty to
vary the expressions* it will represent the Truth more uncertainly and in more
various shapes. 13. Therefore has God been pleased when he ceased immediate
Revelation, to leave his Will written in a form of words, which should be his
standing Law, and a Rule to try all other men's expressions by. 14. In all the
forementioned respects therefore the written Word does excel the unwritten
Tradition of the same Doctrine. 15. Yet unwritten Tradition, or any sure way of
Revealing this Doctrine, may suffice to save him who thereby is brought to
believe. As if there be any among the Aba^sines of Ethiopia, the Coplies in
Egypt, or elsewhere that have the substance of the Covenants delivered them by
unwritten Tradition, or by other Writings, if hereby they come to believe, they
shall be saved. For so the Promise of the Gospel runs, giving salvation to all
that believe, by what means soever they were brought to it. The like may be
said of true Believers in those parts of the Church of Rome, where the
Scripture is wholly hid from the vulgar (if there be any such parts.) 16. Yet
where the written Word is wanting, salvation must needs be more difficult and
more rare, and Faith more feeble, and men's conversations worse ordered, because
they want that clearer Revelation, that surer Rule of Faith and Life, which
might make the way of salvation more easy. 17. When Tradition arises no
higher, or comes originally but from this written Word, and not from the
verbal Testimonies of the Apostles before the Word was written, there that
Tradition is but the preaching of the Word, and not a distinct way of
Revealing. 18. Such is most of the Tradition (for ought I can learn) that is
now afoot in the world, for matter of Doctrine, but not for matter of fact. 17.
Therefore the Scriptures are not only necessary to the well-beeing of the
Church, and to the strength of Faith, but [ordinarily] to the very being of
Faith and Churches. 20. Not that the present Possession of Scripture is of
absolute necessity to the present being of a Church: not that it is so
absolute necessary to every man's salvation, that he read or knew this Scripture
himself: But that it either be at present, or have been formerly in the Church:
that some knowing it, may teach it to others, is of absolute necessity to most
persons and Churches, and necessary to the well-beeing of all. 21. Though
negative unbelief of the authority of Scripture may stand with salvation, yet
positive and universal (I think) cannot. Or, though Tradition may save where
Scripture is not known, yet he that reads or hears the Scripture, and will not
believe it to be the Testimony of God, (I think) cannot be saved, because this
is now the clearest and surest Revelation: And he that will not believe it,
will muchless believe a Revelation more uncertain and obscure. 22. Though all
Scripture be of Divine Authority, yet he that believes but some one Book,
which contains the substance of the Doctrine of salvation, may be saved: much
more they that have doubted but of some particular Books. 23. They that take
the Scripture to be but the Writings of godly honest men, and so to be only a
means of making known Christ, having a gradual precedence to the Writings of
other godly men; and do believe in Christ upon those strong grounds which are
drawn from his Doctrine, Miracles, etc. rather then upon the Testimony of the
Writing, as being purely infallible and Divine, may yet have a Divine and
saving faith. 24. Much more those that believe the whole Writing to be of
Divine inspiration where it handles the substance, but doubt whether God
infallibly guided them in every circumstance. 25. And yet more those that
believe that the Spirit did guide the Writers to Truth, both in Substance and
Circumstance, but doubt whether he guided them in Orthography; or whether their
Pens were as perfectly guided as their minds? 26. And yet more may those have
saving Faith, who only doubt whether Providence infallibly guided any
Transcribers, or Printers, as to retain any Copy that perfectly agrees with
the Autograph. 27. Yet do all these (in my judgment) cast away a singular prop
to their faith, and lay it open to dangerous assaults, and doubt of that which
is a certain truth. 28. As the Translations are no further Scripture, then they
agree with the Copies in the Original Tongues; so neither are those Copies
further then they agree with the Autographs, or Original Copies, or with some
Copies perused and approved by the Apostles. 29. Yet is there not the like
necessity of having the Autographs to try the Transcripts by, as there is of
having the Original Transcripts to try the Translations by. For there is an
impossibility that any Translation should perfectly express the sense of the
Original: But there is a possibility, probability, and facility of true
Transcribing, and grounds to prove it true de facto, as we shall touch anon.
30. That part which was written by the Finger of God; as also the substance of
Doctrine through the whole Scriptures, are so purely Divine, that they have not
in them any thing humane. 31. The next to these are the words that were spoken
by the mouth of Christ, and then those that were spoken by Angels, 32. The
Circumstantials are many of them so Divine, as yet they have in them something
Humane, as the bringing of Paul's Cloak and Parchments, and (as it seems) his
counsel about Marriage, etc. 33. Much more is there something Humane in the
Method and Phrase, which is not so immediately Divine as the Doctrine. 34. Yet
is there nothing sinfully Humane, and therefore nothing false in all. 35. But
an innocent imperfection there is in the Method and Phrase, which if we deny,
we must renounce most of our Logic and Rhetoric. 36. Yet was this imperfect
way (at that time, all things considered) the fittest way to divulge the
Gospel: That is the best Language which is best suited to the Hearers, and not
that which is best simply in it self, and supposes that understanding in the
Hearers which they have not. Therefore it was Wisdom and Mercy to fit the
Scripture to the capacity of all: Yet will it not therefore follow that all
Preachers at all times should as much neglect Definition, Distinction,
Syllogism, etc. as Scripture does. 37. Some Doctrinal passages in Scripture
are only Historically related, and therefore the relating them is no asserting
them for truth; and therefore those sentences may be false, and yet not the
Scripture false: yea, some falsehoods are written by way of reproving them, as
Gehezies Lie, Saul's Excuse, etc. 38. Every Doctrine that is thus related only
Historically, is therefore of doubtful credit, because it is not a Divine
assertion (except Christ himself were the Speaker:) and therefore it is to be
tried by the rest of the Scripture. 39. Where ordinary men were the Speakers,
the credit of such Doctrines is the more doubtful, and yet much more when the
Speakers were wicked: of the former sort are the Speeches of Jobs friends, and
diverse others: of the later sort are the Speeches of the Pharisees, etc. and
perhaps Gamaliels counsel, Act. 5.34, 40. Yet where God does testify his
Inspiration, or Approbation, the Doctrine is of Divine Authority, though the
Speaker be wicked: As in Balaams Prophecy. A facto ad jus ad licitum vel
debitum non valet Argum.
41. The like may be said of matter of Fact; for it is not either necessary or
lawful to speak such words, or do such actions merely because men in Scripture
did so speak or do, no, not though they were the best Saints; for their own
speeches or actions are to be judged by the Law, and therefore are no part of
the Law themselves. And as they are evil where they cross the Law (as Joseph's
swearing, the Ancients Polygamy, etc.) so are they doubtful where their
congruence with the Law is doubtful. 42. But here is one most observable
exception. (conducing much to resolve the great doubt, whether Examples bind?)
Where men are designed by God to such an Office, and act by Commission, and
with a promise of Direction, their Doctrines are of Divine Authority, though we
find not where God did dictate, and their Actions done by that Commission are
current and Exemplary, so far as they are intended or performed for Example,
and so Example may be equivalent to a Law, and the Argument, a facto ad jus,
may hold. So Moses being appointed to the forming of the old Church and
Commonwealth of the Jews, to the building of the Tabernacle, etc. his Precepts
and Examples in these works, (though we could not find his particular
direction) are to be taken as Divine. So also the Apostles having Commission to
Form and Order the Gospel Churches, their Doctrine and Examples therein, are by
their general Commission warranted, and their practice in stablishing the Lords
Day, in settling the Officers and Orders of Churches, are to us as Laws, (still
binding with those limitations as Positives only, which give way to greater*)
43. The ground of this Position is, because it is inconsistent with the Wisdom
and Faithfulness of God, to send men to a work, and promise to be with them,
and yet to forsake them, and suffer them to err in the building of that House,
which must endure till the end of the world. 44. Yet if any of these
Commissioners do err in their own particular conversations, or in matters
without the extent of their Commission, As Peter, Gal. 2.11, 12.13.
this may consist with the faithfulness of God; God has not promised them
infallibility and perfection: the disgrace is their own: but if they should
miscarry in that wherein they are sent to be a rule to others, the Church would
then have an imperfect Rule, and the dishonor would redound to God. 45. Yet I
find not that ever God authorized any mere man to be a Lawgiver to the Church
in Substantials, but only to deliver the Laws which he had given, to Interpret
them, and to determine Circumstantials not by him determined. 46. Where God
owneth men's Doctrines and Examples by Miracles, they are to be taken as
infallibly Divine: much more when Commission, Promise, and Miracles do concur,
which confirms the Apostles Examples for current. 47. So that if any of the
^ings or Prophets* had given Laws, and formed the Church as Moses, they had not
been binding, because without the said Commission: or if any other Minister of
the Gospel shall by Word or Action arrogate an Apostolical privilege. 48. There
is no verity about God, or the chief happiness of man written in Nature, but it
is to be found written in Scriptures. 49. So that the same thing may in these
several respects, be the object both of Knowledge and of Faith. 50. The
Scripture being so perfect a Transcript of the law of Nature or Reason, is much
more to be credited in its supernatural Revelations. 51. The probability of
most things, and the possibility of all things contained in the Scriptures, may
well be discerned by Reason it self, which makes their Existence or Futurity
the more easy to be believed. 52. Yet before this Existence or Futurity of any
thing beyond the reach of Reason can be soundly believed, the Testimony must be
known to be truly Divine. 53. Yet a belief of Scripture Doctrine as probable,
does usually go before a belief of certainty, and is a good preparative
thereto. 54. The direct, express sense, must be believed directly and
absolutely, as infallible, and the consequences (where they may be clearly and
certainly raised:) but where there is danger of erring in raising consequences,
the assent can be but weak and conditional. 55. A Consequence raised from
Scripture being no part of the immediate sense, cannot be called any part of
Scripture. 56. Where one of the premises is in Nature, and the other only in
Scripture, there the Conclusion is mixed, partly known, and partly believed.
That it is the Consequence of those premises, is known; but that it is a Truth,
is, as I said, apprehended by a mixed Act. Such is, a Christians concluding
himself to be justified and sanctified, etc. 57. Where through weakness we are
unable to discern the Consequences, there is enough in the express direct sense
for salvation. 58. Where the sense is not unstood, there the belief can be but
implicit. 59. Where the sense is partly understood, but with some doubting, the
Belief can be but conditionally explicit: that is, we believe it, if it be the
sense of the Word. 60. Fundamentals must be believed Explicitly and Absolutely.

CHAP. IIII. The first Argument to prove Scripture to be the Word of God.
SECT. IIII. 1.

HAving thus showed you in what sense the Scriptures are the word of God, and
how far to be believed, and what is the excellency, necessity and authority of
them; 2 Timothy 3.16.
I shall now add three or four Arguments to help your Faith, which I hope will
not only prove them to be Divine Testimony to the substance of Doctrine
(though that be a useful work against our unbelief) but also that they are the
very written Laws of God, and a perfect Rule of Faith and duty. My Arguments
shall be but few, because I handle it but on the by; and those such as I find
little of in others writings, least I should wast time in doing what is done to
my hands.

1. Those writings and that Doctrine which were confirmed by many and real
Donum Miraculorum and linguarum dandarum fuisse and extraordinarium, et a solis
Apostolis (peculiari privelegio dato a Christo) conferri solitum certo certius
est. Danaeus contr. Bellar. de Baptismo. page 443.
Miracles, must needs be of God, and consequently, of undoubted Truth! But the
books and Doctrine of Canonical Scripture were so confirmed: Therefore, etc.

Against the major proposition nothing of any moment can be said: For its a
Truth apparent enough to nature, that none but God can work real Miracles, or
at least none but those whom he does especially enable thereto. And it is as
manifest, that the Righteous and Faithful God will not give this power for a
seal to any falsehood or deceit.

The usual Objections are these. First, Antichrist shall come with lying
wonders.

Answ. They are no true F^erunt miracula ut (...) atque praecones quib^s
Evangelium commandab^t^^. V^^nim L^x Mosis comp^uribus miraculis in monte Sina
and per desertum authoritatem sibi conciliavit. quae pos^ea destiterunt cum ad
terram promissionis ventum est; eadem ratione miracula nunc quoque sublata
sunt, cum Eva^gelium per universum orbem diffusum est. Promissio igitur quam
Christus in Marco. 16 17. scribi voluit, non ad omnia tempora pertinebat. Pet.
Mart. Loc. Commun. Class. 1. cap. 8.. 20.
Miracles. As they are (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2.9* lying, in sealing to a lying
doctrine: so also in being but seeming and counterfeit Miracles. The like may
be said to those of Pharaohs Magicians, and all other Sorcerers and Witches,
and those that may be wrought by Satan himself. They may be wonders, but not
Miracles.

Object. 2. God may enable false Prophets to work Miracles to try the world,
without any derogation to his Faithfulness.

Answ. No: for Divine power being properly the attendant of Divine Revelation,
if it should be annexed to Diabolical delusions, it would be a sufficient
excuse to the world for their believing those delusions. And if Miracles should
not be a sufficient seal to prove the Authority of the witness to be Divine,
then is there nothing in the world sufficient; and so our Faith will be quite
overthrown.

Object. But however, Miracles will no more prove Christ to be the Son of God,
then they will prove Moses, Elias, or Elisha to be the Son of God: for they
wrought Miracles as well as Christ.

Answ. Miracles are Gods seal, not to extol the person that is isntrumental,
nor for his glory: but to extol God, and for his own Glory. God does not
entrust any creature with this seal so absolutely, as that they may use it when
and in what case they please. If Moses or Elias had affirmed themselves to be
the sons of God, they could never have confirmed that affirmation with a
Miracle: for God would not have sealed to a lie. Christ's power of working
Miracles did not immediately prove him to be the Christ. But it immediately
proved his Testimony to be Divine, and that Testimony spoke his nature and
office. So that the power of Miracles in the Prophets and Apostles, was not to
a^^est to their own greatness, but to the truth of their Testimony con^^rning
Christ. Whatsoever any man affirms to me, and works a real Miracle to confirm
it, I must needs take my self bound (...) believe him.

Object. But what if some one should work miracles to confirm a Doctrine
contrary to Scripture? Would you believe it? Does not Paul say, if an Angel
from Heaven teach any other Gospel, let him be accursed?

Answ. I am sure God will never give any false teacher the power of confirming
his Doctrine by Miracles: else God should subscribe his name to contradictions.
The appearance of an Angel is no Miracle, though a wonder.

Secondly, But the maine assault I know will be made, against the Minor
proposition of the Argument, and so the question will be de facto, whether ever
such Miracles were wrought or no? I shall grant that we must not here argue
circularly, to prove the Doctrine to be of God by the miracles, and then the
miracles to have been wrought by the Divine Testimony of the Doctrine, and so
round. But yet to use the Testimony of the History of Scripture, as a humane
Testimony of the matter of fact, is no circular arguing.

SECT. II. 2.

TOward the confirmation of the Minor, therefore I shall first lay these
grounds. 1. Position.
That there is so much certainty in some Humane Testimony, that may exclude all
doubting, or cause of doubting; or there is some Testimony immediately Humane,
which yet may truly be said to be Divine. 2. Position.
That such Testimony we have of the Fides humana non hab^t sua natura
certitudinem in^all^b^^^m: quamvis sit fides hum^^^ quae moralit^r loquendo
evid^ns and infallib^l^ cens^tu^; ut quod Roma sit, quod Indi sint, etc. Am^s.
in disput. de fidei divl^. veritate, These 3.
Miracles mentioned in Scripture. If these two be cleared, the Minor will stand
firm, and the maine work here will be done. First, I will therefore show you
that there is such a certainty in some Humane Testimony. Both experience and
Reason will confirm this. First, I would desire any rational man to tell me,
Whether he that never was at London, at Paris, or at Rome, may not be certain
by a Humane faith, that there are such Cities? For my own part, I think it as
certain to me, nay more certain then that which I see: and I should sooner
question my own sight alone, then the eyes and credit of so many thousands in
such a case. And I think the Scepticks Arguments against the certainty of
sense, to be as strong as any that can be brought against the certainty of such
a Testimony. Is it not somewhat more then probable, think you, to the
multitudes that never saw either Parliament or King, that yet there is such an
Assembly and such a person? May we not be fully certain that there was such a
person as King James, as Queen Elizabeth, as Queen Mary, etc. here in England?
Yea, that there was such a man as William the Conqueror? May we not be certain
also that he conquered England? With many other of his actions? The like may be
said of Julius Caesar, of Alexander the Great, etc. Sure those that charge all
humane Testimony with uncertainty, do hold their lands then upon an uncertain
tenure. Secondly, It may be proved also by reason. For if 1. the first
testifiers may infallibly know it, and 2. also by an infallible means transmit
it to posterity, and 3. have no intent to deceive, then their Testimony may be
an infallible Testimony. But all these three may be easily proved (I had
thought to have laid down here the Rules by which a certain Humane Testimony
may be discerned from an uncertain, but you may easily gather them from what I
shall lay down for the confirmation of these three Positions.) For the first, I
suppose none will question, whether the first testifiers might infalliby know
the truth of what they testify? If they should, let them consider, First, If
it be not matter of Doctrine (much less abstruse and difficult points) but
only matter of fact, then its beyond doubt it may be certainly known. Secondly,
If it be those also who did see and hear, and handle, who do testify it.
Thirdly, If their senses were sound and perfect, within reach of the object,
and having no deceiving medium. Fourthly, Which may be discerned 1. If the
witnesses be a multitude, for then it may be known they are not blind or deaf,
except they had been culled out of some Hospitalls: especially when all present
do both see and hear them 2. When the thing is done openly in the daylight. 3.
When it is done frequently, and near at hand: for then there would be full
opportunity to discover any deceit. So that in these cases it is doubtless,
sense is infallible, and consequently those that see and hear are most certain
witnesses.

2. Next let us see, whether we may be certain that any Testimony is sincere,
without a purpose to deceive us. And I take that for undoubted in the following
cases. 1. Where the party is of ingenuity and honesty. 2. And it is apparent he
drives on no design of his own, nor cannot expect any advantage in the world.
3. Nay of his Testimony will certainly undo him in the world, and prove the
overthrow of his ease* honor, estate and life. 5. And if it be a multitude
that do thus testify, How can they do it with an intent to deceive? 6. And if
their several Testimonies do agree. 7. And if the very enemies deny not this
matter of fact, but only refer it to other causes; then there is no possibility
of deceit (as I shall further anon evince when I apply it to the Question.)

Thirdly, We are to prove, that there are infallible means of transmitting
such Testimony down to posterity, without depraving any thing substantial. And
then it well remain an undoubted truth, that there is a full certainty in some
humane Testimony, and that to posterity at a remote distance. Now this
tradition is infallible in these cases. 1. If it be (as beforesaid) in matter
of fact only, which the meanest understandings are capable of apprehending. 2.
If it be also about the substance of actions, and not every small circumstance.
3. And also if those Actions were famous in their times, and of great note and
wonder in the world, and such as were the cause of public and eminent
alterations. 4. If it be delivered down in writing and not only by word of
mouth, where the change of speech might alter the sense of the matter. 5. If
the Records be public, where the very enemies may see them: yea published of
purpose by Heralds and Ambassadors, that the world may take notice of them. 6.
If they are men of greatest honesty in all Ages, who have both kept and
divulged these Records. 7* And if there have been also a multitude of these. 8.
And this multitude of several countries, where they could never so much as
meet to agree upon any deceiving counsels: much less all accord in such a
design: and lest of all be able to manage it with secrecy. 9. If also the after
preservers and divulgers of these records could have no more self-advancing
ends, then the first testifiers. 10. Nay if their divulging and attesting these
records did utterly ruinate in the world, their states and lives, as well as it
did the first testifiers. 11. If there be such a dispersing of the copies of
these records all over the world, that the cancelling and abolishing them is a
thing impossible. 12. If the very histories of the enemies do never affirm any
universal abolishing and consuming of them. 13. If all these dispersed copies
through the world, do perfectly agree in every thing material. 14. If it were
a matter of such moment in the judgment of the preservers, neither to add nor
diminish, that they thought their eternal Salvation did lie upon it. 15. If
the histories of their enemies do generally mention their attesting these
records to the loss of their lives; and that successively in every age. 16. If
these records and attestations are yet visible to the world; and that in such a
form as none could counterfeit. 17. If the enemies that lived near or in those
times when the things were done, do 1. write nothing against them of any
moment, 2. but oppose them with fire and sword in stead of Argument, 3. nay if
they acknowledge the fact, but deny the cause Justin Martyr tells Tryphon in
his Dialogue, of the wickedness of the Jews, that they sent out into all parts
of the world their choicest man to persuade the people against the Christians,
they were Atheists and would abolish the Deity, and that they were convict of
gross impi^ty. And yet this mischievous industry of the Jews did not prevail.
only. 18. And if all the enemies were incompetent witnesses, 1. witnessing to
the Negative, of which they could have no certainty, 2. and carried on with
apparent malice and prejudice, 3. and having all worldly advantages attending
their cause, 4* and being generally men unconscionable and impious. 19. If all
these enemies having all these worldly advantages, could neither by Arguments
nor Violence, hinder people from believing these famous and palpable matters of
fact, in the very age wherein they were done, when the truth or falsehood might
most easily be discovered, but that the generality of beholders were forced to
assent. 20. If multitudes of the most ingenuous and violent enemies, have in
every age from the very acting of these things to this day, been forced to
yield, and turned as zealous defenders of these records and their doctrine, as
ever they were opposers of them before. 21. If all these Converts do confess
upon their coming in, that it was ignorance, or prejudice, or worldly respects
that made them oppose so much before. 22. If all the powers of the world, that
can burn the bodies of the witnesses, that can overthrow Kingdoms, and change
their Laws, could never yet reverse or abolish these Records. 23. Nay if some
notable judgment in all ages, have befallen the most eminent opposers thereof.
24. And Lastly, if successions of wonders (though not Miracles as the first,)
have in all ages accompanied the attestation of these records. I say, if all
these twenty four particulars do concur, or most of these, I leave it to the
judgment of any man of understanding, Whether there be not an infallible way
of transmitting matter of Fact to posterity? And consequently, whether there be
not more then a probability, even a fall certainty in such a humane Testimony?

SECT. III.
2. THe second thing now which I am to manifest, is, That we have such a
Testimony of the Miracles,. 3.
which confirmed the Doctrine and Writings of the Bible.

And here I must run over the three foregoing Particulars again; and show you;
first, That the witnesses of Scripture-Miracles, could, and did infallibly know
the Truth which they testified: secondly, That they had no intent to deceive
the world; and thirdly, That it has been brought down to Posterity by a way so
infallible, that there remains no doubt, whether our Records are Authentic.
For the first of these I think will be most easily acknowledged: Men are
naturally so confident of the infallibility of their own senses, that sure they
will not suspect the senses of others. But if they should, let them apply here
what is said before to put them out of doubt. Maxima est differentia inter 1.
testificationem primitiva Ecclesiae quae fuit tempore Apostolorum: 2. Inter
testificationem Ecclesiae quae proxime post Apostolorum temporae secuta est,
quaequa primae Ecclaesiae testificationem a^^eperat: 3. Et inter
testificationem praesentis Ecclesiae de Scriptura. Quae enim and nunc est and
antea fuit Ecclesia, si potest ostendere testimonia eorum qui acceperant and
noverant testificationem primae Ecclesiae de Germanis scriptis, credimus ei, ut
testi probanti sua dicta: Non autem habet potestatemstatuendi aut decernendi
aliquid de libris sacris cujus non possit certa documenta ex testificatione
primitivae Ecclesiae proferre. Chemnitius Exam. Con. Tridentin. part. 1. in
initio. page 86.
First, It was matter of Fact, which might be easily discerned. Secondly, The
Apostles and others who bear witness to it, were present, yea, continual
companions of Christ, and the multitude of Christians were eyewitnesses of the
Miracles of the Apostles, Thirdly, These were men neither blind nor deaf, but
of as sound and perfect senses as we. Fourthly, This is apparent: first,
Because they were great multitudes, even that were present, and therefore could
not all be blind, if they had, how did they walk about? Fifthly, These
Miracles were not done by night, nor in a corner, but in the open light in the
midst of the people. Sixthly, They were not once or twice only performed, but
very often, of several kinds, by several persons, even Prophets, and Christ
himself and his Apostles in many Generations; so that if there had been any
deceit, Quisquis adhuc prodigia ut credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium,
qui mundo credente non credit. Dr. Humfredus in Jesuitism. part. 1. page 166.
it might have been easily discovered. Seventhly, and lastly, It was in the
midst of vigilant and subtle enemies, who were able and ready enough to have
evinced the deceit.

So that it remains certain, That the first Eye witnesses themselves were not
deceived.

2. Let us next consider, whether it be not also as certain that they never
intended the deceiving of the world?

First, It is evident that they were neither fools nor knaves, (...) but men of
ingenuity, and extraordinary Honesty: There needs no more to prove this then
their own Writings, so full of enmity against all kind of vitiousness, so full
of conscientious zeal, and heavenly affections: Yet is this their Honesty also
attested by their enemies; sure the very remnants of Natural Honesty are a
Divine offspring, and do produce also certain effects according to their
strength and nature: God has planted and continued them in man, for the use of
societies, and common converse; for if all Honesty were gone, one man could not
believe another, and so could not converse together. But now supernatural
extraordinary Honesty will produce its effect more certainly: If three hundred,
or three thousand honest godly men should say, they saw such things with their
eyes, he is very incredulous that would not believe it. 2. It is apparent that
neither Prophets, Apostles, nor Disciples in Attesting these things could drive
on any designs of their own. Did they seek either Honor, or Ease, or Profits,
or worldly Delights? Did their Master give them any hopes of these? or did they
see any probability of their attaining it? or did they see any of their fellows
attain it before them? 3. Nay, was it not a certain way to their ruin in the
world? Did not their Master tell them when he sent them out, That they should
be persecuted of all for his sake and the Gospels? Did they not find it true,
and therefore expect the like themselves? Paul knew that in every City Bonds
and Afflictions did abide him: and they lay it down as a granted Rule, That he
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. Now I would fain
know, whether a man's Self, his State, his Liberty, his Life, be not naturally
so near and dear to all, that they would be loath to throw it away, merely to
deceive and cosen the world? All that I know can be objected, is, That they
might do it out of a desire to be admired in the world for their godliness and
their suffering. Answ. First, Go see were you can find thousands, or millions
of men that will cast away their lives to be talked of. Secondly, Did they not
on the contrary renounce their own Honor and Esteem, and call themselves Vile
and Miserable Sinners, and speak worse of themselves then the most impious
wretch will do, and extol nothing but God and his Son Jesus? Thirdly, Did not
their Master foretell them, that they should be so far from getting credit by
his Service, that they should be hated of all men, and their names cast out as
evil doers? Did they not see him spit upon, and hanged on a Cross among thieves
before their eyes, some of them? Did they not find by experience, that their
way was every where spoken against? And the reproach of the Cross of Christ was
the great stumbling block to the world? And could men possibly choose such a way
for Vainglory? I am persuaded it is one great reason why Christ would have the
first Witnesses of the Gospel to suffer so much, to confirm their Testimony to
future Ages, that the world may see that they intended not to deceive them. 5.
Consider also what a multitude these Witnesses were: How could so many thousand
of several Countries lay the plot to deceive the world? They were not only
thousands that believed the Gospel, but thousands that saw the Miracles of
Christ, and many Cities and Countries that saw the Miracles of the Apostles. 6.
And the Testimony of all does so punctually accord, that the seeming
contradiction in some smaller circumstances, does but show their simplicity,
and sincerity, and their agreement in the main. Of the Heaten ancient Writers
attestation to the several Histories of the Bible, I shall particularly say
little, it being done so fully by Grotius de Verit. Christian. Reliligio. l. 1.
p. 40. etc.

Tertullianus de praescriptione affirmat, ipsas authenticas Apostolorum
literas, hoc est ipsa (...) Apostolorum suo adhuc temtempore in Ecclesis
Aposiolicis conservata extitisse.


7 And lastly, The very enemies acknowledge this matter of Fact; only they
ascribe it to other causes. They could not deny the Miracles that were wrought:
Even to this day the Jews acknowledge much of the works of Christ, but
slanderously father them upon the power of the Devil, or upon the force of the
name of God sewed in Christ's thigh, and such like ridiculous Stories they have:
even the Turks confess much of the miracles of Christ, and believe him to be a
great Prophet, though they are professed enemies to the Christian name.

So that I think by all this it is certain, That the first Witnesses of the
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, as they were not deceived themselves, so
neither had they any intent to deceive the world.

3. We are next to show you, that the way that this Testimony has come down to
us, is a certain and undeceiveable way. For,

First, Consider, it is of matter of Fact: (for the Doctrine we are not now
mentioning, except de facto, that this was the Doctrine attested.) 2. They were
the substances of the actions that they chiefly related, and that we are now
enquiring after the certainty of. Though men may mistake in the Circumstances
of the fight at such a place, or such a place, yet that there were such fights
we may certainly know. Or though they may mistake in smaller actions,
circumstances or qualifications of Henry the eight, of William the Conqueror,
etc. yet that there were such men we may certainly know. Now the thing we
enquire after, is, Whether such Miracles were wrought or no? 3. They were The
occasion of writing the several Books of the new Testament, you may see in
Chemnit. Exa. Concilii Trident. in the beginning.
Actions then famous through the world, and made great alterations in States*
They turned the world upside down; Cities were converted, Countries, and Rulers
were turned Christians. And may not the Records in eminent Actions be certain?
We have certain Records of Battles, of Sieges, and of Successions of Princes
among the Heathens before the coming of Christ, and of the great alterations in
our own State for a very long time. 4. It was a formed Dico Evangelium Lucae
quod tuemur apud Ecclesias Apostolicas, and jam universas, ab initio editionis
sed stare. Tertul. adv. Marc.

Vide Sibrandum Jubbertu^ de principiis Christianorum dogmatum, lib. 2. etc.


Record in the very words of the first VVitnesses in VVriting, which has been
delivered to us, and not only an unwritten Testimony; so that men's various
Conceivings, or Expressions could make no alteration. 5. These Records which we
call the Scripture, have been kept publicly in all these Ages; so that the
most negligent enemy might have taken notice of its depravation. Yea, God made
it the office of his Ministers to publish it whatever came of it to all the
world, and pronounced a woe to them if they Preach not this Gospel; which
Preaching was both the divulging of the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ, and
all out of these authentic Records; And how then is it possible, there should
be an universal depravation, and that even in the narration of the matters of
Fact, when all Nations almost, in all the Ages since the Original of the
History, have had these Heralds, who have proclaimed it to the death. 6. And it
is most apparent that the Keepers and Publishers of these Records, have been
men of most eminent Piety and Honesty. The same Testimony which I gave before
for to prove the honesty of the first Witnesses, will prove theirs, though in a
lower degree: A good man, but a Christian, was the Character given them by
their very foes. 7. They have been a multitude, almost innumerable. 8. And
these of almost every Country under heaven. And let any man tell me, How all
these, or the chief of these could possibly meet, to consult about the
depraving of the History of the Scripture? And whether it were possible if such
a multitude were so ridiculously dishonest, yet that they could carry on such a
vain Even among the Papists the more learned and modest maintain the perfection
of the Hebrew Text of the old Testament, as Arias, Pagninus, Vatablus, Cajetan
Quid est gens Judaeorum nisi quaedam seriniaria chri^^ianorum bajulans legem
and prophetas in testimonium assertionis Ecclesiae. August. cont. Faust.
Manichaeum. lib. 12. cap. 23.
design with secrecy and success? 9. Also the after divulgers of the Miracles
of the Gospel, could have no more self-advancing ends for a long time then the
first Witnesses. 10. Nay, it ruined them in the world, as it did the first; So
that let any man judge, whether there be any possiblity, that so many millions
of so many Nations should ruinate themselves, and give their bodies to be
burned, merely to deprave those Scriptures which they do profess. 11. Consider
also when this sacred History was so dispersed over the world, whether the
cancelling and extirpation of it were not a thing impossible, especially by
those means that were attempted. 12. Nay, There is no History of the Enemies
that does mention any universal abolition or depravation of these Records:
Antiochus did what he could, but left the Jews their Scripture entire in
despite of him. Nam cum tot secula intercesserint, nemo tamen quicquam addere
vel auferre vel permutare ausus fuit: omnibus enim nostrae gentis hominibus
insita quodammodo atque ingenita fides est, credere haec Dei ess^ consulta, and
his acquiescere, ac pro ipsis, si ita res posceret, libenter animam ponere,
Josep. cont. Appion. lib. 1. Sic and Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 10. Ita
Philo, referente Eusebio, Preparat. Evang. lib. 8 cap. 2. Mirabile mihi videtur
duobus annorum millibus, imo majore tempore jam sere transacto nec verbum unum
in lege illius esse immutatum, sed centies unusquisque Judaeorum morietur, quam
legis Mosaicae derogabit.
When was the time, and where was the place, that all the Bibles in the world
were gathered together, and consumed with fire, or corrupted with Forgery?
Indeed Julian thought by prohibiting the Schools of Learning to the children of
Christians, to have extirpated Christianity, but Christ did quickly first
extirpate him. 13. All the Copies of those sacred Writings do yet accord (in
all things material) which are found through the world. And consider then if
they had been depraved, whether multitudes of Copies, which had escaped that
depravation, would not by their diversity or contradiction have bewrayed the
rest? 14. It was a matter of such a heinous quality, both by the sentence of
the Law, and in the Consciences of the Preservers and Divulgers of it, for to
add or diminish the least title, that they thought it deserved eternal
damnation. And I refer it to any man of reason, whether so many thousands of
men through the world, could possibly venture upon eternal torment, as well as
upon temporal death, and all this to deceive others by depraving the Laws which
they look to be judged by; or the History of those Miracles which were the
grounds of their Faith? Is not the contrary somewhat more then probable? 15.
Furthermore, The Histories of the Enemies do frequently mention that these
Scriptures have been still maintained to the flames. Though they revile the
Christians, yet they report this their attestation, which proves the constant
succession thereof, and the faithful delivery of Christianity, and its Records
to us. It would be but labor in vain, to heap up here the several reports of
Pagan Historians, of the numbers of Christians, their obstinacy in their
Religion, their Calamities and Torments. 16. These Records, and their
Attestations are yet visible over the world, and that in such a form as cannot
possibly be counterfeit. Is it not enough to put me out of doubt, whether Homer
ever wrote his Iliads, or Demosthenes his Orations, or Virgil and Ovi^ their
several Works, or Aristotle his Volums of so many the Sciences, when I see and
read these Books yet extant; and when I find them such, that I think can
hardly now be counterfeited, no nor imitated? but if they could, who would have
been at that excessive pains, as to have spent his life in compiling such
Books, that he might deceive the world, and make men believe they were the
Works of Aristotle, Ovid? etc. would not any man rather have taken the honor to
himself; so here the case is alike: Yea, these Scriptures though they have less
of Arts and Sciences, yet are incomparably more difficult to have been
counterfeited then the other; I mean before the first Copies were drawn. I
would here stand to show the utter impossibility of any man's forging these
VVritings, but that I intend to make up in a peculiar Argument.

17. Whether any Enemy has with weight of Argument confuted the Christian
Cause? Whether when they have undertaken it, it has not been only an arguing
the They think the Scripture Miracles incredible; and yet every age still has
such wonders as the next ages will not believe. Why is not the raining of Manna
or Quails from heaven, as credible as the raining of that grain about ten
years ago in England? It fell in many parts of the Kingdom* It was like a
withered Wheat corn, but not so long, with a skin of a dark color* which
being pulled of, the grain had a taste somewhat sha^p and hot: I tasted it, and
kept some of it long, which fell on the Leads of the Church, and of the
Ministers House in Bridgenorth, where I preached the Gospel. Tiberius upon a
Letter from Pilate of the Miracles, Death, and Resurrection of Christ, did move
in the Senate to proclaim him to be God, but they refused, because the motion
was not first from themselves, but the Emperor did abide in his opinion still.
Egesip. Anacephaleos. Wherefore Tertullian bids them, Go look in your
Registers, and the Acts of your Senate, in Apolog Vid. Usher. Brit. Eccl. prim.
p. 3.4.
improbability, or assigning the Miracles to other causes, or an opposing the
Doctrine delivered by the Christians, rather then these miraculous actions in
question? I leave those to judge who have read their VVritings. Yea, whether
their common Arguments have not been Fire and Sword? 18. It is an easy matter
yet to prove, that the enemies of Scripture have been incompetent VVitnesses:
First, Being men that were not present, or had not the opportunity to be so
well acquainted with the Actions of Christ, of the Prophets and Apostles, as
themselves and others that do attest them. Secondly, Being men of apparent
malice, and possessed with much prejudice against the persons and things which
they oppose. This I might easily and fully prove if I could stand upon it.
Thirdly, They had all worldly advantages attending their Cause, which they were
all to lose, with life it self, if they had appeared for Christ. Fourthly, They
were generally men of no great Conscience, nor Moral Honesty, and most of them
of most sensual and vicious conversation. This appears by their own Writings,
both Doctrinal and Historical. What sensual Interpretations of the Law, did the
very strict Sect of the Pharisees make? What fleshly Laws have the followers of
Mahomet? What Vices did the Laws of the Heathens tolerate? Yea what foul
errors are in the Ethics of their most rigid Moralists? And you may be sure
that their lives were far worse then their Laws: And indeed their own Histories
do acknowledge as much; To save me the labor of mentioning them, Read Dr.
Hackwels Apology on that Subject. Sure such men are incompetent Witnesses in
any cause between man and man, and would so be judged at any impartial
Judicature. And indeed, how is it possible that they should be much better,
when they have no Laws that teach them either what true Happiness is, or what
is the way and means to attain it? Fifthly, Besides all this, their Testimony
was only of the Negative, and that in such cases as it could not be valid.

19. Consider also, that all the Adversaries of these Miracles and Relations,
could not with all their Arguments or violence hinder thousands from believing
them, in the very time and Country where they were done: but that they who did
behold them, did generally assent, at least to the matter of Fact: So that we
may say with Austin, Either they were Miracles, or not: If they were, why do
you not believe? If they were not, behold the greatest Miracle of all, that so
many thousands (even of the beholders) should be so blind, as to believe
things that never were, especially in those very times when it was the easiest
matter in the world to have disproved such falsehoods. If there should go a
Report now of a man at London, That should raise the Dead, cure the Blind, the
Deaf, the Sick, the Possessed; feed thousands with five Loaves, etc. And that a
multitude of his Followers should do the like, and that a great many times over
and over, and that in the several parts of the Land, in the presence of Crowds,
and thousands of people: I pray you judge, whether it were not the easiest
matter in the world to disprove this if it were false? And whether if were
possible that whole Countries and Cities should believe it? Nay, whether the
easiness and certainty of disproving it, would not bring them all into
extremest contempt? Two things will be here objected: First, That then the
Adversaries not believing, will be as strong against it, as the Disciples
believing is for it. Answer, Read what is said before of the Adversaries
incompetency, and it may satisfy to this. Julian when he scorneth Christ, does
acknowledge his Miracles. What (says he) has this Jesus done worthy of memory
or of any account in all his life? Save that he cured a few blind and lame,
and delivered some from Devils that possessed them, etc.

The Star that appeared at Christ's birth is mentioned by Pliny lib 2. cap. 25.
So do diverse others, as Origin reports, Cont. Celsum.

Herod's killing the children is mentioned in Augustus taunt I had rather (says
he) be Herod's Swine then his Son, because he killed a son of his own among the
rest. Macrob. Saturnal.


Secondly, And consider also that the generality of the Adversaries did believe
the matter of Fact, which is all that we are now enquiring after. The recital
here of those multitudes of Testimonies that might be produced from Antiquity,
is a work that my straight time does prohibit; but is done by others far more
able. Only that well known passage in Josephus I will here set down. In the
time of Tiberias there was one Jesus, a wife man (at least if he was to be
called a man) who was a worker of great Miracles, and a teacher of such who
love the truth, and had many, as well Jews as Gentiles who clave unto him. This
was Christ. And when Pilate upon his being accused by the chief men of our
Nation, had sentenced him to be crucified, yet did not they who had first loved
him forsake him: For he appeared to them the third day alive again, according
to what the Prophets Divinely inspired, had foretold concerning him; as they
had done an innumerable number of very strange things besides. And even to this
day, both the name and sort of persons called Christians, so named from him, do
remain. Thus far Josephus a Jew by Nation, and Religion, who wrote this about
eighty six years after Christ, and fourteen years before the death of St. John;
Himself being born about five or six years after Christ.

20. Consider also how that every Age has afforded multitudes of Josephus
relates the life of John the Baptist as the Evangelists do. The Darkness and
Earthquake at Christ's death is acknowledged by Phlegon in lib. Chron. 13.
Lucian bid his Tormentors search their own Chronicles, and they should find
that in Pilates time the light failed in the midst of the day, and the Sun was
darkened while Christ was suffering. Tertullian also appealeth to their ewn
Chronicles. Apol. And that it was no Natural Eclipse is known to Astronomers.
See Marsilius Ficinus of the Star. The death of Herod is set out by Josephus,
Antiq. lib. 19 cap. 7. as by Luke. Ireneus affirms, that in his time the
working of Miracles, the raising of the Dead, the casting out of Devils,
healing the sick by mere laying on of hands and Pr^phesying were still in
force: And that some that were so raised from death, remained alive among them
long after. See Nicepho. Eccles. Histor. Tom. 1. lib. 4 c. 13 And Justin Martyr
says, That the gift of Prophesying was famous in the Church in his time,
Dialog. ad Tryphon.
VVitnesses, who before were most bitter and violent enemies; And diverse of
these men of note for Learning and place in the world. How mad was Saul against
the Truth? Surely it could be no favor to the Cause, nor overmuch credulity
that caused such men to witness to the death, the truth of that for which they
had persecuted others to the death but a little before. Nor could childish
Fables, or common flying Tales have so mightily wrought with men of Learning
and Understanding. (For some such were Christians in all Ages) 21. Nay, observe
but the Confessions of these Adversaries, when they came to believe: How
generally and ingenuously they acknowledge their former ignorance and prejudice
to have been the cause of their unbelief. 22. Consider also how unable all the
enemies of the Gospel have been to abolish these sacred Records. They could
burn the Witnesses by thousands, but yet they could never either hinder their
succession, or extinguish these Testimonies. 23. Nay, the most eminent
Adversaries have had the most eminent ruin: As Antiochus, Herod, Julian with
multitudes more: This stone having fallen upon them has ground them to powder.
24 It were not difficult here to collect from unquestioned Authors, a constant
succession of Wonders (at least) to have in several Ages accompanied the
Attestation of this Truth: and notable judgments that have befaln the
persecutors of it. And though the Papists by their Fictions, and Fabulous
Legends have done more wrong to the Christian Cause, then ever they are able to
repair; yet unquestionable History does afford us very many Examples; And even
many of those actions which they have deformed with their fabulous additions,
might yet for the substance have much truth: And God might even in times of
Popery work some of these wonders, though not to confirm their Religion as it
was Popish, yet to confirm it as the Christian Religion; for as he had then his
Church, and then his Scripture, so had he then his special Providence to
confirm his Church in their* belief, and to silence the several enemies of the
Faith. And therefore I advise those, who in their inconsiderate zeal are apt to
reject all these Histories of Providence merely because they were written by
Papists, or because some Witnesses to the Truth were a little leavened with
some Popish errors, that they would first view them, and consider of their
probability of Truth or Falsehood, that so they may pick out the Truth, and not
reject all together in the lump, least otherwise in their zeal against Popery,
they should injure Christianity.

And now I leave any man to judge whether we have not had an infallible way of
receiving these Records from the first VVitnesses?

Not that every of the particulars before mentioned, are necessary to the
proving or certain receiving the Authentic Records without depravation, for
you may perceive, that almost any two or three of them might suffice; and that
diverse of them are from abundance for fuller confirmation.

4.
SECT. IV.
ANd thus I have done with this first Argument drawn from the Miracles which
prove the Doctrine and VVritings to be of God. Objection against this Argument
Answered.


But I must satisfy the Scruples of some before I proceed. First, Some will
question, whether this be not: 1. To resolve our faith into Answ.
who believe the Scripture for the Authority of the Church, and to argue
Circularly in this as they. To this I Answer, First, I make in this Argument
the last Resolution of my faith into the Nos fidem quae verbis Dei habetur,
etsi non prorsus nasci ex miraculis, attamen ex cis confirmari possumus
cred^re, Pet. Martyr. Loci Commun cap. 8 page 38. vid. plura ibidem.
Miracles wrought to confirm the Doctrine. If you ask why I believe the
Doctrine to be of God? I Answer, because it was confirmed by many undeniable
Miracles. If you ask why I believe those Miracles to be from God? I Answer,
because no created power can work a Miracle: So that the Testimony of man is
not the Reason of my believing, but only the means by which this matter of
Fact is brought down to my Knowledge. Again, Our Faith cannot be said to be
Resolved into that which we give in Answer to your last Interrogation, except
your Question be only still of the proper grounds of Faith: But if you change
your Question from, what is the Ground of my Faith? to, what is the Non per
alios dispositionem salutis nostrae cognovimus, quam per^ eos per quos
Evangelium pervenit ad nos; quod quidem tunc preconiaverunt, postea vero per
Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam fidei
nostrae futurum.

Irenaeus adver. haeres l. 3. c. 1.


means of conveying down the History to me? Then my faith is not Resolved into
this means. Yet this means, or some other equivalent, I acknowledge so
necessary, that without it, I had never been like to have believed. 2. This
shows you also that I argue not in the Popish Circle, nor take my faith on
their common Grounds: For First, When you ask them, How know you the Testimony
of the Church to be Infallible? They prove it again by Scripture; and there is
their Circle. But as I trust not on the Authority of the Romish Church only,
as they do; no nor properly to the Authority of any Church; no nor only to the
Testimony of the Church, but also to the Testimony of the enemies themselves:
So do I prove the validity of the Testimony I bring from Nature, and well known
Principles, in Reason, and not from Scripture it self, as you may see before.
3. There is a Humane Testimony which is also divine, and so an Humane Faith
which is also divine. Few of Gods extraordinary Revelations have been
immediate,; (The Aquin. sum. 3. q. 55. 2. c.
best Schoolmen think none of all) but either by Angels or by Jesus himself,
who was man as well as God. You will acknowledge if God reveal it to an Angel,
and the Angel to Moses, and Moses to Israel, this is a divine Revelation to
Israel: For that is called a divine Revelation, which we are certain that God
does any way Reveal. Now I would fain know, why that which God does naturally
and certainly Reveal to all men* may not as properly be called a Divine
Revelation, as that which he Reveals by the Spirit to a few. Is not this Truth
from God [That the Senses apprehension of their Object (rightly stated)s
certain] as well as this [Jesus Christ was born of a Virgin, etc.] Though a
Saint or Angel be a fitter Messenger to Reveal the things of the Spirit, yet
any man may be a Messenger to reveal the things of the flesh. An ungodly man if
he have better Eyes and Ears may be a better Messenger or Witness of that
matter of Fact, which he sees and hears, then a godlier man that is blind
or deaf; especially in cases wherein that ungodly man has no provocation to
speak falsely; and most of all, if his Testimony be against himself. I take that
Revelation whereby I know that there was a fight at York, etc. to be of God,
though wicked men were the chief witnesses. For I take it for an undeniable
Maxim, That there is no Truth but of God, only it is derived unto us by
various means.

. 5.
SECT. V.
2. ANd as I have evideently discovered the full certainty of this Testimony of
man concerning the forementioned matter of Fact: So I will show you why I choose
this for my first and main Argument; and also that no man can believe without
the foresaid Humane Testimony. First then, I demanded with my self; By what
Argument did Moses and Christ evince to the world the verity of their Doctrine?
And I find, it was chiefly by this of Miracles; and sure Christ knew the best
Argument to prove the divine Authority of his Doctrine, and that which was the
best then, is the best still. If our selves had lived in the days of Christ,
should we have believed a poor man to have been God, the Savior, the Judge of
the world, without Miracles to prove this to us? Nay, would it have been our
duty to have believed? Does not Christ say, If I had not done the Works that no
man else could do, ye had not had sin? That is, Your not believing me to be the
Messiah, had been no sin: For no man is bound to believe that which was never
convincingly revealed: What the sin against the Holy Ghost is.
And (to tell you my thoughts, If you will but pardon the novelty of the
Interpretation) I think that this is it which is called the sin against the
Holy Ghost, when men will not be convinced by Miracles, that Jesus is the
Christ. That which some Divines judge to be the sin against the Holy Ghost (an
opposing the known Truth only out of malice against it) Its a Question whether
Humane Nature be capable of it. And whether all Humane opposition to Truth be
not through ignorance, or prevalency of the sensual lusts? And so all malice
against Truth, is only against it as conceived to be Falsehood, or else as it
appears an enemy to our sensual desires; Else how does man's Understanding, as
it is an Understanding, naturally choose Truth (either real or appearing) for
its object? So that I think none can be guilty of malice against Truth as
Truth; And to be at emnity with Truth for opposing our sensuality, is a sin
that every man in the world has been in some measure guilty of: And indeed our
Divines do so define the sin against the Holy Ghost, that I could never yet
understand by their definition what it might be: some placing it in an Act
incompatible with the Rational soul; and others making it but gradually to
differ from other sins, How Hunnius was assaulted with this temptation [that he
had sinned against the holy Ghost] you may read in his life and death.

And it is still a common temptation. Matthew. 12.24. etc. Mar 3.28. Joh 5.39 33.
45, 46, 47. Joh. 15 22.24.


which has cast so many into terror of soul, because they could never find
out that graduall difference.

The sense of the place (which the whole context if you view it deliberately
will show you, seems to me to be this; As if Christ had said; While you
believed not the Testimony of the Prophets, yet there was hope: The Testimony
of John Baptist might have convinced you; yea, when you believed not John, yet
you might have been convinced by my own Doctrine: Yea, though you did not
believe my Doctrine, yet there was hope you might have been convinced by my
Miracles: But when you accuse them to be the works of Beelzebub, and ascribe
the work of the Divine Power, or Spirit, to the Prince of Devils, what more
hope? I will after my Ascension send the Holy Ghost upon my Disciples, that
they may work Miracles to convince the world, that they who will believe no
other Testimony, may yet through this believe; But if you sin against this Holy
Ghost (that is, if they will not believe for all these Miracles) (for the
Scripture frequently calls* Faith by the name of Obedience, and Unbelief by the
name of sin,) there is no other more convincing Testimony left, and so their
sin of (unbelief) is incurable, and consequently unpardonable: And therefore he
that speaks against the son of Man (that is, denies his Testimony of
himself) it shall be forgiven him (if he yet believe by this Testimony of the
Spirit) but they that continue unbelievers for all this (and so reproach the
Testimony that should convince them, as you do) shall never be forgiven
(because they cannot perform the condition of forgiveness.)

This I think to be the sense of the Text; And the rather when I consider what
sin it was that these Pharisees committed; for sure that which is commonly
judged to be the sin against the Holy Ghost, I no where find that Christ does
accuse them of; but the Scripture seems to speak on the contrary Act 3.17.
that through ignorance they did it, 1 Cor. 2.8.
for had they known they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. And indeed
it is a thing to me altogether incredible, that these Pharisees should know
Christ to be the Messiah whom they so desirously expected, and to be the Son of
God, and judge of all men, and yet to crucify him through mere malice: charge
them not with this, till you can show some Scripture that charge them with it.

Object. Why then there is no sin against the Holy Ghost now Miracles are
ceased.

Answ. Yes: though the Miracles are ceased, yet their Nunc non ut olim sunt
necessaria miracula: priusquam crederet mundus necessaria fuere ad hoc, ut
mundus crederet, ut August de Civit. Dei. lib. 22. c. 8.
Testimony does still live. The death and Resurrection of Christ are past, and
yet men may sin against that death and Resurrection. So that I think when men
will not believe that Jesus is the Christ, though they are convinced by
undeniable Arguments, of the Miracles which both himself and his disciples
wrought, this is now the sin against the Holy Ghost. And therefore take heed of
slighting this argument.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
SEcondly, And here I would have those men, who cannot endure this resting upon
Yet do I believe that that of 2 Pet. 1.20. is generally mistaken: as if the
Apostle did deny private men the liberty of interpreting Scriptures even for
themselves. When it is in regard of the object, and not of the interpreter that
the Apostle calls it [Private]. As if he should say: The Prophets are a sure
Testimony of the Doctrine of Christianity: but then you must understand that
they are not to be interpreted of the Private men that spoke them, for they
were but types of Christ the Public person, so Psalm. 2. and 16. etc. are to
be interpreted of Christ, and not of David only a private person, and but a
type of Christ in all, so that Peter answers the Question of the Eunuch in
Acts 8. Of whom does the Prophet speak? of himself (privately) or some other
(more public) man? This is I think the true meaning of Peter.
humane Testimony, to consider of what necessity it is for the producing of our
Faith. Something must be taken upon trust from man whether they will or no: and
yet no uncertainty in our Faith neither. First. The mere illiterate man, must
take it upon trust, that the book is a Bible which he hears read, for else he
knows not but it may be some other book. Secondly, That those words are in it,
which the Reader pronounces. Thirdly, That it is translated truly out of the
original languages. Fourthly, That the Hebrew and Greek Copies, out of which
it was translated, are true Authentic Copies. Fifthly, That it was originally
written in these languages. Sixthly, Yea and the meaning of diverse Scripture
passages, which cannot be understood without the knowledge of Jewish customs,
of Chronology, of Geography, etc. though the words were never so exactly
translated. All these with many more the vulgar must take upon the word of
their Teachers. And indeed a faith merely humane, is a necessary preparative to
a faith Divine, in respect of some means and Praecognita necessary thereto. If
a Scholar will not take his masters word, that such letters have such or such a
power, or do spell so or so: or that such a Latin or Greek word has such a
signification; when will he learn, or how will he know? Nay how do the most
learned linguists know the signification of words in any language, and so in
the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, but only upon the credit of their Teachers and
Authors? And yet certain enough too in the maine. Tradition is not so useles
to the world or the Church as some would have it; Though the Papists do
sinfully plead it against the sufficiency of Scripture, yet Scriptures
sufficiency or perfection is only in suo genere, in its own kind, and not in
omni genere, not sufficient for every purpose. Scripture is a sufficient rule
of Faith and life, but not a sufficient means of conveying it self to all
generations and persons. If humane Testimony had not been necessary, why should
Christ have men to be witnesses in the beginning? And also still instruments of
persuading others, and attesting the verity of these sacred records to those
that cannot otherwise come to know them? And doubtless this is a chief The Use
of Church Governors and Teachers; and how far they are to be obeyed.
use of Ministers in the Church, and the great end of God in the stating and
continuing that function; that what men are incapable of believing explicitly,
with a faith properly Divine, that they might receive implicitly, and upon the
word of their Teachers, with a humane faith. Every man should labor indeed to
see with his own eyes* Oportet discentem credere, Aristot. in Analytic. post.
and to know all that God has revealed, and to be wiser even his Teachers; but
every man cannot bestow that time and pains in the study of Languages and
Sciences, without which that knowledge is not now attained. We may rather wish
then hope, Tit. 1.7. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Cor. 12.16.17.21. Luke 12.42. Heb.
13.3.17.24. 1 Timothy 3.5. Act. 20.28. 1 Timothy 3.^, 5. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Cor. 4.15.
that all the Lords people were Prophets. The Church of Christ has been long
in a very doleful plight, betwixt these two extremes, taking all things upon
trust from our teachers, and taking nothing upon trust* And yet those very men
who so disclaim taking upon trust, do themselves take as much upon trust as
others.

Why else are Ministers called the eyes and the hands of the body? Stewards of
the mysteries, and of the house of God? Overseers, Rulers, and Governers of the
Church? And such as must give the children their meat in due season? Fathers of
their people? etc. Surely the clearly known Truth and Duty must be received
from any one though but a child; and known errror and iniquity must be
received from none, though an Angel from Heaven. What then is that we are so
often required to obey our Teaching Rulers in? Surely it is not so much in the
receiving of new instituted Ceremonies from them, which they call things
indifferent: But as in all professions the Scholar must take his masters Word
in learning, till he can grow up to know the things in their own evidence: and
as men will take the words of any Haec duo dictat ipsa ratio. Primo, In
mysteriis quae superant rationem, non nitendum esse ratiocinantis Logica sed
Revelantis authoritate. Secundo, In consequentiis deducendis aut obscuris in
Religione interpretandis, magis fidendum esse caetui in nomine Domini legitime
congregatis, quam privatis spiritibus seorsim sapientibus, and
recalcitrantibus, Doct. Prideaux Lect. 22. de Auth. Eccl. page 361. See Doctor
Jackson Eternal truth of Scripture, lib. 2. chap. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
a^tificers in the matters that concern their own trade, and as every wise
patient will trust the judgment of his Physician, except he know as much
himself; and the Client will take the word of his Lawyer, so also Christ has
ordered that the more strong and knowing should be teachers in his school, and
the young and ignorant should believe them and obey them, till they can reach
to understand the things themselves. So that the matters which we must receive
upon trust from our teachers, are those which we cannot reach to know our
selves: and therefore must either take them upon the word of others, or not
receive them at all: so that if these Rulers and Stewards do require us to
believe, when we know not our selves whether it be truth or not; or if they
require us to obey, when we know not our selves whether it be a duty commanded
by God or not; here it is that we ought to obey them: For though we know not
whether God has revealed such a point, or commanded such an action, yet that
he has commanded us to obey them that Rule over us, who preach to us the word
of God, this we certainly know, Heb. 13.7. Yet I think not we are so strictly
tied to the judgment of a weak Minister of our own, as to take his word before
another that is more Judicious in a neighbor congregation. Nor do I think, if
we see but an appearance of his erring, that we should carelessely go on in
believing and obeying him, without a diligent searching after the Truth* even a
liklyhood of his mistake must quicken us to further enquiry, and may during
that enquiry suspend our belief and obedience: For where we are able to reach
to know probabilities in divine things, we may with diligence lightly reach to
that degree of certainty which our Teachers themselves have attained, or at
least to understand the Reason of their Doctrine. But still remember what I
said before, that fundamentals must be believed with a Faith explicit,
Absolute, and Divine.

And thus I have showed you the flat necessity of taking much upon the
Testimony of man: And that some of these humane Testimonies are so certain,
that they may well be called Divine. I conclude all with this intimation: You
may see by this, of what singular use are the monuments of Antiquity, and the
knowledge thereof, for the breeding and strengthening of the Christian faith:
especially the Histories of those times. I may say of many of them for
doctrine, as Fulbeck of Bracton, Britton, etc. Direct. p. 27. There be certain
ancient writers, whom as it is not unprofitable to read, so to rely on them is
dangerous, their books are Monumenta adorandae rubiginis, of more reverence
then authority.
I would not persuade you to bestow much time in the reading of the Fathers, in
reference to their judgment in matter of Doctrine: Gods word is a sufficient
Rule, and latter times have afforded far better Expositors. But in reference to
matters of fact, for confirming the Miracles mentioned in Scripture, and
relating the wonderful providence since; I would they were read an hundred
times more: Not only the writers of the Church, but even the Histories of the
enemies, and all other antiquities. Little do most consider, how useful these
are to the Christian faith!

CHAP. V. The second Argument.
Argument. 2.
SECT. I.
1.
I Come now to my second Argument, to prove Scripture to be the word of God. And
it is this.

If the Scriptures be neither the invention of Devils, I take it for granted,
that good Angels could not be guilty of forging the Scripture.
nor of men, then it can be from none but God: But that it is neither of
Devils, nor merely of men, I shall now prove (for I suppose none will question
the major proposition) First, Not from Devils; for first they cannot work
Miracles to confirm them. Secondly, It would not stand with Gods Soveraignity
over them, or with his goodness, Wisdom and Faithfulness in governing the
world, to suffer Satan to make Laws, and confirm them with wonders, and obtrude
them upon the world in the name of God, and all this without his disclaiming
them, or giving the world any notice of the forgery. Thirdly, Would Satan speak
so much for God? So seek his Glory as the Scripture does? would he so vilify
and reproach himself? and make known himself to be the hatefullest, and most
miserable of all creatures? would he so fully discover his own wiles? his
Temptations? his methods of deceiving? and give men such powerful warning to
beware of his snares? and such excellent means to conquer himself? would the
Devil lay such a design for men's salvation? would he show them their danger?
and direct them to escape it? would he so mightily labor to promote all Truth
and goodness, and the happiness of mankind as the Scripture does? Let any man
tell me, what book or project in the world, did ever so mightily overthrow the
Kingdom of Satan, as this book, and this Gospell-designe? And would Satan be
such an enemy to his own Kingdom? Fourthly, If Satan were the author, he would
never be so unweariedly, and subtly industrious, to draw the world to
unbelief, and to break the Laws which this book contains, as his constant
temptations do sensibly tell many a poor soul, that he is. Would he be so
earnest to have his own words rejected? or his own Laws broken? I think this is
all clear to any man of Reason.

SECT. II. 2.

SEcondly, Not of man.
That no mere men were the inventers of Scriptures, I prove thus. If men were
the devisers of it, then it was either good men, or bad: but it was neither
good men nor bad: therefore none.

Though goodness and badness have many degrees, yet under some of those degrees
do all men fall. Now I will show you that it could be neither of these. And
first, Good men they could not be. For you might better say that Murderers,
Traitors, Adulterers, Parricides, Sodomites, etc. were good men, rather then
such. To devise Laws and father them upon God: to feign Miracles, and father
them upon God: to set themselves up in the place of God: to say their word is
the word of the Lord; to promise eternal salvation to those that obey them: to
threat damnation to those that obey them not: to draw the world into a course
so destructive to all their worldly happiness, upon a promise of happiness in
another world, which they cannot give; to endeavor so egregiously to cousen all
mankind; If all this, or any of this, be consistent with common honesty, nay if
it be not as horrible wickedness as can be committed, then I confess I have
lost my reason. Much less then could such a number of Good men in all ages,
till (...) were finished, be guilty of such unexpressible crimes. (...) will it
here be any evasion, to say, they were men of a (...) temper, partly good, and
partly bad: for these are not (...) of a middle nature, nor such as will stand
with any rem^^nts of ingenuity or humanity. We have known wicked persons, too
many, and too bad: yet where or when did we ever know any that attempted any so
more-then-Hellish an enterprise? False Prophets have sent abroad indeed
particular falsehoods: But who has adventured upon such a systeme as this?
Mah^m^^ was (...) by the Arabian soldiers for their commander. In his Alco^an
he confesses himself to be a sinner, an Idolater, an Adulterer, given to
Lechery; His Laws run thus. Avenge your selves of your enemies: Take as many
wives as you can keep, and spare not: Kill the Infidels, he that fights
lazily* shall be damned, and he that kills most shall be in Paradise. He
says that Christ had the Spirit and Power of God; and the soul of God; and
that he is Christ's servant, See Alcoran Azoar 2.3.6. Also Azoar 18.4.11.13. He
confesses that Christ is the Spirit, and word, and messenger of God; that his
doctrine i^ perfect, that it enlighteneth the old Testament, and that he came
to confirm it: yet denies him to be God. Magnus fuit Sanctus, magnus Dei
amicus, magnus propheta, etc. Vide Thom. Bradwardin. de Causa Dei, lib. 1. cap.
1. Corol. part 32.
Mahomets example indeed comes nearest to such a villainy: Yet does not be
pretend to the hundredth part so many Miracles, nor so great, as the Scripture
relates, nor does pretend to be God, nor any more then a great Prophet:
trusting more to his sword for success, then to the Authority or truth of his
pretended Revelations. Not denying the truth of much of the Scriptures; but
adding his Alcoran, partly drawn from Scripture, and partly fitted with fleshly
liberties and promises to his own ends. And does not every man among us take
that act of Mahomet to be one of the vilest that the Sun has seen? And judge of
the man himself accordingly? So that I think it beyond doubt, that no one good
man, much less so great a number as were the penmen of Scripture, could devise
it of their own brain, and thrust it on the world.

Secondly, And it is as certain, that no bad men did devise the Scriptures.
Could wicked deceivers so highly advance the glory of God? and labor so
mightily to honor him in the world? Would they have so vilified themselves,
and acknowledged their faults? Could such an admirable undeniable spirit of
holiness, righteousness, and self-denial, which runs through every vein of
Scripture, have been inspired into it from the invention of the wicked? Would
wicked men have been so wise, or so zealous for the suppressing of wickedness?
Or so earnest to bring the world to Reformation? Would they have been such
bitter adversaries to their own ways? and such faithful friends to the ways
that they hate? Would they have vilified the ungodly, as the Scripture does?
And pronounced eternal damnation against them? Would they have extolled the
godly, who are so contrary to them? And proclaimed them a people eternally
blessed? Would they have framed such perfect and such Spiritual laws? And
would they have laid such a design against the flesh? And against all their
worldly happiness, as the scope of the Scripture does carry on? Its needless
sure to mention any more particulars: I think every man of the least ingenuity,
that considers this, or deliberately vieweth over the frame of the Scriptures,
will easily confess, that it is more then probable, That it was never devised
by any deceiving sinner; much less, that all the penmen of it in several Ages
were such wicked deceivers.

So then, if it was neither devised by good men, nor by bad men; then sure, by
no men: and consequently must of necessity proceed from God.

SECT. III. 3.

SEcondly, That it proceeded not merely from man, I also etc.

It is only the Antecedent that here requires proof: which consists of these
two branches, both which I shall make clear.

First, Vid. Wigandum in Method. ante comment. in mino prophetas.
That the doctrine of Scripture was compiled, and the Miracles done, without
the help of much humane learning, or any extraordinary natural endowments.

Secondly, That yet the most learned Philosophers never could reach near the
Gospel Mysteries, nor ever work the Miracles that were then done.

But I shall say most to the Doctrine. For the proof of the former, consider;

First, The whole world was in the times of Moses, and the Prophets
comparatively unlearned. A kind of learning the Egyptians then had (and some
few others) especially consisting in some small skill in Astronomy: But it was
all but barbarous ignorance, in comparison of the Learning of Greece and
Europe. Those Writings of greatest Antiquity, yet extant, do show this. See
also Dr. Hackwell, as before.

2. As rare as Learning then was, yet did God choose the unlearned of that
unlearned time, to be instruments and Penmen of his choicest Scriptures: David,
who was bred a Shephard, is the Penman of those divine unmatchable Psalms. Amos
is taken from a Heardsman to be a Prophet.

3. But especially in those latter Ages when the world was grown more wise and
learned, did God purposely choose the weak, the foolish, the unlearned to
confound them; A company of poor Fishermen, Tentmakers, and such like, must
write the Laws of the Kingdom of Christ; must dive into the Spiritual Mysteries
of the Kingdom; must silence the Wise, and Disputers of the world; and must be
the men that must bring in the world to believe. Doubless, as Gods sending
David, an unarmed Boy, with a Sling and a Stone against an armed Giant, was to
make it appear, that the victory was from himself: So his sending these
unlearned men to Preach the Gospel, and subdue the world, was to convince both
the present and future generations, that it was God, and not man that did the
work.

4. Also the course they took in silencing the learned adversaries, does show
us how little use they made of these Humane helps. They disputed not with them
by the precepts of Logic: Their Arguments were to the Jews the Writings of
Moses and the Prophets; and both to Jews and Gentiles, the miracles that were
wrought; They argued more with deeds, then with words: The blind, the lame,
the sick that were recovered, were their visible Arguments. The Languages which
they spoke, the Prophesies which they uttered, and other such supernatural
gifts of the holy Ghost upon them; these were the things that did convince the
world. Yet this is no president to us, to make as little use of Learning as
they, because we are not upon the same work, nor yet supplied with their
supernatural furniture.

5. The reproaches of their enemies do fully testify this, who cast it still
in their teeth, that they were ignorant and unlearned men. And indeed this was
the great rub that their Doctrine found in the world: it was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, and therefore it appeared to be
the power of God, and not of man: This was it that they discouraged the people
with, Joh. 7 48.49.
Do any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believe on him? but this people that know
not the Law are accursed

6. To conclude, The very frame and style of these sacred Writings, does fully
tell us, that they were none of the Logicians, nor eloquent Orators of the
world that did compose them. This is yet to this day, one of the greatest
stumbling blocks in the world, to hinder men from the reverencing and believing
the Scriptures. They are still thinking, sure if they were the very words of
God, they would excel all other Writings in every kind of excellency, when
indeed it discovers them the more certainly to be of God, because there is in
them so little of man: They may as well say, If David had been sent against
Goliath from God, he would sure have been the most complete soldier, and most
completely armed. The words are but the dish to serve up the sense in: God is
content that the words should not only have in them a savor of Humanity, but
of much infirmity, so that the work of convincing the world may be furthered
thereby. And I verily think, that this is Gods great design* in permitting
these precious spirits of divine Truths, to run in the veins of infirm
Language, that so men may be convinced in all succeeding ages, that Scripture
is no device of Humane Policy. If the Apostles had been learned and subtle men,
we should sooner have suspected their finger in the contrivance. Yea, It is
observable, that in such as Paul, that had some Humane Learning, yet God would
not have them make much use of it, least the excellency of the Cross of Christ
should seem to lie in the enticing words of man's wisdom; and least the success
of the Gospel should seem to be more from the ability of the Preacher, then
from the Arm of God.

Besides all this, It may much persuade us, that the Apostles never contrived
the Doctrine which they Preached, by their sudden and not premeditated setting
upon the work. They knew not whether they should go, nor what they should do,
when he calls one from his Fishing, and another from his Custom; They knew not
what course Christ would take with himself or them, no not a little before he
leaves them. Nay, they must not know their employment till he is taken from
them. And even then is it revealed to them by parcels and degrees, and that
without any study or invention of their own; even after the coming down of the
Holy Ghost; Peter did not well under stand that the Gentiles must be called.
Acts 10.
All which ignorance of his Apostles, and suddenness of Revelation, I think was
purposely contrived by Christ, to convince the world that they were not the
contrivers of the Doctrine which they Preached.

4.
SECT. IV.
2. LEt us next then consider, how far short the learned Philosophers have come
of this. They that have spent all their days in most painful studies; having
the strongest natural endowments for to enable them, and the learned Teachers,
the excellent Libraries, the bountiful encouragement, and countenance of
Princes to further them; and yet after all this, are very Novices in all
spiritual things. They cannot tell what the happiness of the Soul is, nor where
that happiness shall be enjoyed; nor when, nor how long, nor what are the
certain means to attain it; nor who they be that shall possess it. They know
nothing how the world was made, nor how it shall end; nor know they the God who
did create, and does sustain it: but for the most of them, they multiply
feighned Deities.

But I shall have occasion to open this more fully anon, under the last
Argument.

CHAP. VI. The third Argument. Argum. 3.

SECT. I.. 1.

MY third Argument, whereby I prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, is
this. Those Writings which have been owned and fulfilled in several Ages by
apparent extraordinary Providence of God, must needs be of God. But God has
so owned and fulfilled the Scriptures; Ergo, They are of God.

The Major Proposition will not sure be denied. The direct consequence is, That
such Writings are approved by God; and if approved of him, then must they needs
be his own, because they affirm themselves to be his own. It is beyond all
doubt, that God will not interpose his Power, and work a succession of Wonders
in the world, for the maintaining or countenancing of any forgery; especially
such as should be a slander against himself.

All the work therefore will lie in confirming the Minor: Where I shall show
you; first, By what wonders of Providence God has owned and fulfilled the
Scriptures: And secondly, How it may appear that this was the end of such
Providence.

1. The first sort of Providence here to be considered, are those that have
been exercised for the Church universal. Where these three things present
themselves especially to be observed: first, The Propagating of the Gospel, and
raising of the Church: secondly, The Defense and continuance of that Church:
thirdly, The improbable ways of accomplishing these.

And first, Consider, what an unlikely design in the judgment of man, did
Christ send his Apostles upon? To bid a few ignorant Mechanics, Go, Preach,
and make him Disciples of all Nations! To send his Followers into all the
world, to make men believe him to be the Savior of the world, and to charge
them to expect salvation no other way! Why, almost all the world might say,
They had never seen him: And to tell them in Britain, etc. of one crucified
among thieves at Jerusalem, and to charge them to take him for their eternal
King, this was a design very unlikely to prevail. When they would have taken
him by force, and made him a King, then he refused, and hid himself. But when
the world thought they had fully conquered him, when they had seen him dead,
and laid him in his Sepulcher, then does he rise and subdue the world. He that
would have said, when Christ was on the Cross, or in the Grave [that within so
many weeks many thousands of his Murderers should believe him to be their
Savior, or within so many years, so many Countries and Kingdoms should receive
him for their Lord, and lay down their Dignities, Possessions, and Lives (...)
his feet] would have hardly been believed by any that had heard him: and I am
confident they would most of them then have acknowledged, that if such a Wonder
should come to pass; it (...) needs be from the Finger of God alone. That the
Kingdoms of the world should become the Kingdoms of Christ, was then a matter
exceeding improbable. Object.
But you may Object, That first, It is but a small part of the world that
believes; And secondly, Christ himself says, that his Flock is little. I
Answer, First, It is a very great part of the world that are Believers at this
day, if we consider besides Europe, all the Greek Church, and all the Believers
that are dispersed in Egypt, Judea, and most of the Turks Dominions; and the
vast Empire of Prester Jehan in Africa. Secondly, Most Countries of the world
have Received the Gospel; but they had but their time, they have sinned away
the light, and therefore are now given up to darkness. Thirdly, Though the
Flock of Christ's Elect are small, that shall receive the Kingdom, yet the
called, that profess to believe his Gospel, are many.

2. Consider also, as the wonderful raising of the Kingdom of Christ in the
world, so the wonderful preservation and continuance of it. He sends out his
Disciples as Lambs among Wolves, and yet promises them deliverance and
success. His followers are every where hated through the world: their enemies
are numerous as the sands of the sea: The greatest Princes and Potentates, are
commonly their greatest enemies, who, one would think might command their
extirpation, and procure their ruin with a word of their mouths: The learned
men, and great wits of the world, are commonly their most keen and confident
adversaries; who, one would think, by their wit should easily overreach them,
and by their Learning befool them, and by their policy contrive some course for
their overthrow. Nay, (which is more wonderful then all) the very common
professors of the Faith of Christ are as great haters of the sincere and
zealous Professors, almost (if not altogether) as are the very Turks and
Pagans: And those that do acknowledge Christ for their Savior, do yet so abhor
the strictness and spirituality of his Laws and ways, that his sincere subjects
are in more danger of them, then of the most open enemies: whereas in other
Religions, the forwardest in their Religion are best esteemed of. Besides, the
temptations of Satan, the unwillingness of the Flesh, because of the worldly
comforts which we must renounce, and the tedious strict conversation which we
must undertake, these are greater opposers of the Kingdom of Christ then all
the rest; yet in despite of all these, is this Kingdom maintained, the subjects
increased, and these spiritual Laws entertained and obeyed; and the Church
remains both firm and steadfast, as the rocks in the Sea, while the waves that
beat upon it do break themselves in pieces.

3. Consider also in what way Christ does thus spread his Gospel, and preserve
his Church. First, Not by worldly might and power, not by compelling men to
profess him by the Sword. Indeed when men do profess themselves voluntarily to
be his subjects, he has authorized the Sword to see in part to the execution
of his Laws, and to punish those that break the Laws which they have accepted.
But to bring men in from the world into his Church; from Paganism, Turcism, or
Judaism to Christianity, he never gave the Sword any such commission; He never
levied an Army to advance his Dominion; nor sent forth his Followers as so many
Commanders, to subdue the Nations to him by force, and spare none that will not
become Christians: He will have none but those that voluntarily list themselves
under him: He sent out Ministers, and not Magistrates or Commanders, to bring
in the world; Yea, though he be truly willing of men's happiness in receiving
him, and therefore earnestly inviteth them thereto, yet he lets them know, that
he will be no loser by them; as their service cannot advantage him, so their
neglect cannot hurt him: He lets them know that he has no need of them, and
that his beseeching of them is for their own sakes, and that he will be
beholding to none of them all for their service; if they know where to have a
better Master, let them take their course: Even the Kings of the earth shall
stoop to his Terms, and be thankful too, or else they are no servants for
him: His House is not so open as to welcome all comers, but only those that
will submit to his Laws, and accept of him upon his own conditions; therefore
has he told men the worst as well as the best, that if they will be
discouraged or frighted from him, let them go: He tells them of poverty, of
disgrace, of losing their lives, or else they cannot be his Disciples. And is
not this an unlikely way to win men to him? Or to bring in so much of the world
to worship him? He flatters none, he humoreth none, he has not formed his Laws
and Ways to please them. Nay, which is yet more, he is as strict in turning
some men out of his Service, as other Masters would be ready to take them in.
Therefore he has required all his Followers to disclaim all such as are
obstinate offenders, and not so much as to eat, or be familiar with them. How
contrary to all this is the course of the great Commanders of the world, when
they would enlarge their Dominions, or procure themselves followers? They have
no course but to force men, or to flatter them. How contrary was Mahomets
course in propagating his Kingdom? He levieth an Army, and conquereth some
adjoining parts; and as his success increases, so does his presumption; he
inticeth all sorts to come to his Camp; he makes Laws that would please their
fleshly lusts; he promises them beautiful sights, and fair women, and such
carnal delights in another world: In a word, as his Kingdom was planted, so
has it been preserved, by no other ways, but force and flattery. But Christ
has not one word for either of these: His compelling men to come in, is but
rational persuading.

2. Nay, yet more then this, he makes his Church to grow by sufferings; when
others increase their Dominions by the destroying of their enemies, he
increases his, by suffering them to kill his subjects; An unlikely way one
would think, to make the world either love or serve him. There have been few
Ages since the first appearing of the Gospel in the world, wherein the earth
has not drunk in the blood of Believers. In the beginning it was a rare case
to be a faithful Pastor, and not a Martyr: Thirty, Three Roman Bishops
successively were Martyred; thousands, yea ten thousand slaughtered at a time;
In so much that Gregory and Cyprian cry out, that the witnesses who had dyed
for the Truth of the Gospel were to men innumerable, that the world was all
over filled with their blood, and they that were left alive to behold it, were
not so many as those that were slain, that no war did consume so many: And the
Histories of the Enemies acknowledge almost as much.

Now whether this be a likely course to gain disciples, and to subdue the
world, you may easily judge. Yet did the Church never thrive better then by
persecution; what they got not in number, yet they got in the zeal and
excellency of Professors; and seldom has it lost more, then in prosperity, yea
when the vulgar professors have enjoyed prosperity, yet persecution has almost
ever been the lot of the zealous and sincere.

And thus I have showed you those wonders of Providence, which have been
exereised for the Church universal.

SECT. II.. 2.

SEcondly, Consider next what strange providence have been exercised for
particular Churches. I cannot stand to heap up particular examples: You may
find them frequent in the Histories of the Church. What deliverances, Cities
and Countries have had, what Victories those Princes have had, who have been
their Defenders: as Constantine the great, and many since: and what apparent
manifestations of Gods hand in all. Yea, he that reads but the Histories of
latter times, where wars have been managed for defense of the Doctrine of this
Scripture, and obedience thereto, against the corruptions and persecutions of
Cum Romani in victoriosae antiquitatis memoriam templum singulari schemate a
facere decrevissent, ab omni illa deorum, immo daemoniorum multitudin^
quaesierunt usquequo durare pusset, tam excellentis operis tam operosa
constructio; Responsum est, Donec virgo pareret. Illi ad impossibilitatem
Oraculum retorquentes, templum aeternum solennem illam machinam vocaverunt.
Nocte autem cum virginali thalamo virginius flos Mariae egressus est, ita
cecidit and confractum est illud mirabile et columnarium opus, ut vix appareant
vestigia ruinarum. Bernard. in Natal. Domini. Sermon. 23.
Rome, may see most apparent discoveries of the hand of God, yea even in those
wars where the enemy has at last prevailed, as in Bohemia, in Zisca's time, in
France at Merindol and Cabriers. The History of Belgia will show it clearly: so
will the strange preservation of the poor City of Geneva. But all these are
further from us: God has brought such experiments home to our hands. If we
should overlooke the strange providence that produced the reformation in the
times of Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and
King James; yet even the strange passages of these years past, have been such,
that might silence an Atheist, or an Antiscripturist; To see the various
streights that God has brought his people through! The unlikly means by which
he still performed it. The unexpected events of most undertakings! The
uncontrived and unthought-of ways which men have been lead in! The strange
managing of our counsels and our actions! The plain appearance of an
extraordinary providence, and the plain interposition of an Almighty arm,
which has appeared in almost every fight, even where it went against us was
this apparent; and our overthrows were but preparatives to some eminent good;
and the means of carrying on the designs of God, whose Issues showed us what we
could not see before. We have as plainly discerned the success of prayer, and
our unsuccessfulness when we grew secure, almost, as if we had stood by Moses,
Aaron and Hur in the Mount. How confident were the enemies still before their
overthrows? When did we win a field (for the most part) but we lost it first?
How little did we prosper when our Armies were fresh, and flourishing, and
strong? When was it that we were revived, but when we took our selves for dead?
And when we gave up all for lost, then did God most evidently restore it. When
it was thought about a year or two before; that the whole Kingdom would not
have afforded enough, to have resisted the power of the persecuters in one
County, they were so oppressed and banished into America; then did God arise
and his enemies did fly before him; they melted as the wax before the fire,
they were scattered as the chafe before the wind.

Not that I make a mere success, any evidence of a good cause; But successes
that have the apparent finger of God, and are brought about by such wonders of
providence, I am sure do teach us much of God, and tend exceedingly to confirm
us, in the verity of his promises. Some men are so strongly possessed with
prejudice, and others so unobservant of Divine providence, and others such
Atheists, that they think all things fall out by chance, that it is no wonder
if nothing work upon them: Miracles from Heaven had no better success with
most of the beholders in times of old. Sure the strange providence for the
Church in the times of Judges, of the Kings, of Hester, of Nehemiah, were very
convincing, though they were not miracles. And ours have been as strange as
most of theirs. For my own part, having been an eye witness of a very great
part of these eminent providence, from the first of the war; I have plainly
seen something above the course of nature, and ordinary way of Gods workings,
in almost every fight that I have beheld. And many of the adversaries that
before would not see, yet have seen the hand of God, and have been ashamed,
because of their envyings at his people, Isay 26.10. Many do yet suspend their
judgment of all this, till they see the full Issue: so cannot I: whatever the
end may yet prove, I am sure I have seen the Lord in the means: And we may yet
set up Samuels stone, 1 Samuel 7.12.
and say, Hitherto has the Lord helped us. Hitherto the end has not been such
as the enemy hoped. If we will see the end before we judge, for ought I know you
may stay till the end of the world; and till you are judged your selves. For
Gods work is a chain of many links: every age has one link, but the last
reaches to eternity, and you cannot see the end till then. If you wait to know
the full Issue, why, you shall not see it till the Issue of all things: This
folly causes a succession of enemies to the Church, and of men of deluded and
perverse understandings; who will become wiser altogether, when they see the
full end indeed: but then it will be too late. It is true, that things are
still in a sad confusion, and in the eye of the carnal, worse then they were:
But I have so often seen such a cloudy morning to go before a Sunshine day, and
that God delights to work by contraries, and to walk in the clouds, and to
hide the birth in the womb, till the very hour of deliverance, that I am the
less afraid of all this: Our unbelief has been silenced with wonders so often,
that I hope we shall trust him the better while we live. I know the Sword is a
most heavy plague; and War is naturally an enemy to Virtue and Civility, and woe
be to them that delight in blood, or use the Sword, but as the last remedy, and
that promote not Peace to the utmost of their power: I know also how
unsatisfied many are, concerning the lawfulness of the war which has been
managed. This is not a time or place to satisfy such, I have attempted that
largely in another audience. And as I cannot yet perceive by any thing which
they object, but that we undertook our defense upon most warrantable grounds;
so am I most certain that God has wonderfully appeared through the whole. And
as I am certain by sight and sense, that the extirpation of Piety was the
enemies great design; which had so far succeeded, that the generality of the
most able Ministers were silenced, Lectures and Evening Sermons on the Lords
Day suppressed, Christians imprisoned, dismembered, and banished, the Lords Day
reproached, and devoted to Pastimes, that it was as much as a man's estate at
lest was worth, to hear a Sermon abroad, when he had none (or worse) at home;
to meet for prayer, or any godly exercise, and that it was a matter of credit,
and a way to preferment, to revile at, and be enemies against those that were
most conscientious; and every where safer to be a Drunkard, or an adulterer,
then a painful Christian; and that multitudes of humane Ceremonies took place,
when the worship of Christ's institution was cast out (besides the slavery that
invaded us in civil respects) so am I most certain, that this was the work
which we took up Arms to resist; and these were the offenders whom we
endeavored to offend. And the generality of those that scruple the lawfulness
of our war, did never scruple the lawfulness of destroying us, nor of that
doleful havoc and subversion that was made in the Churches of Christ among
us; though now perhaps they will acknowledge some of our persecutors
miscariages. The fault was, that we would not dye quietly; nor lay down our
necks more gently on the block; nor more willingly change the Gospel for the
Mass Book, and our Religion for a fardle of Ceremonies; nor betray the hopes of
our Posterity to their wills As Dalilah by Sampson, so do they by us: They
accuse us, that we do not love them, because we will not deliver up our
strength, that they may put out our eyes, and make us their slaves. Now the
former dangers and miseries are forgotten, and the groans of the godly under
persecution, and of the land under the departure of their freedoms, are not
heard, men begin to forget the state they were in, and to be incompetent judges
of the former engagement. And as bad as they deem the success has yet been;
sure I am many hundred congregations that were in darkness, and are now in
light; and multitudes of souls who by these means have been already converted
and brought to the knowledge and love of Christ, are real Testimenies of our
happy change: Beside the high hopes of the far greater To speak my heart. All
that I fear is lest Master Herbert be a true Prophet, and the Gospel be in its
solar motion traveling for the West and American parts, and qultting its
present places of residence, and unworthy professors and possessours: And then
farewell England, But else not.
spreading of the Gospel; and the foundation that is laid for the happiness of
Posterity. I am no Prophet: nor well skilled in the interpretation of Scripture
prophesies: yet the clear and deep engagements of God in this work which I have
so evidently discerned, do strongly persuade me, that in despite of all the
policy and hopes of our enemies; and of all our own unworthiness, folly,
miscarriages and errors, yet God will end this work in mercy, and make the
Birth which we travel with more beautiful, then our slanderous enemies or our
unbelieving hearts do yet imagine: and that the records of the wonders of this
our Age, shall even convince the world of the truth of the Promises, and
consequently, That the Scripture is the very word of God. In the mean time, me
thinks I hear Christ, as it were, saying to me (as in my personal, so) in the
Churches dangers and distresses, as he did to Peter, What I do thou know not
now, but thou shall know hereafter.

SECT. III.. 3.

THirdly, Consider also of the strange judgments, which in all ages have
overtaken the most eminent of the enemies of the Scriptures. Besides Antiochus,
Herod, Pilate, the persecuting emperors, especially Julian; Church Histories
will acquaint you with multitudes more: Foxes book of Martyes will tell you of
many undeniable remarkable Not that Miracles are still necessary, but special
providence do much confirm. Nec jam opus est Miraculus, cum in omnem terram
verbum sonuerit. Doct. Humfredus Jesiutis. part. 1. page 114.
judgments, on those adversaries of pure Religion the Papists, whose greatest
wickedness is against these Scriptures; subjecting them to their Church,
denying them to the people, and setting up their Traditions as equal to them.
Yea our own times have afforded us most evident examples. Sure God has forced
many of his enemies to acknowledge in their anguish the truth of his
threatenings, and to cry out, as Julian, Vicisti Galilee.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
FOurthly, Consider also the eminent Judgments of God that have befallen the
vile transgressors of most of his Laws. Besides all the voluminous Histories
that make frequent mention of this, I refer you to Doctor Beard his Theater of
Gods Judgments: and the book entitled Gods Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers.
And it is like your own About the time of the silencing of Ministers, how many
Churches in England were torn at once with terrible lightning, and almost no
place else but Churches were touched, especially in the lower part of
Devonshire, where many were scorched, maimed, and some their brains struck out
as they sat in Church. And at the Church of Anthony in Cornwall* near Plymouth,
on Witsunday 1640. See the Relation in Print.
observation may add much.

. 5.
SECT. V.
FIfthly, Consider further of the eminent providence that have been exercised
for the bodies and states of particular believers. The strange deliverance of
many intended to Martyrdom; As you have many instances in the Acts and
Monuments: besides those in Eusebius and others, that mention the stories of
the first persecutions. If it were convenient here to make particular mention
of men's names, I could name you many, who in these late wars have received such
strange preservations, even against the common course of nature, that might
convince an Atheist of the finger of God therein. But this is so ordinary, that
I am persuaded there is scarce a godly experienced Christian, that carefully
observes, and faithfully records the providence of God toward him, but is
able to bring forth some such experiment; and to show you some such strange and
unusual mercies, which may plainly discover an Almighty disposer making good
the promises of this Scripture to his servants, some in desperate diseases of
body, some in other apparent dangers, delivered so suddenly, or so much against
the common course of nature, when all the best remedies have failed, that no
second cause could have any hand in their deliverance.

Sixthly, And Lastly, Consider the Was it not near a Miracle that God wrought
for Mistress Honywood, when she threw the glass up to the wall, saying, if this
glassbreak not, I may be saved, etc. and yet took it up whole.
strange and evident dealings of God with the souls and consciences both of
believers and unbelievers. What pangs of hellish despair have many enemies of
the truth been brought to? How does God extend the spirits of his own people?
Bruising, breaking, killing them with terrors, and then healing, rasing, and
filling them with Joys which they cannot utter? How variously does he mould
them? sometimes they are brought to the gates of Hell; sometime they are
ravished with the foretasts of Heaven: The proudest spirits are made to stoop:
the lowest are raised to an invincible courage. In a word, The workings of God
upon the souls of his people, are so clear and strange, that you may trace a
supernatural causality through them all.

SECT. VI.. 6.

SEcondly, But though it be undeniable, that all these are the extraordinary
workings of God, yet how do they confirm the authority of Scripture? How does
it appear that they have any such end? Answ. That is it I come to show you
next.

First* Some of these works do carry their end apparently with them, and
manifest it in their event. The forementioned providence for raising and
preserving the Church, are such as show us their own ends.

Secondly, They are most usually wrought for the friends and followers of
Scripture, and against the enemies and disobeyers of it.

Thirdly, They are the plain fulfilling of the Predictions of Scripture. The
Judgments on the offenders are the plain fulfilling of its threatenings: And
the mercies to believers are the plain fulfilling of its Promises. As for
example; as unlikely as it was, yet Christ foretold his Apostles, that when he
was lifted up, he would draw all men to him: He sent them upon an errand as
unlikely to be so succesfull as any in the world; and yet he told them just
what success they should find; how good to their message and how hard to their
persons: Psalm. 2.2, 3, 4, 5.
The promise was of old, to give Christ the heathen for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. Christ promises to be
with his messengers to the end of the world. Why now how punctually does he
accomplish all this? What particular Prophesies of Scripture have been
fulfilled, and when, and how, has been already at large discovered by Morne^,
Grotius, Doct. Ja^^son, Parsons Resolut. part. 2. etc.
others, and therefore I shall overpasse that.

Fourthly, These Ask them in New England whether Mistress Hutchinsons and
Mistress Dyers most hideous monstrous births were not convincing providence
against their Antinomian Anti-scriptural heresies, as if God from heaven had
spoke against them: and yet Old England will not take warning.

See Nicephor. Eccl. hist. Tem. 1. li. 4. cap. 13. where Tertulli. Jul.
Capitolinus, Orosius, etc. do mention.


Judgments have been usually executed on offenders, at the very time when they
have been either opposing or violating Scripture: And these mercies bestowed
chiefly upon believers at such a time when they have been most engaged in
defense of, or obedience to the Scriptures.

Fifthly, They usually proceed in such effectual sort, that they force the
enemies and ungodly to confess the cause: yea and often times the very standers
by: so do they force believers also to see, that God makes good his word in all
their mercies.

Sixthly, They are performed in answer to the prayers of believers: while they
urge God with the promises of Scripture, then does he appear in these evident
providence. This is a common and powerful Argument, which most Christians may
draw from their own experiences. Had we no other Argument to prove Scripture to
be the word of God, but only the strange success of the prayers of the Saints,
while they trust upon, and plead the promises with fervency; I think it might
much confirm experienced men. What wonders, yea what apparent miracles did the
prayers of former Christians procure? The Legion of Malta in the time of Mar.
Aurelius, who procured by prayer both Thunder on the enemies and rain for the
Army. See the Epist. of M. Aurelius in Justin Martyrs Apolo. and Xiphitin. in
Vita Aurelij. Melch. Adam in vita Myconij.
Hence the Christians soldiers in their Army were called, the Thundering
Legion: they could do more by their prayers, then the rest by their Arms.
Hence (as Zuingerus testifies) Gregory was called (...), from his frequent
miracles among the heathen. And Vincenti^^ reports that Sulpitius
Bituricensis did expel Devils, heal the sick and raise the dead, by praying to
God for them. When Myconius (a godly Divine) lay sick of that Consumption which
is called a Ph^hisis, Luther prays earnestly that he might be recovered, and
that he might not dye before himself. And so confident was he of the grant of
his desire, that he writes boldly to Myconius, that he should not dye now, but
should remain yet longer upon this earth. Upon these prayers did Myconius
presently revive, as from the dead; and live six years after, till Luther was
dead: And himself has largely written the story, and professed, that when he
read Luthers letters he seemed to hear that voice of Christ, Lazarus come
forth. Yea so powerful and prevailing was Luther in prayer, that Justus Jonas
writes of him, Iste vir potuit quod voluit: That man could do what his list.

What was it less then a Miracle in Baynam the Martyr, who told the Papists,
Lo here is a Miracle! I feel no more pain in this fire then in a bed of Down:
It is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses. So Bishop Farrar, who could say before
he went to the fire, If I stir in the fire, believe not my Doctrine: And
accordingly remained unmoved. Recorded by Sozom. and others.
Theodorus the Martyr in the midst of his torment had one in the shape of a
young man, as he thought, came and wiped off his sweat and eased him of his
pain. But what need I fetch examples so far off? or to recite the multitudes
of them which Church history does afford us? Is there ever a praying Christian
here who knows what it is importunately to strive with God, and to plead his
promises with him believingly, that cannot give in his experiences of most
remarkable answers? I know men's atheism and infidelity will never want
somewhat to say against the most eminent providence, though they were Miracles
themselves. The nature which is so ignorant of God, and at enmity with him,
will not acknowledge him in his clear discoveries to the World, but will ascribe
all to fortune or nature, or some such Idol, which indeed is nothing: But when
mercies are granted in the very time of prayer, and that when to reason there
is no hope, and that without the use or help of any other means or creatures,
yea and prehaps many times over and over, Is not this as plain as if God from
heaven should say to us, I am fulfilling to thee the true word of my promise in
Christ my Son? How many times have I known the prayer of faith to save the
sick, when all Physicians have given them up as dead! It has been my own case
more then once or twice or ten times: Jam. 5.13, 14, 15, 16.
when means have all failed, and the highest Art or Reason have sentenced me
hopeless, yet have I been relieved by the prevalency of fervent prayer, and
that (as the Physician said) tuto, cito, et jucunde. My flesh and my heart
failed, Psalm. 73.26.
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: And though he
yet keep me under necessary weakness, and wholesome sickness, and certain
expectation of further necessities and assaults, yet am I constrained by most
convincing experiences, to set up this stone of Remembrance, and publicly to
the Praise of the Almighty, to acknowledge, that certainly God is true of his
promises, and that they are indeed his own infallible Word, and that it is a
most excellent privilege to have interest in God, and a Spirit of supplication
to be importunate with him. I doubt not but most Christians that observe the
spirit and providence, are able to attest this prevalency of prayer by their
own experiences.

Object. Perhaps you will say, If these rare examples were common, I would
believe.

Answ. First, If they were common, they would be slieghted, as common wonders
are.

Secondly, Importunate prayer is not common, though formal babbling be.

Thirdly, The evident returns of prayer are ordinary to the faithful.

Fourthly, If wonders were common, we should live by sense, and not by faith.

Fifthly, I answer in the words of Austin, God lets not every Saint partake
of Miracles, August. de Civitate Dei, lib. 33.
lest the weak should be deceived with this pernicious error, to prefer
Miracles as better then the works of Righteousness, whereby eternal life is
attained.

CHAP. VII. The fourth Argument. Argum. 4.

SECT. I.. 1.

MY Fourth and last Argument which I will now produce to prove the Scripture to
be the Word and perfect Law of God, is this;

Either the Scriptures are the written Word and Law of God, or else there is no
such extant in the world. But there is a written Word and Law of God in the
world. Ergo This is it.

Here I have these two Positions to prove. First, That God has such a written
Word in the world. Secondly, That it can be no other but this.

That there is such a Word, I prove thus: If it cannot stand with the welfare
of mankind, and consequently with that honor which the wisdom and goodness of
God has by their welfare, that the world should be without a written Law; then
certainly there is such a written Law. But that it cannot stand with the
welfare of the creature, or that honor of God, appears thus. That there be a
certain and sufficient Revelation of the Will of God to man, more then mere
Nature and Creatures do teach, is necessary to the welfare of man, and the
aforesaid honor of God. But there is now no such certain and sufficient
Revelation unwritten in the world; therefore it is necessary that there be such
a Revelation written. The proof of the Major is the main task, which if it be
well performed will clearly carry the whole cause; for I believe all the rest
will quickly be granted, if that be once plain: Therefore I shall stand a
little the more largely to prove it, viz. That there is a necessity for the
welfare of man, and the honor of Gods Wisdom and Goodness, that there be some
further Revelation of Gods Will, then is in mere Nature or Creatures to be
found. And first, I will prove it necessary to the welfare of man; And that
thus. If man have a Happiness or Misery to partake of after this life, and no
sufficient Revelation of it in Nature or Creatures, then it is necessary that
he have some other Revelation of it, which is sufficient. But such a Happiness
or Misery man must partake of hereafter, which Nature and Creatures do not
sufficiently reveal, (either end or means) therefore some other is necessary. I
will stand the largelier on the first Branch of the Antecedent, because the
chief weight lies on it; and I scarce ever knew any doubt of Scripture, but
they also doubted of the immortal state and recompense of souls; and that
usually is their first and chiefest doubt.

I will therefore here prove these three things in order thus. First, That
there is such a state for man hereafter. Secondly, That it is necessary that he
know it, and the way to be so happy. Thirdly, That Nature and Creatures do not
sufficiently reveal it.

For the first, I take it for granted, that there is a God, because Nature
teaches that, and I shall pass over those Arguments drawn from his
righteousness and just dispensations, to prove the variety of men's future
conditions, because they are commonly known; and I shall now argue from sense
it self, because that works best with sensual men: and that thus. If the devil
be very diligent to deceive men of that Happiness, and bring them to that
misery, then sure there is such a Happiness and Misery; but the former is true,
Ergo the later. They that doubt of the Major Proposition do most of them doubt
whether there be any devil, as well as whether he seek our eternal undoing. I
prove both together. First, By his Temptations: Secondly, Apparitions. Thirdly,
Possessions and dispossessions. Fourthly, His Contracts with Witches. I hope
these are palpable Discoveries.

1. The temptations of Satan are sometime so unnatural, so violent, and so
importunate, that the tempted person even feels something besides himself,
persuading and urging him: He cannot go about his calling, he cannot be alone,
but he feels somewhat following him, with persuasions to sin, yea, to sins that
he never found his nature much inclined to, and such as bring him no advantage
in the world, and such as are quite against the temperature of his body. Does
it not plainly tell us that there is a Devil, laboring to deprive man of his
Happiness, when men are drawn to commit such monstrous sins? Such cruelty as
the Romans used to the Jews at the taking of Jerusalem: So many thousand
Christians so barbarously murdered; such bloody actions as those of Nero,
Caligula, Sylla, Messala, Caeracalla, the Roman Gladiatores the French
Massacre, the Gunpowder Plot, the Spanish Inquisition, and their murdering
fifty millions of Indians in forty two years, according to the Testimony of
Acosta their Jesuit. Men invading their own neighbors and brethren, with an
unquenchable thirst after their blood, and merely because of their strictness
in the common professed Religion, as the late cruel wars in England have
declared: I say, how could these come to pass, but by the instigation of the
Devil? When we see men making a j^st of such sins as these, making them their
pleasure, impudently, and implacably against Knowledge and Conscience proceeding
in them, hating those ways that they know to be better, and all those persons
that would help to save them: yea, choosing sin, though they believe it will
damn them, despairing, and yet sinning still; Does not this tell men plainly
that there is a Devil, their enemy? When men will commit the sin which they
abhor in others, which Reason is against, when men of the best natures, as
Vespasian, Julian, etc. shall be so bloody murderers, when men will not be
stirred from sin by any entreaty, though their dearest friends should beg with
tears upon their knees; though Preachers convince them, and beseech them in
the name of the Lord, though wife and children, body and soul be undone by it:
Nay, when men will be the same under the greatest judgments, and under the most
wonderful convincing Providence, as appears in England, yea, under Miracles
themselves.

Surely I think all this shows that there is a Devil, and that he is diligent
in working out ruin. Why else should it be so hard a thing to persuade a man
to that which he is convinced to be good?

. 2.
SECT. II.
Lege Epistolam V^ssii de Samuele apparente Saulo, in Joan Beverovitii
Epistolis. Et D. Prideaux Hypomnemata. page 261, 262
2. BUt yet if this be not palpable enough, The frequent Apparitions of Satan in
several shapes, drawing men, or frighting them into sin, is a discovery
undeniable. I know many are very incredulous herein, and will hardly believe
that there have been such apparitions: For my own part, though I am as
suspicious as most in such reports, and do believe that most of them are
conceits or delusions, yet having been very diligently inquisitive in such
cases, I have received undoubted Testimony of the Truth of such Apparitions;
some from the mouths of men of undoubted honesty and godliness, and some from
the report of multitudes of persons, who heard or saw. Were it fit here to name
the persons, I could send you to them yet living, by whom you would be as fully
satisfied as I: Houses that have been so frequently haunted with such terrors,
that the Inhabitants successively have been witnesses of it.

Luther affirmed of himself, that at Coburge he often times had an apparition of
burning Torches, Melch. Adam. in vita Luth.
the sight whereof did so affright him, that he was near swooning; also in his
own Garden the devil appeared to him in the likeness of a black Boar, but then
he made light of it. Zozomen in his Ecclesiastical History writes of Appelles a
Smith, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 28. Lib. 7 c. 23.
famous in Egypt for working Miracles, who in the night, while he was at
workwas tempted to uncleanness by the devil, appearing in the shape of a
beautiful woman; The like he tells, of a strange apparition in Antioch the night
before the Sedition against Theodosius. Theodorus mentions a fearful sight that
appeared to Gennadius, Patriarch of Constantinople, and the threatening words
which it uttered. The Writings of Gregory, Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom,
Nicephorus, etc. make frequent mention of apparitions, and relate the several
stories at large. You may read in Lavater de Spectris, Lavater page 64, 65.
several other relations of apparitions out of Alexander ab Alexandro, Baptista
Fulgosius, and others. Ludovicus Vives, lib. 1. de Veritate fidei, says, That
among the Savages in America, nothing is more common then to hear and see
Spirits in such shapes both day and night. The like do other Writers testify
of those Indians; De gent. Sept. lib. 2. cap. 3.
So says Olaus Magnus of the Islanders. Cardanus de Subtilit. has many such
Stories. So Joh. Manlius in locor. Commun. collectan. cap. de malis spiritibus,
and de satisfactione. Yea, godly, sober Melanchton affirms that he had seen
some such Sights or Apparritions himself, and many credible persons of his
acquaintance have told him, that they have not only seen them, but had much
talk with Spirits; Among the rest he mentions one of his own Aunt, who sitting
sad at the fire after the death of her husband, Exam. Theol.
there appeared to her one in the likeness of her husband, In obsidione Nolanae
Civitatis, Nolanum Episcopum Faelicem mortuum conspectum fuisse a multis
civitatem illam defendentem, refert August. lib de Mirab. Scripturae ( si ille
liber sit Augustini.) Scio innumera reserri fabulosa vel a fraud, etc. sed (n)
a v^ris tum doctis, tum perspicacibus, tum gravibus and probis, and pluramis
retro seculis allata sunt, and hodie memorantur innumera, ubi non possit non
cum opera humana concurrisse illusio aut v^s diabolica, supplente viz. spiritu
maligno quod hominis superet potestatem. Vossius Epistol. de Samuele in
Beverovitii Epistol. page 203. Vid. Mercur. viperam de prodig. lib. 8. Psellum.
and another like a Franciscan Friar; the former told her that he was her
husband, and came to tell her somewhat; which was, that she must hire some
Priests to say certain Masses for him, which he earnestly besought her, then he
took her by the hand, promising to do her no harm, yet his hand so burned hers*
that it remained black ever after, and so they vanished away. Thus writes
Melanchton. Lavater also himself, who has writ a Book wholly of Apparitions, a
Learned, Godly, Protestant Divine, tells us, that it was then an undeniable
thing, confirmed by the Testimonies of many honest and credible persons, both
men and women, some alive, and some dead, that sometime by night, and sometime
by day have both seen and heard such things: some that going to bed had the
clothes plucked off them; others had somewhat lying down in the bed with them;
others hear it walking in the Chamber by them, spiting, groaning, saying they
were the souls of such or such persons lately departed; that they were in
grievous torments, and if so many Masses were but said for them, or so many
Pilgrimages undertaken to the shrine of some Saint, they should be delivered.
These things with meny such more, says Lavater, were then frequently and
undoubtedly done, and that where the doors were fast locked and the room
searched, that there could be no deceit.

So Sleidan relates the Story of Crescentius the Popes Legate, feared into a
deadly sickness by a fearful Apparition in his Chamber. Most credible and godly
Writers tell us, That on June 20. 1484 at a Town called Hammell in Germany, the
devil took away one hundred and thirty children that were never seen again.

But I need to say no more of this; there is enough written already, not only
by Cicogna, Delrio, Paracelsus, etc. and others of suspected credit, but also
by godly, and faithful Writers, as Lavater, Thyreus de locis infestis.
Geor. Agricola, Olaus Magnus, Zanchius, Pictorius, and many more.

Object.
But you will say, Though this prove that there are Devils, and that they are
enemies to our Happiness, yet how does it prove that there is a future
Happiness or Misery for man?

Answ. Why, plainly thus. What need Satan by these Apparitions to set up
Superstition to draw men to sin, if there were no difference between sinners
and others hereafter? Surely in this life it would be no great displeasure to
them; for usually the wicked have the most prosperous lives; therefore his
delusions must needs have respect to another life; So his seeming Miracles.
Lege Jo. Bap. Van Helmont de Lethiasi c. 9. 27. page 168.
And that the end of his Apparitions, is either to drive men to despair, or to
superstition, or some sin, is evident to all: Most of the Papists Idolatry and
Will worship, has either been caused or confirmed by such Apparitions; For in
former days of darkness they were more common then now. How the Order of the
Carthusian Friars was founded by Bruno upon the terrible speeches and cries of
a dead man* you may read in the life of Bruno, before his Exposition on Paul's
Epistles. Such was the Original of All Souls Day, and other Holidays, as
Tritenhemius, Petrus de Natalibus, l. 10. c. 1. Polyd. Virg. de inv. l. 6. c 9.
do declare. Also praying for the dead, praying to Saints, Purgatory, Merits of
good Works, Satisfaction, Pilgrimages, Masses, Images, Relics, Monastical
Vows, Auricular Confession, and most of the Popish Ceremonies have had their
life and strength from these Apparitions and Delusions of the Devil. But
especially the Cross has been so magnified hereby, that it is grown the
commonest remedy to drive away devils of any in the world for many hundred
years. The Churchyard must have one to keep the devil from the graves of the
dead, and the Church, and almost every Pinnacle, Window, and part of it to keep
him thence; the child Baptized must have one to keep him thence; the High ways
also must have them, that he molest not the Traveller; yea, when morning and
evening, and in times of danger, and in the beginning of any work or duty, men
must sign themselves with the Cross, to keep away devils; Insomuch that the
learned Doctors do handle it among their profound Questions, which makes the
devil so afraid of the Cross, that he shuns it above all things else? So that
you may easily see what great advantage the devil has got over the souls of a
great part of the world by these Apparitions; and consequently that (this being
the end of his endeavors) there is certainly a Happiness which he would deprive
us of, and a Misery that he would bring us to when this life is ended.

SECT. III.. 3.

3. IT is manifest also by the devils Possessing and Tormenting the bodies of
men; for if it were not more for the sake of the soul then the body, why should
he not as much possess or torment a beast? Certainly it is not chiefly the
outward torment of the person that he regards, (though he desire that too)
for then he would not labor to settle his Kingdom generally in peace and
prosperity, and to make men choose iniquity for its worldly advantages. Yet, it
may perhaps be the souls of others, more then the possessed persons themselves,
that the devil may hope to get advantage on. Si quando nos oporteat his
opitulari non loquamur cum spiritu, vel adjurando, vel imperando, quasi nos
audiat, sed tantum precibus and jejuniis incumbendo perfeveremus. Origin. in
Math. 17.
So among the Papists, it has brought their Exorcisms into singular credit, by
their frequent dispossessing the devil: I confess, there have been many
counterfeits of this kind; as the Boy at Bilson by Wolverhampton, hired by the
Papists, and discovered by the vigilant care of Bishop Morton, and diverse
others. But yet if any doubt whether there is any such thing at all, credible
History, and late experience may sufficiently satisfy him. The History of the
dispossession of the devil out of many persons together in a room in
Lancashire, at the prayer of some godly Ministers, is very famous; for which
these Ministers, being Nonconformists, were questioned in the High Commission
Court, as if it had been a device to strengthen the credit of their cause. Read
the Book and Judge. Among the Papists, Possessions are common; (though I believe
very many of them are the Priests and Jesuits delusions.)

What possession is? and how the devil is confined to a body, or whether
circumscribed there in whole or in part, are things beyond my reach to know.
But that the strange effects which we have seen on some bodies, The devil had
the power of death, says the holy Ghost. Heb. 2.14.
have been the products of the special power of the devil there, I doubt not.
Though for my own part I believe, that Gods Works on the world are usually by
Instruments, and not immediate; and as good Angels are his Instruments in
conveying his Mercies, both to soul and body, and Churches, and States; so evil
Angels are instruments of inflicting his Judgments, both corporal and
spiritual. Hence God is said, Psalm. 78.49 to send evil Angels among the
Israelites: hence Paul's phrase, of delivering to Satan: Vid. Petr. Martyr. in
Loc. Commun. Class. 1. cap. 8.. 8. page 39, 40.

Daemoniaci semper fere sunt melancholici; sed non omnes melancholici
daemoniaci. Forest. obs. lib. 10. obs. 19. Melch. Adam. in vit. Luther. Vide
Petr. Martyr. Loc. Commun. Clas. 1. cap. 9. per totum.

For speaking strange languages and versifying, See Grain rius Tract. 15. de
melanc. c. 4. Et Wierum de praesagijs. li. 2. c. 21, 22. and 22. Et Forest.
obs. lib. 20. Obs. 19. in schol.

De Abdit. Rer. Causis. l. 2. c. 16. Vide Fael. Plateri Observat. page 20. de
stupore daemoniaco: et de Exorcista ipso a Daemone percusso et laeso.


hence Satan does execution on the children, cattle, and body of Job, and upon
Jerusalem in that Plague, after numbering the people. To satisfy you fully in
this, and to silence your objections, and to teach you the true and spiritual
use of this doctrine, I refer you to Master Lawrences book (a now Member of the
House of Commons) called Our Communion and War with Angels.

So then, though I judge that Satan is the instrument in our ordinary diseases,
yet does he more undeniably appear in those whom we call the possessed. Luther
thought that all Phrenetick persons, and Idiots, and all bereaved of their
understanding, had Devils; notwithstanding Physicians might ease them by
remedies. And indeed the presence of the Devil may consist with the presence of
a disease, and evil Humor, and with the efficacy of means. Saul's Melancholy
Devil would be gone, when David played on the Harp. Many Divines (as Tertul.
Austin, Zanchius, Lavater, etc.) think that he can work both upon the body and
the mind; and that he makes use to this end of Melancholy humors. And indeed
such strange things are often said and done by the Melancholy and mad, that many
learned Physicians think, that the Devil is frequently mixed with such
distempers, and has a maine hand in many of their symptoms. So Avicen,
Rhasis, Arculanus, Monensis, Jason Pratensis, Hercul. Saxon* etc. Who can give
any natural cause of men's speaking Hebrew or Greek, which they never learned
or spoke before? Of their versifying? Their telling persons that are present
their secrets? discovering what is done at a distance? which they neither see
nor hear? Fernelius mentions two that he saw: whereof one was so tormented
with convulsive pain, sometime in one arm, sometime in the other, sometime in
one finger, etc. that four men could scarce hold him; his head being still
quiet and well: The Physicians judged it a Convulsion from some malignant humor
in the spina dorsi: till having used all means in vain, at last the Devil
derided them, that they had almost destroyed the man with their medicines: The
man spoke Greek and Latin, which he never learned, he told the Physicians many
of their secrets: and a great deal of talk with the Devil which they had he
there mentions. In conclusion, both this and the other were dispossessed by
Popish prayers, fasting and exorcisme. Lib. 30. de Venenis. observat. 8. in
schol.
Forestus mentions a Country man, that being cast into melancholy through
discontent, at some injuries that he had received, the Devil appeared to him in
the likness of a man, and persuaded him rather to make away himself, then to
bear such indignities; and to that end advised him to send for Arsenicke,
Cyprian Sermon. de lapsis, has a History of one possessed, and of her impatience
during the time of prayer. And in those times when they went to Sacrament, the
Catechized, the penitents, and the possessed were all warned to depart the
Assembly. Tertul. Apolog.
and poison himself. But the Apothecary would not let him have it, except he
would bring one to promise that he would not abuse it: whereupon the Devil went
with him as his voucher, and so he took a Dram; But though it tormented him,
yet it did not presently kill him, wherefore the Devil brought him afterward a
Rope, and after that a Knife, to have destroyed himself; At which sight the man
being affrighted, was recovered to his right mind again. You may read a
multitude of such examples in Scribonius, Sikenkius, Wierus, Chr. a Vega,
Langius, Donatus, l. 2. c. 1. de med. mir. Cornel. Gemma, l. 2. de nature.
mirac. c. 4. See also Valesius c. 28. Sacr. Philosop. Roderic. a Castro 2 de
morb. mul. in c. 3. Schol. Caelius Rhodiginus l. 1. antiq. lect. c. 34.
Tertullian challenges the Heathen to bring any one possessed with a Devil
before their Judgment seat, or one that pretended to have the spirit of the
Gods, and if at the command of a Christian he do not confess himself to be a
Devil, let them take the Christian to be presumptuous, and put him immediately
to death. But of Jesus (says he) they say not so, nor that he was a mere man,
but the Power, the Wisdom, and Word of God, and that they are Devils damned
for their wickedness.

So that it seems it was then common for the Devil in the possessed to confess
Christ, or else Tertullian durst not have made such a challenge.

SECT. IV.. 4.

FOurthly, the fourth and last of these palpable Arguments, to contracts with
them: For that he might procure by other means as likely. Beside, it is some
kind of prosperity, or fulfilling of their desires, which he conditioneth to
give them. It is a childish thing to conceit, that the Devil cares so much for
a few drops of their blood: Is not the blood of a beast or other creature as
sweet? Neither can it be only the acknowledgement of his power that he amies
at; nor a mere desire of being honored or worshipped in the world, as
Porphyrius and other Pagans have thought, For he is most truly served, where he
is least discerned, and most abhorred, when he most appears. His Apparitions
are so powerful a means to convince the Atheist, who believes not that there
is either God, or Devil, or Heaven, or Hell, that I am persuaded he would far
rather keep out of sight, and that for the most part he is constrained by God
to appear against his will. Car. Piso. de morbis serosis observe. 9. de Dolor
auris. cum odonta^gia. page 45, 26. Even the Papists confess that all those
spells, and scrols, and actions, which must be done at such an hour, or in such
a form and order, and with such circumstances, as nothing conduce to the effect
intended, if these do any thing, it is from the devil. Vide Reginaldum, Prax.
conscien. Cas. part 1. Q. 7. and Prax. for. poenitential. lib. 17. nu. 157. and
Seq.
Besides, if Satan sought his own honor, he would still speak in his own name:
But contrarily, his usual appearance is in the shape and name of some deceased
person, affirming himself to be the soul of such a one, or else he pretends to
be an Angel of light; And when he makes his compacts with Witches, it is
seldom so plainly and directly, as that they understand it is indeed the Devil
that they deal with. So that it is apparent, Satan seeks something more then
the honor of domineering, that is, the ruin of the party with whom he deals;
And that it is not their bodily and temporal ruin only, appears further by
this; that he will heal as well as hurt, and give power to his confederates to
do the like, and this tends not to the ruin of men's bodies. Though there be a
great deal of deceit among them, yet doubtless many have been cured by Popish
spells, and Pilgrimages, and Exorcismes. Carolus Piso mentions one of his
patients, who was incurably deaf a year together, and was suddenly cured in the
midst of his devotion to the Lady of Lauretto. Fernelius mentions those that
could stop any bleeding by repeating certain words. He saw an universal
Jaundise cured in one night, by the hanging of a piece of Paper about the neck.
A great deal more to the same purpose he has; De abditis re^. causis l. 2. c.
16. If any should doubt whether there be any such Witches, who thus work by the
power of the devil, or have any compact with him, he has as good opportunity
now to be easily resolved, as has been known in most Ages. Let him go but into
Suffolk or Essex, or Lancashire, etc. and he may quickly be informed. Sure it
were strange, if in an age of so much knowledge and conscience, there should so
many score poor creatures be put to death, as Witches, if it were not clearly
manifest that they were such. We have too many examples lately among us, to
leave any doubt of the truth of this.

So that by these attempts of Satan, to deceive and destroy souls, it is
evident, That there is an estate of happiness or misery for every man after
this life.

See Sir Ken. Digby of the Immort. of the soul. And Ab. Rosse his
Philosophical Touchstone in Ans. to it.
All those Arguments which every Commonplace book, and Philosopher almost can
afford you, to prove the immortality of the soul, will also serve to prove the
point in hand. But many can apprehend these Arguments from sense, who cannot
yet reach, and will not be convinced by other Demonstrations. As Temptations,
Apparitions, Possessions, Dispossessions and Witches, are most excellent means
to convince a Sadducee, that there are Angels and Spirits; so also by clear
consequence, that there is a Resurrection, and Eternal life.

SECT. V.. 5.

THe second thing that I am to clear to you, is, That it is necessary

First, If he must go that way, and use those means, then he must needs first
know both the end and way, But he that will obtain the end, must use the means;
therefore he must necessarily know them. All this is so evident, that I believe
few will deny it. That man must use the means, before he attain the end, is
evident,

First, From the nature of the motion of the Rational soul, which is, to seek
the attainment of its propounded end by a voluntary use of means conducing
thereto; For as it has not at its first infusion, that height of perfection,
whereof it is capable, so neither is it carried thereto by violence, or by
blind instinct, for then it were not a Rational motion.

Secondly, Yea the very enjoyment of the end, and the seeking of it, are
actions of the same nature: It is enjoyed by Knowing, Loving, Rejoicing, etc.
And these actions are the means to attain it.

Thirdly, And if the means were not necessary to the end, the wicked were as
capable of it, as the godly: but that will not stand with the Justice of God.

Fourthly, If knowledge of the end, and use of means, were not of necessity to
the obtaining of that end, then a beast, or a block were as fit a subject for
that blessedness, as a man: But these cannot be.

And, That man cannot seek a happiness, which he never knew; nor shun a misery,
which he was not aware of; nor use means thereto, which he was never acquainted
with; I think would be lost and needless labor for me to prove.

. 6.
SECT. VI.


First, Then observe, how long did the most learned Philosophers study, before
they could know those few rude imperfect notions, which some of them did attain
to concerning eternity? They were gray with age and study, before they could
come to know that which a child of seven year old may now know by the benefit
of ^cripture. But all men live not to such an age, therefore this is no
sufficient means.

Secondly, Observe also how uncertain they were, when all was done; what they
speak rightly concerning God, or the life to come in one breath, they are ready
to unsay it again in another, as if their speeches had fallen from them against
their wills, or as Caiphas his confession of Christ. They raise their
Conclusions from such uncertain Premises, that the Conclusions also must needs
be uncertain.

Thirdly, Observe also how rare that Knowledge was among them. It may be in all
the world there may be a few hundreds of learned Philosophers, and among those
there is one part Epicures, another Peripateticks, etc. that acknowledge not a
future Happiness or Misery: And of those few that do acknowledge it, none knows
it truly, nor the way that leads to it. How few of them could tell what was
man's chief good? And those few, how imperfectly? with what mixtures of
falsehood? we have no certainty of any of them that did know so much, as that
there was but one God. For though Socrates dyed for deriding the multitude of
gods, yet there is no certain Record of his right belief of the Unity of the
Godhead. Besides, what Plato and Sir Walter Raleigh, Hist. of the World,
shows that Pythagoras, Orphaeus, and Plato had their doctrine of God from
Scripture, but durst not profess it.

Plotinus was Origens condisciple of Ammonius, therefore no wonder if he be
liker a Divine then the rest.

See Pemble Vind. Great. of this, page 60.61, 62. etc.


Plotinus did write of this, that was found, there is far greater probability
that they had it from Scripture, then merely from Nature and Creatures. For
Therefore Numenius cited by Orig. against Celsus, does call him Moses Atticus.
And diverse of Numenius his Books do recite with great reverence many texts out
of Moses and the Prophets.
that Plato had read the VVritings of Moses, is proved already by diverse
Authors. The like may be said of Though the Epistles betwixt Paul and Seneca
may be fained, yet it is more then probable that he had heard or read Paul's
Doctrine.
Seneca, and many others. So that if this means had contained any sufficiency
in it for salvation, yet it would have extended but to some few of all the
learned Philosophers: And what is this to an universal sufficiency to all
mankind? Nay, there is not one of all their exactest Moralists, that have not
mistaken Vice for Virtue; yea, most of them give the names of Virtue to the
foulest Villainies, such as Self-murder in several cases, Revenge, a proud and
vainglorious affectation of Honor and Applause, with other the like; so far
have these few learned Philosophers been from the true Knowledge of things
Spiritual and Divine, that they could never reach to know the principles of
common honesty. Varro says, That there were in his days two hundred eighty
eight Sects or Opinions among Philosophers concerning the chief good: What
then should the multitudes of the vulgar do, who have neither strength of wit
to know, nor time, and books, and means to study, that they might attain to the
height of these learned men? So that I conclude with Aquinas, that if possibly
Nature and Creatures might teach some few, Aquin. Sum. prima 1ae. Art. 1. Q. 1.
and 2a. 2ae. Q 2. Art. 3 4.
enough to salvation, yet were the Scriptures of flat necessity; for first, the
more commonness: secondly, and more easiness, and speediness: thirdly, and the
more certainty of Knowledge and Salvation.

. 7*
SECT. VII.
Object.
BUt here are some Objections to be Answered. First, Were not the Fathers till
Moses without Scripture? Answer, First, Yet they had a Revelation of Gods
Will, beside what Nature or Creatures taught them. Adam had the Doctrine of
the Tree of Knowledge, and the Tree of Life, and the Tenor of the Covenant made
with him, by such Revelation, and not by Nature. So had the Fathers the
Doctrine of Sacrificing, for Nature could teach them nothing of that, therefore
even the Heathens had it from the Church. Secondly, All other Revelations are
now ceased, therefore this way is more necessary. Thirdly, And there are many
Truths necessary now to be known, which then were not revealed, and so not
necessary.

Object. 2. Does not the Apostle say, that which may be known of God was
manifest in them, etc. Answ. This, with many other Objections are fully scanned
by many Divines, to whom I refer you* particularly Dr. Willet, on Romans 1.14.20.
etc. Only in general I Answer, There is much difference between knowing that
there is a God of eternal power, which may make the sinner unexcusable for his
open sin against Nature (which the Apostle there speaks of,) and knowing
sufficient to salvation. How God deals then with the multitudes that have not
the Scripture, concerning their eternal state, I leave as a thing beyond us,
and so nothing to us. But if a possibility of the salvation of some of them be
acknowledged, yet in the three respects above mentioned, there remains still a
necessity of some further Revelation, then Nature or Creature^ do contain. And
thus I have manifested a necessity for the welfare of man: Now it would follow
that I show it necessary for the Honor of God; but this follows so evidently as
a Consectary of the former, Object.
that I think I may spare that labor. Object. But what if there be such a
necessity? Does it follow that God must needs supply it? Answ. Yes, to some
part of the world. For first, It cannot be conceived how it can stand with his
exceeding Goodness, Bounty, and Mercy, to make a world, and not to save some.
Secondly, Nor with his Wisdom* to make so many capable of salvation, and not
reveal it to them, or bestow it on them. Thirdly, Or to prepare so many other
helps to man's Happiness, and to lose them all for want of such a sufficient
Revelation. Fourthly, Or to be the Governor of the world, and yet to give them
no perfect Law to acquaint men with their duty, and the reward of obedience,
and penalty of disobedience.

SECT. VIII.. 8.

HAving thus proved that there is certainly some written Word of God in the
world. The last thing that I have to prove, is, That there is no other writing
in the world but this can be it. And first, The Apocryphal books are but
Records more imperfect, and uncertain, of the same doctrine for the substance
with the rest, though mixed with some suspected History, and does confirm, but
not contradict the Scriptures, and but few of those books do pretend to a
Divine Authority, as the rest.
There is no other Book in the world that ever I heard of, that does so much as
claim this Prerogative and Dignity. Though Mahomet pretended to speak from God
as Prophet; The barbarousness, and sottishness of his Alcoran, its
contradiction to its self, and to the Scripture which he acknowledges, may
satisfy any man of its forgery; so that it is the most stupendous Judgment of
God that so great a part of the world should continue so brutish, as to believe
and follow him still. Read ^radwardines excellent dispute of this subject; De
causa Dei, lib. 1. cap. 1. Corol. part 32. and Grotius de veritate Relig.
Christianae.
Mahomet calls himself but a Prophet, he acknowledges the truth of most of
the Scripture; and his Alcoran contradicts the very light of Nature.
Aristotle, Plato, and other Philosophers acknowledge their Writings to be merely
of their own study and invention. What book says [Thus says the Lord] and
[This is the word of the Lord] but this? So that if it have no Competitor,
there needs not much to be said.

Secondly, What other book does reveal the Mysteries of God, of the Trinity, of
God and man in one person, of Creation, of the Fall, the Covenants, their
Conditions, Heaven, Hell, Angels, Devils, Temptations, Regeneration, Worship,
etc. Besides, this one book, and those that profess to receive it from this,
and profess their end to be but the confirming and explaining the Doctrine of
this? Indeed upon those subjects which are below the Scripture, as Logic,
Arithmetic, etc. other books may be more excellent then it; as a Tailor may
teach you how to make a Cloak better then all the Statute-Books or Records of
Parliament. But this is a lower excellency then Scripture was intended to.

And thus I have done with this weighty Subject, That the Scripture, which
contains the Promises of our Rest, is the certain infallible Word of God. The
reason why I have thus digressed, and said so much of it, is, because I was
very apprehensive of the great necessity of it, and the common neglect of being
grounded in it; and withal, that this is the very heart of my whole Discourse;
and that if this be doubted of, all the rest that I have said will be in vain;
If men doubt of the Truth, they will not regard the goodness. And the reason
why I have said no more, but passed over the most common Arguments, is, because
they are handled in many books already; which I advise Christians to be better
versed in. To the mere English Reader I commend especially these: Sir Phil.
Mornay Lord du Plessis, his Verity of Christian Religion. Parsons Book of
Resolution Corrected by Bunny, the Second Part. Dr. Jackson on the Creed, and
(come forth since I begun this) Mr. White of Dorchester, Directions for Reading
Scripture. Mr. John Goodwins Divine Authority of Scripture asserted, ( As page
10. with the first Argum^nt to confirm it; and so page 18. and the frequent use
of the equivocal term [Foundation] without explication.
though some of his Positions I judge unsound, yet the Work for the main is
commendable.) Also Read a Book, Called, A Treatise of Divinity, first Part.
Written by our honest and faithful Countryman, Colonel Edward Leigh, a now
Member of the House of Commons. Also Vrsins Catachism on this Question; and
Balls Catachism, with the Exposition, which to those that cannot read larger
Treatises, is very useful.

For the Question, So Dr. Preston on the Attributes, page 47, 48. and forward.

And Byfields Principles.


How it may be known which books be Canonical? I here meddle not with it: I
think Humane Testimony, with the forementioned qualifications must do most in
determining that. As I begun, so I conclude this, with an earnest request to
Ministers, that they would Preach; and People, that they would study this
subject more thoroughly, that their Faith and Obedience may live and flourish,
while they can prove the Scripture to be the Word of God, which contains the
Promise of their Everlasting Rest.

CHAP. VIII. Rest for none but the people of God, proved.
. 1.
SECT. I.
IT may here be expected, that as I have proved, That this Rest remains for
the people of God, so I should now prove, that it remains only for them, and
that the rest of the world shall have no part in it. But the Scripture is so
full and plain in this, that I suppose it needless to those who believe
Scripture. Christ has resolved, that those who make light of him, and the
offers of his Grace, Matthew. 22.5, 6, 7. Luke 14 24. Heb. 12.14.
shall never taste of his Supper; And that without holiness none shall see God:
And that except a man be regenerate and born again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. That he that believes not, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him: That no unclean person, Joh. 3.3.
nor covetous, nor railer, nor drunkard, etc. shall enter into the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.4, 5. That the wicked shall be turned into hell,
Joh 3 18.36. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.21. Psalm 9.17.
and all they that forget God: That all they shall be damned that obey not the
Truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 These. 2.12. That Christ will
come in flaming fire, 2 These 1.8* 9, 10.
to take vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. And Christ himself has
opened the very manner of their process in judgment, and the sentence of their
condemnation to eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.
So that here is no Rest for any but the people of God, except you will call the
intolerable everlasting flames of Hell, a Rest.

And it were easy to manifest this also by Reason: For first, Gods Justice
requires an inequality of men's state hereafter as there was of their lives
here. And secondly, They that walk not in the way of Rest, and use not the
means, are never like to obtain the End; They would not follow Christ in the
Regeneration, nor accept of Rest upon his conditions; they thought him to be
too hard a Master, and his way too narrow, and his Laws too strict: They chose
the pleasures of sin for a season, rather then to suffer affliction with the
people of God: They would not suffer with Christ, that so they might reign with
him. What they made choice of, that they did enjoy: They had their good things
in this life; and what they did refuse, it is but reason they should want: How
often would Christ have gathered them to him, and they would not? And he uses to
make men willing before he save them, and not to save them against their wills.

Therefore will the mouths of the wicked be stopped for ever, and all the world
shall acknowledge the Justice of God. Had the ungodly but returned before their
life was expired, and been heartily willing to accept of Christ for their
Savior and their King, and to be saved by him in his way, and upon his most
reasonable terms, they might have been saved.

Object. But may not God be better then his Word, and save those that he does
not promise to save?

Answ. But not false of his word, in saving those whom he has said he will not
save. Men's souls are in a doleful case when they have no hope of Happiness,
except the Word of God prove false. To venture a man's eternal salvation upon
Hope that God will be better then his word, (that is in plain English, that the
God of Truth will prove a liar) is somewhat beyond stark madness, which has no
name bad enough to express it.

Yet I do believe that the description of Gods people in England, and in
America must not be the same; because, as Gods Revelations are not the same, so
neither is the actual Faith which is required in both, the same; and as the
Written and Positive Laws in the Church were never given them, so obedience to
those mere Positives is not required of them. Whether then the threats against
unbelievers be meant of Unbelief privative and positive only, and not negative?
(such as is all non-believing that which was never revealed) Or whether their
believing that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him, will
serve the turn there? Or whether God has no people there? I acknowledge again
is yet past my understanding.

CHAP. IX. Whether the Souls departed enjoy this Rest?
SECT. I.. 1.

I Have but one thing more to clear, before I come to the Use of this doctrine:
And that is, Whether this Rest remain till the resurrection before we shall
enjoy it? Question.
Or whether we shall have any possession of it before? The Socinians and many
others of late among us, think that the soul separated from the body, is either
nothing, or at least not capable of happiness or misery. Truly, if it should be
so, it would be somewhat a sad uncomfortable doctrine to the godly at their
death, to think of being deprived of their glory till the resurrection; and
somewhat comfortable to the wicked, to think of tarrying out of hell so long.
But I am in strong hopes that this doctrine is false; yea very confident that
it is so. I do believe, that as the soul separated from the body, is not a
perfect man, so it does not enjoy the Glory and happiness so fully and so
perfectly as it shall do after the Resurrection, when they are again conjoined.
What the difference is, and what degree of Glory souls in the mean time enjoy,
are too high things for mortals particularly to discern. For the great
question, what place the souls of those before Christ, It is a doubt, whether
to be in place only D^finitive, and not Circumscriptive, do not contradict the
definition of place.
of Infants, and of all others since Christ, do remain in till the
Resurrection? I think it is a vain enquiry of what is yet beyond our reach. It
is a great question what Place is? But if it be only a circumstant body: and if
[to be in a place*] be only [to be in a circumstant bod^] or in the superficies
of an ambient body, or in the concavity o^ that superficies, then it is
doubtful whether spirits can be properly said [to be in place] We can have yet
no clear conceivings of these things. But that separated souls of Believers do
enjoy unconceivable Blessedness and Glory, even while they remain thus
separated from the body, I prove as follows* (Beside all those Arguments for
the souls Immortality, which you may read in Alex. Rosse his Philosophical
Touchstone, part l^st.)

1. Those words of Paul, 2 Corin. 5.8. Are so exceeding plain, that I yet
understand not what tolerable exception can be made against them. Verse. 6.7 8.
Therefore we are always confident, knowing that while we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord (For we walk by faith, not by sight) we are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body* and present
with the Lord What can be spoken more plainly? so also the 1, 2, 3, and 4.
verses of the same Chapter.

2. As plain is that in Crotius his fancy, that to be with Christ is no more
then to be Christi depositum, is evidently vain: for so to be with Christ,
would not be best of all, seeing that our mere deliverance from present
sufferings is not so great a good, as our present life in the service and
enjoyment of God in his ordinances and mercies, though accompanied with
imperfection, and afflictions; Except he take a stone or a carcass to be
happier then a man.
Philip. 1.23. For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart
and to be with Christ, which is far better. What sense were in these words, if
Paul had not expected to enjoy Christ till the Resurrection? Why should he be
in a straight? Or desire to depart? Should he be with Christ ever the sooner
for that? Nay, should he not have been loath to depart upon the very same
grounds? For while he was in the flesh, he enjoyed something of Christ, but
being departed (according to the Socinians doctrine) he should enjoy no thing
of Christ, till the day of Resurrection.

3. And plain enough is that of Christ to the thief: This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. The dislocation of the word, [ this day] is but a gross
evasion.

4. And sure, if it be but a Parable, of the Rich man in hell, and Lazarus; yet
it seems unlikely to me, that Christ would teach them by such a Parable, as
seemed evidently to intimate and suppose the souls happiness or misery
presently after death, if there were no such matter.

5. Does not his Argument against the Sadduces, for the Resurrection, run upon
this supposition, That (God being not the God of the dead, but of the living,
therefore) Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were then living? i. e. in soul; and
consequently should have their bodies raised at the Resurrection.

6. Plain also is that in the Revelations, chap. 14. verse. 13. Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may
Rest from their labors, and their works do follow them ( i. e. close as the
garments on a man's back follow him, and not at such a distance as the
resurrection.) For if the blessedness were only in R^sting in the Grave, then a
beast or a stone were as blessed; Nay it were evidently a curse, and not a
blessing. For was not life a great Mercy? was it not a greater mercy to enjoy
all the comforts of life? to enjoy the fellowship of the Saints? The comfort of
the ordinances? And much of Christ in all? To be employed in the delightful
work of God, and to edify his Church? etc. Is it not a curse to be so deprived
of all these? Do not these yield a great deal more sweetness, then all the
troubles of this life can yield us bitterness? Though I think not (as Doct.
Twisse. See Barlows Exercit. post Metaph. Schib. Jo. Franciscus Picus Mirand.
says he, heard of a Pope that in his life time told a familiar friend of his,
that he believed not the Immortality of souls; His, friend being dead, appeared
to him as he watched, and told him that his soul which he believed to be
mortal, he should by the Just Judgment of God, prove to be immortal, to his
exceeding torment in eternal fire. This Pope seems to be Leo the tenth. Vide
Du Plessis Mystery of Iniquity. page 641.
some) that it is better to be most miserable, even in hell, then not to be at
all; yet it is undeniable, that it is better to enjoy life, and so much of the
comforts of life, and so much of God in comforts and afflictions as the Saints
do, though we have all this with persecution; then to lie rotting in the grave;
if that were all we could expect. Therefore it is some further blessedness that
is there promised.

7. How else is it said, That we are come to the Mount Zion, the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the
general Assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven,
and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb.
12.22, 23. Sure at the Resurrection the body will be made perfect as well as
the spirit. To say (as Lushington does) that they are said to be made perfect,
because they are sure of it, as if they had it: is an evasion to grossly
contradicting the Text, that by such commentaries he may as well deny any truth
in Scripture: To make good which, he as much abuses that of Philip. 3.12.

8. Does not Scripture tell us that Henoch and Elias are taken up already? And
shall we think they possess that Glory alone?

9. Did not Peter, and James, and John see Moses also with Christ on the Mount?
Yet the Scripture says, Moses dyed. And is it likely that Christ did delude
their senses, in showing them Moses, if he should not partake of that glory
till the Resurrection?

10. And is not that of Stephen as plain as we can desire? Lord Jesus receive
my spirit. Sure if the Lord receive it, it is neither asleep, nor dead, nor
annihilated: but it is where he is, and beholds his Glory.

11. The like may be said of that, Eccles. 12.7. The spirit shall return to God
who gave it.

12. How else is it said that we have eternal life already? John 6.54. and
that the knowledge of God (which is begun here) is eternal life? Polycarpus
inter multas praeclaras voces quas fl^mmae admot^s^ didit, eo die
repraesentandum se dixit coram deo in spiritu. Quo e^d^m tempore M^lito
Episcopus Sardensis vir paris si^ceritatis librum scripsit de corpor^ and
anima, etc. Adeo autem haec sententia m^liore illo s^culo valuit, ut
Tertullianus reponat eam inter communes and primas animi conceptiones quae
natura communiter appraebenduntur. Calvin. in Psychopannyc. vid. Eusebius. Histor.
lib. 1. c. 15. tit. c.
John 17.3. So 1. John 5.13. And he that believes on Christ has everlasting
life, John. 3.36. John. 6.47. He that eats this bread shall not dye, verse.
50. For he dwells in Christ, and Christ in him, verse. 56. And as the Son
lives by the Father, so he that eats him, shall live by him, verse. 57. How
is the Kingdom of God, and of heaven (which is eternal) said to be in us? Luk
17.21. Romans 14.17. Mat. 13.

Surely if there be as great an interruption of our life, as till the
Resurrection (which with some will be many thousand years) this is no eternal
life* nor everlasting Kingdom. Lushingtons evasion is, That because there is no
time with dead men, but they so sleep, that when they awake, it is all one to
them, as if it had been at first; Therefore the Scripture speaks of them, as if
they were there already. It is true indeed, if there were no joy till the
Resurrection, then that consideration would be comfortable: But when God has
thus plainly told us of it before, then this evasion contradicts the Text.
Doubtless there is time also to the dead, though (in respect of their bodies)
they perceive it not. He will not sure think it a happiness to be petrified or
stupefied, whiles others are enjoying the comforts of life: If he do, it were
the best course to sleep out our lives.

13. In Jude 7. The Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha are spoken of, as suffering
the vengeance of eternal fire. And if the wicked do already suffer eternal
fire, then no doubt but the godly do enjoy eternal blessedness. I know some
understand the place, of that fire which consumed their bodies, as being a Type
of the fire of Hell: I will not be very confident against this exposition; but
the text seems plainly to speak more.

14. It is also observable, that when John saw his Glorious Revelations, he is
said to be in the spirit, Revel. 1.10. and 4.2. and to be carried away in the
spirit, Rev. 17.3. and 21.10. And when Paul had his Revelations, and saw things
unutterable, he knew not whether it were in the body, or out of the body: All
implying, that spirits are capable of these Glorious things, without the help
of their bodies.

15. And though it be a Prophetical obscure book, yet it seems to me, that
those words in the Revelations do imply this, where John saw the souls under
the Altar, Rev. 6.9. etc.

16. We are commanded by Christ, Not to fear them that can kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul, Luke 12.4. Does not this plainly imply, That
when wicked men have killed our bodies, If you would see this subject handled
more fully, and all the Arguments answered, which are brought to prove, That
souls have neither Joy nor Pain, till the Resurrection, See Calvin's Treatise
hereof called Psychopannychia.
(that is, separated the souls from them) yet the souls are still alive?

17. The soul of Christ was alive when his body was dead: And therefore so
shall ours too. For his created nature was like ours, except in sin. That
Christ's human soul was alive, is a necessary consequent of its hypostaticall
union with the Divine nature (as I judge) And by his words to the thief. This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: so also by his voice on the Cross, Luke
23.46. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And whether that in, 1 Pet.
3.18, 19. that he went and preached to the spirits in prison, etc. will prove
it, I leave to others to judge. Read Illyricus his Arguments in his Clavis
Scripturae on this Text. Many think that the opposition is not so irregular, as
to put the Dative (...) for (...) as the subject recipent, and the Dative (...)
for (...), as the efficient cause: But that it is plainly to be understood as a
regular opposition, that Christ was mortified in the flesh, but vivified in the
spirit (that is, in the spirit which is usually put in opposition to this
flesh, which is the soul) by which spirit, etc. But I leave this as doubtful;
There Is enough besides.

18. Why is there mention of Gods breathing into man the breath of life, and
calling his soul a living soul? There is no mention of any such thing in the
creating of other creatures: sure therefore this makes some difference between
the life of our souls and theirs.

19. It appears in Saul's calling for Samuel to the Witch, and in the Jews
expectation of the coming of Elias, that they took it for current then, that
Elias and Samuels soul were living.

20. Lastly, if the spirits of those that were disobedient in the days of
Noah, were in prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. Then certainly the separated spirits of the
Just are in an opposite condition of Happiness. If any think that the word
[Prison] signifies not their full misery, but a reservation thereto: I grant
it: yet it imports a reservation in a living and suffering state: For were
they nothing, they could not be in prison.

THE SAINTS Everlasting REST.

The Third Part.

Containing Several Uses of the former Doctrine of REST.

Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the City of my God, New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God,
and my New Name, Rev. 3.12.

Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, For our God
is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29.

Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

If Children, then heirs: heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ; if so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also Glorified together; For I reckon
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with
the Glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.17, 18.

London Printed by Rob. White, for T. Underhill, and F. Tyton, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Bible in great Woodstreet, and at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. 1649.

To my dearly beloved Friends, The Inhabitants of the City of COVENTRY, Both
Magistrates and People; ESPECIALLY Col. John Barker, and Col. Tho. Willoughby,
late Governors, with all the Officers, and Soldiers of their Garrison. Rich.
Baxter Devoteth this Part of this Treatise, in thankful acknowledgment of their
great Affection toward him, and ready acceptance of his labors among them
(which is the highest recompense, if joined with obedience, that a faithful
Minister can expect.)
HUmbly beseeching the Lord on their behalf, that he will save them from that
spirit of Pride, Hypocrisy, Dissension, and Giddiness, which is of late years
gone forth, and is now destroying, and making havoc of the Churches of Christ;
And that he will teach them highly to esteem those faithful Teachers whom the
Lord has made Rulers over them, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.7, 17. and to know
them (so to be) and to obey them; And that he will keep them unspotted of the
guilt of those sins, which in these days have been the shame of our Religion,
and have made us a scandal or scorn to the World.

THE SAINTS Everlasting REST. PART. III.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.. 1.

WHatsoever the Soul of man does entertain, must make its first entrance at the
understanding; which must be satisfied, first, of its Truth, secondly, and of
its goodness, before it find any further admittance: If this porter be
negligent, it will admit of any thing that bears but the face or name of Truth
and Goodness: But if it be faithful, able and diligent in its office, it will
examine strictly, and search to the (...) what is found deceitful, it casts
out, that it go no furth^^ (...) what is found to be sincere and current, it
lets in to the very heart, where the Will and Affections do with welcome
entertain it, and by concoction (as it were) incorporate it into their own
substance. Accordingly I have been hitherto presenting to your understandings.
First, the excellency of the Rest of the Saints, in the first part of this
book; and then the verity in the second part. I hope your understandings have
now tasted this food, and tried what has been expressed. Truth fears not the
light, This perfect beauty abhors darkness; Nothing but Ignorance of its
worth can disparage it. Therefore search, and spare not; Read, and read again,
and then Judge. What think you? Is it good? Or is it not? Nay is it not the
chiefest good? And is there any thing in goodness to be compared with it? And
is it true, or is it not? Nay is there any thing in the world more certain,
then that there remains a Rest to the people of God? Why if your
understandings are convinced of both these, I do here in the behalf of God and
his Truth, and in the behalf of your own souls and their Life, require the
further entertainment hereof; and that you take this blessed subject of Rest,
and commend it as you have found it to your wills and affections; Let your
hearts now cheerfully embrace it, and improve it, as I shall present it to you,
in its respective Uses.

And though the Laws of Method do otherwise direct me, yet because I conceive
it most profitable; I will lay close together in the first place all those
uses, that most concern the ungodly, that they may know where to find their
lesson, and not to pick it up and down intermixed with Uses of another strain.
And then I shall lay down those Uses that are more proper to the Godly by
themselves in the end.

Use First. Showing the unconceivable misery of the ungodly in their loss of
this Rest. SECT. II.. 2.

ANd first, Use I. Consuevimus nos homines praesertim qui crassiore mente
praediti sumus, metis potius quam beneficicia quod opor^et addiscer^.
Tophylact. in Joan. c. 5. verse. 22.
if this Rest be for none but this people of God, What doleful tidings is this
to the ungodly world? That there is so much Glory, but none for them: so great
joys for the Saints of God, while they must consume in perpetual sorrows!
Such Rest for them that have obeyed the Gospel; while they must be Restless in
the flames of hell! If thou who Read these words art in thy soul a stranger
to Christ, and to the holy nature and life of his people, and art not one of
them who are before described, and shall live and dye in the same condition
that thou art now in; Let me tell thee, I am a messenger of the saddest tidings
to thee, that ever yet thy ears did hear: That thou shall never partake of the
joys of Heaven, nor have the least taste of the Saints eternal Rest; Judge.
2.20, 21.
I may say to thee, as E^ud to E^gon; I have a message to thee from God: but it
is a mortal message; against the very life and hopes of thy soul, That as true
as the word of God is true, thou shall never see the face of God with comfort.
This sentence I am commanded to pass upon thee, from the word: Take it as thou will, and escape it if thou can. I know thy humble and hearty subjection to
Christ would procure thy escape: and if thy heart and life were thoroughly
changed, thy relations to Christ and eternity would be changed also, he would
then ^^^nowledge thee for one of his people, and justify thee from all things
that could be charged upon thee, and give thee a portion in the inheritance of
his chosen, And if this might be the happy success of my message, I should be
so fa^ from repining like Jonas, that the threatenings of God are not executed
upon thee, that on the contrary I should bless the day that ever God made me so
happy a Messenger, and return him hearty thanks upon my knees, that ever he
blessed his Word in my mouth with such desired success. But if thou end thy
days in thy present condition, (whether thou be fully resolved never to change;
or whether thou spend thy days in fruitless purposing to be better hereafter,
all is one for that; I say,) if thou live and die in thy unregenerate estate,
as sure as the heavens are over thy head, and the earth under thy feet; as sure
as thou live and breathest in this air, so sure shall thou be shut out of the
Rest of the Saints, and receive thy portion in everlasting fire. I do here
expect that thou should in the pride and scorn of thy heart, turn back upon
me, and show thy teeth, and say, Who made you the doorkeeper of heaven? when
were you there? and when did God show you the Book of Life? or tell you who
they are that shall be saved, and who shut out?

I will not Answer thee according to thy folly; but truly and plainly as I can
discover this thy folly to thy self, that if there be yet any hope, thou may
recover thy understanding, and yet return to God and live. First, I do not name
thee, nor any other: I do not conclude of the persons individually, and say,
This man shall be shut out of heaven, and that man shall be taken in: I only
conclude it of the unregenerate in general, and of thee conditionally, if thou
be such a one. Secondly, I do not go about to determine who shall repent, and
who shall not; much less, that thou shall never repent, and come in to Christ:
These things are unknown to me; I had far rather show thee what hopes thou have
before thee, if thou will not sit still and lose them, and by thy wilful
carelessness cast away thy hopes: And I would far rather persuade thee to
hearken in time, while there is hope, and opportunity, and offers of Grace, and
before the door is shut against thee, that so thy soul may return and live;
then to tell thee, that, there is no hope of thy repenting and returning. But
if thou lie hoping that thou shall return, and never do it; if thou talk of
repenting and believing, but still art the same; if thou live and die with the
world, and thy credit, or pleasure nearer thy heart then Jesus Christ: In a
word, If the foregoing description of the people of God do not agree with the
state of thy soul; Is it then a hard question, whether thou shall ever be
saved? Even as hard a question, as whether God be true? or the Scripture be his
Word? Cannot I certainly tell that thou shall perish for ever, except I had
seen the Book of Life? Why, the Bible also is the Book of Life, and it
describes plainly those that shall be saved, and those that shall be
condemned; Though it do not name them, yet it tells you all those signs and
conditions, by which they may be known. Do I need to ascend up into heaven, to
know, That without holiness none shall see God? Heb. 12.14. Or, That it is the
pure in heart who shall see God? Matthew. 5.8. Or, That except a man be born
again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God? Joh. 3.3. Or, That he that
believes not (that is, stoops not to Christ as his King and Savior) is
condemned already? and that he shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him? Joh. 3.18.36. And that except you repent, (which includes reformation)
you shall all perish? Luke 13.3, 5. With a hundred more such plain Scripture
Expressions? Cannot these be known without searching into Gods Counsels? Why,
thou ignorant or wilful self-deluding Sot! Has thy Bible layn by thee in thy
house so long, and did thou never read such words as these? Or have thou read
it, or heard it read so often, and yet do thou not remember such passages as
these? Nay, Did thou not find, that the great drift of the Scripture is, to
show men who they are that shall be saved, and who not? and let them see the
conditions of both estates? And yet do thou ask me, How I know who shall be
saved? what need I go up to heaven to inquire that of Christ, which he came
down to earth to tell us? and sent his Spirit in his Prophets and Apostles to
tell us? and has left upon Record to all the world? And though I do not know
the secrets of thy heart, and therefore cannot tell thee by name, whether it be
thy state, or no; yet, if thou art but willing and diligent, thou may know
thy self, whether thou be an heir of heaven, or not? And that is the main thing
that I desire; that if thou be yet miserable, thou may discern it and escape
it. But can thou possibly escape if thou neglect Christ and salvation? Heb.
2.3. Is it not resolved on, That if thou love father, mother, wife, children,
house, lands, Matthew. 10.31. Luke 14.26.
or thy own life better then Christ, thou can not be his disciple? and
consequently, can never be saved by him? Is this the word of man, or of God?
Is it not then an undoubted concluded case, that in the case thou art now in,
thou have not the least title to heaven? Shall I tell thee from the Word of
God? It is as impossible for thee to be saved, except thou be born again and
made a new creature, as it is for the devils themselves to be saved. Nay, God
has more plainly and frequently spoken it in the Scripture, that such sinners
as thou shall never be saved, then he has done, that the devils shall never be
saved. And does not this tidings go cold to thy heart? Me thinks, but that
there is yet life and hope before thee, and thou have yet time and means to
have thy soul recovered, or else it should kill thy heart with terror, and the
sight of thy doleful discovered case, should even strike thee dead with
amazement and horror. If old Ely fell from his seat and dyed, to hear that the
Ark of God was gone, which was but an outward sign of his presence, how then
should thy heart be astonished with this tidings, that thou have lost the Lord
God himself, and all thy title to his eternal presence and delights? If Rachel
wept for children, and would not be comforted, because they were not; How then
should thou now sit down and weep for the happiness and future life of thy
soul, because to thee it is not? When King Belshazzar saw but a piece of a
hand sent from God, writing over against him on the wall, it made his
countenance change, his thoughts trouble him, his loins loosed in the joints,
and his knees smite one against another, Dan. 5.6. Why, what trembling then
should seize on thee, who have the hand of God himself against thee? not in a
Sentence or two only, but in the very tenor and scope of the Scriptures? not
threatening thee with the loss of a Kingdom only, as he did Belshazzar, but
with the loss of thy part in the everlasting Kingdom* But because I would fain
have thee, if it be possible, to lay it close to thy heart, I will here stay a
little longer, and show thee, first, The greatness of thy loss; and secondly,
The aggravations of thy unhappiness in this loss; thirdly, And the Positive
miseries that thou may also endure, with their aggravations.

. 3.
SECT. III.
FIrst, The ungodly in their loss of heaven, do lose all that glorious personal
perfection, which the people of God do there enjoy. They lose that shining
luster of the body, surpassing the brightness of the Sun at noon day. Though
perhaps even the bodies of the wicked will be raised more spiritual
incorruptible bodies, then they were on earth, yet that will be so far from
being a happiness to them that it only makes them capable of the more
exq^isite torments, their understandings being now more capable of apprehending
the greatness of their loss, and their senses more capable of feel^ing their
sufferings. Anima illic posita been esse perdidit, at esse non perdidit. Ex qua
re semper cogitur, ut and mortem sine morte, and d^fectum sine d^f^cta, and
(...) sine ^ine patiatur: (...) and m^rs im^orta, sit and defectus indesicions
and finis ^^s^nitus. Gregor Dial. lib. 4.
They would be glad then if every member were a dead member, that it might not
feel the punishment inflicted on it; and if the whole body were a rotten
carcass, or might again lie down in the dust and darkness. The devil himself
has an Angelical and excellent nature, but that only honoreth his skilful
Creator, but is no honor or comfort at all to himself: The glory, the beauty,
the comfortable perfections they are deprived of; much more do they want that
mor^all perfection which the Blessed do partake of: Those holy dispositions and
qualifications of mind; That blessed conformity to the Holiness of God; that
cheerful readiness to do his Will; that perfect rectitude of all their actions;
In stead of these, they have their old ulcerous deformed souls, that
perverseness of Will, that disorder in their faculties* that loathing of good,
that love to evil, that violence of passion, which they ha^ on earth. It is
true, their understandings will be much cleared, both by the ceasing of their
temptations and deluding ob^ects which they had on earth, as also by the sad
experience which they will have in hell, In inferno et si eri^^timulus
paenitudinis nulla ibi e^it correctio voluntatis: a quibus it^ culpabitur
in^quitas, ut nullatenus ab eis possit diligi vel desiderari justitia. Aug. de
fide ad Pet.
of the falsehood of their former conceits and delusions. But this proceeds not
from the sanctifying of their natures. And perhaps their experience and too
late understanding may restrain much of the evil motions of their wills which
they had formerly here on earth; but the evil disposition is never the more
changed, so also will the conversation of the damned in hell be void of many of
those sins which they commit here on earth: They will be drunk no more, and
whore no more, and be gluttonous no more nor oppress the innocent, nor grind
the poor, nor devour the houses and estates of their brethren, nor be revenged
on their enemies, nor persecute and destroy the members of Christ: All these,
and many more actual sins will then be laid aside. But this is not from any
renewing of their natures, they have the same dispositions still, and fain they
would commit the same sins if they could; they want but opportunity, they are
now tied up: it is part of their torment to be denied these their pleasures; No
thanks to them, that they sin not as much as ever; Their hearts are as bad,
though their actions are restrained. Nay it is a great question, whether those
remainders of good, which were left in their natures on earth (as their common
honesty, and moral virtues) be not all taken from them in Hell? Mat. 13.12.
Luke 8.18.
according to that, From him that has not, shall be taken away, even that
which he has. This is the judgment of Divines generally: But because it is
questionable, and much may be said against it, I will let that pass. But
certainly they shall have none of the Glorious perfection of the Saints, either
in soul or body. There will be a greater difference between these wretches, and
the glorified Christian, then there is betwixt a Toad under a sill, and the Sun
in the Firmament. The rich man's purple robes and delicious fare, did not so
exalt him above Lazarus at his door in scabs, nor make the difference between
them so wide, as it is now made on the contrary in their vast separation.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
SEcondly, But the great loss of the damned, will be their loss of God, they
shall have no comfortable relation to him: Nor any of the Saints communion with
him: As they did not like to retain God in knowledge; Romans 1.28. Job. 21.14.
D^cem mill^a quis ponat Gehennas, nihil tal^ dicet quale est a beat a glori^
exc^dere, a Christo audire, Non n^vi vos. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom 33. Multi Gehennam
abhorrent; ego autem casum illius gloria multo amariorem gehennae paena ^^o.
Gregor.
but did him, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; So God
will abhor to retain them in his household, or to give them entertainment in his
Fellowship and Glory. He will never admit them to the inheritance of his
Saints, nor endure them to stand amongst them in his presence; but bid them,
Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. Now these men dare
belie the Lord, if not blaspheme, in calling him by the title of Their Father;
How boldly and con^idently do they daily approach him with their lips, and
indeed reproach him in their formal prayers; with that appellation, Our
Father? As if God would Father the Devils children; or as if the slighters of
Christ, the pleasers of the flesh, the friends of the world, the haters of
godliness, or any that trade in sin and delight in iniquity, were the
Offspring of Heaven! They are ready now, in the height of their presumption,
to lay as confident claim to Christ and heaven, as if they were sincere
believing Saints. The Swearer, the Drunkard, the Whoremaster, the Worldling,
can scornfully say to the People of God, What, is not God our Father as well as
yours? Does he not love us as well as you? Will he save none but a few holy
Precisians? O, but when that time is come, when the case must be decided, and
Christ will separate his followers from his foes, and his faithful friends
from his deceived flatterers, where then will be their presumptuous claim to
Christ? Then they shall find that God is not their Father, but their resolved
foe; because they would not be his people, but were resolved in their
negligence and wickedness: Then, though they had preached, or wrought miracles
in his name, he will not know them: And though they were his Brethren or sisters
after the flesh, yet will he not own them* but reject them as his enemies: And
even those that did eat and drink in his presence on earth, Mat. 7.22.
shall be cast out of his heavenly presence for ever; And those that in his
name did cast out Devils, Mat. 25.41.
shall yet at his command be cast out to those Devils, and endure the torments
prepared for them. And as they would not consent that God should by his Spirit
dwell in them, so shall not these evil doers dwell with him: the Tabernacles of
wickedness shall have no fellowship with him: Psalm. 94.20. and 132.3. Rev.
22.15.
nor the wicked inhabit the City of God. For without are the Dogs; the
Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers, Idolaters, and whatsoever loves and makes
a lie. For God knows the way of the righous, but the way of the wicked leads
to perishing. Psalm. 1.6, 7.
God is first enjoyed in part on earth, before he be fully enjoyed in Heaven.
It is only they that walked with him here, who shall live and be happy with him
there. O little does the world now know what a loss that soul has, who loses
God! What were the world, but a dungeon, if it had lost the Sun? What were the
body, but a loathsome carrion, if it had lost the soul? Yet all these are
nothing to the loss of God, even the little taste of the fruition of God which
the Saints enjoy in this life, is dearer to them then all the world. As the
world when they feed upon their forbidden pleasures, may cry out with the sons
of the Prophets, 2 King. 4.40.
There Is death in the pot; So when the Saints do but taste of the favor of God,
Psalm. 30.5.
they cry out with David, In his favor is life. Nay, though life be naturally
most dear to all men; Psalm. 63.3.
yet they that have tasted and tried, do say with David, his loving kindness is
better then life. So that as the enjoyment of God, is the heaven of the Saints;
so the loss of God, is the hell of the ungodly. And as the enjoying of God is
the enjoying of all; So the loss of God is the loss of All.

. 5.
SECT. V.
THirdly, Moreover as they lose God, so they lose all those spiritual
delightful Affections, and Actions, by which the Blessed do feed on God. That
transporting knowledge: those ravishing views of his Glorious Face: The
unconceivable pleasure of loving God. The apprehensions of his infinite Love to
us; The constant joys which his Saints are taken up with; and the Rivers of
consolation wherewith he does satisfy them. Is it nothing to lose all this?
The employment of a King in ruling a kingdom, does not so far exceed the
employment of the vilest scullion or slave, as this Heavenly employment
exceeds his.

These wretches had no delight in Praising God on earth; their recreations and
pleasures were of another nature: and now, when the Saints are singing his
praises, and employed in magnifying the Lord of Saints; then shall the ungodly
be denied this happiness, and have an employment suitable to their natures and
deserts: Their hearts were full of Hell upon earth: in stead of God, and his
Love, and Fear, and Graces, there was Pride, and self-love, and lust, and
unbelief; And therefore Hell must now entertain those Hearts, which formerly
entertained so much of it. Their Houses on Earth were the resemblances of Hell:
in stead of worshipping God, and calling upon his name, there was scorning at
his worship, and swearing by his name: And now Hell must therefore be their
habitation for ever, where they shall never be troubled with that worship and
duty which they abhorred, but join with the rest of the damned in blaspheming
that God who is avenging their former impieties and blasphemies. Can it
probably be expcted, that they who made themselves merry while they lived on
earth, in deriding the persons and families of the godly, for their frequent
worshipping and praising God, should at last be admitted into the Family of
Heaven, and join with those Saints in those more perfect praises? Surely
without a sound change upon their hearts before they go hence, it is utterly
impossible. It is too late then to say, Give us of your oil, for our Lamps are
out: Let us now enter with you to the marriage feast: let us now join with you
in the joyful Heavenly melody. You should have joined in it on earth, if you
would have joined in Heaven. As your eyes must be taken up with other kind of
sights; so must your hearts be taken up with other kind of thoughts, and your
voices turned to another tune. As the doors of heaven will be shut against you;
so will that joyous employment be denied to you. There is no singing the songs
of Zion in the land of your thraldom: Those that go down to the pit do not
praise him; Who can rejoice in the place of sorrows? And who can be glad in the
land of confusion? God suits men's employments to their natures; The bent of
your spirits was another way, your hearts were never set upon God in your
lives: you were never admirers of his Attributes and works, nor ever thoroughly
warmed with his love: you never longed after the enjoyment of him; you had no
delight to speak or to hear of him: you were weary of a Sermon or Prayer an
hour long, you had rather have continued on earth, if you had known how; you
had rather yet have a place of earthly preferment, or lands and lordships, or a
feast, or sports, or your cups, or whores, then to be interessed in the
Glorious Praises of God, and is it meet then that you should be members of the
Celestial Quire? A Swine is fitter for a Lecture of Philosophy, or an Ass to
build a City, or govern a Kingdom; or a dead Corpse to feast at thy Table, then
thou art for this work of Heavenly Praise.

SECT. VI.. 6.

FOurthly, They shall also be deprived of the Blessed society of Angels, and
glorified Saints. Instead of being companions of those happy spirits, and
numbered with those Joyful and Triumphing Kings; they must now be members of the
corporation of hell, where they shall have companions of a far different nature
and quality. While they lived on earth, they loathed the Saints; they
imprisoned, banished them, and cast them out of their societies; or at least
they would not be their companions in labor, and in sufferings: And therefore
they shall not now be their companions in their Glory. Scorning them, and
abusing them, hating them, and rejoicing in their calamities, was not the way
to obtain their blessedness. If you would have shined with them as Stars in the
Firmament of their Father, you should have joined with them in their holiness,
and faith, and painfulness, and patience: you should have first been ingraffed
with them into Christ, the common stock, and then incorporated into the
fraternity of the members, and walked with them in singleness of heart, and
watched with them with oil in your Lamps, and joined with them in mutual
exhortation, in faithful admonitions, in conscionable reformation, in prayer,
and in praise; you should have traveled with them out of the Egypt of your
natural estate, through the Red Sea, and Wilderness of humiliation and
affliction, and have cheerfully taken up the Cross of Christ, as well as the
name and prefession of Christians, and rejoiced with them in suffering
persecution, and tribulation: All this, if you had faithfully done, you might
now have been triumphing with them in glory, and have possessed with them their
masters joy. But this you could not, you would not endure: your souls loathed
it, your flesh was against it, and that flesh must be pleased, though you were
told plainly and frequently what would come of it: and now you partake of the
fruit of your folly, and endure but what you were foretold you must endure; and
are shut out of that company, from which you first shut out your selves; and
are separated but from them, whom you would not be joined with. You could not
endure them in your houses, nor in your Towns, nor scarce in the Kingdom; 1
King. 18.17. Act. 17.6.
you took them as Ahab did Elias, for the troublers of the land, and as the
Apostles were taken for men that turned the world upside down; If any thing
fell out amiss, you thought all was long of them. When they were dead or
banished, you were glad they were gone; and thought the Country was well rid
of them: They molested you with their faithful reproving your sin; Their holy
conversations did trouble your consciences, to see them so far excel your
selves, and to condemn your looseness by their strictness, and your profaneness
by their conscionable lives, and your negligence by their unwearyed diligence.
You scarce ever heard them pray or sing praises in their families, but it was a
vexation to you; And you envyed their liberty in the worshipping of God. And is
it then any wonder if you be separated from them hereafter? I have heard of
those that have said, that if the Puritans were in Heaven, and the good fellows
in Hell, they had rather go to Hell then to Heaven. And can they think much to
have their desires granted them? The day is near when they will trouble you no
more; betwixt them and you will be a great gulf set, that those that would pass
from thence to you (if any had a desire to ease you with a drop of water)
cannot, neither can they pass to them who would go from you (for if they could,
there would none be left behind) Luke 16.26. Even in this life, while the
Saints were imperfect in their passions and infirmities, clothed with the same
frail flesh as other men, and were mocked destitute, afflicted and tormented,
yet in the judgment of the Holy Ghost, they were such of whom the world was not
worthy, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. Much more unworthy are they of their fellowship in
their Glory.

CHAP. II. The aggravations of the loss of Heaven to the ungodly.
. 1.
SECT. I.
I Know many of the wicked will be ready to think, If this be all, they do not
much care; they can bear it well enough: what care they for losing the
perfections above? What care they for losing God, his favor, or his presence?
they lived merrily without him on earth, and why should it be so grievous to be
without him hereafter? And what care they for being deprived of that Love, and
Joy, and Praising of God? They never tasted sweetness in things of that nature?
Or what care they for being deprived of the Fellowship of Angels and Saints?
They could spare their company in this world well enough; and why may they not
be without it in the world to come? To make these men therefore to understand
the truth of their future condition, I will here annex these two things.

1. I will show you why this forementioned loss will be intolerable, and will
be most tormenting then, though it seem as nothing now.

2. I will show you what other losses will accompany these; which though they
are less in themselves, yet will now be more sensibly apprehended by these
sensual men. And all this from Reason, and the truth of Scripture.

1. Then, That this loss of heaven will be then most tormenting, may appear by
these considerations following.

First, Ignis geh^nnae, luc^bit miseris ut vid. ant unde doleant, ad augmentum,
and non ad consolation^m n^ videant unde gaudeant. Isidor. de de summo. bon.
lib. 1.
The Understandings of the ungodly will be then cleared, to know the worth of
that which they have lost. Now they lament not their loss of God, because they
never knew his excellency, nor the loss of that holy employment and society,
for they were never sensible what they were worth: A man that has lost a
Jewel, and took it but for a common stone, is never troubled at his loss; but
when he comes to know what he lost, then he lamenteth it: Though the
understandings of the damned will not then be sanctified (as I said before) yet
will they be cleared from a multitude of errors which now possess them, and
mislead them to their ruin; They think now that their honor with men, their
estates, their pleasures, their health and life, are better worth their studies
and ^^^our, then the things of another world which they never saw; but when
these things which had their hearts, have left them in misery, and given them
the slip in their greatest need, when they come to know by experience the
things which before they did but read and hear of, they will then be quite in
another mind. They would not believe that water would drown, till they were in
the sea, nor that the fire would burn, till they were cast into it; but when
they feel it they will easily believe: All that error of their mind which made
them set light by God, and abhor his worship, and vilify his people, will then
be confuted and removed by experience; their knowledge shall be increased,
Eccles. 1.18.
that their sorrows may be increased: as Adam by his fall did come to the
knowledge of Good and Evil, so shall all the damned have this increase of
knowledge: As the knowledge of the excellency of that Good which they do enjoy,
and of that Evil which they have escaped, is neces^sary to the glorified
Saints, that they may rationally and truly enjoy their glory, so is the
knowledge of the greatness of that good which they have lost, and of that evil
which they have procured to themselves, necessary to the tormenting of these
wretched sinners; for as the joys of heaven are not enjoyed so much by the
bodily senses, as by the intellect and affections; so it is by understanding
their misery, and by affections answerable, that the wicked shall endure the
most of their torments; for as it was the soul that was the chiefest in the
guilt (whether positively, by leading to sin, or only privatively* in not
keeping the Authority of Reason over Sense, the Understanding be guilty, I will
not now dispute) so shall the soul be chiefest in the punishment; doubtless
those poor souls would be (comparatively) happy, if their understandings were
wholly taken from them, if they had no more knowledge then Idiots, or bruit
beasts; or if they knew no more in hell, then they did upon earth, their loss
and misery would then less trouble them. Though all knowledge be Physically
good, yet some may be neither Morally good, nor good to the owner. Therefore
when the Scripture says of the wicked, that They shall not see life, Joh 3.36.
nor see God, Heb. 12.14. The meaning is, they shall not possess life, or see
God as the Saints do, to enjoy him by that sight, they shall not see him with
any comfort, nor as their own, but yet they shall see him to their terror, as
their enemy; and (I think) they shall have some kind of eternal knowledge or
beholding of God and heaven, and the Saints that are there happy, as a
necessary ingredient to their unutterable calamity: The rich man shall see
Abraham and Lazarus, but afar off; Luk 16.23. Psalm. 138 6.
as God beholds them afar off, so they shall they behold God afar off: Oh how
happy men would they now think themselves, if they did not know that there is
such a place as heaven, or if they could but shut their eyes, and cease to
behold it: Now when their knowledge would help to prevent their misery, they
will not know, or will not read and study, that they may know: Therefore then
when their knowledge will but feed their consuming fire, they shall know whether
they will or no; as Toads and Serpents know not their own vile and venomous
nature, nor the excellent nature of man or other creatures, and therefore are
neither troubled at their own, nor desirous of ours; so is it with the wicked
here; but when their eyes at death shall be suddenly opened, then the case will
be suddenly altered. They are now in a dead sleep, and they dream that they are
the happiest men in the world, and that the godly are but a company of precise
fools, and that either heaven will be theirs as sure as another, or else they
may make shift without it, as they have done here; but when death smites these
men, and bids them awake, and rowseth them out of their pleasant dreams, how
will they stand up amazed and confounded? How will their judgments be changed
in a moment? and they that would not see, shall then see, and be ashamed.

SECT. II.. 2.

2. ANother reason to prove that the loss of heaven will more torment them
then, is this, Because as the Understanding will be cleared, so it will be more
enlarged, and made more capacious to conceive of the worth of that Glory which
they have lost. The strength of their apprehensions, as well as the truth of
them, will be then increased. What deep apprehensions of the wrath of God, of
the madness of sinning, of the misery of sinners, have those souls that now
endure this misery, in comparison of those on earth that do but hear of it?
what sensible apprehensions of the worth of life has the condemned man that is
going to be executed, in comparison of what he was wont to have in the time of
his prosperity? Much more will the actual deprivation of eternal blessedness
make the damned exceeding apprehensive of the greatness of their loss; and as a
large Vessel will hold more water then a shell, so will their more enlarged
understandings contain more matter to feed their torment, then now their
shallow capacity can do.

SECT. III.. 3.

3. ANd as the damned will have clearer and deeper apprehensions of the
Happiness which they have lost, so will they have a truer and closer
application of this Doctrine to themselves, which will exceedingly tend to
increase their torment. It will then be no hard matter to them, to say, This is
my loss, and this is my everlasting remediless misery. The want of this, is the
main cause, why they are now so little troubled at their condition. They are
hardly brought to believe, that there is such a state of misery; but more
hardly to believe that it is like to be their own. This makes so many Sermons
to them to be lost, and all threatenings and warnings to prove in vain. Let a
Minister of Christ show them their misery never so plainly and faithfully, and
they will not be persuaded that they are so miserable: Let him tell them of the
Glory they must lose, and the sufferings they must feel, and they think it is
not They whom he means; such a Drunkard, or such a notorious sinner they think
may possibly come to such a doleful end, but they little think that they are so
near it themselves. We find in all our Preaching by sad experience, that it is
one of the hardest things in the world to bring a wicked man to know that he is
wicked; and a man who is posting in the way to Hell, to know that he is in that
way indeed, or to make a man see himself in a state of wrath and condemnation:
Yea, though the Preacher do mark him out by such undoubted signs which he
cannot deny, yet will he not apply them, nor be brought to say, It is my case;
Though we show them the Chapter and the Verse where it is written, Joh. 3.3*
Heb. 12.14.
that without Regeneration and Holiness, none shall see God; and though they
know no such work that was ever wrought upon themselves; nay, though they might
easily find by their strangeness to the new Birth, and by their very enmity to
Holiness, that they were never partakers of them, yet do they as verily expect
to see God and to be saved, as if they were the most sanctified persons in the
world: It is a most difficult work to make a proud person know that he is
proud, or a covetous man to know that he is covetous or an ignorant, or
erroneous heretical man to know himself to be such a one indeed; But to make
any of these to confess the sin, and to apply the threatening, and to believe
themselves the children of wrath, this is to Humane strength an impossibility.
How seldom do you hear men after the plainest discovery of their condemned
state, to cry out and say, I am the man? or to acknowledge, that if they dye in
their present condition, they are undone for ever? And yet Christ has told us
in his Word, That the most of the world are in that estate; yea, and the most
of those that have the preaching of the Gospel, For many are called but few are
chosen; so that it is no wonder that the worst of men are not now troubled at
their loss of Heaven, and at their eternal misery: because if we should
convince them by the most undeniable Arguments, yet we cannot bring them to
acknowledge it: If we should Preach to them as long as we have breath, we cannot
make them believe that their danger is so great; except a man rise from the
dead, and tell them of that place of torments, and tell them that their merry
Jovial friends, who did as verily think to be saved as they, are now in hell in
those flames, they will not believe. Nay more, though such a Messenger from the
dead should appear and speak to them, and warn them that they come not to that
place of torments, and tell them that such and such of their dear, beloved,
worshipful, or honorable friends are now there, destitute of a drop of water,
yet would they not be persuaded by all this. For Christ has said so, That if
they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.31.
neither will they be persuaded, though one should rise from the dead.

There is no persuading them of their misery till they feel it, except the
Spirit of the Almighty do persuade them.

Oh, but when they find themselves suddenly in the land of darkness, and
perceive by the execution of the sentence that they were indeed condemned and
feel themselves in the scorching flames, and see that they are shut out of the
presence of God for ever, it will then be no such difficult matter to convince
them of their misery: This particular Application of Gods Anger to themselves,
will then be the easiest matter in the world: then they cannot choose but know
and apply it whether they will or no. If you come to a man that has lost a leg
or an arm, or a child, or goods, or house, or his health, is it any hard
matter to bring this man to apply it? and to acknowledge that the loss is his
own? or that the pain which he feels in his sickness is his own? I think not.
Why, it will be far more easy for the wicked in hell, to apply their misery in
the loss of heaven, because their loss is incomparably greater. O this
Application which now if we should dye we cannot get them to, for prevention of
their loss, will then be part of their torment it self: O that they could then
say, It is not my case! But their dolourous voices will then rore out these
forced confessions; O my misery! O my folly! O my unconceiveable unrecoverable
loss!

SECT. IV.. 4.

4. AGain, as the Understandings and Consciences of sinners will be
strengthened against them, so also will their Affections be then more lively
and enlarged then now they are: As Judgment will be no longer so blinded, nor
Conscience stifled and bribed, as now it is; so the Affections will be no
longer so stupefied and dead. A hard heart now makes Heaven and Hell to seem
but trifles; And when we have showed them everlasting Glory and Misery, they
are as men half asleep, they scarce take notice what we say, our words are cast
as stones against a hard wall, which fly back in the face of him that casts
them, but make no impression at all where they fall We talk of terrible
astonishing things, but it is to dead men, that cannot apprehend it: We may rip
up their wounds, and they never feel us; we speak to Rocks rather then to men,
the earth will as soon tremble as they: O but when these dead wretches are
revived, what passionate sensibility! what working Affections! what pangs of
horror! what depth of sorrow will there then be! How violently will they fly in
their own faces! How will they rage against their former madness! The
lamentations of the most passionate wife for the loss of her husband, or of the
tenderest mother for the loss of her children, will be nothing to theirs for
the loss of heaven. O the self-accusing, and self-tormenting fury of those
forlorn wretches! How they will even tear their own hearts, and be Gods
Executioners upon themselves! I am persuaded, as it was none but themselves
that committed the sin, and themselves that were the only meritorious cause of
their sufferings, so themselves will be the chiefest executioners of those
sufferings: God will have it so for the clearing of Justice, and the
aggravating of their distress: even Satan himself, as he was not so great a
cause of their sinning as themselves, so will he not be so great an instrument
as themselves of their torment. And let them not think here, that if they must
torment themselves, they will do well enough, they shall have wit enough to
ease and favor themselves, and resolution enough to command down this violence
of their passions: Alas poor souls, They little know what passions those will
be! and how much beyond the power of their resolutions to suppress! Why have
not lamenting, pining, self-consuming persons on earth so much wit or power as
this? Why do you not thus persuade despairing soul, who lie as Spira, in a
kind of Hell upon earth, and dare not eat, nor drink, nor be merry, but
torment themselves with continual terrors? Why do you not say to them, Sir, why
will you be so mad, as to be your own Executioner? and to make your own life a
continual misery, which otherwise might be as joyful as other men's? Cannot you
turn your thoughts to other matters, and never think of Heaven or Hell? Alas,
how vain are all these persuasions to him? how little do they ease him? you may
as well persuade him to remove a mountain, as to remove these hellish thoughts
that feed upon his spirit, it is as easy to him to stop the stream of the
Rivers, or to bound the overflowing waves of the Ocean, as to stop the stream
of his violent passions, or to restrain those sorrows that feed upon his soul.
O how much less then can those condemned souls, who see the Glory before them
which they have lost, restrain their heart-renting, self-tormenting Passions!
So some direct to cure the Toothach, Do not think of it, and it will not grieve
you; and so these men think to ease their pains in Hell: O, but the loss and
pain will make you think of it whether you will or no. You were as Stocks or
Stones under the threatenings, but you shall be most tenderly sensible under the
execution: O how happy would you think your selves then, if you were turned
into Rocks, or any thing that had neither Passion nor Sense! O now how happy
were you, if you could feel as lightly as you were wont to hear! and if you
could sleep out the time of Execution, as you did the time of the Sermons that
warned you of it! But your stupidity is gone, it will not be.

SECT. V.. 5.

5. MOreover, it will much increase the torment of the damned* in that their
Memories will be as large and strong as their Understandings and Affections;
which will cause those violent Passions to be still working: Were their loss
never so great, and their sense of it never so passionate, yet if they could
but lose the use of their Memory, those passions would dye, and that loss being
forgotten, would little trouble them. But as they cannot lay by their life and
being, though then they would account annihilation a singular mercy; so
neither can they lay aside any part of that being: Understanding, Conscience,
Affections, Memory, must all live to torment them, which should have helped to
their Happiness: And as by these they should have fed upon the Love of God, and
drawn forth perpetually the Joys of his Presence; so by these must they now
feed upon the wrath of God, and draw forth continually the dolours of his
absence. Therefore never think, that when I say the hardness of their hearts,
and their blindness, dullness, and forgetfulness shall be removed, that
therefore they are more holy or more happy then before: No, but Morally more
vile, and hereby far more miserable. O how many hundred times did God by his
Messengers here call upon them, Sinners, consider whether you are going: Do but
make a stand a while, and think where your way will end; what is the offered
Glory that you so carelessly reject? will not this be bitterness in the end?

And yet these men would never be brought to consider. But in the later days
(says the Lord) they shall perfectly consider it; Jer 23 20. Psalm. 9.16.
when they are ensnared in the work of their own hands; when God has Arrested
them, and Judgment is past upon them, and Vengeance is poured out upon them to
the full, then they cannot choose but consider it, whether they will or no. Now
they have no leisure to consider, nor any room in their Memories for the things
of another life: Ah, but then they shall have leisure enough, they shall be
where they have nothing else to do but consider it; their Memories shall have
no other employment to hinder them; it shall even be engraven upon the Tables
of their Hearts. Deuteronomy. 6 9.
God would have had the Doctrine of their eternal State to have been written on
the posts of their doors, on their houses, on their hands, and on their hearts;
He would have had them mind it, and mention it, as they rise and lie down, as
they sit at home, and as they walk abroad, that so it might have gone well with
them at their latter end: And seeing they rejected this counsel of the Lord,
therefore shall it be written always before them in the place of their
thraldom, that which way soever they look, they may still behold it.

Among others, I will briefly lay down here some of those Considerations which
will thus feed the anguish of these damned wretches.

SECT. VI.. 6.

FIrst, It will torment them to think of the greatness of the Glory which they
have lost. O if it had been that which they could have spared, it had been a
small matter: or If it had been a loss repairable with any thing else; If it
had been health, or wealth, or friends, or life, it had been nothing; But to
lose that exceeding Eternal weight of Glory! --

SECT. VII.. 7.

SEcondly, It will torment them also to think of the possibility that once they
were in of obtaining it. Though all things considered there was an
impossibility of any other event then what did befall; yet the thing in it self
was possible, and their will was left to act without constraint. Then they will
remember, The time was when I was in as fair possibility of the Kingdom as
others: I was set up on the stage of the world; If I had played my part wisely
and faithfully, now I might have had possession of the inheritance: I might
have been amongst yonder blessed Saints, who am now tormented with these damned
fiends! The Lord did set before me life and death, and having chosen death, I
deserve to suffer it; The prize was once held out before me If I had run well,
I might have obtained it, If I had striven, I might have had the mastery, If I
had fought valiantly, I had been crowned.

SECT. VIII.. 8.

THirdly, It will yet more torment them to remember, not only the possibility,
O vere Reconciliatio facilis sed perutilis! quam facilis modo tam diffi^^lis
crit postea: et sicut modo nemo est qui reconciliari non possit; it a post
paululum nemo qui poss^^: quoniam sicut benignitas apparuit ultra omnem spem,
ultra omnem aestimationem; similem expectare possumus judicij districtonem.
Bern. Sermon. 1. in Epiphan.
but the great Probability that once they were in, to obtain the Crown and
prevent the misery. It will then wound them, to think, Why I had once the gales
of the spirit ready to have assisted me. I was fully purposed to have been
another man, to have cleaved to Christ, and to have forsook the world; I was
almost resolved to have been wholly for God: I was once even turning from my
base seducing lusts; I was purposed never to take them up again, I had even
cast off my old companions: and was resolved to have associated my self with
the godly; And yet I turned back, and lost my hold, and broak my promises, and
slacked my purposes; Almost God had persuaded me to be a real Christian, and
yet I conquered those persuasions; What workings were in my heart when a
faithful Minister pressed home the truth? O how fair was I once for Heaven? I
had almost had it, and yet I have lost it; If I had but followed on to seek the
Lord, and brought those beginnings to maturity, and blown up the spark of
desires and purposes which were kindled in me, I had now been blessed among the
Saints.

Thus will it wound them, to remember what hopes they once had, and how a
little more might have brought them over to Christ, and have set their feet in
the way of peace.

. 9.
SECT. IX.
FOurthly, Furthermore, it will exceedingly torment them, to remember the fair
opportunity that once they had, but now have lost. To look back upon an age
spent in vanity, when his salvation lay at the stake. To think, How many weeks*
and months, and years did I lose, which if I had improved, I might now have
been happy? Wretch that I was! Could I find no time to study the work for
which I had all my time? Stu'tae valetudin^s fructus est peccatum. Nazianz.
Had I no time among all my labors, to labor for eternity? Had I time to eat,
and drink, and sleep, and work; and none to seek the saving of my soul? Had I
time for sports, and mirth, and vain discourse, and none for prayer, or
meditation on the life to come? Could I take time to look to my estate in the
world? And none to try my title to Heaven, and to make sure of my spiritual
and everlasting state? O precious time, whither art thou fled? I had once time
enough, and now I must have no more! I had so much that I knew not what to do
with it; I was fain to devise pastimes; and to talk it away, and trifle it
away, and now it is gone, and cannot be recalled! O the golden hours that I did
enjoy! Had I spent but one year of all those years, or but one month of all
those months, in through examination, and unfeigned conversion, and earnest
seeking God with my whole heart, it had been happy for me that ever I was born;
But now its past, my days are cut off, my glass it run, my Sun is set, and
will rise no more; God himself did hold me the candle, that I might do his
work, and I loitered till it was burnt out; And now how fain would I have more,
but cannot? O that I had but one of those years to live over again! O that it
were possible to recall one day, one hour of that time! Oh that God would turn
me into the world, and try me once again, with another lives time! How speedily
would I repent! How earnestly would I pray! And lie on my knees day and night!
How diligently would I hear! How carefully would I examine my spiritual state!
How watchfully would I walk! How strictly would I live! But its now too late;
alas, too late. I abused my time to vanity whilst I had it, and now I must
suffer justly for that abuse.

Thus will the remembrance of the time which they lost on earth, be a
continual torment to these condemned souls.

SECT. X.. 10.

FIfthly, And yet more will it add to their calamity, to remember how often
they were persuaded to return, both by the ministry in public, and in private
by all their godly faithful friends; every request, and exhortation of the
Minister will now be as a fiery dart in his spirit. How fresh will every Sermon
come now into his mind? even those that he had forgotten, as soon as heard
them. He even seems to hear still the voice of the Minister, and to see his
tears; O how fain would he have had me to have escaped these torments! How
earnestly did he entreat me! With what love and tender compassion did he
beseech me! How did his bowels yearn over me! And yet I did but make a jest of
it, and hardened my heart against all this. How often did he convince me, that
all was not well with me! And yet I stifled all these convictions. How plainly
did he rip up my sores! And open to me my very heart! And show me the
unsoundness and deceit^fulness of it! And yet I was loath to know the worst of
my self, and therefore shut mine eyes, and would not see. O how glad would he
have been after all his study and prayers and pains, if he could but have seen
me cordially entertain the truth, and turn to Christ! He would have thought
himself well recompensed for all his labors and sufferings in his work, to have
seen me converted and made happy by it. And did I withstand and make light of
all this? Should any have been more willing of my happiness then my self? When
I hear men under all the means that we enjoy, yet think that their Ignorance
shall excuse them, it makes me think of the Answer of the Agent of Charles the
5. Emperor to the Ambassador of Siena. The Sienois having rebelled against the
Emperor sent their Ambassador to excuse it; who when he could find no other
excuse, thought in a jest to put it of thus; What, says he, shall not we of
Siena be excused, seeing we are known to be all fools? The Agent replied: Even
that shall excuse you; but upon the condition which is ^it for fools, which is,
to be kept bound and enchained. Lord Remy his Civil considerations, Chap. 79.
page 200.
Had not I more cause to desire it then he? Did it not more nearly concern me?
It was not he, but I, that was to suffer for my obstinacy: He would have laid
his hands under my feet to have done me good, he would have fallen down to me
upon his knees to have begged my obedience to his message, if that would have
prevailed with my hardened heart. O how deservedly do I now suffer these
flames, who was so forewarned of them, and so entreated to escape them! Nay my
friends, my parents, my godly neighbors did admonish and exhort me; They told
me what would come of my wilfulness and negligence at last, but I did neither
believe them, nor regard them; Magistrates were fain to restrain me from
sinning by Law and punishment; Was not the foresight of this misery sufficient
to restrain me! -- Thus will the Remembrance of all the means that ever they
enjoyed, be fuel to feed the flames in their consciences. O that sinners would
but think of this, when they sit under the plain instruction and pressing
exhortations of a faithful Ministry! How dear they must pay for all this, if
it do not prevail with them! And how they will wish a thousand times in the
anguish of their souls, that they had either obeyed his doctrine, or had never
heard him. The melting words of exhortation which they were wont to hear, will
be hot burning words to their hearts upon this sad review. It cost the Minister
dear, even his daily study, his earnest prayers, his compassionate sorrows for
their misery, his care, his sufferings, his spending, weakening, killing pains;
But O how much dearer will it cost these rebellious sinners? His lost tears,
will cost them blood, his lost sighs, will cost them eternal groans, and his
lost exhortations, will cause their eternal lamentations. For Christ has said
it, that if any City or people receive not, or welcome not the Gospel, Mat.
10.14, 15.16.
the very dust of the messengers feet (who lost his travail to bring them that
glad tidings) shall witness against them, much more then his greater pains: And
it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment then for that
City. That Sodom which was the shame of the world for unnatural wickedness,
the disgrace of mankind: that would have committed wickedness with the Angels
from Heaven; that were not ashamed to prosecute their villainy in the open
street; that proceeded in their rage against Lots admonitions yea under the
very miraculous judgment of God, and groped for the door when they were
stricken blind; That Sodom which was consumed with fire from Heaven, and
turned to that deadly Sea of waters, and suffers the vengeance of eternal fire
( Jud. 7.) even that Sodom shall escape better in the day of Judgment, then the
neglecters of this so great Salvation. It will somewhat abate the heat of their
torment, Heb. 2 3.
that they had not those full and plain offers of grace, nor those constant
Sermons, nor pressing persuasions, nor clear convictions, as those under the
sound of the Gospel have had. I beseech thee who Read these words, stay here
a while, and sadly think of what I say. I profess to thee from the Lord, it is
easier thinking of it now, then it will be then; What a doleful aggravation of
thy misery would this be, that the food of thy soul, should prove thy bane? And
that That should feed thy everlasting torment, which is sent to save thee, and
prevent thy torments?

SECT. XI.. 11.

SIxthly, Yet further, it will much add to the torment of these wretches to
remember, that God himself did condescend to entreat them, That all the
intreatings of the Minister were the intreatings God: How long he did wait, How
freely he did offer, how lovingly he did invite, and how importunately he did
solicit them. How the spirit did continue striving with their hearts, as if he
were loath to take a denial. How Christ stood knocking at the door of their
hearts, Sermon after Sermon, and one Sabbath after another; crying out, Open,
sinner, open thy heart to thy Savior, and I will come in, and sup with thee,
and thou with me, Rev. 3.20. Why sinner ^ Are thy lusts and carnal pleasures
better then I? Are thy worldly Commodities better then my everlasting Kingdom?
Why then do thou resist me? Why do thou thus delay? What do thou mean,
Hos. 8.5.
that thou do not open to me? How long shall it be till thou attain to
innocence? Jer. 4.14.
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 13.27.
Woe to thee, O unworthy sinner; will thou not be made clean? Will thou not be
pardoned, and sanctified, and made happy? Psa. 81.13, 14. Isai. 48.17, 18.
When shall it once be? O that thou would hearken to my word, and obey my
Gospel! Then should thy peace be as the river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the Sea: though thy sins were as red as the Crimson, or Scarlet, I
would make them as white as the Snow, or Wool. O that thou were but wise, Isa.
1.18. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
to consider this! and that thou would in time remember thy latter end!
before the evil days do come upon thee, Eccl. 12.1.
and the years draw nigh when thou shall say of all thy vain delights; I have
no pleasure in them! Why sinner! Shall thy Maker thus bespeak thee in vain?
shall the God of all the world beseech thee to be happy, and beseech thee to
have pity upon thy own soul, and will thou not regard him? Why did he make thy
ears, but to hear his voice? Why did he make thy understanding, but to
consider? Hag. 1.5.
Or thy heart, but to entertain the Son in obedientiall Love? Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, consider thy ways. --

O how all these passionate pleadings of Christ, will passionately transport
the damned with self-indignation! That they will be ready to tear out their own
hearts! How fresh will the remembrance of them be still in their minds?
launcing their souls with renewed torments! What self-condemning pangs will it
raise within them, to remember how often Christ would have gathered them to
himself* even as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, Mat. 27.37.
but they would not? Then will they cry out against themselves, O how justly is
all this befallen me! Must I tire out the patience of Christ? Must I make the
God of Heaven to follow me in vain, from home to the Assembly? from thence to
my Chamber? from Alehouse to Alehouse? Till I had wearied him with crying to
me, Repent, Return? Must the Lord of all the world thus wait upon me? and all
in vain? O how justly is that Patience now turned into fury? which falls upon
my soul with irresistible violence? when the Lord cried out to me in his word*
How long will it be before thou will be made clean and holy? My heart, or at
least my practice answered, Never; I will never be so precise; And now when I
cry out, How long will it be till I be freed from this torment, and saved with
the Saints? How justly do I receive the same answer? Never, Never? -- O sinner,
I beseech thee for thy own sake, think of this for prevention, while the voice
of mercy sounds in thine ears: Yet patience continues waiting upon thee:
Can thou think it will do so still? yet the offers of Christ and life are
made to thee in the Gospel; and the hand of God is stretched out to thee: But
will it still be thus? The spirit has not yet done striving with thy heart;
Isa. 55.6, 7.
But do thou know how soon he may turn away, and give thee over to a
reprobate sense, and let thee perish in the stubbornness and hardness of thy
heart? Rev. 2. and 3.
Thou have yet life, and time, and strength, and means; But do thou think
this life will always last? O seek the Lord while he may be found, and call
upon him while he is near; He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what
Christ now speaks to his soul. Heb. 3*8, 11, 15.
And to day, while it is called to day, harden not your hearts; lest he swear
in his wrath that you shall never enter into his Rest. For ever blessed is he,
that has a Hearing heart and ear, while Christ has a Calling voice.

SECT. XII.. 12.

SEventhly, Again, it will be a most cutting consideration to these damned
sinners, to remember on what easy terms they might have escaped their
misery; and on what easy conditions the Crown was tendered to them. If their
work had been, to remove Mountains, to conquer Kingdoms, to fulfill the Law to
the smallest tittle, then the impossibility would somewhat assuage the rage of
their self-accusing conscience: If their conditions for heaven had been, the
satisfying of Justice for all their transgressions, the suffering of all that
the Law did lay upon them, or bearing that burden which Christ was fain to
bear; Why this were nothing but to suffer Hell, to escape hell: but their
conditions were of another nature; The yoke was light, and the burden was easy
which Jesus Christ would have laid upon them, Mat. 11.28, 29. 1 John 5.3.
his commandments were not grievous. It was but to repent of their former
transgressions, and cordially to accept him for their Savior and their Lord;
to study his will, and seek his face; to renounce all other happiness, but that
which he procures us, and to take the Lord alone for our Supreme Good: to
renounce the government of the world and the flesh, and to submit to his meek
and gracious government; to forsake the ways of our own devising, and to walk
in his holy delightful way, to engage our selves to this by Covenant with him,
and to continue faithful in that Covenant. These were the terms on which they
might have enjoyed the Kingdom: And was there any thing unreasonable in all
this? Or had they any thing to object against it? Was it a hard bargain to have
Heaven upon these conditions? When all the price that is required, is only our
Accepting it in that way that the Wisdom of our Lord thinks meet to bestow it?
And for their want of ability to perform this, it consists chiefly in their
want of will: If they were but willing, they should find that God would not be
backward to assist them, If they be willing, Christ is much more willing.

O when the poor tormented wretch, shall look back upon these easy terms
which he refused, and compare the labor of them with the pains and loss which
he there sustaineth, it cannot be now conceived how it will rent his very
heart! Ah (thinks he) how justly do I suffer all this, who would not be at so
small cost and pains to avoid it! Where was my understanding when I neglected
that gracious offer! When I called the Lord, a hard Master! and thought his
pleasant service to be a bondage, and the service of the Devil and my flesh, to
be the only delight and freedom! Was I not a thousand times worse then mad,
when I censured the holy way of God, as needless preciseness! And cried out on
it as an intolerable burden! When I thought the Laws of Christ, too strict!
and all too much that I did for the life to come! O, what had all the trouble
of duty been, in comparison of the trouble that I now sustain? Or all the
sufferings for Christ and well-doing, in comparison of these sufferings that I
must undergo for ever? What if I had spent my days in the strictest life that
ever did Saint? what if I had lived still upon my knees? What if I had lost my
credit with men? and been hated of all men for the sake of Christ? and born the
reproach and scorn of the foolish? What if I had been imprisoned, or banished,
or put to death? O what had all this been to the miseries that I now must
suffer? Then had, my sufferings now been all over, whereas they do but now
begin but will never end: Would not the heaven which I have lost, have
recompensed all my losses? and should not all my sufferings have been there
forgotten? What if Christ had bid me do some great matter? as to live in
continual tears and sorrow, to suffer death a hundred times over? (which yet
he did not) should I not have done it? How much more, when he said but,
Believe and be saved? Seek my face, and thy soul shall live: Love me above all,
walk in my sweet and holy way, take up thy Cross and follow me, and I will
save thee from the wrath of God, and I will give thee everlasting life. O
gracious offer! O easy terms! O cursed wretch, that would not be persuaded
to accept them.

SECT. XIII.. 13.

EIghthly, Furthermore, this also will be a most tormenting Consideration; to
remember what they sold their eternal welfare for, and what it was that they
had for heaven? when they compare the value of the pleasures of sin, with the
value of the recompense of reward which they forsook for those pleasures: how
will the vast disproportion astonish them! To think of a few merry hours, a few
pleasant cups, or sweet morsels, a little ease, or low delight to the flesh,
the applauding breath of the mouth of mortal men, or the possession of so much
Avarus pati^s vult in inferno aete^naliter comburi, quam haereditatem false
acquisitam minui, vel inj^ste retentam restituere. Alexand. Fabritius in
Destructorio vitiorum part. 4. cap. 2 M.
gold or earth; and then to think of the everlasting glory! what a vast
difference between them will then appear? To think, This is all I had for my
soul, my God, my hopes of ^^lessedness! It cannot possibly be expressed how
these thoughts will tear his very heart. Then will he exclaim against his
folly, O deservedly miserable wretch! Did I set my soul to sale on so base a
price? Did I part with my God for a little Lutum, est divitiaru^ proprii^^imum
epitheton: ut lutum enim in plateis a pedibus ambulantium conculcatur, ita Deus
in paenis opes, vet maximas dispergit and delet. Wigandus in Habuc. 2. page
400. Avarus est pueris similis papiliones sequentibus, magna negligentibus,
Fabritius ubi supra ^.
dirt and dross? and sell my Savior, as Judas, for a little silver? O for how
small a matter have I parted with my Happiness? I had but a dream of delight,
for my hopes of heaven; and now I am awaked, it is all vanished: where are now
my honors and attendance? who does applaud me, or trumpet out my praises? where
is the Cap and Knee that was wont to do me reverence? my Morsels now are turned
to Gall, and my Cups to Wormwood: They delighted me no longer then while they
were passing down, when they were past my taste, the pleasure perished. And is
this all that I have had for the inestimable treasure? O what a mad exchange
did I make? what if I had gained all the world and lost my soul? would it have
been a saving match? But alas, how small a part of the world was it, for which
I gave up my part in Glory? -- O that sinners would forethink of this, when
they are swimming in delights of flesh; and studying how to be rich, and
honorable in the world! when they are desperately venturing upon known
transgression, and sinning against the checks of Conscience!

. 14.
SECT. XIV.
NInthly, Yet much more will it add unto their torment, when they consider that
all this-was their own doings, and that they most wilfully did procure their
own destruction: Had they been forced to sin whether they would or no, it would
much abate the rage of their consciences; Or if they were punished for another
man's transgressions; or if any other had been the chiefest author of their
ruin; But to think, that it was the choice of their own will; and that God had
set them in so free a condition, that none in the world could have forced them
to sin against their wills, this will be a griping thought to their hearts. What
(thinks this wretched creature) had I not enemies enough in the world, but I
must be an enemy to my self? God would neither give the devil nor the world so
much power over me, as to force me to commit the least transgression: if I had
not consented, their temprations had been in vain, they could but entice me, it
was my self that yielded, and that did the evil; and must I needs lay hands
upon mine own soul? and imbrew my hands in my own blood? who should pity me,
who pitied not my self, and who brought all this upon mine own head? When the
enemies of Christ did pull down his Word and Laws, his Ministry and Worship,
the news of it did rejoice me; when they set up dumb, or seducing, or ungodly
Ministers, in stead of the faithful Preachers of the Gospel, I was glad to have
it so; when the Minister told me the evil of my ways, and the dangerous state
that my soul was in, I took him for mine enemy, and his Preaching did stir up
my hatred against him and every Sermon did cut me to the heart, and I was ready
to gnash my teeth in indignation against him. If a drunken Ceremonious Preacher
did speak me fair, or read the Common Prayer, or some toothless Homily instead
of a searching plain-dealing Sermon, why, this was according to my own heart;
never was I vvilling of the means of mine own welfare; never had I so great an
enemy as my self; never did God do me any good, or offer me any for the welfare
of my soul, but I resisted him, and was utterly unwilling of it: he has
heaped mercy upon me, and renewed one deliverance after another, and all to
entice my heart unto him, and yet was I never heartily willing to serve him:
He has gently chastized me, and made me groan under the fruit of my
disobedience, and yet, though I promised largely in my affliction, I was never
unfainedly vvilling to obey him: Never did a good Magistrate attempt a
Reformation, but I was against it, nor a good Minister labor the saving of
the Flock, but I was ready to hinder as much as I could; nor a good Christian
labor to save his soul, but I was ready to discourage and hinder him to my
power, as if it were not enough to perish alone, but I must draw all others to
the same destruction. O what cause has my wife, my children, my servants, my
neighbors, to curse the day that ever they saw me! As if I had been made to
resist God, and to destroy my own and other men's souls, so have I madly behaved
my self. Thus will it gnaw upon the hearts of these wretches, to remember that
they were the cause of their own undoing; and that they vvilfully and
obstinately persisted in their Rebellion, and were mere Volunteers in the
service of the Devil; They would venture, they would go on, they would not
hear him that spoke against it: God called to them, to hear and stay, but they
would not; Men called, Conscience called, Matt. 27.19
and said to them (as Pilates wife,) Have nothing to do with that hateful
sin, for I have suffered many things because of it, but they would not hear,
their Will was their Law, their Rule and their Ruin.

. 15.
SECT. XV.
TEnthly and lastly, It will yet make the vvound in their Consciences much
deeper, when they shall remember, that it was not only their own doing, but
that they were at so much cost and pains for their own damnation: What great
undertakings did they engage in for to effect their ruin? To resist God, to
conquer the Spirit, to overcome the power of Mercies, Judgments, and the Word
it self, to silence Conscience! all this did they take upon them, and perform.
What a number of sins did they manage at once? what difficulties did they set
upon? even the conquering of the power of Reason it self. What dangers did they
adventure on? Though they walked in continual danger of the wrath of God, and
knew he could lay them in the dust in a moment; though they knew they lived in
danger of eternal perdition, yet would they run upon all this. What did they
forsake for the service of Satan, and pleasures of sin? They forsook their God,
their Conscience, their best Friends, their eternal hopes of salvation* and
all. They that could not tell how to forsake a lust, or a little honor or ease
for Christ; yet can lose their souls, and all, for sin. O the labor that it
costeth poor wretches to be damned! Sobriety they might have at a cheap rate,
and a great deal of health and ease to boot; and yet they will rather have
Gluttony and Drunkenness, with poverty, and shame, and sickness, and belchings,
and vomitings; with the outcries and lamentations of wife, and children, and
Conscience it self. Contentedness they might have with ease and delight; yet
will they rather have Covetousness and Ambition, though it cost them study and
care, and fears and labor of body and mind, and (...) continual unquietness
and distraction of spirit, and usually a shameful overthrow at the last Though
their anger be nothing but a tormenting themselves, and Revenge and Envy do
consume their spirits, and keep them upon a continual ^ack of disqu^et, though
uncleanness destroy their bodies, and states, and names; and though they are
foretold of the hazard of their eternal Happiness, yet will they do and suffer
all this* rather then suffer their souls to be saved. How fa^t runs Gehezi for
his Leprosy? what cost and pains is Nimrod at to purchase an universal
confusion? How does an Amorous Amnon pine himself away for a self destroying
lust? How studiously and painfully does Absalon seek a hanging? Ahitophels
reputation and his life must go together; even when they are struck blind by a
Judgment of God, Genesis 19.11.
yet how painfully do the Sodomites grope and weary themselves to find the
door? what cost and pains are the Idolatrous Papists at for their multifarious
Wilworship? As Phocion, when being condemned to die, his fellows had drunk up
all the poison before him so that he could not have any, except he would pay
for it a dear price, he desi^es his friend to pay for it, quoniam A^henis ne
mori quid^m gratis li^^t; so, because God in mercy has resolved that no man
shall be damned except he buy it with his sinful labor, they will pay the
price rather then escape. Phil. 2.12.
How unweariedly and unreservedly have the Malignant enemies of the Gospel
among us, spent their estates and health, and limbs, and lives, to overthrow
the power of Godliness, and set up Formality? to put out the light that should
guide them to heaven? and how earnestly do they still prosecute it to the last?
How do the Nations generally rage* and the people imagine a vain thing? The
Kings of the Earth setting themselves, and the Rulers taking counsel together*
against the Lord, and against his Christ? that they may break the bonds of his
Laws asunder, and cast away the cords of his Government from them, though he
that sits in heaven do laugh them to scorn, though the Lord have them in
derision; though ^e speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure, and re^solve them that yet in despite of them all, He will set
his King upon his holy Hill of Sion? Yet will they spend and tire out
themselves as long as they are able to stir against the Lord. O how the reviews
of this will feed the flames of Hell? With what rage will these damned
wretches curse themselves? and say, Was dam^nation vvorth all my cost and
pains? was it not enough that I perished through my negligence, and that I sit
still while Satan played his game, but I must seek so diligently for my own
perdi^tion? Might I not have been damned on free-cost, but I must purchase it
so dearly? I thought I could have been saved without so much ado; and could I
not have been destroyed without so much ado? How well is all my care, and pains,
and violence now requited? Must I work out so laboriously my own damnation,
when God commanded me to work out my Salvation! O if I had done as much for
Heaven, as I did for Hell, I had surely had it. I cried out of the tedious way
of Godliness, and of the painful course of Duty and Self-denial; and yet I
could be at a great deal more pains for Satan, and for death. If I had loved
Christ as strongly as I did my pleasures and profits, and honors, and thought
on him as often, and sought him as painfully, O how happy had I now been! But
justly do I suffer the flames of Hell, who would rather rather buy them so
dear, then have Heaven on free cost, when it was purchased to my hands! --

Thus I have showed you some of those thoughts, which will aggravate the misery
of these wretches for ever. O that God would persuade thee, who read these
words, to take up these thoughts now seasonably and soberly for the preventing
of that unconceivable calamity, that so thou may not be forced in despite of
thee, to take them up in Hell as thy own Tormentor.

It may be some of these hardened wretches, will jest at all this, and say, How
know you what thoughts the damned in Hell will have?

Ans. First, Why read but the 16 of Luke, and you shall there find some of
their thoughts mentioned.

Secondly I know their understandings will not be taken from them, nor their
conscience, nor Passions: As the Joys of Heaven are chiefly enjoyed by the
Rational soul in its Rational actings: so also must the pains of Hell be
suffered. As they will be men still, so will they act as men.

Thirdly, Beside, Scripture has plainly foretold us as much, that their own
thoughts shall accuse them, 1 John 3.19.20.22.
Romans 2.15. and their hearts condemn them. And we see it begun in despairing
persons here.

CHAP. III. They shall lose all things that are comfortable, as well as Heaven.
SECT. I.. 1.

HAving showed you those considerations which will then aggravate their misery,
I am next to show you their Additonall losses which will aggravate it. For as
Godliness has the promise both of this life and that which is to come, and as
God has said, that if we first seek his Kingdom and Righteousness, all things
else shall be added to us: so also are the ungodly threated with the loss both
of spiritual and of corporal blessings; and because they sought not first
Christ's Kingdom and righteousness, therefore shall they lose both it, and that
which they did seek; and there shall be taken from them even that little which
they have. If they could but have kept their present enjoyments, they would not
much have cared for the loss of Heaven: let them take it that have more mind
of it; But catching at the shadow and loosing the substance, they now find
that they have lost both, and that when they rejected Christ, they rejected all
things. If they had lost and forsaken all for Christ, they would have found all
again in him; for he would have been all in all to them: But now they have
forsaken Christ for other things, they shall lose Christ and that also for
which they did forsake him.

But I will particularly open to you some of their other losses.

. 2.
SECT. II.
FIrst, They shall lose their present presumptuous conceit and belief, of their
Interest in God, and of his favor toward them, and of their part in the
merits and sufferings of Christ. This false Belief does now support their
spirits, and defend them from the terrors that else would seiz upon them; and
fortify them against the fears of the wrath to come. Even as true Faith does
afford the soul a true and grounded support and consolation, and enableth us to
look to Eternity with undaunted courage: So also a false ungrounded Faith does
afford a false ungrounded comfort; and abates the trouble of the considerations
of Judgment and damnation. But alas, this is but a palliat salve, a deceitful
comfort; what will ease their trouble when this is gone? When they can Believe
no longer, they will be quieted in mind no longer, and rejoice no longer. If a
man be near to the greatest mischief, and yet strongly conceit that he is in
safety; his conceit may make him as cheerful as if all were well indeed, till
his misery comes, and then both his conceit and comforts vanish. An ungrounded
persuasion of happiness, is a poor cure for real misery. When the mischief
comes, it will cure the mis-belief; but that belief can neither prevent nor
cure the mischief. If there were no more to make a man happy, but to believe
that he is so, or shall be so, happiness would be far commonner then now it is
like to be. It is a wonder, that any man who is not a stranger both to Gospel
and Reason, should be of the Antinomian faith in this; who tell us that faith
is but the believing that God loves us, and that our sins are already pardoned
through Christ; that this is the chief thing that Ministers should preach; that
our Ministers preach not Christ, because they preach not this; that every man
ought thus to believe, but no man to question his Faith, whether he believe
truly or not, etc. But if all men must believe that their sins are pardoned,
then most of the world must believe a lie; And if no man ought to question the
truth of his faith, then most men shall rest deluded with an ungrounded belief.
The Scripture commands us first to believe for remission of sins, before we
believe that our sins are remitted: If we believe in Christ, that is, accept
him cordially for our Savior, and our King, then we shall receive the pardon
of sins. The truth is, we have more ado to Preach down this Antinomian faith,
then they have to Preach it up; and to Preach our people from such a believing,
then they have to preach them to it. I see no need to persuade people so to
believe, the generality are strong and confident in such a belief already. Take
a congregation of 5000. persons, and how few among them all will you find,
that do not believe that their sins are pardoned, and that God loves them?
Especially of the vilest sinners, who have least cause to believe it? Indeed,
as it is all the work of those men to persuade people to this belief^ so is it
the hardest task almost that we meet with, to convince men (...) the
ungroundedness of this belief, and to break that peace (...) maintains in
their souls. Neither do I know a (...) of men's destruction, then such a
misbelief. Who will ^eek for that which he believes he has already? This is
the great engine of Hell, to make men go merrily to their own perdition. I know
men cannot believe Christ, or believe in, or upon Christ, either too soon, or
too much. But they may believe, or judge that themselves are pardoned, adopted,
and in favor with God, too soon, and too much. For a false judgment is always
too much and too soon. As true grounded Faith is the master grace in the
Regenerate, and of greatest use in the Kingdom of Christ; so is a false
ungrounded faith, the master vice in the unregenerate soul, and of greatest use
in the Kingdom of Satan. Why do such a multitude sit still, when they might
have pardon for the seeking? but that they verily think they are pardoned
already? Why do men live so contentedly in the power of the devil, and walk so
carelessly in the certain way to Hell? but that they think their way will have no
such end, and that the Devil has nothing to do with them? they defy him, they
spit at the mention of his name. If you could ask so many 1000 as are now in
Hell, What madness could cause you to come hither voluntarily? or to follow
Satan to this place of torment? when you might follow Christ to the land of
Rest? They would most of them answer you, We believed that we had followed
toward Salvation; and that the way which we were in, would have brought us to
Heaven: We made sure account of being saved, till we found our selves damned;
and never feared Hell, till we were suddenly in it* we would have renounced our
sinful courses and companions, but that we thought we might have them, and
heaven too; We would have sought after Christ more heartily, but that we
thought we had part in him already; We would have been more earnest seekers of
Regeneration, and the power of godliness, but that we verily thought we were
Christians before O if we had known as much as now we know! what lives would we
have led! what persons would we have been! But we have flattered our selves
into these unsufferable torments: We were told of this before from the word of
God: but we would not believe it, till we felt it; and now there is no remedy.
-- Reader, do but stop, and think here with thy self, how sad a Case this is?
That men should so resolutely cheat themselves of their Everlasting Rest? The
Lord grant it never prove thy own case. I would be very loath to weaken the
true faith of the meanest Christian, or to persuade any man that his faith is
false, when it is true: God forbid, that I should so disparage that precious
grace which has the stamp of the spirit! or so trouble the soul that Christ
would have to be comforted! But I must needs in faithfullness tell thee, that
the confident belief of their good estate and of the pardon of their sins,
which the careless, unholy, unhumbled multitude amongst us, do so commonly
boast of, will prove in the end but a soul-damning delusion. It has made me
ready to tremble many a time, to hear a drunken, ungodly, unfaithful Minister,
as confidently in his formal prayers in the Pulpit, give God thanks for
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and assured hope of Glorification, as
if he had been a most assured Saint! when it may be his Sermon was intended to
reproach the Saints, Luke 18.11. Number. 16.3.5.
and to jeer at Sanctification! Me thoughts I even heard the Pharisee say, I
thank thee that I am not as other men: Or Corah; Are not all the people holy,
every one? How commonly do men thank God for these, which they never received,
nor ever shall do? How many have thanked God for pardon of sin, who are now
tormented for it! and for Sanctification and assured hope of Glory, who are now
shut out of that Inheritance of the Sanctified? I warrant you, there is none of
this believing in hell: nor any persuasions of pardon or happiness, nor any
boasting of their honesty, nor justifying of themselves: This was but Satan's
stratagem, that being blindfold they might follow him the more boldly, but then
he will uncover their eyes, and they shall see where they are.

SECT. III.. 3.

2. ANother addition to the misery of the damned will be this; That with the
loss of heaven, they shall lose also all their hopes. In this life, though they
were threatened with the wrath of God, yet their hope of escaping it did bear up
their hearts; And when they were wounded with the terrors of the Word, they
lick't all whole again with their groundless hopes; but then they shall part
with their hopes and heaven together: We can now scarce speak with the vilest
Drunkard, or Swearer, or covetous Wordling, or scorner at Godliness, but he
hopes to be saved for all this: If you should go to all the Congregation, or
Town, or Country, and ask them one by one, whether they hope to be saved? how
few shall you meet with, that will not say yea? or that make any great question
of it? But, O happy world, if Salvation were as common as this Hope! Even those
whose hellish nature is written in the face of their conversation, that he that
runs may read it, whose tongues plead the cause of the devil, and speak the
language of hell* and whose delight is in nothing but the works of the flesh,
yet these do strongly hope for heaven, though the God of heaven has told them
over and over again in his Word, that no such as they shall ever come there.
Though most of the world shall eternally perish, and the Judge of the world
himself has told us, that of the many that are called, yet but few are chosen,
yet almost all do hope for it, and cannot endure any man that does but question
their hopes: Let but their Minister Preach against their false hopes; or their
best friend come to them, and say. I am afraid your present hopes of heaven
will deceive you, I see you mind not your soul, your heart is not set upon
Christ and heaven, you do not so much as pray to God, and worship him in your
Family; and the Scripture gives you not the least hope of being saved in such a
condition as this is: How ill would they take such an admonition as this? and
bid the Admonisher look to himself, and let them alone, he should not answer
for them, they hope to be saved as soon as these preciser men, that pray, and
talk of heaven so much. -- Nay, so strong are these men's hopes, that they will
dispute the case with Christ himself at Judgment, and plead their eating and
drinking in his presence, their Preaching in his Name, and casting out devils,
(and these are more probable Arguments, then our Baptism, and common
Profession, and name of Christians) they will stiffly deny that ever they
neglected Christ in hunger, nakedness, prison, etc. (and if they did, yet that
is less then stripping, imprisoning, banishing, or killing Christ in his
Members,) till Christ confute them with the sentence of their condemnation:
Though the heart of their hopes will be broken at their death, and particular
Judgment, yet it seems they would fain plead for some hope at the general
Judgment. But O the sad state of these men, when they must bid farewell to all
their Hopes! when their Hopes shall all perish with them! Reader, if thou will
not believe this, it is because thou will not believe the Scriptures. The holy
Ghost has spoke it as plain as can be spoken, Prove. 11.7. When a wicked man
dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perishes,
Prove. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, but the expectation
of the wicked shall perish. See Isai. 28.15, 18. Job 27.8, 9. For what is the
hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul?
Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Job 8.12, 13, 14. Can the
Rush grow up without mire? Can the Flag grow without water? whilst it is yet in
its greeness, not cut down, it withers before any other herb; So are the
paths of all that forget God, and the Hypocrites hope shall perish; whose hope
shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a Spiders Web; He shall lean upon
his house, but it shall not stand, he shall hold it fast, but it shall not
endure. Job 11.20. But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not
escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost: The giving up of
the Ghost is a fit, but terrible resemblance of a wicked man's giving up of his
hopes. For first, As the soul departs not from the body without the greatest
terror and pain, so also does the hope of the wicked depart. O the direful
gripes and pangs of horror that seize upon the soul of the sinner at Death and
Judgment, when he is parting with all his former hopes! Secondly, The soul
departs from the body suddenly, in a moment, which has there delightfully
continued so many years; Just so does the hope of the wicked depart. Thirdly,
The soul which then departs, will never return to live with the body in this
world any more; and the hope of the wicked when it departs, takes an
everlasting Farewell of his soul. A miracle of Resurrection shall again conjoyn
the soul and body, but there shall be no such miraculous Resurrection of the
damned's hope. Me thinks it is the most doleful Spectacle that this world
affords, to see such an ungodly person dying, and to think of his soul, and his
hopes departing together! and with what a sad change he presently appears in
another world? Then if a man could but speak with that hopeless soul, and ask
it; what, are you now as confident of salvation as you were wont to be? Do you
now hope to be saved as soon as the most godly? O what a sad answer would he
return* They are just like Corah Dathan, and their Companions; while they are
confident in their Rebellion against the Lord* and cry out, Are not all the
people holy? They are suddenly swallowed up, and their hopes with them: Or like
Ahah, who hating and imprisoning the Prophet for foretelling his danger, while
he is in confident hopes to return in peace, is suddenly smitten with that
mortal Arrow, which let out those hopes, together with his soul: Or like a
Thief upon the Gallows, who has a strong conceit that he shall receive a
Pardon, and so hopes, and hopes, till the Ladder is turned: Or like the
unbelieving sinners of the world before the Flood, who would not believe the
threatenings of Noah, but perhaps deride him for preparing his Ark so many years
together, when no danger appeared, till suddenly the Flood came and swept them
all away. If a man, had asked these men when they were climbing up into the
tops of Trees and Mountains, Where is now your hope of escaping? Or your merry
deriding at the painful preventing preparations of godly Noah? Or your
contemptuous unbelief of the warnings of God? What do you think these men would
then say? when the waters still pursued them from place to place, till it
devoured their hopes and them together? Or if one had asked Ahab, when he had
received his wound, and turned out of the battle to die; what think you now of
the Prophecy of Micaiah? will you release him out of prison? do you now hope
to return in peace? Why, such a sudden overthrow of their hopes will every
unregenerate sinner receive. While they were upon earth, they frustrated the
expectations (as I may say) of God and man: God sent his messengers to tell
them plainly of their danger, and said, It may be they will hear, and return
and escape: but they stiffened their necks and hardened their hearts: The
Minister studied, and instructed and persuaded, in hope: And when one Sermon
prevailed not, he labored to speak more plainly and piercingly in the next, in
hope that at last they would be persuaded and return: till their hopes were
frustrate, and their labor lost, and they were fain to turn their exhortation
to lamentation, and to sit down in sorrow for men's wilful misery; and take up
the sad exclamation of the Prophet, Isai. 53.1. Who has believed our report?
And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? So did godly parents also instruct
their children in Hope; and watch over them, and pray for them, hoping that at
last their hearts would turn to Christ. And is it not meet that God should
frustrate all their hopes, who have frustrated the hopes of all that desired
their welfare? O that careless sinners would be awaked to think of this in
time? If thou be one of them, who art reading these lines, I do here as a
friend advise thee from the word of the Lord, that, as thou would not have
all thy Hopes deceive thee when thou have most need of them, thou presently try
them whether they will prove current at the touchstone of the Scripture; and if
thou find them unsound, let them go, what sorrow soever it cost thee. Rest not
till thou can give a reason of all thy hopes: 1 Pet. 3.15.
till thou can prove that they are the hopes which grace and not nature only
has wrought, Marks of sound Hope.
that they are grounded upon Scripture-promises and sound evidences, that they
purify thy heart: that they quicken, and not cool thy endeavors in godliness;
that the more thou hopest, the less thou sinnest; and the more painful thou
art in following on the work; and not grow more loose and careless by the
increasing of thy hopes: that they make thee set lighter by all things on
earth, because thou have such hopes of higher possessions: that thou art
willing to have them tried, and fearful of being deceived: that they stir up
they desires of enjoying what thou hopest for, and the deferring thereof is the
trouble of thy heart, Prove. 13.12. If thou be sure that thy hopes be such as
these; God forbid that I should speak a word against them, or discourage thee
from proceeding to hope thus to the end: No, I rather persuade thee to go on in
the strength of the Lord; and what ever men or devils, or thy own unbelieving
heart shall say against it, go on, and hold fast thy hope, and be sure, it
shall never make thee ashamed. But if thy hope be not of this spiritual nature,
and if thou art able to give no better reason why thou hopest, then the worst
in the world may give, That God is merciful; and thou must speed as well as
thou can, or the like; and have not one sound evidence of a saving work of
grace upon thy soul to show for thy hopes; but only hopest that thou shall be
saved because thou would have it so, and because it is a terrible thing to
despair; If this be thy case, delay not an hour; but presently cast away those
hopes, that thou may get into a capacity of having better in their stead.
But it may be thou will think this strange doctrine, and say, What, would you
persuade me directly to despair? Answ. Sinner; I would be loath to have thy
soul destroyed by wilful self-delusion. The truth is, There is a hope (such as
I have before showed thee of) which is a singular grace and duty* and there is
a hope which is a notorious dangerous sin. So consequentely there is a despair
which is a grievous sin: and there is a despair which is absolutely necessary
to thy salvation. I would not have thee, despair of the suffi^ciency of the
blood of Christ to save thee, if thou believe and heartily obey him: Nor of the
willingness of God to pardon and save thee, if thou be such a one: Nor yet
absolutely of thy own salvation; because while there is life and time, there is
some hope of thy conversion, and so of thy salvation, Nor would I draw thee to
despair of finding Christ, if thou do but heartily seek him: Or of Gods
acceptance of any sincere endeavors, nor of thy success against Satan, or any
corruption which thou shall heartily oppose, nor of any thing whatsoever God
has promised to do, either to all men in general, or to such as thou art. I
would not have thee doubt of any of these in the least measure, much less
despair. John 3.3. Heb 12.14. Luke 13.3, 5. Luke 14.24, 25, 26, 27, etc. Mat.
6.21. Romans 8.6, 7, 8, 13. 1 John 2.15. Luke 16.13.
But this is the despair that I would persuade thee to, as thou love thy
soul: That thou despair of ever being saved, except thou be born again; or of
seeing God without Holiness: or of escaping perishing, except thou soundly
Repent: Or of ever having part in Christ, or salvation by him, or ever being
one of his true Disciples, except thou love him above Father, mother, or thy
own life: Or of ever having a Treasure in Heaven, except thy very heart be
there: Or of ever scaping eternal death, if thou walk after the flesh, and do
not by the spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh; or of ever truly loving God,
or being his servant, while thou love the world, and servest it. These things
I would have thee despair of; and what ever else God has told thee shall never
come to pass. And when thou have sadly searched into thy own heart, and
find thy self in any of these cases, I would have thee despair thy self of
ever being saved in that state thou art in; Never stick at the sadness of the
conclusion, man, but acknowledge plainly, If I die before I get out of this
estate, I am lost for ever. It is as good deal truly with thy self as not: God
will not flatter thee, he will deal plainly, whether thou do or not. The very
truth is, This kind of despair is one of the first steps to Heaven. Consider,
if a man be quite out of his way, what must be the first means to bring him in
again? Why, a despair of ever coming to his journies end in the way that he is
in. If his home be Eastward, and he be going Westward, as long as he hopes he
is the right, he will go on; and as long as he so goes on hoping* he goes
further amiss. Therefore when he meets with some body who assures him that he
is clean out of his way, and brings him to despair of coming home, except he
turn back again; then he will return, and then he may hope and spare not. Why,
sinner, Just so it is with thy soul: Thou art born out of the way to Heaven;
and in that way thou have proceeded many a year; Yet thou go on quietly, and
hopest to be saved, because thou art not so bad as many others. Why, I tell
thee, except thou be brought to throw away those hopes, and see that thou have
all this while been quite out of the way to Heaven, and have been a child of
wrath, and a servant of Satan, unpardoned, unsanctified, and if thou had dyed
in this state, had been certainly damned; I say, till thou be brought to
this, thou will never return and be saved. Who will turn out of his way, while
he hopes he is right? And let me once again tell thee, that if ever God mean
good to thy soul, and intend to save thee, this is one of the first things he
will work upon thee: Remember what I say, till thou feel God convincing thee,
that the way which thou have lived in, will not serve the turn, and so breaking
down thy former hopes, there is yet no saving work wrought upon thee; how well
soever thou may hope of thy self. Yea, this much more, If any thing keep thy
soul out of Heaven (which God forbid) there is nothing in the world liker to do
it, then thy false hopes of being saved, while thou art out of the way to
salvation. Why else is it that God cries down such hopes in his word? Why is it
that every faithful, skilful Minister does bend all his strength against the
false faith and hope of sinners? as if he were to fight against neither small
nor great, but this prince of iniquity? Why alas, they know that these are the
main pillars of Satan's Kingdom; Bring down but them two, and the house will
fall. They know also the deceit and vanity of such hopes: that they are
directly contrary to the Truth of God, and what a sad case that soul is in, who
has no other hope, but that Gods word will prove false: when the truth of God
is the only ground of true hope. Alas, it is no pleasure to a Minister to speak
to people on such an unwelcome subject; no more then it is to a pitiful
Physician, to tell his patient; I do despair of your life, except you let
blood, or there is no hope of the cure, except the gangrened member be cut off.
If it be true, and of flat necessity, though it be displeasing, there is no
remedy. Gal. 5.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Why, I beseech you think on it reasonably without prejudice or passion, and
tell me, Where does God give any hope of your salvation till you are new
Creatures? Gal. 6.15. Nay, I have showed you where he flatly overthrows all
such hope. And will it do you any good for a Minister to give you hope, where
God gives you none? or would you desire them to do so? Why, what would you
think of such a Minister, when those hopes forsake you? or what thanks will you
give him, when you find your self in Hell? would you not there lie and curse
him for a deceiver for ever? I know this to be true, and therefore I had rather
you were displeased with me here, then curse me there. For my own part, if I
had but one Sermon to preach while I lived, I think this should be it; to
persuade down all your ungrounded hopes of Heaven; not to leave you there in
despair, but that you may hope upon better grounds which will never deceive
you. God has told us what we shall say, Isai. 3.10, 11. Say to the Righteous,
It shall be well with him, and to the wicked, It shall be ill with him And if I
shall say, it shall be well with thee, when God has said, it shall be ill with
thee, what the better were thou for this? Whose word would stand, think you,
Gods or mine? O, little do carnal Ministers know what they do, who strengthen
the hopes of ungodly men? They work as hard as they can against God, while they
stand there to speak in the name of God. God lays his battery against these
false hopes, as knowing that they must now down, or the sinner must perish: And
these teachers build up what God is pulling down: I know not what they can do
worse to destroy men's souls. There are false teachers in regard of application,
though they are true in regard of doctrine. This is partly through their
flattering men-pleasing temper, partly because they are guilty themselves, and
so should destroy their own hopes, as well as others; and partly because being
graceless, they want that experience which should help them to discern betwixt
hope and hope. The same may be said of carnal friends. If they see a poor
sinner but doubting whether all be well with him, and but troubled for fear
least he be out of the way: What pains do they take to keep up his old hopes?
What, say they, If you should not be saved, God help a great many: You have
lived honestly, etc. Never doubt, man; God is merciful. -- Alas silly
creatures! You think you perform an office of friendship, and do him much good!
Even as much as to give cold water to a man in a Fever, you may ease him at
the present, but it afterward inflames him. What thanks will he give you
hereafter, if you settle him upon his former hopes again? Did you never read
Prove. 24.24. He that says to the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the
people curse, Nations shall abhor him. If you were faithful friends indeed,
you should rather say thus to him; Friend, if you perceive the soundness of
your hopes for Heaven to be doubtful, O do not smother those doubts; but go and
open them to your Minister, or some able friend; and try them thoroughly in
time; and hold no more of them now, then will hold good at Judgment: It is
better they break while they may be built more surely, then when the discovery
will be your torment, but not your remedy. -- This were friendly and faithful
counsel indeed. The Proverb is, If it were not for hope, the heart would break:
And Scripture tells us, that the heart must break that Christ will save. How can
it be bound up, till it be broken first? So that the hope which keeps their
hearts from breaking, does keep them also from healing and saving.

Well, if these unwise men (who are as we say, penny wise, and pound foolish,
who are wise to keep off the smart of a short, conditional, necessary, curable
despair, but not wise to prevent an eternal, absolute, tormenting, uncurable
despair) do not change their condition speedily, these Hopes will leave them,
which they would not leave; and then they that were now resolved to hold fast
their Hopes, let all the Preachers in the world say what they would, shall let
them go whether they will or no. Then let them hope for heaven if they can.

So that you see it will aggravate the misery of the damned, that with the loss
of heaven, they shall lose all that hope of it, which now supporteth them.

SECT. IV.. 4.

THirdly, Another Additional loss will be this. They will lose-all that false
peace of Conscience, which makes their present life so easy. The loss of this
must necessarily follow the loss of the former. When Presumption and Hope are
gone, Peace cannot tarry. Who would think now that sees how quietly the
multitude of the ungodly live, that they must very shortly lie roaring in
everlasting flames? They lie down, and rise, and sleep as quietly, they eat and
drink as quietly; they go about their work as cheerfully, they talk as
pleasantly as if nothing ailed them, or as if they were as far out of danger as
an obedient Believer; like a man that has the Falling Sickness, you would
little think while he is laboring as strongly, and talking as heartily as
another man, how he will presently fall down, and lie gasping, and foaming, and
beating his breast in torment; So it is with these men: They are as free from
the fears of Hell as others, as free from any vexing sorrows, not so much as
troubled with any cares for the state of their souls, nor with any sad or
serious thoughts of what shall become of them in another world; yea, and for
the most part they have less doubts or disquiet of mind, then those who shall
be saved. O happy men, if it would be always thus! and if this peace would
prove a lasting peace! But alas, there is the misery, it will not. They are now
in their own Element, as the Fish in the water, but little knows that silly
creature, when he is most fearlesly and delightfully swallowing down the Bait,
how suddenly he shall be snatched out, and lie dead upon the Bank! And as
little think these careless sinners, what a change they are near. The Sheep, or
the Ox is driven quietly to the slaughter, because he knows not whither he
goes; if he knew it were to his death, you could not drive him so easily. How
contented is the Swine, when the Butchers Knife is shaving his throat? little
thinking that it is to prepare for his death. Why, it is even so with these
sensual careless men: they fear the mischief least, when they are nearest to
it, because they feel it not, or see it not with their eyes: As in the days of
Noah (says Christ) they were eating and drinking, Matthew. 24 37, 38 39.
marrying, and giving in marriage, till the day that Noah entered into the Ark,
and knew not till the Flood came and took them all away; So will the coming of
Christ be; and so will the coming of their particular judgment be: For (says
the Apostle) when they say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes
upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1
These. 5.3. O cruel Peace, which ends in such a War! Reader, If this be thy own
case; if thou have no other peace in thy Conscience then this ungrounded,
self-created peace; I could heartily wish for thy own sake that thou would
cast it off. As I would not have any humble gracious soul to vex their own
consciences needlessly, nor to disquiet, and discompose their spirits by
troubles of their own making, nor to unfit themselves for duty, nor interrupt
their comfortable communion with God, nor to weaken their bodies, or cast
themselves into Melancholy distempers to the scandal of Religion: so would I
not have a miserable wretch, who lives in daily and hourly danger of dropping
into Hell, to be as merry and as quiet, as if all were well with him: It is
both unseemly and unsafe; more unseemly then to see a man go laughing to the
Gallows; and more unsafe then to favor the Gangrened member which must be cut
off, or to be making merry when the enemy is entering our Habitations: Men's
first peace is usually a false peace; it is a second peace which is brought
into the soul upon the casting out of the first, which will stand good, and yet
not always that neither; for where the change is by the halves, the second or
third peace may be unsound as well as the first: as many a man that casts
away the peace of his Profaneness, does take up the peace of mere Civility and
morality, or if he yet discover the unsoundness of that, and is cast into
trouble, then he heals all with outward Religiousness, or with a half
Christianity, and there he takes up with peace: This is but driving Satan out
of one room into another, but till he be cast out of possession, the peace is
unsound. Hear what Christ says, Luke 11.21.22. When a strong man armed keeps
his palace, his goods are in peace; but when a stronger then he shall come upon
him, and overcome him, he takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted,
and devideth his spoils. The soul of every man by nature is Satan's Garrison;
all is at peace in such a man, till Christ comes; when Christ storms this
heart, he breaks the peace, he gives it most terrible Alarms of Judgment and
Hell, he battereth it with the Ordnance of his Threatenings and Terrors; he sets
all in a combustion of Fear and Sorrow, till he have forced it to yield to his
mere mercy, and take him for the Governor, and Satan is cast out; and then does
he establish a firm and lasting Peace. If therefore thou art yet but in that
first peace, and thy heart was never yet either taken by storm, or delivered up
freely to Jesus Christ, never think that thy peace will endure. Can the soul
have peace which is at enmity with Christ, or stands out against him, or thinks
his Government too severe, and his Conditions hard? Can he have peace against
whom God proclaims war? I may say to thee, as Jehu to Joram, when he asked,
Is it peace? What peace while the whordoms of thy mother Jezabel remain? So
thou art desirous to hear nothing from the mouth of a Minister but peace; but
what peace can there be till thou have cast away thy wickedness, and thy first
peace, and made thy peace with God through Christ? Will thou believe God
himself in this Case? Why, read then what he says twice over, Isai. 48.22. and
57.21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. And has he said it? and
shall it not stand? Sinner, Though thou may now harden and fortify thy heart
against Fear, and Grief, and Trouble, yet as true as God is true, they will
batter down thy proud and fortified spirit, and seize upon it, and drive thee
to amazement: This will be done either here or hereafter. My counsel therefore
to thee is, that thou presently examine the grounds of thy peace, and say, I am
now at ease and quiet in my mind; but is it grounded? and will it be lasting?
Is the danger of eternal Judgment over? Am I sure my sins are pardoned, and my
soul shall be saved? If not, alas, what cause of peace? I may be in hell before
the next day for ought I know. -- Certainly, a man that stands upon the Pinnacle
of a Steeple, or that sleeps on the top of the main Mast, or that is in the
heat of the most bloody fight, has more cause of peace and carelessness then
thou. Why, thou live under the wrath of God continually, thou art already
sentenced to eternal death, and may every hour expect the execution, till
thou have sued out a pardon through Christ. I can show thee a hundred
threatenings in Scripture which are yet in force against thee; but can thou
show me one Promise for thy safety an hour? What assurance have thou when thou
go forth of thy doors, that thou shall ever come in again? I should wonder,
but that I know the desperate hardness of the heart of man, how a man that is
not sure of his peace with God, could eat, or drink, or sleep, or live in
peace! That thou art not afraid when thou lie down, lest thou should awake
in hell; or when thou risest up, lest thou should be in hell before night;
or when thou sit in thy house, that thou still fear not the approach of
death, or some fearful Judgment seizing upon thee, and that the threats and
sentence are not always sounding in thy ears. Well, if thou were the nearest
friend that I have in the world, in this case that thou art in, I could wish
thee no greater good, then that God would break in upon thy careless heart, and
shake thee out of thy false peace, and cast thee into trouble; that when thou
feel thy heart at ease, thou would remember thy misery, that when thou
art pleasing thy self with thy estate, or business, or labors, thou would
still remember the approaching woe; that thou would cry out in the midst of
thy pleasant discourse and merry company, O how near is the great and dreadful
change; that what ever thou art doing, God would make thee read thy sentence,
as if it were still written before thine eyes: and which way soever thou go,
he would still meet thee full in the face with the sense of his wrath, as the
Angel did Balaam with a drawn sword, till he had made thee cast away thy
groundless peace, and lie down at the feet of Christ whom thou have resisted,
and say, Lord, what would thou have me to do and so receive from him a surer
and better peace, which will never be quite broken, but will be the beginning
of thy everlasting Peace, and not perish in thy perishing, as the groundless
peace of the world will do.

SECT. V.. 5.

FOurthly, Another additionall loss, aggravating their loss of Heaven, is this;
They shall lose all their carnal Mirth. Their merry vein will then be opened
and emptied: They will say themselves (as Solomon does) of their laughter, Thou
wast mad; and of their Mirth, What did thou? Eccl. 2.2. Their witty jests,
and pleasant conceits are then ended, and their merry tales are all told. Their
mirth was but as the crackling of throns under a pot, Eccles. 7.6. It made a
great blaze and unseemly noise for a little while, but it was presently gone,
and will return no more. They scorned to entertain any saddening thoughts; the
talk of death and Judgment was irksome to them, because it dampt their mirth;
they could not endure to think of their sin or danger, because these thoughts
did sad their spirits: They knew not what it was to weep for sin; or to humble
themselves under the mighty hand of God: They could laugh away sorrow, and sing
away cares, and drive away these Melancholy thoughts: They thought, if they
should live so austerely, and meditate, and pray, and mourn, as the godly do,
their lives would be a continual misery, and it were enough to make them run
mad. Alas, poor souls! What a misery then will that life be, where you shall
have nothing but sorrow? Intense, heart-piercing, multiplied sorrow? When you
shall have neither the Joys of the Saints, nor your own former Joys? Do you
think there is one merry heart in hell? or one joyful countenance? or jesting
tongue? You cry now, A little mirth is worth a great deal of sorrow: But sure a
little godly sorrow, which would have ended in eternal Joy, had been more worth
then a great deal of your foolish mirth, which will end in sorrow. Can men of
gravity run laughing and playing in the streets, as little children do? or wise
men laugh at a mischief, as fools and mad men? Or men that are sound in the
brain, Vid. Platerum observat. lib. 1. page 92.
fall a dancing, as they will do in a Viti Saltus, till they fall down dead
with it? No more pleasure have wise men in your pitiful mirth: For the end of
such mirth is sorrow.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
FIfthly, Another additional loss will be this, They shall lose all their
sensual contentments and delights. That which they esteemed their chiefest
good, their heaven, their God, that must they lose as well as Heaven and God
himself. They shall then in despite of them fulfill that command, Tunc edax
flamma comburit, quos nunc carnalis delectatio polluit: Tunc infinitum patens
inserni barathrum devorat, quos inanis elatio nunc exaltat: et qui olim ex
vitio volunt^tem ca^d^ praesuaso^is explev^^unt, tunc cum duce suo reprobi ad
tormenta (...). Gregor. Moral. 9. Quid enim con^^letur eos qui suam habent
consolationem? Non consolatur Christ, infantia ga^rulos: non consolantur
Christi (...) cachinnantes; non consola^tur p^nni ejus ambulantes in stolis:
Non consolantur p^es^pe and stabulum amantes primas cathedras in Synagogis: sed
aequanimiter sort unive^^am h^n^ consolationem expectantibus in silentio
dominum: ^ug^^tibus, pannosis, pauperibus credere videbantur. Bernard, Sermon. 22.
which here they would not be persuaded to obey, Romans 13.14. of making no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. O what a fall will the
proud ambitious man have, from the top of his honors! As his dust and bones
will not be known from the dust and bones of the poorest beggar; so neither
will his soul be honored or favored any more then theirs. What a number of
Right Honorable Lords, Right Worshipful Kinghts and Gentlemen, Right Reverend
Fathers and Learned Doctors are now shut out of the presence of Christ? If you
say, How can I tell that? Why I answer, because their judge has told me so:
Has he not said by his Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. That not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called? And if they be not called,
they be not predestinate, or justified, or glorified. Romans 8.30. Sure that rich
man, Luke 16. has now no humble obeisance done him, nor titles of honor put
upon him; nor do the poor now wait at his gates to receive of his scraps. They
must be shut out of their wel-contrived houses, and sumptuous buildings; their
comely Chambers, with costly hangings, their soft beds, and easy couches. They
shall not find there their gallant walks, their curious Gardens, with varity
of beauteous odoriferous fruits and flowers; their rich Pastures and pleasant
Meadows, and plenteous Harvest, and Flocks, and Herds. Their tables will not be
so spread and furnished, nor they so punctually attended and observed. They
have not there variety of Dainty fare, now several courses, nor tempting
dishes, prepared to please their appetites to the full: the rich man there
fares not deliciously every day: Neither shall he wear there his purple and
fine linen: The jetting gorgeous well dressed gallant, that must not have a pin
amiss, that stands as a picture set to sale, that take themselves more beholden
to the Tailor or Semster for their comeliness, then to God, they shall then be
quite in a different garb; There is no powdering or curling of the hair, nor
eying of themselves, nor desirous expecting the admiration of beholders. Sure
our voluptuous youths must leave their Cards and Dice behind them; as also
their Hawks, and Hounds, and Bowls, and all their former pleasant sports: They
shall then spend their time in a more sad employment, and not in such pastimes
as these. Where will then be your Maygames, and your Morris daunces? your
Stage Plays, and your Shows? What mirth will you have in remembering all the
Games, and Sports, and Dauncings which you had on the Lords Days, when you
should have been delighting your selves in God and his work? O, what an
alteration will our Joviall roaring swaggerers then find? What bitter draughts
they will have in stead of their Wine and Ale? If there were any drinking of
healths, the Rich man would not have begged so hard for a drop of water: The
heat of their lust will be then abated: They shall not spend their time in
courting their Mistresses, in lascivious discourse, in amorous songs, in wanton
dalliance, in their lustful embracements, or brutish defilements: Yet they are
like enough to have each others company there; But they will have no more
comfort in that company, then Zimri and Cosbi, in dying together; or then lewd
companions have in being hanged together on the same Gallows: O the doleful
meeting that these lustful wantons will have there? How it will even cut them
to the heart to look each other in the face! And to remember that beastly
pleasure for which they now must pay so dear! So will it be with the Fellowship
of Drunkards, and all others that were play-fellows together in sin, who got
not their pardon in the time of their lives: What a direful greeting will
there then be? Cursing the day that ever they saw the faces of one another!
Remembering and ripping up all their lewdness, to the aggravation of their
torment? O that sinners would re^member this in the midst of their pleasure and
jollity! And say to one another. We must shortly reckon for this before the
jealous God. Will the remembrance of it then be comfortable, or terrible?
Will these delights accompany us to another world? How shall we look each
other in the faces, if we meet in Hell together for these things? Will not the
memorial of them be then our torment? Shall we then take these for friendly
actions? Or rather wish we had spent this time in praying together, o^
admonishing one another? O, why should we sell such a lasting, incomprehensible
Joy, for one taste of a seeming pleasure? Come, as we have sinned together, let
us pray together before we stir, that God would pardon us: And let us enter
into a promise to one another, that we will do thus no more, but will meet
together with the godly in the worship of God, and help one another toward
Heaven, as often as we have met for our sinful metriments, in helping to deceive
and destroy each other. -- This would be the way to prevent this sorrow, and a
course that would comfort you when you look back upon it hereafter. Who would
spend so many days and years, and thoughts, and cares, and be at so much cost
and pains, and all to please this flesh for a moment, which must shortly be
most loathsome stinking rottenness; and in the mean time neglect our precious
souls, and that state which we must trust to for ever and ever? To be at such
pains for that pleasure which dies in the enjoying, and is almost as soon gone
as come, and when we have most need of comfort will be so far from following us
as our happiness, that it will be perpetual fuel to the flames which shall
torment us! O that men knew but what they desire, when they would so fain have
all things suited to the desires of the flesh! They would have Buildings,
VValks, Lands, Clothes, Diet, and all so fitted as may be most pleasing and
delightful. Why, this is but to desire their temptations to be increased, and
their snare strengthened: Their Joys will be more carnal; and how great an
enemy carnal Joy is to spiritual, experienced men can quickly tell you. If we
took the flesh so much for your enemy as we do profess, we could not so
earnestly desire, and contrive to accommodate it, and so congratulate all its
contentments as we do.

CHAP. IV. The greatness of the torments of the damned discovered.
. 1.
SECT. I.
HAving thus showed you how great their Loss is who are shut out of Rest, and
how it will be aggravated by those Additional losses which will accompany it: I
should next here show you the greatness of those Positive sufferings which will
accompany this loss. But because I am to Treat of Rest rather then of Torment,
I will not meddle with the Explication of the quality of those sufferings* but
only show their greatness in some few brief discoveries, l^st the careless
sinner, while he hears of no other punishment but that of loss, before
mentioned, should think he can bear that well enough by his own resolvedness,
and so flatter himself ^^hop^ of a tolerable hell. That there are, besides the
loss of Happiness, such actual sensible Torments for the damned, is a matter
beyond all doubt, to him that does not doubt of the truth of the Scripture; and
that they will be exceeding great, may appear by these Arguments following.

First, From the principal Author of them, which is God himself: As it was no
less then God whom the sinner had offended, so it is no less then God that will
punish them for their offenses. He has prepared those torments for his
Enemies; His continued Anger will still be devouring them; His Breath of
Indignation will kindle the flames; His Wrath will be an intolerable burden to
their souls. O, if it were but a creature that they had to do with, ^hey might
better bear it, for the Penalty would be answerable to the Infirmity of him
that should inflict it: A child can give but an easy stroke, but the strokes
of a Giant will be answerable to his strength: Woe to him that falls under the
strokes of the Almighty! They shall feel to their sorrow, That it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God: It were nothing in comparison
to this, if all the world were against them, or if the strength of all
creatures were united in one to inflict their penalty. They had now rather
venture upon the displeasure of God, then to displease a Landlord, a Master, a
Friend, a Neighbor, or their own Flesh; but then they will wish a thousand
times in vain, that they had lost the favor of all the world, and been hated of
all men, so they had not lost the favor of God; for as there is no life like
his Favor, so is there no death like his displeasure; O what a consuming fire
is his Wrath? If it be kindled here, and that but a little, how do we wither
before it, as the grass that is cut down before the Sun? How soon does our
strength decay and turn to weakness? and our beauty to deformity? Churches are
rooted up, Commonwealths are overthrown, Kingdoms depopulated, Armies
destroyed, and who can stand before his wrath? Even the Heavens and the Earth
will melt at his Presence, and when he speaks the word at his great Day of
Account, they will be burnt up before him as a scrole in the fire. The flames
do not so easily run through the dry Stubble, or consume the Houses where its
violence has prevailed, as the wrath of God will feed upon these wretches. O,
they that could not bear a Prison, or a Gibbet, or Fire for Christ, no nor
scarce a few scorns from the mouths of the ignorant, how will they now bear the
devouring fire?

SECT. II.. 2.

2. THe place or state of torment is purposely ordained for the glorifying of
the Attribute of Gods Justice. As all the Works of God are great and wonderful,
so those above all, which are specially intended for the eminent advancing of
some of his Attributes: When he will glorify his Power, he makes the worlds by
his Wisdom: The comely order of all and singular creatures declare his Wisdom;
His Providence is shown in sustaining all things, and maintaining Order, and
attaining his excellent ends, amongst the confused, perverse, tumultuous
agitations of a world of wicked, foolish, self-destroying Miscreants: When a
spark of his Wrath does kindle upon the earth, the whole world, save only
eight persons, are drowned; Sodom Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim are burnt with
fire from heaven to ashes; The sea shuts her mouth upon some; The earth does
open and swallow others; The Pestilence destroys them up by thousands: The
present deplorable estate of the Jews may fully testify this to the world: And
yet the glorifying of the two great Attributes, of Mercy and Justice, is
intended most eminently for the life to come. As therefore when God will
purposely then glorify his Mercy, he will do it in a way and degree that is
now incredible and beyond the comprehension of the Saints that must enjoy it;
so that the blood of his Son, and the enjoyment of himself immediately in Glory
shall not be thought too high an honor for them: So also, when the time comes
that he will purposely manifest his Justice, it shall appear to be indeed the
Justice of God: The everlasting flames of Hell will not be thought too hot for
the Rebellious; and when they have there burned through millions of Ages, he
will not repent him of the evil which is befaln them. O, woe to the soul that is
thus set up for a Butt, for the wrath of the Almighty to shoot at! and for a
Bush that must burn in the flames of his Jealousy, and never be consumed!

SECT. III.. 3.

3. THe torments of the damned must needs be extreme, because they are the
effect of Divine Revenge: Wrath is terrible, but Revenge is implacable: When
the great God shall say, I will now be righted for all the wrongs that I have
born from rebellious creatures; I will let out my wrath, and it shall be stayed
no more, you shall now pay for all the abuse of my Patience! Remember now how I
waited your leisure in vain, how I stooped to persuade you; how I, as it were,
kneeled to entreat you: did you think I would always be slighted by such
miscreants as you? -- O, who can look up when God shall thus plead with them in
the heat of Revenge? Then will he be revenged for ever mercy abused, for his
creatures consumed in luxury and excess; for every hours time misspent; for the
neglect of his word, for the vilifying of his messengers, for the hating of his
people, for the profanation of his ordinances, and neglect of his worship, for
the breaking of his Sabbaths, and the grieving of his Spirit, for the taking of
his Name in vain, for unmerciful neglect of his servants in distress. O the
numberless bills that will be brought in! And the charge that will overcharge
the soul of the sinner! And how hotly Revenge will pursue them all to the
highest! How God will stand over them with the rod in his hand (not the rod of
fatherly chastisement, but that Iron rod wherewith he bruiseth the rebellious)
and lay it on for all their neglects of Christ and grace! Psalm. 2.9.
O that men would foresee this! And not put themselves under the hammer of
revenging fury, when they may have the treasure of happiness at so easy rates!
And please God better in preventing their woe!

4.
SECT. IIII.
SECT. IIII.
4. COnsider also how this Justice and Revenge will be the delight of the
Almighty. Though he had rather men would stoop to Christ and accept of his
mercy, yet when they persist in rebellion, he will take pleasure in their
execution. Though he desire not the death of him that dies, but rather that he
repent and live; yet when he will not repent and live, God does desire and
delight in the execution of Justice: How this is to be understood, read in my
Treatise of Redemption.
conditionally, so that men will repent, he desires not their death, but their
life, Ezekiel 33.11. yet if they repent not, in the same place he utters his
resolution for their death, verse. 8.13. He tells us, Isai. 27.4. That fury is
not in him, yet he adds in the next words, Who would set the briars and
thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together. What a doleful case is the wretched creature in, when he shall thus
set the heart of his Creator against him? and he that made him will not save
him, and he that formed him will not have mercy upon him, Isai. 27.11. How
heavy a threatening is that in Deuteronomy. 28.63. As the Lord Rejoiced over you to do
you good, so the Lord will Rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to
naught. Woe to the soul which God Rejoices to punish. Yea, he tells the simple
ones that love simplicity, and the scorners that delight in scorning, and the
fools that hate knowledge, That because he called and they refused, he stretched
out his hand and no man regarded, but set at naught all his counsel, and would
none of his reproof, therefore he will also laugh at their calamity, and mock
when their fear comes; when their fear comes as desolation, and their
destruction as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon them, Then
shall they call upon him, but he will not answer, they shall seek him early,
but shall not find him; for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord, Prove. 1.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. I would entreat thee,
who read this, if thou be one of that sort of men, that thou will but view
over seriously that part of the Chapter, Prove. 1. from the 20. verse to the
end, and believe them to be the true words of Christ by his Spirit in Solomon:
Is it not a terrible thing to a wretched soul, when it shall lie roaring
perpetually in the flames of Hell, and the God of mercy himself shall laugh at
them? When they shall cry out for mercy, yea, for one drop of water, and God
shall mock them in stead of relieving them? When none in Heaven or earth can
help them but God, and he shall rejoice over them in their calamity? why, you
see these are the very words of God himself in Scripture: And most just is it,
that they who laughed at the Sermon, and mocked at the Preacher, and derided
the people that obeyed the Gospel, should be laughed at, and derided by God. Ah
poor ignorant Fools, (for so this Text calls them) they will then have mocking
enough, So also Psalm. 37.13.
till their heart ache with it! I dare warrant them them for ever making a jest
of Godliness more, or making themselves merry with their own slanderous
reports. It is themselves then that must be the woeful objects of derision, and
that of God himself, who would have crowned them with glory. I know when the
Scripture speaks of Gods laughing and mocking, it is not to be understood
literally, but after the manner of men: but this may suffice us, that it will be
such an act of God to the tormenting of the sinner, which we cannot more fitly
conceive or express under any other notion or name, then these.

. 5.
SECT. V.
5. COnsider who shall be Gods Executioners of their Torment; and that is,
First, Satan. Secondly, Themselves. First, He that was here so successful in
drawing them from Christ, will then be the Instrument of their punishment, for
yielding to his temptations. It was a pitiful sight to see the man possessed,
that was bound with chains, and lived among the Tombs; and that other that
would be cast into the fire, and into the water: but alas, that was nothing to
the torment that Satan puts them to in Hell: That is the reward he will give them
for all their service; for their rejecting the commands of God, and forsaking
Christ, and neglecting their souls at his persuasion. Ah, if they had served
Christ as faithfully as they did Satan, and had forsaken all for the love of
him, he would have given them a better reward. Secondly, and it is most just
also, that they should there be their own tormentors, that they may see that
their whole destruction is of themselves; and they who were wilfully the
meritorious cause, should also be the efficient in their own sufferings; and
then who can they complain of but themselves? and they will be no more able to
cease their self-tormenting, then men that we see in a deep Melancholy, that
will by no Arguments be taken off from their sorrows.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
Duplex damnatorum poena est ingehenna, nam and mentem urit tristitia and
corpus flamma. Bernard. de meditat. gehennalis suppli^ii.
6. COnsider also how that their torment will be universal, not upon one part
alone, while the rest are free, but as all have joined in the sin, so must they
all partake of the torment. The soul, as it was the chief in sinning, shall be
chief in suffering; and as it is of a more spiritual and excellent nature then
bodies are, so will its torments as far exceed our present bodily sufferings.
As the joys of the soul do far surpass all sensual pleasures, and corporal
contentments, so do the pains of the soul surpass these corporal pains; and as
the Martyrs did triumph in the very flames, because their souls were full of
joy, though their bodies were in pain; so though these damned creatures could
enjoy all their bodily pleasures, yet the souls sufferings would take away the
sweetness of them all.

And it is not only a soul, but a sinful soul that must suffer; The guilt
which still remains upon it, will make it fit for the wrath of God to work
upon; as fire will not burn except the fuel be combustible, but if the wood be
dry, or it light upon Straw, how fiercely will it burn them? Why, the guilt of
all their former sins will be as Tinder or Gunpowder to the damned soul, to
make the flames of hell to take hold upon them with fury.

And as the soul, so also the body must bear its part; that body that must
needs be pleased whatsoever became of its eternal safety, shall new be paid for
all its unlawful pleasures: That body which was so carefully looked to, so
tenderly cherished, so curiously dressed; that body which could not endure heat,
or cold, or an ill smell, or a loathsome sight; O what must it now endure! How
are its haughty looks now taken down! How little will those flames regard its
comeliness and beauty! But as Death did not regard it, nor the Worms regard it,
but as freely feed upon the face of the proud and lustful Dames, and the heart
of the most ambitious Lords or Princes, as if they had bin but beggars or
bruits; so will their tormentors then as little pity their tenderness, or
reverence their Lordliness, when they shall be raised from their graves to
their eternal doom. Those eyes which were wont to be delighted with curious
sights, and to feed themselves upon beauteous and comely objects, must then see
nothing but what shall amaze and terrify them; an angry, sin-revenging God
above them, and those Saints whom they scorned enjoying the Glory which they
have lost; and about them will be only Devils and damned souls: Ah then how
sadly will they look back and say, Are all our merry Meetings, our Feasts, our
Plays, our vvanton Toys, our Christmas Games, and Revels come to this? Then
those Ears which were wont to be delighted with Music, shall hear the
shriekes and cries of their damned companions, Children crying out against
their Parents, that gave them encouragement and example in evil, but did not
teach them the fear of the Lord: Husbands crying out upon their Wives, and
Wives upon their Husbands, Masters and Servants cursing each other; Ministers
and People, Magistrates and Subjects charging their misery upon one another,
for discouraging in Duty, conniving at sin, and being silent or formal, when
they should have plainly told one another of their misery, and forewarned them
of this danger. Thus will Soul and Body be companions in Calamity.

. 7.
SECT. VII.
7. ANd the greater by far will their Torments be, because they shall have no
one comfort left to help to mitigate them. In this life when a Minister
foretold them of Hell, or Conscience begun to trouble their peace, they had
Comforters enough at hand to relieve them* Their carnal friends were all ready
to speak comfort to them, and promise them that all should be well with them,
but now they have not a word of comfort, either for him or themselves. Formerly
they had their business, their company, their mirth, to drive away their fears,
they could drink away their sorrows, or play them away, or sleep them away, or
at least time did wear them away; but now all these remedies are vanished: They
had a hard, a presumptuous, unbelieving heart, which was a wall to defend them
against troubles of mind, but now their experience has banished these, and
left them naked to the fury of those flames: Yea, formerly Satan himself was
their comforter* and would unsay all that the Minister said against them, as he
did to our first Mother; Has God said, Ye shall not eat? Yea shall not surely
dye. So does he now, Does God tell you that you shall lie in Hell It is no such
matter, God is more merciful, he does but tell you so to fright you from
sinning: Who would lose his present pleasures, for fear of that which he never
saw? Or if there be a hell, what need you to fear it? Are not you Christians?
And shall you not be saved by Christ? was not his blood shed for you? Ministers
may tell you what they please, they delight to fear men, that they may be
masters in their Consciences, and therefore would make men believe that they
shall all be damned, except they will fit themselves to their precise humor. --
Thus as the Spirit of Christ is the Comforter of the Saints, so Satan is the
Comforter of the wicked, for he knows if he should now disquiet them, they
would no longer serve him; or if fears and doubts should begin to trouble them,
they would bethink themselves of their danger, and so escape it: never was a
theif more careful lest he should awake the people when he is robbing the
house, then Satan is careful not to awake a sinner: And as a cutpurse will look
you in the face, and hold you in a tale, that you may never suspect him while
he is robbing your pockets, so will Satan labor to keep men from all doubts or
jealousies or sorrowful thoughts. But when the sinner is dead, and he has his
prey, and his stratagem has had success, then he has done flattering and
comforting them: While the sight of sin and misery might have helped to save
them, he took all the pains he could to hide it from their eyes: but when it is
too late, and there is no hope left, he will make them see and feel it to the
utmost. O, which way will the forlorn sinner then look for comfort? They that
drew him into the snare and promised him safety, do now forsake him, and are
forsaken themselves. His ancient comforts are taken from him, and the righteous
God, whose forewarnings he made light of, will now make good his word against
him to the least tittle.

SECT. VIII.. 8.

8. BUt the great aggravation of this misery, will be its Eternity. That when a
thousand millions of ages are past, their Torments are as fresh to begin as the
first day. If there were any hope of an end, it would ease them to foresee it;
but when it must be for ever, Horrendo modo fit miseris mors sine morte, finis
sine fin^ defectus sine defectu; quia mors semper vivit, et finis semper
incipit, et defectus deficere nescit. Mors perimit et non extinguit, dolor
cruciat, sed nullatenus pavorem fugat: flamma comburit sed nequ^quam tenebras
excutit. Gregor Moral. lib. 9.
that thought is intolerable: much more will the misery it self be so. They
were never weary of sinning, nor ever would have been, if they had lived
eternally upon earth; And now God will not be weary of plaguing them. They
never heartily repented of their sin; and God will never repent him of their
sufferings; They broke the Laws of the eternal God, and therefore shall suffer
eternal punishment; They knew it was an Everlasting Kingdom which they refused
when it was offered them, and therefore what wonder if they be everlastingly
shut out of it; It was their immortal souls that were guilty of the trespass,
and therefore must immortally suffer the pains. O now what happy men would they
think themselves, if they might have layen still in their graves, or continued
dust, or suffered no worse then the gnawing of those worms! O that they might
but there lie down again! What a mercy now would it be to dye? And how will
they call and cry out for it? O death whither art thou now gone? Now come and
cut off th^s doleful life! O that these pains would break my heart, and end my
being! O that I might once at last dye! O that I had never had a being! --
These groans will the thoughts of Eternity wring from their hearts. They were
wont to think the Sermon long, and prayer long; how long then will they think
these Endless torments? What difference is there betwixt the length of their
pleasures, and of their pains? The one continued but a moment, but the other
endures through all eternity. O that sinners would lay this thought to heart!
Remember how Time is almost gone: Thou art standing all this while at the door
of Eternity; and death is waiting to open the door, and put thee in: Go sleep
out yet but a few more nights, and stir up and down on earth a few more days,
and then thy nights and days shall end; thy thoughts, and cares, and pleasure,
sand all, shall be devoured by eternity: thou must enter upon that state which
shall never be changed. As the Joys of Heaven are beyond our conceiving, so
also are the pains of Hell. Everlasting Torment is unconceivable Torment.

SECT. IX.
Object.
and say, I will never believe that God will thus Torment his Creatures: What,
to delight in their torture! And that for everlasting! And all for the faults
of a short time! It is incredible: How can this stand with the infiniteness of
his mercy? I would not thus Torment the worst enemy that I have in the world,
and yet my mercifulness is nothing to Gods. These are but threats to awe men: I
will not believe them.

Answ.
Answ. Will thou not believe? I do not wonder if thou be loath to believe so
terrible tidings to thy soul as these are; which if they were believed and
apprehended indeed according to their weight, would set thee a trembling and
roaring in the anguish of horror day and night: Credunt Judaei quod ex
Israelitis solis tria genera mortuorum in die judicij sint resuscitanda: quorum
unum futurum sit Israelitarum probissimorum: alterum improbissimorum and
impijssimorum, tertium mediocrium qui non minus been quam male operati ^uerint.
Probos illos e vestigio ad vitam aeternam inscriptum obsignatumque, improbos
autem in G^hennam, sive ignem insernalem abjectum iri dicunt: Mediocres vero
istos peccatores per spatium Chadaschim sive mensium tantummodo duodecim pro
peccatis ipsorum in inferno torquebuntur; deinde corpora eorum consumentur,
ventusque cineres eorum d^fflando disperget subter plantas pedum justorum, etc.
Sic Rabbi Pechal e Talmudo magno, ut Buxtorfius Synag. Judai. cap. 1. p.
25.26.27. Ad hanc haer^sia appropinquat doctrina Papistarum.
And I do as little wonder that the Devil who rules thee, should be loath, if
he can hinder it, to suffer thee to believe it: For if thou did believe it,
thou would spare no cost or pains to escape it. But go to: If thou will read
on, either thou shall believe it before thou stirrest, or prove thy self an
Infidel or Pagan. Tell me then, Do thou believe Scripture to be the word of
God? If thou do not, thou art no more a Christian then thy horse is, or then a
Turk is: For what ground have we besides Scripture to believe that Jesus Christ
did come into the world, or dye for man? If thou believe not these, I have
nothing here to do with thee, but refer thee to the second part of this book,
where I have proved Scripture to be the word of God. But if thou do believe
this to be so, and yet do not believe that the same Scripture is true, thou
art far worse then either Infidel or Pagan: For the vilest Pagans durst hardly
charge their Idol Gods to be liars: And dare thou give the lie to the God of
Heaven? And accuse him of speaking that which shall not come to pass? and that
in such absolute threats, and plain expressions? But if thou dare not stand
to this, but do believe Scripture both to be the word of God, and to be true;
then I shall presently convince thee of the truth of these eternal Torments.
Will thou believe if a Prophet should tell it thee? Why read it then in the
greatest Prophets, Moses, David, and Isaiah, Deuteronomy. 32.22. Psalm. 11.6. and 9,
17. Isai. 30.33. Or will thou believe one that was more then a Prophet? Why
hear then what John Baptist says, Mat. 3.10. Luke 3.17. Or will thou believe
if an Apostle should tell thee? Why hear what one says, Jud. 7.13. where he
calls it the vengeance of eternal fire; and the blackness of darness for ever.
Or what if thou have it from an Apostle that had been rapt up in Revelations
into the third Heaven, and seen things unutterable? Will thou believe then? Why
take it then from Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power. And 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. That they all might be
damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. So
Romans 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Or will thou believe it from the beloved Apostle, who
was so taken up in Revelations, and saw it, as it were, in his visions? Why see
then, Rev. 20.10, 15. They are said there to be cast into the lake of fire, and
tormented day and night for ever. So Rev. 21.8. So 2 Pet. 2.17. Or will thou
believe it from the mouth of Christ himself the judge? Why read it then, Mat.
7.19. and 13.40, 41, 42, 49, 50. As therefore the Tares are gathered and burnt
in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world: the Son of man shall send
forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire;
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc. So Mat. 18.8, 9. So Mark
9.43, 44, 46, 48. Where he repeateth it three times over, Where their worm
never dies, and their fire is not quenched. And Mat. 25.41, 46. Then shall he
say to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his angels: For I was, etc. And these shall go away
into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into life eternal.

What say thou now to all this? Will thou not yet believe? If thou will not
believe Christ, I know not whom thou will believe: and therefore it is in vain
to persuade thee any further: Only let me tell thee the time is at hand when
thou will easily believe, and that without any preaching or arguing: when thou
see the great and terrible day, and hear the condemning sentence past, and
art thy self thrust down to Hell (as Luke 10.15.) then thou shall believe, and
never doubt again: And do not say but thou wast told so much. Surely he that so
much disswades thee from believing, does yet believe and tremble himself. Jam.
2.19.

And whereas thou think that God is more merciful; why sure he knows best
his own mercifulness. His mercy will not cross his Truth. Cannot God be
infinite in mercy, except he save the wilful and rebellious? Is a judge
unmerciful for condemning malefactors? Mercy and Justice have their several
objects: Thousands of humble, believing, obedient souls shall know to their
eternal comfort that God is merciful, though the refusers of his grace, shall
lie under Justice. God will then force thy conscience to confess in Hell, that
God who condemned thee was yet merciful to thee. Was it no mercy to be made a
reasonable creature? And to have Patience endure thy many years provocations,
and wait upon thee from Sermon to Sermon, desiring and entreating thy
repentance and return? Was it no mercy to have the Son of God, with all his
blood and merits freely offered thee, if thou would but have accepted him to
govern and to save thee? Nay when thou had neglected and refused Christ once,
twice, yea a hundred times, that God should yet follow thee with invitations
from day to day? And shall thou wilfully refuse mercy to the last hour, and
then cry out that God will not be so unmercifull as to condemn thee? Thy
conscience will smite thee for this madness, and tell thee, that God was
merciful in all this, though such as thou do perish for your wilfulness. Yea
the sense of the greatness of his mercy, will then be a great part of thy
torment.

And whereas thou think the pain to be greater then the offense, that is
because thou art not a competent Judge; Thou know what pain is, but thou
know not the thousand part of the evil of sin; shall not the righteous Judge
of the world do justly? Nay, it is no more then thou did choose thy self: Did
not God set before thee Life and Death? and tell thee, If thou would accept
of the Government of Christ, and renounce thy Lusts, that then thou should
have eternal Life? And if thou would not have Christ* but the World or Flesh
to rule over thee, thou should then endure eternal torments? Did not he
offer thee thy choice? and bid thee take which of these thou would? yea, and
entreat thee to choose aright? And do thou now cry out of Severity, when thou
have but the consequents of thy wilful choice? But it is not thy accusing God
of cruelty that shall serve thy turn; in stead of procuring thy escape, or the
mitigation of thy torments, it will but make thy burden the more heavy.

And whereas thou say that thou would not so torment thy own enemy; I
Answ. There is no Reason that thou should: For is it all one to offend a
crawling Worm of the earth, and to offend the eternal glorious God? Thou have
no absolute dominion over thine enemy, and there may be some fault in thy self
as well as in him, but with God and us the case is contrary: Yet thou make
nothing of killing a Flea if it do but bite thee, yea a hundred of them though
they did not touch thee, and yet never accusest thy self of cruelty: Yea, thou will torment thy Ox all his life time with toilsome labor, and kill him at the
last, though he never deserved ill of thee, nor disobeyed thee and though thou
have over him but the borrowed authority of a superior fellow creature, and
not the sovereign power of the absolute Creator: Yea, How commonly do thou
take away the lives of Birds and Beasts and Fishes? Many times a great many of
lives must be taken away to make for thee but one meal? How many deaths then
have been suffered in obedience to thy will from thy first Age to thy last
hour? and all this without any desert of the creature? And must it yet seem
cruelty, that the Sovereign Creator, who is ten thousand times more above thee,
then thou art above a Flea or a Toad, should execute his Justice upon such a
contemner of his Authority? But I have given you some Reasons of this before.

. 10.
SECT. X.
BUt methinks I perceive the obstinate sinner desperately resolving, If I must
be damned, there is no remedy, rather then I will live so precisely as the
Scripture requires, I will put it to the venture, I shall escape as well as the
rest of my neighbors, and as the most of the world, and we will even bear it
as well as we can. -- Answ. Alas, poor creature! would thou did but know what
it is that thou do so boldly venture on: I dare say thou would sleep this
night but very unquietly. Will thou leave thy self no room for Hope? Art thou
such a malicious implacable enemy to Christ and thy own soul? And do thou
think indeed, that thou can bear the wrath of God? and go away so easily with
these eternal Torments? Yet let me beg this of thee, that before thou do so
flatly resolve, thou would lend me thine attention to these few Questions
which I shall put to thee, and weigh them with the reason of a man, and if then
thou think thou can bear these pains, I shall give thee over and say no more.

1. Who art thou, that thou should bear the wrath of God? Art thou a God? or
art thou a man? what is thy strength to undergo so much? Is it not as the
strength of Wax or Stubble to resist the Fire? or as Chafe to the Wind? or as
the Dust before the fierce Whirlwinde? Was he not as stout a man as thy self,
who cried to God, Job 13.25 Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the dry stubble? and he that confesses, I am a worm and no man,
Psalm 22.6. If thy strength were as iron, and thy bones as brass, thou could
not bear; If thy foundation were as the Earth, and thy power as the Heavens,
yet should thou perish at the breath of his Indignation: How much more when
thou art but a little piece of warm, creeping, breathing Clay, kept a few days
from stinking* and from being eaten with Worms, by the mere support and favor
of him whom thou thus resistest?

2. If thou art able to wrestle with the indignation of the Almighty, Read Ps.
77.18. Exodus 9.28.
why then do thou tremble at the signs of his Power, or Wrath? Do not the
terrible Thunderclaps sometime fear thee? or the Lightning flashes? or that
unseen Power which goes with it, in renting in pieces the mighty Oaks, and
tearing down the strongest buildings? If thou had been in the Church of
Withicombe in Devonshire, when the lightning broke in, and scorched and burnt
the people, and left the brains and hair upon the pillars, would it not have
made thee afraid? If thou be but in a place where the plague does rage, so that
it comes to so many thousand a week, does it not astonish thee to see men that
were well within a few days to be thrown into the graves by heaps and
multitudes? If thou had stood by when Pharaoh and his people were so
strangely plagued, and at last drowned together in the Sea, or when the earth
swallowed up Dathan, Abiram and their companies, and the people fled away at
the cry, lest the earth should swallow them up also: or when Elias brought fire
from Heaven to consume the Captains and their compaines; would not any of these
sights have daunted thy spirit? Why, how then can thou bear the hellish
plagues?

Thirdly, Tell me also, if thou be so strong, and thy heart so stout, why do
those small sufferings so dismay thee which befall thee here? If thou have but a
tooth ache, or a fit of the gout, or stone, what groans do thou utter? What
moan do thou make? The house is filled with thy constant complaints: Thy
friends about thee are grieved at thy pains, and stand over thee condoling thy
miserable state: If thou should but lose a leg or an arm, thou would make
a greater matter of it; If thou lose but a friend, if thou lose thine estate,
and fall into poverty, and beggary, and disgrace, how heavily would thou
bear any one of these: And yet all these laid together will be one day
accounted a happy state, in comparison of that which is suffered in Hell. Let me
see thee shake off the most painful sickness, and make as light of Convulsive,
Epileptick, Arthritick, Nephritick pains, or such like diseases when they self
upon thee, and then the strength of thy spirit will appear. Alas, how many such
boasters as thy self, have I seen made stoop and eat their words? And when God
has but let out a little of his wrath* that Pharaoh who before asked, Who is
the Lord, that I should let all go for him? have turned their tune, and cried,
I have sinned.

Fourthly, If thy stout spirit do make so light of hell, why then does the
approach of death so much affright thee? Did thou never find the sober
thoughts of death to raise a kind of dread in thy mind? VVast thou never in a
fever, or a consumption, or any disease wherein thou did receive the
sentence of death? If thou wast not, thou will be before long: and then when
the Physician has plainly told thee that there is no hopes, O how cold it
strikes to thy heart? Why is death to men the King of terrors else? and the
stoutest champions then do abate their courage? O but the grave would be
accounted a palace or a Paradise, in comparison of that place of Torment which
thou desperately slightest.

5. If all this be nothing, go try thy strength by some corporal torment: As
Bilney before he went to the stake, would first try his finger in the candle:
so do thou; Hold thy finger a while in the fire, and feel there whether thou
can endure the fire of Hell: Austin men^tioneth a chaste Christian woman who
being tempted to uncleanness by a lewd Ruffian, she desires him for her sake
to hold his finger an hour in the fire; he answers, It is an unreasonable
request; How much more unreasonable is it (says she) that I should burn in
Hell for the satisfying of your lust? Lo say I to thee: If it be an
intolerable thing to suffer the heat of the fire for a year, or a day, or an
hour, what will it be to suffer ten thousand times more for ever? What if thou
were to suffer Lawrence his death, to be roasted upon a Gridiron? or to be
scraped or pricked to death as other Martyrs were? Or if thou were to feed upon
toads for a year together? If thou could not endure such things as these,
how will thou endure the eeternal flames?

6. Tell me yet again, if Hell be so small a matter, why can thou not endure
so much as the thoughts or the mention of it? If thou be alone, thou dare
scarcely think of Hell, for fear of raising disquietness in thy spirit: If thou
bein company, thou can not endure to have any serious speech of it, lest it
spoil the sport and mar the mirth, and make thee tremble as Faelix did when
Paul was discoursing of the Judgment to come. Thou can not endure to hear a
Minister preach of Hell, but thou gnashest thy teeth; and disdainest him, and
reproachest his Sermon, as enough to drive men to desperation or make them mad.
And can thou endure the Torments, when thou can not endure so much as to
hear of them? Alas, man, to hear thy Judgment from the mouth of Christ, and to
feel the execution, will be another kind of matter them to hear it from a
Minister.

7. Furthermore, what is the matter that the rich man in Hell mentioned in,
Luke 16. could not make as light of it as thou do? Was not he as likely a
man to bear it as thy self? Why does he so cry out that he is tormented in the
flames? and stoop so low as to beg a drop of water of a beggar that he had but
a little before despised at his gates? and to be beholden to him that had been
beholden to the dogs to lick his sores?

8. Also what aileth thy companions who were as resolute as thy self, that when
they lie a dying their courage is so cooled, and their haughty expressions are
so greatly changed? They who had the same spirits and language as thou have
now, and made as light of all the threats of the word, yet when they see they
are going into another world, how pale do they look? how faintly do they speak?
how dolefully do they complain and groan? They send for the Minister then, whom
they despised before, and desire to be prayed for, and would be glad to dye in
the state of those, whom they would not be persuaded to imitate in their lives.
Except it be here and there a desperate wretch, who is given over to a more
then Hellish hardness of heart. Why cannot these make as light of it as thou?

9. Yet further, if thou be so fearless of that eternal misery, why is the
least foretast of it so terrible? Did thou never feel such a thing as a
tormenting conscience? If thou have not, thou shall do. Did thou never see
and speak with a man that lived in desparation? or in some degree of these
wounds of spirit, that was near despair? How uncomfortable was their
conference? How burdensome their lives? Nothing does them good which they
possess; The sight of friends, or house, or goods which refresh others, is a
trouble to them: They feel no sweetness in meat or drink: They are weary of
life, and fearful of death: What is the matter with these men? If the Misery
of the damned it self can be endured, why cannot they more easily endure these
little sparks?

10. Again, tell me faithfully; What if thou should but see the Devil
appear to thee in some terrible shape? Would it not daunt thee? What if thou
should meet him in thy way home? Or he should show himself to the at night
in thy bedchamber? would not thy heart fail thee? and thy hair stand an end?
I could name thee those that have been as confident as thy self, who by such a
sight have been so appaled, that they were in danger of being driven out of
their wits. Or what if some damned soul of thy former acquaintance should
appear to thee in some bodily likeness? Would not this amaze thee? What fears
do people live in, whose houses or persons have been but haunted with spirits?
Though they have only heard some noises, and seen some sights, but never felt
any hurt upon their bodies? Alas, what is this to the Torments of Hell? Can
thou not endure a shadow to appear before thee? O how will thou endure to live
with them for ever? Where thou shall have no other company but Devils and the
damned; and shall not only see them but be tormented with them, and by them?
And as incredible a matter as this seems to thee* if thy through conversion
prevent it not, thou know not how few months thou shall be out of this
estate.

11. Lastly, Let me ask thee one more Question: If the wrath of God be to be
made so light of, as thou do; Why did the Son of God himself make so great a
matter of it? When he who was perfectly innocent himself, had taken upon him
the payment of our debt, and stood in our room* and bore that punishment that
we had deserved, it makes him sweat forth water and blood, it makes the Lord of
Life to cry, My soul is heavy, even to the death: It makes him cry out upon the
cross, My God, my God Why have thou forsaken me: Surely if any one could have
born these sufferings easily, it would have been Jesus Christ: He had another
measure of strength to bear it then thou have.

And let me tell thee one thing, which every one understands not: Thou will
have sins of a more heinous nature and degree to suffer for, then ever were
laid upon Jesus Christ, and consequently a punishment of a sorer degree? See
this proved in my Aphorisms of Justificat.
For Christ suffered only for the breaches of the Covenant of works, and not
for the violation of the Covenant of grace (properly so called, that is, not
for the final nonperformance of the conditions of this Covenant,) There was no
man's final unbelief or impenitencie, or resisting the Spirit, that did lie upon
Christ: Howsoever the aggregation of all men's sins might aggravate his burden,
yet the punishment due to those sins particularly, was not like the punishment
which is due to thine: For as the first Covenant gave not so great a reward, so
neither did it threaten so great a penalty as the later does: And the penalty
which the new Covenant threateneth, Christ never underwent. So that the
punishment which thou must suffer, is that which the Apostle speaks of Heb.
10.26. Of how much sorer punishment, etc. and that fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fire which devoureth the adversaries, Heb. 6.8. Woe to poor
sinners for their mad security! Do they think to find it tolerable to them,
which was so heavy to Christ? Nay, the Son of God is cast into a bitter agony,
and bloody sweat, and dolorous complaints, under the curse of the law alone*
and yet the feeble foolish creature makes nothing to bear also the curse of the
Gospel! the good Lord bring these men to their right minds by Repentance, lest
they buy their wit at too dear a rate.

LECT. XI.. 11.

ANd thus I have showed you somewhat of their misery, who miss of this Rest
prepared for the Saints. And now Reader, I demand thy resolution, what use thou will make of all this? Shall it all be lost to thee? or will thou as thou art
alone consider of it in good earnest? Thou have cast by many a warning of God,
will thou do so by this also? Take heed what thou do, and how thou so
resolvest; God will not always stand warning and threatening; The hand of
revenge is lifted up; the blow is coming, and woe to him whoever he be on whom
it lights; Little think thou how near thou stand to thy eternal state,
and how near the Pit thou art dancing in thy greatest jollity; if thy eyes were
but opened, as they will be shortly, thou would see all this that I have
spoken before thine eyes without stirring from the place (I think) in which
thou stand. Do thou throw by the Book, and say, It speaks of nothing but
Hell and Damnation? Thus thou usest also to complain of the Minister; but
would thou not have us to tell thee of these things? should we be guilty of
the blood of thy soul, by keeping silent that which God has charged us upon
pain of death to make known* would thou perish in ease and silence? and also
have us to perish with thee, rather then to awake thee, or displease thee by
speaking the truth? If thou will be guilty of such inhumane cruelty, yet God
forbid we should be guilty of such most sottish folly! There are few Preachers
so simple, but they know that this kind of Preaching is the ready way to be
hated of their Hearers: And the desire of applause, and the favor of men is so
natural to all men, that I think there is few that delight in such a
displeasing way: Our temptations to flattery and Man-pleasing are too strong
for that. But I beseech the consider; Are these things true, or are they not?
If they were not true, I would heartily join with thee against any Minister
that should offer to Preach them, and to affright poor people when there is no
cause; and I should think such Preachers did deserve Death or Banishment: But
if every word of these threatenings be the words of God, and if they be as true
as thou live and read this, what a wretch art thou that would not hear
it, or consider it? Why, what is the matter? If thou be sure that thou art one
of the People of God, this Doctrine will be a comfort to thee and not a terror;
but if thou be yet carnal and unregenerate, methinks thou should be as fraid
to hear of Heaven as of Hell, except the bare name of Heaven or Salvation be
sufficient; sure there is no Doctrine concerning heaven in all the Scripture,
that can give thee any comfort but upon the supposal of thy conversion. What
comfort is it to thee to hear that there is a Rest remaining for the people of
God, except thou be one of them? Nay, what more terrible then to read of Christ
and Salvation for others, when thou must be shut out? Therefore except thou
would have a Minister to preach a lie, it is all one to thee for any comfort
thou have in it, whether he Preach Heaven or Hell to thee: His Preaching
Heaven, and Mercy to thee, can be nothing else but to entreat thee to seek
them, and not neglect or reject them, but he can make thee no promise of it,
but upon the condition of thy obeying the Gospel; and his preaching Hell* is
but to persuade thee to avoid it: And is not this Doctrine fit for thee to
hear? Indeed if thou were quite past hope of escaping it, then it were in vain
to tell thee of hell, but rather let thee take a few merry hours whilst thou
may; but as long as thou art alive there is some hope of thy recovery, and
therefore all means must be used to awake thee from thy Lethargy. O that some
Jonas had this Point in hand to cry in your ears [Yet a few days, and the
Rebellious shall be destroyed] till you were brought down on your knees in
sackcloth and in ashes! Or if some John Baptist might cry it abroad, Now is the
Ax laid to the root of the Tree, every tree that brings not forth good fruit,
is hewn down and cast into the fire; O that some son of Thunder, who could
speak as Paul, till the Hearers tremble, were now to Preach this Doctrine to
thee! Alas, as terribly as you think I speak, yet is it not the thousand part
of what must be felt; for what heart can now possibly conceive, or what tongue
can express the dolours of those souls that are under the wrath of God? Ah,
that ever blind sinners should wilfully bring themselves to such unspeakable
misery! You will then be crying to Jesus Christ, O mercy! O pity* pity, on a
poor soul,! Why, I do now in the name of the Lord Jesus cry to thee; O have
mercy, have pity, man, upon thine own soul; shall God pity thee who wilt not
be entreated to pity thy self? If thy horse see but a pit before him, thou
can scarcely force him in; Balaams Ass would not be driven upon the drawn
Sword, and will thou so obstinately cast thy self into hell, when the danger is
foretold thee? O who can stand before the Lord, and who can abide the
fierceness of his anger? Nah. 1.6. Methinks thou should need no more words,
but presently cast away thy soul-damning sins, and wholly deliver up thy self
to Christ. Resolve on it immediately, man, and let it be done, that I may see
thy face in Rest among the Saints. The Lord persuade thy heart to strike this
Covenant without any longer delay: but if thou be hardened unto death, and
there be no remedy, yet do not say another day, but that thou wast faithfully
warned, and that thou had a friend that would fain have prevented thy
damnation.

CHAP. V. The Second Use, Reprehending the general neglect of this Rest, and
exciting to diligence in seeking it.
SECT. I.. 1.

I Come now to the Second Use which I shall raise from this Doctrine of Rest.
If there be so certain and glorious a Rest for the Saints, why is there no more
industrious seeking after it in the world? One would think that a man that did
but once hear of such unspeakable glory to be obtained, and did believe what he
hears, to be true, should be transported with the vehemence of his desires
after it, and should almost forget to eat or drink, and should mind and care
for nothing else, and speak of, and enquire after nothing else, but how to get
assurance and possession of this Treasure! and yet people who hear of it daily,
and profess to believe it undoubtedly as a fundamental Article of their Faith,
do as little mind it, or care, or labor for it, and as much forget and
disregard it, as if they had never heard of any such thing, or did not believe
one word that they hear; And as a man that comes into America, and sees the
Natives regard more a piece of Glass, or an old Knife, then a piece of Gold,
may think, sure these people never heard of the worth of Gold, or else they
would not exchange it for toys: so a man that looked only upon the lives of
most men, and did not hear their contrary confessions, would think, either
these men never heard of Heaven, or else they never heard of its excellency and
glory; when alas, they hear of it till they are weary of hearing; and it is
offered to them so commonly, that they are tired with the tidings, and cry out
as the Israelites, Numb. 11.6. Our soul is dried away, because there is nothing
but this Manna before our eyes: And as the Indians who live among the golden
Mines do little regard it, but are weary of the daily toil of getting it, when
other Nations will compass the world, and venture their lives, and sail through
storms and waves to get it: So we that live where the Gospel grows, where
heaven is urged upon us at our doors, and the Manna falls about our tents, do
little regard it, and wish these Mines of gold were further from us, that we
might not be put upon the toil of getting it, when some that want it, would be
glad of it upon harder terms: Surely, though the Resurrection of the Body and
Life everlasting be the last Article in their Creed, it is not the least, nor
therefore put last, that it should be last in their desires and endeavors.

. 2.
SECT. II.
I shall apply this Reproof more particularly yet to (...) several sorts of
men. First, To the carnal worldly-minded man, who is so taken up in seeking the
things below, that he has neither heart nor time to seek this Rest.

Sic errant aliqui, and in tantum oblivionem and spiritualem phrenesin
devenerunt, ut tanquam mortui a cord, omnem insumunt operam suam circa carnem;
sic intendentes tabernaculo suo, acsi nunquam putent esse cas^^^rum. Veruntamen
cadat necesse est, atque id quidem in brevi. A^non seipsos nescire videntur,
qui sic dedeti sunt carni and sanguini, acsi omnino nihil aliud quam carnem
solam se esse reputent: Sic in vano accipientes animas suas tanquam prorsus
ignorent anim^s se ^abere. Ber. ^er. ^37.
May I not well say to these men, as Paul to the Galathians in another case?
Foolish sinners! who has bewitched you? It is not for nothing that Divines use
to call the world a Witch* for as in VVitchcraft men's lives, senses, goods, or
cattle are destroyed by (...) (...) secret unseen power of the Devil, of which
a man can give no natural Reason; so here, men will destroy their own souls in
a way quite against their own knowledge; and as Witches will make a man dance
naked, or do the most unseemly, unreasonable actions; so the world does bewitch
men into bruit beasts, and draw them some degrees beyond madness. Would not
any man wonder that is in his right wit, and has but the spiritual use of
Reason, to see what riding and running, what scrambling and catching there is
for a thing of naught, while eternal Rest lies by neglected! what contriving
and caring, what fighting and bloodshed to get a step higher in the world then
their brethren, while they neglect the Kingly dignity of the Saints! what
insatiable pursuit of fleshly pleasures, whilst they look upon the Praises of
God, which is the joy of Angels, as a tiring burden! what unwearied diligence
there is in raising their posterity, in enlarging their possessions, in
gathering a little silver or gold? yea, perhaps for a poor living from hand to
mouth? while in the mean time their Judgment is drawing near; and yet how it
shall go with them then? or how they shall live eternally, did never put them
to the trouble of ones hours sober consideration; what rising early, and
sitting up late, and laboring, and caring year after year to maintain
themselves and their children in credit till they dye, but what shall follow
after that they never think on, as if it were only their work to provide for
their bodies, and only Gods work to provide for their souls, whereas God has
promised more to provide for their bodies without their care, then for their
souls; though indeed they must painfully serve his Providence for both; and yet
these men can cry to us; May not a man be saved without so much ado? And may we
not say with more reason to them? May not a man have a little Air, or Earth? a
little credit or wealth without so much ado? or at least, may not a man have
enough to bring him to his grave without so much ado? O how early do they rowse
up their servants to their labor? up, come away to work, we have this to do,
or that to do; but how seldom do they call them, Up, you have your souls to
look to, you have Everlasting to provide for, up to prayer, to reading of the
Scripture; Alas, how rare is this language! what a gadding up and down the
world is here, like a company of Ants upon a Hillock? taking uncessant pains to
gather a treasure, which death, as the next passenger that comes by, will spurn
abroad? as if it were such an excellent thing, to dye in the midst of wealth
and honors! or as if it would be such a comfort to a man at death, or in
another world, to think that he was a Lord, or a Knight, or a Gentleman, or a
Rich man on earth? For my part, whatever these men may profess or say to the
contrary, I cannot but strongly suspect that in heart they are flat Pagans, and
do not believe that there is an eternal glory and misery, nor what the
Scripture speaks of the way of obtaining it; or at least, that they do but a
little believe it, by the halves, and therefore think to make sure of Earth,
lest there be no such thing as Heaven to be had; and to hold fast that which
they have in hand, lest if they let go that, in hope of better in another
world, they should play the fools and lose all. -- I fear, though the Christian
Faith be in their mouths, lest that this be the faith which is next their
hearts; or else the lust of their Senses does overcome and suspend their
Reason, and prevail with their Wills against the last practical conclusion of
their Understanding. What is the excellency of this Earth, that it has so many
Suitors, and Admirers? what has this World done for its Lovers and Friends,
that it is so eagerly followed, and painfully sought after, while Christ and
Heaven stand by, and few regard them? or what will the world do for them for
the time to come? The common entrance into it is through anguish and sorrow:
The passage through it is with continual care, and labor, and grief; the
passage out of it is with the greatest sharpness and sadness of all. What then
does cause men so much to follow and affect it? O sinful, unreasonable,
bewitched men! Will mirth and pleasure stick close to you? Will gold and
worldly glory prove fast friends to you in the time of your greatest need? will
they hear your cries in the day of your calamity? If a man should say to you at
the hour of your death, as Elias did to Baals Priests, Cry aloud, etc. O,
Riches, or Honor, now help us! will they either Yet Christ's saying [that it is
as hard for a rich man to be saved, as a Cammel to go through the eye of a
Needle] is not to be understood literally; it being a Proverb which the Jews
used of a thing very difficult. vid. Christ. Cartwright in praefat. ante
Annota. in Genesin.
answer, or relieve you? will they go along with you to another world, and
bribe the Judge, and bring you off clear? or purchase you a room among the
blessed? why then did so rich a man want a drop of water for his tongue? or are
the sweet morsels of present delight and honor, of more worth then the eternal
Rest? and will they recompense the loss of that enduring Treasure? Can there be
the least hope of any of these? why, what then is the matter? Is it only a
room for our dead bodies, that we are so much beholden to the world for? why,
this is the last and longest courtesy that we shall receive from it: But we
shall have this, whether we serve it or no; and even that homely dusty dwelling,
it will not afford us always neither: It shall possess our dust but till the
great Resurrection day. Why, how then does the world deserve so well at men's
hands, that they should part with Christ and their salvation to be its
followers? Ah, vile deceitful world! How often have we heard thy faithfullest
servants at last complaining, Oh the world has deceived me, and undone me! It
flattered me in my prosperity, but now it turns me off at death in my
necessity! Ah, if I had as faithfully served Christ, as I have served it; He
would not thus have cast me off; nor have left me thus comfortless and hopeless
in the depth of misery! Thus do the dearest friends and favorites of the world
complain at last of its deceit, or rather of their own self^deluding folly: and
yet succeeding sinners will take no warning. So this is the first sort of
neglecters of Heaven which fall under this Reproof.

SECT. III.
2. THe second sort to be here reproved, are the Vtinam et nos assequamur
sanitatem qui dissoluti sumus et ad omne bonum opus immobiles, neque habemus
hominem, hoc est, humanam rationem, utpote comparati cum jumentis, ut portet
nos in piscinam poenitentiae lacrimarum, in quam qui primus ingreditur,
sanatur. Nam qui poenitentiam differt in tempora posteriora, non festinat hic
poenitere: qui procrastinat non assequitur sanitatem. Primus igitur festina
ingredi ne mors te praeoccupet. Theophylact. in Joan. c. 5
profane, ungodly, presumptuous multitude, who will not be persuaded to be at
so much pains for salvation, as to perform the common outward duties of
Religion. Yea though they are convinced that these duties are commanded by God,
and see it before their eyes in the Scripture, yet will they not be brought to
the constant practice of them. If they have the Gospel preached in the town
where they dwell, it may be they will give the hearing to it one part of the
day, and stay at home the other: or if the master come to the congregation, yet
part of his family must stay at home. If they want the plain and powerful
preaching of the Gospel, how few are there in a whole Town that will either be
at cost or pains to procure a Minister; or travel a mile or two to hear
abroad? Though they will go many miles to the market for provision for their
bodies. The Queen of the South shall rise up in Judgment with this generation,
and condemn them: for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear
the wisdom of Solomon; and behold a greater then Solomon does by his messengers
preach to them. The King of Nineve shall rise up in Judgment with them, and
shall condemn them; for he repented at the preaching of Jonas, but when Jesus
Christ sends his Ambassadors to these men, they will sarce go to hear them,
Mat. 12.41, 42. And though they know that the Scripture is the very Law of God,
by which they must live, and by which they must be acquit or condemned in
Judgment, and that it is the property of every blessed man, to delight in this
law, and to meditate in it day and night, Psalm. 1.2. Yet will they not be at
the pains to read a chapter once in a day, nor to acquaint their families with
this doctrine of Salvation: But if they carry a Bible to Church and let it lie
by them all the week, this is the most use that they make of it. And though
they are commanded, to pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5.17. And to pray always
and not wax faint, Luke 18.1, 2, 3, etc. to continue in prayer, and watch in
the same with thanksgiving, Col. 4.2. Yet will they not be brought to pray
constantly with their families, or in secret: Though Daniel would rather be
cast to the Lions, then he would forbear for a while praying openly in his
house where his enemies might hear him three times a day; yet these men will
rather venture to be an eternal prey to that roaring Lion that seeks to devour
them, then they will be at the pains thus to seek their safety. You may hear in
their houses two oaths for one prayer. Or if they do any thing this way, it is
usually but the running over a few formal words, which they have got on their
tongues end, as if they came on purpose to make a jest of prayer, and to mock
God and their own souls. If they be in distress, or want any thing for their
bodies, they want no words to make known their mind; but to a Physician when
they are sick, to a griping Landlord when they are oppressed, to a wealthy
friend when they are in want, they can lay open their case in sad complaints,
and have words at will to press home their requests: Yea every beggar at their
door can crave relief, and make it their daily practice and hold on with
importunity, and take no denial; necessity fills their mouths with words,
and teaches them the most natural prevailing Rhetorike: These beggars will
rise up Judgment against them and condemn them. Doubtless if they felt but the
misery and necessities of their souls, they would be as forward to beg relief
of God, and as frequent, as fervent, as importunate, and as constant till they
were past their streights. But, alas, he that only reads in a book that he is
miserable, and what his soul stands in need of, but never felt himself
miserable, nor felt particularly his several wants, no wonder if he must also
fetch his prayer from his book only, or at furthest from the strength of his
invention or memory. Solomon's request to God was, That what prayer or
Supplication soever should be made by any man, or by all the people, when every
man shall know his own sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands
before God, that God would then hear and forgive, etc. 2 Chronicles. 6.29, 30. If
these men did thus know and feel every one the sore and the grief of his own
soul, we should neither need so much to urge them to prayer, nor to teach them
how to perform it, and what to say: Whereas now they do invite God to be
backward in giving, by their backwardness in asking; and to be weary of
relieving them* by their own being weary in begging relief; and to be seldom
and short in his favors, as they are in their prayers; and to give them but
common and outward favors, as they put up but common and outside requests; Yea
their cold and heartless prayers do invite God to a flat denial: for among men
it is taken for granted, that he who asks but slieghtly and seldom, cares not
much for that he asks. Do not these men judge themselves unworthy of Heaven,
who think it not worth their more constant and earnest requests? If it be not
worth asking for, it is worth nothing. And yet if you should go from house to
house through Town and Parish, and enquire at every house as you go, whether
they do morning and evening call their family together, and earnestly and
reverently seek the Lord in prayer? how few would you find that constantly and
conscionably practice this duty? If every door were marked where they do not
thus call upon the name of God, that his wrath might be powered out upon that
family, our towns would be as places overthrown by the plague, the people being
dead within, and the mark of judgment on the door without: I fear where one
house would escape, there is ten would be marked out for death: and then they
might teach their doors to pray, Lord have mercy on us; because the people
would not pray themselves. But especially if you could see what men do in their
secret chambers, how few should you find in a whole Town, that spend one
quarter of an hour morning and night in earnest supplication to God for their
souls? O how little do these men set by this eternal Rest? Thus do they
slothfully neglect all endeavors for their one welfare, except some public
duty in the congregation, which custom or credit does engage them to. Persuade
them to read good books, and they will not be at so much pains: persuade them
to learn the grounds of Religion in some Catechism, and they think it a
toilsome slavery, fitter for Schoolboyes or little children then for them:
Persuade them to Sanctify the Lords day in holy exercises, and to spend it
wholly in hearing the word, and repeating it with their families, and prayer,
and meditation, etc. and to forbear all their worldly thoughts and speeches;
And what a tedious life do they take this to be? and how long may you preach to
them, before they will be brought to it? as if they thought that heaven were
not worth all this ado. Christ has been pleading with England these fourscore
years and more by the word of his Gospel, for his worship and for his Sabbaths,
and yet the inhabitants are not persuaded. Nay, he has been pleading these six
years by threatenings, How many of those twelve deplorable abuses, which are the
pillars of Satan's Kingdom, which Cyprian mentions, are not common in England?
1. A man of knowledge without works. 2. An old man without Religious devotion.
3. A young man without obedience. 4. A rich man without alms. 5. A woman
without chastity. 6. A Gentleman without virtue. 7. A Christian contentious. 8.
A beggar proud. 9. A Bishop negligent 10. A congregation without discipline.
11. A Nation without Law. 12. A King unjust. Read Jer. 9.12, 13, 14.

and fire, and sword, and yet can prevail but with very few: And though these
bloody arguments have been spread abroad, and brought home to people from
Parish to Parish, almost as far as the word has gone, so that there is scarce
a Parish in many counties where blood has not been shed and the bodies of the
slain have not been left, yet the generality of England is no more persuaded,
then they were the first day of their warning; and they have not heard the
voice of the rod, which has cried up and down their streets, Yet O England,
will ye not sanctify my Sabbaths, nor call upon my name, nor regard my word,
nor turn from your worldliness and wickedness? God has given them a lash and a
reproof, a wound and a warning; he has (as it were) stood in their blood with
the sword in his hand, and among the heaps of the slain has he pleaded with
the living, and said, What say you? Will you yet worship me, and fear me, and
take me for your Lord? And yet they will not: Alas, yet to this day England
will not; Let me here write it, and leave it upon record, that God may be
justified, and England may be shamed; and posterity may know, if God do deliver
us, how ill we deserved it, or if he yet destroy us, how wilfully we procured
it: And if they that pass by shall ask, Why has God done thus to a
flourishing and prosperous land? You may give them the true, though sad answer,
They would not hear, they would not regard: He smit them down, he wounded them,
he hewed them as wood, and then he beseeched the remainder to consider and
return, but they never would do it: They were weary of his ways, they polluted
his Sabbaths they cast his word and worship out of their families, they would
not be at the pains to learn and obey his will, nay they abhorred his
Ministers, and servants, and holy paths, and all this to the last breath: When
he had slain five thousand or eight thousand at a fight, the rest did no more
reform, then if they had never heard of it: Nay, such a spirit of slumber is
fallen upon them, that if God should proceed and kill them all save one man and
ask that one man, Will thou yet seek me with all thy heart, he would rather
slight it. Lord have mercy upon us! What is gone with men's understanding and
sense? Have they renounced Reason as well as Faith? Are they dead naturally as
well as spiritually? Can they not hear, nor feel, though they cannot believe?
That sad judgment is fal^ upon them, mentioned in Isai. 42.24, 25. Who gave
Jacob for a spoil, and Israel (England) to the robbers? Did not the Lord? He
against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in his ways, neither were
they obedient to his Laws: Therefore he has poured upon them the fury of his
anger, and the strength of battle, and it has set them on fire round about,
yet they knew it not; it burned them, yet they laid it not to heart. Yea this
much more let us leave upon Record against England. They have been so far from
Reforming, and taking up the Worship of God with delight, after all this, that
they have contrarily Pervicaces and obstinatos vocamus cos, non qui ab
infirmitate carnis superati in peccatum aliquod prolapsi sunt; sed qui fibi
placent in peccatis, in ijsque toli volutantur; quos non pudor, non metus, non
objurgatio, non ipsae denique Dei comminationes ipsa Dei judicia, possunt a
p^^cando revocare. Sadeel in Psalm. 32. page 55.
abhorred it at the very heart, and fought against it as long as they could
stand, and when they have been wounded and overthrown in one Fight, they have
been as forward to the next; and when they have been quite subdued in all parts
of the Land, they are as ready again for another war, as if they had never felt
the hand of God at all; and to root out the sincere Worshippers and Worship of
God, they are ready to dye to the last man. Lord, how have thou deserved so
much ill at these men's hands! what harm has praying, and reading, and
preaching painfully, and sanctifying the Sabbath, and fearing to offend done to
England? Have they suffered for these, or for their enmity to these? what evil
do these wretches discern in the everlasting Kingdom, that they do not only
refuse to labor for it, but so detest and resist the holy way that leads to it?
It is well for them that they live in Gospel times, when the patience of God
does wait on sinners, and not in those severer days, when fire from heaven
destroyed the Captains and their Companies that were commanded by the King to
bring but one Prophet before him; or when the 2 King. 1. 2 King. 2.23, 24.
Lions destroyed forty two children for calling a Prophet of God Bald-head: Or
rather it had bin better for these men to have lived in those times, that
though their temporal Judgments had been greater, yet their eternal plagues
might have bin the less. Yet this much more let me leave upon Record to the
shame of England; That all this is not merely through idleness, because they
will not be at the pains to serve God, but it is out of a bitter enmity to his
Word and ways; for they will be at more pains then this in any way that is
evil, Deus non alienis assertionibus, sed suis aestimandus est vocibus. Ambros.
de poenit. l. 1. c. 4. Deus diserte docet ea tantum in Deo colendo adhibenda
esse, quae ipse praecepit, Sum Deo displicet omnis, (...) and simulata
religio, and cultus ex inventione humana profectus. Doctor Sutlive advers.
Bellarm. de Monach. Chap. 25. p. 130.
or in any worship of man's devising: They are as zealous for Crosses, and
Surplices, Processions and Perambulations, reading of a Gospel at a cross way,
the observation of Holidays, and Fasting days, the repeating of the Letany, or
the like forms in the Common Prayer, the bowing at the naming of the word Jesus
(while they reject his Worship) the receiving of the Sacrament when they have
no right to it, and that upon their knees, as if they were more revererent and
devout then the true laborious servants of Christ; with a multitude of things
which are only the traditions of their Fathers; I say, they are as zealous for
these, as if eternal life consisted in them. Where God forbids them, there they
are as forward as if they could never do enough; and where God commands them,
they are as backward to it, yea as much against it, as if they were the
commands of the Devil himself; and for the discipline of Christ, though all
parts of the world have much opposed it, yet where has it been so fiercely and
powerfully resisted? The Lord grant that this hardened, wilful, malicious Nation
fall not under that heavy doom, Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies which would
not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
3. THe third sort that fall under this Reproof, are those self-couzening,
formal, lazy Professors of Religion, who will be brought to any outward duty,
and to take up the easier part of Christianity, but to the inward work, and
more difficult part, they will never be persuaded: They will Preach, or hear,
or read, or talk of heaven, or pray customarily and constantly in their
Families, and take part with the persons or causes that are good, and desire to
be esteemed among the godly, but you can never bring them to the more spiritual
and difficult duties, as to be constant and fervent in secret Prayer, to be
conscionable in the duty of self-examination, to be constant in that excellent
duty of Meditation, to be heavenly minded, to watch constantly over his heart,
and words, and ways; to deny his bodily senses their delights, to mortify the
flesh, and not make provision for it to fulfill its lusts, to love and heartily
forgive an enemy, to prefer his brethren heartily before himself, and to think
meanly of his own gifts and worth, and to take it well of others that think so
too, and to love them that have low thoughts of him, as well as those that have
high; to bear easily the injuries or undervaluing words of others against him,
to lay all that he has at the feet of Christ, and to prefer his Service and
Favor before all; to prepare to die, and willingly to leave all, to come to
Christ, etc. This outside Hypocrite will never be persuaded to any of these.
Above all other, two notable sorts there are of these Hypocrites. First, The
superficial, opinionative Hypocrite. Matthew. 13.5.
Secondly, The worldly Hypocrite. First, The former entertaineth the Doctrine
of the Gospel with Joy, but it is only into the surface of his soul, he never
gives the seed any depth of earth; It changes his opinion, and he thereupon
ingageth for Religion, as the right way, and sides with it as a party in a
Faction, but it never melted and new molded his heart, nor set up Christ there
in full Power and Authority; but as his Religion lies most in his Opinion, so
he usually runs from Opinion to Opinion, and is carried up and down with every
wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they
lie in weight to deceive; and as a child is tossed too and fro; for as his
Religion is but Opinion, so is his Study, and Conference, and chief business
all about Opinion: He is usually an ignorant, Ephesians. 4.14.
Confidentia astra petimus, ruimus in praecipitia. Albe^eric. Gentilis d Jur.
Interpraet. lib. 4.
proud, bold, unreverent enquirer and babbler about controversies, rather then
an humble embracer of the known truth, with love and subjection; you may
conjecture by his bold and forward tongue, and groundless conceitedness in his
own Opinions, and sleighting of the Judgments and persons of others, and seldom
talking of the great things of Christ with seriousness and humility, that his
Religion dwells in his brain, and not in his heart; where the wind of
Temptation assaults him, he easily yields, and it carries him away as a
Feather, because his heart is empty, and not ballaced and stablished with
Christ and Grace. If the Temptation of the Times do assault men's
Understandings, and the sign be in the Head, though the little Religion that he
has lies there, yet a hundred to one but he turns Heretic, or catches the
Vertigo of some lesser errors, according to the nature and strength of the
seducement: If the wind do better serve for a vicious conversation, a hundred
to one but he turns a purveyor for the flesh, and then he can be a Tipler, and
yet religious, a Gamster, a Wanton, a neglecter of Duties, and yet religious:
If this man's Judgment ^ead him the Ceremonious way, then does he employ his
chiefest zeal for Ceremonies, as if his Religion lay in Bowing, Kneeling,
observation of Days, number, and form of words in Prayer, with a multitude of
Traditions and Customs of his Forefathers. If his Judgment be Facile cersuadeas
senem ut sellam deserat, si baculum prius quo niti possit, in manum dederis;
qui te alioqum nunquam auditurus est, sed insidiatorem potius judicaturus, ut
qui cupias pronum ad silicem cranium frangere. Sic mentes humanae ante omnia
sunt ad infallibilem Dei cognitionem adducendae. quam ubi at^^gerint jam facile
dimittent sallacia, etc. Zuinglius de vera and falsa Relig. page 406.
against Ceremonies, then his strongest zeal is employed against them,
studying, talking, disputing against them, censuring the users of them, and
perhaps fall into a contrary superstition, placing his chief Religion in
Baptism, Church Combinations, and forms of Policy, etc. For having not his soul
taken up with the essentials of Christianity, he has only the Mint and
Cummin, the smaller matters of the Law, to lay out his zeal upon. You shall
never hear in private conference any humble and hearty bewailings of his souls
imperfections, or any heart bleeding acknowledgments of his unkindnesses to
Christ, or any pantings and longings after him, from this man,; but that he is
of such a Judgment, or such a Religion, or Party, or Society, or a Member of
such a Church, herein does he gather his greatest comforts; but the inward and
spiritual labors of a Christian he will not be brought to.

Secondly, The like may be said of the worldly Hypocrite, who choaketh the
Doctrine of the Gospel, with the thorns of worldly cares and desires; His
Judgment is convinced, that he must be Religious, or he cannot be saved, and
therefore he reads, and hears, and prays, and forsakes his former company and
courses; but because his belief of the Gospel-Doctrine is but wavering and
shallow, he resolves to keep his hold of present things, lest the promise of
Rest should fail him, and yet to be religious, that so he may have heaven when
he can keep the world no longer, thinking it wisdom to have two strings to his
bow, lest one should break. This man's Judgment may say, God is the chief good;
but his heart and affections never said so, but look upon God as a kind of
strange and disproportionate Happiness, to be tolerated rather then the flames
of hell, but not desired before the felicity on earth. Phil. 3.9.
In a word, the world has more of his Affections then God, and therefore is
his God, and his Coveteousness is Idolatry. This he might easily know and feel,
if he would judge impartially, and were but faithful to himsef: And though this
man do not gad after Opinions and Novelties in his Religion as the former, yet
will he set his sails to the wind of worldly advantage, and be of that opinion
which will best serve his turn* And as a man whose spirits are seized on by
some pestilential malignity, is feeble, and faint, and heartless in all that he
does; so this man's spirits being possessed by the plague of this malignant
worldly disposition, O how faint is he in secret prayer! O how superficial in
Examination and meditation! How feeble in heart-watchings, and humbling,
mortifying endeavors! how nothing at all in loving and walking with God,
rejoicing in him, or desiring after him! so that both these, and many other
sorts of lazy Hypocrites there are, who though they will trudge on with you in
the easy outside of Religion, yet will never be at the pains of inward and
spiritual duties.

SECT. V.. 5.

4. ANd even the godly themselves deserve this Reproof, for being too lazy
seekers of their everlasting Rest. Alas, what a disproportion is there betwixt
our Light and our Heat? our Professions and Prosecution? who makes that haste,
as if it were for heaven? How still we stand! how idly we work! how we talk,
and jest, and trifle away our time! how deceitfully we do the Work of God! how
we hear, as if we heard not, and pray, as if we prayed not, and confer, and
examine, and meditate, and reprove sin as if we did it not, and use the
Ordinances as if we used them not, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
and enjoy Christ, as if we enjoyed him not, as if we had learned to use the
things of heaven, as the Apostle teaches us to use the world! Who would think
that stood by us, and heard us pray in private or public, that we were praying
for no less then everlasting glory? should heaven be sought no more earnestly
then thus? Me thinks we are none of us all in good-sadness for our souls. We do
but dally with the Work of God, and play with Christ, as children, we play with
our meat when we should eat it, and we play with our clothes, and look upon
them, when we should put them on and wear them; we hang upon Ordinances from
day to day, but Read Mr. Whitfields excellent Sermon on this Text.
we stir not up our selves to seek the Lord: I see a great many very constant
in hearing and Praying, and give us some hopes that their hearts are honest,
but they do not hear and pr^y as i^ it were for their lives: O, what a frozen
stupidity has benumbed us! The judgment of Pharaoh is among us, we are turned
into Stones and Rocks, that can neither feel nor stir; The plague of Lots wife
is upon us, as if we were changed into liveless, unmovable Pillars: we are
dying* and we know it, and yet we stir not; we are at the door of eternal
Happiness or Misery, and yet we perceive it not: Death knocks and we hear not,
Christ calls and knocks, and we hear not, God cries to us, To day if you will
hear my voice, harden not your hearts; work while it is day, for the night
comes, when none shall work; Now ply your business, now labor for your lives,
now lay out all your strength and time, now do it, now or never, and yet we
stir no more then if we were half asleep; What haste does Death and Judgment
make? how fast do they come on? they are almost at us, and yet what little
haste make we? what haste makes the Sword to devour, from one part of the Land
to another? what haste does Plague and Famine make? and all because we will not
make haste: The Spur of God is in our sides, we bleed, we groan, and yet we do
not mend our pace; The Rod is on our backs, it speaks to the quick; our lashes
are heard through the Christian world, and yet we stir no faster then before:
Lord, what a senseless, sottish, earthly, hellish thing is a hard heart! that we
will not go roundly and cheerfully toward heaven without all this ado! no nor
with it neither! where is the man that is serious in his Christianity? Methinks
men do every where make but a trifle of their eternal state; they look after it
but a little upon the by, they do not make it the task and business of their
lives. To be plain with you, I think nothing undoes men so much as
complementing, and jesting, in Religion. O, if I were not sick my self of the
same disease, with what tears should I mixed this Ink? and with what groans
should I express these sad complaints? and with what hearts-grief should I
mourn over this universal deadness? Do the Magistrates among us seriously
perform It is a frivolous dream, to think that a Judge or Lawyer has one
conscience as a Judge, and another as a Christian, for he has but one soul,
etc. And how can that seem just according to Law, which appears to a man's
conscience to be unjust? Fulbecks direction, page 33. Rara virtus est inter
principes, non timori esse recte factis: h. e. non obsistere veritati, and his
qui se ad Evangelii veritatem and normam componunt non odiosius imminere; and
contra familiare est principibus quibusdam, pessimos quosque dignitatibus,
honoribusque admovere, non alia causa quam ut immanissime tractent veridicos.
Zuing. de ver. and fals^ Relig. de Scandalo page 392.
their portion of the work? Are they zealous for God? Do they build up his
House? and are they tender of his Honor? Do they second the Word? and encourage
the Godly? and relieve the Oppressed? and compassionate the Distressed? and let
fly at the face of sin and sinners, as being the disturbers of our peace, and
the only cause of all our miseries? Do they study how to do the utmost that
they can for God? to improve their power and parts, and wealth, and honor, and
all their interests for the greatest advantage to the Kingdom of Christ, as men
that must shortly give account of their Stewardship? or do they build their own
houses, and seek their advancements and stand upon, and contest for their own
honors, and do no more for Christ then needs they must, or then lies in their
way, or then is put by others into their hands, or then stands with the
pleasing of their friends, or with their worldy interests? which of these two
courses do they take? and how thin are those Ministers that are serious in
their work? Nay, how mightily do the very best fail in this above all things!
Isa. 58.1.
Do we cry out of men's disobedience to the Gospel in the evidence and power of
the Spirit, and deal with sin as that which is the fire in our Towns and
houses? and by force pull men out of this fire? Jude 23.
Do we persuade our people, as those that know the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor.
5.11.
should do? Do we press Christ and Regeneration, and Faith, and Holiness, as
men that believe indeed, that without these they shall never have Life? Do our
bowels yearn over the Ignorant, and the Careless, and the obstinate Multitude,
Matthew. 9.36. Negligentes non sunt negligendi. Just. Martyr.
as men that believe their own Doctrine? that our dear people must be eternally
damned if they be not timely recovered? When we look them in the faces, do our
hearts melt over them, lest we should never see their faces in Rest? Do we, as
Paul, tell them weeping, of their fleshly, and earthly disposition? and teach
them Long graviori debito tenentur astricti, qui pro multi^ animabus reddituri
sunt rationem. Quid ego infoelix, quo me vertam si tantum thesaurum, si
pretiosum depositum illud quod sibi Chris^us sanguine suo pretiosius judicavit,
contigerit negligentius custodire? si stillantem in cruce Domini sanguinem
collegissem, essetque repositus penes me, in vase vitreo quod and portari
saepius opporteret, quid animi habiturus essem in discrimine tanto? and certe
id servandum accepi pro quo mercator non insipiens, ipsa utique sapientia,
sanguinem suum dedit. Accedit sane ad solicitudinis cumulum, quod cum meam and
proximi conscientiam servare necesse sit, neutra mihi satis est nota: utraque
abyssus, utraque mihi nox est, at exigitur a me custodia utriusque. Bern. Sermon.
3. de tempore.
publicly, Phil. 3.18, 19. Acts 20.20.31.
and from house to house night and day with tears? And do we entreat them, as
if it were indeed for their lives and salvation? that when we speak of the
Joys and Miseries of another world, our people may see us affected accordingly,
and perceive that we do indeed mean as we speak? Or rather, do we not study
words, and neat Expressions, that we may approve our selves able men in the
judgment of critical Hearers? and speak so formally, and heartlesly of
Eternity, that our people can scarcely think that we believe our selves? or
put our tongues into some affected pace? and our language into some forced
Oratorical strain? as if a Ministers business were of no more weight, but to
tell them a smooth tale of an hour long, and so look no more after them till
the next Sermon! Seldom do we fit our Sermons, either for Matter or Manner to
the great end, our peoples salvation; but we sacrifice our studies to our own
credit, or our peoples content, or some such base inferior end; Carnal
discretion does control our fervency; It makes our Sermons like beautiful
Pictures, which have much pains and cost bestowed upon them, to make them
comely and desirable to the eye; but life, or heat, or motion there is none:
Surely as such a conversation is an Hypocritical conversation; so such a Sermon
is as truly an hypocritical Sermon. O the formal frozen lifeless Sermons which
we daily hear preached upon the most weighty piercing Subjects in the world!
How gently do we handle those sins, which will handle so cruelly our poor
peoples souls? And how tenderly do we deal with their careless hearts? not
speaking to them as to men that must be wakened or damned. We tell them of
heaven and hell in such a sleepy tone, and sleighty way, as if we were but
acting a part in a Play; so that we usually preach our people asleep with those
subjects which one would think should rather endanger the driving of some
besides themselves if they were faithfully delivered. Not that I commend, or
excuse that real indiscretion, and unseemly language, and nauseous
repetitions, and ridiculous gestures, whereby many do disgrace the work of God,
and bring his ordinances in contempt with the people, nor think it fit that he
should be an Ambassador from God on so weighty a business, that is not able to
speak sense or reason: But in a word, our want of seriousness about the things
of Heaven, does charm the souls of men into formality, and has brought them
to this customary, careless hearing, which undoes them: The Lord pardon the
great sin of the Ministry in this thing; and in particular, my own.

And are the people any more serious then Magistrates and Ministers? How can it
be expected? Reader, look but to thy self, and resolve the question. Ask
conscience, and suffer it to tell thee truly: Have thou set thine Eternal Rest
before thine eyes, as the great business which thou have to do in this world?
Have thou studied and cared, and watched, and labored, and laid about thee with
all thy might, lest any should take thy Crown from thee? Have thou made have,
Matthew. 6.21.
lest thou should come too late, and dye before the work be done? Has thy
very heart been set upon it, and thy desires and thoughts run out this way?
Have thou pressed on through crowdes of opposition toward the Mark, for this
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus? Phil. 3.13, 14.
still reaching forth unto those things which are before? When you have set
your hand to the work of God, Eccles. 9.10.
have you done it with all your might? Can conscience witness your secret
cries, and groans, or tears? Can your families witness that you have taught
them the fear of the Lord? and warned them all with earnestness and
unweariedness to remember God and their souls, and to provide for Everlasting?
Or that you have done but as much for them, as that damned Glutton would have
had Lazarus do for his brethren on earth, to warn them that they come not to
that place of Torment? Can your Ministers witness, that they have heard you cry
out, What shall we do to be saved? and that you have followed them with
complaints against your corruptions, and with earnest enquiries after the Lord?
Can your neighbors about you witness, that you are still learning of them that
are able to instruct you? and that you plainly, and roundly reprove the
ungodly, and take pains for the saving of your brethrens souls? Let all these
witnesses Judge this day between God and you, Whether you are in good sadness
about the affairs of Eternal Rest. But if yet you cannot discern your
neglects; Look but to your selves, within you, without you, to the work you
have done: you can tell by his work, whether your servant have loytered, though
you did not see him; so you may by your selves: Is your love to Christ, your
faith, your zeal, and other graces strong or weak? What are your joys? what is
your Assurance? Is all right, and strong, and in order within you? Are you
ready to dye, if this should be the day? Do the souls among whom you have
conversed, bless you? Why, Judge by this, and it will quickly appear whether you
have been Laborers, or Loyterers.

O Blessed Rest! how unworthily art thou neglected! O glorious Kingdom! how art
thou undervalued! Little know the careless sons of men, what a state they set
so light by! If they once knew it, they would sure be of another mind.

CHAP. VI. An Exhortation to Seriousness in seeking Rest.
SECT. I.
I Hope,. 1.
Reader, by this time thou art somewhat sensible, what a desperate thing it is
to trifle about our Eternal Rest; and how deeply thou have been guilty of this
thy self. And I hope also, that thou dare not now suffer this Conviction to
dye; but art resolved to be another man for the time to come: What say thou?
Is this thy Resolution? If thou were sick of some desperate disease, and the
Physician should tell thee, [ If you will observe but one thing, I doubt not to
cure you,] would thou not observe it? Why, if thou will observe but this one
thing for thy Soul, I make no doubt of thy Salvation: If thou will now but
shake off thy sloth, and put to all thy strength, and ply the work of God
unweariedly, and be a downright Christian in good sadness; I know not what can
hinder thy Happiness. As far as thou art gone from God, if thou would but now
return and seek him with all thy heart, no doubt but thou shall find him. As
unkindly as thou have dealt with Jesus Christ, if thou did but feel thy self
sick and dead, and seek him heartily, and apply thy self in good earnest to the
obedience of his Laws; thy Salvation were as sure as if thou had it already.
But as full as the Satisfaction of Christ is, as free as the Promise is, as
large as the Mercy of God is; yet if thou do but look on these, and talk of
them, when thou should greedily entertain them, thou will be never the better
for them; and if thou loiter when thou should labor, thou will lose the
Crown. Oh fall to work then speedily and seriously, and bless God that thou
have yet time to do it; and though that which is past cannot be recalled, yet
redeem the time now by doubling thy diligence. And because thou shall see I
urge thee not without cause, I will here adjoyn a multitude of Considerations
to Move thee; yet do I not desire thee to take them by number, but by weight:
Their intent and use is, to drive thee from Delaying and from Loytering in
seeking Rest: And to all men do I propound them, both Godly and ungodly:
Whoever thou art therefore, I entreat thee to rouse up thy spirit, and read
them deliberately, and give me a little while thy attention as to a message
from God; and (as Moses said to the people, Deuteronomy. 32.46.) Set thy heart to all
the words that I testify to thee this day, for it is not a vain thing, but it
is for thy Life: Weigh what I here wright with the Judgment of a man; and if I
speak not Reason, throw it back in my face; but if I do, see thou entertain and
obey it accordingly; and the Lord open thy heart, and fasten his counsel
effectually upon thee.

SECT. II.
. 2.
1. COnsider; Our Affections and Actions should be somewhat answerable to the
Greatness of the Ends to which they are intended. Now the Ends of a Christians
Desires and Endeavors are so Great, that no humane understanding on earth can
comprehend them; whether you respect their proper Excellency, their exceeding
Importance, or their absolute Necessity.

These Ends are, The Glorifying of God, The Salvation of our own and other men's
Souls, in our escaping the Torments of Hell, and Possessing the Glory of
Heaven. And can a man be too much affected with things of such Moment? Can he
Desire them too Earnestly? or Love them too Violently? or Labor for them too
Diligently? When we know, that if our prayers prevail not, and our labor
succeed not, we are undone for ever! I think it concerns us to seek and labor
to the purpose. When it is put to the Question, Whether we shall live for ever
in Heaven or in Hell? and the Question must be resolved upon our Obeying the
Gospel, or our disobeying it, upon the Painfulness or the Slothfulness of our
present Endeavors; I think it is time for us to bestir our selves! and to leave
our trifling and complementing with God.

SECT. III.
2. COnsider;. 3.
Our diligence should be somewhat answerable to the Greatness of the work which
we have to do, as well as to the Ends of it. Now the Works of a Christian here
are very Many, and very Great: The Soul must be renewed; Many and great
Corruptions must be mortified: Custom, and Temptations, and worldly Interests
must be conquered: Flesh must be mastered; Self must be denied: Life, and
friends, and credit, and all must be slighted: Conscience must be upon good
grounds quieted; Assurance of Pardon and Salvation must be attained. And though
it is God that must give us these, and that freely, without our own merit; yet
will he not give them so freely, as without our earnest Seeking and Labor.
Besides, there is a deal of knowledge to be got, for the guiding of our selves,
for the defending of the Truth, for the direction of others; and a deal of
skill, for the right managing of our parts: Many Ordinances are to be used, and
duties performed, ordinary and extraordinary: Every Age, and year, and day,
does require fresh succession of duty; Every place we come in, every person
that we have to deal with; every change of our own Condition, does still
require the renewing of our labor, and brings duty along with it: Wives,
Children, Servants, Neighbors, Friends, Enemies, all of them call for duty
from us: And all this of great importance too; so that for the most of it, if
we miscarry in it, it would prove our undoing.

Judge then your selves, whether men that have so much business lying upon their
hands, should not bestir them? and whether it be their Wisdom either to Delay,
or to Loiter?

SECT. IV.
. 4.
3. COnsider; Our diligence should be somewhat quickened, because of the
shortness and uncertainty of the Time allotted us, for the performing of all
this work, and the many and great impediments which we meet with. Yet a few
days, and we shall be here no more. Time passes on: Many hundred diseases are
ready to assault us: We that now are preaching, and hearing, and talking, and
walking, must very shortly be carried on men's backs, and laid in the dust, and
there left to the worms in darkness and corruption; we are almost there
already: It is but a few days, or months, or years: and what is that when once
they are past? We know not whether we shall have another Sermon, or Sabbath, or
hour. How then should those men bestir them for their Everlasting Rest, who
know they have so short a space for so great a work? Besides, every step in the
way has its difficulties; the gate is straight, and the way narrow: The
righteous themselves are scarcely saved; Scandals and discouragements will be
still cast before us: And can all these be overcome by slothful Endeavors?

SECT. V.
. 5.
4. MOreover; Our diligence should be somewhat answerable to the diligence of
our Enemies in seeking our destruction. For if we sit still while they are
plotting and laboring, or if we be lazy in our defense, while they are
diligent in assaulting us, you may easily conceive how we are likely to speed.
How diligent is Satan in all kind of temptations, Therefore, be sober and
vigilant, (says 1 Pet. 5.8.) because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring
Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour; Whom resist steadfast in the
Faith. How diligent are all the Ministers of Satan? False Teachers, scorners at
godliness, malicious persecutors, all unwearied; And our inward Corruption the
most busy and diligent of all: Whatever we are about, it is still resisting
us; depraving our duties, perverting our thoughts, dulling our Affections to
good, exciting them to evil: And will a feeble resistance then serve our turn?
Should not we be more active for our own preservation, then our Enemies for our
ruin.

SECT. VI.
5. OUr Affections and Endeavors should bear some proportion with the Talents
which we have received,. 6.
and means which we have enjoyed. It may well be expected, that a horseman
should go faster then a footman; and he that has a swift horse, faster then he
that has a slow one: More work will be expected from a sound man, then from
the sick; and from a man at age, Luke 12.48.
then from a Child: And to whom men commit much, from them they will expect the
more. Now the Talents which we have received are many and great: The means
which we have enjoyed are very much, and very precious: What people breathing
on earth have had plainer Instructions? or more forcible Persuasions? or more
constant Admonitions? in season and out of season? Sermons till we have been
weary of them; and Sabbaths till we profaned them? Excellent Books in such
plenty, that we knew not which to read; but loathing them through abundance
have thrown by all? What people have had God so near them, as we have had? or
have seen Christ, as it were, crucified before their eyes, as we have done?
What people have had Heaven and Hell, as it were, opened unto them, as we?
Scarce a day wherein we have not had some spur to put us on. What speed then
should such a people make for Heaven? And how should they fly that are thus
winged? and how swiftly should they sail that have wind and tide to help them?
Believe it Brethren, God looks for more from England, then from most Nations in
the World; and for more from you that enjoy these helps, then from the dark
untaught Congregations of the Land. A small measure of grace beseems not such a
people; nor will an ordinary diligence in the work of God excuse them.

SECT. VII.
6. THe Vigor of our Affections and Actions should be somewhat answerable to
the great cost bestowed upon us,. 7.
and to the deep engaging mercies which we have received from God. Surely we
owe more service to our Master from whom we have our maintenance, then we do to
a stranger to whom we never were beholden. Oh the cost that God has been at
for our sakes! The riches of Sea and Land, of Heaven and Earth, has he powered
out unto us. All our lives have been filled up with Mercies: We cannot look
back upon one hour of it, or one passage in it, but we may behold Mercy. We
feed upon Mercy; we wear Mercy on our backs, we tread upon Mercy: Mercy within
us, common and special; Mercy without us, for this life, and for that to come:
Oh the rare Deliverances that we have partaked of! both national and personal!
How often, how seasonably, how fully have our prayers been heard, and our fears
removed? What large Catalogues of particular Mercies can every Christian draw
forth and rehearse? To offer to number them, would be an endless task, as to
number the stars, or the sands of the shore. If there be any difference betwixt
Hell (where we should have been) and Earth, (where we now are) yea or Heaven,
(which is offered us) then certainly we have received Mercy. Yea, if the Blood
of the Son of God be Mercy, then are we engaged to God by Mercy; for so much
did it cost him to recover us to himself. And should a people of such deep
engagements be lazy in their returns? Shall God think nothing too much nor too
Good for us; and shall we think all too much that we do for him? Thou that art
an observing sensible man, who know how much thou art beholden to God, I
appeal to thee: Is not a loytering performance of a few heartless duties, an
unworthy requital of such admirable kindness? For my own part, when I compare
my slow and unprofitable life, with the frequent and wonderful mercies
received, it shames me, it silenceth me, and leaves me unexcusable.

SECT. VIII.
. 8.
7. A Gain consider; All the Relations which we stand in toward God, whether
common or special, do call upon us for our utmost diligence. Should not the pot
be wholly at the service of the Potter? and the creature at the service of his
great Creator? Are we his Children? and do we not owe him our most tender
affections, and dutiful obedience? Are we the Spouse of Christ? and do we not
owe him our observance, and our Love? If he be our Father, where is his honor?
and if he be our Master, where is his fear? John 13.13.
Mal. 1.6. We call him Lord and Master, and we do well: but if our industry be
not answerable to our assumed relations, we condemn our selves in saying we are
his children or his servants. How will the hard labor and daily toil that
servants undergo to please their Masters, judge and condemn those men who will
not labor so hard for their Great Master? Surely there is none have a better or
more honorable Master then we; nor can any expect such fruit of their labors,
1 Cor. 15. ult.

SECT. IX.
8. COnsider;. 9.
What haste should they make, who have such Rods at their backs as be at ours?
And how painfully should they work, who are still driven on by such sharp
Afflictions? If either we wander out of the way, or loyter in it, how surely do
we prepare for our own smart? Every creature is ready to be Gods Rod to reduce
us, or to put us on: Our sweetest mercies will become our sorrows: Or rather
then he will want a Rod, the Lord will make us a scourge to our selves: Our
diseased bodies shall make us groan, our perplexed minds shall make us
restless; our conscience shall be as a Scorpion in our bosom. And is it not
easier to endure the labor then the spur? Had we rather be still thus
afflicted, then to be up and going? Alas, how like are we to tired horses, that
will lie down, and groan, or stand still, and let you lay on them as long as
you will, rather then they will freely travel on their journey? And thus we
make our own lives miserable, and necessitate God, if he love us, to chasti^e
us. It is true, those that do most, do meet with Afflictions also: but surely
according to the measure of their peace of Conscience, and faithfulness to
Christ, so is the bitterness of their Cup (for the most part) abated.

SECT. X.
9. HOw close should they ply their work,. 10.
who have such great preparations attending them as we have? All the world are
our servants, that we may be the Servants of God. The Sun, and Moon, and Stars,
attend us with their light and influence: The Earth, with all its furniture, is
at our service: How many thousand plants and flowers, and fruits, and birds,
and beasts do all attend us? The Sea with its inhabitants, the Air, the wind,
the frost and snow, the heat and fire, the clouds and rain, all wait upon us
while we do our work. Yea the Angels are ministering Spirits for the Service of
the Elect. And is it not an intolerable crime for us to trifle, while all these
are employed to assist us? Heb. 1.14.
Nay more; The Patience and Goodness of God does wait upon us: The Lord Jesus
waits in the offers of his blood; The Holy Ghost waits, in striving with
our backward hearts; Besides all his Servants, the Ministers of his Gospel, who
study and wait, and preach and wait, and pray and wait upon careless sinners.
And shall Angels and Men, yea the Lord himself, stand by, and look on, and, as
it were, hold thee the Candle while thou do nothing? Oh Christians, I beseech
you, when ever you are upon your knees in prayer, or reproving the
transgressors, or exhorting the obstinate, or upon any duty, do but remember
what attendance you have for this work; and then Judge how it behooves you to
perform it.

SECT. XI.
. 11.
10. SHould not our Affections and Endeavors be answerable to the acknowledged
Principles of our Christian Profession? Sure if we are Christians indeed, and
mean as we speak when we profess the Faith of Christ, we shall show it in
Affections and Actions as well as Expressions. Why the very fundamental
Doctrines of our Religion are, That God is the chief Good, and all our
Happiness consists in his Love, and therefore it should be valued and sought
above all things: That he is our only Lord, and therefore chiefly to be served:
That we must Love him with all our heart, and soul, and strength: That the very
business that men have in the world, and the only errand that God sent them
about, is to Glorify God, and to obtain Salvation, etc. And do men's duties and
conversations second this profession? Are these Doctrines seen in the
painfulness of men's practice? Or rather do not their works deny what their
words do confess? One would think by men's Actions, that they did not believe a
word of the Gospel to be true. Oh sad day when men's own tongues and professions
shall be brought in against them, and condemn them!

SECT. XII.
11. HOw forward and painful should we be in that work,. 12.
where we are sure we can never do enough? If there were any danger of
over-doing, then it might well cause men to moderate their endeavors: But we
know, that if we could do all, we were but unprofitable servants; Luke 17.10.
much more when we are sure to fail in all. It is true, a man may possibly pray
too much, or preach too much, or hear, or reprove too much, (though I have
known few that ever did so;) but yet no man can obey or serve God too much: For
one duty may be said to be too long, when it shuts out another; and then it
cease indeed to be a duty. So that, though all Superstition, or service of
our devising, may be called a Righteousness-over-much; yet as long as you keep
your service to the rule of the Word, that so it may have the true nature of
obedience, you never need to fear being Righteous too much: For else we should
reproach the Lord and Lawgiver of the Church, as if he had commanded us to do
too much. Ah, if the world were not mad with malice, they could never be so
blind in this point as they are; to think that faithful diligence in serving
Christ, is folly and singularity; and that they who set themselves wholly to
seek eternal life, are but precise Puritans! The time is near when they will
easily confess, that God could not be loved or served too much, and that no man
can be too busy to save his Soul: For the world you may easily do too much,
but here (in Gods way) you cannot.

SECT. XIII.
12. IT is the nature of every Grace to put on the Soul to diligence and
speed.. 13.
If you Loved God, you would make haste, and not delay or trifle; you would
think nothing too much that you could possibly do: you would be ambitious to
serve him, and please him still more: Love is quick, and impatient; it is
active, and observant. Joh. 14.15.23.
If you Loved Christ, you would keep his Commandments, and not accuse them of
too much strictness. So also, if you had Faith, it would quicken and encourage
you: If you had the Hope of Glory, it would, as the spring in the watch, set
all the wheels of your Souls agoing. If you had the Fear of God, it would rouse
you out of your slothfulness. If you had Zeal, it would inflame you, and eat
you up. God has put all his Graces in the Soul on purpose to be oil to the
wheels, to be life to the dead, to mind men of their duty, and dispose them to
it, and to carry them to himself: So that in what degree soever thou art
sanctified, in the same degree thou will be serious and laborious in the work
of God.

SECT. XIV.
. 14.
13. COnsider; They that trifle in the way to Heaven, do but lose all their
Labor, when serious endeavors do obtain their End. The Proverb is, As good
never a whit, as never the better. If two be running in a race, he that runs
slowest had as good never have run at all, for now he loses the prize and his
labor both. Acts 26.28.
Many like Agrippa are but Almost Christians, will find in the end they shall
be but Almost Saved. God has set the rate at which the Pearl must be bought;
if you bid a penny less then that rate, you had as good bid nothing. As a man
that is lifting at some weighty thing, if he put too almost strength enough,
but yet not sufficient, it is as good he had put too none at all, for he does
but lose all his labor. Oh how many Professors of Christianity will find this
true to their sorrow? Who have had a mind to the ways of God, and have kept up
a dull task of duty, and plodded on in a formal liveless profession, but never
came to serious Christianity? How many a duty have they lost, for want of doing
them thoroughly, and to the purpose? Perhaps their place in Hell may be the
easier, and so their labor is not lost; but as to the obtaining of Salvation
it is all lost. Many shall seek to enter, and not be able; who if they had
striven, Luke 13* 24.
might have been able. Oh therefore put to a little more diligence and
strength, that all be not in vain that you have done already.

SECT. XV.
14. FUrthermore;. 15.
We have lost a great deal of precious Time already, and therefore it is reason
that we labor so much the harder. If a traveller do sleep or trifle out the
most of the day, he must travel so much the faster in the Evening, or else he
is like to fall short of his Journeys end. With some of us, our childhood and
youth is gone; with some also their middle age is past, and the time before us
is very uncertain and short. What a deal of Time have we slept away, and talked
away, and played away? What a deal have we spent in worldly thoughts, and
labors, or in mere Idleness? Though in likelihood the most of our time is
spent, yet how little of our work is done? And is it not time now to bestir our
selves in the evening of our days? The time which we have lost can never be
recalled: Should we not then Redeem it by improving the little which remains?
You may receive indeed an equal recompense with those that have born the burden
and heat of the day, though you came not in till the last hour; but then you
must be sure to labor soundly that hour. It is enough sure that we have lost
so much of our lives, let us not now be so foolish as to lose the rest, 1 Pet.
4.2, 3, 4.

SECT. XVI.
15. COnsider;. 16.
The greater are your layings out, the greater will be your comings in. Though
you may seem to lose your labor at the present, yet the time comes when you
shall find it with advantage. The Seed which is buried and dead, will bring
forth a plentiful increase at the Harvest. Whatever you do, and whatever you
suffer, this Everlasting Rest will pay for all. There is no repenting of
Labors or Sufferings in Heaven: None says, Would I had spared my pains, and
prayed less, or been less strict and precise, and done as the rest of my
neighbors did: There is never a such a thought in Heaven as these. But on the
contrary it will be their Joy to look back upon their labors and tribulations,
and to consider how the mighty Power of God did bring them through all. Who
ever complained, that he came to Heaven at too dear a Rate? or that his
Salvation cost him more labor then it was worth? We may say of all our
labors, as Paul of our sufferings, Romans 8.18. For I reckon, that the
sufferings (and labors) of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory which shall be revealed in us. We labor but for a moment, but
we shall Rest for ever. Who would not put forth all his strength for one hour,
when he may be a Prince while he lives for that hours work? Oh what is the duty
and sufferings of a short frail life, which is almost at an end as soon as it
begins, in respect of the endless Joys with God? Will not all our tears be then
wiped away? and all the sorrow of our duties forgotten? But yet the Lord will
not forget them; for he is not unjust to forget our work and labor of Love,
Heb. 6.10.

SECT. XVII.
. 17.
16. COnsider; Violence and laborious Striving for Salvation, is the way that
the Wisdom of God has directed us to, as best; and his Sovereign Authority
appointed us, as necessary. Who knows the way to Heaven, better then the God of
Heaven? When men tell us, that we are too strict and precise, whom do they
accuse? God or us? Luke 17.10.
If we do no more then what we are commanded, nor so much neither, they may as
well say, God has made Laws which are too strict and precise. Sure if it were
a fault, it would lie in him that commands it, and not in us who are bound to
obey. And dare these men think that they are wiser then God? Do they know
better then he, what men must do to be saved? These are the men that ask us,
Whether we be wiser then all the world besides? and yet they will pretend to be
wiser then God. What do they less, when God bids us take the most diligent
course, and they tell us, It is more ado then needs? Mark well the language of
the Laws of God, and see how you can reconcile it with the language of the
world: Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent
take it by force. Or as it is in Luke 16.16. Every one presses into it. Luke
13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many shall seek to enter in,
and not be able. So Mat. 7.13.14. Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to
do, do it with thy Might; for there is no Work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
Wisdom in the Grave, whither thou go. 1 Cor. 9.24. Know ye not, that they
which run in a race, run all, but one receives the prize? so run that ye may
obtain. 2 Timothy 2.5. If a man strive for masteries, yet he is not crowned,
except he Non omnes qui dicuntur Episcopi, sed qui graviter et strenue se
gesserint. Sarcer. in locum.
strive lawfully; that is, powerfully and prevailingly. Phil. 2.12. Work out
your Salvation with fear and trembling. 2. Pet. 1.10. Give Diligence to make
your Calling and Election Sure. 1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? So Phil. 1.27. and 3.14.
1 Timothy 6.12, 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 6.5, etc. This is the constant language of Christ:
And which shall I follow, God or men? yea and that the worst and most wicked
men? Shall I think, that every ignorant worldly sot, that can only call a man
Puritan, knows more then Christ? and can teach him to make Laws for his Church?
or can tell God how to mend the Scriptures? Let them bring all the seeming
Reasons that they can against the holy, violent, strivings of the Saints, and
this suffices me to confute them all; That God is of another mind, and he has
commanded me to do much more then I do: And though I could see no Reason for
it, yet his Will is Reason enough to me: I am sure, God is worthy to govern us,
if we were better then we are. Who should make Laws for us, but he that made
us? and who should line out the way to Heaven, but he that must bring us
thither? and who should determine on what Conditions we shall be saved, but he
that bestows the gift of Salvation? So that let World, or Flesh, or Devil,
speak against a holy laborious course, this is my Answer; God has commanded it.

SECT. XVIII.
17. MOreover;. 18.
It is a course that all men in the world either do or will approve of. There Is
not a man that ever was, or is, or shall be, but shall one day justify the
Diligence of the Saints, and give his verdict in the approbation of their
wisdom. And who would not go that way which every man shall applaud? It is
true; it is now a way every where spoken against, and hated: but let me tell
you, 1. Most that speak against it, do in their judgments approve of it; only
because the practice of godliness is against the pleasures of the flesh,
therefore do they against their own judgments resist it: Remember this, you
that will be of the Opinion and Way that most are of: Why will you not be of
the Opinion then that all will shortly be of? Why will you be of a Judgment
which you are sure you shall all shortly change? Oh that you were but as wise
in this, as those in Hell.
They have not one word of Reason against it; but reproaches and Railing are
their best Arguments. 2. Those that now are against it, whether in Judgment or
Passion, will shortly be every man of another mind. If they come to Heaven,
their mind must be changed before they come there. If they go to Hell, their
Judgment will then be altered whether they will or no. If you could speak with
every Soul that suffers those Torments, and ask their Judgments, Whether it
be possible to be too Diligent and Serious in seeking Salvation? you may easily
conjecture what answer they would return. Take the most bitter derider or
persecuter of godliness, even those that will venture their lives for to
overthrow it; If those men do not shortly eat their own words, and wish a
thousand times that they had been the most holy diligent Christians on Earth,
then let me bear the shame of a false Prophet for ever.

SECT. XIX.
. 19.
18. COnsider; They that have been the most Serious Painful Christians, when
they come to dye do exceedingly lament their negligence. Those that have wholly
addicted themselves to the work of God, and have made it the main business of
their lives, and have slighted the world, and mortified the flesh, and have
been the wonders of the world for their Heavenly Conversations; yet when
Conscience is let loose upon them, and God withdraws the sense of his Love, how
do their failings wound them, and disquiet them? What terrors do the Souls of
many undergo, who are generally admired for their godliness and innocence? Even
those that are hated and derided by the world for being so strict, and are
thought to be almost besides themselves for their extraordinary diligence; Yet
commonly when they lie a dying, do wish, Oh, that they had been a thousand
times more holy, more heavenly, more laborious for their Souls! What a case
then will the negligent World be in, when their Consciences are awaked? When
they lie dying, and look behind them upon a lazy negligent life, and look
before them upon a severe and terrible Judgment! What an esteem will they have
of a holy life? For my own part, I may say as Erasmus, Accusant quod nimium
fecerim, verum Conscientia mea me accusat quod minus fecerim, quodque lentior
fuerim. They accuse me for doing too much, but my own Conscience accuses me
for doing too little, and being too slow: And it is far easier bearing the
scorns of the World, then the scourges of Conscience. The World speaks at a
distance without me, so that though I hear their words, I can choose whether I
will feel them: but my Conscience speaks within me at the very heart, so that
every check does pierce me to the quick. Conscience when it is reprehended
justly is the Messenger of God; but ungodly Revilers are but the voice of the
Devil. I had rather be reproached by the Devil for seeking Salvation, then be
reproved of God for neglecting it: I had rather the World should call me
Puritan in the Devils name, then Conscience should call me Loyterer in Gods
name. As God and Conscience are more useful friends then Satan and the World;
so are they more dreadful irresistible Enemies.

SECT. XX.
19. COnsider how far many a man goes,. 20.
and what a deal of pains he takes for Heaven, and yet misseth it for want of
more? When every man that striveth is not crowned, (2 Timothy 2.5.) and many shall
seek to enter in, and not be able, ( Luke 13.24.) and the very Children of the
Kingdom shall be shut out, ( Matthew. 13.41.) and they that have heard the Word,
and received it with Joy, ( Mat. 13.20.) and have heard the Preacher gladly,
and done many things after him, shall yet perish, ( Mark 6.20.) It is time for
us to look about us, and take heed of loytering. When they that seek God daily,
and delight to know his ways, and ask of him the Ordinances of Justice, and
take Delight in approaching to God, and that in fasting and afflicting their
Souls, ( Isai. 58.2, 3.) are yet shut out with Hypocrites and Unbeleevers: When
they that have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and of
the good Word of God, and of the Powers of the World to come, and were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, may yet fall away beyond recovery, and crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, ( Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.) When they that have
received the knowledge of the Truth, and were sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant, may yet sin wilfully, and tread under-foot the Son of God, and do
despite to the Spirit of Grace, till there is nothing left him but the fearful
expectation of Judgment, and fire that shall devour the adversaries; ( Heb.
10.26, 27, 28, 29.) Should not this rouse us out of our laziness and security?
How far has many a man followed Christ, and yet forsaken him, when it comes to
selling of all, to bearing the Cross, to burning at a stake, or to the
renouncing of all his worldly Interests and Hopes? What a deal of pains has
many a man taken for Heaven, that never did obtain it? How many Prayers,
Sermons, Fasts, Alms, good desires, confessions, sorrow and tears for sin, etc.
have all been lost, and fallen short of the Kingdom? Methinks this should
affright us out of our sluggishness, and make us strive to outstrip the
highest Formalists?

SECT. XXI.
. 21.
20. COnsider; God has resolved, That Heaven shall not be had on easier terms.
He has not only commanded it as a duty, but has tied our Salvation to the
performance of it. Rest must always follow Labor. He that has ordained in his
Church on Earth, That he that will not Labor, shall not Eat, has also decreed
concerning the Everlasting Inheritance, 2 Thessalonians. 3.8, 10, 12.
That he that Strives not, shall not Enter. They must now lay up a Treasure in
Heaven, if they will find it there, Mat. 6.19, 20. They must seek First the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. They must not Labor for the
food which perishes, but for that food which endures to Everlasting Life,
Joh. 6.27. Some think that it is good to be Holy, but yet not of such absolute
necessity, but that a man may be saved without it: But God has determined on
the contrary, That without it no man shall see his face, Heb. 12.14.
Seriousness is the very thing wherein consists our Sincerity. If thou art not
Serious, thou art not a Christian. It is not only a high degree in
Christianity, but of the very life and essence of it. As Fencers upon a Stage
(who have all the skill at their weapons, and do eminently and industriously
act their parts, but do not seriously intend the death of each other) do differ
from Soldiers, or Combatants, who fight in good sadness for their lives; Just
so do Hypocrites differ from serious Christians. If men could be saved without
this Serious Diligence, they would never regard it: All the excellencies of
Gods ways would never entice them. But when God has resolved, That if you will
have your ease here, you shall have none hereafter, is it not wisdom then to
bestir our selves to the utmost?

SECT. XXII.
ANd thus,. 22.
Reader, I dare confidently say, I have showed thee sufficient Reason against
thy sloathfulness and negligence, if thou be not a man resolved to shut thine
eyes, and to destroy thy self wilfully in despite of Reason. Yet, lest all this
should not prevail, I will add somewhat more, if it be possible, to persuade
thee to be Serious in thy Endeavors for Heaven.

1. Consider God is in Good earnest with you; and why then should not you be so
with him? In his Commands, he means as he speaks, and will verily require your
real Obedience. In his Threatenings he is Serious, and will make them all good
against the Rebellious. In his Promises he is Serious, and will fulfill them to
the Obedient, even to the least tittle. In his Judgments he is Serious; as he
will make his Enemies know to their terror: Was not God in good earnest when he
drowned the World? When he consumed Sodom and Gomorrah? When he scattered the
Jews? Has he not been in good sadness with us lately in England, and Ireland,
and Germany? And very shortly will he lay hold on his Enemies particularly man
by man, and make them know that he is in good earnest: Especially when it comes
to the great reckoning day. And is it time then for us to dally with God?

2. Jesus Christ was Serious in Purchasing our Redemption. He was Serious in
Teaching, when he neglected his meat and drink, Joh. 4.32. He was Serious in
Praying, when he continued all night at it, Luke 6.12. He was Serious in Doing
good, when his kindred came and laid hands on him, thinking he had been beside
himself, Mark 3.20, 21. He was Serious in Suffering, when he fasted forty
days, was tempted, betrayed, spit on, buffeted, crowned with thorns, sweat
water and blood, was crucified, pierced, dyed: There was no Jesting in all
this. And should not we be Serious in seeking our own Salvation?

3. The Holy Ghost is Serious in soliciting us for our Happiness. His Motions
are frequent, and pressing, and importunate: He striveth with our hearts, Genesis
6.3. He is grieved when we resist him, Ephesians. 4.30. And should not we then be
Serious in obeying his Motions, and yielding to his Suite?

For my own part my sorrows are so real and pressing, that if God be not
serious in hearing and helping me, I shall perish immediately; nor would I be
without his tender regardful providence one day for a world; And should I then
neglect him?
4. God is Serious in hearing our Prayers, and delivering us from our dangers,
and removing our troubles, and bestowing his Mercies. When we are afflicted he
is afflicted with us, Isai. 63.9. He regards every groan and sigh: He puts
every tear into his bottle: He condoleth their misery when he is forced to
chastise them: How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? (says the Lord;) How shall
I make thee as Admah, and as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8. He hears even the rebellious
oft-times, when they call upon him in their misery; when they cry to him in
their trouble, he delivers them out of their distress, Psa. 78.37, 38. Psa.
107.10, 11, 12, 13, 19, 28. Yea, the next time thou art in trouble, thou will
beg for a serious regard of thy prayers, and grant of thy desires. And shall we
be so slight in the work of God, when we expect he should be so regardful of
us? Shall we have real Mercies, down^weight; and shall we return such
superficial and frothy service?

5. Consider; The Ministers of Christ are Serious in Instructing and Exhorting
you: and why should not you be as Serious in obeying their Instructions? They
are Serious in Study; Serious in Prayer; Serious in persuading your Souls to
the Obedience of Christ: They beg of God; they beg of you; they hope; they
wait, and long more for the Conversion and Salvation of your Souls, then they
do for any worldly good: You are their boasting, their Crown and Joy, 1 Thessalonians.
2.19, 20. Your stedfastness in Christ they value as their lives, 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.
They are content to be offered up in the service of your Faith, Phil. 2.17. If
they kill themselves with Study and Preaching, or if they suffer Martyrdom for
preaching the Gospel; they think their lives are well bestowed, so that their
preaching do but prevail for the saving of your Souls. And shall other men be
so painful and careful for your Salvation, and should you be so careless and
negligent of your own? Is it not a Serious Charge that is given to Ministers in
2 Timothy 4.1.? And a Serious Pattern that is given them in Act. 20.20, 31.?
Surely no man can be bound to be more Serious and Painful for the welfare of
another, then he is bound to be for himself.

6. How Serious and Diligent are all the Creatures in their Service to thee?
Lege Fabritium in Destructor. Vitiorum, part. 5. cap. 2. A. Vbi elegantem etiam
historia^ refert ex Linco: de oculo Morali de Monacho Episcopum ignavum
reprehendente and inter eos colloquio: Et ex Augustino solemn ignavum
exprobrantem infert.
What haste makes the Sun to compass the World? and how truly does it return at
its appointed hour? So do the Moon and other Planets. The Springs are always
flowing for thy use; The Rivers still running: The Spring and Harvest keep
their times. How hard does thy Ox labor for thee from day to day? How painfully
and speedily does thy Horse bear thee in travel? And shall all these be
laborious, and thou only negligent? Shall they all be so Serious in serving
thee, and yet thou be so slightly in thy Service to God?

7. Consider; The Servants of the World and the Devil are Serious and Diligent:
Accidiosi erubescere possunt qui non tam diligenter laborant ad impetrandum
gaudium Coeli, sicut multi impiorum laborant ad impetrandum poenam inferni.
Fabritius in Destructorio Vitiorum, part. 5. cap. 2. B.
They ply their work continually with unweariedness and delight, as if they
could never do enough: They make haste, and march furiously, as if they were
afraid of coming to Hell too late: They bear down Ministers, and Sermons, and
Counsel, and all before them. And shall they do more for the Devil then thou will do for God? Or be more diligent for Damnation, then thou will be for
Salvation? Have not thou a better Master? and sweeter Employment? and greater
Encouragements? and a better Reward?

8. The time was when thou wast Serious thy self in thy Service to Satan and
the Flesh; if it be not so yet: Do thou not remember how eagerly thou did
follow thy Sports? or how violently thou wast addicted to customs, or evil
company, or sinful delights? or how earnestly thou wast bent after thy profits,
or rising in the world? And will thou not now be more earnest and violent for
God? What profit had thou then in those things whereof thou art now ashamed?
Romans 6.21.
for the end of those things is Death: But now being made free from sin, and
become the servants of God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the End
everlasting Life, Romans 6.21, 22.

9. You are yet to this day in good earnest about the matters of this life: If
you are sick, what Serious Groans and Complaints do you utter? All the Town
shall quickly know it, if your pain be great. If you are poor, how hard do you
labor for your living, lest your Wife and Children should starve or famish? If
one fall down in a swoun in the house, or street, or in the Congregation, how
seriously will you run to relieve and recover them? And is not the business of
your Salvation of far greater moment? Are you not poor? and should you not then
be laborers? Are you not in fight for your lives? and is it time to sleep? Are
you not in a race? and is not the prize, the Crown of Glory? and should you
then sit still, or take your ease?

10. There is no Jesting in Heaven, nor in Hell. The Saints have a Real
Happiness, and the Damned a Real Misery: The Saints are Serious and high in
their Joy and Praise; and the Damned are Serious and deep in their Sorrow and
Complaints. There are no remiss or sleepy Praises in Heaven; nor any remiss or
sleepy Lamentations in Hell: All men there are in good sadness. And should we
not then be Serious now? Reader, I dare promise thee, the thoughts of these
things will shortly be Serious thoughts with thy self. When thou come to
Death or Judgment, Oh what deep heart-piercing thoughts will thou have of
Eternity! Methinks I foresee thee already astonished to think how thou could
possibly make so light of these things! Methinks I even hear thee crying out of
thy stupidity and madness!

SECT. XXIII.
ANd now,. 23.
Reader, having laid thee down these undeniable Arguments, I do here in the
name of God demand thy Resolution; What say thou? Will thou yield obedience,
or not? I am confident thy Conscience is convinced of thy Duty: Dare thou now
go on in thy common careless course, against the plain Evidence of Reason, and
Commands of God, and against the light of thy own Conscience? Dare thou live
as loosely? and sin as boldly? and pray as seldom and as coldly as before?
Dare thou now as carnally spend the Sabbath? and slubber over the Service of
God as sleightily? and think of thine Everlasting state as carelessly as before?
Or do thou not rather resolve to gird up the loins of thy mind? 1 Pet. 1.13.
and to set thy self wholly about the work of thy Salvation? and to do it with
all thy strength and might? and to break over all the oppositions of the world?
and to slight all their scorns and persecutions? to cast off the weight that
hangs on thee, and the sin that does so easily beset thee, and to run with
patience and speed the race that is before thee? Hebr. 12 1, 2*
I hope these are thy full Resolutions: if thou be well in thy wits, I am sure
they are.

Yet because I know the strange obstinacy and Rockiness of the heart of man,
and because I would fain drive this nail to the head, and leave these
persuasions fastened in thy heart, that so, if it be possible, thou might be
awakened to thy Duty, and thy Soul might live; I shall therefore proceed with
thee yet a little further: And I once more entreat thee to stir up thy
attention, and go along with me in the free and sober use of thy Reason, while
I propound to thee these following Questions: And I command thee from God, that
thou stifle not thy Conscience, and resist not conviction; but Answer them
faithfully, and obey accordingly.

SECT. XXIV.
1 Quest.. 24.
IF you could grow Rich by Religion, or get Lands and Lordships by being
diligent in godliness; or if you could get honor or preferment by it in the
world; or could be recovered from sickness by it, or could live for ever in
prosperity on Earth; What kind of lives would you then lead? and what pains
would you take in the Service of God? And is not the Rest of the Saints a more
excellent Happiness then all this?

2 Quest. If the Law of the Land did punish every breach of the Sabbath, or
every omission of family duties, or secret duties, or every cold and heartless
prayer with Death; If it were Felony or Treason to be ungodly and negligent in
Worship* and loose in your lives; What manner of persons would you then be? and
what lives would you lead? And is not Eternal death more terrible then temporal.

3 Quest. If it were Gods ordinary course to punish every sin with some present
Judgment, so that every time a man swears, or is drunk, or speaks a lie, or
back-biteth his neighbor, he should be struck dead, or blind, or lame in the
place; If God did punish every cold prayer, or neglect of duty with some
remarkable plague; what manner of persons would you then be? If you should
suddenly fall down dead like Ananias and Saphira with the sin in your hands, or
the plague of God should seize upon you as upon the Israelites, Psalm 78.30:
while their sweet morsels were yet in their mouths; If but a Mark should be
set in the forehead of every one that neglected a duty, or committed a sin;
What kind of lives would you then lead? And is not Eternal Wrath more terrible
then all this? Give but Reason leave to speak.

4 Quest. If one of your old acquaintance and companions in sin, should come
from the dead, and tell you, that he suffers the Torments of Hell for those
sins that you are guilty of, and for neglecting those duties which you neglect,
and for living such a careless, worldly, ungodly life as you now live, and
should therefore advise you to take another course; If you should meet such a
one in your Chamber when you are going to bed, and he should say to you, Oh
take heed of this carnal unholy life! Set your self to seek the Lord with all
your might; neglect not your Soul, Prepare for Eternity, that you come not to
the place of Torment that I am in: How would this take with you? and what
manner of persons would you afterward be? It is written in the life of Bruno,
that a Doctor of great note for learning and godliness being dead, and being
brought to the Church to be buried, while they were in their Popish Devotions,
and came to the words Responde mihi, the Corpse arose in the Beir, and with a
terrible voice cried out, Justo Dei Judicio accusatus sum, I am accused at the
Just Judgment of God: At which voice the people run all out of Church
affrighted. On the morrow when they came again to perform the Obsequies, at the
same words as before, the Corpse arose again, and cried with a hideous voice,
Justo Dei Judicio Judicatus sum, I am Judged at the righteous Judgment of God:
Whereupon the people run away again amazed. The third day almost all the City
came together, and when they came to the same words as before, the Corpse rose
again, and cried with a more doleful voice then before, Justo Dei Judicio
Condemnatus sum, I am Condemned at the Just Judgment of God. The consideration
whereof, that a man reputed so upright should yet by his own confession be
damned, caused Bruno, and the rest of his companions, to enter into that strict
order of the Carthusians. If the voice of the dead man could affright them into
Superstition, should not the warnings of God affright thee into true Devotion?

5 Quest. If you knew that this were the last day you had to live in the world,
how would you spend this day? If you were sure when you go to bed that you
should never rise again, would not your thoughts of another life be more
serious that night? If you knew when you are praying that you should never pray
more, would you not be more earnest and importunate in that prayer? Or if you
knew when you are preaching, or hearing, or exhorting, your sinful
acquaintance, that this were the last opportunity you should have, would you
not ply it more closely then usually you do? Why you do not know but it may be
the last; and you are sure your last is near at hand.

6 Quest. If you had seen the general dissolution of the world, and all the
pomp and glory of it consumed to ashes; If you saw all on a fire about you,
sumptuous buildings, Cities, Kingdoms, Land, Water, Earth, Heaven, all flaming
about your ears* If you had seen all that men labored for, and sold their Souls
for, gone; friends gone, the place of your former abode gone, the history
ended, and all come down, what would such a sight as this persuade you to do?
Why such a sight thou shall certainly see. I put my Question to thee in the
words of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.11.12
2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire,
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat? As if he
should say, We cannot possibly conceive or express what manner of persons we
should be in all holiness and godliness, when we do but think of the sudden,
and certain, and terrible dissolution of all things below?

7 Quest. What if you had seen the process of the Judgment of the great day? If
you had seen the Judgment set, and the Books opened, and the most stand
trembling on the left hand of the Judge, and Christ himself accusing them of
their rebellions and neglects, and remembering them of all their former
slightings of his grace, and at last condemning them to perpetual perdition? If
you had seen the godly standing on the right hand, and Jesus Christ
acknowledging their faithful obedience, and adjudging them to the possession of
the Joy of their Lord? What manner of persons would you have been after such a
sight as this? Why this sight thou shall one day see, as sure as thou live.
And why then should not the fore-knowledg of such a day awake thee to thy duty?

8 Quest. What if you had once seen Hell open, and all the damned there in
their easeless Torments? and had heard them crying out of their sloathfulness
in the day of their visitation? and wishing that they had but another life to
live, and that God would but try them once again? One crying out of his neglect
of duty; and another of his loitering and trifling when he should have been
laboring for his life? What manner of persons would you have been after such a
sight as this? What if you had seen Heaven opened, as Stephen did? and all the
Saints there triumphing in Glory? and enjoying the End of their labors and
sufferings? What a life would you lead after such a sight as this? Why you will
see this with your eyes before it be long.

9 Quest. What if you had lien in Hell but one year, or one day, or hour? and
there felt all those Torments that now you do but hear of? and God should turn
you into the world again, and try you with another life's time, and say, I will
see whether yet thou will be any better: What manner of persons would you be?
If you were to live a thousand years, would you not gladly live as strictly as
the precisest Saints? and spend all those years in prayer and duty, so you
might but escape the Torment which you suffered? How seriously then would you
speak of Hell! and pray against it! and hear, and read, and watch, and obey!
How earnestly would you admonish the car^less to take heed, and look about them
to prevent their ruin! And will you not take Gods Word for the truth of this
except you feel it? Is it not your wisdom to do as much now to prevent it, as
you would do to remove it when it is too late? Is it not more wisdom to spend
this life in laboring for Heaven while you have it, then to lie in Torment
wishing for more time in Vain?

10 Quest. What if you had been possessed but one year of the Glory of Heaven?
and there joined with the Saints and Angels in the beholding of God, and
singing his Praise? and afterward should be turned into the world again? What
a life would you lead? What pains would you take rather then be deprived of
such incomparable Glory? Would you think any cost too great, or diligence too
much? If one of those that are now in Heaven should come to live on the Earth
again, what persons would they be? What a stir would they make? How seriously
would they drive on the business of their Salvation? The Country would ring of
their exceeding Holy and Strict Conversations. They would as far excel the
Holiest Persons on Earth, as they excel the careless world. Before they would
lose that Blessed Estate, they would follow God with cries both day and night,
and throw away all, and suffer every day a Death. And should not we do as much
to obtain it, as they would do to keep it?

SECT. XXV.
. 25.
ANd thus I have said enough, if not to stir up the lazy sinner to a serious
working out his Salvation, yet at least to silence him, and leave him
unexcuseable at the Judgment of God. If thou ^anst, after the reading of all
this, go on in the same neglect of God and thy Soul, and draw out the rest of
thy life in the same dull and careless course, as thou have hitherto done, and
if thou have so far conquered and stupefied thy Conscience, that it will
quietly suffer thee to forget all this, and to trifle out the rest of thy time
in the business of the world, when in the mean while thy Salvation is in
danger, and the Judge is at the door. I have then no more to say to thee: It is
as good speak to a post or a Rock. Only as we do by our friends when they are
dead, and our words and actions can do them no good, yet to test me our
affections we weep and mourn for them; so will I also do for these deplorable
Souls. It makes my heart sad, and even tremble to think how they will stand sad
and trembling before the Lord! and how confounded and speechless they will be,
when Christ shall reason with them concerning their negligence and sloth! When
he shall say, as the Lord does in Jer. 2.5, 9, 11, 12, 13. What iniquity have
your fathers (or you) found in me, that ye are gone far from me, and have
walked after vanity? etc. Did I ever wrong you? or do you any harm? or ever
discourage you from following my service? Was my way so bad that you could not
endure it? or my service so base that you could not stoop to it? Did I stoop to
the fulfilling of the Law for you, and could not you stoop to the fulfilling of
the easy Conditions of my Gospel? Was the world or Satan a better friend to
you then I? or had they done for you more then I had done? Try now whether they
will save you, or whether they will recompense you for the loss of Heaven; or
whether they will be as good to you as I would have been. Oh what will the
wretched sinner answer to any of this? But though man will not hear, yet we may
have hope in speaking to God. -- Lord, smite these Rocks till they gush forth
waters: Though these ears are deaf, say to them, Ephata, be opened: Though
these Sinners be dead, let that power speak which sometime said, Lazarus,
arise: We know they will be wakened at the last Resurrection: Oh, but then it
will be only to their sorrow. Oh thou that did weep and groan in Spirit over
a dead Lazarus, pity these dead and senseless Souls, till they are able to weep
and groan for, and pity themselves. As thou have bid thy Servant speak, so
speak now thy self: They will hear thy voyes speaking to their hearts, that
will not hear mine speaking to their ears. Long have thou knocked at these
hearts in vain; now break the doors, and enter in, and pass by all their long
resistance.

SECT. XXVI.
YEt I will add a few more words to the Godly in special,. 26.
to show them why they above all men should be laborious for Heaven; and that
there is a great deal of Reason, that though all the world besides do sit still
and be careless, yet they should abhor that ^^^iness and negligence, and should
lay out all their strength on the work of God. To this end I desire them also
to answer soberly to these few Interrogatories.

1 Quest. What manner of persons should those be, whom God has chosen out to
be Vessels of Mercy? and has given them the very cream and quintescence of his
blessings? when the rest of the world are passed by, and put off with common,
and temporal, and left-hand-Mercies? They who have the Blood of Christ given
them, and the Spirit for Sanctification, Consolation, and Preservation and the
pardon of sins, and Adoption to Sonship, and the guard of Angels, and the
Mediation of the Son of God, and the special Love of the Father, and the
Promise and Seal of Everlasting Rest! Do but tell me in good sadness, what kind
of lives these men should live?

2 Quest. What manner of persons should those be, who have felt the smart of
their negligence so much as the godly have done? In the new birth, in their
several wounds and trouble of Conscience, in their doubts and fears, in their
sharp afflictions on body and state: They that have groaned and cried out so
often, under the sense and effects of their negligence, and are like enough to
feel it again if they do not reform it, sure one would think they should be so
sloathful no more.

3 Quest. What manner of persons should these be in holy diligence, who have
been so long convinced of the evil of laziness? and have confessed on their
knees a hundred and a hundred times, both in public and in private? and have
told God in prayer, how unexcuseably they have herein offended? Should they
thus confess their sin, and yet commit it? as if they told God what they would
do, as well as what they have done?

4 Quest. What manner of persons should those be in painful Godliness, who have
bound themselves to God by so many Covenants as we have done? and in special
have covenanted so often to be more painful and faithful in his service? At every
Sacrament; on many days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving; in most of our deep
distresses and dangerous sicknesses; we are still ready to (...) our neglects,
and to engage our selves, if God will but try (...) trust us once again, how
diligent and laborious we will be, and how we will improve our time, and
reprove offenders, and watch over our selves, and ply our work, and do him more
service in a day then we did in a month: The Lord pardon our perfidious
Covenant Breaking! and grant that our own Engagements may not condemn us.

5 Quest. What manner of persons should they be, who are so near to God as we?
who are his Children, in his Family, still under his Eye; the Objects of his
greatest Jealousy, as well as Love? Nadab and Abihu can tell you, that the
flames of Jealousy are hottest about his Altar: Levit. 10.1, 2.
And Vzza and the 50070 Bethshemites, 1 Samuel 6.19. though dead, do yet tell
you, that Justice as well as Mercy is most active about the Ark. Act. 5.4, 5,
etc.
And Ananias and his wife can tell you, that profession is no cover for
transgression. Judgment begins at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. And the
destroying Angel does begin at the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.5, 6.

6 Quest. What manner of men should they be in Duty, who have received so much
encouragement as we have done by our successes? Who have tasted such sweetness
in diligent obedience, as does much more then countervail all the pains? Who
have so often had experience of the wide difference between lazy and laborious
Duty by their different Issues? Who have found all our lazy Duties unfruitful;
and all our strivings and wrestlings with God successful? so that we were never
importunate with God in vain? We who have had so many admirable National and
Personal Deliverances upon urgent seeking; And have received almost all our
solid Comforts in a way of close and constant Duty; How should we above all men
ply our work?

7 Quest. What manner of men should they be, who are yet at such great
uncertainties, whether we are Sanctified or Justified, or whether we are the
Children of God or no, or what shall Everlastingly become of their Souls? as
most of the godly, that I meet with, are? They that have discovered the
excellency of the Kingdom, and yet have not discovered their interest in it,
but discern a danger of perishing and losing all, and have need of that advice,
Heb. 4.1. And have so many doubts to wrestle with daily as we have; How should
such men bestir themselves in time?

8 Quest. What manner of persons should they be in Holiness, who have so much
of the great work yet undone as we have? So many sins in so great strength?
Graces weak? Sanctification imperfect? Corruption still working our ruin, and
taking advantage of all our omissions? When we are as a Boat-man on the water;
let him row never so hard a month together, yet if he do but slack his hand,
and think to ease himself, his boat goes faster down the stream then before it
went up: So do our Souls, when we think to ease our selves by abating our pains
in Duty. Our time is short: Our enemies mighty: Our hindrances many: God seems
yet at a great distance from many of us: Our thoughts of him are dull, and
strange, and unbeleeving: Our acquaintance and communion with Christ is small:
and our desires to be with him are as small. And should men in our case stand
still?

9 Quest. What manner of men should they be in their diligence, whose lives and
duties are of so great concernment to the saving or destroying of a multitude
of Souls? When if we slip, so many are ready to stumble? and if we stumble, so
many are ready to fall? If we pray hard for them, and admonish them daily and
faithfully and plainly, and exhort them with bowels of pity and love, and go
before them in a holy inoffensive Conversation, it is twenty to one but we may
be instruments of saving many of them from everlasting perdition, and bringing
them to the possession of the Inheritance with us: On the contrary, if we
silently neglect them, or sinfully offend them, we may be occasions of their
perpetual torment: And what a sad thought is that to an honest and merciful
heart! That we may not destroy the Souls for whom Christ dyed; That we may not
rob them of their everlasting Happiness, and God of the Praises that in Heaven
they would give him; What manner of persons should we be in our Duties and
Examples?

10 Quest. Lastly, What manner of persons should they be, on whom the Glory of
the great God does so much depend? Men will Judge of the Father by the Children,
and of the Master by the Servants. We bear his Image, and therefore men will
measure him by his representation. He is no where in the world so lively
represented as in his Saints: And shall they set him forth as a Patron of
Viciousness or Idleness? All the world is not capable of honoring or
dishonoring God so much as we: And the least of his honor is of more worth then
all our lives. I have harped all this while upon the Apostles string, 2 Pet.
3.11. And now let me give it the last touch: Seeing then that all these things
forementioned are so, I charge thee that art a Christian in thy Masters name
to consider, and resolve the Question: What manner of persons ought we to be in
All Holy Conversation and Godliness? And let thy Life Answer the Question as
well as thy Tongue.

SECT. XXVII.
I Have been larger upon this Use then at first I intended;. 27.
Partly because of the general neglect of Heaven that all sorts are guilty of;
Partly because men's Salvation depends upon their present Striving and Seeking;
Partly because the Doctrine of Free Grace mis-understood, is lately so abused
to the cherishing of sloth and security: Partly because many eminent men of
late do Judge, That To work or labor for Life and Salvation is Mercenary, Legal,
and Dangerous; Which Doctrine (as I have said before) were it by the owners
reduced into practice, would undoubtedly damn them; because they that seek not
shall not find, and they that strive not to enter shall be shut out; and they
that labor not shall not be crowned: And partly because it is grown the custom
of this distracted age, in stead of striving for the Kingdom and contending for
the Faith, to strive with each other about Quocirca imprudenter faciunt qui
durissima and (...) primo proponunt, etc. Vide Zuinglium de vera and falsa
Relig. de scandalo. page 402, etc.
uncertain Controversies, and to contend about the circumstantials of the
Faith; Romans 14.17. Titus 3.9. 1 Timothy 1.4. 1 Timothy 6.5. Phil. 2.14.
wherein the Kingdom of God does no more consist then in meats or drinks, or
Questions about the Law* or Genealogies. Si^s, shall we who are Brethren fall
out by the way home? and spend so much of our time about the smaller mat^ers,
which thousands have been saved without, but never any on^ saved by them? while
Christ and our Eternal Rest are almost forgotten? The Lord pardon and heal the
folly of his People!

CHAP. VII. The third Use. Persuading all men to try their Title to this Rest;
And Directing them how to try, that they may know.
SECT. I.
. 1.
I Now proceed to the third Use which we shall raise hence; and because it is of
exceeding great importance to thy Soul, I entreat thee to read it the more
diligently, and weigh it the more seriously.

Is there such a Glorious Rest so near at hand? and shall none enjoy it but the
People of God? What mean the most of the world then, to live so contentedly
without assurance of their interest in this Rest? and to neglect the trying of
their title to it? When the Lord has so fully opened the Blessedness of that
Kingdom, which none but a little flock of obedient Believers shall possess, and
so fully expressed those torments which all the rest of the world must
eternally suffer, a man would think now, That they that believe this to be
certainly true, should never be at any quiet in themselves, till they knew
which of these must be their own state, and were fully assured that they were
Heirs of the Kingdom! Most men that I meet with say, they believe this Word of
God to be true; How then can they sit still in such an utter uncertainty,
whether ever they shall live in Rest, or not? One would think they should run
up and down from Minister to Minister, enquiring, How shall I know whether I
shall live in Heaven or Hell? and that they should even think themselves half
in Hell, till they were sure to escape it, and to be possessed of Rest. Lord,
what a wonderful strange madness is this? that men who look daily when sickness
summons them, and death calls them away, and know they must presently enter
upon unchangeable Joy or Pain, should yet live as uncertain what shall be their
doom, as if they had never heard of any such State? yea and live as quietly and
as merrily in this uncertainty, as if all were made sure, and nothing ailed
them, and there were no danger? Are these men alive or dead? Are they waking,
or are they asleep? What do they think on? Where are their hearts? If they have
but a weighty Suit at Law, how careful are they to know whether it will go with
them or against them? If they were to be tried for their lives at an earthly
Judicature, how careful would they be to know whether they should be saved or
condemned? especially if their care might surely save them? If they be
dangerously sick, they will enquire of the Physician, What think you Sir, shall
I escape or no? But for the business of their Salvation, they are content to be
uncertain. If you ask most men a reason of their hopes to be saved, they will
say it is because God is merciful, and Christ dyed for sinners, and the like
general reasons, which any man in the world may give as well as they: But put
them to prove their special interest in Christ, and in the special saving Mercy
of God, and they can say nothing to the purpose at all; or at least nothing out
of their hearts and experience, but only out of their reading or invention. Men
are desirous to know all things, save God and themselves: They will travel over
Sea and Land to know the situation of Countries, and the Customs of the World:
They will go to Schools and Universities, and turn over multitudes of books,
and read and study from year to year, to know the creatures, and to be
excellent in the Sciences; They will go apprentice seven years to learn a trade
which they may live by here: And yet they never read the book of Conscience,
nor study the state of their own Souls, that they may make sure of living for
ever. If God should ask them for their Souls, as he did Cain for his brother
Abel, they could return but such an Answer as he did: If God or man should say
to them, What case is thy Soul in, man? Is it regenerate, and sanctified, and
pardoned, or no? Is it in a state of life, or a state of death? He would be
ready to say, I know not: Am I my Souls keeper? I hope well; I trust God with
my Soul, and trouble not my self with any such thoughts: I shall speed as well
as other men do; and so I will put it to the venture: I thank God I never made
any doubt of my Salvation. Answ. Thou have the more cause to doubt a great
deal, because thou never did doubt: and yet more, because thou have been so
careless in thy confidence. What do these expressions discover, but a wilful
neglect of thy own Salvation? As a shipmaster that should let his Vessel alone,
and mind other matters, and say, I will venture it among the rocks, and sands,
and gulfs, and waves, and winds; I will never trouble my self to know whether
it shall come safe to the harbor; I will trust God with it; it will speed as
well as other men's Vessels do. Indeed as well as other men's that are as
careless and Idle, but not so well as other men's that are diligent and
watchful. What horrible abuse of God is this, for men to pretend that they
trust God with their Souls, for to cloak their own wilful negligence! If thou
did truly Trust God, thou would also be ruled by him, and trust him in that
way which he has appointed thee, and upon those terms which he has promised
to help thee on. He requires thee to give all Diligence to make thy Calling and
Election sure, and so to trust him, 2 Pet. 1.10. He has lined thee out a way
in Scripture by which thou may come to be sure, and charged thee to search
and try thy self, till thou certainly know. Were he not a foolish traveller
that would hold on his way when he does not know whether it be right or wrong,
and say, I hope I am right; I will not doubt of it; I will go on and trust God?
Art not thou guilty of this folly in in thy travels to Eternity? Not
considering that a little ^erious enquiry and trial whether thy way be right,
might save thee a great deal of labor which thou bestowest in vain, and must
undo again, or else thou will miss of Salvation, and undo thy self? If thou
should see a man in despair, or that were certain to be damned for ever when
he is dead, would not thou look upon such a man as a pitiful object? Why thou
that live in wilful uncertainty, and do not know whether thou shall be
saved or no, art in the next condition to such a person; for ought thou know
to the contrary, thy case hereafter may be as bad as his. I know not what thou
think of thy own state, but for my part, did I not know what a desperate,
blind, dead piece a carnal heart is, I should wonder how thou do to forget
thy misery, and to keep off continual horrors from thy heart; And especially in
these cases following.

1. I wonder how thou can either think or speak of the dreadful God, without
exceeding terror and astonishment, as long as thou art uncertain whether he be
thy Father or thy Enemy, and know not but all his Attributes may be employed
against thee. If his Saints must rejoice before him with trembling, Psa. 2.6,
7, 8, 9
and serve him in fear; If they that are sure to receive the unmovable Kingdom
must yet serve God with reverence and godly fear, because he is a consuming
fire; Heb. 12.28.29
How then should the remembrance of him be terrible to them that know not but
this fire may for ever consume them?

2. How do thou think without trembling upon Jesus Christ? when thou know
not whether his blood has purged thy Soul or not? and whether he will condemn
thee or acquit thee in Judgment; nor whether he be set for thy rising or thy
fall, Luke 2.34. nor whether he be the corner Stone and Foundation of thy
happiness, or a stone of stumbling to break thee and grind thee to powder, Mat.
21.44. Methinks thou should be still in that tune as Job 31.23. Destruction
from God is a terror to me, and by reason of his Highness I cannot endure.

3. How can thou open the Bible, and read a Chapter, or hear a Chapter read,
but it should terrify thee? Methinks every leaf should be to thee as
Belshazzars writing upon the wall, Dan. 5.5, 6.
except only that which draws thee to try and reform: If thou read the
Promises, thou know not whether ever they shall be fulfilled to thee,
because thou art uncertain of thy performance of the Condition: If thou read
the Threatenings, for any thing thou know thou do read thy own sentence. I
do not wonder if thou art an enemy to plain preaching, and if thou say of it,
and of the Minister and Scripture it self as Ahab of the Prophet, I hate him,
for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil, 1 Kings 22.8.

4. I wonder how thou can without terror approach God in prayer, or any duty.
When thou call him thy Father, thou know not whether thou speak true or
false: When thou need him in thy sickness, or other extremity, thou know
not whether thou have a friend to go to, or an enemy. When thou receivest the
Sacrament, thou know not whether thou take thy blessing or thy bane. And who
would wilfully live such a life as this?

5. What comfort can thou find in any thing which thou possessest? Methinks
friends, and honors, and house, and lands, should do thee little good, till
thou know that thou have the love of God with all; and shall have Rest with him
when thou leavest these. Offer to a prisoner before he know his sentence either
music, or clothes, or lands, or preferment, and what cares he for any of
these? till he know how he shall escape for his life, and then he will look
after these comforts of life, and not before; for he knows if he must dye the
next day, it will be small comfort to dye rich or honorable. Methinks it should
be so with thee, till thou know thine eternal state: Do not thou as Ezekiel.
12.18. Eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy drink with trembling and
carefulness, and say, Alas, though I have these to refresh my body now, yet I
know not what I shall have hereafter! Even when thou lie down to take thy
rest, methinks the uncertainty of thy Salvation should keep thee waking, or
amaze thee in thy dreams, and trouble thy sleep; and thou should say as Job
in a smaller distress then thine, Job 7.13, 14. When I say, My bed shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint; then thou scarest me through
dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.

6. Does it not grieve thee to see the people of God so comfortable, when thou
have none thy self? and to think of the Glory which they shall inherit, when
thou have no assurance thy self of ever enjoying it?

7. What shift do thou make to think of thy dying hour? Thou know it is
hard by, and there is no avoiding it, nor any medicine found out that can
prevent it: Thou know it is the King of terror, Job 18.14. and the very
inlet to thine unchangeable state: The godly that have some assurance of their
future welfare, have yet much ado to submit to it willingly, and find, that to
dye comfortably is a very difficult work. How then can thou think of it then
without astonishment, who have got no assurance of the Rest to come? If thou
should dye this day (and who knows what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1.)
thou do not know whether thou shall go straight to Heaven or to Hell: And
can thou be merry till thou art got out of this dangerous state? Methinks
that in Deuteronomy. 28.25, 26, 27. should be the looking-glass of thy heart.

8. What shift do thou make to preserve thy heart from horror, when thou
remembrest the great Judgment day, and the Everlasting flames? Acts 24.25.
Do thou not tremble as Felix when thou hear of it? and as the Elders of
the Town trembled when Samuel came in it, 1 Samuel 16.4.
saying, Come thou peaceably? So methinks thou should do when the Minister
comes into the Pulpit: And thy heart, when ever thou meditatest of that day,
should meditate terror, Isai. 33.18. And thou should be even a terror to thy
self, and all thy friends, Jer. 20.4. If the keepers trembled, and became as
dead men, when they did but see the Angels, Mat. 28.3, 4. how can thou think
of living in Hell with Devils, till thou have got some sound assurance that
thou shall escape it? Or if thou seldom think of these things, the wonder is as
great, what shift thou make to keep these thoughts from thy heart, and to
live so quietly in so doleful a state? Thy bed is very soft, or thy heart is
very hard, if thou can sleep soundly in this uncertain case.

I have showed thee the danger; let me next proceed to show thee the Remedy.

SECT. II.
IF this general uncertainty of the world about their Salvation were
constrained or remediless,. 2.
then must it be born as other unavoidable miseries, and it were unmeet either
to reprove them for it, or exhort them from it: But, alas, the Common Cause is
Wilfulness and Negligence; Men will not be persuaded to use the Remedy, though
it be easy, and at hand, prescribed to them by God himself, and all necessary
helps thereunto provided for them. The great means to conquer this Uncertainty
is Self-Examination, or the Serious and diligent trying of a man's heart and
state by the rule of Scripture. This Scripture tells us plainly who shall be
saved, and who shall not: So that if men would but first search the Word to
find out who be these men that shall have Rest, and what be their properties by
which they may be known; and then next search carefully their own hearts, till
they find whether they are those men or not; how could they choose but come to
some Certainty? But, alas, either men understand not the nature and use of this
duty, or else they will not be at the pains to try. Go through a Congregation
of a thousand men, and how few of them shall you meet with that ever bestowed
one hour in all their lives in a close Examination of their title to Heaven?
Ask thy own Conscience, Reader; When was the time, and where was the place,
that ever thou solemnly tookest thy heart to task as in the sight of God, and
examined it by Scripture Interrogatories, Whether it be Born again and Renewed,
or not? Whether it be Holy, or not? Whether it be set most on God, or on
creatures? on Heaven, or on Earth? and did follow on this Examination till
thou have discovered thy Condition, and so past sentence on thy self
accordingly?

But because this is a Work of so high Concernment, and so commonly neglected,
and men's Souls do so much languish every where under this neglect; I will
therefore (though it be Digressive) 1. Show you, That it is possible by trying
to come to a Certainty. 2. Show you the hindrances that keep men from trying,
and from Assurance. 3. I will lay down some Motives to persuade you to it. 4. I
will give you some Directions how you should perform it. 5. And lastly, I will
lay you down some Marks out of Scripture by which you may try; and so come to
an infallible Certainty, Whether you are the People of God for whom this Rest
Remains, or no. And to prepare the way to these, I will a little first open
to you, what Examination is, and what that Certainty is which we may expect to
attain to.

SECT. III.
. 3. Definition of Examinat.
THis Self-Examination is, An enquiry into the course of our lives, but more
especially into the inward Acts of our Souls, and trying of their Sincerity by
the Word of God, and accordingly Judging of our Real and Relative Estate.

So that Examination contains several Acts: 1. There must be the Trial of
the Physical Truth or Sincerity of our Acts; That is, An enquiry after the very
Being of them: As whether there be such an Act as Belief, or Desire, or Love to
God, within us, or not? This must be discovered by Conscience, and the internal
sense of the Soul, whereby it is able to feel and perceive its own Acts, and to
know whether they be Real or Counterfeit.

2. The next is, The Trial of the Moral Truth or Sincerity of our Acts: Whether
they are such as agree with the Rule and the Nature of their Objects. This is
the discursive work of Reason, comparing our Acts with the Rule: It implies
the former knowledge of the Being of our Acts; and it implies the knowledge of
Scripture in the point in question; and also the Belief of the Truth of
Scripture. This Moral, Spiritual Truth of our Acts, is another thing, far
different from the Natural or Physical Truth, as far as a Man's Being differs
from his Honesty. One man loves his wife under the notion of an harlot, or
only to satisfy his lust; Another loves his wife with a true Conjugal
Affection: The former is True Physical Love, or true in point of Being; but the
latter only is True Moral Love. The like may be said in regard of all the Acts
of the Soul: There is a Believing, Loving, Trusting, Fearing, Rejoicing, all
True in point of Being, and not counterfeit, which yet are all false in point
of Morality and right-being, and so no gracious Acts at all.

3. The third thing contained in the Work of Self-Examination is, The Judging
or Concluding of our Real Estate, that is, of the habitual temper or
disposition of our Hearts by the quality of their Acts: Whether they are such
Acts as prove a Habit of Holiness? or only some slight Disposition? or whether
they are only by some Accident enticed and enforced, and prove neither Habit
nor Disposition? The like also of our Evil Acts. Now the Acts which prove a
Habit must be, 1. Free and cheerful; not constrained, or such as we had rather
not do, if we could help it: 2. Frequent, if there be opportunity: 3. Through
and Serious. Where Note also, lindx;
That the Trial of the Souls Disposition by those Acts which make after the End
(as Desire, Love, etc. to God, Christ, Heaven) is always more Necessary and
more Certain, then the trial of its Disposition to the Means only.

4. The last Act in this Examination, is, To Conclude or Judge of our Relative
Estate, from the former Judgment of our Acts and Habits. As if we find sincere
Acts, we may Conclude that we have the Habits, so from both we may Conclude of
our Relation. So that our Relations or Habits are neither of them felt, or
known immediately; but must be gathered from the knowledge of our Acts which may
be felt. As for Example, 1. I enquire whether I Believe in Christ, or Love God?
2. If I find that I do, then I enquire next whether I do it sincerely according
to the Rule and the Nature of the Object? 3. If I find that I do so, then I
conclude that I am Regenerate or Sanctified. 4. And from both these I conclude
that I am Pardoned, Reconciled, Justified and Adopted into sonship and title to
the Inheritance. All this is done in a way of Reasoning thus: 1. He that
Believes in Spiritual Sincerity, or He that Loves God in Spiritual Sincerity,
is a Regenerate Man: But I do so Believe, and Love; Therefore I am Regenerate.
2. He that Believes in Sincerity, or He that is Regenerate (for the Conclusion
will follow upon either) is also Pardoned, Justified and Adopted: But I do so
Believe, or I am Regenerate: Therefore I am Justified, etc.


SECT. IV.
. 4
THus you see what Examination is, Now let us see what this Certainty, or
Assurance is. And indeed, It is nothing else but the Knowledge of the
forementioned Conclusions (that we are Sanctified, Assurance what.
Justified, shall be Glorified) as they arise from the premises in the work of
Examination.

So that here you may observe, how immediately this Assurance follows the
Conclusion in Examination; and so how necessary Examination is to the obtaining
of Assurance, and how conducible thereunto.

Also that we are not speaking of the Certainty of the Object, or of the thing
in it self considered; but of the Certainty of the Subject, or of the thing to
our Knowledge.

Also you may observe, that before we can come to this Certainty of the
Conclusion, [That we are Justified, and shall be Glorified] there must be a
Certainty of the Premises: And in respect of the Major Proposition [He that
Believes sincerely shall be Justified and Saved] there is requisite in us, 1.
A Certainty of Knowledge, That such a Proposition is written in Scripture: 2. A
Certainty of Assent or Faith, That this Scripture is the Word of God, and True.
Also in respect of the Minor Proposition [But I do sincerely Believe, or Love,
etc.] there is requisite, 1. A Certainty of the Truth of our Faith in point of
Being: 2. And a Certainty of its Truth in point of Morality, or Congruence with
the Rule, or its Right-being. And then follows Assurance, which is the
Certainty that the Conclusion [Therefore I am Justified, etc.] follows
necessarily upon the former Premises.

Vid. Grego. de Valen. Tom. 2. disp. 8. q. 4. punct. 4.
Here also you must carefully distinguish betwixt the several degrees of
Assurance. All Assurance is not of the highest degree. It differs in strength
according to the different degrees of Apprehension in all the forementioned
Points of Certainty which are necessary thereunto. He that can truly raise the
foresaid Conclusion [That he is Justified, etc.] from the Premises, has some
degree of Assurance; though he do it with much weakness, and staggering, and
doubting. The weakness of our Assurance in any one point of the premises, will
accordingly weaken our Assurance in the Conclusion.

Some, when they speak of Certainty of Salvation, do mean only such a Certainty
as excludes all doubting, and think nothing else can be called Certainty, but
this high degree. Perhaps some Papists mean this, when they deny a Certainty.
Some also maintain, That Saint Paul's Plerophory, or full Assurance, is this
Highest degree of Assurance; and that some Christians do in this life attain to
it. But Paul calls it Full Assurance in comparison of lower degrees, and not
because it is perfect. For if Assurance be perfect, then also our Certainty of
Knowledge, Faith and Sense in the ^^^mises must be perfect: And if some Grace
perfect, why not all? and so we turn Novatians, Catharists, Perfectionists.
Perhaps in some their Certainty may be so great, that it may overcome all
sensible doubting, or sensible stirrings of Unbelief, by reason of the sweet
and powerful Acts and Effects of that Certainty: And yet it does not overcome
all Unbelief and Uncertainty so as to expel or nullify them; but a certain
measure of them remains still. Even as when you would heat cold water by the
mixture of hot, you may pour in the hot so long till no coldness is felt; and
yet the water may be far from the highest degree of heat. So faith may suppress
the sensible stirrings of unbelief, and Certainty prevail against all the
trouble of uncertainty, and yet be far from the highest degree.

So that by this which is said you may Answer the Question, What Certainty is
to be attained in this Life? and what Certainty it is that we press men to
labor for and expect?

Furthermore, you must be sure to distinguish betwixt Assurance it self, and
the Joy, and Strength, and other sweet Effects which follow Assurance, or which
immediately accompany it.

It is possible that there may be Assurance, and yet no comfort, or little.
There are many unskilful, but self-conceited Disputers of late, fitter to
manage a club, then an Argument, who tell us, That it must be the Spirit that
must Assure us of our Salvation, and not our Marks and Evidences of Grace; That
our comfort must not be taken from any thing in our selves; That our That it is
not properly any act of faith at all, (much less the Justifying Act) to Believe
that my sins are pardoned, or that Christ dyed in a special sense for Me, or
that I am a Believer, or that I shall be saved; Besides what I have said in the
Appendix to my Aphorisms of Justification. I refer you for satisfaction to
Judicious Mr Anth: Wotton de Reconciliat: Part. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 15. N. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. Page 87, 88, 89, 90, etc.
Justification must be immediately believed, and not proved by our Signs, or
Sanctification, etc. Of these in order. 1. It is as wise a Question to ask,
Whether our Assurance come from the Spirit, or our Evidences, or our Faith,
etc? as to ask whether it be our meat, or our stomach, or our teeth, or our
hands, that feed us? Or whether it be our Eyesight, or the Sun-light by which
we see things? They are distinct Causes, all necessary to the producing of the
same Effect.

So that by what has bin said you may discern, That the Spirit, and Knowledge,
and Faith, and Scripture, and inward Holiness, and Reason, and inward Sense or
Conscience, have all several parts, and necessary uses in producing our
Assurances; which I will show you distinctly.

1. To the Spirit belong these particulars: 1. He has indicted those Scriptures
which contain the promise of our Pardon and Salvation. 2. He gives us the
habit or power of Believing. 3. He helps us also to Believe Actually, That
the Word is true, and to receive Christ and the privileges offered in the
promise. 4. He works in us those Graces, and exciteth those Gracious Acts
within us, which are the I use the word Evidence all along in the vulgar sense
as the same with Signs, and not in the proper sense as the Schools do.
Evidences or Marks of our interest, pardon and Life: He helps us to perform
those Acts which God has made to be the Condition of Pardon and Glory. 5. He
helps us to feel and discover these Acts in our selves. 6. He helps us to
compare them with the Rule* and finding out their qualifications to Judge of
their Sincerity and Acceptance with God. 7. He helps our Reason to Conclude
rightly of our State from our Acts. 8. He enliveneth and heighteneth our
Apprehension in these particulars, that our Assurance may accordingly be strong
and lively. 9. He exciteth our Joy, and fills with comfort (when he pleases)
upon this Assurance. None of all these could we perform well of our selves.

2. The Part which the Scripture has in this Work is, 1. It affords us the
Major Proposition, [That whosoever Believes Sincerely shall be saved.] 2. It
is the Rule by which our Acts must be tried, that we may Judge of their Moral
Truth.

3. The Part that Knowledge has in it, is to Know that the foresaid Proposition
is written in Scripture.

4. The Work of Faith is to Believe the Truth of that Scripture, and to be the
matter of one of our chief Evidences.

5. Our Holiness, and true Faith, as they are Marks and Evidences, are the very
Medium of our Argument, from which we Conclude.

6. Our Conscience and internal Sense do acquaint us with both the Being and
Qualifications of our inward Acts, which are this Medium, and which are called
Marks.

7. Our Reason or Discourse is Necessary to form the Argument, and raise the
Conclusion from the Premises; and to compare our Acts with the Rule, and Judge
of their Sincerity, etc.

Therefore that saying of Cajetane is not so much to be valued as by some of
our Divines it is. Certitudine fidei quilibet scit certo se habere donum
infusum fidei, idque absque formidine alterius partis. Except he take Certitudo
fidei in a very large improper sense.
So that you see our Assurance is not an Effect of any one single Cause alone.
And so neither merely of Faith, by Signs, or by the Spirit.

From all this you may gather, 1. Read Gataker, Shadows without Substances.
page 83, 84.
What the Seal of the Spirit is, to wit, the Works or fruits of the Spirit in
us; 2. What the testimony of the Spirit is, (for if it be not some of the
forementioned Acts, I yet know it not:) 3. What the Testimony of Conscience is.

And (if I be not mistaken) the Testimony of the Spirit, and the Testimony of
Conscience are two concurrent Testimonies or Causes, to produce one and the
same Effect, and to afford the Premises to the same Conclusion, and then to
raise our Joy thereupon. So that they may well be said to Witness Together. Not
one laying down the entire Conclusion of it self, [That we are the Children of
God,] and then the other attesting the same entirely again of it self: But as
concurrent Causes to the same Numerical Conclusion.

But this with Submission to better Judgments, and further Search.

By this also you may see that the The distinction in the Schools used of
Certitudo fidei and Certitudo Evidentiae I deny not. But that has a quite
different sense from this as it is used.
common distinction of Certainty of Adherence, and Certainty of Evidence, must
be taken with a grain or two of salt. For there is no Certainty without
Evidence, no more then there is a Conclusion without a Medium* A small degree
of Certainty, has some small glimpse of Evidence. Indeed 1. the Assent to the
truth of the promise, 2. and the Acceptance of Christ offered with his
benefits, are both before and without any sight or consideration of Evidence;
and are themselves our best Evidence, Therefore I say not that our first
Comfort, much less our Justification is procured by the sight of Evidences: But
our Assurance is.
being that Faith which is the Condition of our Justification. But before any
man can in the least Assurance conclude, that he is the Child of God, and
Justified, he must have some Assurance of that Mark or Evidence. For who can
conclude Absolutely, that he shall receive the thing contained in a Conditional
Promise, till he know that he has performed the Condition? For those that say,
There is no Condition to the New Covenant, I think them not worthy a word of
confutation.

And for their Assertion Their common Error [That Justifying faith is nothing
else but a persuasion more or less of the Love of God to us] is the Root of
this and many more mistakes. To Justify us, and to Assure us that we are
Justified, are quite different things; and procured by different ways, and at
several times usually.
, [That we are bound immediately to Believe that we are Justified, and in
special Favor with God:] It is such as no man, of competent knowledge in the
Scripture, and belief of its truth, can once imagine. For if every man must
believe this, then most must believe a lie, (for they never shall be
Justified:) yea all must at first believe a lie; for they are not Justified
till they believe: and the believing that they are Justified is not the faith
which Justifies them. If only some men must believe this, how shall it be
known who they be? The truth is, [That we are Justified] is not properly to be
Believed at all: For nothing is to be Believed which is not written: but it is
no where written that you or I are Justified: only one of those premises is
written, from whence we may draw the Conclusion, Vid. Aquin. ad 1. Sent. did.
17. art. 1.2, 3. q. 112. and Scotum ad. 3. Sent. dis. 23. q. unica. Bonavent.
1. Sent. q. 17. Biel in 2. Sent. did. 27. q. 3.
That we are Justified, if so be that our own hearts do afford us the other of
the Premises. So that Our Actual Justification is not a matter of mere Faith,
but a Conclusion from Faith and Conscience together. If God have no where
promised to any man Justification immediately without Condition, then no man
can so believe it: but God has no where promised it Absolutely; therefore,
etc. Nor has he declared to any man that is not first a Believer, that he
loves him with any more then a common love: Therefore no more can be believed
but a common love to any such. For the Eternal Love and Election is manifest to
no man before he is a Believer.

SECT. V.
2. HAving thus showed you what Examination is,. 5.
and what Assurance is, I come to the second thing promised; To show you, That
such an Infallible Certainty of Salvation may be attained, and ought to be
labored for, (though a Perfect Certainty cannot here be attained:) And that
Examination is the means to attain it. In which I shall be the briefer, because
many writers Yet I believe that their divines have some of them made the
difference betwixt us and the Papists seem wider then it is, as do these words
of one of them: Ex hoc unico articulo quantumvis minutus a plerisque reputari
queat, universus Papatus and Lutheranismus dependet. Martinus Eisengrenius
initio Apolog. de Cert. Salv. And so have some of our Divines on the other
side, as Luther in Genesis 41. Etiamsi nihil preterea peccatum esset in doctrina
pontificia, just as habemus causas cur ab ecclesia infideli nos sejungeremus.
against the Papists on this point have said enough already. Yet somewhat I
will say, 1. because it is the common conceit of the Ignorant Vulgar, That an
Infallible Certainty cannot be attained, 2. and many have taught and printed,
That it is only the Testimony of the Spirit that can assure us; and that this
proving our Justification by our Sanctification, and searching after Marks and
Signs in our selves for the procuring of Assurance, is a dangerous and
deceitful way. Thus we have the Papists, the Antinomians, and the ignorant
Vulgar conspiring against this doctrine of Assurance and Examination. Which I
maintain against them by these Arguments.

1. Scripture tells us we may know, and that the Saints before us have known
their Justification, and future Salvation; 2 Cor. 5.1. Romans 8.36. Joh. 21.15. 1 John 5.19. and 4.13. and 3.14, 24. and 2.3, 5. Romans 8.15, 16, 36. Ephesians. 3.12.
I refer you to the places for brevity.

2. If we may be certain of the Premises, then may we also be certain of the
undeniable Conclusion of them. But here we may be certain of both the Premises.
For 1. That whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but shall have
everlasting life, is the voice of the Gospel; and therefore that we may be sure
of: That we are such Believers, may be known by Conscience and internal Sense.
I know all the question is in this, Whether the Moral Truth or Sincerity of our
Faith and other Graces can be known thus, or not? And that it may I prove thus.

1. From the natural use of this Conscience, and internal Sense; which is to
acquaint us not only with the Being, but the Qualifications of the Acts of our
Souls. All voluntary Motions are Sensible. And though the heart is so
deceitful, that no man can certainly know the heart of another, and with much
difficulty clearly know their own; yet by diligent observation and examination
known they may be: for though our inward Sense and Conscience may be depraved,
yet not extirpated, or quite ^^^^inguished.

2. The Commands of Believing, Repenting, etc. were in Vain, especially as the
Condition of the Covenant, if we could not know whether we perform them or not.

3. The Scripture would never make such a wide difference between the Godly and
the Wicked, the Children of God and the Children of the Devil, and set forth
the happiness of the one and the misery of the other so largely, and make this
Difference to run through all the veins of its doctrine; if a man cannot know
which of these two estates he is in.

4. Much less would the Holy Ghost urge us to give all diligence to make our
Calling and Election sure, if it could not be done, 2 Pet. 1.10. And that this
is not meant of Objective Certainty, but of Subjective, appears in this, That
the Apostle mentions not Salvation or any thing to come, but Calling and
Election, which to Believers were Objectively Certain before, as being both
past.

5. And to what purpose should we be so earnestly urged to examine, and prove,
and try our selves, Whether we be in the Faith, and whether Christ be in us, or
we be Reprobates? 1 Cor. 11.28. and 2 Cor. 13.5. Why should we search for that
which cannot be found?

6. How can we obey those precepts, which require us to Rejoice always, 1 These.
5.16. to call God our Father, Luke 11.2. to live in his Praises, Psalm. 49.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. and to long for Christ's Coming* Rev. 22.17, 20. 1 These. 1.10. and to
comfort our selves with the mention of it, 1 These. 4.18. which are all the
Consequents of Assurance? Who can do any of these heartily, that is not in some
measure sure, that he is the Child of God?

7. There are some duties that either the Saints only, or chiefly are commanded
to perform: And how shall that be done, if we cannot know that we are Saints?
Psalm. 144.5. and 132.9. and 30.4. and 31.23. etc.

Thus I have proved that a Certainty may be attained: an Infallible, though not
a perfect Certainty: such as excludes deceit, though it exclude not all degree
of doubting. If Bellarmine by his Conjectural Certainty do mean this
Infallible, though imperfect Certainty, (as I doubt he does not,) then I would
not much contend with him; And I acknowledge that it is not properly a Certainty
of mere Faith, but mixed.

SECT. VI.
3. THe third thing that I promised is,. 6. Hindrances of Examination.
to show you what are the Hindrances which keep men from Examination and
Assurance. I shall 1. Show you what hinders them from Trying, and 2. What
hinders them from Knowing, when they do Try: That so when you see the
Impediments, you may avoid them.

And 1. We cannot doubt but Satan will do his part, 1. Satan.
to hinder us from such a necessary duty as this: If all the power he has can
do it, or all the means and Instruments which he can raise up, he will be sure
above all duties to keep you off from this. He is loath the Godly should have
that Joy, and Assurance, and Advantage against Corruption, which the faithful
performance of Self-Examination would procure them. And for the Ungodly he
knows, if they should once fall close to this Examining task, they would find
out his deceits, and their own danger, and so be very likely to escape him: If
they did but faithfully perform this duty, he were likely to lose most of the
Subjects of his Kingdom. How could he get so many millions to Hell willingly,
if they knew they went thither? And how could they choose but know if they did
thoroughly try? having such a clear light and sure rule in the Scripture to
discover it? If the beast did know that he is going to the slaughter, he would
not be driven so easily to it; but would strive for his life before he comes to
dye, as well as he does at the time of his death. If Balaam had seen as much of
the danger as his Ass, instead of his driving on so furiously, he would have
been as loath to proceed as he. If the Syrians had known whither they were
going, as well as Elisha did, they would have stopped before they had found
themselves in the hand of their Enemies, 2 King. 6.19, 20. So if sinners did
but know whither they are hasting, they would stop before they are engulfed in
damnation. If every swearer, drunkard, whoremonger, lover of the world, or
unregenerate person whatsoever, did certainly know that the way he is in will
never bring him to Heaven, and that if he dye in it, he shall undoubtedly
perish, Satan could never get him to proceed so resolvedly: Alas, he would then
think every day a year till he were out of the danger; and whether he were
eating, drinking, working, or what ever he were doing, the thoughts of his
danger would be still in his mind, and this voice would be still in his ears,
Except thou Repent and be converted thou shall surely perish. The Devil knows
well enough, that if he cannot keep men from trying their states, and knowing
their misery, he shall hardly be able to keep them from Repentance and
Salvation: And therefore he deals with them as Jael with Sisera; she gives him
fair words, and food, and lays him to sleep, and covers his face, and then
she comes upon him softly, Judge. 4.19, 21. Judge. 16.21.
and strikes the nail into his temples: And as the Philistines with Sampson,
who first put out his eyes, and then made him grind in their mills. If the pit
be not covered, who but the blind will fall into it? If the snare be not hid,
the bird will escape it: Satan knows how to angle for Souls, better then to
show them the hook and the line, and to fright them away with a noise, or with
his own appearance.

Therefore he labors to keep them from a searching Ministry; or to keep the
Minister from helping them to search: or to take off the edg of the Word, that
it may not pierce and divide; or to turn away their thoughts; or to possess
them with prejudice: Satan is acquainted with all the Preparations and Studies
of the Minister, he knows when he has provided a searching Sermon fitted to
the state and necessity of a hearer: and therefore he will keep him away that
day, if it be possible above all, or else cast him asleep, or steal a way the
Word by the cares and talk of the world, or some way prevent its operation, and
the sinners obedience.

This is the first Hinderance.

SECT. VII.
2. WIcked men also are great impediments to poor sinners when they should
examine and discover their estates.. 7.
1. Their Examples hinder much. When an ignorant sinner sees all his friends
and neighbors do as he does, and live quietly in the same state with himself,
yea the Rich and Learned as well as others, this is an exceeding great
temptation to him to proceed in his security. 2. Also the merry company and
pleasant discourse of these men, does take away the thoughts of his Spiritual
State, and does make the understanding drunk with their sensual delight: so
that if the Spirit had before put into them any jealousy of themselves, or any
purpose to Try themselves, this Jovial company does soon quench them all. 3.
Also their continual discourse of nothing but matters of the world, does damp
all these purposes for self-trying, and make them fo^gotten. 4. Their railings
also, Read on th^s Subject Mr. Young his Books, which handle it fully.
and scorning at godly persons, is a very great impediment to multitudes of
Souls, and possesses them with such a prejudice and dislike of the way to
Heaven, that they settle resolvedly in the way they are in. 5. Also their
constant persuasions, allurements, threats, etc. hinder much. God does scarce
ever open the eyes of a poor sinner, to see that ^ll is naught with him, and
his way is wrong, but presently there is a multitude of Satan's Apostles ready
to flatter him, and dawb, and deceive, and settle him again in the quiet
possession of his former Master. What, say they, do you make a doubt of your
Salvation, who have lived so well, and done no body harm, and been beloved of
all? God is merciful: and if such as you shall not be saved, God help a great
many: What do you think is become of all your forefathers? and what will become
of all your friends and neighbors that live as you do? Will they all be
damned? Shall none be s^ved think you, but a few strict precisians? Come, come,
if ye hearken to these Puritan books or Preachers, they will drive you to
despair shortly, or drive you out of your wits: they must have something to
say: they would have all l^ke themselves: Are not all men sinners? and did not
Christ dye to save sinners? Never trouble your head with these thoughts, but
believe and you shall do well. -- Thus do they follow the Soul that is escaping
from Satan, with restless cries till they have brought him back: Oh, how many
thousands have such cha^ms kept a sleep in deceit and security, till death and
Hell have awaked and better informed them! The Lord calls to the sinner, and
tells him, The Gate is strait; the way is narrow, Luke 13.24, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2
Pet. 1.10.
and few find it: Try and examine whether thou be in the faith or no: give all
diligence to make sure in time: -- And the world cries out clean contrary,
Never doubt. Never trouble your selves with these thoughts. -- I entreat the
sinner that is in this strait to consider, That it is Christ and not their
fathers or mothers, or neighbors, or friends that must judge them at last; and
if Christ condemn them, these cannot save them: and therefore common Reason may
tell them, that it is not from the words of Ignorant men, but from the word of
God that they must fetch their comforts and hopes of Salvation. When Ahab would
enquire among the multitudes of flattering Prophets, 1 King. 22.5, 6
it was his death. They can flatter men into the snare, but they cannot tell
how to bring them out. Oh, take the counsel of the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 5.6, 7.
Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience: Be not ye therefore partakers
with them. And Act. 2.40. Save your selves from this untoward generation.

SECT. VIII.
. 8.
3. BUT the greatest hindrances are in men's own hear^s.

1. Some are so Ignorant that they know not what Self-Examination is, nor what
a Minister means when he persuades them to Try themselves: Or they know not
that there is any Necessity of it; but think Or as Mr. Saltmarsh says, every
man is bound to believe, but no man to Question whether he believe or no. p.
92, 93 And this Faith (he says) is a being persuaded more or less of Christ's
love. p. 94. So that by this Doctrine every man is bound to believe that Christ
loves him, and not to question his belief, (If it were only Christ's common
love, he might thus believe it) but a special love to him is no where written.
every man is bound to Believe that God is his Father, and that his sins are
pardoned, whether it be true or false; and that it were a great fault to make
any Question of it: Or they do not think that Assurance can be attained; or
that there is any such great differences betwixt one man and another; but that
we are all Christians, and therefore need not to trouble our selves any
further: Or at least they know not wherein the difference lies; nor how to set
upon this searching of their hearts, nor to find out its secret motions, and to
judge accordingly. They have as gross Conceits of that Regeneration which they
must search for, as Nicodemus had, John 3.5. And when they should Try whether
the Spirit be in them, they are like those in Act. 19.2. That knoew not whether
there were a Holy Ghost to be received or no.

2. Some are such Infidels that they will not Believe that ever God will make
such a difference betwixt men in the life to come, and therefore will not
search themselves whether they differ here: Though Judgment and Resurrection be
in their Creed, yet they are not in their Faith.

3. Some are so Dead-hearted, that they perceive not how nearly it does concern
them, let us say what we can to them, they lay it not to heart, but give us the
hearing, and there is an end.

4. Some are so possessed with Self-love and Pride, that they will not so much
as suspect any such danger to themselves. Like a proud Tradesman who scorns the
motion when his friends desire him to cast up his Books because they are afraid
he will Break. As some fond Parents that have an overweening conceit of their
own Children, and therefore will not believe or hear any evil of them* such a
fond Self-love does hinder men from suspecting and trying their states.

5. Some are so guilty that they dare not try: They are so fearful that they
shall^find their estates unsound, that they dare not search into them. And yet
they dare venture them to a more dreadful Trial

6. Some are so far in love with their sin, and so far in dislike with the way
of God, that they dare not fall on the Trial of their ways, least they be
forced from the course which they love, to that which they loath.

7. Some are so Resolved already never to change their present state, that they
neglect Examination as a useless thing: Before they will turn so precise and
seek a new way, when they have lived so long, and gone so far, they will put
their E^ernal state to the venture, come of it what will. And when a man is
fully resolved to hold on his way, and not to turn back be it right or wrong,
to what end should he enquire whether he b^ right or no?

8. Most men are so taken up with their worldly affairs and are so busy in
driving the trade of providing for the flesh, that they cannot set themselves
to the Trying of their title to Heaven: They have another kind of happiness in
their eye which they are pursuing, which will not suffer them to make sure of
Heaven.

9. Most men are so clogged with a Laziness and Slothfulness of Spirit, that
they will not be persuaded to be at the pains of an hours Examination of their
own hearts. It requires some labor and diligence to accomplish it thoroughly,
and they will rather venture all then set about it.

10. But the most common and dangerous impediment is that false Faith and Hope
commonly called Presumption, which bears up the hearts of the most of the
world, and so keeps them from suspecting their danger.

Thus you see what abundance of difficulties must be overcome before a man can
closely set upon the Examining of his heart. I do but name them for brevity
sake.

. 9. Hindrances which keep many that do Examine from attaining strong
Assurance, and cause many to be de^ceived.
SECT. IX.
AND if a man do break through all these impediments, and set upon the Duty,
yet assurance is not presently attained: Of those few who do enquire after
Marks and Means of Assurance, and bestow some pains to learn the difference
between the sound Christian, and the unsound; and look often into their own
hearts, yet diverse are deceived and do miscarry, especially through these
following causes.

1. There is such a Confusion and darkness in the Soul of man, especially of an
unregenerate man, that he can scarcely tell what he does, or what is in him. As
one can hardly find any thing in a house where nothing keeps his place, but
all is cast on a heap together; so is it in the heart where all things are in
disorder, ^specially when darkness is added to this disorder; so that the heart
is like an obscure Cave or Dungeon, where there is but a little crevise of
light, and a man must rather grope then see. No wonder if men mistake in
searching such a heart, and so miscarry in judging of their estates.

2. And the rather because most men do accustom themselves to be strangers at
home, and are little taken up with observing the temper and motions of their
own hearts: All their studies are employed without them, and they are no where
less acquainted then in their own breasts.

3. Besides many come to the work with forestalling conclusions: They are
resolved what to judge before they Try: They use the duty but to strengthen
their present conceits of themselves, and not to find out the truth of their
condition: Like a bribed Judge, who examines each party as if he would Judge
uprightly, when he is resolved which way the cause shall go before hand. Or as
perverse disputers, who argue only to maintain their present opinions, rather
then to try those opinions whether they are right or wrong. Just so do men
examine their hearts.

4. Also men are partial in their own Cause: They are ready to think their
great sins small, and their small sins to be none; their gifts of nature to be
the work of Grace, and their gifts of common grace, to be the special grace of
the Saints. They are straight ways ready to say, Mat. 19.20.
All these have I kept from my youth: And I am rich and increased, etc. Rev.
3.17. The first common excellency that they meet with in themselves, does so
dazzle their eyes, that they are presently satisfied that all is well, and look
no further.

5. Besides, most men do search but by the halves. If it will not easily and
quickly be done, they are discouraged, and leaveoff. Few set to it and follow
it, as beseems them in a work of such moment. He must give all diligence that
means to make sure.

6. Also men try themselves by false Marks and Rules; not knowing wherein the
truth of Christianity does consist; some looking beyond, and some short of the
Scripture standard.

7. Moreover there is so great likeness betwixt the lowest degree of special
grace, and the highest degree of Common Grace, that it is no wonder if the
unskilful be mistaken. It is a great Question, whether the main difference
between special grace and common, be not rather gradual, then specifical: If it
should be so (as some think) then the discovery will be much more difficult.
However to discern by what principle our affections are moved, and to what
ends, and with what sincerity, is not very easy; there being so many wrong
Ends and motives which may excite the like Acts. Every grace in the Saints has
its counterfeit in the Hypocrite.

8. Also men use to Try themselves by unsafe Marks: either looking for a high
degree of grace instead of a lower degree in sincerity, as many doubting
Christians do; or else enquiring only into their outward Actions; or into their
inward Affections without their ends, motives and other qualifications: The
sure evidences are Faith, Love, etc. that are Essential parts of our
Christianity, and that lie nearest to the heart.

9. Lastly, Men frequently miscarry in this work by setting on it in their own
strength. As some expect the Spirit should do it without them, so others
attempt it themselves without seeking or expecting the help of the Spirit: both
these will certainly miscarry in their Assurance. How far the Spirits
Assistance is necessary is showed before, and the several Acts which it must
perform for us.

SECT. X.
. 10. Some further Hindrances which keep some Christians without Assurance and
Comfort.
FUrther Causes of doubting among Christians.

Because the Comfort of a Christians life does so much consist in his Assurance
of Gods Special Love, and because the right way of obtaining it is so much
controverted of late, I will here proceed a little further in opening to you
some other Hindrances which keep true Christians from Comfortable Certainty,
besides the forementioned Errors in the Work of Examination: Though I would
still have you remember and be sensi^le, That the neglect or slighty
performance of that great duty, and not following on the sea^ch with
Seriousness and Constancy, is the most common Hinderance, for ought I have yet
found.

I shall add now these Ten more, which I find very ordinary Impediments, and
therefore desire Christians more carefully to Consider and Beware of them.

1. One Common and great Cause of doubting and uncertainty, is, The weakness
and small measure of our Graces. A little Grace is next to None. Small things
are hardly discerned. He that will see a small needle, a hair, a mote, or
atome, must have clear light and good eyes: But houses, and Towns, and
Mountains are easily discerned. Most Christians content themselves with a small
measure of Grace, and do not follow on to spiritual strength and manhood. They
Believe so weakly, and Love God so little, that they can scarce find whether
they Believe and Love at all. Like a man in a swoun, whose pulse and breathing
is so weak and obscure, that it can hardly be perceived whether they move at
all, and consequently, whether the man be alive or dead.

The chief Remedy for such would be, Remedy.
To follow on their duty till their Graces be increased: Ply your work: Wait
upon God in the use of his prescribed means, and he will undoubtedly bless you
with Increase and Strength. Oh that Christians would bestow most of that time
in getting more Grace, which they bestow in Anxious doubtings, whether they
have any or none: And that they would lay out those Serious Affections in
Praying, and seeking to Christ for more Grace, which they bestow in fruitless
Complaints of their supposed Gracelesness! I beseech thee, Christian, take this
advice as from God: And then, when thou Believe strongly, and Love
fervently, thou can not doubt whether thou do Believe and Love or not: No
more then a man that is burning hot can doubt whether he be warm; or a man that
is strong and lusty can doubt whether he be alive. Strong Affections will make
you feel them. Who loves his friend, or wife, or child, or any thing strongly,
and does not know it? A great measure of Grace is seldom doubted of: Or if it
be, you may quickly find when you seek and try.

SECT. XI.
2. ANother Cause of uncomfortable living is,. 11.
That Christians look more at their present Cause of Comfort or Discomfort,
then they do at their Future Happiness, You sit poreing ^ searching for pillars
of hope within you, and be-bestow much pains to answer your own fears, but the
ready way to make the business clear is by going to Christ. Stand not so much
upon this Question, Whether you have believed in truth or no; but put al out of
doubt by a present faith. The door is open; enter and live: You may more easily
build a new fabric of comfort, by (...), then repair your old dw^lling, and
clear all suits that are brought against your tenure. Simonds Deserted Soul.
page 554.
and the way to attain it. They look after Signs which may tell them what they
are, more then they do at P^ecepts which tell them what they should do. They
are very desirous to know whether they are Justified and beloved or not; but
they do not think what course they should take to be Justified, if they be not.
As if their present Case must needs be their Everlasting Case; and if they be
now unpardoned, there were no Remedy. Why I beseech thee consider this, Oh
doubting Soul: What if all were as b^d as thou do fear? and none of thy sins
were yet pardoned? Is not the Remedy at hand? May not all this be done in a
moment? Do thou not know that thou may have Christ and pardon when ever
thou will? Call not this a loose or strange doctrine. Christ is willing if thou
be willing. He offers himself and all his benefits to thee: He presses them
on thee, and urges thee to accept them: He will condemn thee and destroy thee
if thou will not accept them. Why do thou therefore stand whining and
complaining that thou art not Pardoned and Adopted, when thou should take
them being offered thee? Were he not mad that would lie weeping and wringing
his hands, because he is not pardoned, when his Prince stands by all the while
offering him a pardon, and entreating; and threatening, and persuading, and
correcting him, and all to make him take it? What would you say to such a man?
Would you not chide him for his folly, and say, If thou would have Pardon and
Life, why do thou not take it? Why then do you not say the like to your
selves? Know ye not that Pardon and Adoption are offered you only on the
Condition of your Believing? And this Believing is nothing else but the
Accepting of Christ for thy Lord and Savior, as he is offered to thee with his
benefits in the Gospel: And this Accepting is principally (if not only) the Act
of thy Will. So that if thou be willing to have Christ upon his own terms, that
is, to Save and Rule thee, then thou art a Believer: Thy willingness is thy
Faith. And if thou have Faith, thou have the surest of all Evidences.
Justifying Faith is not thy Persuasion of Gods special Love to thee, or of thy
Justification; but thy Accepting Christ to make thee Just and Lovely. It may be
thou will say, I cannot Believe; It is not so easy a matter to Believe as you
make it. Answ. Indeed to those that are not willing, it is not easy: God only
can make them willing: But to him that is willing to have Christ for King and
Savior, I will not say Believing is easy, but it is already performed; for
this is Believing. Let me therefore put this Question to every doubting
complaining Soul: What is it that thou art complaining and mourning for? What
makes thee walk so sadly as thou do? Because thou have not Christ and his
benefits. Why, art thou willing to have them on the forementioned Condition? or
art thou not? If thou be Willing, thou have him: Thy Accepting is thy
Believing: To as many as Receive him (that is, Accept him) to them he gives
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that Believe on his Name, Joh.
1.12. But if thou art not Willing, why do thou Complain? Methinks the tongue
should follow the bent of the heart or Will; And they that would not have
Christ, should be speaking against him, at least against his Laws and Ways, and
not complaining because they do not enjoy him. Do thou groan and make such
moan for want of that which thou would not have? If indeed thou would not
have Christ for thy King and Savior, then have I nothing to say but to
persuade thee to be Willing. Is it not madness then to lie complaining that we
have not Christ, when we may have him if we will? If thou have him not, take
him, and cease thy complaints: Thou can not be so forward and willing as he
is: And if He be Willing, and thou be Willing, who shall break the Match?
Flowings of Christ's Blood, etc. page 95.
I will not say as Mr Saltmarsh most horridly does, That we ought no more to
Question our Faith, which is our first and foundation Grace, then we ought to
Question Christ the Foundation of our Faith. But this I say, That it were a
more wise and direct course to Accept Christ offered (which is Believing) then
to spend so much time in doubting whether we have Christ and Faith or no.

SECT. XII.
3. ANother Cause of many Christians trouble,. 12.
is, Their mistaking Assurance for the Joy that sometime accompanies it; or at
least confounding them together. Therefore when they want the Joy of Assurance,
they are as much cast down as if they wanted Assurance it self. Mr Paul Bayne I
think one of the holiest, choicest men that ever England bred, yet describes
the temper of his spirit thus; I thank God in Christ, sustentation I have, but
Su v^ties Spiritual I taste not any. In his Letters.
Doctor Sibbs says well, That as we cannot have Grace but by the work of the
Spirit, so must there be a further Act to make us Know that we have that Grace;
and when we Know we have Grace, yet must there be a further Act of the Spirit
to give us Comfort in that Knowledge. Some Knowledge or Assurance of our
Regenerate and Justified Estate the Spirit gives more ordinarily; but that
sensible Joy is more seldom and extraordinary. We have cause enough to keep off
doubtings and distress of spirit, upon the bare sight of our Evidences, though
we do not feel any further Joys. This these complaining Souls understand not;
and therefore though they cannot deny their willingness to have Christ, nor
many other the like Graces, which are infallible Signs of their Justification
and Adoption, yet because they do not feel their spirits replenished with
comforts, they throw away all, as if they had nothing. As if a Child should no
longer take himself for a son, then he sees the smiles of his Fathers face, or
hears the comfortable expressions of his mouth: And as if the Father did
cease to be a Father when ever he cease those smiles and speeches.

SECT. XIII.
. 13.
4. ANd yet further is the trouble of these poor Souls increased, in that They
know not the ordinary way of Gods conveying these expected Comforts. In
watchfulness and d^ligence we sooner meet with comfort then in idle
complaining; Our Care therefore should be to get sound Evidence of a good
estate, and then to keep those Evidences clear. D^ Sibbs Preface to Souls
Conflict.
When they hear that they are the free gifts of the Spirit, they presently
conceive themselves to be merely passive therein, and that they have nothing to
do but to wait when God will bestow them: Not understanding, that though these
Comforts are Spiritual, yet are they Rational; raised upon the Understandings
apprehension of the Excellency of God our Happiness, and of our Interest in
him; and by the rolling of this blessed Object in our frequent Meditations. The
Spirit does advance and not destroy our Reason: It does rectify it, and then
use it as its ordinary instrument for the conveyance of things to our
Affections, and exciting them accordingly; and not lay it aside, and Affect us
without it. Therefore our Joys are raised discoursively; and the Spirit first
reveals our Cause of Joy, and then helps us to Rejoice upon those revealed
grounds: So that he who Rejoices groundedly, knows why he Rejoices
ordinarily. Now these mistaken Christians lie waiting when the Spirit does cast
in these Comforts into their hearts, while they sit still and labor not to
excite their own Affections; Nay while they Reason against the Comforts which
they wait for. As if a poor man should complain for want of money, when a chest
full stands by him, and he may take what he will: Is it not better take it out,
then lie complaining for want?
These men must be taught to know, that the matter of their Comfort is in the
Promises, and thence they must fetch it as often as they expect it: And that if
they set themselves daily and diligently to Meditate of the Truth of those
Promises, and of the rare excellency contained in them, and of their own title
thereto, in this way they may expect the Spirits assistance for the raising of
holy Comfort in their Souls. But if they lie still bewailing their want of Joy,
while the full and free Promises lie by them, and never take them, and rip them
up, and look into them, and apply them to their hearts by Serious Meditation,
They may complain for want of Comfort long enough before they have it, in Gods
ordinary way of conveyance. God works upon Men as Men, as Reasonable
Creatures: The Joy of the Promises, and the Joy of the Holy Ghost, are one Joy.

And those Seducers who in their Ignorance mis-guide poor Souls in this point,
do exceedingly wrong them: while they persuade them so to expect their comforts
from the Spirit, as not to be any authors of them themselves, nor to raise up
their own hearts by Argumentative means, telling them, that such Comforts are
but hammered by themselves, and not the genuine Comforts of the Spirit. How
contrary is this to the doctrine of Christ?

SECT. XIV.
5. ANother Cause of the trouble of their Souls is,. 14. God will keep the rich
store of consistent and abiding comforts till the great day, that when all the
family shall come together, he may pour out the fullness of his hidden treasures
on them: We are now in the morning of the day, the feast is to come; a
breakefast must serve, to stay the stomach, till the King of Saints with all
his friends sit down together. Simonds Deserted Soul. page 507.
Their expecting a greater measure of Assurance then God does usually bestow
upon his people. Most think, as long as they have any doubting they have no
Assurance: They consider not that there are many degrees of Infallible
Certainty below a perfect or an undoubting Certainty. They must know, that
while they are here they shall Know but in part: They shall be imperfect in
their Knowledge of Scripture, which is their Rule in Trying; and imperfect in
the Knowledge of their own obscure deceitful hearts. Some strangeness to God and
themselves there will still remain: Some darkness will overspread the face of
their Souls: Some Unbelief will be making head against their Faith: And some of
their grievings of the Spirit will be Grieving themselves and making a breach
in their Peace and Joy. Yet as long as their Faith is prevailing, and their
Assurance does tread down and subdue their Doubtings, though not quite expel
them, they may walk in Comfort, and maintain their Peace. But as long as they
are resolved to lie down in sorrow till their Assurance be perfect, their days
on Earth must then be days of sorrow.

SECT. XV.
. 15. So some think they are Gods people, because they are of such a party, or
such a strict opinion; and when they change their opinion they change their
comfort. Some that could have no comfort while they were among the Orthodox, as
soon as they have turned to such or such a Sect, have comfort in abundance;
partly through Satan's delusion, and partly because they think their change in
Opinion has set them right with God, and therefore they rejoice. So many
Hypocrites, whose Religion lies only in their Opinions, h^ve their Comfort
also only there.
6. AGain, many a Soul lies long in trouble, by taking up their Comforts in the
beginning upon unsound or uncertain grounds. This may be the case of a gracious
Soul, who has better grounds, and does not see them: And then when they grow
to more ripeness of Understanding, and come to find out the insufficiency of
their former grounds of Comfort, they cast away their Comfort wholly, when they
should only cast away their rotten props of it, and search for better to
support it with. As if their Comfort and their Safety were both of a nature,
and both built on the same Foundation, they conclude against their Safety,
because they have discovered the mistake of their former Comforts. And there
are many much applauded Books and Teachers of late who further the delusion of
poor Souls in this point, and make them believe, that because their former
Comforts were too Legal, and their persuasions of their good estate were ill
grounded, therefore themselves were under the Covenant of Works only, and their
spiritual condition as unsound as their Comforts: These men observe not, That
while they deny us the use of Marks to know our own state, yet they make use of
them themselves to know the states of others: Yea and of false and insufficient
Marks too. For to argue from the Motive of our persuasion of a good estate, to
the goodness or badness of that estate, is no sound arguing: It follows not
that a man is unregenerate, because he judged himself regenerate upon wrong
grounds. For perhaps he might have better grounds, and not know it; or else not
know which were good and which bad. Safety and Comfort stand not always on the
same bottom. Bad grounds do prove the Assurance bad which was built upon them,
but not always the Estate bad. These Teachers do but toss poor Souls up and
down as the waves of the Sea, making them believe that their Estate is altered
as often as their conceits of it alter. Alas, few Christians do come to know
either what are solid grounds of Comfort, or whether they have any such grounds
themselves in the infancy of Christianity. But as an Infant has life before he
knows it, and as he has misapprehensions of himself and most other things
for certain years together, and yet it will not follow that therefore he has
no life or reason: So is it in the case in hand. Yet this should persuade both
Ministers and Believers themselves to lay right grounds for their Comfort in
the beginning, as far as may be. For else usually when they find the flaw in
their Comforts and Assurance, they will judge it to be a flaw in their Safety
and Real Estates. Just as I observe most persons do who turn to Errors or
Heresies: They took up the Truth in the beginning upon either false or doubtful
grounds; and then when their grounds are overthrown or shaken, they think the
doctrine is also overthrown, and so they let go both together; as if None had
solid Arguments, because They had not; or none could manage them better then
They. Even so when they perceive that their Arguments for their good estate
were unsound, they think that their Estate must needs be as unsound.

SECT. XVI.
7. MOreover,. 16.
many a Soul lies long under doubting, Through the great Imperfection of their
very Reason, and exceeding weakness of their natural parts. Grace does usually
rather turn our parts to their most necessary use, and employ our faculties on
better Objects, then add to the degree of their natural strength. Many honest
hearts have such weak heads, that they know not how to perform the work of
Self-Tryal: They are not able rationally to argue the Case: They will
acknowledge the Premises, and yet deny the apparent Conclusion. Or if they be
brought to acknowledge the Conclusion, yet they do but fluctuate and stagger in
their concession, and hold it so weakly, that every assault may take it from
them. If God do not some other way supply to these men the defect of their
Reason, I see not how they should have clear and settled Peace.

SECT. XVII.
. 17.
8. ANother great and too common Cause of Doubting and Discomfort, is, The
secret maintaining of some known sin. When a man lives in some
unwarrantantable practice, and God has often touched him for it, and Conscience
is galled, and yet he continues it; When men dally with sin, and will be
playing with snares and baits, and allow a secret liberty in the heart to sin,
conniving at many workings of it, and not setting upon mortification with
earnest endeavors, though they be convinced, yet they are not persuaded to
arise with all their might against the Lords enemies, but do his work
negligently, which is an accursed thing, for this God casts them upon sore
straits. Simonds Deserted Soul, etc. page 521.522.
It is no wonder if this person want both Assurance and Comfort. One would
think that a Soul that lies under the fears of Wrath, and is so tender as to
tremble and complain, should be as tender of sinning, and scarcely adventure
upon the appearance of evil: And yet sad experience tells us that it is
frequently otherwise: I have known too many such, that would complain and yet
sin, and accuse themselves, and yet sin still, yea and despair, and yet proceed
in sinning; and all Arguments and means could not keep them from the wilful
committing of that sin again and again, which yet they did think themselves
would prove their destruction. Yea some will be carried away with those sins
which seem most contrary to their dejected temper. I have known them that would
fill men's ears with the constant lamentations of their miserable state, and
despairing accusations against themselves, as if they had been the most humble
people in the world; and yet be as passionate in the maintaining their
innocence when another accuses them, and as intolerably peevish, and tender of
their own reputation in any thing they are blamed for, as if they were the
proudest persons on earth; still denying or extenuating every disgraceful fault
that they are charged with.

This cherishing of sin does hinder Assurance these four ways. 1. It does abate
the degree of our Graces, and so makes them more undiscernable. 2. It obscureth
that which it destroys not; for it bears such sway, that Grace is not in
Action, nor seen to stir, nor scarce heard speak for the noise of this
Corruption. 3. It puteth out or dimmeth the eye of the Soul, that it cannot see
its own condition; and it benummeth and stupifieth that he cannot feel its own
case. 4. But especially it provokes God to withdraw himself, his Comforts and
the Assistance of the Spirit, without which we may search long enough before we
have Assurance. God has made a separation betwixt Sin and Peace: Some would
have men after the committing of gross sin to be presently comfortable, and
believe, without humbling themselves at all. Indeed when we are once in Christ,
we ought not to question our state in him, etc. But yet a guilty conscience
will be clamorous and full of Objections, and God will not speak peace to it
till it be humbled. God will let his best children know what it is to be too
bold with sin, etc. Dr Sibbs, Souls Conflict, Preface.
Though they may consist together in remiss degrees; yet so much as Sin
prevails in the Soul, so much will the Peace of that Soul be defective. As
long as thou do favor or cherish thy Pride and Self-esteem, thy aspiring
projects and love of the world, thy secret lusts and pleasing the desires of
the flesh, or any the like unchristian practice, thou expectest Assurance and
Comfort in Vain. God will not encourage thee by his precious gifts in a course
of sinning. This worm will be crawling and gnawing upon thy Conscience: It will
be a freting, devouring canker to thy Consolations. Thou may steal a spark of
false comfort from thy worldly prosperity or delights; or thou may have it
from some false Opinions, or from the delusions of Satan: But from God thou will have no more Comfort, then thou make Conscience of sinning. However an
Antinomian may tell thee, That thy Comforts have no such dependence upon thy
Obedience, nor thy discomforts upon thy disobedience; and therefore may speak
as much Peace to thee in the course of thy sinning as in thy most conscionable
walking, yet thou shall find by experience that God will not do so. If any man
set up his Idols in his Heart, and put the stumbling block of his iniquity
before his face, and comes to a Minister or to God to enquire for Assurance
and Comfort, God will Answer that man by himself, and in stead of comforting
him, he will set his Face against him, he will Answer him According to the
multitude of his Idols. Read Ezekiel. 14.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

SECT. XVIII.
9. ANother very great and common Cause of want of Assurance and Comfort,. 18.
is, When men grow Lazy in the spiritual part of duty, and keep not up their
Graces in constant and lively Action. As Dr Sibbs says truly, It is the lazy
Christian commonly that lacks Assurance. The way of painful duty is the way
of fullest Comfort. Christ carries all our Comforts in his hand: If we are out
of that way where Christ is to be met, we are out of the way where Comfort is
to be had.

These three ways does this Laziness debar us of our Comforts.

1. By stopping the Fountain, and causing Christ to withhold this blessing from
us. See Dr Sibs Souls Conflict. page 480, 481.
Parents use not to smile upon children in their neglects and disobedience. So
far as the Spirit is Grieved, he will suspend his Consolations. Assurance and
Peace are Christ's great Encouragements to faithfulness and obedience: And
therefore (though our Obedience do not Merit them, yet) they usually rise and
fall with our Diligence in duty. They that have entertained the Antinomian
dotages to cover their Idleness and Viciousness, may talk their nonsense
against this at pleasure; but the laborious Christian knows it by experience.
As prayer must have Faith and Fervency to procure its success, besides the
Bloodshed and Intercession of Christ, ( Jam. 5.15, 16.) so must all other parts
of our Obedience. He that will say to us in that Triumphing day, Well Done Good
and Faithful Servant, etc. Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord! Will also clap
his Servants upon the back in their most Affectionate and Spiritual Duties, and
say, Well Done Good and Faithful Servant, take this Fore-taste of thy
Everlasting Joy. If thou grow seldom and customary, and cold in Duty,
especially in thy secret Prayers to God, and yet find no abatement in thy
Joys, I cannot but fear, that thy Joys are either Carnal or Diabolical.

2. Grace is never apparent and sensible to the Soul but while it is in Action:
Therefore want of Action must needs cause want of Assurance: Habits are not
felt immediately, but by the freeness and facility of their Acts: Of the very
Being of the Soul it self, nothing is felt or perceived (if any more Be) but
only its Acts. The fire that lies still in the flint is neither seen nor felt;
but when you smite it, and force it into Act, it is easily discerned. The
greatest Action does force the greatest Observation; whereas the dead or
unactive are not remembered or taken notice of. Those that have long lain still
in their graves are out of men's thoughts as well as their sight; but those that
walk their streets, and bear Rule among them, are noted by all. It is so with
our Graces. That you have a Habit of Love or Faith, you can no otherwise know
but as a consequence by reasoning: but that you may have the Acts you may know
by Feeling. If you see a man lie still in the way; what will you do to know
whether he be drunk, or in a swoun, or dead? Will you not stir him or speak to
him, to see whether he can go? Or feel his pulse, or observe his breath?
Knowing that where there is life their is some kind of motion? I earnestly
beseech thee, Christian, observe and practice this excellent Rule: Thou now
know not whether thou have Repentance, or Faith, or Love, or joy: Why be
more in the Acting of these, and thou will easily know it:
Draw forth an Object for Godly sorrow, or Faith, or Love, or Joy; and lay thy
heart flat unto it, and take pains to provoke it into suitable action; and then
see whether thou have these Graces or no. As Doctor Sibbs observes, There is
sometimes Grief for sin in us when we think there is none: Souls Conflict. page
480, 481.
it wants but stir^ing up by some quickening word: The like he says of Love;
and may be said of every other Grace. You may go seeking for the Hare or
Partridge many hours, and never find them while they lie close and stir not,
but when once the Hare betakes him self to his legs, and the bird to her
wings, then you see them presently. So long as a Christian has his Graces in
lively Action, so long, for the most part, he is assured of them. How can you
doubt whether you love God in the Act of Loving? Or whether you believe in the
very Act of Believing? If therefore you would be assured whether this Sacred
Fire be kindled in your hearts, blow it up; get it into a fl^me, and then you
will know: Believe till you feel that you do believe; and Love till you feel
that you love.

3. The Action of the Soul upon such excellent Objects, Men experimentally feel
that comfort in doing that which belongs unto them, which before they longed
for, and went without. Dr Sibbs Souls Conflict. page 45.
does naturally bring Consolation with it. The very Act of Loving God in Christ
does bring unexpressible sweetness with it into the Soul. The Soul that is best
furnished with Grace, when it is not in Action, is like a Lute well string'd
and tuned, which while it lies still does make no more Music then a common
piece of wood; but when it is taken up and handled by a skilful Lutist, the
melody is most delightful. Preface to Souls Conflict
Some degree of comfort (says that comfortable Doctor) follows every good
Action, as heat accompanies fire, and as beams and influences issue from the
Sun; which is so true, that very heathens upon the discharge of a good
Conscience have found comfort and peace answerable: This is Praemium ante
Praemium, a Reward before the Reward.

As a man therefore that is cold should not stand still and say, I am so cold
that I have no mind to Labor, but labor till ^is coldness be gone, and heat
excited: So he that wants assurance of the truth of his graces, and the comfort
of Assurance, must not stand still and say, I am so doubtful and uncomfortable
that I have no mind to duty, but ply his duty, and exercise his Graces, till
he find his Doubts and Discomforts to vanish.

SECT. XIX.
. 19. Non est mirum si ^imen^ Melancholici, quia causam timoris continuo secum
portant; Anima enim esti^voluta cum caligine tenebrosa, et quia anima sequitur
corporis passiones seu complexiones, ideo timent, etc Galenus in fine quartae
partic. de Morbo.
10. LAstly, another ordinary Nurse of Doubtings and Discomfort, is, The
prevailing of Melancholy in the body; whereby the brain is continually
troubled and darkened, the Fancy hindered, and Reason perverted by the
distempering of its instruments, and the Soul is still clad in mourning weeds.
It is no more wonder for a Conscientious man that is overcome with Melancholy
to doubt, and fear, and despair, then it is for a sick man to groan, or a child
to cry when he is beater. This is the case with most that I have known lie long
in doubting, and distress of Spirit. With some their Melancholy being raised
by Crosses or distemper of body, or some other occasion, does afterward bring
in trouble of Conscience as its companion. Timor et pusillanimitas si multum
tempus habuerint, Melancholicum faciunt. Hippocrat.
With others trouble of mind is their first trouble; which long hanging on
them, at last does bring the body also into a Melancholy habit: And then
trouble increases Melancholy, and Melancholy again increases trouble, and
so round. This is a most sad and pitiful state: For as the disease of the body
is chronical and obstinate, and physic does seldom succeed, where it has far
prevailed; so without the Physician, the labors of the Divine are usually in
vain. You may silence them, but you cannot com^fort them: You may make them
confess that they have some Grace, and yet cannot bring them to the comfortable
Conclusi^ons. Or if you convince them of some work of the Spirit upon their
souls, and a little at present abate their sadness, yet as soon as they are
gone home, and look again upon their souls through this perturbing humor, all
your convincing Arguments are forgotten, and they are as far from comfort as
ever they were. All the good thoughts of their estate which you can possibly
help them to, are seldom above a day or two old. As a man that looks through a
black or blew or red glass, does think things which he sees to be of the same
color; and if you would persuade him to the contrary he will not believe you;
but wonder that you should offer to persuade him against his eyesight! So a
Melancholy man sees all things in a sad and fearful plight, because his Reason
looks on them through this black humor, with which his brain is darkened and
distempered. And as a man's eyes which can see all things about them, yet cannot
see any imperfection in themselves* so is it almost impossible to make many of
these men to know that they are Melancholy. But as those who are troubled with
the Ephialtes do cry out of some body that lies heavy upon them, when the
disease is in their own blood and humors; so these poor men cry out of sin and
the wrath of God, when the main cause is in this bodily distemper. The chief
part of the cure of these men must be upon the body, because there is the chief
part of the disease.

And thus I have showed you the chief causes, why so many Christians do enjoy
so little Assurance and Consolation.

CHAP. VIII. Containing an Exhortation and Motives to Examine.
SECT. I.
HAving thus discoverd the Impediments to Examination,. 1.
I would presently proceed to direct you to the performance of it, but that I
am ye^ jealous whether I have fully prevailed with you wills; and whether you
are indeed Resolved to set upon the Duty. I have found by long experience as
well as from Scripture, That the main difficulty lies in bringing men to be
willing, and to set themselves in good earnest to the searching of their hearts.

Many love to hear and read of Marks and signs by which they may Try; but few
will be brought to spend an hour in using them when they have them. They think
they should have their Doubts resolved as soon as they do but hear a minister
name some of these Signs* and if that would do the work, then Assurance would
be more common: But when they are informed that the work lies most upon their
own hands, and what pains it must cost them to search their hearts faithfully,
then they give up and will go no further.

This is not only the case of the ungodly, who commonly perish through this
neglect; but multitudes of the godly themselves are like Idle Beggars, who will
rather make a practice of begging and bewailing their misery, then they will
set themselves to labor painfully for their relief: So do many spend days and
years in sad complaints and doubtings, that will not be brought to spend a few
hours in Examination. I entreat all these persons, what condition soever they
are of, to consider the weight of these following Arguments, which I have
propounded in hope to persuade them to this duty.

SECT. II.
. 2. Motive 1.
1. TO be deceived about your Title to Heaven, is exceeding easy; and not to be
deceived, is exceeding difficult. This I make manifest to you thus.

Mat. 7.22.26.27, etc. Prove. 14.12. Luke 13.25, 26 Luke 18.21, 11 Rev. 3.17. So
Ananias and Saphira* The rich man in Luke 16. etc.
1. Multitudes that never suspected any falsehood in their hearts, have yet
proved unsound in the day of Trial; and they that never feared any danger
toward them, have perished for ever: Yea many that have been confident of their
integrity and safety. I shall adjoyn the proofs of what I say, in the Margin
for brevity sake. How many poor souls are now in Hell, that little thought of
coming thither? and that were wont to despise their counsel that bid them Try
and make sure? And to say, They made no doubt of their Salvation?

2. Yea, and many that have excelled in worldly wisdom, yet have been befooled
in this great business: and they that had wit to deceive their neighbors,
Ahitophel, Gehezi, Ananias and Saphira. Pharisees, Jesuits, etc. Romans 1.22.
were yet deceived by Satan and their own hearts. Yea, men of strongest
head-pieces, and profoundest learning, who knew much of the secrets of Nature,
of the courses of the Planets, and motions of the Spheres, have yet been
utterly mistaken in their own hearts.

3. Yea, Those that have lived in the clear light of the Gospel, and heard the
difference between the Righteous and the Wicked plainly laid open, and many a
Mark for Trial laid down, and and many a Sermon pressing them to Examine, and
directing them how to do it, Judas and the Jews that heard Christ.
yet even these have been, and daily are deceived.

4. Yea, those that have had a whole life's time to make sure in, and have been
told over and over that they had their lives for no other end, but to provide
for Everlasting Rest, and make sure of it, have yet been deceived, and have
wasted that lifetime in forgetful security.

5. Yea, those that have Preached against the negligence of others, and pressed
them to Try themselves, and showed them the danger of being mistaken, Mat 7.22.
Romans 2.21. 1 Cor. 9.27.
have yet proved mistaken themselves.

And is it not then time for us to rifle our hearts, and search them to the
very quick?

SECT. III.
2. TO be mistaken in this great Point is also very Common,. 3. Motive 2.
as well as easy: So common that it is the case of most in the world. In the
old world we find of none that were in any fear of Judgment: and yet how few
persons were not deceived? So in Sodom: So among the Jews: And I would it were
not so in England! Gal. 6.3, 4, 7. Mat. 7.21.
Almost all men amongst us do verily look to be saved: You shall scarce speak
with one of a thousand that does not: And yet Christ tells us, That few find
the strait gate and narrow way that leads to Life. Do but reckon up the several
sorts of men that are mistaken in thinking they have title to Heaven, Ephesians. 4*
18. Hosea 4.6. Isai. 27.11. 2 Cor. 4.3. Rev. 2.6, 20.
as the Scripture does enumera^e them, and what a multitude will they prove! 1.
All that are ignorant of the Fundamentals of Religion. 2. All Heretic, who
maintain false doctrines against the Foundation, or against the necessary means
of Life. 3. All that live in the practice of gross sin. Titus 2 19. 1 Cor. 6.9.
and 15.50. Ephesians. 5.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 66.18. Jam 4 4, 5. Heb. 12.14. John 3.3. 2 Timothy 3.5. James 1.22. Mark 13.5, 6. Matthew. 10.37. John 12 25.
4. Or that love and regard the smallest sin. 5. All that harden themselves
against frequent reproof. Prove. 29.1. 6. All that mind the Flesh more then the
Spirit. Romans 8.6.7.13. Or the world more then God. Phil. 3.18, 19. 1 John
2.15.16. 7. All that do as the most do. Luke 13.23, 24, 25. 1 John 5.19. 8. All
that are deriders at the Godly, and discourage others from the way of God by
their reproaches. Pro. 1.22. etc. 3.34. and 19.29. 9. All that are unholy: And
that never were Regenerate and born anew. 10. All that have not their very
hearts set upon Heaven. Mat. 6.21. 11. All that have a Form of Godliness
without the Power. 12. And all that love either parents, or wife, or children,
or house, or lands, or life, more then Christ. Luke 14.26. Every on of these
that thinks he has any Title to Heaven, is as surely mistaken as the
Scripture is true.

And if such multitudes are deceived, should not we search the more diligently,
lest we should be deceived as well as they?

SECT. IV.
. 4.
3. NOthing more dangerous then to be thus mistaken. The Consequents of it are
lamentable and desperate. If the Godly be mistaken in judging their state to be
worse then it is, the consequents of this mistake will be very sad: But if the
ungodly be mistaken, the Danger and Mischief that follows is unspeakable.

1. It will exceedingly confirm them in the service of Satan, and fasten them
in their present way of death. They will never seek to be recovered, as long as
they think their present state may serve. As the Prophet says, Isa. 44.20. A
deceived heart will turn them aside, that they cannot deliver their own soul,
nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?

2. It will take away the efficacy of means that should do them good: Nay, it
will turn the best means to their hardening and ruin. If a man mistake his
bodily disease, and think it to be clean contrary to what it is, will he not
apply contrary remedies which will increase it? So when a Christian should
apply the Promises, his mistake will cause him to apply the threatenings: and
when an ungodly man should apply the Threatenings, and Terrors of the Lord,
this mistake of his estate will make him apply the promises: And there is no
greater strengthener of sin, and destroyer of the soul, then Scripture
misapplyed. Wordly delights, and the deceiving words of sinners, may harden men
most desperately in an unsafe way: But Scripture misapplied, will do it far
more effectually and dangerously.

3. It will keep a man from compassionating his own soul. Though he be a sad
object of pity to every understanding man that beholds him, yet will he not
be able to pity himself, because he knows not his own misery. As I have seen
a Physician lament the case of his Patient when he has discerned his certain
death in some small beginning, when the Patient himself feared nothing, because
he knew not the mortal nature of his disease. So does many a Minister or godly
Christian lament the case of a carnal wretch, who is so far from lamenting it
himself, Acts 7.54.
that he scorns their pity, and bids them be sorry for themselves, Acts
22.22.
they shall not answer for him; and takes them for his enemies because they
tell him the truth of his danger. As a man that sees a beast going to the
slaughter does pity the poor creature, when it cannot pity it self because it
little thinks that death is so near: So is it with these poor siners: and all
long of this mistaking their Spiritual state. Is it not a pitiful sight to see
a man laughing himself, when his understanding friends stand weeping for his
misery? Paul mentions the voluptuous men of his time and the worldlings with
weeping: Phil. 3.17, 18.
but we never read of their weeping for themselves* Christ stands weeping
over Jerusalem, Luke 19.
when they know not of any evil that was toward them, nor give him any thanks
for his pity or his tears.

4. It is in a case of greatest moment, and therefore mistaking must needs be
most dangerous. If it were in making an ill bargain, yet we might repair our
loss in the next: Turpe est in re Militari dicere, Non putarem.
Scipio was wont to say, It was an unseemly absurd thing in Military cases to
say, I had not thought, or I was not aware; The matter being of so great
concernment, every danger should be thought of, that you may be aware. Sure in
this weighty case, where our everlasting Salvation or Damnation is in Question,
and to be determined, every mistake is insufferable and inexcusable which might
have been prevented by any cost or pains. Therefore men will choose the most
able Lawyers and Physicians, because the mistakes of one may lose them their
Estates, and the mistakes of the other may lose them their lives: But mistakes
about their Souls are of a higher nature.

5. If you should continue your mistakes till death, there will be no time
after to correct them for your recovery. Mistake now, and you are undone for
ever. Men think to see a man dye quietly or comfortably, is to see him dye
happily: But if his comfort proceed from this mistake of his condition, it is
the most unhappy case and pitiful sight in the world. To live mistaken in such
a case is lamentable, but to dye mistaken is desperate.

Seeing then that the case is so dangerous, what wise man would not follow the
search of his heart both night and day till he were assured of his safety?

SECT. V.
. 5.
4. COnsider how small the labor of this duty is in comparison of the sorrow
which follows its neglect. A few hours or days work, if it be closely
followed and with good direction, may do much to resolve the Question. There is
no such trouble in searching our hearts, nor any such danger as may deter men
from it* what harm can it do to you to Try or to know? It will take up no very
long time: Or if it did, yet you have your time given you for that end. One
hour so spent will comfort you more then many otherwise. If you cannot have
while to make sure of heaven, how can you have while to eat, or drink, or live?
You can endure to follow your callings at Plow, and Cart, and Shop, to toil and
sweat from day to day, and year to year in the hardest labors: And cannot you
endure to spend a little time in inquiring what shall be your everlasting
state? What a deal of sorrow and after-complaining might this small labor
prevent? How many miles travel besides the vexation may a Traveller save by
inquiring of the way? Why what a sad case are you in, while you live in such
uncertainty? You can have no true comfort in any thing you see, or hear, or
possess. You are not sure to be an hour out of Hell. And if you come thither
you will do nothing but bewail the folly of this neglect. No excuse will then
pervert Justice, or quiet your Conscience. If you say, I little thought of this
day and place; God and Conscience may reply, why did thou not think of it?
Wast thou not warned? Had thou not time? Therefore must thou perish because
thou would not think of it. As the Commander answered his Soldier in
Plutarch, when he said, non volens erravi, I erred against my will; he beat him
and replied, non volens poenas dato, Thou shall be punished also against thy
will.

SECT. VI.
5. THou can scarce do Satan a greater pleasure,. 6.
nor thy self a greater injury. It is the main scope of the Devil in all his
Temptations to deceive thee, and keep the ignorant of thy danger till thou feel
the everlasting flames upon thy soul: And will thou join with him to deceive
thy self? If it were not by this deceiving thee, he could not destroy thee: And
if thou do this for him, thou do the greatest part of his work, and art the
chief destroyer and Devil to thy self. And has he deserved so well of thee,
and thy self so ill, that thou should assist him in such a design as thy
damnation? To deceive another is a grievous sin, and such as perhaps thou
would scorn to be charged with: And yet thou think it nothing to deceive
thy self. Says Solomon, As a mad man who casts firebrarnds, arrows and
death; So is the man that deceives his neighbor, Pro. 26.18, 19.
and says, Am not I in sport? Surely then he that makes but a sport, or a
matter of nothing to deceive his own soul, may well be thought a mad man,
casting firebrarnds and death at himself. If any man think himself to be
something when he is nothing, he deceives himself, says Paul, Gal. 6.3.
Certainly among all the multitudes that perish, this is the commonest cause of
their undoing; that they would not be brought to Try their state in time. And
is it not pity to think that so many thousands are merrily traveling to
destruction and do not know it, and all for want of this diligent search?

SECT. VII.
6. THE time is near when God will search you:. 7.
And that will be another kind of Trial then this. If it be but in this life by
the fiery trial of affliction, it will make you wish again and again, that you
had spared God that work and your selves the sorrow; and that you had Tried and
Judged your selves, 1 Cor. 11.30, 31.
that so you might have escaped the Trial and Judgment of God. He will Examine
you then as officers do offenders, with a word and a blow: and as they would
have done by Paul, Acts 22.14
Examine him by scourging. It was a terrible voice to Adam when God calls to
him, Adam, where art thou? Qu^d profuerit (...) si sociis and c^cumstantibus
s^^am innocentiam prohaverit, c^m cum Jud^x cr^minis convic^u^ t^neat? (...)
nos s^mper ad Christi (...) si^^amus; ei nos probimu^; and op ram demus ut nos
ipsos pertentemu^ penetume ut aliis, sic nobis impunamu^. Cartrit. Harmon. vol.
2, page 231.
have thou eaten, etc? and to Cain when God asks him, Where is thy brother?
To have demanded this of himself had been easier. Men think God minds their
state and ways no more then they do their own. They consider not in their
hearts (says the Lord, Hos. 7.2.) that I remember all their wickedness; now
their own doings have beset them about, they are before my face. Oh what a
happy preparation would it be to that last and great Trial, if men had but
thoroughly Tried themselves, and made sure work beforehand? When a man does but
soberly and believing think of that day, especially when he shall see the
Judgment set, what a Joyful preparation is it, if he can truly say, I know the
sentence shall pass on my side; I have Examined my self by the same Law of
Christ which now must Judge me, and I have ^ound that I am quit from all my
guilt, and am a Justified person in Law already. Oh, Sirs; if you knew but the
comfort of such a preparation, you would fall close to the work of
Self-Examining yet before you slept.

SECT. VIII.
. 8.
7. LAstly, I desire thee to Consider, What would be the sweet effects of this
Examining. If thou be upright and Godly, it will lead thee straight toward
Assurance of Gods Love: If thou be not, though it will trouble thee at the
present, yet does it tend to thy happiness, and will lead thee to Assurance of
that happiness at length.

1. The very Knowledge it self is naturally desirable. Every man would fain
know things to come; especially concerning themselves: If there were a book
written which would tell every man his destiny, what shall befall him to his
last breath, how desirous would people be to procure it and read it? How did
Nebuchadnezzars thoughts run on things that after should come to pass? and he
worshipped Daniel, Dan. 2.29, 46, 4^.
and offered oblations to him, because he foretold them. When Christ had told
his Disciples, that one of them should betray him, how desirous are they to
know who it was? though it were a matter of sorrow? Mat. 26. Mat. 24.
How busily do they enquire when Christ's Predictions should come to pass, and
what were the Signs of his coming? With what gladness does the Samaritan woman
run into the City, John 4.29.
saying, Come and see a man that has told me all that ever I did; though he
told her of her faults? When Ahaziah lay sick, how desirous was he to know
whether he should live or dye? 2 Kings 1 2
Daniel is called a man greatly beloved, therefore God would reveal to him
things that long after must come to pass. Dan. 9.23. and 10.11, 19.
And is it so desirable a thing to hear Prophecies, and to know what shall
befall us hereafter? and is it not then most especially desirable to know what
shall befall our Souls? and what place and state we must be in for ever? Why
this you may know, if you will but faithfully Try.

2. But the Comforts of that Certainty of Salvation which this Trial does
conduce toward, are yet far greater: If ever God bestow this blessing of
Assurance on thee, thou will account thy self the happiest man on earth, and
feel that it is not a Notional or empty mercy. For 1. What sweet thoughts will thou have of God? All that Greatness, and Jealousy, and Justice which is the
terror of others, will be matter of encouragement and Joy to thee: As the son
of a King does rejoice in his fathers Magnificence and Power, which is the awe
of Subjects, and terror of Rebels. When the thunder does roar, and the
lightening flash, and the earth quake, and the signs of dreadful omnipotency do
appear, thou can say, All this is the effect of my Fathers power.

2. How sweet may every thought of Christ, and the blood that he has shed, and
the benefits he has procured, be unto thee who have got this Assurance? Then
will the Name of a Savior be a sweet Name; and the thoughts of his gentle and
loving nature, and of the gracious design which he has carried on for our
Salvation, will be pleasing thoughts: Then will it do thee good to view his
wounds by the eye of faith, and to put thy finger, as it were, into his side,
when thou can call him as Thomas did, My Lord, and my God!

3. Every passage also in the Word will then afford thee Comfort: How sweet
will be the Promises when thou art sure they are thine own? The Gospel will
then be Glad Tidings indeed. The very threatenings will occasion thy Comfort to
remember that thou have escaped them. Then thou will cry out with David, Oh how
I love thy Law! It is sweeter then honey; More precious then gold, etc. And as
Luther, That thou will not take all the world for one leaf of the Bible. When
thou wast in thy sin, this Book was to thee as Micaiah to Ahab; It never spoke
Good of thee, but Evil; and therefore no wonder if then thou did hate it: But
now it is the charter of thy Everlasting Rest, how welcome will it be to thee?
and how beautiful the very feet of those that bring it? Rom, 10.15.


4. What boldness and comfort then may thou have in prayer? When thou can
say, Our Father, in full Assurance; and know that thou art welcome and
accepted through Christ, and that thou have a promise to be heard when ever
thou ask, and know that God is readier to grant thy requests then thou to
move them; With what comfortable boldness may thou then approach the Throne
of Grace? Heb. 10.22 19
Especially when the case is weighty, and thy necessity great, this Assurance
in prayer will be a sweet privilege indeed: A despairing Soul that feels the
weight of Sin and Wrath, especially at a dying hour, would give a large price
to be partaker of this Privilege, and to be sure that he might have Pardon and
Life for the asking for.

5. This Assurance will give the Sacrament a sweet relish to thy Soul, and make
it a refreshing feast indeed.

6. It will multiply the sweetness of every mercy thou receivest, when thou art
sure that all proceeds from Love, and are the beginnings and earnest of
Everlasting Mercies: Thou will then have more comfort in a morsel of bread,
then the world has in the greatest abundance of all things.

7. How comfortably then may thou undergo all Afflictions? When thou know
that he means thee no hurt in it, but has promised that All shall work
together for thy Good; Romans 8.28. Heb 12.6, 7. Psalm. 75.76.
when thou art sure that he chasteneth thee, because he loves thee, and
scourges thee, because thou art a Son whom he will receive, and that out of
very faithfulness he does afflict thee, What a support must this be to thy
heart? and how will it abate the bitterness of the Cup? Even the Son of God
himself does seem to take comfort from this Assurance, when he was in a manner
forsaken for our sins; and therefore he cries out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And even the Prodigal under his guilt and misery does take
some Comfort in remembering that he has a Father.

8. This Assurance will sweeten to thee the fore-thoughts of death, and make
thy heart glad to fore-think of that entrance into Joy; Number 23.10.
when a man that is uncertain whither he is going, must needs dye with horror.

9. It will sweeten also thy fore-thoughts of Judgment, when thou art sure that
it will be the day of thy absolution and Coronation.

10. Yea the very thoughts of the flames of Hell will administer matter of
Consolation to thee, when thou can certainly conclude thou art saved from
them.

11. The fore-thoughts of Heaven also will be more incomparably delightful,
when thou art certain that it is the place of thine Everlasting abode.

12. It will make thee exceeding lively and strong in the Work of the Lord:
With what courage will thou run, when thou know thou shall have the prize?
and fight, when thou know thou shall conquer? 1 Cor. 15.58.
It will make thee always abound in the work of the Lord, when thou know
that thy labor is not in vain.

13. It will also make thee more profitable to others. Thou will be a most
cheerful encourager of them from thine own experience. Thou will be able to
refresh the weary, and to strengthen the weak, and speak a word of Comfort in
season to the troubled Soul: Whereas now without Assurance, in stead of
comforting others, thou will rather have need of support thy self: So that
others are losers by thy Uncertainty as well as thy self.

14. Assurance will put life into all thy Affections or Graces. 1. It will help
thee to Repent and melt over thy sins, when thou know how dearly God did
Love thee whom thou have abused. 2. It will inflame thy Soul with Love to God,
when thou once know thy near Relation to him, Psalm. 116.1. and 18.1, 2.
and how tenderly he is affected toward thee. 3. It will quicken thy desires
after him, when thou art once sure of thy Interest in him. 4. It is the most
excellent Fountain of Continual Rejoicing, 1 These 4.17, 18
Hab. ^.17, 18, 19. 5. It will confirm thy Trust and Confidence in God in the
greatest straits, Psalm. 89.26. and 46.1, 2, 3, etc. 6. It will fill thy heart
with Thankfulness. 7. It will raise thee in the high delightful work of Praise.
Psalm. 118.28. Isai 25.1.
8. It will be the most excellent help to a Heavenly Mind. 9. It will
exceedingly tend to thy Perseverance in all this. He that is sure of the Crown
will hold on to the End, when others will be tired and give up through
discouragement.

All these sweet effects of Assurance would make thy Life a kind of Heaven on
Earth. Seeing then that Examination of our states is the way to this Assurance,
and the Means without which God does not usually bestow it, does it not Concern
us to fall close to this Searching Work?

SECT. IX.
. 9.
I Would not have bestowed this time and labor in urging you with all these
foregoing Considerations, but that I know how backward man is to this duty.
And though I am certain that these Motives have weight of Reason in them, yet
experience of men's unreasonableness in things of this Nature, does make me
Jealous, lest you should lay by the Book when you have read all this, as if you
had done, and never set your selves to the practice of the duty. Reader, Thou
see the Case in hand is of greatest moment: It is to know, Whether thou shall
Everlastingly live in Heaven or Hell? If thou have lived hitherto in dark
uncertainty, it is a pitiful case: but if thou wilfully continue so, thy
Madness is unexpressible: And is it not wilfully, when a through Trial might
help thee to be Resolved, and thou will not be persuaded to be at so much
pains? What say thou now? Art thou fully resolved to fall upon the Work?
Shall all this labor that I have bestowed in persuading thee be lost, or no?
If thou will not obey, I would thou had never read these lines, that they
might not have aggravated thy guilt, and silenced thee in Judgment. I here put
this special Request to thee in behalf of thy Soul; nay I lay this charge upon
thee in the Name of the Lord, That thou defer no longer, but take the next
opportunity that thou can have, and take thy Heart to task in good earnest,
and think with thy self, Is it so Easy, so Common, and so Dangerous to be
Mistaken? Are there so many wrong ways? Is the heart so guil^ful? Why then do I
not search into every corner? and ply this work till I know my state? Must I so
shortly undergo the Trial at the Bar of Christ? And do I not presently fall on
Trying my self? Why what a case were I in if I should then miscarry? May I know
by a little diligent Enquiry now? and do I stick at the labor? And here set
thy self to the duty. -- Object. But it may be thou will say, I know not how to
do it. Ans. That is the next Work that I come to, to give thee Directions
herein: but, alas, it will be in Vain if thou be not resolved to practice them.
Will thou therefore before thou go any further here promise before the Lord,
to set thy self (to thy power) upon the speedy performing of the duty according
to these Directions which I shall lay down from the Word? I demand nothing
unreasonable or impossible of thee: It is but That thou would presently
bestow a few hours time, to know what shall become of thee for ever. If a
neighbor, or common friend, desire but an hours time of thee, in conference, or
in labor, or any thing that thou may help them in, thou would not sure
deny it: How much less should thou deny this to thy self in so great a Case?
I pray thee take this request from me, as if upon my knees in the Name of
Christ I did prefer it to thee: And I will betake me upon my knees to Christ
again, to beg that he will persuade thy heart to the Duty: And in hope that
thou will practice them, I will here give thee some Directions.

CHAP. IX. Containing Directions for Examination, and some Marks for Trial.
SECT. I.
. 1.
I Will not stand here to lay down the Directions necessary for preparation to
this Duty, because you may gather them from what is said concerning the
Hindrances: For the Contraries of those Hindrances will be most necessary
Helps. Only before you set upon it, I advise you moreover to the Observation of
these Rules. 1. Come not with too peremptory Conclusions of your selves
beforehand. Do not Judge too confidently before you Try. Many Godly dejected
Souls come with this Pre-judging to the work, concluding certainly that their
state is Miserable before they have Tried it: And most wicked men on the
contrary side do conclude most confidently that their state is good, or
tolerable at the least. No wonder if these both miscarry in Judging, when they
pass the Sentence before the Trial.

2. Be sure to be so well acquainted with the Scripture, as to know what is the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, and what are the Conditions of Justification
and Glorification, and consequently what are sound Marks to Try thy self by,
and wherein the Truth of Grace, and Essence of Christianity does consist.

3. And it will not be unuseful to write out some of the chief and those
Scriptures withal which hold them forth, and so to bring this Paper with you
when you come to Examination.

4. Be a constant observer of the temper and motions of thy heart: Almost all
the difficulty of the work does lie in the true and clear discerning of it. Be
watchful in observing the Actings both of Grace and Corruption; and the
circumstances of their Actings; as how frequent? how violent? how strong or
weak were the outward incitements? how great or small the impediments? what
delight, or loathing, or fear, or reluctance, did go with those Acts? by these
and the like observations you may come to a more infallible knowledge of your
selves.

5. Be sure you set upon the work with a serious, rouzed, wakened Soul,
apprehensive of how great concernment it is.

6. And lastly, Resolve to judge thy self impartially; neither better nor worse
then thou art, but as the Evidence shall prove thee.

SECT. II.
BEing thus provided,. 2.
then set to the business: and therein observe these Directions following;
(which I will mention briefly, that lying close together, you may be able to
view and observe them the more easily.)

1. Empty thy mind of all thy other cares and thoughts, that they do not
distract or divide thy mind: This work will be enough at once of it self,
without joining others with it.

2. Then fall down before God, and in hearty prayer desire the assistance of
his Spirit, to discover to thee the plain truth of thy Condition; and to
enlighten thee in thy whole progress in the work.

3. Make choice of the most convenient Time and Place. I shall not stand upon
the particular Directions about these, because I shall mention them more
largely when I come to direct you in the duty of Contemplation: Only thus in
brief. 1. Let the Place be the most private, that you may be free from
distractions. 2. For the Time, thus. 1. When you are most solitary and at
leisure: You cannot cast accounts, especially of such a nature as these, either
in a crowd of company, or of employments. 2. Let it be a set and cho^en Time,
when you have nothing to hinder you. 3. But, if it may be, let it be the
present Time, especially if thou have been a stranger hitherto to the work.
There is no delaying in matters of such weight. 4. Especially when you have a
more special call to search your selves: as in public calamities, in time of
sickness, before Sacrament, etc. 5. When God is Trying you by some Affliction,
and (as Job says) is searching after your sin, Job 10.6.
then set in with him, and search after them your selves. 6. Lastly, You should
specially take such a Time when you are most fit for the work: when you are not
secure and stupid on one hand; nor yet under deep desertions or Melancholy on
the other hand: for else you will be unfit Judges of your own states.

4. When you have thus chosen the fittest Time and Place, then draw forth,
either from thy Memory, or in writing, the forementioned Marks, or
Gospel-Conditions, or Descriptions of the Saints: Try them by Scripture, and
convince thy Soul thoroughly of their infallible Truth.

5. Proceed then to put the Question to thy self: But be sure to state it
right. Let it not be, Whether there be any Good in thee at all? (for so thou will err on the one hand:) Nor yet, Whether thou have such or such a degree and
measure of Grace? (for so thou will err on the other hand:) But, Whether such
or such a Saving Grace be in thee at all in sincerity, or not?

6. If thy heart draw back, and be loath to the work; suffer it not so to give
thee the slip: but force it on: Lay thy command upon it: let Reason interpose,
and use its authority: Look over the foregoing Arguments, and press them home:
Yea, lay the Command of God upon it; and charge it to obey upon pain of his
displeasure: Set Conscience a work also: let it do its office, till thy lazy
heart be spurred up to the work: For if thou suffer it to break away once and
twice, etc. it will grow so headstrong, that thou can not master it.

7. Let not thy Heart trifle away the Time, when it should be diligently at the
work: Put the Question to it seriously: Is it thus and t^us with me, or no?
Force it here to an Answer: suffer it not to be silent: nor to jangle and think
of other matters: If the Question be hard, through the darkness of thy Heart;
yet do not give it over so: but search the closer: and study the case the more
exactly: And if it be possible, let not thy Heart give over, till it have
Resolved the Question, and told thee off or on, in what case thou art: Ask it
strictly (as Joseph examined his Brethren, Genesis 43.7.) how it stands affected:
Do as David, Psalm. 77.6. My spirit made Diligent Search: If thy Heart strive to
break away before thou art resolved; wrestle with it, till thou have prevailed,
and say, I will not let thee go, till thou have Answered. He that can prevail
with his own Heart, shall also be a prevailer with God.

8. If thou find the work beyond thy strength, so that after all thy pains
thou art never the more resolved; then seek out for help: Go to some that is
Godly, experienced, able, and faithful; and tell him thy case, and desire his
best advice and help. Not that any can know thy heart, so well as thy self: But
if thou deal faithfully, and tell him what thou know by thy self; he can
tell thee whether they be sound Evidences, or not; and show thee Scripture how
to prove them so; and direct thee in the right use of such Evidences; and show
thee how to conclude from them. Yea, when thou can get no further, the very
Judgment of an able Godly man should take much with thee, as a probable
Argument; as the Judgment of a Physician concerning the state of thy body:
Though this can afford thee no full certainty, yet it may be a great help to
stay and direct thee. But be sure thou do not make this a pretense to put off
thy own duty of Examining: But only use it as one of the last remedies, when
thou find thy own endevors will not serve. Neither be thou forward to open
thy case to every one: or to a carnal, flattering, unskilful person: But to one
that has wisdom to conceal thy secrets, and tenderness to compassionate thee,
and skill to direct thee, and faithfulness to deal truly and plainly with thee.

9. When by all this pains and means thou have discovered the truth of thy
state, then pass the Sentence on thy self accordingly. A mere examination will
do thee little good, if it proceed not to a Judgment. Conclude as thou find:
Either that thou art a true Believer: or that thou art not. But pass not this
Sentence rashly; nor with self-flattery, nor from Melancholy terrors and
fears: But do it groundedly and deliberately; and truly as thou find,
according to thy Conscience. Do not conclude, as some do, [ I am a good
Christian,] or as others do, [ I am a Reprobate, or a Hypocrite, and shall be
damned,] when thou have no ground for what thou say, but thy own fancy, or
hopes, or fears; nay, when thou art convinced by Scripture and Reason of the
contrary; and have nothing to say against the Arguments. Let not thy Judgment
be any way by assed, or bribed; and so fore-stalled from sentencing aright.

10. Labor to get thy heart kindly Affected with its discovered condition,
according to the sentence passed on it. Do not think it enough to know: but
labor to feel, what God has made thee see. If thou find thy self undoubtedly
graceless, Oh get this to thy heart; and think what a doleful Condition it is:
To be an Enemy to God! to be unpardoned! unsanctified! and if thou should so
dye, to be Eternally damned! One would think such a thought should make a heart
of stone to quake! On the contrary: If thou find thy self renewed and
sanctified indeed; Oh get this warm and close to thy heart. Bethink thy self;
What a blessed state the Lord has brought thee into! To be his Child! his
Friend! to be pardoned, justified, and sure to be saved! Why what need thou
fear? but sinning against him? Come war, or plague, or sickness, or death, thou
art sure they can but thrust thee into Heaven.

Thus follow these Meditations, till they have left their impression on thy
heart.

11. Be sure to Record this Sentence, so passed, write it down: or at least
write it in thy Memory: At such a time upon through Examination, I found my
state to be thus or thus: This Record will be very useful to thee hereafter. If
thou be ungodly: what a damp will it be to thy presumption and security, to go
and read the Sentence of thy Misery under thy own hand? If thou be godly: what
a help will it be against the next Temptation to doubting and fear, to go and
read under thy hand this Record? May thou not think; If at such a time I
found the Truth of Grace, is it not likely to be now the same? and these my
doubts to come from the Enemy of my Peace?

12. Yet would I not have thee so trust to once discovery, as to Try no more:
Especially if thou have made any foul Defection from Christ, and played the
backslider; See then that thou renew the Search again.

13. Neither would I have this hinder thee in the daily Search of thy ways; or
of thy increase in Grace, and fellowship with Christ: It is an ill sign, and
desperate vile sin, for a man when he thinks he has found himself Gracious,
and in a happy state, to let down his watch, and grow negligent of his heart
and ways, and scarce look after them any more.

14. Neither would I have thee give over in discouragement, if thou can not
at once or twice, or ten times trying, discover thy Case: But follow it on till
thou have discovered. If one hours labor will not serve, take another: If one
day, or month, or year be too little; follow it still. If one Min^ster cannot
direct thee sufficiently, go to another. The Issue will answer all thy pains.
There is no sitting down discouraged in a work that must be done.

15. Lastly, above all take heed, if thou find thy self to be yet
unregenerate, that thou do not conclude of thy Future estate by thy present:
nor say, Because I am ungodly, I shall dye so: or because I am an Hypocrite, I
shall continue so. No: thou have another work to do: And that is, To resolve
presently to cleave to Christ, and break off thy Hypocrisy, and thy
Wickedness. If thou find that thou have been all this while out of the way, do
not sit down in despair; but make so much the more haste to turn into it. If
thou have been an Hypocrite, or ungodly person all thy life, yet is the promise
offered thee by Christ; and he tendereth himself to be thy Lord and Savior:
Neither can thou possibly be so Willing to Accept of him, as he is to Accept
thee. Nothing but thy own unwillingness can keep thy Soul from Christ, though
thou have hitherto abused him, and dissembled with him.

Object. But if I have gone so far, and been a professor so long, and yet find
my self an Hypocrite now after all; what hope is there that I should now become
sincere? Answ. Do thou heartily Desire to be Sincere? Thy Sincerity does lie
especially in thy Will: As long as thou art unwilling, I confess thy case is
sad: But if thou be willing to receive Christ as he is offered to thee, and so
to be a Christian indeed, then thou art sincere. Neither has Christ restrained
his Spirit, or Promises, to any set time; or said to thee, Thou shall find
grace, if thou sin but so much, or so long: But if thou be heartily Willing at
any time, I know not who can hinder thy happiness. (Yet is this no diminution
of the sin or danger of delaying.)

Thus I have given you these Directions for Examination; which conscionably
practiced, will be of singular advantage and use to discover your states: But
it is not the bare reading of them that will do it. I fear, of many that will
approve of this advice, there will but few be brought to use it. However, those
that are willing, may find help by it: and the rest will be left more
unexcuseable in Judgment.

SECT. III.
. 3.
I Will not digress further to warn you here of the false Rules and Marks of
Trial which you must beware, having opened them to you fullier when I preached
on that subject. But I will briefly adjoyn some Marks to try thy Title to this
Rest, by: referring you for a fuller discovery to the Description of the People
of God in the first part of the Book. But be sure you search thoroughly, and
deal plainly, or else you will but lose your labor, and deceive your selves.

1. Every Soul that has Title to this Rest, does place his chiefest Happiness
in it; Mark 1.
and make it the chief and ultimate End of his Soul. This is the first Mark:
which is so plain a Truth, that I need not stand to prove it. For this Rest
consists in the full and glorious enjoyment of God: And he that makes not
God his chief Good, and ultimate End, is in heart a Pagan and vile Idolater;
and does not take the Lord for his God.

Let me ask thee then; Do thou truly in Judgment and Affection account it thy
chiefest Happiness to enjoy the Lord in Glory? or do thou not? Can thou say
with David, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is my Portion? Psalm. 119.57. and 142.5* Lam.
3* 24.
And as Psa. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and whom in earth that I
desire in comparison of thee? If thou be an heir of Rest, it is thus with thee.
Though the flesh will be pleading for its own delights, and the world will be
creeping into thine affections, and thou can not be quite freed from the Love
of it; Yet in thy ordinary, settled, prevailing Judgment and Affections, thou
preferrest God before all things in the world. 1. Thou make him the End of
thy Desires and Endevors: The very reason why thou hear and prayest, why
thou desire to live and breathe on earth, is chiefly this, That thou may
seek the Lord, and make sure of thy Rest. Thou seek first the Kingdom of
God, and its Righteousness: Though thou do not seek it so desirously and
zealously as thou should; yet has it the chief of thy desires and endevors;
and nothing else is desired or preferred before it: Mat. 6.33. So that thy very
heart is thus far set upon it: Mat. 6.21. Col. 3.1, 2, 3.

2. Also thou will think no labor or suffering too great to obtain it. And
though the flesh may sometime shrink or draw back, yet art thou resolved and
content to go through all. Mat. 7.13. 2 Timothy 2.5. Romans 8.17. Luke 14.26, 27. 2 Timothy 2.12. Luke 14.24.

3. Also if thou be an heir of Rest, thy valuation of it will be so high, and
thy affection to it so great, that thou would not exchange thy Title to it,
and hopes of it, for any worldly Good whatsoever. Indeed when the Soul is in
doubts of enjoying it, perhaps it may possibly desire rather the continuance of
an earthly happiness, then to depart out of the body with fears of going to
Hell. But if he were sure that Heaven should be his own, he would desire to
depart and to be with Christ, as being the best st^te of all. And if God would
set before him an Eternity of Earthly pleasures and contents on one hand, and
the Rest of the Saints on the other hand, and bid him take his choice; he would
refuse the world, and choose this Rest: Psalm. 16.9, 10. Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 5.2,
3. Phil. 3.20. Thus if thou be a Christian indeed, thou take God for thy
chiefest Good, and this Rest for the most amiable and desirable state: and by
the foresaid means thou may discover it.

But if thou be yet in the flesh, and an unsanctified wretch, then is it clean
contrary with thee in all these respects: Then do thou in thy Heart prefer
thy worldly happiness and fleshly delights before God: And though thy tongue
may say, that God is the chief Good, yet thy Heart does not so esteem him. For,
1. The world is the chief End of thy Desires and Endevors. Thy very heart is
set upon it. Thy greatest Care and Labor is to maintain thy estate, or credit,
or fleshly delights: But the life to come has little of thy care or labor.
Thou did never perceive so much excellency in that unseen Glory of another
world, as to draw thy heart so after it, or set thee a laboring so heartily for
it. But that little pains which thou bestowest that way, it is but in the
second place, and not the first: God has but the worlds leavings; and that
time and labor which thou can spare from the world; or those few cold and
careless thoughts which follow thy constant, earnest and delightful thoughts of
earthly things: Neither would thou do any thing at all for Heaven, if thou
knew'st how to keep the world: But lest thou should be turned into Hell when
thou can keep the world no longer, therefore thou will do something.

2. Therefore it is that thou think the way of God too strict; and wilt not
be persuaded to the constant labor of conscionable walking according to the
Gospel rule: And when it comes to trial, that thou must forsake Christ or thy
worldly happiness, and the wind which was in thy back does turn in thy face,
then thou will venture Heaven rather then Earth, and (as desperate Rebels use
to say) thou will rather trust Gods Mercy for thy Soul, then man's for thy body;
and so wilfully deny thy obedience to God.

3. And certainly if God would but give thee leave to live in health and wealth
for ever on Earth, thou would think it a better state then Rest: Let them
seek for Heaven that would, thou would think this thy chiefest happiness.
This is thy case if thou be yet an unregenerate person, and have no Title to
the Saints Rest.

SECT. IV.
. 4.
THe second Mark which I shall give thee, to try whether thou be an Heir of
Rest, is this.

As thou take God for thy chief Good, so [ Thou do heartily accept of
Christ for thy only Savior and Lord to bring thee to this Rest]. Mark 3.
The former Mark was the sum of the first and great Command of the Law of
Nature, [ Thou shall Love the Lord with all thy heart, or above all.] This
second Mark is the sum of the Command or Condition of the Gospel, which says,
[ Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.] And the performance of
these two is the whole sum or essence of Godliness and Christianity. Observe
therefore the parts of this Mark, which is but a Definition of Faith. 1. Do
thou find that thou art naturally a lost condemned man for thy breach of the
first Covenant? and do believe that Jesus Christ is the Mediator who has
made a sufficient satisfaction to the Law? and hearing in the Gospel that he is
offered without exception unto all, do heartily consent that he alone shall
be thy Savior? and do no further trust to thy Duties and works, then as
conditions required by him, and means appointed in subordination to him? not
looking at them as in the least measure able to satisfy the Curse of the Law,
or as a Legal Righteousness, nor any part of it? But art content to trust thy
Salvation on the Redemption made by Christ?

2. Art thou also content to Take him for thy only Lord and King? to govern
and guide thee by his Laws and Spirit? And to obey him even when he commands
the hardest duties? and those which most cross the desires of the flesh? Is it
thy sorrow when thou breakest thy resolution herein? and thy Joy when thou
keep closest in obedience to him? And though the world and flesh do sometime
entice and over reach thee, yet is it thy ordinary Desire and Resolution to
Obey? So that thou would not change thy Lord and Master for all the world?
Thus it is, with every true Christian. But if thou be an Hypocrite, it is far
otherwise. Thou may call Christ thy Lord and thy Savior: But thou never
foundest thy self so lost without him, as to drive thee to seek him and trust
him, and lay thy Salvation on him alone. Or at least thou did never heartily
consent that he should Govern thee as thy Lord; nor did resign up thy Soul
and Life to be Ruled by him; nor take his Word for the Law of thy Thoughts
and Actions. It is like thou art content to be saved from Hell by Christ when
thou dyest: But in the mean time he shall command thee no further then will
stand with thy credit, or pleasure, or worldly estate and ends. And if he would
give thee leave, thou had far rather live after the world and flesh, then
after the Word and Spirit. And though thou may now and then have a Motion or
Purpose to the contrary; yet this that I have mentioned is the ordinary desire
and choice of thy heart: And so thou art no true Believer in Christ: For though
thou confess him in words, yet in works thou do deny him, being disobedient,
and to every Good Work a Disapprover and a Reprobate, Tit. 1.16. This is the
Case of those that shall be shut out of the Saints Rest.

But especially I would here have you observe, That it is in all this the
Consent of your Hearts or Wills which I lay down in this Mark to be enquired
after: For that is the most essential Act of Justifying Faith. Therefore I do
not ask, whether thou be Assured of Salvation: nor yet whether thou can
believe that thy sins are pardoned, and that thou art beloved of God in Christ:
These are no parts of Justifying Faith; but excellent fruits and consequents,
which they that do receive, are comforted by them: but perhaps thou may never
receive them whilst thou live, and yet be a true heir of Rest. Do not say
then, I cannot believe that my sin is pardoned, or that I am in Gods favor, and
therefore I am no true Believer: This is a most mistaking conclusion. The
Question is, Whether thou can heartily Accept of Christ that thou may be
pardoned, reconciled to God, and so saved? Do thou Consent that he shall be
thy Lord who has bought thee? and take his own course to bring thee to Heaven?
This is Justifying Saving Faith; and this is the Mark that thou must try thy
self by. Yet still observe, That all this Consent must be Hearty and Real: not
feigned, or with reservations. It is not saying, as that dissembling son, Matt.
21.30. I go sir, when he went not: To say, Christ shall be my Lord, and yet let
corruption ordinarily rule thee; or be unwilling that his Commands should
encroach upon the interest of the world or flesh. If any have more of the
Government of thee then Christ; or if thou had rather live after any other
Laws then his, if it were at thy choice, thou art not his Disciple. Thus I have
laid you down these two Marks, which I am sure are such as every Christian
has, and no other but sincere Christians. I will add no more, seeing the
substance of Christianity is contained in these. Oh that the Lord would now
persuade thee to the close performance of this Self-trying Task! That thou
may not tremble with horror of Soul when the Judge of all the World shall try
thee: but have thy Evidence and Assurance so ready at hand, and be so able to
prove thy Title to Rest, that the thoughts and approaching of Death and
Judgment, may revive thy spirits, and fill thee with Joy, and not apale thee,
and fill thee with amazement!

CHAP. X. The fourth Use. The Reason of the Saints Afflictions here.
SECT. I.
A Further necessary Use which we must make of the present Doctrine is this:. 1.
To inform us why the People of God do suffer so much in this life. What
wonder? when you see their Rest does yet Remain: They are not yet come to their
Resting place. We would all fain have continual prosperity, because it is easy
and pleasing to the flesh; but we consider not the unreasonableness of such
desires. We are like children, who if they see any thing which their appetite
desires, do cry for it: and if you tell them that it is unwholesom, or hurtful
for them, they are never the more quieted: or if you go about to heal any sore
that they have, they will not endure you to hurt them, though you tell them,
that they cannot otherwise be healed: their Sense is too strong for their
Reason; and therefore Reason does little persuade them. Even so is it with us
when God is afflicting us. He gives us Reasons why we must bear them; so that
our Reason is often convinced and satisfied: And yet we cry and complain still;
and we rest satisfied never the more. It is not Reason, but Ease that we must
have: What cares the flesh for Scripture and Argument, if it still suffer and
smart? These be but wind and words, which do not remove or abate its pain.
Spiritual remedies may cure the spirits maladies; but that will not content the
flesh. But methinks Christians should have another palate then that of the
flesh, to try and relish providence by: God has purposely given them the
Spirit, to subdue and overrule the flesh. And therefore I shall here give them
some Reasons of Gods dealing in their present sufferings, whereby the equity
and mercy therein may appear: And they shall be only such as are drawn from
the reference that these afflictions have to our Rest; which being a Christians
Happiness, and ultimate End, will direct him in judging of all estates and
means.

SECT. II.
1. COnsider then,. 2.
That Labor and Trouble are the common way to Rest, both in the course of
Nature and of Grace. Can there possibly be Rest without Motion and Weariness?
Do you not Travel and Toil first, and then rest you afterward? The day for
Labor goes first, and then the night for Rest does follow. Why should we desire
the course of Grace to be perverted, any more then we would do the course of
Nature? seeing this is as perfect and regular as the other? God did once dry up
the Sea to make a passage for his people: and once make the Sun in the
Firmament to stand still: But must he do so always? or as often as we would have
him? It is his established Decree, That through many tribulations we must enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Act. 14.22. And that if we suffer with him, we
shall also be glorified with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. As Bildad said to Job. Chap.
18.4. Shall the Earth be forsaken for Thee? or the Rock be removed out of his
place? So, must God pervert his stablished Order for Thee?
And what are we, that Gods Statutes should be reversed for our pleasure?

SECT. III.
2. COnsider also,. 3.
That Afflictions are exceeding useful to us, to keep us from mistaking our
Resting place, and so taking up short of it. A Christians Motion Heaven-wards
is Voluntary, and not constrained. Those means therefore are most profitable to
him, which help his Understanding and Will in this prosecution. The most
dangerous mistake that our Souls are capable of, is, to take the Creature for
God, and Earth for Heaven. And yet, alas, how common is this? And in how great
a degree are the best guilty of it? Though we are ashamed to speak so much with
our tongues, yet how often do our hearts say, It is best being here? And how
contented are they with an earthly portion? So that I fear God would displease
most of us more, to afflict us here, and promise us Rest hereafter, then to
give us our hearts desire on earth, though he had never made us a promise of
Heaven. As if the Creature without God, were better, then God without the
Creature. Alas, how apt are we, like foolish children, when we are busy at
our sports and worldly employments, to forget both our Father, and our home?
Therefore is it a hard thing for a Rich man to enter into Heaven, because it is
hard for him to value it more then Earth, and not to think he is well already.
Come to a man that has the world at will, and tell him, This is not Your
Happiness; You have higher things to look after; and how little will he regard
you! But when Affliction comes, it speaks convincingly; and will be heard when
Preachers cannot. What warm, affectionate, eager thoughts have we of the world,
till Affliction cool them, and moderate them? How few and cold would our
thoughts of Heaven be, how little should we care for coming thither, if God
would give us Rest on Earth? Our thoughts are with God, as Noah's Dove was in
the Ark; kept up to him a little against their inclinations and desires: but
when once they can break away, they fly up and down over all the world, to see
if it were possible to find any Rest out of God: But when we find that we
seek in vain, and that the world is all covered with the waters of instable
vanity and bitter vexation, and that there is no Rest for the sole of our foot,
or for the foot of our Soul; no wonder then if we return to the Ark again. Many
a poor Christian (whom God will not suffer to be drowned in worldliness, nor to
take up short of his Rest) is sometime bending his thoughts to thrive in
wealth; sometime he is enticed to some flesh-pleasing sin; sometime he begins
to be lifted up with applause; and sometime being in health and prosperity, he
has lost his relish of Christ, and the Joys above: Till God break in upon his
riches, and scatter them abroad, or upon his children, or upon his conscience,
or upon the health of his body, and break down his mount which he thought so
strong: Psa. 30.6, 7.
And then when he lies in Manass^^ his fetters, or is fastened to his bed with
pining sickness, Oh, what an opportunity has the Spirit to plead with his
Soul? When the World is worth nothing, then Heaven is worth something. I leave
every Christian to judge by his own experience, whether we do not over-love the
World more in prosperity then in adversity? and whether we be not loather to
come away to God, when we have what the flesh desires here? How often are we
sitting down on Earth, as if we were loath to go any further till Affliction
call to us, as the Angel to Elijah, Up, thou have a great way to go? How often
have I been ready to think my self at home, till Sickness has roundly told me,
I was mistaken? And how apt yet to fall into the same disease, which prevails
till it be removed by the same cure? If our dear Lord did not put these thorns
into our bed, we should sleep out our lives, and lose our Glory. Therefore does
the Lord sometime deny us an inheritance on Earth with our Brethren, because he
has separated us to stand before him, and minister to him, and the Lord
himself will be our inheritance, as he has promised: (as it is said of the
Tribe of Levi, Deuteronomy. 10.8, 9.)

SECT. IV.
3. COnsider also,. 4.
That Afflictions be Gods most effectual means, to keep us from straggling out
of the way to our Rest. If he had not set a hedge of Thorns on the right hand,
and another on the left, we should hardly keep the way to Heaven: Itaque
statuamus eos in media and vegeta valetudine aegrotare, qui valetudine
abutuntur: contra eos aegrotos been habere qui ad Deum ex animo convertuntur,
and ab ipsis morbis petunt adversus peccata medicinam. Sadeel in Psalm. 32. page
27.
If there be but one gap open without these Thorns, how ready are we to find
it, and turn out at it? But when we cannot go astray, but these Thorns will
prick us, perhaps we will be content to hold the way. When we grow fleshly, and
wanton, and worldly, and proud, what a notable means is Sickness, or other
Affliction, to reduce us? It is every Christian, as well as Luther, that may
call Affliction, one of his best Schoolmasters. Many a one, as well as David,
may say by experience, Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I
(sincerely) kept thy Precepts: Psalm. 119.67. As Phisicians say of bodily
destruction, so may we of spiritual, That Peace kills more then War. Read
Nehem. 9. Their case is ours. When we have prosperity we grow secure and
sinful: Then God afflicts us, and we cry for mercy, and purpose reformation:
But after we have a little Rest, we do evil again, ( Verse. 28.) Till God take
up the Rod again, that he may bring us back to his Law: ( verse. 29.) And thus
prosperity, and sinning, and suffering, and repenting, and deliverance, and
sinning again, do run all in around: Even as Peace breeds Contention; and that
breeds War; Most Christians can unfold Mr Herberts Riddle by experience;

A poor man's Rod when thou do ride;

Is both a weapon and a guide.


and that, by its bitterness, breeds Peace again. Many a thousand poor
recovered sinners may cry, Oh healthful sickness! Oh comfortable sorrows! Oh
gainful losses! enriching poverty! Oh Blessed Day, that ever I was afflicted!
It is not only the pleasant streams, and the green pastures; but his Rod and
Staff also that are our Comfort: Psalm. 23. Though I know it is the Word and
Spirit that do the main work; Yet certainly the Time of Suffering is so
opportune a season, that the same word will take then, which before was scarce
observed: It does so unbolt the door of the heart, that a Minister or a godly
man may then be heard, and the Word may have easier entrance to the
Affections. Psa. 119.71 75
Even the Threats of Judgment will bring an Ahab, or a Nineveh, into their
sackcloth and ashes, and make them cry mightily unto GOD. Something then will
the feeling of those Judgments do.

SECT. V.
. 5.
4. COnsider also, That Afflictions are Gods most effectual Means, to make us
mend our pace in the way to our Rest. They are his Rod, and his Spur: What
sluggard will not awake and stir when he feels them? It were well if mere
Love would prevail with us, and that we were rather drawn to Heaven, then
driven: But seeing our hearts so are bad, that Mercy will not do it; it is
better be put on with the sharpest scourge, then loyter out our time till the
doors are shut: Matthew the 25. Chap. and the 3, 5, and 10, Verses. Oh what a
difference is there betwixt our prayers in health, and in sickness! betwixt our
prosperity and our adversitiy-repentings! He that before had not a tear to
shed, nor a groan to utter; now can sob, and sigh, and weep his fill: He that
was wont to lie like a block in prayer, and scarce minded what he said to God;
Now when affliction presses him down, how earnestly can he beg? how does he
mingle his prayers and his tears? how does he purpose and promise reformation?
and cry out, what a person he will be, if God will but hear him, and deliver
him! Alas, if we did not sometime feel the spur, what a slow pace would most of
us hold toward Heaven? and if we did not sometimes smart by Affliction, how
dead and blockish would be the best men's hearts? Even innocent Adam is liker to
forget GOD in a Paradise, then Joseph in a prison, or Job upon a dunghill. Even
a Solomon is like enough to fall in the midst of pleasure and prosperity, when
the most wicked Manasses in his Irons may be recovered. As Doctor Stoughton
says, We are like to childrens tops, that will go but little longer then they
are whipped. Seeing then that our own vile natures do thus require it, why should
we be unwilling, that GOD should do us good, by so sharp a means? Sure that is
the best dealing for us, which surest and soonest does further us for Heaven. I
leave thee, Christian, to judge by thy own experience, whether thou do not go
more watchfully, and lively, and speedily in thy way to Rest, in thy
sufferings, then thou do in thy more pleasing and prosperous state? If you go
to the vilest sinner on his dying bed, and ask him, Will you now drink, and
whore, and scorn at the godly as you were wont to do? you shall find him quite
in another mind. Much more then will Affliction work on a gracious Soul.

SECT. VI.
5. COnsider further;. 6.
It is but this Flesh which is troubled and grieved (for the most part) by
Affliction: And what Reason have we to be so tender of it? In most of our
sufferings the Soul is free, further then we do wilfully afflict it our selves.
Suppose thou be in poverty: It is thy flesh only that is pinched. If thou have
sores or sicknesses: it is but the flesh that they assault. If thou dye: it is
but that flesh that must rot in the grave. Indeed it uses also to reach our
hearts and Souls, when the body suffers: but that is, because we pore upon
our evils, and too much pity and condole the flesh; and so we open the door,
and let in the pain to the heart our selves, which else could have gone no
further then the flesh. God smites the flesh; and therefore we will grieve our
spirits: and so multiply our grief, as if we had not enough before. Oh, if I
could but have let my body have suffered alone in all the pining, paining
sicknesses which God laid upon it, and not have foolishly added my own
self-tormenting fears, and cares, and sorrows, and discontents; but have
quieted and comforted my Soul in the Lord my Rock and Rest; I had escaped the
far greater part of the Afflictions. Why is this flesh so precious in our eyes?
Why are we so tender of these dusty carcasses? Is flesh so excellent a thing?
Is it not our prison? and what if it be broken down? Is it not our Enemy? yea
and the greatest that ever we had? and are we so fearful lest it be overthrown?
Is it not it that has so long hampered and clogged our Souls? and tied them to
earth? and ticed them to forbidden lusts and pleasures? and stolen away our
hearts from God? Was it not it that longed for the first forbidden fruit? and
must needs be tasting, what ever it cost? And still it is of the same temper:
It must be pleased, though God be displeased by it, and our selves destroyed.
It makes all Gods mercies the occasion of our transgressing, and draws
poison from the most excellent objects. If we behold our food, it inticeth to
gluttony; if drink, to drunkenness; if apparel, or any thing of worth, to
pride: if we look upon beauty, it ticeth to lust; if upon money or possessions,
to Covetousness. It causes our very spiritual love to the godly, to degenerate
into carnal; and our spiritual Zeal, and Joy, and other graces: It would make
all carnal like it self. What are we beholden to this flesh for, that we are so
loath that any thing should ail it? Indeed we must not wrong it our selves; for
that is forbidden us: Nor may we deny it any thing that is fit for a Servant;
that so it may be useful to us, while we are forced to make use of it. But if
God chastise it for rebelling against him and the Spirit, and it begin to cry
and complain under this chastisement, shall we make the suffering greater then
it is, and take its part against God? Indeed the Flesh is very near to us; we
cannot choose but condole its sufferings, and feel somewhat of that which it
feels. But is it so near as to be our chiefest part? Or cannot it be sore,
but we must be so sorry? or cannot it consume and pine away, but our peace and
comfort must consume with it? What if it be undone? are we therefore undone? or
if it perish and be destroyed, do We therefore perish? Oh fie upon this
carnality and unbelief, which is so contradictory to the principles of
Christianity! Surely God deals the worse with this Flesh, because we so
overvalue and Idolize it. We make it the greatest part of our care and labor
to provide for it, and to satisfy its desires; and we would have God to be of
our mind* and to do so too. But as he has commanded us, to make no provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the desires or lusts thereof, ( Romans 13.14) So will he
follow the same rule himself in his dealings with us; and will not much stick
at the displeasing of the flesh, when it may honor himself, or profit our
Souls. The flesh is aware of this; and perceives that the Word and Works of God
are much against its desires and delights; 1 Kings 22. 8.
and therefore is it also against the Word and Works of God: It says of the
Word (as Ahab of Micaiah,) I hate it, for it does not speak good concerning me,
but evil. There is such an Enmity betwixt this flesh and God, That they that
are in the flesh cannot please him: and the carnal mind is Enmity against him;
for it is not subject to his Law, nor indeed can be: So inconsistent is the
pleasing of the flesh, and the pleasing of GOD; That he has concluded, That to
mind the things of the flesh, or to be carnally minded, is Death; and if we
live after the flesh, we shall dye; but if by the Spirit we mortify the deeds
of the body, we shall live, Romans 8. verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13.

So that there is no likelihood, that ever Gods dealings should be pleasing to
the flesh; no more then its works are pleasing to God. Why then (O my Soul)
do thou side with this Flesh? and say as it says, and complain as it
complains? It should be part of thine own work to keep it down, and bring it
in subjection: and if God do it for thee, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27.
should thou be discontented? Has not the pleasing of it been the cause of
almost all thy spiritual sorrows? Why then may not the displeasing of it,
further thy Joys? Acts 16.
Should not Paul and Silas sing, because their feet were in the stocks, and
their flesh yet sore with the last days scourgings? Why their spirits were not
imprisoned, nor scourged! Ah unworthy Soul! Is this thy thanks to God for his
tenderness o^ Thy good? and for his preferring thee so far before the body? Art
thou turned into flesh thy self, by thy dwelling a few years in flesh? That thy
Joys, and thy Sorrows are most of them so fleshly? Art thou so much a debtor to
the flesh, that thou should so much live to it, Romans 8.12.
and value its prosperity? Has it been so good a friend to thee, and to thy
Peace? Or is it not thy Enemy as well as Gods? Why do thou look so sadly on
those withered limbs, and on that pining body? Do not so far mistake thy self,
as to think, its Joys and thine are all one; or that its prosperity and thine
are all one; or that thou must needs stand or fall together. When it is rotting
and consuming in the grave, then shall thou be a companion of the perfected
Spirits of the Just: Heb. ^2.23.
And when those bones are scattered about the Churchyard; then shall thou be
praising God in Rest. And in the mean time; have not thou food of consolation
which the flesh knows not of? and a Joy which this stranger meddleth not
with? And do not think that when thou art turned out of this body, that thou
shall have no habitation: Art thou afraid thou shall wander destitute of a
Resting place? Is it better Resting in flesh then in God? Do thou not know,
that when this house of earth is dissolved, thou have a building with God not
made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens? 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. It would therefore
better become thee earnestly to groan, Verse. 3, 4.
desiring to be clothed upon with that house. Is thy flesh any better then the
flesh of Noah was? And yet though God saved him from the common deluge, he
would not save him from common death. Or is it any better then the flesh of
Abraham, or Job, or David, or all the Saints that ever lived? Yet did they all
suffer and dye. Do thou think that those Souls which are now with Christ, do
so much pity their rotten or dusty corpse? or lament that their ancient
habitation is ruined? and their one^ comely bodies turned into earth? Oh what a
thing is strangeness and disacquaintance! It makes us afraid of our dearest
friends; and to draw back from the place of our only happiness. So was it with
thee toward thy chiefest friends on earth: While thou wast unacquainted with
them, thou did withdraw from their society: but when thou did once know
them thoroughly, thou would have been loath again to be deprived of their
fellowship. And even so, though thy strangeness to God and another world, do
make thee loath to leave this flesh; yet when thou have been but one day or
hour there, (if we may so speak of that Eternity, where is neither day nor
hour) thou would be full loath to return into this flesh again. Doubtless
when God, for the Glory of his Son, did send back the Soul of Lazarus into its
body, he caused it quite to forget the Glory which it had enjoyed, and to leave
behind it the remembrance of that happiness, together with the happiness it
self: Or else it might have made his life a burden to him, to think of the
blessedness that he was fetched from: and have made him ready to break down the
prison doors of his flesh, that he might return to that happy state again. Oh
then impatient Soul! murmur not at Gods dealings with that body; but let him
alone with his work and way. He knows what he does; but so do not thou: He
sees the End; but thou see but the beginning. If it were for want of love to
thee, that he did thus chastise thy body, then would he not have dealt so by
all his Saints. Do thou not think he did not love David, and Paul, or Christ
himself? Or rather does he not chasten because he loves? and scourges every
Son whom he receives? Heb. 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Believe nor the
Fleshes reports of God, nor its commentaries upon his Providence. It has
neither Will nor Skill to interpret them aright: Mat. 16.23. Romans 8 6, 7, 8. 1
Cor. 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Not Will; for it is an enemy to them: They are against it, and it is against
them. Not Skill; for it is darkness: It savoreth only the things of the flesh;
but the things of the Spirit it cannot understand, because they are spiritually
discerned. Never expect then that the flesh should truly expound the meaning of
the rod. It will call Love, Hatred; and say, God is destroying, when he is
saving; and murmur, as if he did thee wrong, and used thee hardly, when he is
showing thee the greatest mercy of all. Are not the foul steps the way to Rest,
as well as the fair? Yea are not thy sufferings the most necessary passages of
his providence? And though for the present they are not Joyous, but Grievous;
yet in the End do they bring forth the Quiet fruits of Righteousness, to all
those that are exercised thereby. Heb. 12.11.
Have thou not found it so by former experience, when yet this flesh would have
persuaded thee otherwise? Believe it then no more, which has misinformed thee
so often. For indeed there is no believing the words of a wicked and ignorant
enemy. Ill Will never speaks well. But when malice, viciousness and Ignorance
are combined, what actions can expect a true and fair interpretation? This
flesh will call Love, Anger; and Anger, Hatred, and Chastisements, Judgments:
It will tell thee, That no man's case is like thine; and if God did Love thee,
Psalm. 116.11.
he would never so use thee: It will tell thee, That the promises are but
deceiving words, and all thy prayers and uprightness is vain: Psalm. 73.13, 14,
15.
If it find thee sitting among the ashes, it will say to thee as Jobs wife;
Do thou yet retain thine integrity? Job 2. 8, 9, 10. Thus will it draw thee
to offend against God, and the generation of his Children. It is a party, and
the suffering party, and therefore not fit to be the Judge. If your Child should
be the Judge, when and how often you should chastise him, and whether your
chastisement be a token of fatherly love, you may easily imagine what would be
his Judgment. If we could once believe God, and Judge of his dealings by what he
speaks in his Word, and by their usefulness to our Souls, and reference to our
Rest, and could stop our ears against all the clamours of the flesh, then we
should have a truer Judgment of our Afflictions.

SECT. VII.
. 7.
6. LAstly Consider, God does seldom give his people so sweet a fore-taste of
their Future Rest, as in their deep Afflictions. He keeps his most precious
cordials for the time of our greatest faintings and dangers. To give such to
men that are well and need them not, is but to cast them away: They are not
capable of discerning their working on their worth. A few drops of Divine
Consolation in the midst of a world of pleasure and contents, will be but lost
and neglected; as some precious spirits cast into a vessel or river of common
waters. The Joys of Heaven are of unspeakable sweetness: But a man that
overflows with earthly delights, is scarce capable of tasting their sweetness:
They may easilier comfort the most dejected Soul, then him that feels not any
need of comfort, as being full of other comforts already. Even the best of
Saints do seldom-taste of the delights of God, and pure, spiritual, unmixed
Joys, in the time of their prosperity, as they do in their deepest troubles and
distress. God is not so lavish of his choice favors, as to bestow them
unseasonably: Even to his own will he give them at so fit a time, when he
knows that they are needful, and will be valued; and when he is sure to be
thanked for them, and his people rejoiced by them. Especially when our
sufferings are more directly for his cause, then does he seldom fail of
sweetening the bitter cup. Therefore have the Martyrs been possessors of the
highest Joys, and therefore were they in former times so ambitious of
Martyrdom. I do not think that Paul and Silas did ever sing more Joyfully, then
when they were sore with scourgings, and were fast in the inner prison, with
their feet in the stocks, Acts 16.24, 25. When did Christ preach such comforts
to his Disciples, and leave them his Peace, and assure them of his providing
them mansions with himself? but when he was ready to leave them, Jo^. 14. and
15, and 16. and 17. John 20.
and their hearts to be sorrowful because of his departure? When did he appear
among them, and say, Peace be unto you? but when they were shut up together for
fear of the persecuting Jews? When did the room shake where they were, and the
Holy Ghost come down upon them, and they lift up their voices in praising God?
but when they were imprisoned, convented, and threatened for the Name of
Christ? Acts 4.24, 31. When did Stephen see Heaven opened, but when he was
giving up his life for the testimony of Jesus? Acts 7.55. And though we be
never put to the suffering of Martyrdom, yet God knows, that in our natural
sufferings we need support. Many a Christian that has waited for Christ (with
Simeon in the Temple) in duty and holiness all his days, yet never finds him in
his arms till he is dying; though his Love was fixed in their hearts before:
and they that wondered that they tasted not of his comforts, have then when it
was needful received abundance. And indeed, in time of prosperity, that comfort
which we have is so mixed according to the mixed causes of it, that we can very
hardly discern what of it is carnal, and what is spiritual. But when all
worldly comforts and hopes are gone, then that which is left is most likely to
be spiritual. And the Spirit never works more sensibly and sweetly, then when
it works alone. Seeing then that the time of Affliction, is the time of our
most pure, spiritual, heavenly Joy, for the most part, why should a Christian
think it so sad a time? Is not that our best estate, wherein we have most of
God? Why else do we desire to come to Heaven? If we look for a Heaven of
fleshly delights, we shall find our selves mistaken. Conclude then, that
Affliction is not so bad a state for a Saint in his way to Rest, as the flesh
would make it. Are we wiser then God? Does not he know what is good for us
better then we? Or is he not as careful of our Good, as we are of our own? Ah,
woe to us if he were not much more! and if he did not love us better then we
love either him or our selves!

SECT. VIII.
. 8.
BUT let us hear a little what it is that the flesh can object.

1. Oh, says one, I could bear any other Affliction save this: If God had
touched me in any thing else, I could have undergone it patiently; but it is my
dearest friend, or child, or wife, or my health it self, etc.

I Answer: It seems God has hit the right vein, where thy most inflamed
distempered blood did lie: It Is his constant course to pull down men's Idols,
and take away that which is dearer to them then himself. There it is that his
Jealousy is kindled; and there it is that thy Soul is most endangered. If God
should have taken from thee that which thou can let go for him, and not that
which thou can not; or have afflicted thee where thou can bear it, and not
where thou can not, thy Idol would neither have been discovered, nor removed:
this would neither have been a sufficient Trial to thee, nor a Cure; but have
confirmed thee in thy Soul-deceit and Idolatry.

Object. 2. Oh, but, says another, if God would but deliver me out of it, yet
I could be content to bear it: but I have an uncureable sickness, or I am like
to live and dye in poverty, or disgrace, or the like distress.

I answer, 1. Is it nothing that he has promised it shall work for thy Good?
Romans 8.28. and that with the affliction he will make a way to escape? that he
will be with thee in it? and deliver thee in the fittest manner and season? 2.
Is it not enough that thou art sure to be delivered at death? and that with so
full an advancing deliverance? Oh what cursed Unbelief does this discover in
our hearts? That we would be more thankful to be turned back again, into the
stormy tumultuous Sea of the World, then to be safely and speedily landed at
our Rest! And would be gladder of a few years inferior mercies at a distance,
then to enter upon the Eternal Inheritance with Christ? Do we call God our
chief Good, and Heaven our Happiness? and yet is it no Mercy or Deliverance to
be taken hence, and put into that possession?

Object. 3. Oh, but, says another, if my Affliction did not disable me for
Duty, I could bear it; but it makes me useless and utterly unprofitable.

Answ. 1. For that Duty which tends to thy own personal benefit, it does not
disable thee, but is the greatest quickening help that thou can expect. Thou
usest to complain of coldness, and dullness, and worldliness, and security: If
affliction will not help thee against all these, by warming, quickening,
rouzing thy spirit, I know not what will. Sure thou will repent thoroughly, and
pray fervently, and mind God and Heaven more seriously, either now or never.
2. And for Duty to others, and for thy service to the Church; it is not thy
Duty when God does disable thee. He may call thee out of the Vineyard in this
respect, even before he call thee by death. If he lay thee in the grave, and
put others in thy place to do the service, is this any wrong to thee? or does
it beseem thee to repine at it? Why so, if he call thee out before thy death,
and let thee stand by, and see others do the work in thy stead, should thou
not be as well content? Must God do all the work by thee? Has he not many
others as dear to him, and as fit for the employment? But, alas, what
deceitfulness lies in these hearts! When we have time, and health, and
opportunity to work, then we loyter, and do our Master but very poor service:
But when he lays Affliction upon us, then we complain that he disableth us
for his work; and yet perhaps we are still negligent in that part of the work
which we can do. So, when we are in health and prosperity, we forget the
public, and are careless of other men's miseries and wants, and mind almost
nothing but our selves: But when God Afflicts us, though he excite us more to
Duty for our selves, yet we complain that he disableth us for Duty to others:
As if on the sudden we were grown so charitable, that we regard other men's
Souls far more then our own! But is not the hand of the flesh in all this
dissimulation? Secretly thus pleading its own cause? What pride of heart is
this to think, that other men cannot do the work as well as we? Or that God
cannot see to his Church, and provide for his people without us?

Object. 4 Oh, but, ^aith another, It is the godly that are my afflict^rs: they
disclaim me, and will scarce look at me; they censure me, and backbite me, and
slander me, and look upon me with a disdainful eye: If it were ungodly men, I
could bear it easily: I look for no better at their hands: but when those that
were my delight, and that I looked for daily comfort and refreshing from, when
these shall be my grief, and as thorns in my sides, who can bear it? --

Answ. 1. Who ever is the instrument, the Affliction is from God, and the
provoking cause from thy self: And were it not fitter then that thou look more
to God and thy self? 2. Did thou not know, that the best men are still sinful
in part? and that their hearts are naturally deceitful, and desperately wicked,
as well as others? And this being but imperfectly cured, so far as they are
fleshly, the fruits of the flesh will appear in them, which are strife, hatred,
Gal. 5 19* 20, 21.
variance, emulations, wrath, seditions, heresies, envyings, etc. So far the
best is as a brier, and the most upright of them sharper then a thorny hedge:
Learn therefore a better use from the Prophet, Micah 7.4, 5, 6, 7. Trust not
(too much) in a friend, nor put confidence in a guide; Keep the doors of thy
mouth from her that lies in thy bosom, etc. But look rather for the Lord, and
wait for the God of thy Salvation. If we could use our Friends as Friends, God
would make them our helps and comforts: But when once we make them our gods by
excessive love, delight, and trust, then he suffers them to prove Satan's to us,
and to be our accusers and tormentors: It is more safe to me to have any
creature a Satan then a God; to be tormented by them then to Idolize them.
It is likely thou have given that Love and Trust to Saints, which was due
only to God, or which thou have denied him: and then no wonder if he chastise
thee by them. Or perhaps the observation of the excellencies of Grace has made
thee forget the vileness of Nature; and therefore God will have thee take
notice of both. Many are tender of giving too much to the dead Saints, that yet
give too much to the living without scruple. Till thou have learned to suffer
from a Saint, as well as from the Wicked* and to be abused by the Godly, as
well as the Ungodly, never look to live a contented or comfortable life, nor
never think thou have truly learned the Art of Suffering. Do not think that I
vilify the Saints too much in so saying. I confess it is pity that Saints must
suffer from Saints; And it is quite contrary to their holy Nature, and their
Masters Laws; Joh. 14* 27. and 13 34.35. and 15.12, 17. Mat. 22.37, 39 1 John
3.11, 14 17, 18* 23, and 4.7, 11, 12, 20, 21, etc. Act. 15 38, 39 2 Chronicles.
16.10. and 15.17. Psa. 41.8, 9. Read Psa. 55.12, 13, 14.
who has left them his Peace, and made Love to be the Character of his
Disciples, and to be the first, and great, and new Commandment. And I know that
there is much difference between them and the world in this point. But yet, as
I said, they are Saints but in part; and therefore Paul and Barnabas may so
fall out, as to part asunder; and upright Asa may imprison the Prophet: (call
it persecution, or what you please). Joseph's Brethren that cast him into a pit,
and sold him to strangers for a slave, I hope were not all ungodly. Jobs wife
and friends were sad comforters. David's Enemy was his familiar friend, with
whom he had taken sweet counsel, and they had gone up together to the House of
God. And know also, that thy own nature is as bad as theirs; and thou art as
likely thy self to be a grief to others. Can such ulcerous, leprous sinners, as
the best are, live together, and not infest and molest each other with the
smell of their sores? Why if thou be a Christian, thou art a daily trouble to
thy self; and art molested more with thy own corruptions, then with any man's
else: And do thou take it so hainously to be molested with the frailties of
others, when thou can not forbear doing more against thy self? For my part,
(for all our Graces) I rather admire at that wisdom and goodness of God, that
maintains that order and union amongst us, as is: and that he suffers us
not to be still one another executioners, and to lay violent hands on our
selves, and each other. I dare not think that there is no one gracious, that
has labored to destroy others that were so, in these late dissentions. Sirs,
you do not half know yet the mortal wickedness of depraved Nature. If the best
were not more beholden to the Grace of God without them, then to the habitual
Grace within them, you should soon see, That men of low degree are vanity, and
men of high degree are a lie; to be put in the balance, they are lighter then
vanity it self, Psalm. 62.7, 8, 9. For what is man that he should be clean? and
he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? Behold he puts no
trust in his Saints, and the Heavens are not clean in his sight: How much more
abominable and filthy is man, that drinks up iniquity like water? Job 15.14,
15, 16.

Object. 5. Oh but if I had that consolation, which you say God reserveth for
our suffering times, I should suffer more contentedly: but I do not perceive
any such thing.

Answ. 1. The more you suffer for Righteousness sake, the more of this blessing
you may expect; and the more you suffer for your own evil doing, the longer you
must look to stay till that sweetness come. When we have by our folly provoked
God to chastise us, shall we presently look that he should fill us with
comfort? That were (as Mr Paul Bayn says) to make Affliction to be no
Affliction. What good would the bitterness do us, if it be presently drowned in
that sweetness? It is well in such sufferings, if you have but supporting
Grace; and your sufferings sanctified to work out your sin, and bring you to
God.

2. Do you not neglect or resist the comforts which you desire? God has filled
Precepts, and Promises, and other of his Providence with matter of comfort: If
you will overlook all these, and make nothing of them, and pore all upon your
sufferings, and observe one cross more then a thousand mercies, who makes you
uncomfortable but your selves? If you resolve, that you will not be comfortable
as long as any thing aileth your flesh, you may stay till death before you have
comfort.

3. Have your Afflictions wrought kindly with you, and fited you for comfort?
Have they humbled you? and brought you to a faithful confession and reformation
of your beloved sin? and made you set close to your neglected Duties? and
weaned your hearts from their former Idols? and brought them unfeignedly to
take God for their Portion and their Rest? If this be not done, how can you
expect Comfort? Should God bind up the sore while it festereth at the bottom?
It is not mere Suffering that prepares you for Comfort; but the success and
fruit of Sufferings upon your hearts.

I shall say no more on this Subject of Afflictions, because so many have
written on it already: Among which I desire you especially to read Mr Bayns
Letters, and Mr Hughes his Dry Rod blooming and fruit-bearing, and Young's
COUNTERPOYSON.

CHAP. XI. An Exhortation to those that have got Assurance of this Rest, or
title to it, that they would do all that possibly they can to help others to it
also. The fifth Use.
SECT. I.
. 1.
Has God set before us such a glorious prize as this Everlasting Rest of the
Saints is? And has he made man capable of such an unconceiveable Happiness?
Why then do not all the children of this Kingdom bestir themselves more to help
others to the enjoyment of it? Alas, how little are poor Souls about us,
beholden to the most of us? We see the Glory of the Kingdom; and they do not:
We see the misery and torment of those that miss of it; and they do not: We see
them wandering quite out of the way, and know that if they hold on, they can
never come there* and they discern not this themselves: And yet we will not set
upon them seriously, and show them their danger and error, and help to bring
them into the way that they may live! Alas, how few Christians are there to be
found, that live as men that are made to do good, and that set themselves with
all their might to the saving of Souls! No thanks to us if Heaven be not empty;
and if the Souls of our brethren perish not for ever.

But because this is a Duty which so many neglect, and so few are convinced
that God does expect it at their hands, and yet a duty of so high concernment,
to the Glory of God, and the happiness of men; I will speak of it somewhat the
more largely: and show you. 1. Wherein it does consist, and how to be done: 2.
What is the cause that it is so neglected: 3. And then give some Considerations
to persuade you to the performance of it, and others to the bearing of it: 4.
And lastly, apply this more particularly to some persons whom it does more
nearly concern. Of all these in order.

SECT. II.
1. I Would have you therefore well understand,. 2. Siqui^ dicat quia infi mihi
sunt (...) Resp. Cum Augustino (...) ^sse Christum p^opter (...) cum ^^fi^mus
^^ligendu, sit praeter Christum.
what is this work which I am persuading you to. Know then on the Negative, 1.
It is not to invade the office of the Ministry* and every man to turn a
public Preacher. I would not have you go beyond the bounds of your Callings:
We s^e by sad experience, what fruits those men's teaching does bring forth, who
run uncalled, and thrust themselves into the place of public Teachers,
thinking themselves the fitt^st for the work in the pride of their hearts,
while they have need to be taught the very principles of Religion: how little
does God bless the labors o^ these self-conc^ited intruders?

Danda potius est opera ut proficiant and fi^miores evadant in domino; muniendi
sunt ne seducantur; monendi nequis pretextu infirmitatis superbo carnis
indulgeat; Denique and Ecclesiae interest ut infirmi been sentiant de suis
doctoribus and pastoribus. Boger. in Epist. ante Annot. in Grotii Pier.
2. Neither do I persuade you to a Zealous promoting of factions and parties,
and venting of uncertain opinions, which men's Salvation is little concerned in.
Alas, what advantage has the Devil lately got in the Church by this imposture!
The time that should be employed in drawing men's Souls from sin to Christ, is
employed in drawing them to opinions and parties: When men are fallen in Love
with their Beatus qui venas susurrii divini percipis in silentio; quam bonum
utique est homini dominum expectare? -- Uaum cave; ne abundari incipias in
sersu tuo, and velis plus sapere quam oporte^ sapere, ne forte dum lucem
Sectaris impingas in tenebras; illud^nte tibi demonio meri^^ano. Bernard. Sermon.
90.
own conceits, and proudly think themselves the wisest, how diligently do they
labor to get them followers? as if to make a man a proselite to their
opinions, were as happy a work as to convert him to Christ! And when they fall
among the lighter, ignorant, unsounder sort of professors, whose Religion is
all in their brain, and on their tongue, they seldom fail of their desired
success. These men shall shortly know, that to bring a man to the knowledge and
Love of Christ, is another kind of work, then to bring him to be Baptized
again, or to be of such a Church, or such a side. Unhappy are the Souls that
are taken in their snare: Who when they have spent their lives in studying and
contending for the circumstantials of Religion, which should have been spent in
studying and loving the Lord Jesus, do in the end reap an empty harvest
suitable to their empty profession.

3. Nor do I persuade you to speak against men's faults behind their backs, and
be silent before their faces, as the common custom of the world is. To tell
other men of their faults, tends little to their reformation, if they hear it
not themselves. To whisper out men's faults to others, as it comes not from
Love, or from any honest principle, so usually does it produce no good effect:
For if the party hear not of it, it cannot better him: If he do, he will take
it but as the reproach of an enemy, tending to disgrace him, and not as the
faithful counsel of a friend, tending to recover him; and as that which is
spoken to make him odious, and not to make him virtuous. It tends not to
provoke to godliness, but to raise contention: for a whisperer separateth the
chiefest friends, Prove. 16.28. And how few shall we find that make conscience
of this horrible sin? or that will confess it, and bewail it when they are
reprehended for it? Especially if men are speaking of their enemies, or those
that have wronged them, or whom they suppose to have wronged them; or if it be
of one that eclipseth their glory, Genesis 31.1. Psalm 41 7.
or that stands in the way of their gain or esteem; or if it be one that
differs from them in Judgment, or one that is commonly spoke against by
others, who is it that makes any Conscience of backbiting such as these? And
you shall ever observe, that the forwarder they are to backbiting, the more
backward always to faithful admonishing; 1 Samuel 22.9. Dan. 6 3. Rom 1.29 30.
John 7.51.
and none speak less of a man's faults to his face for his reformation, then
those that speak most of them behind his back to his defamation. If ill will or
Envy lie at the heart, it makes them cast forth disgracing speeches, as often as
they can meet with such as themselves who will hear and entertain them. Even as
a corrupt humor in the stomach provokes a man to vomit up all that he takes,
while it self remains and continues the disease. (It is Chrysostomes
similitude.)

So far am I from persuading therefore to this preposterous course, that I
would advise you to oppose it where ever you meet with it. See that you never
hear a man speaking against his neighbor behind his back, (without some special
cause or call) but presently rebuke him: ask him, Whether he has spoke those
things in a way of love to his face? if he have not; ask him, how he dare so
pervert Gods prescribed order, who commands to rebuke our neighbor plainly,
and to tell him his fault first in private, and then before witness, till we
see whether he will be won, Prove. 25.23.
or not, Levit. 19.17. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. And how he dare do as he would not
be done by?

SECT. III.
THe duty therefore that I would press you to, is of another nature,. 3.
and it consists in these things following. 1. That you get your hearts
affected with the misery of your brethrens Souls: Be compassionate toward
them. Yearn after their recovery and Salvation: If you did earnestly long after
their conversion, and your hearts were fully set to do them good, it would set
you a work, and God would usually bless it.

2. Take all opportunities that possibly you can, to confer with them privately
about their states, and to instruct and help them to the attaining of
Salvation. And lest you should not know how to manage this work, let me tell
you more particularly what you are herein to do. 1. If it be an Ignorant carnal
person that you have to deal with, who is an utter stranger to the Mysteries of
Religion, and to the work of Regeneration on his own Soul, the first thing you
have to do, is to acquaint him with these Doctrines. Labor to make him
understand wherein man's chief Happiness does consist: and how far he was once
possessed of it: and what Law and Covenant God then made with him: and how he
broke it: and what penalty he incurred, and what misery he brought himself into
thereby: Teach him what need men had of a Redeemer: and how Christ in mercy did
interpose, and ^ear the penalty: and what Covenant now he has made with man:
and on what terms only Salvation is now to be attained: and what course Christ
takes to draw men to himself: and what are the riches and privileges that
Believers have in him.

If when he understands these things, he be not moved by them; or if you find
that the stop lies in his will and affections, and in the hardness of his
heart, and in the interest that the flesh and the world have got in him; Then
show him the excellency of the Glory which he neglects; and the
intolerableness of the loss of it; and the extremity and eternity of the
torments of the damned; and how certainly they must endure them, and how just
it is for their wilful refusals of grace; and how hain^us a sin it is to reject
such free and abundant mercy, and to tread under foot the blood of the
Covenant: Show him the certainty, nearness and terrors of death and judgment,
and the vanity of all things below which now he is taken up with; and how
little they will bestead him in that time of his extremity. Show him, that by
nature he himself is a child of wrath, and enemy to God; and by actual sin much
more: Show him the vi^e and heinous nature of sin; the absolute necessity he
stands in of a Savior; the freeness of the promise; the fullness of Christ;
the sufficiency of his Satisfaction; his readiness to receive all that are
willing to be his; the Authority and Dominion which he has purchased over us:
Show him also the absolute necessity of Regeneration. Faith and Holiness of
life; how impossible it is to have Salvation by Christ without these; and what
they are, and the true nature of them. If when he understands all this, you
find his Soul inthralled in presumption and false hopes, persuading himself
that he is a true Believer, and pardoned, and reconciled, and shall be saved by
Christ, and all this upon false grounds, or merely because he would have it so,
(which is a common case:) Then urge him hard to examine his state: show him the
necessity of trying; the danger of being deceived; the commonness and easiness
of mistaking through the deceitfulness of the heart; the extreme madness of
putting it to a blind adventure; or of resting in negligent or wilful
uncertainty: Help him in trying himself: Produce some undeniable Evidences from
Scripture: Ask him, Whether these be in him or not? Whether ever he found such
workings or dispositions in his heart? Urge him to a rational answer: do not
leave him, till you have convinced him of his misery: and then seasonably and
wisely show him the remedy. If he produce some common gifts, or duties, or
works; know to what end he does produce them? If to join with Christ in
composing him a Righteousness; show him how vain and destructive they are: If
it be by way of Evidence to prove his title to Christ; show him how far a
common work may reach; and wherein the Life of Christianity does consist; and
how far he must go further if he will be Christ's disciple. In the mean time,
that he be not discouraged with hearing of so high a measure; show him the way
by which he must attain it: be sure to draw him to the use of all means: set
him a hearing and reading the Word, calling upon God, accompanying the godly:
persuade him to leave his actual sin, and to get out of all ways of temptation;
especially to forsake ungodly company; and to wait patiently on God in the use
of means: and show him the strong hopes, that in so doing he may have of a
blessing; this being the way that God will be found in.

If you perceive him possessed with any prejudicate conceits against the godly,
and the way of holiness; show him their falsehood, and with wisdom and meekness
answer his Objections.

If he be addicted to delay the duties he is convinced of, or laziness and
stupidity do endanger his Soul; then lay it on the more powerfully, and set
home upon his heart the most piercing considerations, and labor to fasten them
as thorns in his conscience, that he may find no ease or rest till he change
his estate.

SECT. IV.
. 4.
BUt because in all works the manner of doing them is of greatest moment, and
the right performance does much further the success; I will here adjoyn a few
Directions, which you must be sure to observe in this work of Exhortation: for
it is not every advice that uses to succeed, nor any manner of doing it, that
will serve the turn. Observe therefore these Rules.

1. Set upon the work sincerely, and with right intentions. Let thy Ends be the
Glory of God in the parties Salvation. Do it not to get a name or esteem to thy
self; or to bring men to depend upon thee; or to get thee followers: Do not as
many carnal Parents and Masters will do, viz. rebuke their Children and
Servants for those sins that displease them, and are against their profit or
their humors, as disobedience, unthriftiness, unmannerliness, etc. and labor
much to reform them in these, but never seek in the right way that God has
appointed, to save their Souls. But be sure thy main end be to recover them
from misery, and bring them into the way of eternal Rest.

SECT. V.
. 5.
2. DO it Speedily: As you would not have them Delay their returning, so do not
you Delay to seek their return. You are purposing long to speak to such an
Ignorant neighbor, and to deal with such a scandalous sinner, and yet you have
never done it. Alas, he runs on the score all this while: he goes deeper in
debt: wrath is heaping up: Sin takes rooting: Custom does more fasten him:
Engagements to sin grow stronger and more numerous: Conscience grows seared:
the heart grows hardened: while you delay, the Devil rules and rejoices:
Christ is shut out: the Spirit is repulsed: God is daily dishonored: his Law is
violated: he is without a Servant, and that service from him which he should
have: the Soul continues in a doleful state: time runs on: the day of
visitation hastes away: death and judgment are even at the door: and what if
the man dye and miss of Heaven, while you are purposing to teach him and help
him to it? What if he drop into hell while you are purposing to prevent it? If
in case of his bodily distress, you must not bid him, go and come again to
morrow, when you have it by you, and he is in want, Prove. 3.27, 28. how much
less may you delay the succor of his Soul: If once death snatch him away, he is
then out of the reach of your Charity.

SECT. VI.
. 6.
3. LEt thy Exhortation proceed from Compassion and Love: and let the manner of
it clearly show the person thou dealest with, that it hence proceeds. It is
not jeering, or scorning, or reproaching a man for his faults, that is a likely
way to work his reformation: Nor is it the right way to convert him to God, to
rail at him, and vilify him with words of disgrace. Men will take them for
their enemies that thus deal with them: And the words of an enemy are little
persuading. Lay by your Passion therefore, and take up compassion, and go to
poor sinners with tears in your eyes, that they may see you indeed believe them
to be miserable; and that you do unfeignedly pity their case: Deal with them
with earnest humble intreatings: Let them see that your very bowels do yearn
over them, and that it is the very desire of your hearts to do them good: Let
them perceive that you have no other end but the procuring of their everlasting
Happiness; and that it is your sense of their danger, and your love to their
Souls that forces you to speak; even because you know the terrors of the Lord,
and for fear lest you should see them in eternal torments. Say to them: Why
friend, you know it is no advantage of my own that I seek: The way to please
you, and to keep your friendship, were to sooth you in your way, or to speak
well of you, or to let you alone: but Love will not suffer me to see you
perish, and be silent: I seek nothing at your hands, but that which is
necessary to your own happiness: It is your self that will have the gain and
comfort if you come in to Christ, etc. -- If men should thus go to every
ignorant wicked neighbor they have, and thus deal with them, Oh what blessed
fruits should we quickly see! I am ashamed to hear some lazy hypocritical
wretches, to revile their poor ignorant neighbors, and separate from their
company and communion, and proudly to judge them unfit for their society, before
ever they once tried with them this compassionate Exhortation! Oh you little
know what a prevailing course this were like to prove! and how few of the
vilest drunkards or swearers would prove so obstinate, as wholly to reject or
despise the Exhortations of Love! I know it must be God that must change men's
hearts: But I know also that God works by means; and when he means to
prevail with men, he usually fitteth the means accordingly, and stirs up men
to plead with them in a prevailing way, and so sets in with his grace, and
makes it successful. Certainly those that have tried can tell you by
experience, that there is no way so prevailing with men as the way of
Compassion and Love. So much of these as they discern in your Exhortation,
usually so much does it succeed with their hearts. And therefore I beseech
those that are faithful to practice this course.

SECT. VII.
. 7.
4. ANother Direction I would give you is this: Do it with all possible
plainness and faithfulness. Do not dawb with men, and hide from them their
misery or danger, or any part of it: Do not make their sins less then they are;
nor speak of them in an extenuating language: Do not encourage them in a false
hope or faith, no more then you would discourage the sound hopes of the
righteous. If you see his case dangerous, tell him plainly of it: Neighbor, I
am afraid God has not yet renewed your Soul; and that it is yet a stranger to
the great work of Regeneration and Sanctification: I doubt you are not yet
recovered from the power of Satan to God, nor brought out of the state of wrath
which you were born in, and have lived in: I doubt you have not chosen Christ
above all, nor set your heart upon him, nor unfeignedly taken him for your
Sovereign Lord. If you had, sure you durst not so easily disobey him; you could
not so neglect him and his worship in your family and in public: you could
not so eagerly follow the world, and talk of almost nothing but the things of
this world, while Christ is seldom mentioned or sought after by you. If you
were in Christ, you would be a new Creature: old things would be passed away,
and all things would become new: you would have new thoughts, and new talk, and
new company, and new endeavors and a new conversation: Certainly without these
you can never be saved: You may think otherwise, and hope better as long as you
will, but your hopes will all deceive you, and perish with you: Alas, it is not
as you will, nor as I will, who shall be saved; but it is as God will: Heb.
12.14. Joh. 3 3. Luke 19 27.
and God has told us, That without holiness none shall see him, and except we
be born again we cannot enter into his Kingdom; and that all that would not
have Christ reign over them, shall be brought forth and destroyed before him.
Oh therefore look to your state in time. -- Thus must you deal roundly and
faithfully with men, if ever you intend to do them good: It is not hovering at
a distance in a general discourse that will serve the turn: It is not in curing
men's Souls as in curing their bodies, where they must not know their danger,
lest it sadden them, and hinder the cure. They are here agents, in their own
cure; and if they know not their misery, they will never bewail it, nor know
how much need they have of a Savior: If they know not the worst, they will not
labor to prevent it; but will sit still or loiter till they drop into
perdition, and will trifle out their time in delays till it be too late: And
therefore speak to men as Christ to the Pharisees, till they knew that he meant
them. Deal plainly, or you do but deceive and destroy them.

SECT. VIII.
5. ANd as you must do it Plainly,. 8.
so also Seriously, Zealously, and Effectually. The exceeding stupidity and
deadness of men's hearts is such, that no other dealing will ordinarily work.
You must call loud to awake a man in a Swoun or Lethargy. If you speak to the
common sort of men, of the evil of their sin, of their need of Christ, of the
danger of their Souls. and of the necessity of Regeneration, they will wearily
and unwillingly give you the hearing, and put off all with a sigh, or a few
good wishes, and say, [ God forgive us, we are all sinners,] and there is an
end. If ever you will do them good therefore, you must sharpen your
exhortation, and set it home, and follow it with their hearts, till you have
rouzed them up, and made them begin to look about them. Let them know that thou
speak not to them of indifferent things, not about childrens games, or
worldlings vanities, or matters of a few days or years continuance; nor yet
about matters of uncertainty, which perhaps may never come to pass: But it is
about the saving or damning of their Souls and bodies; and whether they shall
be Blessed with Christ, or tormented with Devils, and that for ever and ever
without any change; It is, how to stand before God in Judgment, and what answer
to give, and how they are like to speed: And this Judgment and eternal state
they shall very shortly see; they are almost at it; yet a few more nights and
days, and they shall presently be at that last day; a few more breathes they
have to breathe, and they shall breathe out their last; and then as certainly
shall they see that mighty change, as the Heaven is over their heads, and the
earth under their feet. Oh labor to make men know, that it is mad jesting
about Salvation or Damnation; and that Heaven and Hell be not matters to be
played with, or passed over with a few careless thoughts! Is it most certain
that one of these days thou shall be either in everlasting unchangeable Joy or
Torments, and does it not awake thee? Is there so few that find the way of
life? so many that go the way of death? so hard to escape? so easy to
miscarry? and that while we fear nothing but think all is well? and yet do you
fit still and trifle! Why what do you mean? what do you think on? The world is
passing away: its pleasures are fading: its honors are leaving you: its
profits will prove unprofitable to you: Heaven or Hell are a little before you:
God is Just and Jealous: his Threatenings are true: the great day of his
Judgment will be terrible: your time runs on: your lives are uncertain: you are
far behind hand: you have loitered long: your case is dangerous: your Souls are
far gone in sin: you are strange to God: you are hardened in evil customs: you
have no assurance of pardon to show: if you dye to morrow, how unready are you?
and with what terror will your Souls go out of your bodies? And do you yet
loiter for all this? Why consider with your selves: God stands all this while
waiting your leisure: his patience bears: his Justice forbeareth: his Mercy
entreats you: Christ stands offering you his blood and merits: you may have
him freely, and life with him: the Spirit is persuading you: Conscience is
accusing and urging you: Ministers are praying for you, and calling upon you:
Satan stands waiting when Justice will cut off your lives, that he may have
you: This is your time: Now or Never. What! had you rather lose Heaven then
your profits or pleasures? had you rather burn in Hell, then repent on Earth?
had you rather howl and roar there, then pray day and night for mercy here? or
to have Devils your Tormentors, then to have Christ your Governor? Will you
renounce your part in God and Glory, rather then renounce your cursed sins? Do
you think a holy life too much for Heaven? or too dear a course to prevent an
endless misery? Oh friends; What do you think of these things? God has made
you men, and endued you with Reason; do not renounce your Reason where you
should chiefly use it. -- In this manner you must deal roundly and seriously
with men. Alas, it is not a few dull words between Jest and earnest, between
sleep and waking, as it were, that will waken an ignorant dead-hearted sinner?
When a dull hearer and a dull speaker meet together, a dead heart and a dead
exhortation, it is far unlike to have a lively effect. If a man fall down in a
Swoun, you will not stand trifling with him, but lay hands on him presently,
and snatch him up, and rub him, and call loud to him: If a house be on fire,
you will not in a cold affected strain go tell your neighbor of it, nor go make
an oration of the nature and danger of fire; but you will run out, and cry,
Fire, Fire: Matters of moment must be seriously dealt with. To tell a man of
his sins so softly as Eli did his sons, 1 Samuel 23. 1 Kings 22.8.
or reprove him so gently as Jehosaphat did Ahab (Let not the King say so) does
usually as much harm as good. I am persuaded the very manner of some men's
reproof and exhortations, has hardened many a sinner in the way of
destruction: To tell them of Sin, or of Heaven or Hell, in a dull, easy,
careless language, does make men think you are not in good sadness, nor do mean
as you speak; but either you scarce think your selves such things are true, or
else you take them for small indifferent matters, or else sure you would never
speak of them in such a slight indifferent manner. Oh Sirs, deal with Sin as
Sin, and speak of Heaven and Hell as they are, and not as if you were in Jest.
I confess I have failed much in this my self; the Lord lay it not to my charge.
Loathness to displease men, makes us undo them.

SECT. IX.
6. YEt lest you run into extremes,. 9.
I advise you to do it with Prudence and discretion. Be as serious as you can;
but yet with Wisdom. And especially you must be wise in these things following.
1. In choosing the fittest season for your Exhortation: not to deal with men
when they are in passion, or drunk, or in public, where they will take it for
a disgrace. M^n should observe when sinners are fittest to hear instructions.
Physic must not be given at all times, but in season. Opportunity advantageth
every work. It is an excellent example that Paul gives us, Gal. 2.^. He
communicated the Gospel to them, yet privately to them of reputation, lest he
should run in vain. Some men would take this to be a sinful complying with
their Corruption, to yield so far to their pride and bashfulness, as to teach
them only in private, because they would be ashamed to own the Truth in
Public: But PAVL knew how great a hinderance men's reputation is to their
entertaining of the Truth; and that the remedy must not only be fitted to the
disease, but also to the strength of the Patient; and that in so doing the
Physician is not guilty of favoring the disease, but is praiseworthy for
taking the right way to cure; and that learners and young-beginners, must not
be dealt with as open professors. Moreover, means will work easily if you take
the opportunity; when the Earth is soft, the Plow will enter. Take a man when
he is under affliction, or in the house of mourning, or newly stirred by some
moving Sermon, and then set it home, and you may do him good. Christian
Faithfulness does require us, not only to do good when it falls in our way,
but to watch for opportunities of doing good.

2 Be wise also in suiting your Exhortation to the quality and temper of the
person. All meats are not for all stomachs: One man will vomit that up again in
your face, which another will digest. 1. If it be a learned, or ingenious,
rational man, you must deal more by convincing Arguments, and less by
passionate persuasions: 2. If it be one that is both ignorant and stupid, there
is need of both: 3. If one that is convinced, but yet is not converted, you
must use most those means that rouse up the affections. 4. If they be obstinate
and secure, you must reprove them sharply. 5. If they be of timorous, tender
natures, and apt to dejections or distraction, they must be tenderly dealt
with. All cannot bear that rough dealing as some can. Love, and Plainness, and
Seriousness, takes with all: but words of terror some can scarce bear. This is
(as we say of stronger Physic, Hellebore, Colloquintida, etc. nec puero, nec
seni, nec imbecillo, sed robusto, etc.) not fit for every complexion and state.

3. You must be wise also in using the aptest expressions. Many a Minister does
deliver most excellent necessary matter, in such unsavory, harsh, and unseemly
language, that it makes the hearers loath the food that they should live by,
and laugh at a Sermon that might make them quake: Especially if they be men of
curious ears, and carnal hearts; and have more common wit and parts then the
speaker. And so it is in private Exhortation, as well as public: If you
cloth the most amiable beautiful Truth in the sordid rags of unbeseeming
language, you will make men disdain it as monstrous and deformed, though it be
the offspring of God, and of the highest nature.

SECT. X.
7. LEt all your Reproofs and Exhortations be backed with the Authority of
God.. 10. ut drachmam auri fine imagine principis, sic verba hortantis sine
authoritate Dei, contemnunt homines, etc. Lypsius.
Let the sinner be convinced that you speak not from your selves, or of your
own head. Show them the very words of Scripture for what you say: Turn them to
the very Chapter and Verse where their sin is condemned, and where the duty is
commanded. Press them with the Truth and Authority of God: Ask them whether
they believe that this is his Word? and that his Word is true? So much of God
as appears in our Words, so much will they take. The voice of man is
contemptible; but the voice of God is awful and terrible. They can and may
reject your words, that cannot, nor dare reject the words of the Almighty. Be
sure therefore to make them know, that you speak nothing but what God has
spoken first.

SECT. XI.
8. YOu must also be Frequent with men in this Duty of Exhortation.. 11.
It is not once or twice that usually will prevail. If God himself must be
constantly solicited, as if importunity could prevail with him when nothing
else can; Luke 18.1. Heb. 3.13. 2 Timothy 4.3.
and therefore require us, always to pray, and not to wax faint: the same
course, no doubt, will be most prevailing with men. Therefore are we commanded
to Exhort one another daily; and with all long-suffering. As Lypsius says, ut
ignis ^ silice non uno ictu, etc.
The fire is not always brought out of the flint at one stroke: nor men's
affections kindled at the first exhortation. And if they were, yet if they be
not followed, they will soon grow cold again. Weary out sinners with your
loving and earnest entreaties. Follow them, and give them no rest in their sin.
This is true Charity* and this is the way to save men's Souls; and a course that
will afford you comfort upon review.

SECT. XII.
. 12.
9. STrive to bring all your Exhortations to an Issue: Stick not in the work
done, but look after the success, and aim at that end in all your speeches. I
have long observed it in Ministers and private men, that if they speak never so
convincing powerful words, and yet their hearts do not long after the success
of them with the hearers, but all their care is over when they have done their
speech, pretending that having done their duty, they leave the Issue to God,
these men do seldom prosper in their labors: But those whose very heart is set
upon the work, and that long to see it take for the hearers conversion, and use
to enquire how it speeds, God usually blesses their labors, though more weak.
Labor therefore to drive all your speeches to the desired Issue. If you are
reproving a sin, cease not till (if it may be) you have got the sinner to
promise you to leave it, and to avoid the occasions of it: If you are exhorting
to a Duty; urge the party to promise you presently to set upon it. If you would
draw them to Christ, leave not till you have made them confess, that their
present unregenerate state is miserable, and not to be rested in; and till they
have subscribed to the necessity of Christ, and of a change; and till they have
promised you to fall close to the use of means. O that all Christians would be
persuaded, to take this course with all their Neighbors that are yet in the
flesh; that are enslaved to sin, and strangers to Christ!

SECT. XIII.
10. LAstly,. 13. Nec sic inflect^re sensus Humanos edicta valent quam vita
r^gentis.

Primus jussa subi; tunc observantior aequi fit Populus.

Loripedem rectus derideat, Ae^biopem al bus; Quis tulerit Gracchos de
seditione querentes? Si fur displiceat Verri, homicida Miloni, etc.

Siquis opprobriis dignum latraverit integer ipse, etc.


Be sure that your Examples may Exhort, as well as your words. Let them see you
constant in all the Duties that you persuade them to: Let them see in your
lives that difference from sinners, and that excellency above the world, which
you persuade them to in your speeches. Let them see by your constant Labors for
Heaven, that you do indeed believe that which you would have them to believe.
If you tell others of the admirable Joys of Heaven, and your selves do nothing
but drudg for the world, and are as much taken up in striving to be rich, or as
quarrelsom with your Neighbors in a case of commodity, as any others; who will
then believe you? or who will be persuaded by you to seek the everlasting
riches? Will they not rather think, that you persuade them to look after
another world, and to neglect this, that so you might have the more of it to
your self? Let not men see you proud, while you exhort them to be humble; nor
to have a seared Conscience in one thing, while you would have theirs tender in
another. An innocent life is a continual powerful reproof to the wicked: And
the constant practice of a holy and heavenly life, is a constant disquietment
to the Conscience of a Worldling, and a constant solicitation of him to change
his course.

And thus I have opened to you the first and great part of this Duty,
consisting in private familiar Exhortation, for the helping of poor Souls to
this Rest, that are out of the way, and have yet no Title to it: and I have
showed you also the manner how to perform it that you may succeed, I will now
speak a little of the next part.

SECT. XIV.
BEsides the duty of private admonition,. 14.
you must do your utmost endevors to help men to profit by the public
Ordinances. And to that end you must do these things. 1. Do your endevors for
the procuring of Faithful Ministers where they are wanting. This is Gods
ordinary means of converting and saving. Romans 10.14.
How shall they hear without a Preacher? Not only for your own sakes therefore
but for the poor miserable ones about you, do all you can to bring this to
pass. 2 Cor. 4.3. Prove. 29.18.
If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. By sleight or by force
they so muzzle the poor laboring Ox, that they make an As^ of him. Tho. Scot in
his Projector, page 31.

Sacril gio poena est; neque ei soli qu^^e sacro abstulerit, sed etiam ci qui
sacro commendatum.

Cicero. li. 1. de Legib.

Cum diis pugnant sacrilegi. Qu. Curtius, lib. 7.


Where vision fails, the people perish. Improve therefore all your Interest
and Diligence to this end. Ride, and go, and seek, and make friends, till you
do prevail: If means be wanting, to maintain a Minister, extend your purses to
the utmost, rather then the means of men's Salvation should be wanting. Who
knows how many Souls may bless you, who have been converted and saved by the
Ministry which you have procured? It is a higher and nobler work of charity,
then if you gave all that you have to relieve their Bodies: (Though both must
be regarded, yet the Soul in the first place.) What abundance of good might
great men do in this, if they were faithful improvers of their interests and
estates, as men that believe God has the chief interest, and will shortly call
them to an account for their Stewardships? What unhappy Reformers has the
Church still met withal, that in stead of taking away the corruptions in the
Church, do diminish that maintenance which should further the work? If our
Ignorant Forefathers gave it for the service of the Church, and their more
knowing posterity do take it away, without the least pretense of right to it, I
doubt not but the pious intent of Progenitors will more extenuate the fault of
their Ignorance, then the Knowledge of their Posterity will excuse their
Sacriledg. Alas, that the sad example of King Henry the eighth's Reformation,
and the almost Has not England already been as the Eagles nest, that was set
on fire with a coal that sticked to the flesh which was stolen from the Altar?

De Ecclesia qui aliquid suratur Judae proditori comparatur. Aug. in Johan. The
Arguments used of late to excuse this heinous sin, are much of the nature of
those which Dionisius senior was wont to use in the like case; ut vid. in
Valerii Maximi lib. 1. ca. 2. Et Justin. l. 21.


miraculous consumption of the estates of Impropriators, and the many hundred
Congregations that live in woeful darkness for want of maintenance for a
Ministry, should yet be no more effectual a warning to this Age. If they take
away most, and give back a little, we are beholden to their bounty. If a
corrupt Officer lose his Interest, the Church does not lose hers. Here is great
talk of reducing the Church to the Primitive pattern: If so; I dare affirm that
every Church must have many Ministers: (And they that know wherein the work of
the Ministry does consist, will no more wonder at that, then that a Regiment of
Soldiers should have many Officers.) And To make up that number of Ministers
that the church should have, now the maintenance is taken away. I would rich
men would study and enter into the Ministry who can maintain themselves, and so
do the work freely. Let them know to their faces, that it is a work that the
greatest Lord in the land is not too good for. See what Hieron. says ad
Damasum.

Clericos illo: convenit ecclesiae stipendiis sustentari, quibus parentum and
amicorum nulla suffra gantur stipendia. Quiautem bonis parentum and opibus
sustentari poss^^t si quod pauperum est accipiunt sacriligium profecto
incurrant, and committunt. And besides it would bear up the credit of the
office, and take often much prejudice from the people.


how will that be, when they will scarce afford maintenance for one? They are
likelier to bring the Church to the Primitive Poverty, then to the Primitive
Pattern. If I were not known to be quite beyond their exceptions my self, I
might not say so much, lest I were thought to plead my own interest: Especially
a dying man should be out of the reach of such accusations. But the Lord
knows, that it is not a desire that Ministers should be rich, that makes me
speak this; but an earnest desire of the Happiness of the Church: Nor do I mean
the Ministry only by the word [ Church:] It is the people that are robbed and
bear the loss, more then the Ministers: Ministers must and will have
maintenance, or else men will set their Children to other studies: When there
is no other, the people must allow it themselves, or be without: What Minister
can well over-see and watch over more then a thousand Souls? nor I think so
many. Many Congregations have four thousand, ten thousand, twenty thousand,
some fifty thousand, yea seventy thousand. How many Officers will the State
maintain in an Army of thirty thousand? I had almost said, the work of
governing the Church is greater, and has need of as many. I would all
Scripture and primitive patterns were well viewed in this. Oh happy
Reformation, if Popish superstitious Clergy men, had been only taken down, and
able godly men put in their places, or in right offices, without such
diminution of the number or the maintenance! Or if a supply at present could
not be had, yet should they not have overthrown the hopes of posterity. But to
leave this Digression: I hope those that God has called to his work, will
labor never the less for the shortness of their maintenance: And those of the
people that can do no more, can yet pray the Lord of the harvest that he will
send forth laborers. And he that has put that petition into our mouths, I
hope will put the answer into our hands.

SECT. XV.
. 15.
2. YEt is it not enough that you seek after Teachers, but especially you must
seek after such as are fittest for the work. An ignorant Emperick that kills
more then he cures, does not so much differ from an able Physician, as an
unskilful Minister from one that is able. Alas, this is the great defect among
us: Men that are fitted for the work indeed are almost wonders: One or two, or
three, or four in a County is much. And almost as few that are well skilled in
managing known truths upon the Conscience.
How few that have dived into the Mysteries of Divinity? or have thoroughly
studied the most needful controversies? or are able to explain or maintain the
Truth? But only they store their Memories with the Opinions and Phrases of
those Teachers that are in most credit, in common cases; and then they think
they are Divines: And every man that steps out of their common rode, they can
say he is Erroneous or Heretical; but how to confute him they cannot tell.
Alas, whence comes this misery to the Church? The late Prelates
discountenancing the godly learned, is one main cause; and their filling the
Ministry with the vilest that did best fit their ends: And so great a
Corruption of the Ministry cannot suddenly be cured. And another great cause is
this: There is not a choice made of the most excellentest wits, and those
youths that are ripest in learning and Religion: but some of them are so rich,
that the Ministry is too mean for them; and some so poor, that they have no
maintenance to subsist on at the Universities. And so every one that is best
furnished to make a trade of the Ministry, or whose parents have best affection
to it, how unfit soever the Child is, must be a Minister: and those few, very
few, choice wits that would be fittest, are diverted.

For Gods sake and the sake of poor Souls, Gentlemen, put this in practice
presently.
How small a matter were it (and yet how excellent a work) for every Knight or
Gentleman of means in England, to cull out some one or two, or more poor boys
in the Country Schools, who are of the choicest wits, and most pious
dispositions, who are poor and unable to proceed in learning, and to maintain
them a few years in the Universities, till they were fit for the Ministry? It
were but keeping a few superfluous attendants the less; or a few horses or dogs
the less: If they had hearts to it, it were easily spared out of their sports,
or rich apparel, or superfluous diet: or what if it were out of more useful
costs? See Capels Epistle Dedis. before Mr Pemble on the Sacrament.
or out of their childrens larger portions? I dare say they would not be sorry
for it when they come to their reckoning. One sumptuous feast, or one costly
suit of apparel, would maintain a poor boy a year or two at the University, who
perhaps might come to have more true worth in him, then many a glittering
sensual Lord; and to do God more service in his Church, then ever they did with
all their estates and power.

SECT. XVI.
3. ANd when you do enjoy the blessing of the Gospel,. 16.
you must yet use your utmost diligence to help poor Souls to receive the fruit
of it. To which end you must draw them constantly to hear and attend it: Mind
them often of what they have heard: Draw them, if it be possible, to repeat it
in their families: If that cannot be, then draw them to come to others that do
repeat it; that so it may not dye in the hearing. The very drawing of men into
the company and acquaintance of the godly, besides the benefit they have by
their endeavors, is of singular use to the recovery of their Souls. Association
breeds familiarity: and familiarity breeds love: and familiarity and love
to the godly, does lead to familiarity and love to God and godliness: It is
also a means to take off prejudice, by confuting the worlds slanders of the
ways and people of God. Use therefore often to meet together, besides the more
public meeting in the Congregation: not to vent any unsound opinions, nor yet
in distaste of the public meeting, nor in opposition to it, nor at the time
of public worship; nor yet to make a groundless Schism, or to separate from
the Church whereof you are members, nor to destroy the old that you may gather
a new Church out of its ruins, as long as it has the essentials, and there is
hope of reforming it; nor yet would I have you forward to vent your own
supposed gifts and parts in teaching where there is no necessity of it; nor to
attempt that in the interpretation of difficult Scriptures, or explication of
difficult controversies, which is beyond your ability, though perhaps pride
will tell you, that you are as able as any. But the work which I would have you
meet about, is this: To repeat together the Word which you have heard in
public; to pour out your joint prayers for the Church and pour selves; to
join in cheerful singing the praises of God; to open your scruples, and doubts,
and fears, and get resolution; to quicken each other in Love, and Heavenliness,
and Holy walking, and all this not as a separated Church, but as a part of the
Church more diligent then the rest in redeeming time, and helping the Souls of
each other Heavenward.

I know some careless ones think this course needless; and I know some
Formalists do think it Schismatical, who have nothing of any moment to say
against it; Against both these, if I durst so far digress, I could easily prove
it warrantable and use^ul. I know also that many of late do abuse private
meetings to Schism, and to vilify Gods Ordinances, and vent the windy issue of
their empty brains. But betwixt these extremes I advise you to walk; and
neither to forsake the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of
some is, but exhort one another, Heb. 10.25. Nor yet to be carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines: But let all your private meetings be in
subordination to the public; and by the approbation and consent of your
spiritual guides, and not without them of your own heads, (where such guides
are men of knowledge and godliness;) remembering them which have the Rule over
you, which speak to you the Word of God, following their faith, and as men
whose hearts are stablished with grace, considering the whole end of a
Christians conversation: Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever, Heb. 13.7, 8, 9, 17. And I beseech you Brethren, Mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and
Avoid them. For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple, Romans 16.17, 18. I would you would ponder every one of these words, for
they are the precious advice of the Spirit of God, and necessary now, as well
as then.

SECT. XVII.
4. ONe thing more I advise you concerning this:. 17.
If you would have Souls converted and saved by the Ordinances, Labor still to
keep the Ordinances and Ministry in Esteem. No man will be much wrought on by
that which he despises. The great causes of this contempt are, a perverted
Judgment, and a Graceless heart. It is no more wonder for a Soul to loath the
Ordinances that savoureth not their spiritual nature, nor sees God in them,
nor is thoroughly wrought on by them, then it is for a sick man to loath his
food. Nor is it any wonder for a perverted understanding to make a Jest of God
himself, much less to set light by his Ordinances. Oh what a rare blessing is a
clear, sound, sanctified Judgment! Where this is wanting, the most hellish vice
may seem a virtue, and the most sacred Ordinance of divine Institution may seem
as the waters of Jordan to Naaman. If any enemies to Gods Ordinances assault
you, I refer you to the reading of Mr Hen: Lawrences late book for Ordinances.

The profane Scorners of Ministry and Worship heretofore, were the means of
keeping many a Soul from Heaven; but the late generation To them that think I
speak too harshly I say as Dr Sutline in praesat. de Mo^achis contra
Bellarminum. Res est plane ardua de hominum genere impud^n issimo modeste; de
turpissimo and sceleratissimo modice and sine acerbitate loqui. Moderatus tam^n
sum ipse mihi quantum l^cuit, and non quid ipsi de nobis m^ruerint, sed quid
nost^os homines deceat, spec^^vi.
of proud ignorant Sectaries amongst us, have quite out-stripped in this the
vilest persecutors. Oh how many Souls may curse these wretches in Hell for
ever, that have by them been brought to contemn the means that should save
them! By many years experience in my conversing with these men, I can speak it
knowingly, that the chiefest of their zeal is let out against the faithful
Ministers of Christ: he is the ablest of their preachers that can rail at them
in the most devilish language: it is their most common discourse in all
companies, both godly and profane to vilify the Ministry, and make them
odious to all partly by slanders, and partly by scorns: Is this the way to win
Souls? Whereas formerly they thought, that if a man were won to a love of the
Ministry and Ordinances, he was in a hopeful way of being won to God; now these
men are as diligent to bring all men to scorn them, as if this were all that
were necessary to the saving of their Souls, and he only shall be happy that
can deride at Ministers and Discipline. If any doubt of the truth of what I
say, he is a stranger in England; and for his satisfaction let him read all the
books of Martin Marpriest, and tell me whether the Devil ever spoke so with a
tongue of flesh before? For you, my dear friends, I acknowledge to Gods praise,
that you are as far from the contempt of Ordinances or Ministry, as any people
I know in the Land. I shall confirm you herein, not in my own words, but in his
that I know you dare not dis-regard. 1 These. 5.11, 12, 13. Wherefore comfort
your selves together, 1 These. 5.1^, 12, 13.
and Edify one another, even as also ye do: And we beseech you Brethren, to
know them which labor among you, and are Over you in the Lord, and admonish
you: And to esteem them very highly in Love for their Works sake; and be at
peace among your selves. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves; for they watch for your Souls, as those that must give an account; that
they may do it with Joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you,
Heb. 13.17.

Thus you see part of your duty for the Salvation of others.

SECT. XVIII.
. 18.
ANd now, Christian Reader, seeing it is a Duty that God has laid upon every
man according to his ability, thus to exhort and reprove, and with all possible
diligence to labor after the Salvation of all about him; judge then whether
this work be conscionably performed. Where shall we find the man almost among
us, that sets himself to it with all his might, and that has set his heart
upon the Souls of his brethren, that they may be saved?

Let us here therefore a little enquire, What may be the Causes of the gross
neglect of this Duty, that the Hindrances being discovered, may the more
easily be overcome.

1. One Hinderance is, Men's own Gracelesness and Guiltiness. They have not been
ravished themselves with the heavenly delights; how then should they draw
others so earnestly to seek them? They have not felt the wickedness of their
own natures, nor their lost condition, nor their need of Christ, nor felt the
transforming renewing work of the Spirit: How then can they discover these to
others? Ah that this were not the case of many a learned Preacher in England!
and the causes why they preach so frozenly and generally! Men also are guilty
themselves of the sins they should Reprove; and this stops their mouth, and
makes them ashamed to reprove.

2. Another Hinderance is, A Secret Infidelity prevailing in men's hearts:
Whereof even the best have so great a measure, that causes this duty to be
done by the halves. Alas, Sirs, we do not sure believe men's Misery. We do not
believe sure that the threatenings of God are true. Did we verily believe, that
all the unregenerate and unholy shall be eternally tormented, as God has said,
Oh how could we hold our tongues when we are among the unregenerate? How could
we choose but burst out into tears when we look them in the face, as the Prophet
did when he looked upon Hazael? Especially when they are our kindred or friends
that are near and dear to us? Thus does secret unbelief of the truth of
Scripture, consume the vigor of each grace and duty. Oh Christians, if you did
verily believe, that your poor, carnal, ungodly neighbors, or wife, or husband,
or child, should certainly lie for ever in the flames of Hell, except they be
thoroughly recovered and changed, and that quickly before death do snatch them
hence, Would not this make you cast off all discouragements, and lie at them
day and night till they were persuaded? and give them no rest in their carnal
state? How could you hold your tongue, or let them alone another day, if this
were soundly believed? If you were sure that any of your dear friends that are
dead, were now in Hell, and persuading to repentance would get him out again,
would you not persuade him day and night, if you were in hearing? And why
should you not do as much then to prevent it, while he is in your hearing, but
that you do not believe Gods Word that speaks the danger? Why did Noah prepare
an Ark so long before, and persuade the world to save themselves, but because
he believed God, that the flood should come? and therefore says the Holy
Ghost, By faith Noah prepared the Ark. Heb. 11.7.
And why did not the world hearken to his persuasion, and seek to save
themselves as well as Noah, but because they did not believe there would be any
such deluge? They see all fair and well, and therefore they thought that
threatenings were but wind. The rich man in Hell cries out; Send to my brethren
to warn them, that they come not to this place of torment: He felt it, and
therefore being convinced of its truth would have them prevent it: But his
brethren on earth they did not see and feel as he, and therefore they did not
believe, nor would have been persuaded though one had risen from the dead. Luke
16.31.
I am afraid most of us do believe the predictions of Scripture, but as we
believe the predictions of an Almanac, which tells you that such a day will
be rain, and such a day wind; you think it may come to pass, and it may be not;
and so you think of the predictions of the damnation of the wicked. Oh were it
not for this cursed Unbelief, our own Souls and our neighbors would gain more
by us then they do.

3. This faithful dealing with men for their Salvation, is much Hindered also
by our want of Charity and Compassion to men's Souls. We are hard-hearted and
cruel toward the miserable; and therefore (as the Priest and the Levite did by
the wounded man) we look on them and pass by. Oh what tender heart could endure
to look upon a poor, blind, forlorn sinner, wounded by sin, and captivated by
Satan, and never once open our mouths for his recovery? What though he be
silent, and do not desire thy help himself; yet his very misery cries aloud:
Misery is the most effectually suitor to one that is compassionate. If God had
not heard the cry of our Miseries before he heard the cry of our prayers, and
been moved by his own pity before he was moved by our importunity, we might
have long enough continued the slaves of Satan. Is it not the strongest way of
arguing that a poor Lazare has, to unlap his sores, and show them the
passengers? all his words will not move them so much as such a pitiful sight.
Alas, what pitiful sights do we daily see? The Ignorant, the profane, the
neglecters of Christ and their Souls; their sores are open and visible to all
that know them: and yet do we not pity them? You will pray to God for them in
customary duties, that God would open the eyes, and turn the hearts of your
ignorant carnal friends and neighbors: And why do you not endeavor their
conversion if you desire it? And if you do not desire it, why do you ask it?
Does not your negligence convince you of hypocrisy in your prayers, and of
abusing the high God with your deceitful words? Your neighbors are near you,
your friends are in the house with you, you eat and drink, and work and walk,
and talk with them, and yet you say little or nothing to them. Why do you not
pray them to consider and return, as well as pray God to convert and turn them?
Have you as often and as earnestly begged of them to think on their ways, and to
reform, as you have taken on you to beg of God that they may do so? What if you
should see your neighbor fallen into a pit, and you should presently fall down on
your knees, and pray God to help him out, but would neither put forth your hand
to help, nor once persuade or direct him to help himself? would not any man
censure you to be cruel and hypocritical? What the Holy Ghost says of men's
bodily miseries, 1 John 3.17.
I may say much more of the misery of their souls; If any man sees his brother
in need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? Or what love has he to his brothers soul? Sure if you saw your friend
in Hell, you would persuade him hard to come thence, if that would serve; and
why do you not now persuade him to prevent it? The Charity of our ignorant
forefathers may rise up in judgment against us, and condemn us: They would give
all their estates almost, for so many Masses or pardons, to deliver the souls
of their friends from a feigned Purgatory: And we will not so much as
importunately admonish and entreat them, to save them from the certain flames
of Hell though this may be effectual to do them good, and the other will do
none.

4. Another hinderance is, A base man pleasing disposition that is in us. We
are so loath to displease men, and so desirous to keep in credit and favor with
them, that it makes us most unconscionably neglect our known duty. A foolish
Physician he is, and a most unfaithful friend, that will let a sick man dye for
fear of troubling him. And cruel wretches are we to our friends, that will
rather suffer them to go quietly to hell, then we will anger them, or hazard
our reputation with them. If they did but fall in a swoon, we would rub them
and pinch them, and never stick at hurting them. If they were distracted, we
would bind them with chains, and we would please them* in nothing that tended
to their hurt. And yet when they are besides themselves in point of salvation,
and in their madness posting on to damnation, we will not stop them, for fear
of displeasing them. How can these men be Christians, that love the praise and
favor of men, more then the favor of God, John 12.43. For if they yet seek to
please men, they are no longer the servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10. To win them
indeed they must become all things to all men; but to please them to their
destruction, and let them perish, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Prove. 11.36.
that we may keep our credit with them, is a course so base and barbarously
cruel, that he that has the face of a Christian should abhor it.

5. Another common hinderance is, A sinful Bashfulness. When we should labor to
make men ashamed of their sins, we are our selves ashamed of our duties. May
not these sinners condemn us? when they will not There is no shame now amongst
men, but to be poor and honest. Tho. Scot. Projector. p. 8.
blush to swear, or be drunk, or neglect the worship of God, and we will blush
to tell them of it, and persuade them from it? Elisha looked on Hazael till he
was ashamed; and we are ashamed to look on, or speak to the offender. Sinners
will rather boast of their sins, 2 King. 8.11. Jer. 6.15. and 8.12. Luke 9.26.
Illum ego perijsse dico cui perijt pudor. Curtius.
and impudently show them in the open streets: and shall not we be as bold in
drawing them from it? Not that I approve of impudence in any: For (as one
says) I take him for a lost man, that has lost his modesty. Nor would I have
inferiors forget their distance in admonishing their superiors; but do it with
all humility, submission, and respect. But yet I would much less have them
forget their duty to God and their friends, be they never so much their
superiors, it is a thing that must be done. Bashfulness is unseemly in cases of
flat necessity. And indeed it is not a work to be ashamed of: to obey God in
persuading men from their sins to Christ, and helping to save their souls, is
not a business for a man to blush at. And yet, alas, what abundance of souls
have been neglected through the prevailing of this sin! Even the most of us are
hainously guilty in this point. Reader, is not this thy own case? Has not thy
conscience told thee of thy duty many a time, and put thee on to speak to poor
sinners, lest they perish; and yet thou have been ashamed to open thy mouth to
them, and so let them alone to sink or swim? Believe me, thou will ere long be
ashamed of this shame. O read those words of Christ, Luke 9.26. Mark. 8.38.
and tremble. He that is ashamed of me and of my words before this adulterous
generation, of him will the son of man be ashamed before his father and the
Angels.

5. Another hinderance is, impatiency, laziness, and favoring of the flesh. It
is an ungrateful work, and for the most part makes those our enemies that were
our friends: And men cannot bear the reproaches and unthankful returns of
sinners. It may be they are their chief friends on whom is all their
dependence, so that it may be their undoing to displease them. Besides, it is a
work that seldom succeeds at the first, except it be followed on with wisdom
and unweariedness: you must be a great while teaching an ignorant person,
before they will be brought to know the very fundamentals: and a great while
persuading an obstinate sinner, before he will come to a full resolution to
return. Now this is a tedious course to the flesh, and few will bear it. Not
considering what patience God used toward us when we were in our sins, and how
long he followed us with the importunities of his Spirit, holding out Christ
and life, and beseeching us to accept them. Woe to us if God had been as
impatient with us, as we are with others. If Christ be not weary nor give over
to invite them, we have little reason to be weary of doing the message, See 2
Timothy 2.24, 25,

6. Another hinderance is, self-seeking, and self-minding. Men are all for
themselves, Phil. 2.20.
and all mind their own things, but few the things of Christ and their
brethren. Hence is that Cainish voice, Am I my brothers keeper? Every man must
answer for himself. Hence also it is that a multitude of ignorant professors do
think only, where they may enjoy the purest ordinances, and thither they will
go over sea and land, or what way of discipline will be sweetest to themselves,
and therefore are prone to groundless separation: But where they have the
fairest opportunity to win the souls of others, or in what place or way they
may do most good; these things they little or nothing regard. As if we had
learned of the Monks, and were setting up their principles and practice, when
we seem to oppose them.

If these men had tried what some of their brethren have done, they would know,
that all the purest ordinances and Churches will not afford that solid comfort,
as the converting of a few sinners by our unwearied compassionate exhortations.
Two men in a frosty season come where a company of people are ready to starve;
the one of them laps himself, and takes shelter, for fear lest he should
perish with them; the other in pity falls to rub them, that he may recover heat
in them, and while he laboreth hard to help them, he gets far better heat to
himself then his unprofitable companion does.

7. With many also pride is a great impediment. If it were to speak to a great
man, they would do it, so it would not displease him. But to go among the poor
multitude, and to take pains with a company of ignorant beggars, or mean
persons, and to sit with them in a smoaky nasty cottage, and there to instruct
them, and exhort them from day to day; where is the person almost that will do
it? Many will much rejoice if they have been instruments of converting a
Gentleman (and they have good cause) But for the common multitude, they look
not after them: As if God were a respecter of the persons of the rich, or the
souls of all were not alike to him. Alas these men little consider how low
Christ did stoop to us! When the God of Glory comes down in flesh, to worms,
and goes Preaching up and down among them from City to City! Not the sillyest
woman that he thought too low to confer with. John 4. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Few rich, and noble, and wise are called. It is the poor that receive the glad
tidings of the Gospel.

8. Lastly, With some also their Ignorance of the duty does hinder them from
performing it. Either they know it not to be a duty, or at least not to be
their duty. Perhaps they have not considered much of it, nor been pressed to it
by their teachers; as they have been to hearing, and praying, and other duties.
If this be thy case who read this, that mere Ignorance, or inconsiderateness
has kept thee from it; then I am in hope now thou art acquainted with thy
duty, thou will set upon it. Object. O but, says one, I am of so weak parts
and gifts that I am unable to manage an exhortation; Object. 1.
especially to men of strong natural parts and understanding. Answ. First, Set
those upon the work who are more able, Secondly, Yet do not think that thou art
so excused thy self, but use faithfully that ability which thou have; not in
teaching those of whom thou should learn, but in instructing those that are
more ignorant then thy self, and in exhorting those that are negligent in the
things which they do know. If you cannot speak well your self, yet you can tell
them what God speaks in his word: It is not the excellency of speech that
wins souls, but the authority of God manifested by that speech, and the
power of his word in the mouth of the instructor. A weak woman may tell what
God says in the plain passages of the word, as well as a learned man. If you
cannot preach to them, yet you can turn to the place in your Bible, or at least
remember them of it, and say, Thus it is written. One of mean parts may
remember the wisest of their duty when they forget it. David received
seasonable advice from Abigail, a woman. When a man's eyes are blinded with
passion, or the deceits of the world, or the lusts of the flesh, a weak
instructor may prove very profitable: for in that case he has as much need to
hear of that he knows, as of that which he does not know.

Object. It is my superior that needs advice and exhortation: and is it fit
for me to teach or reprove my betters? must the wife teach the husband, of whom
the Scripture bids them learn? or must the child teach the parents, whose
duty it is to teach them?

Answ. First, It is fit that husbands should be able to teach their wives, and
parents to teach their children; and God expects they should be so, and
therefore commands the inferiors to learn of them. But if they through their
own negligence do disable themselves, or through their own wickedness do bring
their souls into such misery, as that they have the greatest need of advice and
reproof themselves, and are objects of pity to all that know their case, then
it is themselves, and not you, that break Gods order, by bringing themselves
into disability and misery.

Matter of mere order and manners must be dispensed with in cases of flat
necessity. Though it were your Minister, you must teach him in such a case. It
is the part of parents to provide for the children, and not children for the
parents: and yet if the parents fall into want, must not the children relieve
them? It is the part of the husband to dispose of the affairs of the family
and estate; and yet if he be sick or besides himself, must not the wife do it?
The rich should relieve the poor: but if the rich fall into beggary, they must
be relieved themselves. It is the work of the Physician to look to the health
of others: and yet if he fall sick, some body must help him, and look to him.
So must the meanest servant admonish his master, and the child his parents,
and the wife her husband, and the people their Minister, in cases of necessity.
Secondly, yet let me give you these two cautions here.

1. That you do not pretend necessity when there is none, out of a mere desire
of teaching: There is scarce a more certain discovery of a proud heart, then to
be forwarder, and more desirous to Teach, then to Learn: especially toward
those that are fitter to Teach us.

2. And when the Necessity of your superiors does call for your advice, yet do
it with all possible humility, and modesty, and meekness: Let them discern your
reverence and submission to their superiority, in the humble manner of your
addresses to them: Let them perceive, that you do it not out of a mere teaching
humor, 1 Timothy 5.1.
or proud self-conceitedness. An Elder must be admonished, but not rebuked. If
a wife should tell her husband of his sin in a masterly railing language; or if
a servant reprove his master, or a child his father in a saucy disrespective
way, what good could be expected from such reproof? But if they should meekly
and humbly open to him his sin and danger, and entreat him to bear with them in
what God commands, and his misery requires, and if they could by tears
testify their sense of his case; What father, or master, or husband; could
take this ill?

Object. But some may say, This will make us all Preachers, and cause all to
break over the bounds of their callings: every boy and woman then will turn
preacher.

Ans. 1. This is not taking a Pastoral charge of souls, nor making an office or
calling of it, as Preachers do.

2. And in the way of our callings, every good Christian is a Teacher, and has
a charge of his neighbors soul. Let it be only the voice of a Cain to say, Am I
my brothers keeper? I would have one of these men, that are so loath that
private men should teach them, to tell me, What if a man fall down in a swoon
in the streets, though it be your father or superior; would you not take him up
presently, and use all means you could to recover him? Or would you let him lie
and dye, and say, It is the work of the Physician, and not mine: I will not
invade the Physicians calling? In two cases every man is a Physician. First, In
case of necessity* and when a Physician cannot be had: and secondly, in case
the hurt be so small, that every man can do it as well as the Physician. And in
the same two cases every man must be a Teacher.

Object. Some will further object, to put off this duty, That the party is so
ignorant, or stupid, or careless, or rooted in sin, and has been so often
exhorted in vain; that there is no hope. Ans. How know you when there is no
hope? Cannot God yet cure him? and must it not be by means? and have not many
as far gone been cured? should not a merciful Physician use means while there
is life? and is it not inhuman cruelty in you to give up your friend to the
devil and damnation as hopeless, upon mere backwardness to your duty, or upon
groundless discouragements? What if you had been so given up your self when you
were ignorant? Object. But we must not cast pearls before Swine, nor give that
which is holy to Dogs. Ans. That is but a favorable dispensation of Christ, for
your own safety: When you are in danger to be torn in pieces, Christ would have
you forbear, but what is that to you that are in no such danger? As long as
they will hear, you have encouragement to speak, and may not cast them off as
contemptuous Swine. Obj. O but it is a friend that I have all my dependence on,
and by telling him of his sin and misery, I may lose his love, and so be
undone. Answ. Sure no man that has the face of a Christian will for shame own
such an objection as this: Yet I doubt it often prevails in the heart. Is his
love more to be valued then his safety? or thy own benefit by him, then the
salvation of his soul? Or will thou connive at his damnation, because he is thy
friend? Is that thy best requital of his Friendship? Had thou rather he
should burn for ever in Hell, then thou should lose his favor, or the
maintenance thou have from him? Object. But I hope, though he be not regenerate
and holy, that he is in no such danger. Ans. Nay then, if thou be one that do
not believe Gods word, I have no more to say to thee, Joh. 3.3. Heb. 12.14. I
told you before, that this unbelief was the root of all.

TO conclude this Use,. 6.
that I may prevail with every soul that fears God, to use their utmost
diligence to help all about them, to this blessed Rest, which they hope for
themselves, let me entreat you to consider of these following Motives.

1. Consider, Nature teaches the communicating of good: and grace does
especially dispose the soul thereto. The neglect therefore of this work is a
sin against both Nature and Grace. He that should never seek after God himself,
would quickly be concluded graceless by all: And is not he as certainly
graceless, that does not labor the salvation of others, when we are bound to
love our neighbor as our self? Would you not think that man or woman
unnatural, that would let their own children or neighbors famish in the
streets, while they have provision at hand? And is not he more unnatural that
will let his children or neighbors perish eternally, and will not open his
mouth to save them? Certainly this is most barbarous cruelty. Pity to the
miserable is so natural, that we account an unmerciful cruel man, a very
monster, to be abhored of all. Many vicious men are too much loved in the
world: but a cruel man is abhorred of all. Now that it may appear to you what a
cruel thing this neglect of souls is, do but consider of these two things.
First, How great a work it is. Secondly, And how small a matter it is that thou
refusest to do for the accomplishing of so great a work. First, It is to save
thy brother from eternal flames: that he may not there lie roaring in endless
remediless torments. It is to bring him to the Everlasting Rest, where he may
live in unconceivable happiness with God. Secondly; And what is it that you
should do to help him herein? Why, it is to teach him, and persuade him* and
lay open to him his sin, and his duty, his misery and the remedy, till you have
made him willing to yield to the offers and commands of Christ. And is this so
great a matter for to do, to the attaining of such a blessed End? If God had
bid you give them all your estates to win them, or lay down your lives to save
them, sure you would have refused; when you will not bestow a little breath to
save them! Is not the soul of a Husband, or Wife, or Child, or Neighbor worth
a few words? It is worth this, or it is worth nothing. If they did lie dying in
the streets, and a few words would save their lives, would not every man say,
that he were a cruel wretch that would let them perish, rather than speak to
them? Even the covetuous hypocrite, that James reproves, would give a few
words to the poor; and say, go, and be warmed, and be clothed: What a
barbarous unmerciful wretch then art thou, that wilt not vouchsafe a few words
of serious sober admonition, to save the soul of thy neighbor or friend?
Cruelty and unmercifulness to men's bodies is a most damnable sin: but to their
souls much more, as the soul is of greater worth then the body; and as eternity
is of greater moment then this short time. Alas, you do not see or feel what
case their souls are in, when they are in Hell, for want of your faithful
admonition! Little know you what many a soul may now be feeling, who have been
your neighbors and acquaintance, and dyed in their sins; on whom you never
bestowed one hours sober advice for the preventing of their unhappiness. If you
did know their misery, you would now do more to bring them out of hell: but
alas it is too late, you should have done it while they were with you, Nicocl^s.
it is now too late. As one said in reproach of Physicians; that they were the
most happy men because all their good deeds and cures were seen above ground to
their praise, but all their mistakes and neglects were buried out of sight: so
I may say to you, many a neglect of yours to the souls about you may be now
buried with those souls in Hell, out of your sight and hearing, and therefore
now it does not much trouble you: but alas they feel it though you feel it not.
May not many a Papist rise up in judgment against us and condemn us? They will
give their lands and estates to have so many Masses said for the souls of their
deceased friends (when it is too late) to bring them out of a feigned
Purgatory: And we will not ply them with persuasions while we may, to save them
from real threatened condemnation: Though this cheaper means may prove
effectual, when that dearer way of Papists will do no good: Jeremy cried out,
My bowels, My bowels, I cannot hold my peace, because of a temporal
destruction of his people: And do not our bowels yearn? and can we hold our
peace at men's eternal destruction?

2. Consider, What a rate Christ did value souls at, and what he has done
toward the saving of them: He thought them worth his blood and sufferings: and
shall not we then think them worth the breath of our mouths? Will you not set
in with Christ for so good a work? Nor do a little, where he has done so much?

3. Consider, What fit objects of pity they are. It is no small misery, to be
an enemy to God, unpardoned, unsanctified, strangers to the Churches special
privileges, without hope of salvation if they so live and dye. And which is
yet more, they are dead in these their trespasses and miseries, and have not
hearts to feel them, or to pity themselves. If others do not pity them, they
will have no pity, for it is the nature of their disease to make them piti^less
to their own souls, yea to make them the most cruel destroyers of themselves.

4. Consider, It was once thy own case. Thou wast once a slave of Satan thy
self, and confidently did go on in the way to condemnation. What if thou
had been let alone in that way? Whither had thou gone? and what had become
of thee? It was Gods Argument to the Israelites, to be kind to strangers,
because themselves were sometime strangers in Egypt; so may it persuade you to
show compassion to them that are strangers to Christ, and to the hopes and
comforts of the Saints, because you were once as strange to them your selves.

5. Consider, The Relation that thou stand in toward them. It is thy
neighbor, thy brother, whom thou art bound to be tender of, and to love as thy
self. He that loves not his brother whom ^e sees daily, 1 John 3.10. and
4.20.21.
most certainly does not love God whom he never saw: And does he love his
brother, that will stand by, and see him go to hell, and never hinder him?

Glossa igitur Lyrani in Mat. 25. est improbanda ubi dicit, Considerandum etiam
quod hic non sit mentio do operibus miserecordiae ex part animae quia illa
pertinent pro majori part ad praelatos, ad quos pertinet alios instruere and
dirigere in Salutem.
6. Consider, What a deal of guilt this neglect does lay upon thy soul. First,
Thou art guilty of the murder, and damnation of all those souls whom thou do
thus neglect. He that stands by, and sees a man in a pit, and will not pull
him out if he can, does drown him. And he that stands by while thieves rob
him, or murderers kill him, and will not help him if he can, is accessory to
the fact. And so he that will silently suffer men to damn their souls, or will
let Satan and the world deceive them, and not offer to help them, will
certainly be Judged guilty of damning them. And is not this a most dreadful
consideration? O Sirs, how many souls then have every one of us been guilty of
damning! What a number of our neighbors and acquaintance are dead, in whom we
discerned no signs of sanctification, and we never did once plainly tell them
of it, or how to be recovered! If you had been the cause but of burning a man's
house through your negligence, or of undoing him in the world, or of destroying
his body, how would it trouble you as long as you lived? If you had but killed
a man unadvisedly, it would much disquiet you. We have known those that have
been guilty of murder, that could never sleep quietly after, nor have one
comfortable day, their own consciences did so vex and torment them. O then what
a heart may thou have, that have been guilty of murdering such a multitude of
precious souls? Remember this when thou look thy friend or carnal neighbor
in the face: and think with thy self: Can I find in my heart, through my
silence and negligence, to be guilty of his everlasting burning in Hell? Me
thinks such a thought should even untye the tongue of the dumb.

2. And as you are guilty of their perishing, so are you of every sin which in
the mean time they do commit. If they were converted they would break off their
course of sinning: and if you did your duty, you know not but they might be
converted. As he that is guilty of a man's drunkenness, is guilty of all the
sins which that drunkenness does cause him to commit. So he that is guilty of a
man's continuing unregenerate, is also guilty of the sins of his unregeneracie.
How many curses, and oaths, and scorns at Gods ways, and other sins of most
hanious nature, are many of you guilty of, that little think of it? You that
live godlily, and take much pains for your own souls, Qui non vetat peccare cum
potest jubet.
and seem fearful of sinning, would take it ill of one that should tell you,
that you are guilty of weekly or daily whoredoms, and drunkenness, and
swearing, and lying, etc. And yet it is too true, even beyond all denial, by
your neglect of helping those who do commit them.

3. You are guilty also, as of the sin, so of all the dishonor that God has
thereby. And how much is that? And how tender should a Christian be of the
Glory of God? the least part whereof is to be valued before all our lives.

4. You are guilty also of all those Judgments which those men's sins do bring
upon the town or country where they live. I know you are not such Atheists,
but you believe it is God that sends sickness, and famine, and war; and also
that it is only sin that moves him to this indignation. What doubt then is
there but you are the cause of Judgments, who do not strive against those sins
which do cause them? God has stayed long in patience, to see if any would deal
plainly with the sinners of the times, and so free their own souls from the
guilt: But when he sees that there is almost none, but all become guilty, no
wonder then if he lay the Judgment upon all. We have all seen the drunkards,
and heard the swearers in our streets, and we would not speak, to them, we have
al lived in the midst of an Ignorant, worldly, unholy people; and we have not
spoke to them with earnestness, plainness, and love: No wonder then if God
speak in his wrath both to them and us. Eli did not commit the sin himself, and
yet he speaks so coldly against it, that he also must bear the punishment.
Guns and Canons speak against sin in England, because the inhabitants would not
speak. God pleads with us with fire and sword, because we would not plead
with sinners with our tongues. God locketh up the clouds, because we have shut
up our mouths. The earth is grown hard as Iron to us, because we have hardened
our hearts against our miserable neighbors. The cries of the poor for bread are
loud, because our cries against sin have been so low. Sicknesses run apace from
house to house, and sweep away the poor unprepared inhabitants, because we
swept not out the sin that breeds them. When you look over the woeful
desolations in England, how ready are you to cry out on them that were the
causers of it? But did you consider how deeply your selves are guilty? And as
Christ said in another case, Luke 19 40. If these should hold their peace, the
stones would speak: So because we held our peace at the Ignorance, ungodliness,
and wickedness of our places, therefore do these plagues and Judgments speak.

7. Consider, What a thing it will be to look upon your poor friends eternally
in those flames, and to think that your neglect was a great cause of it? and
that there was a time when you might have done much to prevent it? If you
should there perish with them, it would be no small aggravation of your
torment: If you be in Heaven, it would sure be a sad thought, were it possible
that any sorrow could dwell there. To hear a multitude of poor souls there cry
out for ever, O if you would but have told me plainly of my sin and danger, and
dealt roundly with me, and set it home, I might have escaped all this torment,
and been now in Rest! O what a sad voice will this be!

8. Consider, What a Joy is it like to be in Heaven to you, to meet those there
whom you have been means to bring thither! To see their faces, and join with
them for ever in the praises of God, whom you were instruments to bring to the
knowledge and obedence of Christ. What it will be then we know not: But sure
according to our present temper, it would be no small Joy.

9. Consider, how many souls have we drawn into the way of damnation, or at
least hardened, or settled in it? And should we not now be more diligent to draw
men to life? There is not one of us, but have had our companions in sin,
especially in the days of our Ignorance and unregeneracy. We have enticed
them, or encouraged them to Sabbath-breaking, drinking, or revellings, or
dancings, and stageplayes, or wantonness, and vanities, if not to scorn and
oppose the godly: We cannot so easily bring them from sin again, as we did draw
them to it: Many are dead already without any change discovered, who were our
companions in sin: we know not how many are and will be in hell that we drew
thither, and there may curse us in their torments for ever. And does it not
beseem us then to do as much to save men, as we have done to destroy them? and
be merciful to some, as we have been cruel to others?

10. Consider, how diligent are all the enemies of these poor souls to draw
them to Hell? And if no body be diligent in helping them to Heaven, what is
like to become of them? The Devil is tempting them day and night: Their inward
lusts are still working and withdrawing them: The flesh is still pleading for
its delights and profits; Their old companions are ready to entice them to sin,
and to disgrace Gods ways and people to them, and to contradict the doctrine
of Christ that should save them, and to increase their prejudice, and dislike
of holiness. Seducing Teachers are exceeding diligent in sowing tares, and in
drawing off the unstable from the doctrine and way of life: so that when we
have done all we can, and hope we have won men, what a multitude of late have
after all been taken in this snare? And shall a seducer be so unwearied in
Proselyting poor ungrounded souls to his Fancies? And shall not a sound
Christian be much more unwearied in laboring to win men to Christ and Life?

11. Consider, The neglect of this does very deeply wound when conscience is
awaked. When a man comes to dye, conscience will ask him, What good have thou
done in thy life time? The saving of souls is the greatest good work, what have
thou done toward this? How many have thou dealt faithfully with? I have often
observed, that the consciences of dying men, do very much wound them for this
omission. For my own part (to tell you my experience) when ever I have been
near death, my conscience has accused me more for this then for any sin: It
would bring every ignorant profane neighbor to my remembrance* to whom I never
made known their danger: It would tell me, Thou should have gone to them in
private, and told them plainly of their desperate danger, without bashfulness
or dawbing; though it had been when thou should have eaten or slept, if thou
had no other time: Conscience would then remember me, how at such a time, or
such a time I was in company with the ignorant, or was riding by the way with a
wilful sinner, and had a fit opportunity to have dealt with them, but did not:
or at least did it by the halves, and to little purpose. The Lord grant I may
better obey conscience hereafter while I live and have time, that it may have
less to accuse me of at death.

12. Consider further, It is now a very seasonable time which you have for this
work. Take it therefore while you have it. There are times wherein it is not
safe to speak, it may cost you your liberties, or your lives; It is not so now
with us. Besides, your neighbors will be here with you but a very little
while: They will shortly dye, and so must you. Speak to them therefore while
you may; set upon them, and give them no rest till you have prevailed. Do it
speedily, for it must be now or never. A Roman Emperor when he heard of a
neighbor dead, he asked, And what did I do for him before he dyed? and it
grieved him that a man should dye near him, and it could not be said that he
had first done him any good. Me thinks you should think of this when you hear
that any of your neighbors are dead; But I had far rather while they are alive
you would ask the question: There is such and such a neighbor (alas how many)
that are ignorant and ungodly, what have I done or said that might have in it
any likelihood of recovering them? They will shortly be dead, and then it is
too late.

13. Consider, this is a work of greatest charity, and yet such as every one of
you may perform. If it were to give them moneys, the poor have it not to give:
if to fight for them, the weak cannot: if it were to suffer, the fearful will
say, they cannot: But every one has a tongue to speak to a sinner. The poorest
may be thus charitable, as well as the rich.

14. Consider also the happy consequences of this work where it is faithfully
done: To name some;

1. You may be instrumental in that blessed work of saving souls, a work that
Christ came down and died for, a work that the Angels of God rejoice in; for
says the holy Ghost, If any of you do err from the truth, and one convert
him, let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam.
5:19, 20. And how can God more highly honor you, then to make you instruments
in so great a work?

2. Such souls will bless you here and hereafter: They may be angry with you at
first; but if your words prevail and succeed, they will bless the day that ever
they knew you, and bless God that sent you to speak to them.

3. If you succeed, God will have much glory by it; He will have one more to
value and accept of his Son, on whom Christ's blood has attained its ends; He
will have one more to love him, and daily worship and fear him, and to do him
service in his Church.

4. The Church also will have gain by it; There will be one less provoker of
wrath, and one more to strive with God against Sin and Judgment, and to engage
against the Sinners of the Times, and to win others by Doctrine and Example. If
thou could but convert one persecuting Saul, he might become a Paul, and do
the Church more service then ever thou did thy self; however, the healing of
Sinners is the surest method for preventing or removing of Judgments.

5. It is the way also to the purity and flourishing of the Church, and to the
right erecting and executing the Discipline of Christ; if men would but do what
they ought with their neighbors in private, what a help would it be to the
success of the Public endeavors of the Ministry? and what hope might we have
that daily some would be added to the Church? and if any be obstinate, yet this
is the first course that must be taken to reclaim them; who dare separate from
them, or excommunicate them before they have been first thoroughly admonished,
and instructed in private? according to Christ's Rule, Matthew. 18.15, 16.

6. It brings much advantage to your selves: First, It will increase your
graces; both as it is a course that God will bless, and as it is an acting of
them in this persuading of others; He that will not let you lose a cup of water
which is given for him, will not let you lose these greater works of Charity;
Besides, those that have practiced this duty most conscionably, do find by
experience, that they never go on more speedily and prosperously toward
heaven, Dan. 11.33.
then when they do most to help others thither with them: It is not here as
with worldly treasure, the more you give away, the less you have; but here, the
more you give, the more you have: The setting forth Christ in his fullness to
others, will warm your own hearts, and stir up your love; The opening of the
evil and danger of sin to others will increase your hatred of it, and much
engage your selves against it. Secondly, And it seems that it will increase
your Glory as well as your Grace, both as a duty which God will so reward, (
For those that convert many to Righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever, Dan. 12.3.) and also as we shall there behold them in heaven, and be
their associates in blessedness, whom God made us here the instruments to
convert. Thirdly, However, it will give us much peace of Conscience, whether we
succeed or not, to think that. we were faithful, and did our best to save
them, and that we are clear from the blood of all men, and their perishing
shall not lie upon us. Fourthly, Besides, that is a work, that if it succeed,
does exceedingly rejoice an honest heart: He that has any sense of Gods Honor,
or the least affection to the soul of his brother, must needs rejoice much at
his conversion, whosoever be the Instrument, but especially when God makes
our selves the means of so blessed a work: If God make us the Instuments of
any temporal good, it is very comfortable, but much more of eternal good? There
is naturally a rejoicing follows every good work, answerable to the degree of
its goodness; ^e that does most good, has usually the most happy and
comfortable life: If men knew the pleasure that there is in doing good, they
would not seek after their pleasure so much in evil; for my own part, it is an
unspeakable comfort to me, that God has made me an instrument for the
recovering of so many from bodily diseases, and saving their natural lives: but
all this is yet nothing to the comfort I have in the success of my labors, in
the conversion and confirmation of souls; it is so great a joy to me, that it
drowneth the painfulness of my daily duties, and the trouble of my daily
languishing and bodily griefs! and makes all these, with all oppositions and
difficulties in my work to be easy and as nothing: and of all the personal
mercies that ever I received, next to his love in Christ, and to my soul, I
must most joyfully bless him for the plenteous success of my endeavors upon
others; O what fruits then might I have seen, if I had been more faithful, and
plied the work in private and public as I ought! I know we have need to be
very jealous of our deceitful hearts in this point, lest our rejoicing should
come from our pride, and self-ascribing. Naturally we would every man be in the
place of God, and have the praise of every good work ascribed to our selves:
but yet, to imitate our Father in goodness and mercy, and to rejoice in that
degree we attain to, is the part of every child of God. I tell you therefore,
to persuade you from my own experience, that if you did but know what a joyful
thing it is to be an instrument for the converting and saving of souls, you
would set upon it presently, and follow it night and day through the greatest
discouragements and resistance. Fifthly, I might also tell you of the
honorableness of this work, but I will pass by that, lest I excite your pride
instead of your zeal.

And thus I have showed you what should move and persuade you to this duty. Let
me now conclude with a word of Entreaty: First, to all the godly in general.
Secondly, To some above others in particular, to set upon the conscionable
performance of this most excellent Work.

CHAP. XII. An advice to some more specially to help others to this Rest, pressed
largely on Ministers and Parents.
SECT. I.. 1.

UP then every man that has a tongue, and is a Servant of Christ, and do
something of this your Masters Work: Why has he given you a tongue, but to
speak in his Service? And how can you serve him more eminently, then in the
saving of Souls? He that will pronounce you blessed at the last day, and
sentence you to the Kingdom prepared for you, because you fed him, and clothed
him, and visited him, etc. in his Members, will sure pronounce you blessed for
so great a work as is the bringing over of souls to his Kingdom, and helping to
drive the match betwixt them and him. He that says, The poor you have always
with you, has left the ungodly always with you, that you might still have
matter to exercise your Charity upon. O, if you have the hearts of Christians,
(...) or of men in you, let them yearn toward your poor, ignorant, ungodly
neighbors; Alas, there is but a step betwixt them and death, and hell; many
hundred diseases are waiting ready to seize on them, and if they dye
unregenerate, they are lost for ever. Have you hearts of Rock, that cannot
pity men in such a case as this? If you believe not the Word of God, and the
danger of Sinners, why are you Christians your selves? If you do believe it,
why do you not bestir you to the helping of others? Do you not care who is
damned, so you be saved? If so, you have as much cause to pity your selves;
for it is a frame of spirit utterly inconsistent with Grace; should you not
rather say as the Leapers of Samaria, 1 Kings 7.9.
Is it not a day of glad tidings, and do we sit still, and hold your peace?
Has God had so much mercy on you, and will you have no mercy on your poor
neighbors? You need not go far to find objects for your pity: Look but into
your streets, or into the next house to you, and you will probably find some.
Have you never an ignorant, unregenerate neighbor that sets his heart below,
and neglects Eternity? O what blessed place do you live in, where there there
is none such? If there be not some of them in thine own Family it is well; and
yet art thou silent? Do thou live close by them, or meet them in the streets,
or labor with them, or travel with them, or sit and talk with them, and say
nothing to them of their souls, or the life to come? If their houses were on
fire, thou would run and help them, and will thou not help them, when their
souls are almost at the fire of Hell? If thou knew but a Remedy for their
Diseases thou would tell it them, or else thou would judge thy self
guilty of their death. Cardan Non dubito quin iste fit apud inferos quod
moriens artem suam mortalibus inviserit. vid. Jo. van. Helmont de Lithiasi cap.
7. p. 123.
speaks of one that had a Receipt that would suddenly and certainly dissolve
the stone in the Bladder, and he concludes of him, that he makes no doubt but
that man is in hell, because he never revealed it to any before he dyed: What
shall we say then of them that know of the remedy for curing souls, and do not
reveal it, nor persuade men to make use of it? Is it not Hypocrisy to pray
daily for their Conversion and Salvation, and never once endeavor to procure
it? And is it not Hypocrisy to pray, That Gods Name may be Hallowed, and never
to endeavor to bring men to Hallow it, nor hinder them from profaning it? And
can you pray [ Let thy Kingdom come] and yet never labor for the coming, or
increase of that Kingdom? Is it no grief to your hearts, to see the Kingdom of
Satan so to flourish? and to see him lead captive such a multitude of souls?
You take on you that you are Soldiers in Christ's Army, and will you do nothing
against his prevailing enemies? You pray also daily, That his Will may be done,
and should you not daily then persuade men to do it, and dissuade them from
sinning against it? You pray, That God would forgive them their sins, and that
he would not lead them into Temptation, but deliver them from evil, And yet
will you not help them against Temptations? nor help to deliver them from the
greatest evil? nor help them to Repent and Believe, that they may be forgiven?
Alas, that your Prayers and your Practice should so much disagree! Look about
you therefore Christians with an eye of compassion on the ignorant ungodly
sinners about you; be not like the Priest or Levite that saw the man wounded,
and passed by: God did not so pass by you when it was your own case. Are not
the souls of your neighbors fallen into the hands of Satan? Does not their misery
cry out unto you, Help, help! As you have any compassion toward men in the
greatest misery, Help! As you have the hearts of men, and not of Tigers in you,
Help! Alas, how forward are Hypocrites in their Sacrifice, and how backward to
show mercy! How much in Praying and duties of worship, and how little in plain
Reproof and Exhortation* and other duties of compassion! And yet God has told
them, That he will have mercy and not sacrifice (that is mercy before
sacrifice) And how forward are these Hypocrites to censure Ministers for
neglecting their duties? yea, to expect more duty from one Minister, then ten
can perform? and yet they make no conscience of neglecting their own! Nay how
forward are they to separate from those about them? and how censorious against
those that admit them to the Lords Supper, or that join with them? and yet will
they not be brought to deal with them in Christ's way for their recovery? As if
other men were to work, and they only to sit by, and Judge! Because they know
it is a work of trouble, and will many times set men against them, therefore no
persuasion will bring them to it. They are like men that see their neighbors
sick of the plague, or drowning in the water, or taken captive by the enemy;
and they dare not venture to relieve him themselves: but none so forward to put
on others. So are these men the greatest expecters of duty, and the lest
performers.

. 2.
SECT. II.
BUt as this duty lies upon all in general, so upon some more especially,
according as God has called or qualified them thereto. To them therefore more
particularly I will address my exhortation: Whether they be such as have more
opportunity and advantages for this work, or such as have better abilities to
perform it, or such as have both. And these are of several sorts.

1. All you that God has given more learning and knowledge to, and endued with
better parts for utterance, then your neighbors, God expects his duty
especially at your hand. The strong are made to help the weak; and those that
see must direct the blind. God looks for this faithful improvement of your
parts and gifts, which if you neglect, it were better for you that you never
had received them, for they will but further your condemnation; and be as
useless to your own Salvation, as they were to others.

. 3.
SECT. III.
2. ALl those that have special familiarity with some ungodly men, and that
have interest in them, God looks for this duty at their hands. Christ himself
did eat and drink with Publicans and sinners, but it was only to be their
Physician, and not their companion. Who knows but God gave you interest in
them, to this end, that you might be means of their recovery. They that will
not regard the words of another, will regard a brother, or sister, or husband,
or wife, or near friend, Besides that the bond of friendship does engage you to
more kindness and compassion then ordinary.

SECT. IV.. 4.

3. Physicians that are much about dying men, should in a special manner make
conscience of this duty: They have a treble advantage. First, They are at hand.
Secondly, They are with men in sickness and dangers, when the ear is more open,
and the heart less stubborn then in time of health. He that made a scorn of
godliness before, well then be of another mind, and hear counsel then, if ever
he will hear it. Thirdly, Besides, they look upon their Physician as a man in
whose hand is their life: or at least may do much to save them, and therefore
they will the more regardfully hear his advice. O therefore you that are of
this honorable profession, do not think this a work besides your calling, as
if it belonged to none but Ministers; except you think it besides your calling
to be compassionate, or to be Christians. O help therefore to fit your patients
for heaven: and whether you see they are for Life or for Death, teach them both
how to live and to dye, and give them some Physic for their souls, as you do
for their bodies. Blessed be God that very many of the chief Physicians of this
Age have by their eminent piety vindicated their profession from the common
imputation of Atheism and profaneness.

SECT. V.. 5.

4. ANother sort that have excellent advantages for this duty, is men that have
wealth and authority, and are of great place and command in the world,
especially that have many that live in dependence on them. O what a world of
good might Gentlemen, and Knights, and Lords do, that have a great many of
Tenants, and that are the leaders of the Country, if they had but hearts to
improve their interest and advantage. Little do you that are such think of the
duty that lies upon you in this! Have you not all your honor and riches from
God? and is it not evident then that you must employ them for the best
advantage of his service? Do you not know who has said, that to whom men
commit much, from them they will expect the more? You have the greatest
opportunities to do good of most men in the world; Your Tenants dare not
contradict you, lest you dispossess them or their children, of their
habitations; They fear you more then they do God himself; Your frown will do
more with them, then the threatenings of the Scripture, They will sooner obey
you, then God: If you speak to them for God and their souls, you may be
regarded, when even a Minister that they fear not, shall be despised. If they
do but see you favor the way of Godliness, they will lightly counterfeit it at
least, to please you, especially if they live within the reach of your
observation. O therefore, as you value the honor of God, your own comfort, and
the Salvation of souls, improve your interest to the utmost for God. Go visit
your Tenants and neighbors houses, and see whether they worship God in their
families; and take all opportunities to press them to their duties. Do not
despise them, because they are poor or simple: Remember, God is no respecter of
persons, your flesh is of no better metal then theirs, nor will the worms spare
your faces or hearts any more then theirs; nor will your bones or dust bear the
badge of your Gentility, you must all be equals when you stand in Judgment. And
therefore help the soul of a poor man as well as if he were a Gentleman: And
let men see that you excel others as much in piety, heavenliness, compassion,
and diligence in Gods work, as you do in riches and honor in the world.

1 Cor. 1.26.
I confess you are like to be singular if you take this course: but then
remember, you shall be singular in glory, for few great and mighty, and noble
are called.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
5. ANother sort that have special opportunity to this work, of helping others
to heaven, is, The Ministers of the Gospel: As they have, or should have more
ability then others, so it is the very work of their calling; and every one
expects it at their hands, and will better submit to their teaching, then to
other men's. I intend not these instructions so much to teachers, as to others,
and therefore I shall say but little to them: and if all, or most Ministers
among us were as faithful and diligent as some, I would say nothing. But
because it is otherwise, let me give these two or three words of advice to my
Brethren in this office.

1. Be sure that the recovering and saving of souls, be the main end of your
studies and preaching. O do not propound any low and base ends to your selves.
This is the end of your calling, let it be also the end of your endeavors. Act.
20. and 26.18.
God forbid that you should spend a weeks study to please the people; or to
seek the advancing of you own reputations. Dare you appear in the Pulpit on
such a business, and speak for your selves, when you are sent, and pretend to
speak for Christ? Dare you spend that time, and wit, and parts for your selves?
And wast the Lords day in seeking applause, which God has set apart for
himself? O what notorious sacrilege is this! Set out the work of God as
skilfully and adornedly as you can: But still let the winning of souls be your
end, and let all your studies and labors be serviceable thereto. Let not the
window be so painted, as to keep out the light; but always Judge that the best
means, that most conduces to the end. Do not think that God is best served by
a neat, starched, laced Oration: But that he is the able, skilful Minister,
that is best skilled in the art of instructing, convincing, persuading, and so
winning of souls: and that is the best Sermon that is best in these. When you
once grow otherwise minded, and seek not God, but your selves, God will make
you the basest and most contemptible of men, as you make your selves the most
sinful and wretched. Has not this brought down the Ministry of England once
already? It is true of your reputation, as Christ says of your lives; They
that will save them shall lose them. O let the vigor also of your persuasions
show, that you are sensible on how weighty a business you are sent. O Preach
with that seriousness, and fervor, as men that believe their own doctrine; and
that know their hearers must either be prevailed with, or be damned. What you
would do to save them from Everlasting burning, that do, while you have the
opportunity, and price in your hand: that people may discern that you are in
good sadness, and mean as you speak: and that you are not stageplayers, but
preachers of the doctrine of Salvation. Remember what Cicero says, that if the
matter be never so combustible, yet if you put not fire to it, it will not
burn: And what Erasmus says, that a hot Iron will pierce when a cold one will
not; And if the wise men of the world account you mad, say as Paul, Amlingus
was much used to that saying, when he was reproached for his zeal. Si
insanimus, Deo insanimus.
If we are besides our selves, it is to God: And remember that Christ was so
busy in doing good, that his friends themselves begun to lay hands on him,
thinking he had been besides himself, Mark. 3.

SECT. VII.
. 7.
2. THe second and chief word of advice that I would give you, is this, Do not
think that all your work is in your studies, and in the Pulpit. I confess that
is great, but alas, it is but a small part of your task. You are Shepherds,
and must know every sheep, and what is their disease, and mark their strayings,
and help to cure them, and fetch them home. If the paucity of Ministers in
great congregations (which is the great unobserved mischief in England, that
cries for reformation) did not make it a thing impossible in many places, I
should charge the Ministers of England with most notorious unfaithfulness, for
neglecting so much the rest of their work, which calls for their diligence as
much as public Preaching. O learn of Paul, Act. 20.19, 20, 31. to preach
publikly, and from house to house night and day with tears. Let there not be a
soul in your charge that shall not be particulary instructed and watched over.
Go from house to house daily, and enquire how they grow in knowledge, and
holiness, and on what grounds they build their hopes of salvation: and whether
they walk uprightly, and perform the duties of their several relations; and
use the means to increase their abilities. See whether they daily worship God
in their families, and set them in a way, and teach them how to do it: Confer
with them about the doctrines and practice of Religion, and how they receive
and profit by public teaching: and answer all their carnal objections; keep in
familiarily with them, that you may maintain your interest in them, and improve
all your interest for God. See that no seducers do creep in among them, or if
they do, be diligent to countermine them, and preserve your people from
infection of Heresies or Schisms: or if they be infected, be diligent to
procure their recovery; Not with passion and lordliness, but with patience and
condescension: As Musculus did by the Anabaptists, visiting them in Prison
where the Magistrate had cast them, and there instructing and relieving them,
and though they reviled him when he came, and called him a false prophet, and
Antichristian seducer, that thirsted for their blood, yet he would not so leave
them, till at last by his meekness and love he had overcome them, and recovered
many to the truth and to unity with the Church.

Have a watchful eye upon each particular sheep in your flock: Do not do as the
lazy separatists, that gather a few of the best together, and take then only
for their charge, leaving the rest to sink or swim, and giving them over to the
Devil and their lusts, and except it be by a Sermon in the Pulpit, scarce ever
endeavoring their salvation, nor once looking what becomes of them. O let it
not be so with you! If any be weak in the faith, receive him, but not to
doubtful disputations. If any be too careless of their duties, and too little
savor the things of the Spirit, let them be pitied, and not neglected; Romans
14.1.
If any walk scandalously, and disorderly, deal with them for their recovery
with all diligence, and patience; and set before them the hainousness and
danger of their sin: If they prove obstinate after all, then avoid them and
cast them off; But do not so cruelly as to unchurch them by hundreds and by
thousands and separate from them as so many Pagans, and that before any such
means has been used for their recovery. If they are ignorant, it may be your
fault as much as theirs; and however, they are fitter to be instructed then
rejected; except they absolutely refuse to be taught. Christ will give you no
thanks for keeping, or putting out such from his School, that are unlearned,
when their desire or will is to be taught. I confess it is easier to shut out
the ignorant, then to bestow our pains night and day in teaching them; but woe
to such slothful, unfaithful servants! Who then is a faithful and a wise
servant, Mat. 24 45.46
whom his Lord has made Ruler over his household, to give them their meat in
due season, according to every ones age and capacity? Blessed is that servant,
whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. O, be not asleep while the
woolfe is waking! Let your eye be quick in observing the dangers and strayings
of your people. If jealousies, heart burnings, or contentions arise among them,
quench them before they break out into raging, unresistible flames: As soon as
you discern any turn worldly, or proud, or factious, or self-conceited, or
disobedient, or cold, and slothful in his duty; delay not, but presently make
out for his recovery: Remember how many are loosers in the loss of a soul.

. 8.
SECT. VIII.
DO not dawb, or deal slightly with any; some will not tell their people
plainly of their sins, because they are great men, and some because they are
godly, as if none but the poor and the wicked should be plainly dealt with: Do
not you so, but reprove them sharply (though differently, and with wisdom) that
they may be sound in the Faith. Poor Zegedine suffered many years captivity in
misery and irons by the Turks, for one word in a Sermon, which distasted a
woman without the least cause. As Latimer says, We cannot now say to great
sinners Vae vobis, but we shall be called Coram nobis.
When the Palsgrave chose Pitiscus for his Household Chaplain, he charged him,
that without fear he should discharge his duty, and freely admonish him of his
faults as the Scriptures do require; Such encouragement from great ones, would
embolden Ministers, and free themselves from the unhappiness of sinning
unreproved. If Gentlemen would give no more thanks to Doegs and Accusers of the
Ministers, then Wigandus his Prince did to that flattering Lawyer, who accused
him for speaking to Princes too plainly, they would learn quickly to be silent;
when they had been forced as Hamans themselves, to clothe Mordecai, and set him
in honor. However, God does sufficiently encourage us to deal plainly, He has
bid us speak and fear not; He promised to stand by us, and he will be our
security; He may suffer us to be Anathema secundum dici (as Bueholtzer said)
but not secundum esse; He will keep us, as he did Husse's heart from the power
of the fire, though they did beat it, when they found it among the ashes; they
may burn our bones, as Bucers and Phagius his, or they may raise lies of us
when we are dead, as of Luther, Calvin, and Oecolampadius; but the soul feels
not this, that is rejoicing with his Lord: In the mean time let us be as well
learned in the Art of Suffering (as Zenophon) as they are in the Art of
Reproaching: Numb. 22.11. 1 King. 22.27.
I had rather hear from the mouth of Balack [ God has kept thee from honor,]
or from Ahab, [Feed him with the bread and water of affliction] or from Amaziah
[Art thou made of the Kings Counsel? 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
forbear, why should thou be smitten,] then to hear Conscience say, [ Thou
have betrayed souls to damnation by thy cowardice and Silence; Ezekiel. 3.18.20.
and 33.8. Matthew. 25.30.
] or to hear God say [ Their blood will I require at thy hands,] or to hear
from Christ the Judge [ Cast the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,] Yea, or to hear these Sinners cry out
against me in eternal fire, and with implacable rage to charge me with their
undoing.

And as you must be plain and serious, Lege Knoxi orationem ante obitum ad
Symmistas and Presbyteros.
so labor to be skilful and discreet, that the manner may somewhat answer the
excellency of the matter: How ought have I heard a stammering tongue, with
rediculous expressions, vain repetitions, tedious circumlocations, and unseemly
pronunciation, to spoil most precious spiritual Doctrine, and make the Hearers
either loath it, or laugh at it? How common are these extremes in the Ministers
of England? That while one spoils the food of Life by Affectation, and
new-fashioned mincing, and pedantick toys, either setting forth a little and
mean matter with a great deal of froth, and gaudy dressing, so that there is more
of the shell or paring, then of the meat: or like childrens Babies, that when
you have taken away the dressing, you have taken away all, or else hiding
excellent Truths in a heap of vain Rhetoric, and deforming its naked beauty
with their paintings, so that no more seriousness can be perceived in their
Sermons, then in a Schoolboys Declamations; and our people are brought to hear
Sermons as they do Stageplays, because Ministers behave themselves but as the
Actors; On the other side, how many by their slovenly dressing, and the
uncleanness of the dish that it is served up in, do make men loath and nauseate
the food of Life, and even despise and cast up that which should nourish them?
Such Novices are admitted into the Sacred Function, to the hardening of the
wicked, the sadning of the godly, and the disgrace and wrong of the Work of the
Lord; and those that are not able to speak Sense or Reason, are made the
Ambassadors of the most High God.

I know our style must not be the same with different Auditories; Our language
must not only be suited to our matter, but also to our hearers, or else the
best Sermon may be worst; we must not read the highest Books to the lowest
Form; Therefore was Luther wont to say, That Quipueriliter, populariter,
trivialiter, and simplicissime docent, optimi ad vulgus sunt concionatores; but
yet it is a poor Sermon that has nothing but words and noise. Every Reasonable
soul has both Judgment and Affection, and every Rational Spiritual Sermon must
have both: A Discourse that has Judgment without Affection, is dead, and
uneffectual, and that which has Affection without Judgment, is mad and
transporting: Remember the Proverb, Non omnes qui habent citharam, sunt
citharaedi, Every man is not a Musician that has an Instrument, or that can
jangle it and make an noise on it: And that other Proverb, Multi sunt qui Boves
stimulant, pauci aratores, Many can prick the Oxen, but few can Plow; so many
Preachers can talk loud and earnestly, but few can guide their Flock aright, or
open to them solidly the mysteries of the Gospel, and show the true mean
betwixt the extremes of contrary errors: I know both must be done; Holding the
Plow without driving the Oxen, does nothing and driving without holding, makes
mad work, and is worse then nothing: But yet remember, that every Plow-boy can
drive, but to guide is more difficult, and therefore belongs to the Master
Workman; The violence of the Natural motion of the Winds can drive on the
Ship; but there is necessary a Rational motion to guide and govern it, or else
it will quickly be on the Rocks or Shelves, either broke or sunk, and had
better lie still in the Harbor, or at Anchor: The horses that have no Reason
can set the Coach or Cart a going, but if there be not some that have reason to
guide them, it were better stand still. O therefore let me bespeak you, my
brethren, in the Name of the Lord, especially those that are more young and
weak, that you tremble at the greatness of this holy Employment, and run not up
into a Pulpit as boldly as into the Market place; Study and Pray, and Pray and
Study, till you are become Workmen that need not be ashamed, 2 Timothy 2.15.
rightly dividing the Word of Truth, that your people may not be ashamed, or
aweary to hear you; But that besides your clear unfolding of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, you may also be Masters of your peoples Affections, and may be as
potent in your divine Rhetoric, as Cicero in his Humane, who, as it is is
said, while he pleaded for Ligarius, Arma de imperatoris quantumvis irati manu
excusserit, and misero supplici veniam impetrarit. Or as it said of excellent
Bucholcerus in rostra sua and mediae concionis suggestum nunquam ascendit, quin
de cordibus hominum ipsis quos fere vellet affectus excuteret. Templum
ingrediebatur quis sensu irae divinae perterritus? Deum immortalem! quanta
fidei voluptate perfusus domum redibat? Calamitatum angore and tentationum
fluctibus quassabatur alius: non doloris tantum allevationem, sed propositum
etiam sibi ingenerari sentiebat, mala quaeque forti constantique animo
perferendi. Erat omni vitiorum caeno contaminatus aliquis: flexanima orationis
hujus suada, nisi plane desperatus esset corregibatur. Vivida nimirum in
Bucholcero omnia fuerunt, vivida vox, vividi oculi, vividae manus, gesius omnes
vividi: Adeo sese in illo divini spiritus virtutes consenuere. Hinc auditorium
ejus ita commotum oratione Bucholceri constat, ut, licet non nisi finita hora
altera peroraret, nullum tamen audiendi taedium, vel e media cuiquam plebe
obrepserit. Melch. Adamus in vita Bucholcer.
Bucholcer, that he never went up into the Pulpit, but he raised in men almost
what affections he pleased; so raising the dejected, and comforting the
afflicted, and strengthening the tempted, that though it were two hours before
he had done, yet not any even of the common people were weary of hearing him.
Set before your eyes such patterns as these; and labor with unwearied diligence
to be like them. To this end take Demosthenes counsel, plus olei quam vini
absumere. It is a work that requires your most serious searching thoughts.
Running, hasty, easy studies, bring forth blind births. When you are the
most renowned Doctors in the Church of God, alas, how little is it that you
know, in comparison of all that which you are ignorant of! Content not your
selves to know what is the Judgment of others, as if that were to know the
truth in its evidence: Give not over your studies when you know what the
Orthodox hold, and what is the opinion of the most esteemed Divines: Though I
think while you are Novices, and learners your selves, you may do well to take
much upon trust from the more judicious; yet stop not there; but know, that
such faith is more borrowed then your own: An implicit faith in matters not
fundamental, and of great difficulty, is o^t times commendable, yea and
necessary in your people, who are but Scholars; but in you that are Masters and
Teachers it is a reproach.

SECT. IX.
4. BE sure that your conversation be teaching,. 9.
as well as your doctrine. Do not contradict and confute your own doctrine by
your practice. Be as forward in a Holy and Heavenly life, as you are in
pressing on others to it. Let your discourse be as edifying and spiritual, as
you teach them that theirs must be; go not to law with your people, nor quarrel
with them, if you can possibly avoid it. If they wrong you, forgive them; For
evil language, give them good; and blessing for their cursing; Let go your
right, rather then let go your hopes and advantages for the winning of one
soul. Suffer any thing rather then the Gospel and men's souls should suffer.
Become all things (lawful) to all men, if by any means you may win some. Let
men see that you use not the Ministry only for a trade to live by; But that
your very hearts are wholly set upon the welfare of their souls. Whatsoever
meekness, humility, condescension, or self-denial you teach them from the
Gospel, O teach it them also by your undissembled leading example. This is to
be Guides, and Pilots, and Governors of the Church indeed. Be not like the
Orators that Diogenes blamed, that studied been dicere, non been facere: Nor
like the sign at the Inn door, that hangs out in the rain it self, while it
shows others where they may have shelter and refreshing; Nor like a fencer that
can offend, but not defend, as Cicero said of Caelius, that he was a good right
hand-man, but an ill left hand man. See that you be as well able to defend your
selves, when you are tempted by Satan, or accused by men to be proud, covetous,
or negligent, as to tell others what they should be. O how many heavenly
doctrines are in some peoples ears, that never were in the preachers heart!
Too true is that of Hilary, Sanctiores sunt aures plebis, quam corda
sacerdotum. Alas, that ever pride, emulation, hypocrisy, or covetousness
should come into a pulpit! Luther was wont to advise Preachers to see that
these three Dogs did not follow them into the Pulpit, Pride, Coveteousness, or
Envy.
They are hateful in the shops and streets, but more hateful in the Church;
but in the Pulpit most of all. What an odious sight is it, to see pride and
ambition stand up to preach humility! and hypocrisy to preach up sincerity!
and an earthly minded man to preach for a heavenly conversation! Do I need to
tell you that are Teachers of others, that we have but a little while longer to
preach? and but a few breaths more to breath? and then we must come down, and
be accountable for our work? Do I need to tell you, that we must dye and be
judged as well as our people? or that justice is most severe about the
Sanctuary? and judgment begins at the house of God? and revenge is most
implacable about the Altar? and jealousy hottest about the Arc? Have you not
learned these lessons from Eli, Corah, Nadah and Abihu, Vzzah, and the
Bethshemites, etc. though I had said nothing? Can you forget, that even some of
our tribe shall say at judgment, Lord, we have taught in thy Name? who yet must
depart, with, I know you not? Do you learn nothing by the afflictions that now
lie upon you? You see what has been done against the Ministry of England: how
some have been laid hold on by the hand of justice; Mat. 7.
and some by the hand of violence and injustice, and how all are lashed and
reproached by the wanton tongues of ignorant, insolent Sectaries; neither
Prelaticall, Presbyterian nor mere Independent now spared, it being the very
calling it self that now they set against: How they rob the Church of her due
maintenance, and make no more of it then Dionisius did of robbing Aesculapius
of his golden beard, quia barbatus erat filius, at pater Apollo non ita* or
then the same Dionisius did of robbing Jupiter Olympius of the golden Coat
that Hieron had given, saying, that a Coat of Gold was too heavy for Summer,
and too cold for VVinter, but cloth would be suitable to both; Or then he did
of robbing the Images of the vessels of gold which they held in their hands,
saying, he did but take what they offered, Valor. Maxim. li. 1. c. 2.
and held forth to him: Or then the same Dionisius did of robbing the temple of
Proserpina, Just. l. 21.
when afterward his ships had a prosperous wind, Videtis, inquit, quam
prospera navigatio a dijs immorta^ibus detur sacrilegis: Ex hoc colligens aut
non esse deos, aus illis non esse molesta Sacrilegia. Sirs, does God lay all
this on the Church and Ministry for nothing? Does not the world know what an
ignorant, lazy, superstitious Ministry had lately possessed most Churches in
the land? And how many such are yet remaining? and those that are better, alas,
how far from what we should be, either in knowledge or practice! And yet how
unwilling are they to learn what they know not? Even as unwilling as their
people are to learn of them, if not much more. O see your errors by the glass
of your Afflictions: And if the words of God will not serve the turn, let the
tongues of enemies and Sectaries show you your transgressions: Of whom I may
say to you, as Erasmus of Luther, Deus dedit huic postremae aetati propter
morborum multitudinem acrem medi cum: And as the Emperor Charles of the same
Luther, Si sacri ficuli frugi essent, nullo indigerent Luthero. Yet let not any
Papist catch at this, as if our Ministry were unlearned and vicious in
comparison of theirs: the contrary for the common sort is well known: And
though the Jesuits of late have been so industrious and learned, yet I could
tell them out of Erasmus, of some that proved heriticks must be killed, from
Paul's Haereticum hominem devita, i. e. de vita toll. And of Hen. Stephanus his
priest of Artois, that would prove that it belonged to his parishoners to pave
the Church, and not to him, from Jeremies Paveant illi, non paveam ego. Or if
these seem partial witnesses, I could tell them what Bellarmine says of the
ninth Age: Seculo haec nullum extitit indoctius aut infaelicius, quo qui
mathematicae aut Philosophiae operam dabat, magus vulgo putabatur: And as As
Doctor Hackwel recites him, with more to the same purpose: As one that would
prove, that there were ten worlds, from Christ's words, Nonne december facti sunt
mundi? and the other disproved him from the words following, Sed ubi sunt novem?
Espencae^s says, ut Graece rosse suspectum fuerit, Haebraice prope
haereticum. I could tell them also what a Clergy was found in Germany and in
England at the Reformation, what barbarous ignorance, beastly uncleanness, and
murders of the children begotten in whoredom was found among them. I could
tell them who have been turned from their Church by a mere journey to Rome,
there seeing the wickedness of their chiefest Clergy; And what Petrar^h,
Mantuan, with multitudes more say of it. And (if the most horrid murders were
not become virtues with them and did they not think they did God service by
killing his servants) I should mind them of all the burnings in England, and
of all the unparalleled bloody Massacres in France, and the inquisition of
Spain, which their Clergy yet manage and promote. If any say that I speak this
but upon reports, we have seen no such thing: I answer as Pausanias, when he
was blamed for dispraising a Physician that he had never made trial of, Si
periculum fecissem nequaquam viverem: If we had fallen into their hands it had
been too late to complain. Quia me vestigia terrent* Omnia in adversum
spectantia, nulla retrorsum. And some taste of the fruit of their projects we
have lately had in England: by which paw we may sufficiently conjecture of the
Lion. So that as bad as we are, our adversaries have little cause to reproach
us.

But yet, brethren, let us impartially judge our selves; for God will shortly
Judge us impartially. What is it that has occasioned so many Novices to invade
the Ministry, who being puffed up with pride, are fallen into the snare of the
devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. and bring the work of God into contempt, by their ignorance?
Has not the ungodliness and ambition of those that are more learned, by
bringing learning it self into contempt; been the cause of all this? Alas, who
can be so blinded by his charity, as not to see the truth of this among us? How
many of the greatest wits have the most graceless hearts? And relish Cicero,
Demosthenes or Aristotle better then David, or Paul, or Christ? And even loathe
those holy ways which customarily they preach for? That have no higher ends in
entering upon the Ministry, then gain and preferment? And when the hopes of
preferment are taken away, they think it but folly to choose such a toilsome and
ungrateful work. And thus the ball of reproach is tossed between the well
meaning ignorants, and the ungodly learned; and between these two, how
miserable is the Church* The one cries out of unlearned Schismatics; The other
cries out of proud, ungodly persecutors, and say, These are your learned men;
that study for nothing but a benefice or a Bishopric, that are as strange to
the Mysteries of Regeneration and a holy life, as any others! And O that these
reproaches were not too true of many! God has lessoned Ministers of late, one
would think sufficiently, to beware of ambition, and secular avocations; But it
is hard to hear God speak by the tongue of an enemy: or to see and acknowledge
his hand where the Instrument does miscarry. If English Examples have lost
their force (as being so near your eyes that you cannot see them remember the
end of Funcius that learned Chronologer, who might have lived longer as a
Divine, but died as a Princes Counselor, and his Distich pronounced at his
death, Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi, Et fuge ceu pestem (...): and
the like fate of Justus Jonas ( I.C. Son of that great Divine of the same name)
the next year, whose last Verses were like the former Quid juvat innumeros
scire at que evolvere casus, si facienda fugis, fi fugienda facis? Study not
therefore the way of rising, but the way of righteousness; Honesty will hold
out, when Honors will deceive you. If your hearts be once infected with the
fermentation of this swelling humor, it will quickly rise up to your brain,
and corrupt your intellectuals; and then you will be of that opinion which your
Flesh thinks to be good* and not that which your judgment thought to be true;
and you will fetch your Religion from the Statute Book, and not from the Bible;
as the jest went of Agricola (who turned from a Protestant to an Antinomian,
and being convinced of that error, turned Papist into the other extreme) and
Pebugius and Sidonius Authors of the Interim; Chrysma ab eis and oleum
pontificium inter alia defenduntur, ut ipsi discederent unctiores, (because
they obtained Bishoprics by it.) O what a doleful case is it, to see so many
brave wits, and men of profound Learning, to be made as useless and hurtful to
the Church of God by their pride and ungodliness, as others are by their pride
and Ignorance; were a clear, understanding conjoined with an holy heart and
heavenly life, and were they as skilful in Spiritual as Humane Learning, what a
glory and blessing would they be to the Churches!

SECT. X.. 10.

5. LAstly, Be sure that you study and strive after Unity and Peace; if ever
you would promote the Kingdom of Christ and your peoples Salvation, do it in a
way of Peace and Love; Public wars, and private quarrels do usually pretend to
the Reformation of the Church, to the vindicating of the Truth, and the welfare
of souls; but they as usually prove in the issue, the greatest means to the
overthrow of all; It is as natural for both wars and private contentions to
produce Errors, Schisms contempt of Magistra^y, Ministry, and Ordinances, as it
is for a dead carrion to breed Worms and Vermin; Believe it from one that has
too many years experience of it both in Armies and Garrisons* It is as hard a
thing to maintain even in your godly people, a sound understanding, a tender
consciences, a lively, gracious, heavenly, frame of spirit, and an upright life
in a way of war and contention, as to keep your candle lighted in the greatest
Storms, or under the waters: The like I may say of perverse and fierce
Disputings about Baptism, and the Circumstantials of Discipline, or other
Questions that are far from the foundation: they oftener lose the Truth then
find it. A Synod is as likely and lawful a means as any for such decisions,
and yet Nazianzen says, Se hactenus non vidisse ullius Synodi utilem (...) aut
in qua res male se habentes, non magis exacerba^^ quam (...) fuerint: With the
vulgar he seems to be the Conqueror that has the last word, or at lest he that
has the most plausible deportment, the most affecting tone, the most earnest
and confident expressions, the most probable arguments, rather then he that
has the most naked demonstrations: He takes with them most, that speaks for
the Opinion which they like and are inclined to, though he speak Nonsense; and
he that is most familiar with them, and has the best opportunities and
advantages to prevail, especially he that has the greatest interest in their
affections; so that a disputation before the vulgar even of the godly, is as
likely a means to corrupt them as to cure them; usually the most erroneous
seducers will carry out their Cause with as good a face, as fluent a tongue, as
great contempt and reproach of their opposers, and as much confidence that the
truth is on their side, as if it were so indeed. Paraeus his Master taught him,
that Certo certius in qualibet minutissima panis portione, Paraeus in prefat.
ad Comment. in Genesin.
vere and substantialiter integrum corpus Christi esset, item in, apud, cum,
sub minutissima vini guttula adesset integer sanguis dominicus; what confidence
was here in a bad cause? And if you depend on the most reverend and best
esteemed Teachers, and suffer the weight of their reputation to turn the
Scales, you may in many things be never the nearer to the Truth: How many
learned able men, has the name and authority of Luther mislead, in the point
of consubstantiation? Vrsine was carried away with it a while, till he was
turned from it by the reading of Luthers own arguments, they were such
Paralogismes: Yet was it Luthers charge to his followers, that none should call
themselves after his name, because he dyed not for them, nor was his doctrine
his own. The only way therefore to the prospering of your labors is, to quench
all flames of contentions, to your power! If you would have the waters of
verity and piety to be clear, the way is not to stir in them and trouble them,
but to let them settle in peace, and run down into practice. Woe to those
Ministers that make unnecessary divisions and parties among the people, that so
they may get themselves a name, and be cried up by many followers! And as you
should thus study the peace and unity of your congregations, so keep out all
the occasions of divisions: especially the doctrine of separation* De
Independentibus Orthodoxis and hoereticis, and horum tolerantia lege David
Blondellum de Jure plebis in Regimine Ecclesiast. page 72.73.74.75.
and popular Church government, the apparent Semnary of faction and perpetual
contentions. If once your people be taught that it belongs to them to govern
themselves, and those that Scripture calls their Guides and Rulers, you shall
have mad work! When every one is a Governor, who are the governed? When the
multitude how unable soever, must hear and judge of every cause, both their
Teachers and others, they need no other employment to follow; this will find
them work enough, as it does to Parliament men to sit and hear and speak and
vote. Is it not strange that so learned a man as Pet. Ramus volebat non penes
paucos, sed penes universam Ecclesiam esse judicium doctrinae, Electionem and
rejectionem ministrorum, ex communicationem et absolutionem -- A Synodo autem
approbata disciplina ufitata, novae autem opiniones explosae sunt. Insunctum
etiam illurum pertium ecclesijs, ut omni studio, flect^re illos; and si non ad
sententiam mutandam saltem ad pacem fovendam mansuete invitare conarentur. Sed
nova and inaeudita crudeli^as quae Parisijs exorta in ni^ptijs illis fatalibus
long lateque regnum Galliae pervasit, domesticaes et intestinas contentiones
omnes sustulit. In vita Bul^ingeri. Aureliae Synedo praesedit Sadeel, ubi
cumprimis eorum opinio discussit confutataque qui disciplinam pariter
doctrinamque, Democratico vel potius O^blocratico more quodam ex populi
^uffragijs regi administrarique volebant. -- Et cum in alijs provincijs
recrudescere illud super Ecclesiastica politera dissidium intelligeret Sadeel,
censuit de re tota sibi ampliter esse disserendum. Atque habita synodus rursum,
cui et praefuit, tanta faelicitate usus dicendi docendique, ut schismutis ejus
princeps, vir alioqui eruditionis baud spernendae, in Orthodoxorum parts sese
contulerit, ac mutatam sententiam edito libello prof^ssus sit. In vi^a Sad^el.
In Nemausensi synodo actum de Discipl^na Ecclesiastica, cujus formam quandam
^ovam et insolitam quidam Johan. Parisiensis non animo tantum sedetiam scripto
designabat: ^ique viri quidam docti verum novarum pruritis plus aequo
laborantes adhaerebant, et magna verborum argumentorumque acie opinionem illius
muuitam defendebant. Illorum tamen conatui sefe opposuit B^za, doctissime and
disertissime rem totam edisserens. Ejus sententiam tota synodus unanimo
consensu approbavit, etc. In vita Bezae.
Pet. Ramus should be the advocate for the multitudes authority in
Church Government? But that God must use so sharp a cure for those contentions
as that bloody French Massacre, me thinks should make Engalnd to tremble to
consider it! Least the same disease here must have the like cure. If an Army
had tried this popular Government but one year among themselves in their
military affairs; and had attempted and managed all their designs by the Vote
of the whole Army, I durst have valued their judgments the better ever after in
this point. Woe to the patient that must have a mistaking Physician till he be
grown skilful by making experiments upon his diseases. And woe to the people
that are in such hands, as must learn their skill in Government from the common
calamities only, and from their experience of the sufferings of the people!
This kind of knowledge, I confess, is the throughest: but it is pity that so
many others should pay so dear for it.

You therefore that are the Guides of this Charet of Christ take heed of losing
the reins lest all be overthrown: It is but lately that the Prelates held them
so hard, that we might not move on in the way of unquestionable duty, and we
might not stir at all, for fear of stirring amiss, and godliness was shut out
upon pretense of well-ordering it. Do not Quibus nunc a vobis vinculis
constringendi sunt, qui (cum donis omnibus spiritalibus careant) veterum
prophetarum simiae, tribusque Anticyris digna capita, non prophetae vel ex
taberna, vel Militari statione in Cathedram Christi indecoro habitu, mente
certe parum sobria, finentibus vobis prosilijsse dicuntur, ut quicquid in
buccam venerat, aut quomodocunque vitrea bilis suggesserat, in Christianae
fidei et nominis aeternum ludibrium, frementibus pijs, cachinnan tibus atheis,
^vomerent? Audita (utinam falsa) refero: quae vestra immo Christianorum omnium
interest, summa apud vos severitate plecti, nequis deinceps falsa zeli
religiosi specie per sacrilegum nefas abusus, sacrosanctum Domini, quod super
nos omnes invocatum est nomen, gentibus blasp^mandum propinet, terramque quae
tanta monstra tulit, diris quantum in se est devoveat. Blondellus de Jure
plebis, p. 76.77.
you run now into the contrary extreme, to think that all restraint is evil.
Alas poor England! how are thy bowels torn out! and thy reformation and
deliverance grown (as to man) impossible! because thy inhabitants, yea and
Guides, run all into extremes! like a drunken man that reeleth from side to
side, but cannot keep the middle way: nay they hate a man of peace that runs
not out into their extremes. One party would pluck up the hedge of government,
as if the vineyard could not be fruitful, except it lie wast to the pleasure
of all the beasts of of the Forest. They are like the pond that should grudge
at the banks and dam, and think it injurious to be thus restrained of its
liberty, and therefore combine with the winds to raise a tempest, and so
assault and break down the banks in their rage* and now where is that peaceable
association of waters? Me thinks the enemies of government are just in the case
as I remember when I was a boy our School was in, when we had barred out our
Master: We grudged at our yoke, we longed for liberty; because it was not given
us we resolved to take it, when we had got out our Master and shut fast the
doors, we grew bold, and talked to him at our pleasure* then no one was Master,
and every one was Master: we spend our time in playing and in quarrelling: we
treat at last with our Master about coming in: but our liberty was so sweet,
this we were loath to leave it, and we had run our selves so deep in guilt that
we durst not trust him; and therefore we resolve to let him in no more: But in
the end when our play-dayes (which we called Holy days) were over, we are fain
to give account of our boldness, and soundly to be whipped for it, and so to come
under the yoke again. Lord, if this be the case of England, let us rather be
whipped and whipped again, then turned out of thy School, and from under thy
government. We feel now how those are mistaken, that think the way for the
Churches unity, is to dig up the banks and let all loose, that every man in
Religion may do what his list.

On the other side, some men to escape this Scylla do fall into the Charyb^^^
of former violence and formality: They must have all men to walk in fetters,
and they must be the makers of them; and Ministers must be taught to Preach, by
such Jives as their horses are taught to pace. No man must be suffered to come
into a Pulpit, that thinks not or speaks not as they would have him: Or if they
cannot take away his liberty, they will do what they can to blast his
reputation; Yet if he cannot have the repute of being Orthodox, it were well if
they would leave him the reputation of a Christian. But having also a
Christianity of their own making, and proper to themselves, they will presently
unchristen him, and make him a Heretic by proclamation; as if they had so far
the power of the Keys, as to lock up the doors of Heaven against him, and wipe
out his name from the book of Life. It strikes me sometimes into an amazement
with admiration, that it should be possible for such mountains of pride, to
remain in the hearts of many godly, reverend Ministers! That they should no
more be conscious of the weakness of their own understandings, but that even in
disputable difficult things, they must be the Rule by which all others must be
judged! So that every man's judgment must be cut meet to the standard of theirs;
and whatsoever opinion is either shorter or longer, must be rejected with the
scorn of an Heresy or an Error! Wonderful! That men that have ever studied
Divinity, should no more discern the profundities and difficulties! and their
own incapacities! More wonderful that any disciple of Christ should be such an
enemy to knowledge, as to resolve they will know no more themselves then is
commonly known, nor suffer any other to know more! So that when a man has read
once what is the opinion of the Divines that are most in credit, Read but Mr.
Gatakers Answer to Mr. Walkers vindication, And Amyraldus preface before his
Answ. to Spanhemius, and then judge whether this be true.

Omnis secta humana authoritate firmata, ratione caret. Aenaeas Sylvius in
Platina.

Lege Cameronem accurate disserentem de potestate Eccles. Praele^t. page
460.461.462. etc. and besides Camero, Musculus, with many others deny any
Judicial decisive power in Ministers, in doctrinalls. Vid. Vedelij Rationale
Theologic l. 3. c. 6. page 511.


he dare search no further for fear of being counted a Novellist or Heretic;
or lest he bear their curse for adding to, or taking from the common conceits!
So that Divinity is become an easier study then heretofore: We are already at a
Neplus ultra It seems vain when we know the opinions in credit, to search any
further: We have then nothing to do, but easily to study for popular Sermons,
nor is it safe so much as to make them our own by looking into and examining
their grounds, lest in so doing we should be forced to a dissent* So that
Scholars may easily be drawn to think, that it is better to be at a venture of
the common belief, which may be with ease, then to weary and spend themselves
in tedious studies, when they are sure beforehand of no better reward from men,
then the reputation of Heretics* Which is the lot of all that go out of the
common rode. So that who will hereafter look after any more truth then is known
and in credit, except it be some one that is so taken with admiration of it, as
to cast all his reputation overboard rather then make shipwreck of his
self-prized Merchandise! Yet most wonderful is it, that my Christian,
especially so many godly Ministers should arrogate to themselves the high
prerogatives of God! viz. to be the Rule and Standard of Truth! I know they
will say that Scripture is the Rule; but when they must be the peremtory Judges
of the sense of that Scripture, so that in the hardest controversies none must
swarve from their sense, upon pain of being branded with Heresy or error, what
is this but to be the Judges themselves, and Scripture but their servant? The
final, full, decisive interpretation of Laws, belongs to none but the
Lawmakers themselves. For who can know another man's meaning, beyond his
expressions, but himself?

And yet it increases my wondering, that these Divines have not forgotten the
late arrogance of the prelates in the same kind; under which some few of
themselves did suffer! Nor yet how constantly our Divines that write against
the Papists, do disclaim any such living, final, decisive Judge of
controvesies, but make Scripture the only Judge* O what mischief has the Church
of Christ suffered by the enlarging of her Creed! While it contained but twelve
Articles, believers were plain and peaceable and honest. But a Christian now is
not the sam^ thing as then: Our heads shall swell so big (like children that
have the rickets) that all the body fares the worse for it. Every new Article
that was added to the Creed, was a new engine to stretch the brains of
believers, and in the issue to ^end out the bowels of the Church. It never went
so well with the Church* since it begun (as Erasmus says of the times of the
Nicene counsel) re^ ing^niosam fore Christianum esse, to be a matter of so much
wit and cunning to be a Christian. Not but that all our wit should be here
employed, and controversies of difficulty may be debated; but when the decision
of these must be put into our Creed, and a man must be of the faith that the
Church is of, it goes hard. Me thinks I could read Aquinas, or Scotus, or
Bellarmine with profit, ut Philosophiam, et Theologiam liberam; but when I most
make them all parts of my Creed, and subscribe to all they say, or else be no
Catholic, this is hard dealing. I know now we have no Spanish inquisition to
fire us from the truth: But as Cryn^us was wont to say, Fontifici Romano
Erasmum plus, nocuiss^ (...), quam Lutherum stomachando; so some men's
reproaches may do more then other men's persecutions.

And it is not the least aggravation of these men's arrogancy, that they are
most violent in the points that they have least studied, or which they are most
ignorant in: Yea and that their cruel reproaches are usually so incessant, Lege
vitam Ge. Majoris.
that where they once fasten, they scarce ^ver loose again; having learned the
old lesson, to be sure to accuse boldly, See the foresaid Answer of Mr. Gataker
to Mr. Walker.
for the scarre will remain when the wound is healed. Yea some will not spare
the same of the dead, but when their souls have the happiness of Saints with
God, their names must have the stain of Heresy with men. More ingenuity had
Charles the Emperor, when the Spanish soldiers would have dug up the bones
of Luther: Sinite ipsum, inquit, quiescere ad diem resurrectionis, et judicium
omnium, etc. Let him rest, says he, till the resurrection and the final
Judgment: if he were a Heretic he shall have as severe a Judge as you can
desire.

These are the extremes which poor England groaneth under; And is there no
remedy? Besides the God of Peace* there is no remedy. Peace is fled from men's
Principles and Judgments, and therefore it is a stranger to their Affections
and practices: no wonder then if it be a stranger in the Land, both in Church
and State,

If either of the forementioned extremes be the way to Peace, we may have it:
or else where is the man that seeks after it? But I remember Luthers Oracle,
and fear it is now to be verified. H^c perdent Religionem Christianam: 1.
Oblivio beneficiorum ab Evangelio acceptorum: 2. Securitas, quae jam passim and
ubique regnat: 3. Sapientia mundi, quae vult omnia redigere in ordinem, and
impiis mediis Ecclesiae paci consulere. Three things will destroy the Christian
Religion. First, Forgetfulness of the benefits we received by the Gospel:
Secondly, Security: Thirdly, The wisdom of the world which will needs reduce
all into Order, and look to the Churches peace by ungodly means.

The zeal of my spirit after Peace, has made me digress here further then I
intended: O what a thing is Self-love, if men do want peace in their own
consciences, or in the humors of their bodies, they can quickly feel it, and
think themselves undone till they have peace again; and yet the want of peace
in Church and State is no trouble to them, but for their own ends and fancies
they can delight in devisions.
But the sum and scope of all my speech is this; Let every conscionable
Minister study equally for Peace and Truth, as knowing that they dwell both
together in the golden mean, and not at such a distance as most Hotspurs do
imagine; and let them believe that they are like to see no more success of
their labors, then they are so studious of Peace; and that all wounds will let
out both blood and spirits, and both Truth and Godliness is ready to run out at
every breach that shall be made among the people or themselves; and that the
time for the Pastures of Profession to be green, and for the Field of true
Godliness to grow ripe for the Harvest, and for the Rose of Devotion and
Heavenliness to be fragrant and flourish; it is not in the blustering stormy
tempestuous Winter, but in the calm delightful Summer of Peace. O what
abundance of excellent hopeful fruits of Godliness have I seen blown down
before they were ripe, by the impetuous winds of wars, and other contentions,
and so have layen trodden under foot by Libertinism, and sensuality, as meat for
Swine, who else might have been their Masters deligh! In a word, I never yet
saw the Work of the Gospel go on well in Wars, nor the business of men's
salvation succeed among dissentions; but if one have in such times proved a
gainer* multitudes have bin losers: The same God is the God both of Truth and
Peace: the same Christ is the Prince of Peace, and Author of Salvation; the
same Word is the Gospel of Peace and Salvation: both have the same causes, both
are wrought and carried on by the same Spirit, the same Persons are the Sons of
Peace and Salvation: so inseparably do they go hand in hand together. O
therefore let us be the Ministers, and helpers of our peoples peace, as ever we
desire to be helpers of their Salvation.

And how impossible is it for Ministers to maintain peace among their people,
if they maintain not peace among themselves? O what a staggering is it to the
faith of the weak, when they see their Teachers and Leaders at such odds? It
makes them ready to throw away all Religion, when they see scarce two or three
of the most learned and godly Divines of one mind, but like the bitterest
enemies, disgracing and vilifying one another, and all because the Articles of
our faith must be so unlimited, voluminous, and almost infinite, so that no man
well knows when he may call himself an Orthodox Christian. When our Creed is
swelled to the bigness of a National Confession, one would think that he that
subscribeth to that Confession should be Orthodox, and yet if he jump not just
with the Times in expounding every Article of that Confession, and run not with
the stream in every other Point that is in question amongst them, though he had
subscribed to the whole Harmony of Confessions, he is never the nearer the
estimation of Orthodox; Were we all bound together by a Confession or
Subscription of the true Fundamentals, and those other Points that are next to
Fundamentals only, and there took up our Christianity and Unity, yielding each
other a freedom of differing in smaller or more difficult Points, or in
expressing our selves in different terms, and so did live peaceably and
lovingly together, notwithstanding such differences, as men that all knew the
mysteriousness of Divinity, and the imperfection of their own understandings,
and that here we know but in part, and therefore shall most certainly err and
d^ffer in part: what a world of mischiefs might this course prevent? I often
think on the examples of Luther and Melancthon: It was not a few things that
they differed in, nor such as would now be accounted small; besides, the
imperious harshness of Luthers disposition (as Carolostadius could witness,)
and yet how sweetly and p^aceably, and lovingly did they live together without
any breach or disagreement considerable: As Mel. Adamus says of them, Et si
tempora fuerunt ad distractiones proclivia, hominumque levitas dissidiorum
cupida, tamen cum alter alterius vitia nosset, nunquam inter eos simultas
extitit, ex qua animorum alienatio subsecuta sit; so that their agreement arose
not hence, that either was free from faults or errors, but knowing each others
faults, they did more easily bear them: Certainly if every difference in
Judgment in matters of Religion should seem intolerable, or make a breach in
affection, then no two men on earth must live together or tolerate each other,
but every man must resolve to live by himself: for no two on earth but differ
in one thing or other, except such as take all their faith upon trust, and
explicitly believe nothing at all; God has not made our Judgments all of a
complexion no more then our faces, nor our Knowledge all of a size, any more
then our bodies; and methinks men that be not resolved to be any thing in
Religion, should be afraid of making the Articles of their Faith so numerous,
lest they should shortly become Heretics themselves, by disagreeing from
themselves, and they should be afraid of making too strict Laws for those that
differ in Judgment in controvertible Points, lest they should shortly change
their Judgments, and so make a Rod for their own Backs; for how know they in
difficult disputable Cases, but within this twelve months themselves may be of
another mind? except they are resolved never to change, for fear of incurring
the reproach of Novelty and Mutability, and then they were best resolve to
study no more, nor ever to be wiser: I would we knew just as what Age a man
must receive this principle against changing his Judgment; I am afraid lest at
last they should teach it their children, and lest many Divines did learn it
too young, and if any besides besides Christ and his Apostles must be the
Standard and Foundation of our faith, I would we could certainly tell who they
are, for I have heard yet none but the Pope or his General Council expressly lay
claim to the Prerogative of infallibility, and I think there is few that have
appeared more fallible; for my own part I admire the gifts of God in our first
Reformers, Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, etc. And I know no man since the
Apostles days whom I value and honor more then Calvin, and whose Judgment in
all things (one with another) I more esteem and come nearer too; (Though I may
speed as Amiraldus, to be thought to defend him but for a defense to his own
errors;) but yet if I thought we must needs be in all things of his mind, and
know no more in any one Point then he did, I should heartily wish that he had
lived one fifty years longer, that he might have increased and multiplied his
knowledge before he died, and then succeeding Ages might have had leave to have
grown wiser, till they had attained to know as much as he. Some men can tell
what to say in point of Ceremonies, Common Prayer, etc. when they are pressed
with the Examples and Judgments of our first Reformers,; but in matters of
Doctrine they forget their own Answers, as if they had been perfect here, and
not in the other, or as if Doctrinals were not much fuller of Mysteries and
difficulties, then Worship! So far am I from speaking all this for the security
of my self in my differing from others, that if God would dispense with me for
my Ministerial Services without any loss to his people, I should leap as
lightly as Bishop Ridley when he was stripped of his Pontificalia, Brus. l. 1. c.
18. ex Plut. Laert. l. 3. Nemo filens placuit multi brevitate loquendi:
Ausonius.
and say as Paedaretus the Laconian when he was not chosen. In numerum
trecentorum, Gratias habeo tibi, O Deus, quod tot homines meliores me huic
Civitati dedisti.

But I must stop, and again apologize for this tediousness; though it be true*
as Zeno says, Verbis multis non eget veritas; yet, Respiciendum etiam quibus
egent lectores; And as Plato to Antisthenes, Orationis modus est non penes
dicentem sed penes audientem. I conclude not with a Laconism, but a
Christianism, as hoping my Brethren will at lest hear their Master, Mark 9.50.
Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another: and Calvin's
Exposition which is the sum of all I have said. q. d. Danda est vobis opera,
non tantum ut salsi intus sitis, sed etiam ut saliatis alios: Quia tamen sal
acrimonia sua mordet, ideo statim admonet, sic temperandam esse condituram, ut
pax interim salva maneat.

SECT. XI.. 11.

6. THe last whom I would persuade to this great Work of helping others to the
Heavenly Rest, is Parents, and Masters of Families: All you that God has
entrusted with Children or Servants, O consider what Duty lies on you for the
furthering of their Salvation. That this Exhortation may be the more effectual
with you, I will lay down these several Considerations for you seriously to
think on.

1. What plain and pressing commands of God are there that require this great
Duty at your hands. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. And these words which I command thee this
day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to thy
children, speaking of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. So Deuteronomy.
11. And how well is God pleased with this in Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Shall I hide
from Abraham that thing which I do? For I know him, that he will command his
Children, and his Household after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord,
etc. And it is Joshuaes Resolution, That he and his Household will serve the
Lord. Josh 24.15.
Prove. 22.6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he
will not depart from it. Ephesians* 6.4. Bring up (your children) in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord. Many the like Precepts, especially in the Book of
Proverbs, you may find: So that you see it is a Work that the Lord of heaven
and earth has laid upon you; and how then dare you neglect it and cast it off?

2. It is a duty that you ow, your children in point of Justice; from you they
received the defilement and misery of their natures; and therefore you ow them
all possible help for their recovery* If you had but hurt a stranger, yea,
though against your will, you would think it duty to help to cure him.

3. Consider how near your children are to you, and then you will perceive,
that from this Natural Relation also, they have interest in your utmost help:
your children are, as it were, parts of your selves; If they prosper when you
are dead, you take it almost as if you lived and prospered in them. If you
labor never so much, you think it not ill bestowed, nor your buildings, or
purchases too dear, so that they may enjoy them when you are dead: and should
you not be of the same mind for their everlasting Rest?

4. You will else be witnesses against your own souls: your great care* and
pains, and cost for their bodies, will condemn you for; your neglect of their
precious souls; you can spend your selves in toyling and caring for their
bodies, and even neglect your own souls, and venture them sometimes upon
unwarrantable courses, and all to provide for your Posterity; and have you not
as much reason to provide for their souls? Do you not believe that your
children must be everlastingly happy or miserable when this life is ended? and
should not that be forethought of in the first place?

5. Yea, All the very bruit creatures may condemn you; Which of them is not
tender of their young? How long will the Hen sit to hatch her Chickens? and how
busily scrape for them? and how carefully shelter and defend them? and so will
even the most vile and venomous Serpent; and will you be more unnatural and
hard-hearted then all these? will you suffer your children to be ungodly and
profane, and run on in the undoubted way to damnation, and let them alone to
destroy themselves without control?

6. Consider, God has made your children to be your charge; yea, and your
servants too: Every one will confess they are the Ministers charge, and what a
dreadful thing it is for them to neglect them, when God has told them, That if
they tell not the wicked of their sin and danger, their blood shall be required
at that Ministers hands; and is not your charge as great and as dreadful as
theirs? Have not you a greater charge of your own Families then any Minister
has? Yea doubtless* and your duty, it is to reach, and admonish, and reprove
them, and watch over them, and at your hands else will God require the blood of
their souls: The greatest charge it is that ever you were entrusted with, and
we to you if you prove unfaithful and betray your trust, and suffer them to be
ignorant for want of your teaching, or wicked for want of your admonition or
correction! O ^ad account that many parents will make!

7. Look into the dispositions and lives of your children, and see what a work
there is for you to do. First, It is not one sin that you must help them
against, but thousands; their name is Legion, for they are many; It is not one
weed that must be pulled up, but the field is overspread with them. Secondly,
And how hard is it to prevail against any one of them? They are Hereditary
diseases, bred in their Natures. Naturam expell^s furea, etc. They are a^ near
them as the very heart, and how tenacious are all things of that which is
natural? how hard to teach a Hare not to be fearful? or a Lion or Tiger not to
be fierce? Besides, the things you must teach them are quite above them, yea,
and clean contrary to the interest and desires of their Flesh; how hard is it
to teach a man to be willing to be poor, and despised, and destroyed here for
Christ! to deny themselves, and displease the flesh, to forgive an Enemy, to
love those that hate us, to watch against temptations, to avoid occasions and
appearance of evil, to believe in a crucified Savior, to rejoice in
tribulation, to trust upon a bare word of Promise, and let go all in hand (if
called to it) for something in hope that they never saw, nor ever spoke with
man that did see; to make God their chief delight and love, and to have their
hearts in heaven while they live on earth; I think none of this is easy; they
think otherwise let them try and Judge; yet all this must be learned, or they
are undone for ever. If you help them not to some Trade, they cannot live in
the world, but if they be destitute of these things, they shall not live in
heaven; If the Mariner be not skilful he may be drowned, and if the Soldier
be not skilful he may be slain; but they that cannot do the things above
mentioned will perish for ever; For without holiness none shall see God, Heb.
12.14. O that the Lord would make all you that are Parents sensible what a work
and charge does lie upon you! You that neglect this important work, and talk to
your Families of nothing but the world, I tell you, the blood of souls lies on
you, make as light of it as you will, if you repent not and amend, the Lord
will shortly call you to an account for your guiltiness of your childrens
everlasting undoing; and then you that could find in your hearts to neglect
the souls of your own children, will be judged more barbarous then the Irish or
Turks, that kill the children of others.

8. Consider also what a world of sorrows do you prepare for your selves by the
neglect of your children: First, You can expect no other but that they should
be thorns in your very eyes, and you may thank your selves if they prove so,
seeing they are thorns of your own planting. Secondly, If you should repent of
this your negligence, and be saved your selves, yet is it nothing to you to
think of the damnation of your children? You know, God has said, That except
they be born again they shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. Methinks then
it should be a heartbreaking to all you that have unregenerate children;
Methinks you should weep over them every time you look them in the face, to
remember that they are in the way to eternal fire! Some people would lament the
fate of their children, if but a Wizard should foretell them some ill fortune to
befall them; and do you not regard it, when the Living God shall tell you, That
the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all they that forget God? Psalm. 9.17.
Thirdly, Yet all this were not so doleful to you, if it were a thing that you
had no hand in, or could do nothing to help; but to think that all this is much
long of you! that ever your negligence should bring your child to these
everlasting torments, which the very damned man ( Luke 16.) would have had his
brethren been warned to escape; if this seem light to thee, thou have the heart
of a hellish Fiend in thee, and not of a man. Fourthly, But yet worse then all
this will it prove to you, if you die in this sin; for then you shall be
miserable as well as they; and O what a greeting will there be then between
ungodly Parents and children! what a hearing will it be to your tormented
souls, to hear your children cry out against you, All this that we suffer was
long of you, you should have taught us better, and did not; you should have
restrained us from sin, and corrected us, but you did not; what an addition
will such outcries be to your misery?

9. On the other side, do but think with your selves; what a world of comfort
you may have if you be faithful in this duty: First, If you should not succeed,
yet you have freed your own souls, and though it be sad, yet not so sad, for
you may have peace in your own consciences, Secondly, But if you do succeed,
the comfort is unexpressible. For first, Godly children will be truly loving to
your selves that are their Parents; when a little riches or matters of this
world, will often make ungodly children to cast off their very natural affection:
secondly, Godly children will be most obedient to you; They dare not disobey
and provoke you, because of the command of God, except you should command them
that which is unlawful, and then they must obey God rather then men: thirdly,
And if you should fall into want, they would be most faithful in relieving you,
as knowing they are tied by a double bond, of Nature, and of Grace: fourthly,
And they will also be helpers to your souls, and to your spiritual comforts;
they will be delighting you with the mention of heaven, and with all holy
conference and actions; when wicked children will be grieving you with cursing,
and swearing, or drunkenness, or disobedience: fifthly, Yea, when you are in
trouble, or sickness, and at death* your godly children will be at hand to
advise and to support you; they will strive with God in prayers for you; O what
a comfort is it to a Parent, to have a child that has the Spirit of Prayer,
and interest in God? how much good may they do you by their importunity with
God? And what a sadness is it to have children, that when you lie sick, can do
no more but ask you how you do, and look on you in your misery? sixthly, Yea,
all your Family may fare the better, for one child or servant that fears
God; (yea perhaps all the Town where he lives:) As Joseph's case proves, and
Jacobs, and many the like; when one wicked child may bring a Judgment o^ your
house: seventhly, And if God make you instruments of your childrens conversion,
you will have a share in all the good that they do through their lives; all the
good they do to their brethren, or to the Church of God, and all the honor they
bring to God, will redound to your happiness, as having been instruments of it:
eighthly, And what a comfort may it be to you all your lives, to think that you
shall live with them for ever with God? ninthly, But the greatest joy will be,
when you come to the possession of this, and you shall say, Here am I, and the
children thou have given me; And are not all these comforts enough to persuade
you to this duty?

10. Consider further, That the very welfare of Church and State lies mainly
on this duty, of well educating children; and without this, all other means are
like to be far less successful. I seriously profess to you, that I verily think
all the sins and miseries of the Land, may acknowledge this sin for their great
Nurse and Propagator. O what happy Churches might we have, if Parents did their
duties to their children! then we need not exclude so many for ignorance or
scandal, nor have our Churches composed of members so rude! then might we spare
most of the quarrels about Discipline, Reformation, Toleration, and Separation;
any reasonable government would do better with a well-taught people, then the
best will do with the ungodly. It is not good Laws and Orders that will reform
us, if the men be not good, and Reformation begin not at home; when children go
wicked from the hands of their Parents, thence some come such to the
Universities, and so we come to have an ungodly Ministry; and in every
profession they bring this fruit of their Education with them; when Gentlemen
teach their children only to Hunt, and Hawk, and game, and deride the godly,
what Magistrates, and what Parliaments, and so what Government, and what a
Commonwealth are we like to have? when all must be guided by such as these?
some perverse inconsiderate persons, lay the blame of all this on the
Ministers, that people of all sorts are so ignorant and profane, as if one man
can do the work of many hundreds! I beseech you that are Masters and Parents,
do your own duties, and free Ministers from these unjust aspersions, and the
Church from her reproach and confusion; Have not Ministers work enough of their
own to do? O that you knew what it is that lies on them! And if besides this,
you will cast upon them the work of every Master and Parent in the Parish, it is
like indeed to be well done: How many sorts of Workmen must there be to the
building of an house? and if all of them should cast it upon one, and
themselves do nothing, you may judge how much were like to be done! If there be
three or four Schoolmasters in a School, amongst three or four hundred
Scholars; and all the lower that should fit them for the higher Schools, should
do nothing at all, but send all these Scholars to the highest Schoolmaster as
ignorant as they received them, would not his life be a burden to him, and all
the work be frustrate and spoiled? Why so it is here: The first work toward
the reforming and making happy of Church and Commonwealth lies in the good
education of your children; the most of this is your work; and if this be left
undone, and then they come to Ministers raw and ignorant, and hardened in their
sins; alas what can a Minister do! whereas if they came trained up in the
Principles of Religion, and the practice of godliness, and were taught the fear
of God in their youth; O what an encouragement would it be to Ministers! and
how would the work go on in their hands! I tell you seriously, this is the
cause of all our miseries and unreformedness in Church and State; even the want
of a holy education of children! Many lay the blame, on this neglect, and that
but there is none has so great a hand in it as this: what a School must there
needs be where all are brought raw, as I said, to the highest School? what a
house must there needs be built, when Clay is brought to the Masons hands in
stead of Bricks? What a Commonwealth may be expected, if all the Constables and
Justices should do nothing but cast all upon King and Parliament? And so, what
a Church may we expect, when all the Parents and Masters in the Parish shall
cast all their duty on their Ministers? Alas, how long may we Catechize them,
and preath to them, before we can get them to understand the very Principles of
the Faith? This, this is the cause of our Churches deformities, and this is the
cause of the present difficulty of Reformation. Its in vain to contend about
Orders and Disci^pline, if the persons that live under it be not prepared.
Perhaps you will say, the Apostles had not their hearers thus prepared to their
hands: Is not the word the first means of conversion?

Answ. 1. The Apostles preached to none at first but Infidels and Pagans: And
are you no better? Will you do no more for your children then they?

2. All the success of their labors, was to gather here and there a Church from
among the world of unbelievers: but now the Kingdoms of the world are become
the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ.

3. And yet the Apostles were extraordinarily qualified for the work, and
seconded it by Miracles, for the convincing of their hearers.

4. I do verily believe that if Parents did their duty as they ought* the word
publikly preached would not be the ordinary means of Regeneration in the
Church, but only without the Church, among Infidels. Not that I believe Doctor
Burges, and Master Bedfords doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration: But God would
pour out his grace so upon the children of his people, and hear prayers for
them, and bless such endeavors for their holy education, that we should see the
promises made good to our seed; and the unthankful Anabaptists, that will not
confess that the children of the Saints are any nearer God, or more beholden
to him then Pagans, so much as for the favor to be visible Church Members,
should by sweet experience be convinced of their error, and be taught better
how to understand, that our children are holy.

II. I entreat you that are parents also to consider, what excellent advantages
you have above all others for the saving of your children.

1. They are under your hands while they are young and tender and flexible; But
they come to Ministers when they are grown elder, and stiffer, and settled in
their ways, and think themselves too good to be catechized, and too old to be
taught. You have a twigg to bend, and we an oak. You have the young plants of
sin to pluck up, and we the deep rooted vices. The consciences of children are
not so seared with a custom of sinning and long resisting grace, as others.
You have the soft and tender earth to plow in, and we have the hard and stony
ways, that have been trodden on by many years practice of evil. When they are
young' their understandings are like a sheet of white paper, that has nothing
written on; and so you have opportunity to write what you will. But when they
are grown up in sin, they are like the same paper written over with falsehoods;
which must all be bloted out again, and truth written in the place: and how
hard is that? We have a double task, first to unteach them, and then to teach
them better; but you have but one. We must unteach them all that the world, and
flesh, and wicked company, and the devil have been diligently teaching them in
many years time. We have hardened hearts to beat on, like a Smiths Anvile, that
will not feel us: We may tell them of death and Judgment, heaven and hell, and
they hear us as if they were asleep or dead; you have the soft clay to mold,
and we the hardened burned bricks. You have them before they are possessed with
prejudice, and false conceits against the truth: but we have them to teach,
when they have many years lived among those that have scorned at godliness, and
taught them to think Gods ways to be foolish preciseness. Custom has not
en^nared and engaged your little ones to contrary ways: But of old sinners,
the Lord himself has said, that if the Ethiopian can change his skin, and the
Leopard his spots; then may those that are acc^stomed to do evil, learn to do
well, Jer. 13.23. Does not the experience of all the world show you the power
of education? What else makes all the Children of the Jews to be Jews? and all
the Children of the Turks to be Mahometans? and of Christians, to be in
profession Christians? and of each Sect or party in Religion to follow their
parents, and the custom of the place? Why now what an advantage have you, to
use all this for the furtherance of their happiness? and possess them as
strongly beforehand against sin, as else Satan would do for it; and so Satan
should come to them upon some of those disadvantages that now Christ comes on.

2. Consider also, that you have the affections of your Children more then any
others: None in the world has that interest in their hearts as you. You will
receive that counsel from an undoubted friend, that you would not do from an
enemy, or a stranger. Why now, your children cannot choose but know that you
are their friends, and advise them in love: and they cannot choose but love you
again. Their love is loose and arbitrary to others: but to you it is
determinate and fast; nature has almost necessitated them to love you. O
therefore improve this your interest in them for their good.

3. You have also the greatest authority over them. You may command them, and
they dare not disobey you; or else it is your own fault, for the most part;
for you can make them obey you in your business in the world. Yea you may
correct them to enforce obedience. Your authority also is the most unquestioned
authority in the world. The authority of Kings and Parliaments, has been
disputed, but yours is past dispute. And therefore if you use it not to
constrain them to the works of God, you are without excuse,

4. Besides, their whole dependence is on you for their maintenance and
livelihood. They know you can either give them, or deny them what you have; and
so punish or reward them at your pleasure. But on Ministers or neighbors they
have no such dependence.

5. Moreover, you that are parents, know the temper, and inclinations of your
children, what vices they are most inclined to, and what instruction or reproof
they most need; But Ministers that live more strange to them, cannot know this.

6. Above all you are ever with them, and so have opportunity as to know their
faults, so to apply the remedy, You may be still talking to them of the word of
God, and minding them of their state and duty; and may follow and set home
every word of advice: as they are in the house with you, or in the shop, or in
the field at work; O what an excellent advantage is this, if God do but give
you hearts to use it. Especially you mothers, remember this: you are more with
your children while they are little ones then their fathers; be you therefore
still teaching them as soon as ever they are capable of learning. You cannot do
God such eminent service your selves, as men, but you may train up children
that may do it, and then you will have part of the comfort and honor. Bathsheba
had part of the honor of Solomon's wisdom Pro. 31.1. for she taught him. And
Timothe's mother and grandmother, of his piety. Plutrach speaks of a Spartan
woman, that when her neighbors were showing their apparel and jewels, she
brought out her children virtuous and well taught, and said, These are my
ornaments and Jewels. O how much more would this adorn you, then your bravery?
What a deal of pains are you at with the bodies of your children more then the
fathers? And what do you suffer to bring them into the world? and will not you
be at as much pains for the saving of their souls? You are naturally of more
tender affections then men: and will it not move you to think that your
children, should perish for ever? O therefore I beseech you for the sake of the
children of your bowels, teach them, admonish them, watch over them, and give
them no rest till you have brought them over to Christ.

And thus I have showed you reason enough to make you diligent in teaching your
children, if reason will serve, as me thinks among reasonable creatures it
should do.

SECT. XII.. 12.

LEt us next hear what is usually objected against this by negligent men.

Object. 1. We do not see but those children prove as bad as others, that are
taught the Scriptures and brought up so holily: And those prove as honest men
and good neighbors, that have none of this ado with them.

Answ. 1. O who art thou man that disputest against God? Has God charged you
to teach your children diligently his word, speaking of it as you sit at home,
and as you walk abroad, as you lie down and as you rise up, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8.
and dare you reply that it is as good let it alone? Why this is to set God at
defiance; and as it were to spit in his face, and give him the lie. Will you
take it well at your servants, if when you command them to do a thing, they
should return you such an answer, that they do not see but it were as good let
it alone? VVretched worm! dare thou thus lift up thy head against the Lord
that made thee and must judge thee? Is it not he that commands thee? If thou
do not believe that this Scripture is his word, thou do not believe in
Jesus Christ: for thou have nothing else to tell thee that there is a Christ.
And if thou do believe that this is the word of God, how dare thou say, It is
as good disobey it? This is devilish pride indeed, when such sottish sinful
dust shall think themselves wiser then the living God, and take upon them to
reprove and cancel his word.

2. But alas, you know not what honesty is, when you say, that the ignorant are
as honest as others: You think those are the honestest men, that best please
you: But I know those are the most honest, that best please God. Christ says
in Luk 8.15. that an honest heart is that which keeps the word of God; and
you say, they are as honest that reject it. God made men to please himself, and
not to please you: And you may know by his Laws who please him best. The
Commandments have two Tables; and the first is, Thou shall love the Lord with
all thy heart: and the second, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. First
seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33.

3. And what if some prove naught that are well brought up? It is not the
generality of them: will you say that Noah's family was no better then the
drowned world, because there was one Chaus in it? Nor David's, because there was
one Absalom? Nor Christ's, because there was one Judas?

4. But what if it were so? Have men need of the less teaching, or the more?
you have more wit in the matters of this world: you will not say, I see many
labor hard, and yet are poor, and therefore it is as good never labor at all;
you will not say, Many that go to School learn nothing, and therefore they may
learn as much though they never go. Or, many that are great tradesmen break,
and therefore it is as good never trade at all. Or many great eaters are as
lean as others, and many sick men recover no strength, though they eat; and
therefore it is as good for men never to eat more. Or, many plow and sow, and
have nothing comes up; and therefore it is as go (...) to plow more. What a
fool were he that should reason thus? And is not he a thousand times worse,
that shall reason thus for men's souls? Peter reasons the clean contrary way, If
the righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
1 Pet. 4.18. And so does Christ, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, for many shall seek to enter, and not be able. Other men's miscariages
should quicken our diligence; and not make us cast away all. What would you
think of that man, that should look over into his neighbors garden, and because
he sees here and there a nettle or weed among much better stuff should say;
Why, you may see, these men that bestow so much pains in digging and weeding,
have weeds in their garden as well as I that do nothing, and therefore who
would be at so much pains? Just thus does the mad world talk. You may see now,
those that pray, and read, and follow Sermons, have their faults as well as we,
and have wicked persons among them as well as we; Yea, but that is not the
whole garden, as yours is, it is but here and there a weed, and as soon as they
spy it, they pluck it up, and cast it away.

4. But however, if such men be as wicked as you imagine, can you for shame lay
the fault upon the Scripture, or Ordinances of God? Do they find any thing in
the Scriptures to encourage them to sin? You may far better say, It is long of
the Judge and the Law which hangs them, that there are so many Thieves. Did you
ever read a word for sin in the Scripture? Or ever hear a Minister, or godly
man persuade people to sin, or from it rather? (I speak not of Sectaries, who
usually grow to be enemies to Scripture) Lord, what horrible impudence is in
the faces of ungodly men? When a Minister has spent himself in studying and
persuading his people from sin; or when Parents have done all they can to
reform their children, yet people will say, it is long of this that they are so
bad. What? will reproving and correcting for sin bring them soonest to it? I
dare challenge any man breathing, to name any one Ruler that ever was in the
world, that was so severe against sin as Jesus Christ, or to show me any Law
that ever was made in the world so severe against sin as the Laws of God! And
yet must it be long of Christ and Scripture that men are evil? When he
threatens damnation against impenitent sinners, is it yet long of him? Yea,
see how these wicked men contradict themselves? What is it that they hate the
Scripture for, but that it is so strict and precise, and forbids them their
pleasures and fleshly liberties? that is, their sins. And yet if any fall into
sin, they will blame the Scripture, that forbids it. I know in these late years
of licenciousness and Apostasy, many that talk much of Religion, prove guilty
of grievous crimes: But then they turn away so far from Christ and Scripture.
As bad as the godly are, I dare yet challenge you to show me any society under
Heaven like them that most study and delight in the Scriptures: or any School
like the Scholars of Christ. Because parents cannot by all their diligence get
their children to be as good as they should be, shall they therefore leave them
to be as bad as they will? Because they cannot get them to be perfect Saints,
shall they therefore leave them to be as incarnate devils? Certainly your
children untaught, will be little better.

. 13.
SECT. XIII.
2. SOme will further object, and say, It is the Work of Ministers to teach
both us and our children, and therefore we may be excused.

Answ. 1. It is first your duty, and then the Ministers; It will be no excuse
for you, because it is their Work, except you could prove it were only theirs:
Magistrates must govern both you and your children, does it therefore follow
that you must not govern them? It belongs to the Schoolmaster to correct them,
and does it not belong also to you? There must go many hands to this great
Work, as to the building of a house there must be many Workmen, one to one
part, and another to another; and as your corn must go through many hands
before it be bread; the Reapers, the Threshers, the Millers, the Bakers, and
one must not leave their part, and say it belongs to the other: so it it is
here in the instructing of your children: first, you must do your work, and
then the Minister must do his; you must be doing it privately night and day;
the Minister must do it publicly, and privately as often as he can.

2. But as the case now stands with the Ministers of England, they are disabled
from doing that which belongs to their Office, and therefore you cannot now
cast your work on them. I will instance but in two things. First, It belongs to
their Office to govern the Church, and to teach with authority, and great and
small are commanded to obey them, Heb. 3.7.17. etc. But now this is unknown,
and Hearers look on themselves as free men, that may obey or not, at their own
pleasure: A Parents teaching which is with authority, will take more, then ones
that is taken to have none; People think we have authority to speak to them
when they please to hear, and no more. Nay, few of the godly themselves do
understand the authority that their Teachers have over them from Christ: They
know how to value a Ministers gifts, but not how they are bound to learn of him
and obey him, because of his Office. Not that they should obey him in evil, nor
that he should be a final decider of all controversies, nor should exercise his
authority in things of no moment: But as a Schoolmaster may command his
Scholars when to come to School, and what Book to read, and what form to be of;
and as they ought to obey him, and to learn of him, and not to set their wits
against his, but to take his word, and believe him as their Teacher, till they
understand as well as he, and are ready to leave his School: Just so are people
bound to obey and learn of their Teachers, and to take their words, while they
are learners, in that which is beyond their present capacity, till they are
able to see things in their proper evidence. Now this Ministerial Authority is
unknown, and so Ministers are the less capable of doing their Work, which comes
to pass, first, From the pride of man's nature, especially Novices, which makes
men impatient of the Reins of Guidance and Command; secondly, From the Popish
error of implicit Faith; to avoid which we are driven as far into the contrary
extreme: thirdly, From the usurpation of the late Prelates, who took almost all
the Government from the Ministers, and thereby overthrew the very essence of
the Office, by robbing it of that part which is as essential, at least, as
preaching; fourthly* And from the modesty of Ministers, that are loath to show
their Commission, and make known their Authority, lest they should be thought
proud: As if a Schoolmaster should let his Scholars do what their list; or a
Pilot let the Seamen run the Ship whither they will, for fear of being thought
proud in exercising their authority. Secondly, But a far greater clog then
this yet, does lie upon the Ministers, which ^ew take notice of; and that is,
The fewness of Ministers, and the greatness of Congregations. In the Apostles
times every Church had a multitude of Ministers (and so it must be again, or we
shall never come near that Primitive pattern;) and then they could preach
publicly, and from house to house: But now, when there is but one or two
Ministers to many thousand souls, we cannot so much as know them, much less
teach them one by one: It is as much as we can do to discharge the public
Work. So that you see, you have little reason to cast your Work on the
Ministers, but should the more help them by your diligence, in your several
families, because they are already so over burdened.

SECT. XIV.. 14.

3. BUt some will say, We are poor men, and must labor for our living, and so
must our children, and cannot have while to teach them the Scriptures; we have
somewhat else for them to do. Answ. And are not poor men subject to God, as
well as rich? and are they not Christians? and must they not give account of
their ways? and have not your children souls to save or lose, as well as the
rich? cannot you have while to speak to them as they are at their work? have
you not time to instruct them on the Lords day? you can find time to talk
idly, as poor as you are; and you can find no time to talk of the way to
Life! you can find time on the Lords day for your children to play, or walk or
talk in the streets, but no time to mind the life to come. Me thinks you
should rather say to your children, I have no Lands or Lordships to leave you;
nothing but hard labor and poverty in the world; you have no hope of great
matters here; be sure therefore to make the Lord your portion, and to get
interest in Christ, that you may be happy hereafter; if you could get riches,
they would shortly leave you, but the riches of Grace and Glory will be
everlasting. Me thinks, you should say as Peter, Silver and gold I have none,
but such as I have, I give you. The Kingdoms of the world cannot be had by
beggars, but the Kingdom of Heaven may. O what a terrible reckoning will many
poor men have, when Christ shall plead his cause, and judge them! May not he
say, I made the way to worldly honors unaccessible to you, that you might not
look after it for your selves, or your children; but Heaven I set open, that
you might have nothing to discourage you: I confined riches and honors to a
few, but my Blood and Salvation I offered to all, that none might say, I was
not invited: I tendered Heaven to the poor, as well as the rich; I made no
exception against the meanest beggar, that did not wilfully shut out
themselves: Why then did you not come your selves, and bring your children, and
teach them the way to the eternal Inheritance? Do you say you were poor? Why, I
did not set Heaven to sale for money, but I called those that had nothing, to
take it freely; only on condition they would take me for their Savior and
Lord, and give up themselves unfeignedly to me, in obedience and love. What can
you answer Christ, when he shall thus convince you? Is it not enough, that your
children are poor and miserable here, but you would have them be worse for
everlasting too? If your children were beggars, yet if they were such beggars
as Lazarus, they may be conveyed by Angels into the presence of God. But
believe it, as God will save no man, because he is a Gentleman, so will be save
no man because he is a beggar. God has so ordered it in his providence, that
riches are exceeding occasions of men's damnation, and will you think poverty a
sufficient excuse? The hardest point in all our work, is to be weaned from the
world, and in love with heaven: and if you will not be weaned from it, that
have nothing in it but labor and sorrow, you have no excuse. The poor cannot
have while, and the rich will not have while, or they are ashamed to be so
forward, the young think it too soon, and the old too late: and thus most men
in stead of being saved, have somewhat to say against their salvation: and when
Christ sends to invite them, they say* I pray thee have me excused; O
unworthy guests of such a blessed feast! and most worthy to be turned into the
everlasting burnings.

SECT. XV.. 15.

4. BUt some will object: We have been brought up in ignorance our selves, and
therefore we are unable to teach your children. Answer. Indeed this is the very
sore of the Land. But is it not pity, that men should so receive their
destruction by tradition? would you have this course to go on thus still? (...)
parents did not teach you; and therefore you cannot teach your children; and
therefore they cannot teach theirs; By this course the knowledge of God should
be banished out of the world, and never be recovered. But if your parents did
not teach you, why did not you learn when you came to age? The truth is, you
had no hearts to it; for he that has not knowledge, cannot value it or love
it. But yet, though you have greatly sinned, it is not too late, if you will
but follow my faithful advice in these 4. points.

1. Get your hearts deeply sensible of your own sin and misery, because of this
long time which you have spent in ignorance and neglect. Bethink your selves
sometime when you are alone; Did not God make you, and sustain you for his
service? should not he have had the youth and strength of your spirits? Did you
live all this while at the door of Eternity? What if you had dyed in ignorance?
Where had you been then? What a deal of time have you spent to little purpose?
Your life is near done, and your work all undone. You are ready to dye, before
you have learned to live. Should not God have had a better share of your lives?
and your souls been more sadly regarded and provided for? In the midst of these
thoughts, cast down your selves in sorrow, as at the feet of Christ, bewa^^
your folly, and beg pardon, and recovering grace.

2. Then think as sadly how you have wronged your children: If an unthrift that
has sold all his lands, will lament it for his childrens sake as well as his
own; much more should you.

3. Next, set presently to work, and learn your selves. If you can read, do: if
you cannot, get some that can: and be much among those that will instruct and
help you; be not ashamed to be seen among learners, though it be to be
Catechized: but be ashamed that you had not learned soone^. God forbid you
should be so mad, as to say, I am now too old to learn: Except you be too old
to serve God, and be saved; how can you be too old to learn to be saved? Why
not rather; I am too old to serve the Devil and the world? I have tried them
too long to trust them any more? What if your parents had not taught you any
trade to live by? or what if they had never taught you to speak? would not you
have set your selves to learn when you had come to age? Remember that you have
souls to care for, as well as your children: and therefore first begin with
your selves.

4. In the mean time while you are learn^ng your selves, teach your children
what do you know: and what you cannot teach them your selves, put them on to
learn it of others that can: persuade them into the company of the godly, who
will be glad to instruct them. If French men, or Welsh men lived in the Town
among us, that could not understand our language; would they not converse with
those that do understand it? and would they not daily send their children to
learn it by being in the company of those that speak it? so do you, that you
may learn the heavenly language: Get among those that use it; and encourage
your children to do so to: Have you no godly neighbors that will be helpful to
you herein? O do not keep your selves strange to them; but go among them and
desire their help; and be thankful to them, that they will entertain you into
their company. God forbid you should be like those that Christ speaks of Luke
11.52. that would neither enter into the Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer
those that would to enter. God forbid you should be such cruel barbarous
wretches, as to hinder your children from being godly, and to teach them to to
be wicked! And yet alas, how many such are there swarming every where among us?
If God do but touch the hearts of their children or servants, and cause them to
hear and read the Word, and call upon him, and accompany with the godly, who
will sooner scorn them and revile them and discourage them, then an ungodly
parent? What, say they, you will now be one of the holy brethren! You will be
wiser then your parents! etc. Just such as Pharaoh was to the Israelites, such
are these wicked wretches to their own children, Exodus 5.3, 8, 9. When Moses
said, Let us go sacrif^ce to the Lord, lest ^e fall upon us with pestilence or
sword, etc, Pharaoh answers* They are idle, therefore they say, let us go
sacrifice: lay more work upon them etc. Just so do these people say to their
children! You know, Pharaoh was the representer of the devil, and yet let me
tell you, These ungodly parents are far worse then Pharaoh. For the children of
Israel were many thousands, and were to go three days journey out of the land:
but these men hinder their children from serving God at home: Pharaoh was not
their father, but their King; but these men are enemies to the children of
their bodies; Nay more; let me te^l you, I know none on earth that play the
part of the devil himself more truly then these men. And if any thing that
walks in flesh may be called a devil, I think it is a parent that thus
hinderech his children from salvation. I solemnly profess I do not speak one
jot worse of these men, then I do think and verily believe in my soul: Nay,
take it how you will, I will say, thus much more: I verily think that in this
they are far worse then the devil. God is a righteous Judge, and will not make
the Devil himself worse then he is: I pray you ^e patient while you consider
it, and then judge your selves, They are the parents of their children, and so
is not the devil: Do you think then that it is as great a fault in him to seek
their destruction, as in them? Is it as great a fault for the VVoolf to kill
the Lambs, as for their own dams to do it? Is it so horrid a fault for an enemy
in war to kill a child? Or for a bear, or a mad dog to kill it, as for the
mother to dash i^ b^ains against the wall? You know it is not: Do not you think
then, that it is so hateful a thing in Satan to entice your children to sin and
hell, and to discourage and dissuade them from holiness and from heaven, as it
is in you. You are bound to love them by nature, more then Satan is. O then
what people are those that will teach their children in stead of holiness, to
curse and swear, and rail and backbite, to be proud and revengeful, to break
the Lords day, and to despise his ways, to speak wantonly, and filthily, to
scorn at holiness, and glory in sin! O when God shall ask these children, Where
learned you this language and practice? and they shall say, I learned it of my
father or mother; I would not be in the case of those parents for all the
world! Alas, is it a work that is worth the teaching, to undo themselves for
ever? Or can they not without teaching learn it too easily of themselves? Do
you need to teach a Serpent to sting, or a Lion to be fierce? Do you need to
sow weeds in your garden? will they not grow of themselves? To build a house
requires skill and teaching: but a little may serve to set a town on fire. To
heal the wounded, or the sick, requires skill: but to make a man sick, or to
kill him, requires but little. You may sooner teach your children to swear
then to pray; and to mock at godliness, then to be true godly. If these parents
were sworn enemies to their children, and should study seven years how to do
them the greatest mischief; they could not possibly find out a surer way, then
by drawing them to sin, and withdrawing them from God.

. 16.
SECT. XVI.
I Shall therefore conclude with this earnest request to all Christian parents
that read these lines; that they would have compassion on the souls of their
poor children, and be faithful to the great trust that God has put on them. O
Sirs, if you cannot do what you would do for them; yet do what you can. Both
Church and State, Cities and Country, do groan under the neglect of this
weighty duty: your children know not God nor his Laws, but take his name in
vain, and slieght his worship, and you do neither instruct them nor correct
them: and therefore does God correct both them and you. You are so tender of
them, that God is the le^^ tender both of them and you. Wonder not if God make
you smart for your childrens sins: for you are guilty of all they commit, by
your neglect of doing your duty to reform them, even as he that makes a man
drunk, is guilty of all the sin that he commits in his drunkenness. Will
you resolve therefore to set upon this duty, and neglect it no longer? Remember
Eli; your children are like Moses in the basket in the water, ready to perish
if they have not help. As ever you would not be charged before God for
murderers of their souls, and as ever you would not have them cry out against
you in everlasting fire, see that you teach them how to escape it, and bring
them up in holiness and the fear of God. You have heard that the God of heaven
does flatly command it you: I charge every one of you therefore, upon your
allegiance to him, and as you will very shortly answer the contrary at your
peril, that you neither refuse nor neglect this most necessary work. If you are
not willing now you know it to be so plain and so great a duty, you are flat
Rebels, and no true subjects of Christ. If you are willing to do it, but know
not how, I will add a few words of direction to help you. 1. Teach them by
your own example, as well as by your words. Be your selves such as you would
have them be; practice is the most effectual teaching of children, who are
addicted to imitation, especially of their parents. Lead them the way to
prayer, and reading, and other duties. Be not like base Commanders, that will
put on their Soldiers, but not go on themselves. Can you expect your children
should be wiser or better then you? Let them not hear those words out of your
mouths, nor see those practices in your lives, which you reprove in them. No
man shall be saved because his children are godly, if he be ungodly himself:
Who should lead the way in holiness, but the father and master of the family?
It is a sad time when he must be accounted a good master or father, that will
not hinder his family from serving God, but will give them leave to go to
heaven without him.

I will but name the rest for your direct duty for your Family. 1. You must
help to inform their understandings. 2. To store their memories. 3. To rectify
their wills. 4. To quicken their affections. 5. To keep tender their
consciences. 6. To restrain their tongues, and help them to skill in gracious
Speech. 7. And to reform and watch over their outward conversation.

To these ends: First, Be sure to keep them, at least, so long at School, till
they can read English. It is a thousand pities that a reasonable Creature
should look upon a Bible, as upon a Stone, or a piece of Wood. Secondly, Get
them Bibles and good Books, and see that they read them. Thirdly* Examine them
often what they learn. Fourthly, Especially bestow the Lords day in this work;
and see that they spend it not in sports or idleness. Fifthly, Show them the
meaning of what they read and learn, Josh. 4 6, 21, 22. Psalm. 78.4, 5, 6* and
34.11. Sixthly, Acquaint them with the godly, and keep them in good company,
where they may learn good; and keep them out of that company that would teach
them evil. Seventhly, Be sure to cause them to learn some Catechism, containing
the chief Heads of Divinity; as those made by the Assembly of Divines, or
Master Balls.

. 17.
SECT. XVII.
THe Heads of Divinity which you must teach them first, are these. 1. That
there is one only God, who is a Spirit, invisible, infinite, eternal,
Almighty, good, merciful, true, just, holy etc. 2. That this God is one in
three, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. 3. That he is the Maker, Maintainer, and
Lord of all 4. That man's happiness consists in the enjoying of this God, and
not in fleshly pleasure, profits, or honors. 5. That God made the first man
upright and happy, and gave him a Law to keep, with Conditions, that if he kept
it perfectly, he should live happy for ever; but if he broke it, he should die.
6. That man broke this Law, and so forfeited his welfare, and became guilty of
death, as to himself, and all his Posterity. 7 That Christ, the Son of God, did
here interpose, and prevent the full execution, undertaking to die in stead of
man, and so to Redeem him: whereupon all things were delivered into his hands
as the Redeemer, and he is under that relation the Lord of all. 8. That Christ
hereupon did make with man a better Covenant or Law, which proclaimed pardon of
sin to all that did but repent and believe and obey sincerely. 9. That he
revealed this Covenant and Mercy to the world by degrees, first, in darker
Promises, Prophecies, and Sacrifices; then in many Ceremonious Types, and then
by more plain foretellings by the Prophet^. 10. That in the fullness of time
Christ came, and took our Nature into Union with his Godhead, being conceived
by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary. 11. That while he was on earth,
he lived a life of sorrows, was crowned with Thorns* and bore the pains that
our sins deserved; at last being Crucified to death, and buried, and so
satisfied the Justice of God. 12. That he also Preached himself to the Jews,
and by constant Miracles did prove the truth of his Doctrine and Mediatorship,
before thousands of Witnesses: That he revealed more fully his New Law or
Covenant, That whosoever will believe in him, and accept him for Savior, and
Lord, shall be pardoned and saved, and have a far greater glory then they lost,
and they that will not, shall lie under the curse and guilt, and be condemned
to the everlasting fire of hell. 13. That he rose again from the dead, having
conquered death, and took fuller possession of his Dominion over all, and so
ascended up into heaven, and there reigns in glory. 14. That before his
Ascension he gave charge to his Apostles, to go Preach the foresaid Gospel to
all Nations and persons, and to offer Christ and Mercy, and Life, to every one
without exception, and to entreat, and persuade them to receive him; and that
he gave them authority to send forth others on the same Message, and to
Baptize, and to gather Churches, and confirm and order them, and to settle a
course for a succe^^^on of Ministers and Ordinances to the end of the world.
15. That he also gave them power to work frequent and evident Miracles for the
confirmation of their Doctrine, and the convincing of the world; and to annex
their writings to the rest of the Scriptures, and so to finish and seal them
up, and deliver them to the world as his infallible Word and Laws, which none
must dare to alter, and which all must observe. 16. That for all this free
Grace is offered to the world, yet the heart is by Nature so desperately
wicked, that no man will believe and entertain Christ sincerely, except by an
Almighty power he be changed and born again; and therefore does Christ send
forth his Spir^t with his Word, which secretly and effectually works holiness
in the hearts of the Elect, drawing them to God, and the Redeemer. 17. That the
means by which Christ works and preserves this Grace, is the Word Read and
Preached, together with frequent ^ervent Prayer, Meditation, Sacraments,
gracious Conference; and it is much furthered also by special Providence,
keeping us from temptations, fitting Occurrences to our advantage, drawing us
by Mercies, and driving us by Afflictions; and therefore it must be the great
and daily care of every Christian to use faithfully all the said Ordinaces, and
improve the said providence. 18. That though the new Law or Covenant be an
easy yoke, and there is nothing to be grievous in Christ's Commands, yet so bad
are our hearts, and so strong our temptations, and so diligent our enemies,
that whosoever will be saved, he must strive, and watch, and bestow his utmost
care and pains, and deny his flesh, and forsake all that would draw him from
Christ, and herein continue to the end, and overcome. And because this cannot
be done without continual supplies of Grace, whereof Christ is the only
Fountain, therefore we must live in continual dependence on him, by Faith, and
know, That our life is hid with God in him. 19. That Christ will thus by his
Word and Spirit gather him a Church of all the elect out of the world, which is
his body and spouse, and he their head and husband, and will be tender of the^
as the apple of his eye, and preserve them from dangers; and continue among
them his presence and ordinances, And that the members of this Church must live
together in most entire Love and Peace, delighting themselves in God and his
worship, and the fore-thoughts and mention of their everlasting happiness;
forbearing and forgiving one another, and ^^^ieving each other in need, as if
that which they have were their brothers. And all men ought to strive to be of
this society. Yet will the visible Churches be still mixed of good and bad. 20.
That when the fall number of these elect are called home, Christ will come down
from heaven again, and raise all the dead, and set them before him to be
judged: And all that have loved God above all, and believed in Christ, and been
willing that he should reign over them, and have improved their mercies in the
day of grace, them he will Justify, and sentence them to inherit the
Everlasting Kingdom of Glory, and those that were not such, he will condemn to
Everlasting fire; Both which sentences shall be then executed accordingly.

This is the Creed, or brief sum of the doctrine which you (...) teach your
children.

. 18.
SECT. XVIII.
THen for matter of practice, teach them the meaning of the Commandments,
especially of the great Commands of the Gospel, show them what is commanded and
forbidden* in the first table and in the second, toward God and men, in regard
of the inward and the outward man. And here show them. 1. The Authority
commanding, that is, the Almighty God, by Christ the Redeemer. They are not now
to look at command, as coming from God immediately, merely as God, or the
Creator, but as coming from God by Christ the Mediator, who is now the Lord of
all, and only Lawgiver; seeing the father now Judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment to the Son, John 5.22, 23, 24. 2. Show them the terms
on which duty is required, and the ends of it. 3. And the nature and duties,
and the way to perform them aright. 4. And the right order, that they first
love God above all, and then their neighbor: first seek the Kingdom of God and
his righteousness. 5. Show them the excellencies and delights of Gods service.
6. And the flat necessity. 7. Especially labor to get all their hearts, and
teach them not only to speak the words.

And for sin, show them its evil and danger, and watch over them against it.
Especially 1. The sins that youth is commonly addicted to. 2. And which their
nature and constitution most leads them to. 3. And which the time and place do
most strongly tempt to, 4. But specially be sure to kill their killing sins:
those that all are prone to, and are of all most deadly; as Pride, Worldliness,
Ignorance, Profaneness, and Flesh-pleasing.

And for the manner, you must do all this. 1. Betime, before sin get rooting.
2. Frequently. 3. Seasonably. 4. Seriously and diligently. 5. Affectionatly and
tenderly. 6. And with authority; compelling, where commanding will not serve,
and adding correction where instruction is frustrate,

And thus I have done with this Use of exhortation, to do our ^tmost for the
Salvation of others. The Lord give men compassionate hearts, that it may be
practiced, and then I doubt not but he will succeed it to the increase of his
Church.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS Everlasting REST.

The Fourth Part.

Containing a Directory for the getting and keeping of the Heart in Heaven: By
the diligent practice of that Excellent unknown Duty of Heavenly Meditation.

Being the main thing intended by the Author, in the writing of this Book; and
to which all the rest is but subservient.

And Isaac went out to meditate in the Field, at the Eventide, Genesis 24 63.

In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my soul, Psalm.
94.19.

When I wake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139 18.

For our Conversation is in Heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior,
the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious Body; according to the working whereby he is able, even
to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.20, 21.

For where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also, Matthew. 6.21.

Master it is good for us to be here, Mark 9.5.

London Printed by Rob. White, for T. Underhill, and F. Tyton, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Bible in great Woodstreet, and at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. 1649.

TO MY Dearly beloved friends in the Lord, The Inhabitants of the Town of
SHREWSBVRY, Both Magistrates, Ministers, and People, As also Of the
Neighboring Parts. Rich. Baxter Devoteth this Practical Part of this
Treatise, As a Testimony of his Love to his Native Soil, And to his many Godly
and Faithful Friends there living.
HEartily praying the Lord and Head of the Church, to keep them in Unity,
Peace, Humility, Vigilance, and Stedfastness in the Truth; and to cause them to
contribute their utmost endeavors for the setting up of able faithful
Teachers, and building up the House of God, which has so long been neglected,
and which has now so many hands employed to divide and demolish it: And that
the Lord would save them in this hour of Temptation, that they may be approved
in this trial, and not be found Light when God shall weigh them. And that he
would acquaint them with the daily serious exercise of this most precious,
spiritual, soul-exalting work of HEAVENLY MEDITATION, and that when the Lord
shall come, he may find them so doing.

The Introduction.
IN the former Part, I have chiefly pressed those Duties, which must be used
for the attainment of this Everlasting Rest. In this, I shall chiefly handle
those, which are necessary to raise the heart to God, and to our Heavenly and
comfortable life on Earth. It is a Truth too evident, which an inconsiderate
Zealot reprehended in Master CULVERWELL as an Error, That many of Gods Children
do not enjoy that sweet Life, and blessed Estate in this World, which God their
Father has provided for them: That is, Which he offers them in his Promises,
and charge upon them as their duty in his Precepts, and brings even to
their hands in all his Means and Mercies. God has set open Heaven to us in his
Word, and told every humble sincere Christian, That they shall shortly there
live with himself, in unconceiveable Glory; and yet where is the person that is
affected with this Promise? whose heart leaps for joy, at the hearing of the
news? or that is willing, in hopes of Heaven, to leave this World? But even the
godly have as strange unsavory thoughts of it, as if God did but delude us, and
there were no such Glory? and are almost as loath to die, as men without hope.
The consideration of this strange disagreement, between our Professions and
Affections, caused me to suspect, that there was some secret lurking unbelief
in all our hearts; and therefore I wrote those Arguments in the second Part,
for the Divine Authority of the Scripture. And because I find another cause to
be the carelessness, forgetfulness, and idleness of the Soul, and not keeping in
action that Faith which we have: I have here attempted the removal of that
cause, by prescribing a course for the daily acting of those Graces, which must
fetch in the Celestial Delights into the heart. O the Princely, joyful, blessed
Life, that the godly lose through mere idleness? As the Papists have wronged
the merits of Christ, by their ascribing too much to our own Works; so it is
almost incredible, how much they on the other extreme, have wronged the safety
and consolation of men's Souls, by telling them, that their own endevors are
only for Obedience and Gratitude, but are not so much as Conditions of their
Salvation, or Means of their increased Sanctification or Consolation. And while
some tell them, That they must look at nothing in themselves, for Acceptance
with God, or Comfort, (and so make that Acceptance and Comfort to be equally
belonging to a Christian, and a Turk:) And others tell them, That they must
look at nothing in themselves, but only as signs of their good Estate: This
has caused some to expect only Enthusiastic Cons^lations; and others to
spend their days in enquiring after signs of their sincerity: Had these poor
Souls well understood, that Gods way to persuade their wills, and to excite and
actuate their Affections, is by the Discourse, Reasoning, or Consideration of
their Understandings, upon the Nature and Qualifications of the Objects which
are presented to them: And had they bestowed but that time, in exercising holy
Affections, and in serious Thoughts of the promised Happiness, which they have
spent in enquiring only after Signs; I am confident, according to the
ordinary Workings of God, they would have been better provided, both with
Assurance, and with Joys. How should the Heir of a Kingdom, have the comfort
of his Title, but by fore-thinking on it? Its true, God must give us our
Comforts by his Spirit: But how? by quickening up our souls to believe and
consider of the promised Glory; and not, by comforting us we know not how, nor
why; or by giving men the foretasts of Heaven, when they never think of it.

I have here prescribed thee, Reader, the delightfullest task to the Spirit,
and the most ted^ous to the Flesh, that ever men on Earth were employed in. I
did it first only for my self, but am loath to conceal the means that I have
found so consola^ory. If thou be one that wilt not be persuaded to a course so
laborious, but wilt only go on in thy task of common formal duties: thou
may let it alone, and so be destitute of delights, except such as the World,
and thy Forms can afford thee; but then do not for shame complain for want of
comfort, when thou do wilfully reject it: And be not such an Hypocrite as to
pray for it, while thou do refuse to labor for it. If thou say, Thy comfort
is all in Christ; I must tell thee, it is a Christ remembered and loved, and not
a Christ forgotten, or only talked of, that will solidly comfort. Though the
Directory for Contemplation was only intended for this Part, yet I have now
premised two other Uses. The heart must be taken off from Resting on Earth,
before it will be fit to converse above. The first Part of saving Religion, is
the taking God only for our End and Rest.

CHAP. I. USE. VI. Reproving our Expectations of Rest on Earth.
SECT. I.. 1.

Does this Rest remain? How great then is our sin and folly, to seek and expect
it here? Where shall we find the Christian that deserves not this Reproof?
Surely we may all cry guilty to this accusation. We know not how to enjoy
convenient Houses, Goods, Lands and Revenues; but we seek Rest in these
enjoyments. We seldom, I fear, have such sweet and heart contenting thoughts of
God, and Glory, as we have of our earthly delights. How much Rest do the
voluptuous seek, in Buildings Walks, Apparel, Ease, Recreations, Sleep,
pleasing Meats and Drinks, merry Company, Health and Strength, and long Life?
Nay, we can scarce enjoy the necessary Means that God has appointed for our
Spiritual good, but we are seeking Rest in them. Do we want Minister, Godly
Society, or the like helps? O, think we, if it were but thus and thus with us,
we were well. These must be delighted in; but as means only to help us to God,
not as a happiness to content us without God.
Do we enjoy them? O, how we settle upon them, and bless our selves in them, as
the rich fool in his wealth? Our Books, our Preachers, Sermons, Friends,
Abilities for Duty? do not our hearts hug them, and quiet themselves in them,
even more then in God? Indeed, in words we disclaim it, and God has usually
the pre-eminence in our tongues, and professions; but its too apparent, that
its otherwise in our hearts, by these Discoveries. First, Do we not desire
these more violently, when we want them, then we do the Lord himself? Do we not
cry out more sensibly, O, my Friend, my Goods, my Health! then, O my God! Do we
not miss Ministry, and Means more passionately, then we miss our God? Do we not
bestir our selves more to obtain and enjoy these, then we do to recover our
communion with God? Secondly, Do we not delight more in the Possession of
these, then we do in the fruition of God himself? Nay, be not those mercies and
duties, most pleasant to us, wherein we stand at greatest distance from God? We
can read, and study, and confer, preach and hear, day after day, without much
weariness, because in these we have to do with Instruments and Creatures; but
in secret Prayer, and conversing with God immediately, where no Creature
interposeth; how dull? how heartless and weary are we? Thirdly, And if we lose
Creatures or Means, does it not trouble us more then our loss of God? If we
lose but a friend, or health, etc. all the Town will hear of it; but we can
miss our God, and scarce bemoan our misery. Thus its apparent, we exceedingly
make the Creature our Rest. Is it not enough, that they are sweet delights, and
refreshing helps in our way to Heaven; but they must also be made our Heaven it
self? Christian Reader, I would as willingly make thee sensible of this sin, as
of any sin in the world, if I could tell how to do it: For the Lords greatest
quarrel with us, is in this point. Therefore I most earnestly beseech thee, to
press upon thine own Conscience, these following Considerations.

. 2.
SECT. II.
1. IT is gross Idolatry to make any Creature or Means, our Rest. To ^ettle the
Soul upon it, and say, Now I am well, upon the bare enjoyment of the Creature;
what is this, but to make it our god? Certainly, to be the Souls Rest, is Gods
own Prerogative. And as it is palpable Idolatry to place our Rest in Riches and
Honors; so it is but a more spiritual and refined Idolatry, to take up our Rest
in excellent Means, in the Churches prosperity, and in its Reformation. When we
would have all that out of God, which is to be had only in God; what is this
but to turn away from him to the Creature, and in our hearts to deny him? when
we fetch more of our comfort, and delight from the thoughts of prosperity, and
those mercies which here we have at a distance from God, then from the
fore-thoughts of our everlasting Blessedness in him. Nay, when the thoughts of
that day, when we must come to God, is our greatest trouble, and we would do
any thing in the world to escape it; but our enjoyment of Creatures, though
absent from him, is the very thing our souls desire. When we had rather talk of
him, then come to enjoy him; and had rather go many miles to hear a powerful
Sermon of Christ and Heaven, then to enter and possess it. O, what vile
Idolatry is this? when we dispute against Epicures, Academicks, and all Pagans,
how earnestly do we contend; That God is the chief Good, and the fruition of
him our chief Happiness? what clear Arguments do we bring to evince it? but do
we believe our selves? or are we Christians in judgment, and Pagans in
affection? or do we give our senses leave to be the chusers of our Happiness,
while Reason and Faith stand by? O Christians, how ill must our dear Lord needs
take it, when we give him cause to complain, as sometime he did of our fellow
Idolaters. Jer. 50.6. That we have been lost sheep, and have forgotten our
Resting place. When we give him cause to say, Why my people can find rest in
any thing, rather then in me! They can find delight in one another, but none
in me; they can rejoice in my Creatures and Ordinances, but not in me: yea, in
their very labors and duty, they seek for rest, and not in me; they had rather
be any where, then be with me: Are these their gods? have these delivered, and
redeemed them? will these be better to them, then I have been, or then I would
be? If your selves have but a wife, a husband, a son, that had rather be any
where, then in your company, and is never so merry, as when furthest from you,
would you not take it ill your selves? Why so must our God needs do. For what
do we but lay these things in one end of the balance, and God in the other, and
foolishly in our choice, prefer them before him? 1 Samuel 1.8.
As Elkanah said to Hannah, Am not I better to thee, then ten sons? So when we
are longing after Creatures, we may hear God say, Am not I better then all the
Creatures to thee?

. 3.
SECT. III.
I mean the end of Precept, not of his Purpose.
2. COnsider how thou contradictest the end of God, in giving these things. He
gave them to help thee to him, and do thou take up with them in his stead? He
gave them that they might be comfortable refreshments in thy journey; and
would thou now dwell in thy Inn, and go no further? Thou do not only
contradict God herein, but losest that benefit which thou might receive by
them, yea, and make them thy great hurt and hinderance. Surely, it may be
said of all our Comforts and all Ordinances, and the blessedst enjoyments in
the Church on Earth, as God said to the Israelites of his Ark, Numb. 10.33. The
Ark of the Covenant went before them, to search out for them a Resting place.
So do all Gods mercies here. They are not that Rest (as John professes he was
not the Christ) but they are voices crying in this Wilderness, to bid us
prepare; for the Kingdom of God, our true Rest, is at hand. Therefore to Rest
here, were to turn all Mercies clean contrary to their own ends, and our own
advantages, and to destroy our selves with that which should help us.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
3. COnsider whether it be not the most probable way to cause God; either,
first, to deny these Mercies which we desire; or secondly, to take from us
those which we do enjoy; or thirdly, to imbitter them at least, or curse them
to us. Certainly, God is no where so jealous as here: If you had a servant,
whom your own wife loved better then she did your self, would you not both take
it ill of such a wife, and rid your house of such a servant? You will not
suffer your child to use a knife, till he have wit to do it without hurting
him. Why so, if the Lord see you begin to settle in the world, and say, Here I
will rest; no wonder if he soon in his jealously unsettle you. If he love you,
no wonder if he take that from you, wherewith he sees you about to destroy your
selves. It has been my long observation of many, That when they have attempted
great works, and have just finished them, or have aimed at great things in the
world, and have just obtained them, or have lived in much trouble and
unsettlement, and have just overcome them, and begin with some content to look
upon their condition, and rest in it; they are usually near to death or ruin.
You know the story of the fool in the Gospel: When a man is once at this
language, Soul take thy ease, or rest; the next news usually is, Thou fool,
this night, or this month, or this year, shall they require thy soul, and then
whose shall these things be? O, what house is there, where this fool dwells
not? Dear Christian friends, you to whom I have especially relation, Let you
and I consider, whether this be not our own case. Have not I after such an
unsettled life, and after almost five years living in the weary condition of
war, and the unpleasing life of a Soldier, and after so many years groaning
under the Churches unreformedness, and the great fears that lay upon us, and
after so many longings, and prayers for these days: Have I not thought of them
with too much content? and been ready to say, Soul take thy rest? Have not I
comforted my self more, in the fore-thoughts of enjoying these, then of coming
to Heaven, and enjoying God? What wonder then, if God cut me off, when I am
just sitting down in this supposed Rest? and has not the like been your
condition? Many of you have been Soldiers, driven from house and home, endured
a life of trouble and blood, been deprived of Ministry and Means, longing to
see the Churches settling: Did you not reckon up all the Comforts you should
have at your return? and glad your hearts with such thoughts, more then with
the thoughts of your coming to Heaven? Why what wonder if God now somewhat
cross you, and turn some of your joy into sadness? Many a servant of God has
been destroyed from the Earth, by being overvalued and overloved. I pray God
you may take warning for the time to come, that you rob not your selves of all
your mercies. I am persuaded, our discontents, and murmurings with an
unpleasing condition, and our covetous desires after more, are not so provoking
to God, nor so destructive to the sinner, as our too sweet enjoying, and Rest
of Spirit in a pleasing State. If God have crossed any of you, in Wife,
Children, Goods, Friends, etc. either by taking them from you, or the comfort
of them, or the benefit and blessing, Try whether this above all other, be not
the cause; for wheresoever your desires stop, and you say, Now I am well; that
condition you make your god, and engage the jealousy of God against it.
Whether you be friends to God, or enemies, you can never expect that God should
wink at such Idolatry, or suffer you quietly to enjoy your Idols.

. 5.
SECT. V.
4. COnsider, if God should suffer thee thus to take up thy Rest here, it were
one of the forest plagues, and greatest curses that could possibly befall thee:
It were better for thee, if thou never had a day of ease, or content in the
world; for then weariness might make thee seek after the true Rest: But if he
should suffer thee to sit down and rest here, where were thy rest when this
deceives thee? A restless wretch thou would be through all eternity. Psalm.
17.14. Luke 16.25.
To have their portion in this life, and their good things on the Earth, is the
lot of the most miserable perishing sinners. And does it become Christians then
to expect so much here? Our Rest is our Heaven; and where we take our Rest,
there we make our Heaven: And would thou have but such a Heaven as this?
Certainly, as Saul's Messengers found but Michols man of Straw, when they
expected David: So will thou find but ^ Rest of Straw, of Wind, of Vanity,
when thou most need Rest. It will be but as a handful of water to a man
that is drowning, which will help to destroy, but not to save him. But that is
the next.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
5. COnsider, thou seek Rest where it is not to be found; and so wilt lose
all thy labor; and (if thou proceed) thy souls eternal Rest too. I think I
shall easily evince this, by these clear demonstrations following.

First, Our Rest is only in the full obtaining of our ultimate end: But that
is not to be expected in this life; therefore, neither is rest to be here
expected. Is God to be enjoyed in the best Reformed Church, in the purest and
powerfullest Ordinances here, as he is in Heaven? I know you will all confess,
he is not: How little of God (not only the multitude of the blind world, but
sometimes) the Saints themselves do enjoy, even under the most excellent Means;
let their own frequent complainings testify. And how poor comforters are the
best Ordinances and Enjoyments, without God, the truly Spiritual Christian
knows. Will a stone rest in the Air in the midst of its fall, before it comes
to the Earth? No, because its center is its end. Should a Traveller take up his
rest in the way? No, because his home is his journeys end. When you have all
that Creatures and Means can afford, have you that you sought for? Have you
that you believed, pray, suffer for? I think you dare not say so. Why then do
we once dream of resting here? We are like little Children strayed from home;
and God is now fetching us home; and we are ready to turn into any house, stay,
and play with every thing in our way, and sit down on every green bank; and
much ado there is to get us home.

Secondly, As we have not yet obtained our end, so are we in the midst of
labors and dangers; and is there any resting here? What painful work does lie
upon our hands? Look to our Brethren, to godly, to ungodly, to the Church, to
our souls, to God; and what a deal of work in respect of each of these, does
lie before us? and can we rest in the midst of all our labors? Indeed, we may
take some refreshing, and ease our selves sometimes in our troubles; if you
will call that Rest: But that's not the settling Rest we now are speaking of; we
may rest on Earth, as the Ark is said to have rested in the midst of Jordan,
Josh. 3.13. A short and small Rest, no question; or as the Angels of Heaven are
desired to turn in, and rest them on Earth, Genesis 18.4. They would have been
loath to have taken up their Quum transierit tempus pugnae, and venerit pax
illa quae praecellit omnem intellectum, (quantumcunque enim cogitaverit de pace
illa, minus eam capit animus in ista corporis gravedine constitutus) cum
venerit inquam illa pax and patria, jam domus erit Deo, qui in pugna
tabernaculum. Non procedemus ad pugnandum, sed permanebimus ad loudandum. Quid
enim decitur de illa domo? Beati qui habitant in domo tua, Domine, in secula
seculorum laudabunt te. In tabernaculo adhuc gemimus; in domo landabimus.
Quare? Quia gemitus est peregninantium, laudatio jam in patria and in domo
commorantium. Qui in illam intrant ut inhabitent, ipsi sunt qui intrant ut
inhabitentur. In domum tuam intra ut inhabites: In domum Dei ut inhabiter is.
Est enim melior Domus: qui cum te caeperit inhabitare, beatum te facit. Nam si
tu ab illo non habitaris, miseres. August. in Psalm 26. and 31.
dwelling there. Should Israel have settled his Rest in the Wilderness, among
Serpents, and enemies, and weariness, and famine? Should Noah have made the Ark
his home, and have been loath to come forth when the waters were fallen? Should
the Mariner choose his dwelling on the Sea? and settle his rest in the midst of
Rocks and Sands, and raging Tempests? though he may adventure through all
these, for a Commodity of worth; yet I think he takes it not for his rest.
Should a Soldier rest in the midst of fight? when he is in the very thickest
of his enemies? and the instruments of death compass him about? I think he
cares not how soon the battle is over: And though he may adventure upon war for
the obtaining of peace, yet I hope he is not so mad, as to take that instead of
Peace. And are not Christians such Travelers, such Mariners, such Soldiers?
Have we not fears within, and troubles without? are we not in the thickest of
continual dangers? we cannot eat, drink, sleep, labor, pray, hear, confer, etc.
but in the midst of snares and perils? and shall we sit down and rest here? O
Christian, follow thy work, look to thy dangers, hold on to the end, win the
field, and come off the ground, before thou think of a settling rest. I read
indeed that Peter on the mount, when he had seen a glimpse of Glory, said, Its
good for us to be here. But sure when he was on the Sea, in the midst of waves,
he does not then say, Its good to be here* No, then he has other language,
Save Master, we perish. And even his desires to rest on the Mount, are noted in
Scripture to come from hence, He knew not what he said: It was on Earth, though
with Christ in his transfiguration. And I dare say the like of thee, when ever
thou talkest of resting on Earth, Thou know not what thou say. I read that
Christ when he was on the Cross, comforted the converted thief with this, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: But if he had only comforted him with
telling him, That he should rest there on that Cross, would he not have taken
it for a derision? Me thinks it should be ill resting in the midst of
sicknesses and pains, persecution and distresses: One would think it should be
no contentful dwelling for Lambs among Wolves. The wicked have some slender
pretense for their sin in this kind; they are among their friends, in the
midst of their portion, enjoying all the Happiness that they are like to enjoy:
But is it so with the godly? Surely, the world is at best, but a stepmother to
them; nay, an open enemy. But if nothing else would convince us; yet sure the
remainders of sin which does so easily beset us, should quickly satisfy a
believer, That here is not his rest. What, a Christian, and Rest in a state of
sinning? it cannot be: Or do they hope for a perfect freedom here? that is
impossible. I say therefore to every one that thinks of rest on Earth, as
Micah, chapter 2. verse 10. Arise ye, depart, this is not your Rest* because it
is polluted.

Thirdly, The nature of all these things may convince you, That they cannot be
a Christians true rest. They are too poor to make us such; and too low to raise
us to happiness; and too empty to fill our souls; and too base to make us
blessed; and of too short continuance, to be our eternal contents. They cannot
subsist themselves, without support from Heaven; how then can they give
subsistence to our souls? Sure if prosperity, or whatsoever we can here desire,
be too base to make us gods of, then are they too base to be our rest.

Fourthly, That which is the Souls true rest, must be sufficient to afford it
perpetual satisfaction: But all things below do delight us only with fresh
variety. The content which any Creature affords, does wax old and abate after
a short enjoyment: We pine away for them, as Amnon for his sister; and when we
have satisfied our desire, we are weary of them, and loath them. If God should
rain down Angels food, after a while our souls would loath that dry Manna. The
most dainty fare, the most costly clothing would not please us, were we tied to
them alone. The most sumptuous house, the softest bed, were we confined to
them, would be but a prison. One recreation pleases not long; we must have
supply of new, or our delights will languish, nay, our delight in our society
and friendship, especially if carnal, is strongest while fresh. And in the
Ordinances of God themselves, (so far as we delight in them for themselves and
not for God) if novelty support not, our delight grows dull. If we hear still
the same Minister; or if in Preaching and Praying, he use often the same
expressions; or if he Preach often the same Sermon? how dull grows our devotion,
though the matter be never so good, and at first did never so highly please us?
If we read the most excellent and pleasing Books, the third or fourth reading
is usually more heartless, then the first or second* Nay, in our general way of
Christianity, our first godly acquaintance, our first Preachers, our first
Books, our first Duties, have too commonly our strongest affections. All
Creatures are to us, as the flowers to the Be. There is but little of that
matter which affords them honey on any flower; and therefore they must have
supply of fresh variety, and take of each a superficial taste, and so to the
next yea, some having gone through variety of States, and ^asted of the
pleasures of their own Country, do travel for fresh variety abroad; and when
they come home, they usually betake themselves to some solitary corner, and sit
down, and cry with Solomon, Vanity and Vexation* And with David, I have seen an
end of all perfection: Psalm. 119.
And can this be a place of Rest for the soul?

Fifthly, Those that know the creature least, do affect it most; the more its
known* the less ^t satisfies: Those only are taken with it, who can see no
further then its outward beauty, not beholding its inward vanity; Its like a
comely Picture, if you stand too near it, it appears less beautiful; we are
prone to over-admire the persons of men, places of Honor, and other men's happy
condition, but it is only while we do but half know them* stay but a while
till we know them thoroughly, and have discovered the evil as well as the good,
and the defects, as well as the perfections, and then do we cease our
admiration.

. 7.
SECT. VII.
6. TO have creatures and means without God, who is their end, is so far from
being our happiness, that its an aggravation of our misery* even as to have
food without strength* and starve in the midst of plenty, and as Pharoahs Kine,
to devour all, and be fear still* What the better were you, if you had the best
Minister on Earth* the best Society, the purest Church, and therewithal the
most plentiful Estate, but nothing of God? If God should say, Take my
Creatures, my Word, my Servants, my Ordinances, but not my Self; would you
take this for a happiness? If you had the Word of God, and not the Word which
is God* Or Panem Domini, non panem Dominum, ut August.
the Bread of the Lord, and not the Lord, which is the true Bread? or could cry
with the Jews, The Temple of the Lord, and had not the Lord of the Temple? This
were a poor happiness. Was Capernaum the more happy, or the more miserable, for
seeing the mighty works which they had seen, and hearing the words of Christ
which they did hear? Matthew. 11.21, 22, 23.
Surely, that which aggravates our sin and misery, cannot be our Rest.

7. If all this be nothing, do but consult with Experience, both other men's and
your own, too many thousands and millions have made trial, but did ever one of
these find a sufficient Rest for his soul on this earth? Delights I deny not
but they have found, and imperfect temporary content, but Rest and Satisfaction
they never found: And shall we think to find that which never man could find
before us? Ahabs Kingdom is nothing to him, except he had also Naboaths
Vineyard; and did that satisfy him, think you, when he obtained it? If we had
conquered to our selves the whole world, we should perhaps do as Alexander is
Fabled to have done, Sit down and weep because there is never another world to
Conquer. If I should send you forth as Noah's Dove, to go through the earth, to
look for a Resting place, you would return with a confession, that you can
find none: Go ask Honor, Is there Rest here? Why, you may as well rest on the
top of the tempestuous Mountains, or in Etnaes flames, or on the Pinnacle of
the Temple. If you ask Riches, Is there Rest here? Even such as is in a bed of
Thorns; or were it a bed of Down, yet must you arise in the morning, and leave
it to the next Guest that shall succeed you: Or if you enquire of worldly
Pleasure and ease, can they give you any tidings of true Rest? Even such as the
fish or bird has in the Net, or in swallowing down the deceitful bait; when
the pleasure is at the sweetest, death is the nearest: It is just such a
content and happiness, as the exhilarating vapors of the wind do give to a man
that is drunk; it causes a merry and cheerful heart, it makes him forget his
wants and miseries, and conceive himself the happiest man in the world, till
his sick vomitings have freed him of his disease, or sleep have assuaged and
subdued those vapors which deluded his fantasy, and perverted his
Understanding, and then he awakes a more unhappy man then ever he was before.
Such is the Rest and Happiness that all worldly pleasures does afford. As the
Fantasy may be delighted in a pleasant dream, when all the senses are
captivated by sleep; so may the flesh or sensitive appetite, when the
reasonable soul is captivated by security, but when the morning comes, the
delusion vanishes; and where is the pleasure and happiness then? Or if you
should go to Learning, to purest, plentifullest, powerfullest Ordinances, or
compass sea and land to find out the perfectest Church, and holiest Saints,
and enquire whether there your soul may rest: You might happily receive from
these indeed an Olive Branch of Hope, as they are means to your Rest, and have
relation to eternity; but in regard of any satisfaction in themselves, you
would remain as restless as ever before. O how well might all these answer many
of us, Genesis 30.2.
with that indignation, as Jacob did Rachel, Am I instead of God? Or as the
King of Israel said of the Messengers of the King of Assyria, 2 Kings 5.7.
when he required him to restore Naaman to health, Am I God, to kill, and to
make alive, that this man sends to me to recover a man of his Leprosy? So may
the highest perfections on earth say, Are we God, or in stead of God, that this
man comes to us to give a soul Rest? Go take a view of all estates of men in
the world, and see whether any of them have found this Rest. Go to the
Husbandman, and demand of him, behold his circular endless labors, his
continual care and toil, and weariness, and you will easily see, that there is
no Rest; Go to the Tradesman, and you shall find the like: If I should send
you lower, you would judge your labor lost: Or go to the conscionable painful
Minister, and there you will yet more easily be satisfied, for though his
spending, killing, endless labors are exceeding sweet, yet is it not because
they are his Rest, but in reference to his peoples, and his own eternal Rest,
at which he aims, and to which they may conduce. If you should ascend to
Magistracy, and enquire at the Throne, you would find there is no condition so
restless, and your hearts would even pity poor Princes and Kings. Doubtless,
neither Court, nor Country, Towns, or Cities, Shops, or Fields, Treasuries,
Libraries, Soli^a^iness, Society, Studies, or Pulpits can afford any such thing
as this Rest: If you could enquire of the dead of all Generations; or if you
could ask the living through all Dominions, they would all tell you, here is no
Rest; and all Mankind may say, All our days are sorrow, and our labor is
grief, and our hearts take not rest, Eccles. 2.23. Go to Genevah, go to New
England, find out the Church which you think most hapyy, and we may say of it,
as lamenting Jeremy of the Church of the Jews, Lam. 1.3. She dwells among the
Heathen, she finds no rest, all her Persecutors overtake her. The holiest
Prophet, the blessedst Apostle would say* as one of the most blessed did, 2
Cor. 7.5. Our flesh had no rest, without were fightings, within were fears: If
neither Christ nor his Apostles, to whom was given the earth and the fullness
thereof, had rest here, why should we expect it?

Or if other men's experiences move you not, do but take a view of your own: Can
you remember the estate than did fully satisfy you? Or if you could, will it
prove a lasting state? For my own part, I have run through seve^al places and
states of life, and though I never had the necessities which might occasion
discontent, yet did I never find a setlement for my soul; and I believe we may
all say of our Rest, 1 Cor. 15.19.
as Paul of our Hopes, If it were in this life only, we were of all men most
miserable. Or if you will not credit your past experience, you may try in your
present or future wants: when Conscience is wounded, God offended, your bodies
weakened, your friends afflicted, see if these can yield you Rest. If then
either Scripture, or Reason, or the Experience of your selves and all the world
will satisfy us, we may see there is no resting here. And yet how guilty are
the generality of Professors of this sin! How many halts and stops do we make,
before we will make the Lord our Rest! How must God even drive us, and fire us
out of every condition, lest we should sit down and Rest there! If he give us
Prosperity, Riches, or Honor, we do in our hearts dance before them, as the
Israelites before their Calf, and say, These are thy Gods, and conclude it is
good being here. If he imbitter all these to us by Crosses, how do we strive to
have the Cross removed, and the bitterness taken away, and are restless till
our condition be sweetened to us, that we may sit down again, and rest where we
were? If the Lord, seeing our perverseness, shall now proceed in the cure, and
take the creature quite away, then how do we labor, and care, and cry, and
pray, that God would restore it, that if it may be, we may make it our Rest
again? And while we are deprived of its actual enjoyment, and have not our
former Idol to delight in, yet rather then come to God, we delight our selves
in our hopes of recovering our former state, and as long as there is the least
likelihood of obtaining it, we make those very hopes our Rest: if the poor by
laboring all their days, have but hopes of a fuller estate when they are old
(though a hundred to one they dye before they have obtained i^, or certainly at
least immediately after) yet do they labor with patience, and rest themselves on
these Expectations. Or if God do take away both present enjoyments, and all
hopes of ever recovering them, how do we search about, from creature to
creature, to find out something to supply the room, and to settle upon in
stead thereof? Yea, if we can find no supply, but are sure we shall live in
poverty, in sickness, in disgrace, while we are on earth, yet will we rather
settle in this misery, and make a Rest of a wretched Being, then we will leave
all and come to God. A man would think, that a multitude of poor people, who
beg their bread, or can scarce with their hardest labor have sustenance for
their lives, should easily be driven from Resting here, and willingly look to
heaven for Rest; and the sick who have not a day of ease, nor any hope of
recovery le^t them: But O the cursed aversness of these souls from God* We will
rather account our misery our happiness, yea that which we daily groan under as
intolerable, then we will take up our happiness in God. If any place in hell
were tolerable, the soul would rather take up its Rest there, then come to God.
Yea when he is bringing us over to him, and has convinced us of the worth of
his ways and service, I know the means of grace must be loved and valued, and
the usual enjoyment of God is in the use of them, and he that delights in any
worldly thing more then in them, is not a true Christian: But when we are
content with duty in stead of God, and had rather be at a Sermon then in
Heaven, and a member of a Church here, then of that perfect Church, and rejoice
in ordinances but as they are part of our earthly prosperity; this is a sad
mistake
the last deceit of all is here; we will rather settle upon those ways that
lead to him, and those ordinances which speak of him, and those gifts which
flow from him, then we will come clean over to himself. Christian, marvel not
that I speak so much of Resting in these: Beware least it should prove thy own
case; I suppose thou art so far convinced of the vanity of Riches, and Honor,
and carnal pleasure, that thou can more easily disclaim these (and its well
if it be so) but for thy more spiritual mercies in thy way of profession, thou
look on these with less suspicion, and think they are so near to God,
that thou can not delight in them too much, especially seeing most of the
world despise them* or delight in them too little. But do not the increase of
these mercies dull thy longings after heaven? If all were according to thy
desire in the Church, would thou not sit down and say, I am well; Soul, take
thy Rest, and think it a judgment to be removed to heaven? Surely if thy
delight in these excel not thy delight in God, or if thou would gladly leave
the most happy condition on earth, to be with God, then art thou a rare man, a
Christian indeed. Many a one of us were more willing to go to heaven in the
former days of persecution, when we had no hopes of seeing the Church
reformed, and the Kingdom delivered: But now we are in hopes to have all things
almost as we desire, the case is altered, and we begin to look at heaven as
strangely and sadly, as if it would be to our loss to be removed to it. Is this
the right use of Reformation? Or is this the way to have it continued or
perfected? should our deliverances draw our hearts from God? O, how much better
were it, in every trouble* to fetch our chief arguments of comfort, from the
place where our chiefest Rest remains; and when others comfort the poor with
hopes of wealth, or the sick with hopes of health and life, let us comfort our
selves with the hopes of heaven. So far rejoice in the creature, as it comes
from God, or leads to him, or brings thee some report of his love; So far let
thy soul take comfort in ordinances, as God does accompany them with quickening
or comfort, or gives in himself unto thy soul by them. Still remembering, when
thou have even what thou do desire, yet this is not Heaven; yet these are but
the first fruits. Is it not enough that God allows us all the comforts of
travelers, and accordingly to rejoice in all his mercies, but we must set up
our staff, as if we were at home? While we are present in the body, 2 Cor. 5.6,
7, 8, 9.
we are absent from the Lord; and while we absent from him, we are absent from
our Rest. If God were as willing to be absent from us, as we from him, and if
he were as loath to be our Rest, as we are loath to Rest in him, we should be
left to an Eternal Restless separation. In a word, as you are sensible of the
sinfulness of your earthly discontents, so be you also of your irregular
contents, and pray God to pardon them much more. And above all the plagues and
judgments of God on this side hell, see that you watch and pray against this [
Of settling any where short of Heaven, or reposing your souls to Rest on any
thing below God.] Or else, when the bough which you tread on breaks, and the
things which you Rest upon deceive you, you will perceive your labor all lost,
and your sweetest contents to be preparatives to your w^, and your highest
hopes will make you ashamed. Try, if you can persuade Satan to lea^e tempting,
and the world to cease both troubling and seducing, and sin to cease inhabiting
and acting, if you can bring the Glory of God from above, or remove the Court
from Heaven to earth, and secure the continuance of this through Eternity* then
settle your selves below, and say, Soul take thy rest here: But till then admit
not such a thought.

CHAP. II. USE. VII. Reproving our unwillingness to Dye.
. 1.
SECT. I.
IS there a Rest remaining for the people of God? Why are we then so loath to
dye, and to depart from hence that we may possess this Rest? If I may judge of
others hearts by my own, we are exceeding guilty in this point. We linger, as
Lot in Sodom, till God being merciful to us, does pluck us away against our
wills. How rare is it to meet with a Christian, though of strongest parts and
longest profession, that can dye with an unfeigned willingness! Especially if
worldly calamity constrain them not to be willing! Indeed, we sometime set a
good face on it, and pretend a willingness when we see there is no remedy; and
that our unwillingness is only a disgrace to us, but will not help to prolong
our lives: But if God had enacted such a law for the continuance of our lives
on earth, as is enacted for the continuance of the Parliament, that we should
not be dissolved till our own pleasure; and that no man should dye till he were
truly willing; I fear Heaven might be empty for the most of us, and if our
worldly prosperity did not fade, our lives on earth would be very long, if not
eternal. We pretend desires of being better pre^a^e^ and of doing God some
greater service, and to that end we beg on year more, and another, and another,
but still our promised preparation and service is as far to seek as ever
before, and we remain as unwilling to dye, as we were when we begged our first
R^p^^vall. For mere moral considerations against the fear of death read Charon
of Wisdom. l. 2. c. 11.
If God were not more willing of our company, then we are of his, how long
should we remain thus distant from him? And as we had never been sanctified if
God had stayed till we were willing; so if he should refer it wholly to our
selves, it would at least be long before we should be glorified. I confess
that Death of it self is not desirable; but the souls Rest with God is, to
which death is the common passage. And because we are apt to make light of this
sin, and to plead our common nature for to patronize it; let me here set before
you its aggravations, and also propound some further considerations which may
be useful to you and my self against it.

SECT. II.. 2.

ANd first consider, What a deal of gross infidelity does lurk in the bowels of
this sin? Either paganish unbelief of the truth of that eternal blessedness,
and of the truth of the Scripture which does promise it to us; or at least a
doubting of our own interest, or most usually somewhat of both these. And
though Christians are usually most sensible of the latter, and therefore
complain most against it; yet I am apt to suspect the former to be the main
radical master sin, and of greatest force in this business. O, if we did but
verily believe, that the promise of this glory is the word of God, and that God
does truly mean as he speaks, and is fully resolved to make it good; if we did
verily believe, that there is indeed such blessedness prepared for believers*
as the Scripture mentions; sure we should be as impatient of living, as we
are now fearful of dying and should think every day a year till our last day
should come: We should as hardly refrain from laying violent hands on our
selves, or from the neglecting of the means of our health and life, as we do now
from overmuch carefulness and seeking of life by unlawful means. If the
eloquent oration of a Philosopher concerning the souls immortality and the life
to come could make his affected hearer, presently to cast himself head long
from the rock, as impatient of any longer delay; what would a serious
Christians belief do, if Gods Law against self murder did not restrain? Is it
possible that we can truly believe, that death will remove us from misery to
such glory, and yet be loath to dye? If it were the doubts of our own interest,
which did fear us; yet a true belief of the certainty and excellency of this
Rest, would make us restless till our interest be cleared. If a man that is
desperately sick to day, did believe he should arise sound the next morning; or
a man to day in despicable poverty, had assurance that he should to morrow
arise a prince; would they be afraid to go to bed? Or rather think it the
longest day of their lives, till that desired night and morning come? The truth
is, though there is much faith and Christianity in our mouths, yet there is
much infidelity and paganism in our hearts, which is the maine cause, that we
are so loath to dye.

. 3.
SECT. III
3. ANd as the weakness of our Faith, so also the coldness of our Love is
exceedingly discovered by our unwillingness to dye. Love does desire the
nearest conjunction, the fullest fruition, and closest communion; Where these
desires are absent, there is only a naked pretense of Love: He that ever felt
such a thing as Love working in his breast, has also felt these desires
attending it. If we love our friend, we love his company: his presence is
comfortable; his absence is troublesome: when he goes from us, we desire his
return: when he comes to us, we entertain him with welcome, and gladness: when
he dies, we mourn, and usually over-mourn: Amicus animae dimidium. Aug.
to be separated from a faithful friend, is to us as the renting of a member
from our bodies; And would not our desires after God be such, if we really
loved him? Nay should it not be much more then such, as he is above all friends
most lovely? The Lord teach us to look closely to our hearts, and take heed of
self-deceit in this point: For certainly what ever we pretend or conceit, if we
love either Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Child, Friend, Wealth, Mat. 10.37.
or life more then Christ, we are yet none of his sincere Disciples. When it
comes to the trial, the question will not be, Who has preached most, or heard
most, or talked most? but who has loved most? when our account is given in,
Christ will not take Sermons, Prayers, Fastings, no, nor the giving of our
goods, nor the burning of our bodies in stead of love, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, Solus
est qui sine Amico est. Aust.
3, 4, 8, 13. and 16.22. Ephesians. 6.24. And do we love him, and yet care not how
long we are from him? If I be deprived of my bosom friend, me thinks I am as a
man in a wilderness, solitary, and disconsolate: And is my absence from God, no
part of my trouble? and yet can I take him for my chiefest friend? If I delight
but in some Garden, or Walk, or Gallery, I would be much in it: If I love my
Books, I am much with them, and almost unweariedly poaring on them. The food
which I love* I would often feed on; the clothes that I love, I would often
wear; the recreations which I love, I would often use them; the business which
I love, I would be much employed in: And can I love God, and that above all
these; and yet have no desires to be with him? Is it not a far likelier sign of
hatred then of love; when the thoughts of our appearing before God, are our
most grievous thoughts; and when we take our selves as undone, because we must
die and come unto him? Surely, I should scarce take him for an unfeigned
friend, who were as well contented to be absent from me, as we ordinarily are
to be absent from God. Was it such a joy to Jacob to see the face of Joseph in
Egypt? and shall we so dread the sight of Christ in glory? and yet say we love
him? I dare not conclude, that we have no love at all, when we are so loath to
die. But I dare say, were our love more, we should die more willingly. Yea, I
dare say, Did we love God, but as strongly, as a worldling loves his wealth, or
an ambitious man his honor, or a voluptuous man his pleasure; yea, as a
drunkard loves his swinish delight, or an unclean person his brutish lust: We
should not then be so exceeding loath to leave the world, and go to God. O, if
this holy flame of love were thoroughly kindled in our breasts, in stead of our
pressing fears, our dolorous complaints, and earnest prayers against death, we
should join in David's Wilderness-lamentations, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart
pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God: My soul
thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God?
The truth is, As our knowledge of God, is exceeding dark, and our faith in him,
exceeding feeble; so is our love to him but little, and therefore are our
desires after him so dull.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
3. IT appears we are little weary of sinning, when we are so unwilling to be
freed by dying. Did we take sin for the greatest evil, we should not be willing
of its company so long; did we look on sin as our cruellest enemy, and on a
sinful life, as the most miserable life; sure we should then be more willing of
a change. But O, how far are our hearts from our doctrinal profession, in this
point also! We preach and write, and talk against sin and call it all that
naught is; and when we are called to leave it, we are loath to depart: We brand
it with the most odious names that we can imagine, (and all far short of
expressing its vileness;) but when the approach of death puts us to the trial,
we choose a continuance with these abominations, before the presence and
fruition of God. Plutarch. in Apotheg. Cum Schegius Medicus caecus ficret,
patienter fert, Quia, inquit, multa in vita vidi, quae maluissem non videre.
Optavi ad nonnulla etiam fuisse surdum.
But as Nemon smote his Soldier for railing against Alexander his enemy,
saying, I hired thee to fight against him, and not to rail against him: So may
God smite us also, when he shall hear our tongues reviling that sin, which we
resist so slothfully, and part with so unwillingly. Christians, seeing we are
conscious that our hearts deserve a smiting for this, let us join together, to
chide and smite our own hearts, before God do judge and smite them. O foolish
sinful heart! Have thou been so long a sink of sin, a cage of all unclean
lusts, a fountain uncessantly streaming forth the bitter and deadly waters of
transgression? and art thou not yet aweary? Wretched Soul! have thou been so
long wounded in all thy faculties? so grievously languishing in all thy
performances? so fruitful a soil for all iniquities? and art thou not yet more
weary? Have thou not yet transgressed long enough? nor long enough provoked thy
Lord? nor long enough abused love? would thou yet grieve the Spirit more? and
sin against thy Saviors blood? and more increase thine own wounds? and still
lie under thy grievous imperfections? Has thy sin proved so profit able a
commodity? so necessary a companion? such a delightful employment? that thou
do so much dread the parting day? Has thy Lord deserved this at thy hands?
that thou should choose to continue in the Suburbs of ^ell, rather then live
with him in light? and rather stay and drudg in sin, and abide with his and thy
own professed enemy, then come away and dwell with God? May not God justly
grant thee thy wishes, and seal thee a lease of thy desired distance, and nail
thy ear to these doors of misery, and exclude thee eternally from his glory?
Foolish sinner! who has wronged thee? God, or sin? who has wounded thee, and
caused thy groans? who has made thy life so woeful? and caused thee to spend
thy days in dolor? is it Christ, or is it thy corruption? and art thou yet so
loath to think of parting? shall God be willing to dwell with man? and the
Spirit to abide in thy peevish heart? and that where sin does straiten his
room, and a cursed inmate inhabit with him, which is ever quarrelling and
contriving against him? and shall man be loath to come to God, where is nothing
but perfect Blessedness and Glory? Is not this to judge our selves unworthy of
everlasting Life? If they in Acts 13.46. who put the Gospel from them, did judge
themselves unworthy; do not we who fly from life and glory?

SECT. V.. 5.

4. IT shows that we are insensible of the vanity of the Creature, Inquit,
Plate rus ille Felix, aegrotus, Fin^m fac dolorum Domine: Sordent enim mihi
omaia terrena: Vtinam. utinam vel hoc momento h^ra meae mortis instarct: Ex
animo cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo.
and of the vexation accompanying our residence here, when we are so loath to
hear, or think of a removal. What ever we say against the world, or how
grievous soever our complaints may seem; we either believe not, or feel not
what we say, or else we should be answerably affected to it. We call the world
our enemy, and cry out of the oppression of our Taskmasters, and groan under
our sore bondage; but either we speak not as we think, or else we imagine some
singular happiness, to consist in the possession of worldly things; for which,
all this should be endured. Is any man loath to leave his prison? or to remove
his dwelling from cruel enemies? or to escape the hands of murderous robbers? Do
we take the world indeed for our prison? our cruel, spoiling* murderous foe?
and yet are we loath to leave it? Do we take this flesh for the clog of our
spirits? and a vail that's drawn betwixt us and God? and a continual in dwelling
traitor to our souls? and yet are we loath to lay it down? Acts 12.7, 8, 9.
Indeed Peter was smitten by the Angel, before he arose and left his prison;
but it was more from his ignorance of his intended deliverance, then any
unwillingness to leave the place. I have read of Joseph's long imprisonment; and
Daniels casting into the Den of Lions; and Jeremies sticking fast in the
Dungeon; and Jonahs lying in the belly of the VVhale; and David from the deep
crying to God; but I remember not that any were loath to be delivered. I have
read indeed, That they suffered cheerfully, Heb. 11.
and rejoiced in being afflicted, destitute and tormented; yea, and that some
of them would not accept of deliverance: But not from any love to the
suffering, or any unwillingness to change their condition; but because of the
hard terms of their deliverance, Acts 16.25. Compara nunc si placeat hanc vitam
cum illa. Elige si potes perpetuam corp^ris vitam in labor, aerumnaque
miserabili tantarum commutation^i votorumque laedio, fastidio voluptatum. Dum
si Deus ista perpetuare velit, illa diligeres?

Nam si per se vita fugienda est, ut sit molesliarum fuga requies aerumnarum,
quanto magis ea requies est expetenda, cui futurae resurrectionis voluptas
perpetua succedet? Vbi nulla criminum series, nulla illecebra delictorum.
Ambros. lib. de Ressurect. John 16.20, 33.


and from the hope they had of a better resurrection. Though Paul and Sylas
could sing in the stocks, and comfortably bear their cruel scourgings; yet I do
not believe they were unwilling to go forth; nor took it ill when God relieved
them. At foolish wretched soul! Does every prisoner groan for freedom? and
every Slave desire his Jubilee? and every sick man long for health? and every
hungry man for food? and do thou alone abhor deliverance? Does the Seamen
long to see the Land? does the Husbandman desire the Harvest? and the laboring
man to receive his pay? does the traveller long to be at home? and the runner
long to win the prize? and the Soldier long to win the field? And art thou
loath to see thy labors finished? and to receive the end of thy Faith, and
sufferings? and to obtain the thing, for which thou live? Are all thy
sufferings only seeming? have thy gripes, thy griefs and groans, been only
dreams? if they were, yet methinks we should not be afraid of waking: Fearful
dreams are not delightful. Or is it not rather the worlds delights, that are
all mere dreams and shadows? Is not all its glory, as the light of a Glowworm,
a wandering fire, yielding but small directing light, and as little comforting
heat in all our doubtful, and sorrowful darkness? or has the world In these
its latter days, laid aside its ancient enmity? Is it become of late more
kind? has it left its thorny renting nature? who has wrought this great
change? and who has made this reconciliation? Surely, not the great
Reconciler: He has told us, in the world we shall have trouble, and in him
only, we shall have peace. We may reconcile our selves to the world (at our
peril) but it will never reconcile it self to us. O foolish unworthy soul! who
had rather dwell in this land of darkness, and rather wander in this barren
wilderness, then be at rest with Jesus Christ! who had rather stay among the
Wolves, and daily suffer the Scorpions stings, then to praise the Lord with
the Hosts of Heaven! If thou did well know what Heaven is, and what Earth is,
it would not be so.

SECT. VI.. 6.

5. THis unwillingness to dye, does actually impeach us of high Treason against
the Lord: Is it not a choosing of Earth before him? and taking these present
things for our happiness? and consequently making them our very God? If we did
indeed make God our God, that is, our End, our Rest, our Portion, our Treasure;
how is it possible but we should desire to enjoy him? It behooves us the rather
to be fearful of this, it being utterly inconsistent with saving Grace to value
any thing before God, or to make the Creature our highest End: Many other sins
foul and great may possibly yet consist with sincerity, but so, I am certain,
cannot that. But concerning this I have spoke before.

SECT. VII.. 7.

6. ANd all these defects being thus discovered, what a deal of dissembling
does it more over show? We take on us to believe undoubtedly, the exceeding
eternal weight of Glory: We call God our chiefest Good, and say, we love Him
above all, and for all this we fly from Him, as if it were from Hell it self;
would you have any man believe you, when you call the Lord your only Hope, and
speak of Christ as All in All, and talk of the Joy that is in Presence, and yet
would endure the hardest life, rather then dye and come unto him? What
self-contradiction is this, to talk so hardly of the world and flesh, to groan
and complain of sin and suffering, and yet fear no day more then that which we
expect should bring our final freedom? what shameless gross dissembling is
this, to spend so many hours, and days, in hearing Sermons, reading Books,
conferring with others, and all to learn the way to a place which we are loath
to come to? To take on us all our lifetime, to walk toward Heaven, to run, to
strive, to fight for Heaven, which we are loath to come to? What apparent
palpable hypocrysie is this, to lie upon our knees in public and private, and
spend one hour after another in prayer, for that which we would not have? If
one should over-hear thee in thy daily devotions, crying out, Lord deliver me
from this body of death, from this sin, this sickness, this poverty, these
cares and fears, how long Lord shall I suffer these? and withal should hear
thee praying against death; can he believe thy tongue agrees with thy heart?
except thou have so far lost thy reason, as to expect all this here; or except
the Papists Doctrine were true, that we are able to fulfill the Law of God; or
our late Perfectionists are truly enlightened, who think they can live and not
sin: but if thou know these to be undoubtedly false, how can thou deny thy
gross dissembling?

. 8.
SECT. VIII.
7. COnsider, how do we wrong the Lord and his Promises, and disgrace his ways
in the eyes of the world? As if we would actually persuade, them to question,
whether God be true of his Word or no? whether there be any such glory as
Scripture mentions? when they see those who have professed to live by Faith,
and have boasted of their hopes in another world, and persuaded others to let
go all for these hopes, and spoken disgracefully of all things below, in
comparison of these unexpressable things above; I say, when they see these very
men so loath to leave their hold of present things, and to go to that glory
which they talked and boasted of; how does it make the weak to stagger? and
confirm the world in their unbelief and sensuality? and make them conclude,
sure if these Professors did expect so much glory, and make so light of the
world as they seem, they would not themselves be so loath of a change. O how are
we ever able to repai^ the wrong which we do to God and poor souls by this
scandal? And what an honor to God? what a strengthening to Believers? what a
conviction to Unbelievers would it be, if Christians in this did answer their
professions, and cheerfully welcome the news of Rest?

. 9.
SECT. IX.
8. IT evidently discovers that we have been careless loyterers, that we have
spent much time to little purpose, Vltima verba Nobilis And. Dudithii ad
Ruterum discedentem verissima: Vale, inquit, and foeliciter vive, and inter.
vivendum been mori disce: quae ars ast artium omnium difficillims, simulque
praestantissima.
and that we have neglected and lost a great many of warnings. Have we not had
all our life time to prepare to die? So many years to make ready for one hour?
and are we so unready and unwilling yet? What have we done? why have we lived?
that the business of our lives is so much undone? Had we any greater matters to
mind? Have we not foolishly wronged our souls in this? would we have wished
more frequent warnings? How often has death entered the habitations of our
neighbors? how often has it knocked at our own doors? we have first heard that
such a one is dead, and then such a one, and such a one, till our Towns have
changed most of their Inhabitants; And was not all this a sufficient warning,
to tell us that we were also Mortals, and our own turn would shortly come? Nay,
we have seen death raging in Towns and Fields, so many hundred a day dead of
the Pestilence, so many thousands slam of the Sword and did we not know it
would reach to us at last? How many distempers have vexed our bodies? frequent
Languishings, consuming Weaknesses, wasting Fevers, here pain, and there
trouble, that we have been forced to receive the sentence of death; and what
were all these but so many Messengers, sent from God to tell us we must shortly
dye, as if we had heard a lively voice, bidding us, Delay no more, but make you
ready: And are we unready and unwilling after all this? O careless dead hearted
Sinners! unworthy neglecters of Gods Warnings! faithless betrayers of our own
souls.

All these heinous aggravations do lie upon this sin of unwillingness to dye,
which I have laid down to make it hateful to my own soul (which is too much
guilty of it) as well as yours: And for a further help to our prevailing
against it, I shall adjoyn these following Considerations.

SECT. X.. 10.

1. COnsider, [not to dye] were [never to be happy.] To escape death, were to
miss of blessedness: Except God should translate us as Henoch and Elias, which
he never did before or since* 1 Cor. 15.19.
If our hops in Christ were in this life only, we were then of all men most
miserable. The Epicure has more pleasure to his Flesh then the Christian; the
Drunkard the Whoremaster, and the jovial Lads, do swagger it out with gallantry
and mirth, when a poor Saint is mourning in a corner: yea, the very beasts of
the field do eat and drink, and skip, and play, and care for nothing, when many
a Christian dwells with sorrows: So that if you would not dye, and go to heaven,
what would you have more then an Epicure, or a beast? 1 Cor. 15.13, etc.
What does it avail us to fight with beasts, as men, if it were not for our
hopes of a life to come? Why do we pray, and fast, and mourn? why do we suffer
the contempt of the world? why are we the scorn and hatred of all? if it were
not for our hopes after we are dead? why are we Christians and not Pagans and
Infidels, if we do not desire a life to come? why, Christian, would thou lose
thy faith? and lose thy labor, in all thy duties, and all thy sufferings?
would thou lose thy hope? and lose all the end of thy life? and lose all the
blood of Christ? and be contented with the portion of a worldling or a brute?
If thou say No, to this, how can thou then be loath to dye? As good old Milius
said when he lay a dying, Melch. Adam. in vita Milij.
and was asked whether he were willing to dye or no; Illius est nolle mori, qui
nolit ire ad Christum. A saying of Austins which he often repeated, Let him be
loath to dye, who is loath to be with Christ.

. 11.
SECT. XI.
2. COnsider, Is God willing by death to Glorify us? and are we unwilling to
dye that we may be glorified? would God freely give us heaven? and are we
unwilling to receive it? As the Prince who would have taken the lame beggar
into his Coach, and he refused, said to him, Opitime mereris qui in luto
haereas. Thou well deservest to stick in the dirt, So may God to the refusers
of Rest; You well deserve to live in trouble. Me thinks if a Prince were
willing to make you his heir, you should scarce be unwilling to accept it. Sure
the refusing of such a kindness, must needs discover ingratitude and
unworthiness. As God has resolved against them, who make excuses when they
should come to Christ, Verily none of these that were bidden shall taste of my
supper: So is it just with him to resolve against us, who frame excuses when we
should come to Glory.

SECT. XII.. 12.

3. THe Lord Jesus was willing to come from heaven to earth for us; Cum dicis,
Beat vivere volo, bonam rem quaeris, sed non hic, si habuit hic istud
Christus, habe and tu, in regione mortis tuae: Quid ille invenit, attend.
Venit de alia regione, et quid invenit nisi quod hic abund^roit? labores,
dolores, mortem: Ecce quod hic habes et quod abundat, manducavit tecum. Quod
hic in cella miseriae tuae abundavit, acetum hic bibit, fell hic bibit: ecce
quod in cella tua invenit. At ad magnam mensam te invitavit, mensam solis,
mensam Angelorum, ubi ipse panis est. August. sup. Joann. 13.
and shall be unwilling to remove from earth to heaven for our selves and him?
Sure if we had been once possessed of Heaven, and God should have sent ^s to
earth again, as he did his Son for our sakes, we should then have been loath to
remove indeed: It was another kind of change then ours is, which Christ did
freely submit unto; to cloth himself with the garments of flesh, and to take
upon him the form of a servant, to come from the bosom of the Fathers Love, to
bear his wrath which we should have borne. Shall he come down to our hell? from
the height of glory to the depth of misery? to bring us up to his Eternal Rest?
and shall we be after this unwilling? Sure Christ had more cause to be
unwilling, he might have said, What is it to me if these sinners suffer? If
they value their flesh above their spirits, and their lusts above my Fathers
Love, if they needs will sell their souls for naught; who is it fit should be
the loser? and who should bear the blame and curse? Should I whom they have
wronged? must they wilfully transgress my Law? and I undergo their deserved
pain? Is it not enough that I bear the trespass from them, but I must also
bear my Fathers wrath? and satisfy the Justice which they have wronged? Must I
come down from Heaven to Earth, and cloth my self with humane flesh? be spit
upon and scorned by man? and fast, and weep, and sweat, and suffer? and bleed
and dye a cursed death? and all this for wretched worms, who would rather
hazard all they had, and venture their souls and Gods favor, then they would
forbear but one forbiden morsel? Do they cast away themselves so slightly? and
must I redeem them again so dearly? Thus we see that Christ had much to have
pleaded against his coming down for man; and yet he pleaded none of this: He
had reason enough to have made him unwilling; and yet did he voluntarily
condescend. But we have no reason against our coming to him: except we will
reason against our hopes, and plead for a perpetuity of our own calamities.
Christ came down to fetch us up: and would we have him loose his blood and
labor, and go away again without us? Has he bought our Rest at so dear a rate?
Is our inheritance purchased with the blood of God? And are we after all this
loath to enter? Ah Sirs, it was Christ and not we, that had cause to be loath.
The Lord forgive and heal this foolish ingratitude.

. 13.
SECT. XIII.
4. COnsider; do we not combine with our most cruel, mortal foes? and jump with
them in their most malicious design, while we are loath to dye and go to
heaven? where is the height of all their malice? and what is the scope of all
temptations? and what is the devils daily business? Is it not to keep our souls
from God? And shall we be well content with this, and join with Satan in our
desires? what though it be not those eternal torments? yet its the one half of
Hell, which we wish to our selves, while we desire to be absent from Heaven and
God. If thou should take counsel of all thine enemies? If thou should
beat thy brains both night and day, in studying to do thy self a mischief? What
greater then (...), could it possibly be, To continue here on earth from God?
Excepting only hell it self O what sport is this to Satan? that his desires
and thine should so concur? That when he sees he cannot get thee to Hell, he
can so long keep thee out of Heaven, and make thee the earnest petitioner for
it thy self? O gratify not the Devil so much to thy own displeasure.

. 14.
SECT. XIV.
5. DO not our daily fears of death, make our lives a continual torment? Timor
mortis pejor quam ipsa mors. Eras. Colloq
The fears of death (as Erasmus says) being a sorer evil then death it self.
And thus, as Paul did dye daily in regard of preparation, and in regard of the
necessary sufferings of his life: so do we in regard of the torments, and the
useless sufferings which we make our selves. Those lives which might be full of
Joys, in the daily contemplation of the life to come, and the sweet delightful
thoughts of bliss; how do we fill them up with terrors, through all these
causeless thoughts and fears? Thus do we consume our own comforts, and prey
upon our tru^st pleasures. When we might lie down, and rise up, and walk abroad
with our hearts full of the Joys of God; we continually fill them with
perplexing fears. For he that fears dying, must be always fearing, because he
has always cause to expect it. And how can that man's life be comfortable, who
lives in continuul fear, of loosing his comforts?

SECT. XV.. 15.

5. MOreover, all these are self-created sufferings: As if it were not enough
to be the deservers, Eheu quam miserum est, fieri metuendo senem! Publius.
but we must also be the executioners of our own calamities! As if God had not
inflicted enough upon us, but we must inflict more upon our selves* Is not
death bitter enough to the flesh of it self, but we must double and treble and
multiply its bitterness? Do we complain so much of the burden of our troubles,
and yet daily add unto the weight? Sure the state of poor mortals is
sufficiently calamitous; they need not make it so much worse. The sufferings
laid upon us by God, do all lead to happy issues: the progress is, from
suffering to patience, from thence to experience, Romans 5.3, 4. Romans 8.17.
and so to Hope, and at last to Glory. But the sufferings which we do make our
selves, have usually issues answerable to their causes: The motion is Circular
and endless, from sin to suffering, from suffering to sin, and so to suffering
again, and so in infinitum. And not only so, but they multiply in their
course: every sin is greater then the former, and so every suffering also
greater. This is the natural progress of them, which if mercy do intercept, no
thanks to us. So that except we think that God has made us to be our own
tormentors, we have small reason to nourish our fears of death.

SECT. XVI.. 16.

7. COnsider further; they are all but useless unprofitable fears. As all our
care cannot make one hair white or black, Mat. 5.36. Mat. 6.27.
nor add one cubit to our stature, so neither can our fear prevent our
sufferings, nor delay our dying time an hour: Willing or unwilling we must
away. Many a man's fears have hastened his end, but no man's ever did avert it.
Its true, a cau^e^one fear or care concerning the danger after death, has
profited many; and is very useful to the preventing of that danger* But for a
member of Christ, and an heir of Heaven, to be afraid of entering his own
inheritance; this is a sinful useless fear.

SECT. XVII.
. 17.
8. BUt though it be useless in respect of good, yet to Satan is it very
serviceable. Our ^ears of dying ensnare our souls and add strength to many
temptations. Nay when we are called to dye for Christ, and put to it in a day
of trial, it may draw us to deny the known truth, and forsake the Lord God
himself. You look upon it now as a small sin, a common frailty of humane
nature: But if you look to the dangerous consequents of it, me thinks it should
move you to other thoughts. What made Peter deny his Lord? what makes Apostates
in suffering times forsake the truth? and the green blade of unrooted faith, to
wither before the heat of persecution? Fear of imprisoment and poverty may do
much, but fear of death will do much more. When you see the Gibbet, or hear the
sentence, if this fear of dying prevail in you, you will strait begin to say as
Peter, I know not the man. When you see the fagots set, and fire ready, you will
say as that Apostate to the Martyr, O the fire is hot, and nature's frail,
forgeting that the fire of hell is hotter. Sirs, as light as you make of it,
you know not of what force these fears are to separate your souls from Jesus
Christ. Have we not lately had frequent experience of it? How many thousand
have fled in fight, and turned their back on a good cause, where they knew the
honor of God was concerned, and their countries welfare was the prize for
which they fought, and the hopes of their posterity did lie at the sta^e, and
all through unworthy fear of dying? Have we not known those, who lying under a
wounded conscience, and living in the practice of some known sin, durst scarce
look the enemy in the face, because they durst not look death in the face? but
have trembled and drawn back, and cried, alas I dare not dye, If I were in the
case of such or such, I durst dye. He that dare not dye, dare scarce fight
valiantly. Therefore we have seen in our late wars, that there is none more
valiant then these two sorts.

1. Those who have conquered the fear of death by the power of Faith.

2. And those who have extinguished it by desperate prophanness, and cast it
away through stupid security. So much fear as we have of death, usually so much
cowardice in the cause of God: However its an evident temptation and snare.
Beside the multitude of unbelieving contrivances, and discontents at the wise
disposals of God, and hard thoughts of most of his providence, which this sin
does make us guilty of: Besides also it loses us much precious time, and that
for the most part near our end. When time should be most precious of all to us;
and when it should be employed to better purpose, then do we vainly and
sinfully wast it, in the fruitless issues of these distracting fears: So that
you see how dangerous a snare these fears are, and how fruitful a parent of
many evils.

SECT. XVIII.. 18.

9. COnsider, what a competent time the most of us have had: Some thirty, some
forty, some fifty or sixty years. How many come to the grave younger, for one
that lives to the shortest of these? Christ himself, as is generally thought,
lived but Helvicus and some other Modern Chronologers think he dyed in the
thirty fifth year of his age.
thirty three years on earth. If it were to come, as it is past, you would
think thirty years a long time. Did you not long ago in your threatening
sickness, think with your selves, O, if I might enjoy but one seven years more,
or ten years more! And now you have enjoyed perhaps more then you then begged;
and are you nevertheless unwilling yet? Except you would not die at all, but
desire an immortality here on Earth; which is a sin inconsistent with the truth
of Grace. If your sorrow be merely this, That you are mortal; you might as well
have lamented it all your lives: For sure you could never be ignorant of this.
Why should not a man that would dye at all, be as well willing at thirty or
forty, if God see it meet, as at seventy or eighty? nay, usually when the
longest day is come, men are as loath to depart as ever. He that loses so many
years, has more cause to bewail his own neglect, then to complain of the
shortness of his time; and were better lament the wickedness of his life, then
the brevity. Length of time does not conquer corruption; it never withers, nor
decays through age. Except we receive an addition of Grace, as well as Time,
we naturally grow the older the worse. Let us then be contented with our
allotted proportion: And as we are convinced, that we should not murmr,
against our assigned degree of wealth* of health, of honor, and other things
here; so let us not be discontented with our allowed proportion of time. O, my
Soul, depart in peace! Have thou not here enjoyed a competent share? As thou
would not desire an unlimited state, in wealth and honor, so desire it not in
point of time. Is it fit, that God or thou should be the sharer? If thou were
sensible how little thou deservest an hour of that patience which thou have
enjoyed, thou would think thou have had a large part. Would thou have thy
age called back again? ^a^st thou eat thy bread, and have it too? Is it not
Divine Wisdom that sets the bounds? God will not let one have all the work, nor
all the suffering, nor all the honor of the work: He will honor himself by
variety of instruments; by various persons, and several ages, and not by one
person or age: Seeing thou have acted thine own part, and finished thine
appointed course, come down contentedly, that others may succeed; who must have
their turns as well as thou. As of all other outward things, so also of thy
time and life; thou may as well have too much, as too little: Only of God,
and eternal life, thou can never enjoy too much, nor too long. Great
receivings, will have great accounts: where the lease is longer, the fine and
rent must be the greater. Much time has much duty. Is it not as easy to
answer for the receivings and the duties, of thirty years, as of an hundred?
Beg therefore for Grace to improve it better; but be content with thy share of
time.

. 19.
SECT. XIX.
10. COnsider, thou have had a competency of the comforts of life, and not of
naked time alone. God might have made thy life a misery; till thou had been
as weary of possessing it, as thou art now afraid of loosing it. If he had
denied thee the benefits and ends of living, thy life would have been but a
slender comfort. They in Hell have life as well as we, and longer far then they
desire: God might have suffered thee to have consumed thy days in ignorance, or
to have spent thy life to the last hour, before he brought thee home to
himself, and given thee the saving Knowledge of Christ; and then thy life had
been short, though thy time long. But he has opened thine eyes in the morning
of thy days, and acquainted thee betimes with the trade of thy life. I know the
best are but negligent loyterers, and spend not their time according to its
worth; but yet he that has an hundred years time, and loses it all, lives
not so long as he that has but twenty, and bestows it well. Its too soon to go
to Hell at an hundred years old, and not too soon to go to Heaven at twenty.
The means are to be valued in reference to their end: That's the best means,
which speediliest and surest obtains the end. He that has enjoyed most of
the ends of life, has had the best life, and not he that has lived longest.
You that are acquainted with the life of Grace* what if you live but twenty or
thirty years? would you change it for a thousand years of wickedness? God might
have let you have lived like the ungodly world, and then you would have had
cause to be afraid of dying. We have lived in a place and time of light; in
Europe, not in Asia, Africa or America; in England, not in Spain or Italy; in
the Age when Knowledge does most abound, and not in our forefathers days of
darkness; we have lived among Bibles, Sermons, Books, and Christians. As one
Ac^e of fruitful soil, is better then many of barren Commons; as the possession
of a Kingdom for one year, is better then a lease of a Cottage for twenty; so
twenty or thirty years living in such a place, or age, as we, is better then
Methuselahs age, in the case of most of the world besides. And shall we not
then be contented with our proportion? If we who are Ministers of the Gospel,
have seen abundant fruit of our labors; if God has blessed our labors in seven
years* more then some others in twenty or thirty; if God have made us the
happy, (though unworthy) means, of converting and saving more souls at a
Sermon, then some better men in all their lives; what cause have we to complain
of the shortness of our time in the work of God? would unprofitable,
unsuccessful preaching have been comfortable? will it do us good to labor to
little purpose, so we may but labor long? If our desires of living, are for the
service of the Church, as our deceitful hearts are still pretending, then (...)
if God honor us to do the more service, though in the lesser time, we have our
desire. God will have each to have his share; when we have had ours, let us
rest contented. Persuade then thy backward soul to its duty, and argue down
these dreadful thoughts: Unworthy wretch! Has thy Father allowed thee so large
a part, and caused thy lot to fall so well? and given thee thine abode in
pleasant places? and filled up all thy life with mercies? and do thou now
think thy share too small? is not that which thy life does want in length, made
up in breadth, and weight, and sweetness? Lay all together, and look about thee,
and tell me; how many of thy neighbors have more? how many in all the Town or
Country, have had a better share then thou? why might not thou have been
one of the thousands, whose carcasses thou have seen scattered as Dung on the
Earth? or why might not thou have been one that's useless in the Church? and
an unprofitable burden to the place thou live in? What a multitude of hours
of consolation? of delightful Sabbaths? of pleasant studies? of precious
companions? of wondrous deliverances? of excellent opportunities? of fruitful
labors? of joyful tidings? of sweet experiences? of astonishing providence
has thy life partaked of? so that many a hundred who have each of them lived
an hundred years, have not altogether enjoyed so much. And yet art thou not
satisfied with thy lot? Has thy life been so sweet, that thou art loath to
leave it? is that the thanks thou returnest to him, who sweetened it to draw
thee to his own sweetness? Indeed, if this had been all thy portion, I could
not blame thee to be discontented: And yet let me tell thee too, That of all
these poor souls, who have no other portion, but receive all their good things
in this life, there is few or none even of them, who ever had so full a share
as thy self. And have thou not then had a fair proportion, for one that must
shortly have Heaven besides? O foolish Soul! would thou were as covetous after
eternity, as thou art for a fading perishing life! and after the blessed
presence of God, as thou art for continuance with Earth and Sin! Judges 5.28.
Then thou would rather look through the windows, and cry through the
lattises, Why is his chariot so long a coming? Why tarry the wheels of his
chariots? How long Lord! How long!

. 20.
SECT. XX.
11. COnsider, what if God should grant thy desire, and let thee live yet many
years? but vvithal should strip thee of the comforts of life, and deny thee the
mercies which thou have hitherto enjoyed? Would this be a blessing vvorth the
begging for? Might not God in judgment give thee life, as he gave the murmuring
Israelites Quails? or as he often times gives men riches and honor, when he sees
them over-earnest for it? Might he not justly say to thee, Seeing thou had
rather linger on earth, then come away and enjoy my presence; seeing thou art
so greedy of life, take it, and a curse with it; never let fruit grow on it
more, nor the Sun of comfort shine upon it, nor the dew of my blessing ever
water it: James 5.2, 3.
Let thy table be a snare, let thy friends be thy sorrow; let thy riches be
corrupted, and the rust of thy silver eat thy flesh. Go hear Sermons as long as
thou will, but let never Sermon do thee good more; let all thou hear make
against thee, and increase the smart of thy wounded spirit: If thou love
Preaching better then Heaven, go and preach till thou be aweary, but never
profit soul more. Sirs, what if God should thus chastise our inordinate desires
of living, were it not just? and what good would our lives then do us? See
thou not some that spend their days on their cowch in groaning? and some in
begging by the highway sides? and others in seeking bread from door to door?
and most of the world in laboring for food and raiment, and living only that
they may live, and loosing the ends and benefits of life? Why, what good would
such a life do thee, were it never so long? when thy soul shall serve thee
only in stead of Salt, to keep thy body from stinking? God might give thee
life, till thou art weary of living; and as glad to be rid of it, as Judas or
Ahitophel; and make thee like many miserable Creatures in the world, who can
hardly forbear laying violent hands on themselves. Be not therefore so
importunate for life; which may prove a judgment, in stead of a blessing.

SECT. XXI.. 21.

12. COnsider, how many of the precious Saints of God, of all ages and places,
have gone before thee? Thou art not to enter an untrodden path, nor appointed
first to break the Ice. Except only Henoch and Elias, which of the Saints have
escaped death? And art thou better then they? There are many millions of Saints
dead, more then do now remain on Earth. What a number of thine own bosom
friends, and intimate acquaintance, and companions in duty, are now there? and
why should thou be so loath to follow? Nay, has not Jesus Christ himself gone
this way? has he not sanctified the grave to us? and perfumed the dust with
his own body? And art thou loath to follow him too? O rather let us say as
Thomas, John 11.16. Romans 8.17.
Let us also go, and die with him; or rather, let us suffer with him, that we
may be glorified together with him.

Many such like Considerations might be added, as that Christ has taken out
the sting: How light the Saints have made of it; how cheerfully the very Pagans
have entertained it, etc. But because all that's hitherto spoken, is also
conducible to the same purpose, I pass them by. If what has been said, will
not persuade, Scripture and Reason have little force.

I have said the more on this subject, finding it so needful to my self and
others; finding that among so many Christians, who could do and suffer much for
Christ, there is yet so few that can willingly die; and of many who have
somewhat subdued other corruptions; so few have got the conquest of this. This
caused me to drawforth these Arrows from the quiver of Scripture, and spend
them against it.

. 22.
SECT. XXII.
I Will only yet Answer some Objections, and so conclude this Use.

1. Object. O, If I were but certain of Heaven, I should then never stick at
dying.

Answ. 1. Search, for all that, whether some of the forementioned c^uses may
not be in fault, as well as this.

2. Did thou not say so long ago? Have you not been in this song this many
years? if you are yet uncertain, whose fault is it? you have had nothing else
to do with your lives, nor no greater matter then this to mind. Were you not
better presently fall to the trial; till you have put the Question out of
doubt? Must God stay while you trifle? and must his patience be continued to
cherish your negligence? If thou have played the loyterer, do so no longer. Go
search thy soul, and follow the search close, till the^ come to a clear
discovery. Begin to night, stay not till the next morning. Certainty comes not
by length of time, but by the blessing of the Spirit upon wise and faithful
trial. You may linger out thus twenty years more, and be still as uncertain as
now you are.

3. A perfect certainty may not be expected: we shall still be deficient in
that as well as in other things: They who think the Apostle speaks absolutely,
and not comparatively, of a perfect assurance in the very degree, when he
mentions a Plerophory or Full assurance. I know no reason, but they may expect
perfection in all things else, as well as this. When you have done all, you
will know this but in part. If your belief of that Scripture, which says,
Believe, and be saved, be imperfect; and if your knowledge, whether your own
deceitful hearts do sincerely believe or not, be imperfect; or if but one of
these two be imperfect: the result or conclusion must needs be so too. If you
would then stay till you are perfectly certain, you may stay for ever: if you
have obtained assurance but in some degree, or got but the grounds for
assurance said; it is then the speediest, and surest way, to desire rather to
be quickly in Rest: For then, and never till then, will both the grounds and
assurance be fully perfect.

4. Both your assurance, and the comfort thereof, is the gift of the Spirit,
who is a free bestovver: And Gods usual time to be largest in mercy, is when
his people are deepest in necessity. A mercy in season, is the sweetest mercy.
I could give you here abundance of late examples, of those who have languished
for assurance and comfort; some all their sickness, and some most of their
lives; and when they have been near to death, they have received in abundance.
Never fear death then through imperfections of assurance; for that's the most
usual time of all, when God most fully and sweetly bestovvs it.

SECT. XXIII.. 23.

OBject. 2. O, but the Churches necessities are great, and God has made me
useful in my place; so that the loss will be to many, or else, me thinks, I
could willingly die.

Answ. This may be the case of some; but yet remember, the heart is deceitful:
God is often pretended, when our selves are in^ended. But if this be it that
sticks with thee indeed, consider, VVilt thou pretend to be vviser then God?
does not he know how ^o provide for his Church? Cannot he do his work
without thee? or find out instruments enough besides thee? Think not too
highly of thy self, because God has made thee useful. Must the Church needs
fall when thou art gone? Art thou the foundation on which its built? Could God
take away a Moses, an Aaron, David, Elias, etc. and find supply for all their
places? and cannot he also find supply for thine? This is to derogate from God
too much, and to arrogate too much unto thy self. Neither art thou so merciful
as God; nor can love the Church so well as he: As his interest is infinitely
beyond thine, so is his tender care and bounty. But of this before.

Yet mistake me not in all that I have said: I deny not but that it is lawful
and necessary for a Christian upon both the forementioned grounds, to desire
God to delay his death; both for a further opportunity of gaining assurance,
and also to be further serviceable to the Church. See Phil. 2.26, 27.
But first, This is nothing to their case who are still delaying, and never
willing; whose true discontents are at death it self, more then at the
unseasonableness of dying. Secondly, Though such desires are sometimes lawful,
yet must they be carefully bounded and moderated; to which end are the former
considerations. We must not be too absolute and peremptory in our desires; but
cheerfully yield to Gods disposal. The rightest temper is that of Paul's, to be
in a straight between two; desiring to depart, Phil. 1.23.
and be with Christ, and yet to stay while God will have us, to do the Church
the utmost service. But alas, we are seldom in this straight: Our desires run
out all one way, and that for the flesh, and not the Church: Our streights are
only for fear of dying; and not betwixt the earnest desires of dying, and of
living.

. 24.
SECT. XXIV.
OBject. But is not death a punishment of God for sin? Does not Scripture call
it the King of fears? And Nature above all other evils abhor it?

Malum poenae, vel privatio boni in genere Entis, non in genere Moris.
Answ. I Will not meddle with that which is controversal in this: Whether Death be
properly a punishment, or not: But grant that in it self considered, it may be
called Evil, as being naturally the dissolution of the Creature. Yet being
sanctified to us by Christ, and being the season, and occasion of so great a
Good, as is the present possession of God in Christ; it may be welcomed with a
glad submission, if not with desire. Christ affords us grounds enough to
comfort us against this natural Evil: And therefore endues us with the
principle of Grace, to raise us above the reach of nature.

For all those low and poor Objections, as leaving House, Goods, and Friends,
leaving our children unprovided, etc. I pass them over as of lesser moment,
then to take much with men of Grace.

SECT. XXV.. 25.

LAstly, For comfort in the Death of Friends, the Nine Considerations of Gerson
are excellent. Operum part. 4. f. 146. And his following Tractate, De
Consolatione mortis parentum.
Understand me in this also, That I have spoke all this to the faithful soul. I
persuade not the ungodly from fearing death: Its a wonder rather, that they
fear it no more; and spend not their days in continual horror, as is said
before. Truly, but that we know a stone is insensible, and a hard heart is dead
and stupid, or else a man would admire how poor souls can live in ease and
quietness, that must be turned out of these bodies into everlasting flames! Or
that be not sure, at least, if they should die this night, whether they shall
lodge in Heaven or Hell the next; especially when so many are called, and so few
chosen; and the Righteous themselves are scarcely saved? One would think such
men should eat their bread with trembling; and the thoughts of their danger
should keep them waking in the night; and they should fall presently a
searching themselves; and enquiring of others, and crying to God, That if it
were possible they might quickly be out of this danger, and so their hearts be
freed from horror! For a man to quake at the thoughts of death, that looks by
it to be dispossessed of his happiness, and knows not whether he is next to
go; this is no wonder. But for the Saints to fear their passage by Death to
Rest, this is an unreasonable hurtful Fear.

CHAP. III. Motives to a Heavenly Life.
. 1.
SECT. I.
WE have now by the guidance of the Word of the Lord, and by the assistance of
his Spirit, showed you the nature of the Rest of the Saints; and acquainted you
with some duties in relation thereto: We come now to the close of all, to press
you to the great duty, which I chiefly intended, when I begun this subject; and
have here reserved it to the last place, because I know hearers are usually of
slippery memories; yet apt to retain the last that is spoken, though they
forget all that went before. Dear friends, its pity that either you or I,
should forget any thing of that which does so nearly concern us, as this
Eternal Rest of the Saints does. But if you must needs forget something; let it
be any thing else, rather then this; let it be rather all that I have hitherto
said (though I hope of better) then this one ensuing Use.

Is there a Rest, and such a Rest remaining for us? Why then are our thoughts
no more upon it? why are not our hearts continually there? why dwell we not
there, in constant contemplation? Sirs, Ask your hearts in good earnest, what
is the cause of this neglect? are we reasonable in this? or, are we not? Has
the Eternal God provided us such a Glory, and promised to take us up, to dwell
with himself? and is not this worth the thinking on? Should not the strongest
desires of our hearts be after it? and the daily delights of our souls be
there? Do we believe this? and can we yet forget and neglect it? What Is the
matter? will not God give us leave to approach this light? or will he not
suffer our souls to taste and see? Why then, what means all his earnest
invitations? why does he so condemn our earthly-mindedness? and command us to
set our affections above? Ah vile hearts! If God were against it, we were
likelier to be for it. When he would have us to keep our station, then we are
aspiring to be like God, and are ready to invade the Divine Prerogatives: But
when he commands our hearts to Heaven, then they will not stir an inch; like
our Predecessors, the sinful Israelites: When God would have them march for
Canaan, then they mutiny, and will not stir; either they fear the Giants, or
the walled Cities, or want necessaries, or something hinders them* but when God
bids them not to go* then will they needs be presently marching, and fight they
will, though it be to their overthrow. If the fore-thoughts of glory were
forbidden fruit, perhaps we should be sooner drawn unto them; and we should
itch (as the Bethshemites) to be looking into this Ark. Sure I am, where God
has forbidden us to place our thoughts, and our delights, thither it is eas^y
enough to draw them. If he say (Love not the World, nor the things of the
World) we dote upon it never the less. We have love enough, if the world
require it; and thoughts enough to pursue our profits. How delightfully and
unweariedly, can we think of vanity? and day after day employ our minds about
the Creature? And have we no thoughts of this our Rest? How freely, and how
frequently can we think of our pleasures, our friends, our labors, our flesh,
our lusts, our common studies, or news? yea, our very miseries, our wrongs, our
sufferings, and our seats? But where is the Christian, whose heart is on his
Rest? Why Sirs, what is the matter? why are we not taken up with the vievvs
of Glory? and our souls more accustomed to these delightful Meditations? Are
we so full of joy, that we need no more? or is there no matter in Heaven, for
our joyous thoughts? or rather are not our hearts carnal and blockish? Earth
will to Earth* Had we more Spirit, it would be otherwise with us. As the
Jews use to cast to the ground the Book of Esther, before they read it, because
the Name of God is not in it. And as Austin cast by Ciceroes writings, because
they contained not the Name of Jesus: So let us humble and cast down these
sensual hearts that have in them no more of Christ and Glory: As we should not
own our duties any further then somewhat of Christ is in them, so should we no
further own our hearts: And as we should delight in the creatures no further
then they have reference to Christ and Eternity; so should we no further
approve of our own hearts. If there were little of Christ and Heaven in our
mouths, but the world were the only subject of our speeches, then all would
account us to be ungodly; why then may we not call our hearts ungodly, that
have so little delight in Christ and Heaven? A holy tongue will not excuse or
secure a profane heart. Why did Christ pronounce his Disciples eyes and ears
so blessed, but as they were the doors to let in Christ by his Works and Words
into their hearts? O blessed are the eyes that so see, and the ears that so
hear, that the heart is thereby raised to this blessed heavenly frame. Sirs, so
much of your hearts as is empty of Christ and heaven, let it befilled with
shame and sorrow, and not with ease.

. 2.
SECT. II.
Exhort.
BUt let me turn my Reprehension to Exhortation, That you would turn this
Conviction into Reformation. And I have the more hope, because I here address
my self to men of Conscience, that dare not wilfully disobey God, and to men
whose Relations to God are many and near, and therefore methinks there should
need the fewer words to persuade their hearts to him: Yea, because I speak to
no other men, but only them whose portion is there, whose hopes are there, and
who have forsaken, all that they may enjoy this glory; and shall I be
discouraged from persuading such to be heavenly-minded? why, fellow Christians;
if you will not hear and obey, who will? well may we be discouraged to exhort,
the poor, blind, ungodly world, and may say, as Moses, Exodus 6.12. Behold the
Children of Israel have not hearkened unto me, how then shall Pharaoh hear me?
Who ever thou art therefore that read these lines, I require thee, as thou
tendrest thine Allegiance to the God of Heaven, as ever thou hopest for a part
in this glory, that thou presently take thy heart to task: chide it for its
wilful strangeness to God; turn thy thoughts from the pursuit of Vanity, bend
thy soul to study Eternity, busy it about the life to come; habituate thy self
to such contemplations, and let not those thoughts be seldom and cursory, but
settle upon them, dwell here, bathe thy soul in heavens Delights, drench thine
affections in these rivers of pleasure, or rather in this sea of Consolation;
and if thy backward soul begin to flag, and thy loose thoughts to fly abroad,
call them back, hold them to their work, put them on, bear not with their
lasiness, do not connive at one neglect; and when thou have once in obedience
to God tried this work, and followed on till thou have got acquainted with it,
and kept a close guard upon thy thoughts till they are accustomed to obey, and
till thou have got some mastery over them, thou will then find thy self in the
suburbs of Heaven, and as it were in a new world, thou will then find indeed,
that there is sweetness in the work and way of God, and that the life of
Christianity is a life of Joy; Thou will meet with those abundant consolations,
which thou have prayed, and panted, and groaned after, and which so few
Christians do ever here obtain, because they know not this way to them, or else
make not conscience of walking in it.

You see the work now before you: This, this is it that I would fain persuade
your souls to practice: Beloved friends and Christian neighbors, who hear me
this day, let me bespeak your consciences in the name of Christ, and command
you by the Authority I have received from Christ, that you faithfully set upon
this weighty duty, and fix your eye more steadfastly on your Rest, and daily
delight in the fore-thoughts thereof. I have persuaded you to many other
duties, and (I bless God) many of you have obeyed, and I hope never to find
you at that pass, as to say when you perceive the command of the Lord, that you
will not be persuaded, nor obey; if I should, it were high time to bewail your
misery: Why, you may almost as well say, we will not obey, as sit still and not
obey. Christians, I beseech you, as you take me for your Teacher, and have
called me thereto, so hearken to this Doctrine; if ever I shall prevail with
you in any thing, let me prevail with you in this, to set your heart where you
expect a Rest and Treasure. Do you not remember, that when you called me to be
your Teacher, you promised me under your hands, that you would faithfully and
conscionably endeavor the receiving every truth, and obeying every command,
which I should from the Word of God manifest to you? I now charge your promise
upon you; I never delivered to you a more apparent Truth, nor pressed upon you a
more apparent duty, then this? If I knew you would not obey, what should I do
here preaching? Not that I desire you to receive it chiefly as from me, but as
from Christ, on whose Message I come. Me thinks, if a child should show you
Scripture, and speak to you the Word of God, you should not dare to disobey it.
Do not wonder that I persuade you so earnestly; though indeed if we were truly
reasonable in spiritual things, as we are in common, it would be a real wonder
that men should need so much persuasion, to so sweet and plain a duty; but I
know the emplyment is high, the heart is earthly, and will still draw back, the
temptations and hindrances will be many and great, and therefore I fear,
before we have done, and laid open more fully the nature of the Duty, that you
will confess all these persuasions little enough; The Lord grant they prove not
so too little, as to fail of success, and leave you as they find you: Say not,
we are unable to set our own hearts on heaven, this must be the work of God
only, and therefore all your Exhortation is in vain; for I tell you, though
God be the chief disposer of your hearts, yet next under him you have the
greatest command of them your selves, and a great power in the ordering of your
own thoughts, and for determining your own wills in their choice; though
without Christ you can do nothing, yet under him you may do much, and must do
much, or else it will be undone, and you undone through your neglect; Do your
own parts, and you have no cause to distrust whether Christ will do his: Do not
your own consciences tell you, when your thoughts fly abroad, that you might do
more then you do to restrain them? and when your hearts lie flat, and neglect
Eternity, and seldom mind the Joys before you that most of this neglect is
wilful? If you be to study a set Speech, you can force your thoughts to the
intended Subject; if a Minister be to study a Sermon, he can force his thoughts
to the most saving Truths, and that without any special grace: might not a
true Christian there mind more the things of the life to come, if he did not
neglect to exerci^e that authority over his own thoughts, which God has given
him? especially in such a work as this, where he may more confidently expect
the assistance of Christ, who uses not to forsake his people in the work he
sets them on. If a carnal Minister can make it his work, to study about Christ
and heaven, through all his life time, and all because it is the trade he lives
by, and knows not how to subsist without it; why then, me thinks a spiritual
Christian should study as constantly the Joys of heaven, because it is the very
business he lives for, and that the place he must be in for ever: If the Cook
can find in his heart to labor and sweat about your meat, because it is the
trade that maintains him, though perhaps he taste it not himself: Me thinks
then, you for whom it is prepared, should willingly bestow that daily pains, to
taste its sweetness, and feed upon it; and if it were about your bodily food,
you would think it no great pains neither; a good stomach takes it for no great
labor to eat and drink of the best till it be satisfied, nor needs it any great
invitation thereto: Christians, if your souls were sound and right, they would
perceive incomparably more delight and sweetness, in Knowing, Thinking,
Believing, Loving, and Rejoicing in your future Blessedness in the fruition of
God, then the soundest stomach finds in its food, or the strongest senses in
the enjoyment of their objects; so little painful would this work be to you,
and so little should I need to press you to it: its no great pains to you to
think of a friend, or any thing else that you dearly love, and as little would
it be to think of Glory, if your love and delight were truly there: if you do
but see some Jewel, or Treasure, you need not long exhortations to stir up your
desires, the very sight of it is motive enough; if you see the fire when you
are cold, or see a house in a stormy day, or see a safe harbor from the
tempestuous seas, you need not be told what use to make of it: the sight does
presently direct your thoughts: you think, you look, you long, till you do
obtain it. Why should it not be so in the present case? Sirs, one would think,
to show you this Crown and Glory of the Saints, should be motive enough to make
you desire it; to show you that Harbor where you may be safe from all dangers,
should soon teach you what use to make of it, and should bend your daily
studies toward it; but because I know while we have flesh about us, and any
remnants of that carnal mind, which is enmity to God, and to this noble work,
that all motives are little enough; And because my own, and others sad
experiences tell me how hardly the best are drawn to a constancy and
faithfulness in this duty; I will here lay down some moving Considerations,
which if you will but vouchsafe to ponder thoroughly, and deliberately weigh
with an impartial judgment, I doubt not but they will prove effectual with
your hearts, and make you resolve upon this excellent duty. I pray you friends,
let them not fall to the ground, but take them up, and try them, and if you
find they concern you, make much of them, and obey them accordingly.

. 3.
SECT. III.
1. COnsider, a heart set upon heaven, will be one of the most unquestionable
evidences of thy sincerity, and a clear discovery of a true work of saving
grace upon thy soul. You are much in enquiring after Marks of sincerity, and I
blame you not, its dangerous mistaking when a man's salvation lies upon it: You
are often asking, How shall I know that I am truly sanctified? Why, here is a
mark that will not deceive you, if you can truly say that you are possessed of
it; Even, a heart set upon Heaven. Would you have a sign infall^ble, not from
me, or from the mouth of any man, but from the mouth of Jesus Christ himself,
which all the enemies of the use of Marks, can lay no exception against? Why
here is such a one, Mat. 6.21. Where your treasure is, there will your hearts
be also. Know once assuredly where your heart is, and you may easily know that
your treasure is there: God is the Saints Treasure and happiness: Heaven is the
place where they must fully enjoy him: A heart therefore set upon heaven, is no
more, but a heart set upon God, desiring after this full enjoyment: And surely
a heart set upon God through Christ, is the truest evidence of saving grace.
External actions are easiest discovered; but those of the heart are the surest
evidences. When thy learning will be no good proof of thy grace; when thy
knowledge, thy duties and thy gifts will fail thee, when Arguments from thy
tongue and thy hand may be confuted; yet then will this Argument from the bent
of thy heart prove thee sincere. Take a poor Christian that can scarce speak
true English about Religion, that has a weak understanding, a failing memory,
a stammering tongue; yet his heart is set on God, he has chosen him for his
Portion, his thoughts are on Eternity, his desires there, his dwelling there;
he cries out, O that I were there; he takes that day for a time of
imprisonment, wherein he has not taken one refreshing view of Eternity: I had
rather dye in this man's condition, and have my soul in his souls case; then in
the case of him that has the most eminent gifts, and is most admired for parts
and duty, whose heart is not thus taken up with God. The man that Christ will
find out at the last day, and condemn, for want of a wedding Garment, will be
he that wants this frame of heart: The question will not then be, How much you
have known, or professed, or talked? but, How much have you loved, and where
was your heart? Why then, Christians, as you would have a sure testimony of the
love of God, and a sure proof of your title to Glory, labor to get your hearts
above. God will acknowledge that you really love him, and take you for faithful
friends indeed, when he sees your hearts are set upon him. Get but your hearts
once truly in Heaven, and without all question your selves will follow. If sin
and Satan keep not thence your affections, they will never be able to keep away
your persons.

SECT. IIII.. 4.

2. COnsider, A heart in Heaven is the highest excellency of your spirits here,
and the noblest part of your Christian disposition: As there is not only a
difference between men and beasts, but also among men, between the Noble and
the Base: so there is not only a common excellency, whereby a Christian differs
from the world, but also a peculiar nobleness of spirit, whereby the more
excellent differ from the rest: And this lies especially in a higher and more
heavenly frame of spirit. Os homini sublime dedit, etc.
Only man of all inferior creatures, is made with a face directed heavenward:
but other creatures have their faces to the earth. As the Noblest of Creatures,
so the Noblest of Christians, are they that are set most direct for Heaven. As
Saul is called a choice and goodly man, 1. Jam. 9.2. and 10.23, 24.
higher by the head then all the company: so is he the most choice and goodly
Christian, whose head and heart is thus the highest. Men of noble birth and
spirits, do mind high and great affairs, and not the smaller things of low
poverty: Their discourse is, of the councels and matters of State, of the
Government of the Commonwealth, and public things; and not of the
Countrey-mans petty employments. O, to hear such an heavenly Saint, who has
fetched a journey into heaven by faith, and has been wrapped up to God in his
contemplations, and is newly come down from the veiws of Christ, what
discoveries he will make of those Superior regions! What ravishing expressions
drop from his lips! How high and sacred is his discourse! Enough to make the
ignorant world astonished, Act. 26.24.
and say, Much study has made them mad: And enough to convince an
understanding hearer, that have seen the Lord; and to make one say, No man
could speak such words as these, except he had been with God* this, This is the
noble Christian. As Bucholcers hearers concluded, when he had preached his last
Sermon, being carried between two into the Church, because of his weakness, and
there most admirably discoursed of the Blessedness of souls departed this life,
Caeteros concio naetores a Bucholcero semper omnes, illo autem die etiam ipsum
a sese superatum, That Bucholcer did ever excel other preachers, but that day
he excelled himself: so may I conclude of the heavenly Christian, Fraxinus in
Sylvis pulcherrima pinus in hortis: populus in fluvi is, abies in montibus
altis. Virg.
He ever excels the Rest of men, but when he is nearest Heaven he excels
himself. As those are the most famous mountains that are highest; and those the
fairest trees that are talest, and those the most glorious Pyramides and
buildings whose tops do reach nearest to Heaven: so is he the choicest
Christian, whose heart is most frequently, and most delightfully there. If a
man have lived near the King, or have traveled to see the Sultan of Persia, or
the great Turk; he will make this a matter of boasting, and thinks himself one
step higher then his private neighbors that live at home. What shall we then
judge of him that daily travels as far as Heaven, and there has seen the King
of Kings? That has frequent admittance into the Divine presence, and feasteth
his soul upon the tree of life? For my part, I value this man before the
ablest, the richest, the most learned in the world.

. 5.
SECT. V.
3. COnsider, A heavenly mind is a joyful mind: This is the nearest and the
truest way to live a life of comfort: And without this you must needs be
uncomfortable. Can a man be at the fire, and not be warm? or in the Sunshine,
and not have light? Can your heart be in Heaven, and not have comfort? The
countries of Norway, Island, and all the Northward, are cold and frozen,
because they are farther from the power of the Sun: But in Egypt, Arabia, and
the Southern parts, it is far otherwise, where they live more near its powerful
rays. What could make such frozen uncomfortable Christians, but living so far
as they do from heaven? And what makes some few others so warm in comforts, but
their living higher then others do? and their frequent access so near to God?
When the Sun in the Spring draws near our part of the earth, how do all things
congratulate its approach? The earth looks green and casts off her mourning
habit: the trees shoot forth; the plants revive, the pretty birds, how sweetly
sing they? the face of all things smile upon us, and all the creatures below
rejoice. Beloved friends, if we would but try this life with God, and would but
keep these hearts above, what a Spring of joy would be within us? and all our
graces be fresh and green? How would the face of our souls be changed? and all
that is within us rejoice? How should we forget our winter sorrows? and
withdraw our souls from our sad retirements? How early should we rise (as those
birds in the spring) to sing the praise of our Great Creator. O Christian, get
above: Believe it, that Region is warmer then this below. Those that have been
there, have found it so, and those that have come thence have told us so: And I
doubt not but that thou have sometime tried it thy self. I dare appeal to thy
own experience, or to the experience of any soul that knows what the true Joys
of a Christian are: When is it that you have largest comforts? Is it not after
such an exercise as this, when thou have got up thy heart, and converst with
God, and talked with the inhabitants of the higher world, and veiwed the
mansions of the Saints and Angels, and filled thy soul with the forethoughts of
Glory? If thou know by experience what this practice is, I dare say thou
know what spiritual Joy is. David professes that the light of Gods
countenance would make his heart more glad then theirs that have Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 4.6, 7. and Act. 2.28. out of Psalm. 16. Thou shall fill
me full of Joy with thy countenance. If it be the countenance of God that fills
us with Joy; then sure they that draw nearest, and most behold it, must needs
be fullest of these Joys. Sirs, if you never tried this Art, nor lived this
life of heavenly contemplation, I never wonder that you walk uncomfortably,
that you are all complaining, and live in sorrows, and know not what the Joy of
the Saints means: Can you have comfort from God, and never think of him? Can
Heaven rejoice you, when you do not re^member it? Does any thing in the world
glad you, when you think not on it? Must not every thing first enter your
judgment and consideration, before it can delight your heart and affection? If
you were possessed of all the treasure of the earth; if you had title to the
highest dignities and dominions, and never think on it, sure it would never
rejoice you. Whom should we blame then, that we are so void of consolation, but
our own negligent unskilful hearts? God has provided us a Crown of Glory, and
promised to set it shortly on our heads and we will so much as think on it: He
holds it out in the Gospel to us, and bids us, Behold and Rejoice; and we
will not so much as look at it: And yet we complain for want of Comfort. What a
perverse course is this, both against God and our own Joys? I confess, though
in fleshly things, the presenting of a comforting object, is sufficient to
produce an answerable delight, yet in spirituals we are more disabled: God must
give the Joy it self, as well as afford us matter for Joy: But yet withal, it
must be remembered, that God does work upon us as men, and in a rational way
does raise our comforts: He enableth and exciteth us to mind and study these
delightful objects, and from thence to gather our own comforts, as the Be does
gather her honey from the flowers: Therefore he that is most skilful and
painful in this gathering Act, is usually the fullest of this spiritual
sweetness. Where is the man that can tell me from experience, that he has had
solid and usual Joy, in any other way but this? and that God works it
immediately on his affections, without the means of his understanding and
considering? It is by believing that we are filled with Joy and Peace, Romans
15.13. and no longer then we continue our believing. 1 Pet. 1.8.
It is in hope that the Saints Rejoice, yea, in this hope of the glory of God,
Romans 5.2. and no longer then they continue hoping. And here let me warn you of
a dangerous snare, an opinion which will rob you of all your comfort: some
think, if they should thus fetch in their own comfort by believing and hoping,
and work it out of Scripture promises, and extract it by their own thinking and
studying, that then it would be a comfort only of their own hammering out (as
they say) and not the genuine Joy of the Holy Ghost. A desperate mistake,
raised upon a ground that would overthrow almost all duty, as well as this:
which is, their setting the workings of Gods Spirit, and their own spirits in
opposition, when their spirits must stand in subordination to Gods: They are
conjunct causes, cooperating to the producing of one and the same effect. Gods
Spirit works our comforts, by setting our own spirits awork upon the
promises, and raising our thoughts to the place of our comforts. As you would
delight a covetuous man by showing him gold, or a voluptuous man with fleshly
delights; so God uses to delight his people, by taking them, as it were, by
the hand, and leading them into Heaven, and showing them himself, and their
Rest with him. God uses not to cast in our Joys while we are idle, or taken up
with other things. It is true, he sometime does it suddenly, but yet usually in
the foresaid order, leading it into our hearts by our judgment and thoughts:
And his sometime sudden extraordinary casting of comforting thoughts into our
hearts, should be so far from hindering our endeavors in a meditateing way, that
it should be a singular motive to quicken us to it; even as a taste given us of
some cordial or choiser food, will make us desire and seek the Rest. God
feeds not Saints as birds do their young, bringing it to them, and putting it
into their mouths, while they lie still in the nest, and only gape to receive
it. But as he gives to man the fruits of the earth, the increase of their land
in Corn and wine, while we plow, and sow, and weed, and water, and dung, and
dress, and then with patience expect his blessing: so does he give the joys of
the soul. Yet I deny not, that if any should so think to work out his own
comforts by meditation, as to attempt the work in his own strength, and not do
all in subordination to God; nor perceive a necessity of the Spirits
assistance; the work would prove to be like the workman, and the comfort he
would gather would be like both, even mere vanity: Even as the husband man's
labor without the sun, and rain, and blessing of God.

So then you may easily see, that close meditation on the matter and cause of
our Joy, is Gods way to procure solid Joy. For my part, if I should find my
joy of another kind, I should be very prone to doubt of its sincerity. If I
find a great deal of comfort in my heart, and know not how it came thither,
nor upon what rational ground it was raised, nor what considerations do feed
and continue it, I should be ready to question, how I know whether this be from
God? And though, as the Cup in Benjamins sack, it might come from Love, yet it
would leave me but in fears and amazement, because of the uncertainty. As I
think our love to God, should not be like that of fond lovers, who love
violently, but they know not why: so I think a Christians Joy, should be a
grounded rational Joy, and not to rejoice and know not why. Though perhaps in
some extraordinary case, God may cast in such an extraordinary kind of joy,
yet I think its not his usual way. And if you observe the spirits of most
forlorn, uncomfortable, despairing Christians, you shall find the Reason to
be, their ungrounded expectation of such unusual kind of joys: Jam jam
tacturos Sydera summa putes. Jam jam tacturos tartara nigra putes. Ovid.
and accordingly are their spirits variously tossed, and most unconstantly
tempered: Sometime when they meet with such Joys (or at least think so,) then
they are cheerful and lifted up, but because these are usually short-lived
Joys, therefore they are strait as low as hell; and ordinarily that is their
more lasting temper. And thus they are tossed as a vessel at sea, up and down,
but still in extreme: whereas, alas, God is most constant, Christ the same,
Heaven the same, and the Promise the same, and if we took the right course for
fetching in our comfort from these, sure our comforts would be more settled and
constant, though not always the same. Whoever thou art therefore that Read
these lines, I entreat thee in the name of the Lord, and as thou valuest the
life of constant Joy, and that good conscience, which is a continual feast;
that thou would but seriously set upon this work, and learn this Art of
Heavenly-mindedness, and thou shall find the increase a hundred fold, and the
benefit abundantly exceed thy labor. But this is the misery of man's Nature;
Though every man naturally abhors sorrow, and loves the most merry and
joyful life, yet few do love the way to Joy, or will endure the pains by which
it is obtained; they will take the next that comes to hand, and content
themselves with earthly pleasures, rather then they will ascend to heaven to
seek it, and yet when all is done, they must have it there, or be without it.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
4. COnsider, A heart in heaven will be a most excellent preservative against
temptations, a powerful means to kill thy corruptions, and to save thy
conscience from the wounds of sin: God can prevent our sinning, though we be
careless, and keep off the temptation which we would draw upon our selves; and
sometime does so; but this is not his usual course, nor is this our safest way
to escape. When the mind is either idle, or ill employed, the devil needs not
a greater advantage; when he finds the thoughts let out on Lust, Revenge,
Ambition, or Deceit, what an opportunity has he to move for Execution, and to
put on the Sinner to practice what he thinks on? Nay, if he find the mind but
empty, there is room for any thing that he will bring in; but when he finds the
heart in heaven, what hope that any of his motions should take? Let him entice
to any forbidden course, or show us the bait of any pleasure, the soul will
return Nehemiaes Answer, I am doing a great work, and cannot come, Neh. 6.3.
Several ways will this preserve us against Temptations. First, By keeping the
heart employed. Secondly, By clearing the Understanding, and so confirming the
Will. Thirdly, By prepossessing the Affections with these highest delights.
Fourthly, And by keeping us in the way of Gods blessing.

First, By keeping the heart employed; when we are idle, we tempt the devil to
tempt us; as it is an encouragement to a Thief, to see your doors open, and no
body within; and as we use to say, Careless persons make Thieves: or as it will
encourage an Highway Robber, to see you unweaponed; so may it encourage Satan,
to find your hearts idle; but when the heart is taken up with God, it cannot
have while to hearken to Temptations, it cannot have while to be lustful and
wanton, ambitious or worldly: If a poor man have a suit to any of you, he will
not come when you are taken up in some great man's company or discourse, that's
but an ill time to speed.

If you were but busied in your lawful Callings, you would not be so ready to
hearken to Temptations, much less if you were busied above with God: Will you
leave your Plow and Harvest in the Field? or leave the quenching of a fire in
your houses, to run with children a hunting of Butterflies? would a Judge be
persuaded to rise from the Bench, when he is sitting upon life and death, to
go and play among the Boys in the streets? No more will a Christian when he is
busy with God, and taking a survey of his eternal Rest, give ear to the
alluring charms of Satan, Non vacat exiguis, etc. is a Character of the truly
prudent man; the children of that Kingdom should never have while for trifles;
but especially when they are employed in the affairs of the Kingdom; and this
employment is one of the Saints chief preservatives against temptations: For as
Gregory says, In Homil.
Nunquam Dei amor otiosus est; operatur enim magna, si est: Si vero operari
renuit, non est amor; The Love of God is never idle; it works great things
when it truly is; and when it will not work, it is not love. Therefore
being still thus working, it is still preserving.

Secondly, A heavenly mind is the freest from sin, because it is of clearest
understanding in spiritual matters of greatest concernment. A man that is much
in conversing above, has truer and livelyer apprehensions of things concerning
God and his soul, then any reading or learning can beget: Though perhaps he may
be ignorant in diverse controversies, and matters that less concern salvation,
yet those truths which must stablish his soul, and preserve him from
temptation, he knows far better then the greatest Scholars; he has so deep an
insight into the evil of sin, the vanity of the creature, the brutishness of
fleshly sensual delights, that temptations have little power on him, for these
earthly vanities are Satan's baits, which though they may take much with the
undiscerning world, yet with the clear-sighted, they have lost their force. In
vain, says Solomon, the net is spread in the sight of any bird, Pro. 1.17. And
usually in vain does Satan lay his snares to entrap the soul that plainly sees
them; when a man is on high, he may see the further; we use to set our
discovering Sentinels on the highest place that is near unto us, that he may
discern all the motions of the Enemy; In vain does the Enemy lay his
Ambuscado's when we stand over him on some high Mountain, and clearly discover
all he does: When the heavenly-minde is above with God, he may far easier from
thence discern every danger that lies below, and the whole method of the devil
in deceiving; Nay, if he did not discover the snare, yet were he likelier far
to escape it then any others that converse below: A net or bait that is laid on
the ground, is unlikely to catch the bird that flies in the Air: while she
keeps above, she is out (...) of the danger, and the higher the safer; so is it
with us; Satan's temptations are laid on the earth, earth is the place, and
earth the ordinary bait: How shall these ensnare the Christian, who has left
the earth, and walks with God? But alas, we keep not long so high, but down we
must to the earth again, and then we are taken.

If conversing with wise and learned men, is the way to make one wise and
learned, then no wonder if he that converseth with God, become wise: If men
that travel about the earth, do think to return home with more experience and
wisdom, Itali habent proverbium hec. Qui Venetias non vidit, non credit: and
qui aliquandiu ibi non vixit, non intelligit. Quod de vita hac coelesti
verissimum.
how much more he that travels to heaven? As the very Air and Climate that we
most abide in, do work our bodies to their own temper; no wonder if he that is
much in that sublime and purer Region, have a purer soul, and quicker sight;
and if he have an understanding full of light, who lives with the Sun, the
Fountain, the Father of light; as certain herbs and meats we feed on, do tend
to make our sight more clear, so the soul that is fed with Angels food, must
needs have an^ understanding much more clear, then they that dwell and feed on
earth. And therefore you may easily see, that such a man is in far less danger
of temptations, and Satan will hardlier beguile his soul; even as a wise man is
hardlier deceived then fools and children. Alas, the men of the world, that
dwell below, and know no other conversation but earthly, no wonder if their
understandings be darkened, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and they be easily drawn to every wickedness; no wonder if Satan take them
captive at his will, and lead them about, as we see a Dog lead a blind man
with a string; The foggy Air and Mists of earth do thicken their sight; the
smoke of worldly cares and business, blindes them, and the dungeon which they
live in, is a land of darkness: How can Worms and Moles see, whose dwelling is
always in the earth? while this dust is in men's eyes, no wonder if they
mistake gain for godliness, sin for grace, the world for God, their own wills
for the Law of Christ, and in the issue hell for heaven; if the people of God
will but take notice of their own hearts, they shall find their experiences
confirming this that I have said. Christians, do you not sensibly perceive,
that when your hearts are seriously fixed on heaven, you presently become wiser
then before? Are not your understandings more solid? and your thoughts more
sober? have you not truer apprehensions of things then you had? For my own
part, if ever I be wise, it is when I have been much above, and seriously
studied the life to come: Me thinks I find my understanding after such
contemplations, as much to differ from what it was before, as I before differed
from a Fool or Idiot; when my understanding is weakened, and befooled with
common employment, and with conversing long with the vanities below; me thinks,
a few sober thoughts of my Fathers house, and the blessed provision of his
Family in Heaven, does make me (with the Prodigal) to come to my self again:
Surely, when a Christian withdraws himself from his earthly thoughts, and
begins to converse with God in heaven, he is as Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.36.
taken from the beasts of the field to the Throne, and his understanding
returns to him again. O when a Christian has had but a glimpse of Eternity,
and then looks down on the world again, how does he befool himself for his sin!
for neglects of Christ! for his fleshly pleasures! for his earthly cares! How
does he say to his Laughter, Thou art mad! and to his vain Mirth, What do
thou? How could he even tear his very flesh, and take revenge on himself for
his folly! how verily does he think that there is no man in Bedlam so truly
mad, as wiful sinners, and lazy betrayers of their own souls, and unworthy
sleighters of Christ and glory!

This is it that makes a dying man to be usually wiser then other men are,
because he looks on Eternity, as near, and knowing he must very shortly be
there, he has more deep and heart-piercing thoughts of it, then ever he could
have in health and prosperity; Therefore it is, that the most deluded sinners
that were cheated with the world, and bewitched with sin, do then most
ordinarily come to themselves, so far as to have a righter judgment then they
had; and that many of the most bitter enemies of the Saints, would give a world
to be such themselves, and would fain dye in the condition of those whom they
hated; even as wicked Balaam, when his eyes are opened, to see the perpetual
blessedness of the Saints, will cry out, O that I might dye the death of the
righteous, and that my last end might be like his: As Witches when they are
taken, and in prison, or at the Gallows, have no power left them to bewitch any
more; so we see commonly the most ungodly men, when they see they must dye, and
go to another world, their judgments are so changed, and their speech so
changed, as if they were not the same men, as if they were come to their wits
again, and Sin and Satan had power to bewitch them no more: Yet let the same
men recover, and lose their apprehension of the life to come, and how quickly
do they lose their understandings with it? In a word, those that were befooled
with the world and the flesh, are far wiser when they come to die, and those
that were wise before, are now wise indeed. If you would take a man's judgment
about Sin, or Grace, or Christ, or Heaven, go to a dying man, and ask him which
you were best to choose? ask him, whether you were best be drunk or no? or be
lustful, or proud, or revengeful or no, ask him, whether you were best pray,
and instruct your Families, or no? or to sanctify the Lords Day, or no? though
some to the death may be desperately hardened, yet for the most part, I had
rather take a man's judgment then, about these things, then at any other time.
For my own part, if my judgment be ever solid, it is when I have the seriousest
apprehensions of the life to come; nay, the sober mention of death sometimes,
will a little compose the most distracted understanding. Sirs, do you not think
(except men are stark devils) but that it would be a harder matter to entice a
man to sin, when he lies a dying, then it was before? If the devil or his
Instruments should then tell him of a cup of Sack, of merry company, of a
Stage Play, or Morrice-Dance, do you think he would then be so taken with the
motion? If he should then tell him of Riches, or Honors, or show him a pair of
Cards, or Dice, or a Whore, would the temptation, think you, be as strong as
before? would he not answer, Alas, what is all this to me, who must presently
appear before God, and give account of all my life, and straitways be in
another world? Why Christian, if the apprehension of the neerness of Eternity
will work such strange effects upon the ungodly, and make them wiser then to be
deceived so easily as they were wont to be in time of health; O then what rare
effects would it work with thee, and make thee scorn the baits of sin, if thou
could always dwell in the views of God; and in lively thoughts of thine
everlasting state? Surely, a believer, if he improve his faith, may ordinarily
have truer and more quickening apprehensions of the life to come, in the time of
his health, then an unbeliever has at the hour of his death.

Thirdly, Furthermore, A Heavenly mind is exceedingly fortified against
temptations, because the affections are so thoroughly prepossessed with the high
delights of another world. Whether Satan do not usually by the sensitive
Appetite prevail with the Will, without any further prevailing with the Reason,
then merely to suspend it, I will not now dispute: But doubtless when the soul
is not affected with good, though the Understanding do never so clearly
apprehend the Truth, it is easy for Satan to entice that soul. Mere
speculations, (be they never so true) which sink not into the affections, are
poor preservatives against temptations. He that loves most, and not he that
only knows most, will easilyest resist the motions of sin. There is in a
Christian a kind of spiritual taste, whereby he knows these things, besides
his mere discuisive reasoning power: The Will does as sweetly relish goodness,
as the Understanding does Truth; and here lies much of a Christians strength:
If you should dispute with a simple man, and labor to persuade him that Sugar
is not sweet, o^ that Wormwood is not bitter; perhaps you might by Sophistry
over-argue his mere Reason, but yet could you not persuade him against his
sense; whereas a man that has lost his taste, is easilyer deceived for all his
reason; So is it here; when thou have had a fresh delightful taste of heaven,
thou will not be so easily persuaded from it; you cannot persuade a very child
to part with his Apple, while the taste of its sweetness is yet in his mouth. O
that you would be persuaded to try this course, to be much in feeding on the
hidden Manna, and to be frequently tasting the delights of heaven. Its true, it
is a great way off from our Sense, but Faith can reach as far as that. How
would this raise the resolutions? and make thee laugh at the fooleries of the
world? and scorn to be cheated with such childish toys? Reader, I pray thee
tell me in good sadness, do thou think, if the devil had set upon Peter in
the Mount, when he saw Christ in his Transfiguration, and Moses and Elias
talking with him, would he so ^asily have been drawn to deny his Lord? what,
with all that glory in his eye? No, the devil took a greater advantage, when he
had him in the High Priests Hall, in the midst of danger and evil company, when
he had forgotten the sight on the Mount, and then he prevails: So if he should
set upon a believing soul, when he is taken up in the Mount with Christ, what
would such a soul say? Get th^e behind me Satan, would thou persuade me from
hence with trifling pleasures? and steal my heart from this my Rest? would
thou have me sell these joys for nothing? Is there any honor or delight like
this? or can that be profit which loses me this? some such answer would the
soul return. But alas, Satan stays till we are come down, and the taste of
heaven is out of our mouths, and the glory we saw is even forgotten, and then
he easily deceives our hearts: What if the devil had set upon Paul, when he was
in the third Heaven, and seeing those unutterable things? could he then do you
think, have persuaded his heart, to the pleasures, or profits, or honors of the
world? If his prick in the flesh, which he after received, were not affliction,
but temptation, sure it prevailed not, but sent him to heaven again for
preserving grace; Though the Israelites below may be enticed to Idolatry, and
from eating and drinking to rise up to play, yet Moses in the Mount with God
will not do so; and if they had been where he was, and had but seen what he
there saw, perhaps they would not so easily have sinned: If ye give a man Aloes
after Honey, or some loathsome thing when he has been feeding on junkets, will
he not soon perceive, and spit it out? O if we could keep the taste of our soul
continually delighted with the sweetness above, with what disdain should we
spit out the baits of sin?

Fourthly, Besides, whilst the heart is set on heaven, a man is under Gods
protection, and therefore if Satan then assault him, God is more engaged for
his defense, and will doubtless stand by us, and say, My grace is sufficient
for thee: when a man is in the way of Gods blessing, he is in the less danger
of sins enticing.

So that now upon all this, let me entreat thee, Christian Reader, If thou be a
man that is haunted with temptation (as doubless thou art, if thou be a man,)
if thou perceive thy danger, and would fain escape it; O use much this
powerful remedy, keep close with God by a heavenly mind; learn this Art of
diversion, and when the temptation comes, go strait to heaven, and turn thy
thoughts to higher things; thou shall find this a surer help then any other
resisting whatsoever: As men will do with scolding women, let them alone and
follow their business, as if they heard not what they said, and this will
sooner put them to silence, then if they answered them word for word; so do by
Satan's temptations, it may be he can overtalk you, and over-wit you in dispute,
but let him alone, and study not his temptations, but follow your business
above with Christ, and keep your thoughts to their Heavenly employment, and you
will this way sooner vanquish the temptation, then if you argued or talked it
out with the Tempter: not but that sometime its most convenient to over-reason
him, but in ordinary temptations to known sin, you shall find it far better to
follow this your work, and neglect the allurements, and say as Grynaeus (out of
Chrysostom.) when he sent back Pistorius letters, not so much as opening the
Seal, Inhonestum est, honestam matronam cum meritrice litigare; Its an unseemly
thing for an honest Matrone, to be scolding with a Whore: so its a dishonest
thing for a Son of God, in apparent cases to stand wrangling with the devil,
and to be so far at his beck, as to dispute with him at his pleasure, even as
often as he will be pleased to tempt us. Christian, If thou remember that of
Solomon, Prove. 15.24. thou have the sum of what I intend, The way of life is
above to the wise, to avoid the path of hell beneath; and withal remember
Noah's example, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation,
Genesis 24.40.
(and no wonder for) Noah walked with God; So I may say to thee, even as God to
Abraham, Walk before God, and thou will be upright, Genesis 17.1.

. 7.
SECT. VII.
5. COnsider, The diligent keeping of your hearts on heaven, will preserve the
vigor of all your graces, and put life into all your duties. Its the heavenly
Christian, that is the lively Christian. Its our strangeness to Heaven that
makes us so dull: Its the end that quickens to all the means: And the more
frequently and clearly this end is beheld, the more vigorous will all our
motion be. How does it make men unweariedly labor, and fearelesly venture, when
they do but think of the gainful prize? How will the Soldier hazard his life?
and the Mariner pass through storms and waves? how cheerfully do they compass
sea and land, and no difficulty can keep them back, when they think of an
uncertain perishing treasure. O, what life then would it put into a Christians
endeavors, if he would frequently forethink of his everlasting Treasure? We run
so slowly, and strive so lazily, because we so little mind the prize. When a
Christian has been tasting the hidden Manna, and drinking of the streams of
the Paradise of God; what life does this Ambrosia and Nectar put into him? How
fervent will his spirit be in prayer, when he considers that he prays for no
less then Heaven? If Henoch, Elias, or any of the Saints, who are now in
Heaven, and have partaked of the vision of the living God, should be sent down
to the earth again to live on the terms as we now do, would they not strive
hard? and pray earnestly, rather then lose that blessed Rest? No wonder, for
they would know what it is they pray for. Its true, we cannot know it here so
thoroughly as they: yet if we would but get as high as we can, and study but
that which may now be known, it would strangely alter both our spirits and our
duties. Observe but the man who is much in heaven, and you shall see he is not
like other Christians: There is somewhat of that which he has seen above,
appears in all his duty and conversation: Nay, take but the same man,
immediately when he is returned from these views of Bliss, and you shall easily
perceive that he excels himself, as if he were not indeed the same as before:
If he be a Preacher, how heavenly are his Sermons? what clear descriptions?
what high expressions? what savory passages has he of that Rest? If he be a
private Christian, what heavenly conference? what heavenly prayers? what a
heavenly carriage has he? May you not even hear in a preachers Sermons, or in
the private duties of another, when they have been most above? When Moses had
been with God in the mount, he had derived so much glory from God; that made
his face to shine, that the people could not behold him. Beloved friends, if
you would but set upon this employment, even so would it be with you: men would
see the face of your conversation shine, and say, surely he has been with God.
As the body is apt to be changed into the temper of the air it breaths in, and
the food it lives on; so will your spirits receive an alteration according to
the objects which they are exercised about: If your thoughts do feed on Christ
and heaven, you will be heavenly; if they feed on Earth, you will be earthly.
Its true, a heavenly Nature goes before this heavenly employment; but yet the
work will make it more heavenly: There must be life, before we can feed, but
our life is continued and increased by feeding. Therefore, Reader, let me here
inform thee, That if thou lie complaining of deadness and dullness, that thou
can not love Christ, nor rejoice in his Love; that thou have no life in
prayer, nor any other duty; and yet never tryedst this quickening course, or at
least art careless and unconstant in it: Why, thou art the cause of thy own
complaints; thou deadest and dullest thine own heart; thou deniest thy self
that life which thou talkst of? Is not thy life hid with Christ in God? Col.
3.3.
Whither must thou go, but to Christ, for it? and whither is that, but to
Heaven, where he is? Thou will not come to Christ, John 5.40.
that thou may have life? If thou would have light and heat, why art thou
then no more in the Sunshine? If thou would have more of that Grace which
flows from Christ, why art thou no more with Christ for it? Thy strength is in
Heaven, and thy life in Heaven, and there thou must daily fetch it, if thou will have it. For want of this recourse to heaven, thy soul is as a candle that
is not lighted, and thy duties as a sacrifice which has no fire. Fetch one
coal daily from this Altar, and see if thy offering will not burn. Light thy
candle at this flame, and feed it daily with Oil from hence, and see if it will
not gloriously shine: Keep close to this reviving fire, and see if thy
affections will not be warm. Thou bewailest thy want of love to God, (and well
thou may, for its a heinous crime, a killing sin) why, lift up thy eye of
Faith to Heaven, behold his beauty, contemplate his excellencies, and see
whether his amiableness will not fire thy affections, and his perfect goodness
ravish thy heart. As the eye does incense the sensual affections, by its
overmuch gazing on alluring objects; so does the eye of our Faith in
meditation, inflame our affections toward our Lord, by the frequent gazing on
that highest beauty. Whoever thou art, that art a stranger to this employment,
be thy parts and profession never so great, let me tell thee, Thou spendest thy
life but in trifling or idleness; thou seem to live, but thou art dead: I
may say of thee, as Seneca of idle Varia, Scis latere, vivere nescis; Thou
know how to lurk in idleness, but how to live, thou know not. And as the
same Seneca would say, when he passed by that sluggards dwelling, Ibi fit^s est
Varia; so may it be said of thee: There lies such a one, but not there lives
such a one; for thou spendest thy days liker to the dead, then the living. One
of Draco's Laws to the Athenians was, That he who was convict of De animo hoc
caeles^i dico ut Rabbinus ille de operibus: Doctrina sine opere non est
doctrina: Cadit enim super corda, sicut imber super saxa. Et ut Chrysostom. Nihil
frigidius est doctore verbis solummodo Philosophante: Hoc enim non est doctoris
sed Hystrionis.
idleness should be put to death: Thou do execute this on thy own soul,
whilst by thy idleness thou destroyest its liveliness.

Thou may many other ways exercise thy parts, but this is the way to exercise
thy Graces: They all come from God as their Fountain, and lead to God as their
ultimate End, and are exercised on God as their chiefest Object; so that God is
their All in All. From Heaven they come, and heavenly their nature is, and to
Heaven they will direct and move thee. And as exercise maintains appetite,
strength, and liveliness to the body, so does it also to the soul. Use limbs,
and have limbs, is the known Proverb. And use Grace and Spiritual Life in these
heavenly exercises, and you shall find it quickly cause their increase. The
exercise of your mere abilities of Speech will not much advantage your graces;
but the exercise of these heavenly soul exalting gifts, will unconceivably help
to the growth of both. For as the Moon is then most full and glorious, when it
does most directly face the Sun; so will your souls be both in gifts and
graces, when you do most nearly view the face of God. This will feed your
tongue with matter, and make you abound and overflow, both in Preaching,
Praying, and Conferring. Besides, the fire which you fetch from Heaven for your
Sacrifices, is no false or strange fire: As your liveliness will be much more,
so will it be also more sincere. A man may have a great deal of fervor in
Affections and Duties, and all prove but common and unsound, when it is raised
upon common Grounds, and motives; your zeal will partake of the nature of those
things by which it is acted; The zeal therefore which is kindled by your
meditations on Heaven, is most like to prove a heavenly zeal, and the
liveliness of the Spirit which you fetch from the face of God, must needs be
the Divinest and sincerest life: Some men's fervency is drawn only from their
Books, and some from the pricks of some stinging affliction, and some from the
mouth of a moving Minister, and some from the encouragement of an attentive
Auditory; but he that knows this way to heaven, and it derives it daily from
the pure Fountain, shall have his soul revived with the water of Life, and
enjoy that quickening which is the Saints peculiar: By this Faith thou may
offer Abels Sacrifice, more excellent then that of common men, and by it obtain
winess that thou art righteous, God testifying of thy gifts, (that they are
sincere,) Heb. 11.4. when others are ready, as Baals Priests, to beat
themselves, and cut their flesh, because their sacrifice will not burn; then if
thou can get but the spirit of Elias, and in the chariot of Contemplation,
can soar aloft, till thou approachest near to the quickening Spirit, thy soul
and sacrifice will gloriously flame, though the flesh and the world should cast
upon them the water of all their opposing enmity. Say not now, How shall we get
so high? or how can mortals ascend to heaven? For Faith has wings, and
Meditation is its chariot, Its office is to make absent things, as present. Do
you not see how a little piece of Glass, if it do but rightly face the Sun,
will so contract its beams and heat, as to set on fire that which is behind
it, which without it would have received but little warmth? Why, thy Faith is
as the Burning-glass to thy Sacrifice, and Meditation sets it to face the Sun
only take it not away too soon, but hold it there awhile, and thy soul will
feel the happy effect. The slanderous Jews did raise a foolish tale of Christ,
that he got into the Holy of Holies, and thence stole the true name of God; and
lest he should lose it cut a hole in his thigh, and sewed it therein; and by
the virtue of this, he raised the dead, gave sight to the blind, cast out
devils, and performed all his Miracles. Surely, if we can get into the Holy of
Holies, and bring thence the Name and Image of God, and get it closed up in our
hearts: this would enable us to work wonders; every duty we performed would be
a wonder, and they that heard, would be ready to say, Never man spoke as this
man speaks. The Spirit would possess us, as those flaming tongues, and make
us every one to speak, (not in the variety of the confounded Languagues, but)
in the primitive pure Language of Canaan, the wonderful Works of God. We should
then be in every duty, whether Prayer, Exhortation, or brotherly reproof, as
Paul was at Athens, his Spirit ((...)) was stirred within him; Acts 17.16.
and should be ready to say, as Jeremy did, Jer. 20.9. His word was in my
heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I was weary with forbearing,
and I could not stay.

Christian Reader, Art thou not thinking when thou see a lively believer, and
hear his soul-melting Prayers, and soul-ravishing discourse, O how happy a
man is this! O that my soul were in this blessed plight! Why, I here direct and
advise thee from God: Try this forementioned course, and set thy soul
conscionably to this work, and thou shall be in as good a case: Wash thee
frequently in this Jordan, and thy Leprous dead soul will revive, and thou
shall know that there is a God in Israel, and that thou may live a vigorous
and joyous life, if thou wilfully cast not by this duty, and so neglect thine
own mercies. If thou be not a lazy reserved hypocrite, but do truly value
this strong and active frame of Spirit; show it then by thy present attempting
this heavenly exercise. Say not now, but thou have heard the way to obtain this
life into thy soul, and into thy duties: If thou will yet neglect it, blame thy
self. But alas, the multitude of Professors come to a Minister, just as Naaman
came to Elias; they ask us, How shall I know I am a child of God? How shall I
overcome a hard heart? and get such strength and life of Grace? But they expect
that some easy means should do it; and think we should cure them with the very
Answer to their Question, and teach them a way to be quickly well; but when
they hear of a daily trading in Heaven, and the constant Meditation on the
joys above: This is a greater task then they expected, and they turn their
backs, as Naaman on Elias, or the young man on Christ, and few of the most
conscionable will set upon the duty: Will not Preaching, and Praying, and
Conference serve (say they) without this dweling still in Heaven? Just as
Country people come to Physicians; when they have opened their case, and made
their moan, they look he should cure them in a day or two, or with the use of
some cheap and easy Simple; but when they hear of a tedious Method of Physic,
and of costly Compositions, and bitter Potions; they will hazard their lives
with some sotish Empirick, who tells them an easier and cheaper way, yea, or
venture on death it self, before they will obey such difficult counsel. Too
many that we hope well of, I fear will take this course here: If we could give
them life, as God did, with a word, or could heal their souls, as Charmers do
their bodies, with easy stroaking, and a few good words, then they would
readily hear and obey. I entreat thee Reader, beware of this folly; fall to the
work; the comfort of Spiritual Health will countervail all the trouble of the
Duty. It is but the flesh that repines and gain-sayes, which thou know was
never a friend to thy soul: If God had set thee on some grievous work, should
thou not have done it for the life of thy soul? How much more when he does but
invite thee Heavenward to himself?

SECT. VIII.. 8.

6. COnsider, The frequent believing views of Glory, are the most precious
cordial in all Afflictions. First, To sustain our spirits, and make our
sufferings far more easy. Secondly, To stay us from repining, and make us bear
with patience and joy: And thirdly, to strengthen our resolutions, that we
forsake not Christ for fear of trouble. Our very Beast will carry us more
cheerfully in travel, when he is coming homeward, where he expects Rest. A
man will more quietly endure the lancing of his sores, the cutting out the
Stone, when he thinks on the ease that will afterward follow. What then will
not a believer endure, when he thinks of the Rest, to which it tends? What if
the way be never so rough? can it be tedious, if it lead to Heaven? O sweet
sickness! Contumeliis, quae vulgo tales habentur, nimio otio ingenia nostra
insirma and muliebria, and inopia verae injuriae lascivientia commoventur.
Venit tandem mors (...) omnium malorum, quae omnes pares facit, and victo
victorique finem aque maturum affert. Chytraeus.
Sweet Reproaches! Imprisonments! or Death! Which is accompanied with these
tastes of our future Rest! This does keep the suffering from the soul, so that
it can work upon no more but our fleshly outside; even as Alexipharmical
Medicines preserve the heart, that the contagion reach not the vital spirits.
Surely, our sufferings trouble not the mind, according to the degrees of
bodily pain; but as the soul is more or less fortified with this preserving
Antidote. Believe it, Reader, thou will have a doleful sickness, thou will
suffer heavily, thou will die most sadly, if thou have not at hand the
foretasts of Rest. For my own part (if thou regard the experience of one that
has often tried) had it not been for that little (alas too little) taste which
I had of Rest, my sufferings would have been grievous, and death more terrible.
I may say as David, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see
the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. And as the same David,
Psalm. 142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man
that would know me; refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul. I cried unto
thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the Land of the
living. I may say of the promise of this Rest, as David of Gods Law; Unless
this had been my delight, I had perished in mine affliction, Psalm. 119.92. One
thing (says he) I have desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life; to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. For in time of trouble he shall hide me
in his Pavilion; in the secret of his Tabernacle he shall hide me, he shall set
me up upon a rock. And then shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies
round about me; therefore shall I offer in that his Tabernacle sacrifices of
joy, and sing, yea, sing praises unto the Lord, Psalm. 27.4, 5, 6. Therefore as
thou will then be ready with David to pray, Be not far from me, for trouble is
near, Psalm. 22.11. So let it be thy own chiefest care, not to be far from God
and Heaven, when trouble is near; and thou will then find him to be unto thee,
a very present help in trouble, Psalm. 46.1. Then though the figtree should not
blossom, neither should fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive should
fail, and the fields should yield no meat, the stock should be cut off from the
fold, and there were no heard in the stalls: Yet thou might rejoice in the
Lord, and joy in the God of thy Salvation, Hab* 3.17, 18. All sufferings are
nothing to us, so far as we have the foresight of this salvation. No bolts, nor
bars, nor distance of place, can shut out these supporting joys; because they
cannot confine our faith and thoughts, although they may confine our flesh.
Christ and Faith are both Spiritual; and therefore prisons and banishments
cannot hinder their intercourse. Even when persecution and fear has shut the
doors, Christ can come in, and stand in the midst, and say to his Disciples,
Peace be unto you. And Paul and Silas can be in Heaven, even when they are
locked up in the inner prison, and their bodies scourged, and their feet in the
stocks. No wonder if there be more mirth in their stocks, then on Herod's
throne; for there was more of Christ and Heaven. The Martyrs find more Rest in
the flames, then their persecutors can in their pomp and tyranny; because they
foresee the flames they escape, and the Rest which that fiery Chariot is
conveying them too. It is not the place that gives the Rest, but the presence
and beholding of Christ in it. If the Son of God will walk with us in it, Dan.
3.
we may walk safely in the midst of those flames, which shall devour those that
cast us in. Why then Christian, keep thy soul above with Christ; be as little
as may be out of his company, and then all conditions will be alike to thee.
For that is the best estate to thee, in which thou possessest most of him. The
moral arguments of a Heathen Philosopher may make the burden somewhat lighter;
but nothing can make us soundly joy in tribulation, except we can fetch our joy
from Heaven. How came Abraham to leave his Country, and follow God he knew not
whither? Why, because he looked for a City that has foundations, whose builder
and maker is God, Heb. 11.8, 9, 10. What made Moses choose affliction with the
people of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season? and to
esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt? Why,
because he had respect to the recompense of Reward. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. What
made him to forsake Egypt, and not to fear the wrath of the King? Why, he
endured, as seeing him who is invisible, ver. 27. How did they quench the
violence of fire? And out of weakness were made strong, Omnia facile contemnere
potest, qui s^ moriturum esse sario cogitat. inq. Chytraeus.
etc. Why would they not accept deliverance when they were tortured? Why, they
had their eye on a better Resurrection which they might obtain. Yea, it is most
evident that our Lord himself did fetch his encouragement to sufferings from
the foresight of his glory: For to this end he both dyed, and rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14.9. Even
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God. Heb. 12.2. Who can wonder that pain and sorrow, poverty and
sickness should be exceeding grievous to that man who cannot reach to see the
end? Or that Death should be the King of terrors to him, who cannot see the
life beyond it? He that looks not on the end of his sufferings, as well as on
the suffering it self, he needs must lose the whole consolation: And if he see
not the quiet fruit of righteousness, which it afterward yields, it cannot to
him be joyous, but grievous, Heb. 12.11. This is the noble advantage of faith;
it can look on the means and end together. This also is the reason why we often
pity our selves more then God does pity us, though we love not our selves so
much as he does: and why we would have the Cup to pass from us, when he will
make us drink it up. We pity our selves with an ignorant pity, and would be
saved from the Cross, which is the way to save us. God sees our glory as soon
as our suffering, and sees our suffering as it conduces to our glory; he sees
our Cross and our Crown at once, and therefore pittyeth us the less, and will
not let us have our wills. Sirs, believe it, this is the great reason of our
mistakes, impatience, and censuring of God; of our sadness of spirit at
sickness, and at death, because we gaze on the evil it self, but fix not our
thoughts on what is beyond it. We look only on the blood, and ruin, and danger
in our wars: but God sees these, with all the benefits to Souls, Bodies,
Church, State, and Posterity, all with one single view. We see the Ark taken by
the Philistines, but see not their god falling before it, and themselves
returning it home with gifts. They that saw Christ only on the Cross, or in the
Grave, do shake their heads, and think him lost: but God saw him dying, buried,
rising, glorified, and all this with one view. Surely faith will imitate God in
this, so far as it has the glass of a promise to help it. He that sees Joseph
only in the pit, or in the prison, will more lament his case, then he that sees
his dignity beyond it. Could old Jacob have seen so far, it might have saved
him a great deal of sorrow. He that sees no more then the burying of the Corn
under ground, or the threshing, the winnowing, and grinding of it, will take
both it and the labor for lost; but he that foresees its springing and
increase, and its making into bread for the life of man, will think otherwise.
This is our mistake: we see God burying us under ground, but we foresee not the
spring, when we shall all revive: we feel him threshing, and winnowing, and
grinding us, but we see not when we shall be served to our Masters table. If we
should but clearly see Heaven, as the end of all Gods dealings with us, surely
none of his dealings could be so grievous. Think of this, I entreat thee,
Reader, If thou can but learn this way to Heaven, and get thy soul acquainted
there, thou need not be unfurnished of the choicest Cordials, to revive thy
spirits in every affliction; thou know where to have them when ever thou
want: thou may have arguments at hand to answer all that the devil or
flesh can say to thy discomfort. Oh, if God would once raise us to this life,
we should find, that though heaven and sin are at a great distance; yet heaven
and a prison, or remotest banishment, heaven and the belly of a Whale in the
Sea, heaven and a Den of Lions, a consuming sickness, or invading death, are at
no such distance. But as Abraham so far off saw Christ's day, and rejoiced, so
we in our most forlorn estate, might see that day when Christ shall give us
Rest, and therein rejoice. I beseech thee Christian, for the honor of the
Gospel, and for the comfort of thy soul, that thou be not to learn this
heavenly Art, when in thy greatest extremity thou have most need to use it. I
know thou expectest suffering days, at least thou look to be sick and dye:
thou will then have exceeding need of consolation; why, whence do thou think
to draw thy comforts? If thou broach every other vessel, none will come: its
only heaven that can afford thee store; the place is far off, the well is deep;
and if then thou have not wherewith to draw, nor have got thy soul acquainted
with the place; thou will find thy self at a fearful loss. Its not an easy,
nor a common thing, even with the best sort of men, to die with Joy. As ever
thou would shut up thy days in peace, and close thy dying eyes with comfort,
dye daily; live now above, be much with Christ, and thy own soul, and the
Saints about thee shall bless the day that ever thou tookst this Council. When
God shall call thee to a sick bed, and a grave, thou shall perceive him saying
to thee, as Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast. Its he that with Stephen does see heaven opened, and
Christ sitting at the right hand of God, who will comfortably bear the storm of
stones, Acts 7.56. Thou know not yet what trials thou may be called to;
The Clouds begin to rise again, and the times to threaten us with fearful
darkness; Few Ages so prosperous to the Church, but that still we must be
saved, so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. and go to heaven by the old road. Men that
would fall if the storm should shake them, do frequently meet with that which
tryes them. Why, what will thou do if this should be thy case? Art thou fitted
to suffer imprisonment, or banishment? to bear the loss of goods and life? How
is it possible thou should do this, and do it cordially, and cheerfully,
except thou have a taste of some greater good, which thou look to gain by
losing these? will the Merchant throw his goods overboard till he sees he must
otherwise lose his life? And will thou cast away all thou have, before thou
have felt the sweetness of that Rest, which else thou must lose by saving
these? Nay, and it is not a speculative knowledge which thou have got only by
Reading or Hearing of heaven, which will make thee part with all to get it; as
a man that only hears of the sweetness of pleasant food, or reads of the
melodious sounds of Music, this does not much excite his desires; but when he
has tried the one by his taste, and the other by his ear, then he will more
lay out to get them; so if thou should know only by the hearing of the ear,
what is the glory of the inheritance of the Saints, this would not bring thee
through sufferings and death; but if thou take this Trying tasting course, by
daily exercising thy soul above, then nothing will stand in thy way, but thou
would on till thou were there, though through fire and water: What State
more terrible then that of an Apostate? when God has told us, If any man draw
back, his soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. Because they take not
their pleasure in God, and fill not themselves with the delights of his ways,
and of his heavenly paths, which drop fatness, Psalm. 65.11. Therefore do they
prove backsliders in heart, and are filled with the bitterness of their own
ways, Prove. 14.14.

Nay, If they should not be brought to trial, and so not actually deny Christ,
yet they are still interpretatively such, because they are such in disposition,
and would be such in action, if they were put to it. I assure thee, Reader, for
my part, I cannot see how thou will be able to hold out to the end, if thou
keep not thine eye upon the recompense of reward, and use not frequently to
taste this cordially; or the less thy diligence is in this, the more doubtful
must thy perseverance needs be; for the Joy of the Lord is thy strength, and
that Joy must he fetched from the place of thy Joy; and if thou walk without thy
strength, how long do thou think thou art like to endure?

. 9.
SECT. IX.
7. COnsider, It is he that has his conversation in heaven, who is the
profitable Christian to all about him? with him you may take sweet counsel, and
go up to the celestial House of God. When a man is in a strange Country, far
from home, how glad is he of the company of one of his own Nation? how
delightful is it to them to talk of their Country, of their acquaintance, and
the ^^^airs of their home? why, with a heavenly Christian thou may have such
discourse, for he has been there in the Spirit, and can tell thee of the Glory
and Rest above. What pleasant discourse was it to Joseph to talk with his
Brethren in a strange Land; and to enquire of his Father, and his brother
Benjamin? Is it not so to a Christian to talk with his Brethren that have been
above, and enquire after his Father, and Christ his Lord? when a worldling will
talk of nothing but the world, and a Politician of nothing but the affairs of
the State, and a mere Scholar of Humane learning, and a common Professor, of
Duties, and of Christians: the Heavenly man will be speaking of Heaven, and the
strange Glory which his Faith has seen, and our speedy and blessed meeting
there. I confess, to discourse with able men, of clear Understandings and
piercing Wits, about the controverted difficulties in Religion, yea, about some
Criticisms in Languages and Sciences, is both pleasant and profitable; but
nothing to this Heavenly discourse of a Believer. O, how refreshing and savory
are his expressions? how his words do pierce, and melt the heart? how they
transform the hearers into other men? that they think they are in Heaven all
the while? How does his Doctrine drop as the Rain, and his Speech distill as the
gentle Dew? as the small Rain upon the tender Herb? and as the showers upon the
Grass? while his tongue is expressing the Name of the Lord, and ascribing
greatness to his God? Deuteronomy. 32.2, 3. Is not his feeling, sweet discourse of
Heaven, even like that box of precious ointment, which being opened to pour on
the head of Christ, does fill the house with the pleasure of its perfume? All
that are near may be refreshed by it. His words are like the precious ointment
on Aarons head, that ran down upon his beard, and the skirts of his Garments;
Even like the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descends from the Celestial
Mount Zion, where the Lord has commanded the blessing, even life for evermore,
Psalm. 133.3. This is the man who is as Job, When the Candle of God did shine
upon his head; and when by his light, he walked through darkness: When the
secret of God was upon his Tabernacle; and when the Almighty was yet with him:
Then the ear that heard him, did bless him; and the eye that saw him, gave
witness to him, Job 29.3, 4, 5, 11. Happy the people that have a Heavenly
Minister: Happy the children and servants that have a Heavenly Father or
Master: Happy the man that has Heavenly Associates; if they have but hearts to
know their happiness. This is the Companion, who will watch over thy ways; who
will strengthen thee when thou art weak; who will cheer thee when thou art
drooping, and comfort thee with the same comforts, wherewith he has been so
often comforted himself, 2 Cor. 1.4. This is he that will be blowing at the
spark of thy Spiritual Life, and always drawing thy soul to God; and will be
saying to thee, as the Samaritan woman, Come and see one that has told me all
that ever I did; one that has ravished my heart with his beauty; one that has
loved our souls to the death: Is not this the Christ? Is not the knowledge of
God and Him, Eternal life? Is not it the glory of the Saints to see his Glory?
If thou come to this man's house, and sit at his Table, he will feast thy soul
with the dainties of Heaven; thou shall meet with a better then Plato's
Philosophical feast, even a taste of that feast of fat things, Of wines on the
lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wine on the lees well refined, Isai.
25.6. That thy soul may be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and thou may
praise the Lord with joyful lips, Psalm 63.5. If thou travel with this man on
the way, he will be directing and quickening thee in thy Journey to Heaven; If
thou be buying or selling, or trading with him in the world, he will be
counselling thee to lay out for the inestimable Treasure. If thou wrong him, he
can pardon thee, remembering that Christ has not only pardoned greater
offenses to him, but will also give him this unvaluable portion; If thou be
angry, he is meek, considering the meekness of his heavenly Pattern; or if he
fall out with thee, he is soon reconciled, when he remembers that in heaven
you must be everlasting friends: This is the Christian of the right stamp; this
is the servant that is like his Lord, these be the innocent that save the
Island, and all about them are the better where they dwell. O Sirs, I fear the
men I have described are very rare, even among the Religious; but were it not
for our own shameful negligence, such men we might all be: What Families! what
Towns! what Commonwealths! what Churches should we have, if they were but
composed of such men! but that is more desirable then hopeful, till we come to
that Land which has no other inhabitants, save what are incomparably beyond
this: Alas, how empty are the speeches, and how unprofitable the society of all
other sorts of Christians in comparison of these! A man might perceive by his
Divine Song, and high Expressions, Deuteronomy. 32. and 33. that Moses had been often
with God, and that God had showed him part of his Glory. Who could have
composed such spiritual Psalms, and poured out praises as David did, but a man
after Gods own heart? and a man that was near the heart of God, and (no doubt)
had God also near his heart? Who could have preached such spiritual Doctrine,
and dived into the precious mysteries of Salvation, as Paul did, but one who
had been called with a light from heaven, and had been rapt up into the third
heavens, in the Spirit, and there had seen the unutterable things? If a man
should come down from heaven amongst us, who had lived in the possession of
that blessed State, how would men be desirous to see or hear him? and all the
Country far and near would leave their business and crowd about him: happy
would he think himself that could get a sight of him; how would men long to
hear what reports he would make of the other world? and what he had seen? and
what the blessed there enjoy? would they not think this man the best companion,
and his discourse to be of all most profitable? Why sirs! Every true believing
Saint shall be there in person, and is frequently there in Spirit, and has
seen it also in the Glass of the Gospel: Why then do you value their company no
more? and why do you enquire no more of them? and why do you relish their
discourse no better? Well; for my part I had rather have the fellowship of a
Heavenly minded Christian, then of the most learned Disputers, or Princely
Commanders.

SECT. X. 10.

8. COnsider, There is no man so highly honoreth God, as he who has his
conversation in Heaven; and without this we deeply dishonor him. Is it not a
disgrace to the Father, when the Children do feed on Husks, and are clothed in
rags, and accompany with none but Rogues and Beggars? Is it not so to our
Father, when we who call our selves his Children, shall feed on Earth, and the
garb of our souls be but like that of the naked World? and when our hearts
shall make this clay and dust their more familiar and frequent company, who
should always stand in our Fathers presence, and be taken up in his own
Attendance? Sure, it beseems not the Spouse of Christ, to live among his
Scullions and Slaves, when they may have daily admittance into his presence
Chamber; he holds forth the Scepter, if they will but enter. Sure, we live
below the rates of the Gospel, and not as becomes the Children of a King, even
of the great King of all the World. We live not according to the height of our
Hopes, nor according to the plenty that is in the Promises, nor according to
the provision of our Fathers house, and the great preparations made for his
Saints. It is well we have a Father of tender Bowels, who will own his
Children, even in dirt and rags: It is well the foundation of God stands sure,
and that the Lord knows who are his; or else he would hardly take us for his
own, so far do we live below the honor of Saints: If he did not first challenge
his interest in us, neither our selves, nor others could know us to be his
people. But O, when a Christian can live above, and rejoice his soul in the
things that are unseen; how does God take himself to be honored by such a one?
The Lord may say, Why this man believes me; I see he can trust me, and take my
Word: He rejoices in my promise, before he has possession; he can be glad and
thankful for that which his bodily eyes did never see: This man's rejoicing is
not in the flesh; I see he loves me, because he minds me; his heart is with
me, he loves my presence; and he shall surely enjoy it in my Kingdom for ever.
Because thou have seen (says Christ to Thomas) thou have believed; but blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, John 20.29. How did God
take himself honored by Caleb and Joshuah, when they went into the promised
Land, and brought back to their Brethren a taste of the Fruits, and gave it
commendation, and encouraged the people? And what a promise and recompense do
they receive, Numb. 14.24, 30. For those that honor him, he will honor, 1 Samuel
2.30.

SECT. XI.. 11.

9. COnsider, If thou make not conscience of this duty of diligent keeping thy
heart in Heaven. First, thou disobeyest the flat commands of God. Secondly,
Thou losest the sweetest parts of Scripture. Thirdly, And do frustrate the
most gracious discoveries of God.

God has not left it as a thing indifferent, and at thy own choice, whether
thou will do it or not; He has made it thy duty as well as the means of thy
comfort, that so a double bond might tie thee not to forsake thy own mercies.
Col 3 1, 2. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above;
set your affections on things above, not on things on earth. The same God that
has commanded thee to believe, and to be a Christian, has commanded thee to
set thy affections above: The same God that has forbidden thee to murder, to
steal, to commit adultery, incest, or Idolatry, has forbidden thee the neglect
of this great duty; and dare thou wilfully disobey him? Why make thou not
conscience of the one as well as of the other? Secondly, besides, thou losest
the most comfortable passages of the Word. All those most glorious
descriptions of heaven, all those discoveries of our future blessedness, all
Gods Revelations of his purposes toward us, and his frequent and precious
promises of our Rest, what are they all but lost to thee? Are not these the
stars in the Firmament of the Scripture? and the most golden lines in that Book
of God? Of all the Bible, Me thinks thou should not part with one of those
Promises or Predictions, no not for a world. As Heaven is the perfection of all
our mercies, so the Promises of it in the Gospel, are the very soul of the
Gospel. That Word which was sweeter to David then the honey and the honey
comb, and to Jeremy the Joy and rejoicing of his heart, Jer. 15.16. The most
pleasant part of this thou losest. Thirdly, Yea, thou do frustrate the
preparations of Christ for thy Joy, and make him to speak in vain. Is a
comfortable word from the mouth of God, of so great worth, that all the
comforts of the world are nothing to it? and do thou neglect and overlook so
many of them? Reader, I entreat thee to ponder it, why God should reveal so
much of his Counsel, and tell us before hand of the Joys we shall possess, but
only that he would have us know it for our Joy? If it had not been to make
comfortable our present life, and fill us with the delights of our foreknown
blessedness, he might have kept his purpose to himself, and never have let us
know it till we come to enjoy it, nor have revealed it to us till death had
discovered it, what he meant to do with us in the world to come; yea when we
had got possession of our Rest, he might still have concealed its Eternity from
us, and then the fears of losing it again, would have bereaved us of much of
the sweetness of our Joys. But it has pleased our Father to open his Counsel,
and to let us know the very intent of his heart, and to acquaint us with the
eternal extent of his Love, and all this that our Joy may be full, and we might
live as the heirs of such a Kingdom: And shall we now overlook all, as if he
had revealed no such matter? Shall we live in earthly cares and sorrows, as if
we knew of no such thing? And rejoice no more in these discoveries, then if the
Lord had never writ it? If thy Prince had sealed thee but a Patent of some
Lordship, how often would thou be casting thine eye upon it? and make it thy
daily delight to study it, till thou should come to possess the dignity it
self? And has God sealed thee a Patent of Heaven, and do thou let it lie by
thee, as if thou had forgot it? O that our hearts were as high as our Hopes,
and our Hopes as high as these infallible Promises!

. 12.
SECT. XII.
10. COnsider, It is but equal that our hearts should be on God, when the heart
of God is so much on us. If the Lord of Glory can stoop so low, as to set his
heart on sinful dust, sure one would think we should easily be persuaded, to
set our hearts on Christ and Glory, and to ascend to him in our daily
affections, who vouchsafes to condescend to us! O, If Gods delight were no
more in us, then ours is in him, what should we do? what a case were we in?
Christian, do thou not perceive that the Heart of God is set upon thee? and
that he is still minding thee with tender Love, even when thou forgettest both
thy self and him? Do thou not find him following thee with daily mercies,
moving upon thy soul, providing for thy body, preserving both? Does he not bear
thee continually in the arms of Love? and promise that all shall work together
for thy good? and suit all his dealings to thy greatest advantage? and give his
Angels charge over thee? And can thou find in thy heart to cast him by? and
be taken up with the Joys below? and forget thy Lord, who forgets not thee?
Fie upon this unkind ingratitude! Is not this the sin that Isaiah so solemnly
does call both heaven and earth to witness against? The Ox knows his owner,
Isai. 1.2, 3.
and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my People does not
consider: If the Ox or Ass do straggle in the day, they likely come to their
home at night; but we will not so much as once a day, by our serious thoughts
ascend to God. When he speaks of his own respects to us, hear what he says,
Isai. 15.16. When Zion says, The Lord has forsaken me, my Lord has forgotten
me: Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee:
Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are
continually before me. But when he speaks of our thoughts to him, the case is
otherwise, Jer. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire?
yet my People have forgotten me days without number. As if he should say, you
would not forget the clothes on your backs, you will not forget your braveries
and vanities, you will not rise one morning, but you will remember to cover
your nakedness; And are these of more worth then your God? or of more
concernment then your eternal life? and yet you can forget these day after day.
O brethren, give not God cause to expostulate with us, as Isai. 65.11. Ye are
they that have forsaken the Lord, and that forget my holy Mountain; But rather
admire his minding of thee, and let it draw thy mind again to him, and say as
Job 7.17. What is man, that thou should magnify him? and that thou
should set thy heart upon him? and that thou should visit him every
morning, and try him every moment? ver. 18. So let thy soul get up to God, and
visit him every morning, and thy heart be toward him every moment.

SECT. XIII.
11. COnsider;. 13.
Should not our interest in Heaven, and our Relation to it, continually keep
our hearts upon it? Besides that excellency which is spoken of before. Why
there our Father keeps his court; Do we not call him our Father which art in
Heaven: Ah ungratious unworthy children, that can be so taken up in their play
below, as to be mindless of such a Father! Also there is Christ our Head, our
Husband, our Life: and shall we not look toward him, and send to him, as often
as we can, till we come to see him face to face? If he were by
Transubstantiation in the Sacraments or other ordinances, and that as
gloriously as he is in Heaven, then there were some reason for our lower
thoughts: But when the Heavens must receive him till the restitution of all
things; let them also receive our hearts with him. There also is our Mother,
For Jerusalem which is above is that mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. And there are
multitudes of our elder Brethren: There are our friends and our ancient
acquaintance, whose society in the flesh we so much delighted in, and whose
departure hence we so much lamented: And is this no attractive to thy thoughts?
If they were within thy reach on earth, thou would go and visit them; and why
will thou not oftener visit them in Spirit? and rejoice beforehand to think of
thy meeting them there again? Says old Bullinger, Socrates gaudet sibi
moriendu^ esse, propterea quod Homerum, Hesiodum and alios praestantissimos
viros se visurum crederet; quanto magis ego gaudeo qui certus sum me visurum
esse Christum servatorem meum, aeternum Dei filium, in assumta carne, and
praeterea tot sanctissimos and eximios Patriarchas? etc. Socrates rejoiced that
he should die, because he believed he should see Homer, Hesiod, and other
excellent men; how much more do I rejoice, who am sure to see Christ my
Savior, the eternal Son of God, in his assumed flesh; and besides, so many
holy and excellent men? When Luther desired to dye a Martyr, and could not
obtain it, he comforted himself with these thoughts, and thus did write to them
in prison, Vestra vincula mea sunt, vestri carceres and ignes mei sunt, dum
confiteor and praedico vobisque simul compatior and congratulor; Yet this is my
comfort, your Bonds are mine, your Prisons and Fires are mine, while I confess
and Preach the Doctrine for which you suffer, and while I suffer and
congratulate with you in your sufferings: Even so should a Believer look to
heaven, and contemplate the blessed state of the Saints, and think with
himself, Though I am not yet so happy as to be with you, yet this is my daily
comfort, you are my Brethren and fellow Members in Christ, and therefore your
joys are my joys, and your glory by this near relation is my glory,
especially while I believe in the same Christ, and hold fast the same Faith and
Obedience, by which you were thus dignified; and also while I rejoice in Spirit
with you, and in my daily meditations congratulate your happiness. Moreover,
our house and home is above. For we know if this earthly house of our
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens. Why do we then look no oftener toward it? and
groan not earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from
Heaven? 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. Sure, if our home were far meaner, we should yet
remember it, because it is our home: You use to say, Home is homely, be it
never so poor; and should such a home then be no more remembered? If you were
but banished into a strange Land, how frequent thoughts would you have of home?
how often would you think of your old companions? which way ever you went, or
what company soever you came in, you would still have your hearts, and desires
there; you would even dream in the night, that you were at home, that you saw
your Father, or Mother, or Friends, that you were talking with Wife, or
Children, or Neighbors: And why is it not thus with us in respect of Heaven? Is
not that more truly, and properly our home, where we must take up our
everlasting abode, then this, which we are looking every hour, when we are
separated from, and shall see it no more? We are strangers, and that is our
Country, Heb. 11 14, 15. We are heirs, and that is our Inheritance; even an
Inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. We are here in continual distress, and want, and
there lies our substance; even that better and more enduring substance, Heb.
10.34. We are here fain to be beholden to others, and there lies our own
perpetual Treasure, Matthew. 6.20, 21. Yea, the very Hope of our souls is there;
all our hope of relief from our distresses; all our hope of happiness, when we
are here miserable; all this hope is laid up for us in Heaven, whereof we hear
in the true Word of the Gospel, Col. 1.5. Why, beloved Christians, have we so
much interest, and so seldom thoughts? have we so near relation, and so little
affection? are we not ashamed of this? Does it become us to be delighted in the
company of strangers, so as to forget our Father, and our Lord? or to be so
well pleased with those that hate and grieve us, as to forget our best and
dearest friends? or to be so besotted with borrowed trifles, as to forget our
own possession and treasure? or to be so taken up with a strange place, as not
once a day to look toward home? or to fall so in love with tears and wants, as
to forget our eternal Joy, and Rest? Christians, I pray you think whether this
become us? or whether this be the part of a wife or thankful man? why here thou
art like to other men, as the heir under age, who differs not from a servant;
but there it is that thou shall be promoted, and fully estated in all that was
promised. Surely, God uses to plead his propriety in us, and from thence to
conclude to do us good; even because we are his own people, whom he has chosen
out of all the world: And why then do we not plead our interest in him, and
thence fetch Arguments to raise up our hearts, even because he is our own God,
and because the place is our own possession? Men use in other things to
over-love, and overvalue their own, and too much to mind their own things: O,
that we could mind our own inheritance! and value it but half as it does
deserve!

. 14.
SECT. XIIII.
12. LAstly consider, There is nothing else that's worth the seting our hearts
on. If God have them not, who, or what shall have them? if thou mind not thy
Rest, what will thou mind? As the Disciples said of Christ, ( John 4.32, 33.)
has any man given him meat to eat, that we know not of? So say I to thee; Have
thou found out some other God, or Heaven, that we know not of? or something
that will serve thee in stead of Rest? Have thou found on Earth an Eternal
happiness? where is it? and what is it made of? or who was the man that found
it out? or who was he that last enjoyed it? where dwelt he? and what was his
name? or art thou the first that have found this treasure? and that ever
discovered Heaven on Earth? Ah wretch! trust not to thy discoveries, boast not
of thy gain, till experience bid thee boast, or rather take up with the
experience of thy forefathers, who are now in the dust, and deprived of all,
though sometime they were as lusty and jovial as thou. I would not advise thee
to make experiments at so dear rates, as all those do that seek after happiness
below; least when the substance is lost, thou find too late, that thou did
catch but at a shadow; least thou be like those men, that will needs search out
the Philosophers stone, though none could effect it that went before them; and
so buy their experience with the loss of their own estates and time, which they
might have had at a cheaper rate, if they would have taken up with the
experience of their Predecessors. So I would wish thee not to disquiet thy
self, in looking for that which is not on Earth; least thou learn thy
experience with the loss of thy soul^ which thou might have learned at
easier terms, even by the warnings of God in his Word, and loss of thousands
of souls before thee. It would pity a man to see, that men will not believe God
in this, till they have lost their labor, and Heaven, and all: Nay, that many
Christians, who have taken Heaven for their resting place, do lose so many
thoughts needlessly on Earth; and care not how much they oppress their spirits,
which should be kept nimble and free for higher things. As Luther said to
Melancthon, when he over-pressed himself with the labors of his Ministry; so
may I much more say to thee, who oppressest thy self with the cares of the
world. Vellem te adhuc decies plus obrui: Adeo me nihil tui miseret, qui toties
monitus, ne onerares teipsum tot oneribus, and nihil audis, omnia been monita
contemnis. Tom. 1. Epist. page 355. b.
Erit cum sero stultum tuum hunc zelum frustra damnabis; quo jam ardes solus
omnia portare, quasi ferrum aut saxum sis. it were no matter, if thou were
oppressed ten times more; so little do I pity thee; who being so often warned,
that thou should not load thy self with so many burdens, do no whit regard
it, but contemnest all these wholesome warnings: Thou will shortly when it is too
late, condemn this thy foolish forwardness, which makes thee so desirous to
bear all this, as if thou were made of Iron or Stone. Alas, that a Christian
should rather delight to have his heart among these thorns and briars, then in
the bosom of his crucified, glorified Lord! Surely, if Satan should take thee
up to the Mountain of Temptation, and show thee the Kingdoms, and glory of the
world; he could show thee nothing that's worthy thy thoughts, much less to be
preferred before thy Rest. Indeed so far as duty and necessity requires it, we
must be content to mind the things below; but who is he that contains himself
within the compass of those limits? And yet if we bound our cares and thoughts,
as diligently as ever we can, we shall find the least to be bitter and
burdensome; even as the least VVasp has a sting, and the smallest Serpent has
his poison. As old Hiltenius said of Rome, Est proprium Roman potestatis ut
sit ferreum, and licet digiti minorentur ad parvitatem acus, tamen manent
ferrei: It is proper to the Roman power to be of iron, and though the fingers
of it be diminished to the smalness of a needle, yet they are iron still; The
like may I say of our earthly cares, It is their property to be hard and
troublous, and so they will be when they are the least: Verily, if we had no
higher hopes then what is on earth, I should take man for a most silly creature,
and his work and wages, all his travel and his felicity, to be no better then
dreams and vanity, and scarce worth the minding or mentioning, especially to
thee a Christian should it seem so, whose eyes are opened by the Word and
Spirit, to see the emptiness of all these things, and the precious worth of the
things above: O then be not detained by these silly things, but if Satan
present them to thee in a temptation, send them away from whence they came; as
Pellicanus did send back the silver bowl (which the Bishop had sent him for a
token) with this answer, Astricti sunt quotquot Tyguri cives and inquilini, bis
singulis annis, solenni juramento, ne quis eorum ullum munus ab ullo principe
accipiat; All that are Citizens and Inhabitants of Tigurum, are solemnly sworn
twice a year, not to receive any gift from any Prince abroad; so say thou, we
the Citizens and Inhabitants of heaven, are bound by solemn and frequent
Covenants, not to have our hearts enticed or entangled, with any foreign
honors or delights, but only with those of our own Country: If thy thoughts
should like the laborious Be, go over the world from flower to flower, from
creature to creature, they would bring thee no Honey or sweetness home, save
what they gathered from their relations to Eternity.

Object. But you will say perhaps, Divinity is of larger extent, then only to
treat of the life to come, or the way thereto; there are many controversies of
great difficulty, which therefore require much of our thoughts, and so they
must not be all of heaven.

Answ. For the smaller controversies which have vexed our Times, and caused the
doleful divisions among us, I express my mind as that of Graserus, Cum in
visitatione aegrotorum, and ad emigrationem ex hac vita beatam praeparatione
daeprehendisset, controversias illas Theologicas, quae scientiam quidem
inflantem pariunt, conscientias vero fluctuantes non sedant, quaeque hodie
magna animorum contentione agitantur, and magnos tumultus in rebuspub.
excitant, nullum prorsus usum habere, quinimo conscientias simpliciorum non
aliter ac olim in Papatu humana figmenta intricare; Caepit ab eis toto animo
abhorrere, and in publicis concionibus tantum ca proponere, quae ad fidem
salvificam in Christum accendendam, and ad pietatem veram juxta verbum Dei
exercendam, veramque consolationem in vita and morte praestandam faciebant;
When he had found in his visiting the sick, and in his own preparations for
well dying, that the Controversies in Divinity (which beget a swelling
knowledge, but do not quiet troubled consciences, and which are at this day
agitated with such contention of spirits, and raise such tumults in
Commonwealths) are indeed utterly useless, yea and moreover, do entangle the
consciences of the simple, just as the humane inventions in Popery formerly
did; he begun with full bent of mind to shun or abhor them, and in his public
Preaching to propound only those things which tended to the kindling a true
faith in Jesus Christ, and to the exercise of true godliness according to the
Word of God, M^lch. Adam. in vita Graseri.
and to the procuring of true consolation, both in life and at death. I can
scarce express my own mind more plainly, then in this Historians expressions
of the mind of Graserus. While I had some competent measure of health, and
looked at death as at a greater distance, there was no man more delighted in
the study of controversy; but when I saw dying men have no mind on it, and how
unsavory and uncomfortable such conference was to them, and when I had often been
near to death my self, and found no delight in them, further then they
confirmed, or illustrated the Doctrine of eternal Glory, I have minded them
ever since the less: Though every Truth of God is precious, and it is the sin
and shame of Professors that are no more able to defend the Truth, yet should
all our study of controversy be still in relation to this perpetual Rest, and
consequently be kept within its bounds, and with most Christians, not have the
twentieth part of our time or thoughts: Who that has tried both studies, does
not cry out, as Summerhard was wont to do of the Popish School Divinity, Quis
me miserum tandem liberabit ab ista rixosa Theologia? Who will once deliver me
wretch from this wrangling kind of Divinity? And as its said of Bucholcer, Cum
eximiis a Deo dotibus esset decoratus, in certamen tamen cum rabiosis illius
seculi Theologis descendere noluit. Desii (inquit) disputare, caepi supputare:
quoniam illud dissipationem, hoc collectionem significaet. Vidit enim ab iis
controversias moveri, quas nulla unquam amoris Dei seintilla calefecerat: vidit
ex diuturnis Theologorum rixis, utilitatis nihil, detrimenti plurimum in
ecclesias redundasse. i. e. Though he was adorned by God with excellent gifts,
yet would he never enter into contention with the furious Divines of that age.
I have ceased (says he) my Disputations, and now begin my Supputation; for
that signifies Dissipation, but this Collection: For he saw, that those men
were the movers of Controversies, who had never been warmed with one spark of
the love of God; he saw, That from the continual brawls of Divines, no benefit,
but much hurt did accrue to the Churches; and it is worth the observing which
the Historian adds, Quapropter omnis ejus cura in hoc erat, ut auditores fidei
suae commissos, doceret been vivere and beat Mori; Et annotatum in adversariis
amici ejus repererunt, permultos in extremo agone constitutos, gratias ipsi hoc
nomine egisse, quod ipsius ductu servatorem suum Jesum agnovissent, cujus in
cognitione pulchrum vivere, mori vero long pulcherrimum ducerent. Atque haud
scio annon hoc ipsum long Bucholcero coram Deo sit gloriosius futurum, quam si
aliquet contentiosorum libellorum myriadas posteritatis memoriae consecrasset.
i. e. Therefore this was all his care, That he might teach his hearers,
committed to his charge, To live well, and die happily: And his friends found
noted down in his Papers, a great many of persons, who in their last agony, did
give him thanks for this very reason, That by his direction they had come to
the knowledge of Jesus their Savior; in the knowledge of whom, They esteemed it
sweet to live, but to die far more sweet. And I cannot tell, whether this very
thing will not prove more glorious to Bucholcer before God, then if he had
consecrated to the memory of posterity, many Myriads of contentious writings.
And as the study of controversies is not the most pleasant, nor the most
profitable; so much less the public handling of them: For do it with the
greatest meekness, and ingenuity, yet shall we meet with such unreasonable men,
as the said Bucholcer did, Qui arrepta ex aliquibus voculis calumniandi
materia, haereseos insimulare and traducere optimum virum non erubescerent;
Frustra obtestante ipso, dextre data, dextre acciperent. i. e. Who taking
occasion of reproach from some small words, were not ashamed to traduce the
good man, and accuse him of Heresy; while he in vain obtested with them, that
they should take in good part, what was delivered with a good intention.
Siracides says in Ecclesiasticus, Chapter 26. That a scolding woman shall be
sought o^t for to drive away the enemies; but experience of all ages tells us
to our sorrow, That the wrangling Divine is their chiefest in let, and no such
Scarcrow to them at all.

So then its clear to me, That there is nothing worth our minding, but Heaven,
and the way to Heaven.

All the Question will be about the affairs of Church and State? Is not this
worth our minding? to see what things will come to? and how God will conclude
our differences?

Answ. So far as they are considered as the providence of God, and as they
tend to the settling of the Gospel, and Government of Christ, and so to the
saving of our own, and our posterities souls, they are well worth our diligent
observation; but these are only their relations to eternity. Otherwise I
should look up on all the stirs and commotions in the world, but as the busy
gading of a heap of Ants, or the swarming of a nest of Wasps or Bees: The spurn
of a man's foot destroys all their labor; or as an Interlude or Tragedy of a
few hours long: They first quarrel, and then fight, and let out one another
blood, and bring themselves more speedily, and violently to their graves; which
however they could not long have delayed, and so come down, and the Play is
ended: And the next generation succeeds them in their madness, and make the
like bustle in the world for a time; and so they also come down, and lie in the
dust. Like the Roman Gladiatores, that would kill one another by the hundreds,
to make the beholders a solemn show; or as the young men of Joab and Abner,
that must play before them, by stabbing one another to the heart, and fall down
and dye, and there is an end of the sport. And is this worth a wise man's
observance?

Surely, our very bodies themselves, for which we make all this ado in the
world, are very silly pieces: Look upon them (not as they are set out in a
borrowed bravery) but as they lie rotting in a ditch, or a grave; and you will
say, they are silly things indeed. Why then, sure all our dealings in the
world, our buyings and sellings, and eating and drinking, our building and
marrying, our wealth and honors, our peace and our war, so far as they relate
not to the life to come, but tend only to the support and pleasing of this
silly flesh, must needs themselves be silly things, and not worthy the frequent
thoughts of a Christian: For the Means (as such) is meaner then their end.

And now does not thy Conscience say as I say, That there is nothing but
Heaven, and the way to it, that is worth thy minding?

15.
SECT. XV.
THus I have given thee these twelve Arguments to consider of, and if it may
be, to persuade thee to a heavenly mind: I now desire thee to view them over,
read them deliberately, and read them again, and then tell me, Are they Reason,
or are they not? Reader, stop here while thou answerest my Question: Are these
Considerations weighty, or not? are these Arguments convincing, or not? Have I
proved it thy duty, and of flat necessity, to keep thy heart on things above,
or have I not? Say, Yea, or Nay, man! If thou say Nay; I am confident thou
contradictest thine own Conscience, and speak against the light that is in
thee, and thy Reason tells thee thou speak falsely: If thou say Yea, and
acknowledge thy self convinced of the duty; bear witness then, that I have thine
own confession: That very tongue of thine shall condemn thee, and that
confession be pleaded against thee, if thou now go home, and cast this off, and
wilfully neglect such a confessed duty; and these twelve Considerations shall
be as a Jury to convict thee, which I propounded, hoping they might be
effectual to persuade thee. I have not yet fully laid open to you, the nature
and particular way of that duty, which I am all this while persuading you to;
that is the next thing to be done: All that I have said hitherto, is but to
make you willing to perform it. I know the whole work of man's salvation, does
stick most at his own will: If we could once get over this block well, I see
not what could stand before us. Be soundly willing, and the work is more then
half done. I have now a few plain Directions to give you, for to help you in
doing this great work; but alas, its in vain to mention them, except you be
willing to put them in practice. What says thou Reader, Art thou willing, or
art thou not? will thou obey, if I show thee the way of thy Duty? However, I
will set them down, and tender them to thee, and the Lord persuade thy heart to
the Work.

CHAP. IV. Containing some Hindrances of a Heavenly Life.
SECT. I.. 1.

THe first task that I must here set thee, consists in the avoiding of some
dangerous Ad illam via^^ requiritur, 1. Quod homo per virtuosam assuefactionem
and gratam, sit radicatus in virtutibus: Quod nullam delectationem ^abeat in
appetitu vanae gloriae, in capiditate divi^iarum, in concupiscentia oculorum
and gule. 2. Requiritur internum silentium, ut non occupet se circa exteriora:
Quid audicrit, vel viderit for is nihil curando, tanquam in somno occurrissent.
3. Amorosa adhaesio cum Deo: Vt onmia ejus, judicia, omnia facta, ^mnes
doctrinas. cum veverentia amplectatur. 4. Quod nibil aliud quaerat, sedreputet
sibi illum dil^ctum sufficientissimum, superexcellentem illum in cord suo
diligat super omne quod potest videri, audiri, vel cogitari, vel imaginari:
Quia totus amabilis, totus desiderabilis, etc. 5. Quod saepe reducat ad
memorians perfectiones Dei, and illis intime congratuletur. Gerson 3. part. in
Alphabeto divini amoris, cap 14.
hindrances, which otherwise will keep thee off from this work, as they have
done many a thousand souls before thee. If I show thee briefly where the Rocks
and Gulf do lie, I hope thou will beware. If I stick up a mark at every
quicksand, I hope I need to say no more, to put thee by it. Therefore as thou
valuest the comforts of a Heavenly conversation, I here charge thee from God,
to beware most carefully of these impediments.

1. The first is, The living in a known unmortified sin. Observe this. O, what
havoc this will make in thy soul! O, the joys that this has destroyed! The
blessed Communion with God, that this has interrupted! The ruins it has made
amongst men's graces! The soul-strengthning duties that this has hindered! And
above all others, it is especially an enemy to this great duty.

Christian Reader, I desire thee in the fear of God, stay here a little, and
search thy heart: Art thou one that have used violence with thy conscience? Art
thou a wilful neglecter of known duties? either public, private, or secret?
Art thou a slave to thine appetite, in eating or ^rinking? or to any other
commanding sense? Art thou a proud Seeker of thine own esteem? and a man that
must needs have men's good opinion, or else thy mind is all in a combustion?
Art thou a wilfully peevish and passionate person? as if thou were made of
Tinder or Gun powder, ready to take fire at every word, or every wry look, or
every supposed sleighting of thee? or every neglect of a complement or
courtesy? Art thou a knowing deceiver of others in thy dealing? or one that
have set thy self to rise in the world? not to speak of greater sins, which all
take notice of: If this be thy case, I dare say, Heaven and thy Soul are very
great strangers: I dare say, thou art seldom in Heart with God; and there is
little hope it should ever be better, as long as thou continuest in these
transgressions: These beams in thine eyes, will not suffer thee to look to
Heaven; these will be a cloud between thee and God. When thou do but attempt
to study Eternity, and to gather comforts from the life to come, thy sin will
presently look thee in the face, and say, These things belong not to thee: How
should thou take comfort from Heaven, who take so much pleasure in the
lusts of thy flesh? O, how this will damp thy joys! and make the thoughts of
that day, and state, to become thy trouble, and not thy delight! Every wilful
sin that thou live in, will be to thy comforts as water to the fire; when
thou think to quicken them, this will quench them; when thy heart begins to
draw near to God, this will presently come in thy mind, and cover thee with
shame, and fill thee with doubting. Besides (which is most to the point in
hand) it does utterly indispose thee and disable thee to this work: When thou
should wind up thy heart to Heaven, alas, its biased another way; it is
entangled in the lusts of the flesh, and can no more ascend in Divine
Meditation, then the bird can fly, whose wings are clipped, or that is entangled
in the Lime-twigs, or taken in the snare. Sin does cut the very sinews of the
soul; therefore, I say of this heavenly life, as Master Bolton says of Prayer,
Either it will make thee leave sinning, or sin will make thee leave it; and
that quickly too: For these cannot continue together. If thou be here guilty,
who read this, I require thee sadly to think of this folly. O man! what a
life do thou lose! and what a life do thou choose! what daily delights do
thou sell, for the swinish pleasure of a stinking lust! what a Christ! what a
glory, do thou turn thy back upon, when thou art going to the embracements of
thy hellish pleasures! I have read of a Gallant addicted to uncleanness, who at
last, meeting with a beautiful Dame, and having enjoyed his fleshly desires of
her, found her in the morning to be the dead body of one that he had formerly
sinned with, which had been acted by the devil all night, and left dead again
in the morning. Surely all thy sinful pleasures are such. The devil does
animate them in the darkness of the night; but when God awakes thee, at the
farther, at death, the deceit is vanished, and nothing left but a carcass to
amaze thee, and be a spectacle of horror before thine eyes. Thou think thou
have hold of some choice delight, but it will turn in thy hand (as Moses rod)
into a Serpent; and then thou would fain be rid of it, if thou knew how;
and wilt ^^ie from the face of it, as thou do now embrace it: And shall this
now dream thee from the high delights of the Saints? If Heaven and Hell can
meet together, and if God can become a lover of sin, the^^ may them live in
thy sin, and in the tastes of glory, and may have a conversation in Heaven,
though thou cherish thy corruption. If therefore thou find thy self guilty,
never doubt on it, but this is the cause that estrangeth thee from Heaven: And
take heed, least it keep out thee, as it keeps out thy heart; and do not say,
but thou wast bid, Take heed. Yea, if thou be a man that hitherto have escaped,
and know no reigning sin in thy soul; yet let this warning move thee to
prevention, and stir up a dread of this danger in thy spirit. As Hu^nius writes
of himself, That hearing the mention of the unpardonable sin against the Holy
Ghost, it stirred up such fears in his spirit, that made him cry out. What if
this should be my case? and so rouzed him to prayer and trial. So think thou,
though thou yet be not guilty, what a sad thing it were, if ever this should
prove thy case: And therefore watch.

. 2.
SECT. II.
2. A Second hinderance carefully to be avoided, is, An Earthly mind: For you
may easily conceive, that this cannot stand with an Heavenly mind. God and
Mammon Earth and Heaven, cannot both have the delight of thy heart. This makes
thee like Anselmne's Bird, with a stone tied to the foot, which as often as she
took flight, did pluck her to the Earth again. The description of a Worldling.
If thou be a man that have fancied to thy self, some content or happiness to
be found on Earth, and beginnest to taste a sweetness in gain, and to aspire
after a fuller and a higher estate, and have hatched some thriving projects in
thy brain, and art driving on thy rising design; Believe it, thou art marching
with thy back upon Christ, and art posting apace from this Heavenly life. Why,
has not the World that from thee, which God has from the Heavenly? When he is
blessing himself in his God, and rejoicing in hope of the glory to come; then
thou art blessing thy self in thy prosperity, and rejoicing in hope of thy
thriving here: When he is solacing his soul in the views of Christ, of the
Angels and Saints, that he shall live with for ever; then art thou comforting
thy self with thy wealth, in looking over thy Bills and Bonds, in viewing thy
Money, thy Goods, thy Cattle, thy Buildings, or large Possession; and art
recreating thy mind in thinking of thy hopes; of the favor of some great ones,
on whom thou dependest; of the pleasantness of a plentiful and commanding
state; of thy larger provision for thy children after thee; of the rising of
thy house, or the obeisance of thine inferiors: Are not these thy morning and
evening thoughts, when a gracious soul is above with Christ? Do thou not
delight, and please thy self with the daily rolling these thoughts in thy
mind, when a gracious soul should have higher delights? If he were a fool by
the sentence of Christ, that said, Soul take thy rest, thou have enough laid up
for many years: What a fool of fools art thou, that knowing this, yet take
not warning, but in thy heart speak the same words? Look them over
seriously, and tell me, what difference between this fools expressions, and thy
affections? I doubt not, but thou have more wit then to speak thy mind just in
his language; but, man, remember, thou have to do with the searcher of hearts.
It may be thou holdst on in thy course of duty, and prayest as often as thou
did before; it may be thou keep in with good Ministers, and with godly
men, and seem as forward in Religion as ever: But what is all this to the
purpose? Mock not thy soul, man; for God will not so be mocked. What good may
yet remain in thee, I know not; but sure I am, thy course is dangerous, and if
thou follow it on, will end in dolor. Methinks I see thee befooling thy self,
and tearing thy hair, and gnashing thy teeth, when thou hear thy case laid
open by God: Thou fool, this night shall they require thy soul from thee; and
then whose are all these things? Certainly, so much as thou delightest and
restest on Earth; so much is abated of thy delights in God. Thine earthly mind
may consist with thy profession and common duties; but it cannot consist with
this Heavenly duty. I need not tell thee all this, if thou would deal
impartially, and not be a traitor to thy own soul; thou know thy self how
seldom and cold, how cursory and strange thy thoughts have been of the joys
hereafter, ever since thou did trade so eagerly for the world. Methinks I
even perceive thy conscience stir now, and tell thee plainly, that this is thy
case; hear it, man; O, hear it now; least thou hear it in another manner when
thou would be full loath. O the cursed madness of many that seem to be
religious! who thrust themselves into multitude of employments, and think they
can never have business enough, till they are loaded with labors, and clogged
with cares, That their souls are as unfit to converse with God, as a man to
walk with a mountain on his back; and till he has even transformed his soul
almost into the nature of his drossie carcass, and made it as unapt to soar
aloft, as his body is to leap above the Sun: And when all is done, and they
have lost that Heaven they might have had upon Earth, they rake up a few rotten
arguments to prove it lawful, and then they think that they have salved all;
though these sots would not do so for their bodies, nor forbear their eating,
or drinking, or sleeping, or sporting, though they could prove it lawful so to
do; though indeed they cannot prove it lawful neither. They miss not the
pleasures of this Heavenly Life, if they can but quiet their Consciences, while
they fasten upon lower and baser pleasures. For thee, O Christian, who have
tasted of these pleasures; I advise thee, as thou valuest their enjoyment, as
ever thou would taste of them any more, take heed of this gulf of An earthly
mind: For if once thou come to this, that thou will be rich, thou fallest into
temptation, and a snare, and into diverse foolish and hurtful lusts; 1 Samuel 9.20.
Sed amor Dei adhuc est valde modieus and debilus: Mundanus vero sort and
potens; repugnatque sortiter, ne nidum suum seu hospitium quod habuit ab
infantia in homine perdat. Et quod plus molestat, ipse amor mundi oculis
cernitur corporis, and sentitur duleus esse ad retireidum; amarus vero ad
perdendum: Amor autem Dei e contra non videtur; and sencitu d^r. ^ad
acquirendum, and dulcis ad dimittendum. Gerson, part. 3. fol. 382. De monte
contemplat. cap. 21.
it is Saint Paul's own words, 1 Timothy 6.9. Set not thy mind, as Saul, on the
Asses, when the Kingdom of Glory is before thee. Keep these things as thy upper
Garments, still loose about thee, that thou may lay them by, when ever there
is cause: But let God and Glory be next thy heart, yea, as the very blood and
spirits, by which thou live; Still remember that of the Spirit, The
friendship of the World, is enmity with God: Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the World, is the enemy of God, Jam. 4.4. And 1 John 2.15. Love not
the world, nor the things in the world: If any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him. This is plain dealing; and happy he that faithfully
receives it.

. 3.
SECT. III.
3. A Third hinderance, which I must advise thee to beware, is. The company of
ungodly and sensual men. Not that I would dissuade thee from necessary
converse, or from doing them any office of Love; especially not from
endeavoring the good of their souls, as long as thou have any opportunity or
hope: Nor would I have thee conclude them to be Dogs and Swine, that so thou
may evade the duty of Reproof: Nor yet to judge them such at all, as long as
there is any hope of better, or before thou art certain they are such indeed;
much less can I approve of the practice of those, who, because the most of the
world are naught, do therefore conclude men Dogs or Swine, before ever they
faithfully and lovingly did admonish them, yea, or perhaps before they have
known them, or spoke with them; and hereupon they will not communicate with
them in the Lords Supper, but separate from them into distinct Congregations; I
persuade thee to no such ungodly separation: As I never found one word in
Scripture, where either Christ or his Apostles denied admittance to any man
that desired to be a Member of the Church, though but only prosessing to
Repent and Believe; so neither did I ever there find that any but convicted
Heretics, or scandalous ones (and that for the most part* after due
admonition) were to be avoided or debarred our fellowship. And whereas it is
urged, That they are to prove their interest to the privileges which they lay
claim to, and not we to disprove it; I Answer, if that were granted, yet their
mere professing to Repent and Believe in Christ, is a sufficient evidence of
their interest to Church member-ship, and admittance thereto by Baptism
(supposing them not admitted before:) and their being Baptized persons, or
members of the universal visible Church (into which it is that they are
Baptized) is sufficient evidence of their interest to the Supper, till they do
by Heresy or Scandal blot that Evidence; Romans 14.1.
which Evidence if they do produce, yea though they are yet weak in the Faith
of Christ, who is he that dare refuse to receive them? And this, after much
doubting, dispute, and study of the Scriptures, I speak as confidently, as
almost any truth of equal moment; So plain is the Scripture in this point, to a
man that brings his Understanding to the model of Scripture, and does not bring
a model in his brain, and reduce all he reads to that model. The door of the
visible Church, is incomparably wider then the door of heaven; and Christ is so
tender, so bountiful, and forward to convey his grace, and the Gospel so free
an offer and invitation to all, that surely Christ will keep no man off; if
they will come quite over in spirit to Christ, they shall be welcome; If they
will come but only to a visible Profession, he will not deny them admittance
there, because they intend to go no further, but will let them come as near as
they will, and that they come no further shall be their own fault; and so it is
not his readiness to admit such, nor the openness of the door of his visible
Church that makes men Hypocrites, but their own wickedness; Christ will not
keep such out among Infidels, for fear of making Hypocrites; but when the net
is drawn unto the shore, the fishes shall be separated, and when the time of
Harvest comes, then the Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that work iniquity, Matthew. 13.41. There are many Saints (or
sanctified men) that yet shall never come to heaven, who are only Saints by
their separation from Paganism, into fellowship with the visible Church, but
not Saints in the strictest sense, by separation from the ungodly, into the
fellowship of the mystical body of Christ, Heb. 10 29. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14, 2,
21. and 26.19. and 28.9. Exodus 19.6. 1 Cor. 7.13, 14. Romans 11.16. Heb. 3.1.
compared with ver. 12. 1 Cor. 3.17. and 14.33. 1 Cor. 1.2. compared with 11.20,
21, etc. Gal. 3.26. compared with Gal. 3.3, 4. and 4.11. and 5.2, 3* 4. Joh.
15.2.

Thus far I have digressed by way of Caution, that you may not think that I
dissuade you from lawful converse; but it is the unnecessary society of ungodly
men, and too much familiarity with unprofitable companions, though they be not
so apparently ungodly, that I dissuade you from. There are many persons, whom
we may not avoid, or excommunicate out of the Church, no nor out of our private
society, judicially, or by way of penalty to them, whom yet we must exclude
from our too much familiarity in way of prudence for preservation of our
selves: It is not only the open profane, the swearer, the drunkard, and the
enemies of godliness, that will prove hurtful companions to us, though these
indeed are chiefly to be avoided; but too frequent society with dead-hearted
Formalists, or persons merely civil and moral, or whose conference is empty,
unsavory, and barren, may much divert our thoughts from heaven, and do our
selves a great deal of wrong; as mere idleness and forgetting God, will keep a
soul as certainly from Heaven, as a profane, licentious, fleshly life: so also
will the usual company, of such idle, forgetful, negligent persons, as surely
keep our hearts from heaven, as the company of men more dissolute and profane.
Alas, our dullness and backwardness is such, that we have need of the most
constant and powerful helps: A clod, or a stone that lies on the earth, is as
prone to arise and fly in the Air, as our hearts are naturally to move toward
heaven: you need not hold nor hinder the earth and Rocks to keep them from
flying up to the skies; it is sufficient that you do not help them: And surely
if our spirits have not great assistance, they may easily be kept from flying
aloft, though they never should meet with the least impediment: O think of this
in the choice of your company; when you spirits are so powerfully disposed for
heaven, that you need no help to lift them up; but as the flames you are
always mounting upward, and carrying with you all that's in your way; then you
may indeed be less careful of our company; but till then as you love the
delights of a heavenly life, be careful herein: As its reported of a Lord that
was near to his death, and the Doctor that prayed with him read over the
Letany, For all women laboring with child, for all sick persons and young
children, etc. From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine;
from battle, murder, and sudden death, etc. Alas, says he, what is this to me,
who must presently dye? etc. So may thou say of such men's conference, who can
talk of nothing but their Callings and vanity; Alas, what is this to me who must
shortly be in Rest, and should now be refreshing my soul with its foretastes?
what will it advantage thee to a life with God, to hear where the Fair is such
a day, or how the Market goes, or what weather is, or is like to be, or when
the Moon changes, or what news is stirring? why, this is the discourse of
earthly men. What will it conduce to the raising of thy heart Godward, to hear
that this is an able Minister, or that an able Christian, or that this was an
excellent Sermon, or that is an excellent book? to hear a violent arguing, or
tedious discourse, of Baptism, Ceremonies, the power of the Keys, the order of
Gods Decrees, or other such controversies of great difficulty and less
importance? Yet this for the most part, is the sweetest discourse, that thou
art like to have, of a formal, speculative, dead-hearted Professor. Nay, if
thou had newly been warming thy heart, in the contemplation of the blessed
Joys above, would not this discourse benum thine affections, and quickly freez
thy heart again? I appeal to the Judgment of any man that has tried it, and
makes observations on the frame of his spirit. Men cannot well talk of one
thing, and mind another, especially things of such differing natures. You
young men who are most liable to this temptation, think sadly of what I say:
Can you have your hearts in Heaven on an Alehouse bench, among your roaring,
singing, swaggering companions? or when you work in your Shops with none but
such, Ephesians. 5.4.
whose ordinary language is oaths, or filthiness, or foolish talking, or
jesting? Nay, let me tell you thus much more; that if you choose such company
when you might have better, and find most delight and content in such, you are
so far from a Heavenly conversation, that as yet you have no title to heaven at
all, and in that estate shall never come there: For were your Treasure there,
your heart would not be on things so distant, Mat. 6.21. In a word, our company
will be part of our happiness in heaven, and its a singular part of our
furtherance to it, or hinderance from it. And as the creatures living in the
several Elements, are commonly of the temperature of the Element they live in,
as the fishes cold and moist like the water, the worms cold and dry as the
earth, and so the rest: So are we usually like the society which we most
converse in. He that never found it hard, to have a heavenly mind in earthly
company, it is certainly because he never tried.

. 4.
SECT. IIII.
4. A Fourth hinderance to a heavenly conversation is, Too frequent disputes
about lesser truths; and especially when a man's Religion lies only in his
opinions; a sure sign of an unsanctified soul. If sad examples be doctrinal to
you, or the Judgments of God upon us be regarded, I need to say the less upon
this particular. Its legibly written in the faces of thousands; It is visible
in the complexion of our diseased nation; This facies Hypocritica is our facies
Hipocratica: He that has the least skill in Physiognomy, may see that this
complexlon is mortal, and this picture-like, shaddow-like visage affords our
state a sad prognostic. You that have been my companions in Armies and
Garrisons, in Cities and Countries, I know have been my companions in this
observation, That they are usually men least acquainted with a Heavenly life,
who are the violent disputers about the circumstantials of Religion: He whose
Religion is all in his opinions, will be most frequently and zealously speaking
his opinions; And he whose Religion lies in the Knowledge and love of God in
Christ, will be most delightfully speaking of that time when he shall enjoy God
and Christ. As the body does languish in consuming fevers, when the native heat
abates within, and an unnatural heat inflaming the external parts succeeds; so
when the zeal of a Christian does leave the internals of Religion, and fly to
ceremonials, externals or inferior things, the soul must needs consume and
languish. Yea though you were sure your opinions were true, yet when the
chiefest of your zeal is turned thither, and the chiefest of your conference
there laid out, the life of grace decays within, and your hearts are turned
from this heavenly life. Not that I would persuade you to undervalue the least
truth of God, nor that I do acknowledge the hot disputers of the times, to have
discovered the truth above their Brethren; but in case we should grant them to
have hit on the Truth; yet let every Truth in our thoughts and speeches have
their due proportion, and I am confident the hundredth part of our time and our
conference, would not be spent upon the now common Theams* For as there is an
hundred truths of far greater consequence, which do all challenge the
precedencie before these, so many of those Truths alone, are of an hundred
times nearer concernment to our souls, and therefore should have an answerable
proportion in our thoughts. Neither is it any excuse for our casting by these
great fundamental Truths, because they are common and known already: For the
chief improvement is yet behind; It is a good saying of Picus Mirandula
wherewith D. Estius concludes his Oration De Certitudine Salutis: Veritatem
Philosophia querit, Theologia invenit, Religio possidet.

Study to obey, not to dispute: Turn not Conscience into questions and
controversies: lest while thou art resolving what to do, thou do just nothing.
Draw not all to reason, leave something to faith. Where thou can not sound
the bottom, admire the depth: Kiss the book and lay it down, weep over thy own
ignorance, and send one hearty wish to heaven; O when shall I come to know as I
am known? -- The time is at hand when all must be accomplished, and we
accomptable: When arts shall cease, and tongues be abolished, and knowledge
vanish away. Do but think now one thought what will be the Joy of thy heart
when thou can truly say, Lord thou have written to me the great things of thy
Law, and I have not accounted them as strange things, etc. Pemple in preface to
Vindic. Gratiae.


and the soul must be daily refreshed with the Truth of Scripture, and the
goodness of that which it offers and promises, as the body must be with its
daily food; or else the known Truths that lie Idle in your Heads, will no more
nourish, or comfort or save you, then the bread that lies still in your
Cupboards will feed you. Ah he is a rare and precious Christian, who is skilled
in the improving of well known truths. Therefore let me advise you that aspire
after this Joyous Life; spend not too much of your thoughts, your time, your
zeal, or your speeches upon quarrels that less concern your souls; But when
hypocrites are feeding on husks or shells, or on this heated food which will
burn their lips, far sooner then warm and strengthen their hearts; then do you
feed on the Joys above. I could wish you were all understanding men, able to
defend every truth of God; and to this end that you would read and study
controversy more: and your understanding and stability in these days of
trial, is no small part of my comfort and encouragment: But still I would have
the chiefest to be chiefly studied; and none to shoulder out your thoughts of
Eternity: The least controverted points are usually most weighty, and of most
necessary frequent use to our souls.

For you, my neighbors and friends in Christ, I bless God that I have so little
need to urge this hard upon you, or to spend my time and speeches in the
Pulpit, on these quarrels, as I have been necessitated to my discontent for to
do elsewhere: I rejoice in the wisdom and goodness of our Lord, who has saved
me much of this labor. 1. Partly by his tempering of your spirits to sincerity.
2. Partly by the doleful, yet profitable, example of those few that went out
from us, whose former and present condition of spirit, makes them stand as the
pillar of Salt, for a continual terror and warning to you, and so to be as
useful, as they were like to be hurtful. 3. Partly by the confessions and
bewailings of this sin, that you have heard from the mouth of the Yet still I
doubt not but we should be still learning to know more: As Dav. Chytraus said
when he lay on his death bed; Jucundiorem sibi discessum fore, si moribundus
etiam aliquid didicisset.
Dying, advising you to beware of changing your fruitful society, for the
company of deceivers. I do unfeignedly rejoice in these providence, and bless
the Lord who thus establishes his Saints. Study well those precepts of the
Spirit, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive, but not to doubtful
disputations. 2 Timothy 2.23. But foolish and unlearned questions, avoid, knowing
that they do gender strifes. And the servant of the Lord must not strive. Tit.
3.9. But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and
strivings about the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness;
he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railing* evil surmisings, perverse disputings of
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness: From such withdraw thy self.

. 5.
SECT. V.
5. AS you value the comforts of a heavenly Life, take heed of a proud and
lofty spirit. There is such an Antipathy between this sin and God, that thou will never get thy heart near him, nor get him near thy heart, as long as this
prevails in it. If it cast the Angels from heaven that were in it, it must
needs keep thy heart estranged from it: If it cast our first parents out of
Paradise, and separated between the Lord and us, and brought his curse on all
the creatures here below; it must needs then keep our hearts from Paradise, and
increase the cursed separation from our God. Believe it, hearers, a proud heart
and a Heavenly heart, are exceeding contrary. Intercourse with God will keep
men low and that lowliness will further their intercourse: when a man is used
to be much with God, and taken up in the study of his glorious attributes, he
abhors himself in dust and ashes: and that self-abhorrance is his best
preparative, to obtain admittance to God again. Therefore after a soul-humbling
day, or in times of trouble, when the soul is lowest, it uses to have freest
access to God, and savor most of the life above: He will bring them into the
wilderness, and there he will speak comfortably to them, Hos. 2.14. The delight
of God is in a humble soul even him that is contrite and trembles at his word;
and the delight of a Humble soul is in God: Isa. 57.15. and 66.2. Psalm. 34.18.
and 51.17.
and sure where there is mutual delight, there will be freest admittance, and
heartiest welcome, and most frequent converse. Heaven would not hold God and
the proud Angels together; but a humble soul he makes his dwelling: and surely
if our dwelling be with him, and in him, and his dwelling also be with us and
in us, there must needs be a most near and sweet familiarity* But the soul that
is proud cannot plead this privilege; God is so far from dwelling in it, that
he will not admit it to any near access, but looks upon it afar off. Psalm.
138.6. The proud he resists (and the proud resists him) but to the humble
he gives this and other Graces. 1 Pet. 5.5. A proud mind is a high mind in
conceit, self-esteem, and carnal-aspiring: A heavenly mind is a high mind
indeed, James 4.6.
in Gods esteem, and in higher (yet holy) aspiring, These two sorts of
high-mindedness, are more adverse to one another, then a high mind and a low:
As we see that most wars and bloodshed is between Princes and Princes, and not
between a Prince and a Plowman. A low spirit and a humble, is not so contrary
to a high and heavenly, as is a high and a proud. A grain of Mustard Seed may
come to be a tree; A small Acorn may be a great Oak. The sail of the windmil
that is now down, may presently be the highest of all; A Subject that is low
may be raised high, and he that is high may be yet higher, as long as he stands
in subordination to his Prince, who is the fountain of honor but if he break
out of that subordination, and become a competitor, or will assume and arrogate
honor to himself; he will find this prove the falling way. A man that is
swelled in a Dropsy with wind or water, is as far from a sound well fleshed
constitution, Description of a proud man.
as he that is in a consuming Atrophy. Well then; art thou a man of worth in
thine own eyes? and very tender of thine esteem with others? Art thou one that
much valuest the applause of the people? and feel thy heart tickled with
delight when thou hear of thy great esteem with men? and much dejected when
thou hear that men slight thee? Do thou love those best who most highly
honor thee? and does thy heart bear a grudg at those that thou think do
undervalue thee, and entertain mean thoughts of thee, Nemo pluris aest^mavit
virtutem, quam qui boni viri famam perdidit ne conscientiam perderet: ut Seneca
admodum Theologice.
though they be otherwise men of godliness and honesty? Art thou one that must
needs have thy humors fulfilled? and thy judgment must be a rule to the
Judgments of others? and thy word a law to all about thee? Art thou ready to
quarrel with every man, that lets fall a word in derogation from thy honor? Are
thy passions kindled if thy word or will be crossed? Art thou ready to judge
humility to be sordid baseness? and know not how to stoop and submit? and
wilt not be brought to shame thy self, by humble confession, when thou have
sinned against God, or injured thy brother? Art thou one that honor the
godly that are rich? and think thy self somebody if they value and own thee?
but look strangely at the godly poor, and art almost ashamed to be their
companion? Art thou one that can not serve God in a low place, as well as in
a high? and think thy self the fittest for offices and honors? and love
Gods service when it stands with preferment? Have thou thine eye and thy speech
much on thy own deservings? and are thy boastings restained more by wit then by
humility? Optime Chytraeus: Amplum nomen and claritatem popularem, in his
terris plaerique nescimus, antequam paenitere caepit, contemnere: Vsibus
denique edocti, cum saevum praelustre fulmen ab arce ferit, sero nobis and
Christo vivere optamus.
Do thou delight in opportunities of setting forth thy parts? and love to
have thy name made public to the world? and would fain leave behind thee
some monument of thy worth, that posterity may admire thee when thou art dead
and gone? Have thou witty circumlocutions to commend thy self, while thou
seem to debase thy self, and deny thy worth? Do thou desire to have all
men's eyes upon thee? and to hear men observing thee, say, This is he? Is this
the end of thy studies and learning, of thy labors and duties, of seeking
degrees and titles and places, that thou may be taken for somebody abroad in
the world? Art thou unacquainted with the deceitfulness and wickedness of thy
heart? or know thy self to be vile only by reading and by hearsay, but not
by experience and feeling of thy vileness? Art thou readier to defend thy self
and maintain thine innocence, then to accuse thy self, or confess thy fault?
Can thou hardly hear a close reproof, and do digest plain dealing with
difficulty and distaste? Art thou readier in thy discourse to teach then to
learn? and to dictate to others, then to hearken to their instructions? Art
thou bold and confident of thy own opinions, and little suspicious of the
weakness of thy understanding? but a sleighter of the judgments of all that are
against thee? Is thy spirit more disposed to command and govern, then it is to
obey and be ruled by others? Art thou ready to censure the Doctrine of thy
Teachers, the actions of thy Rulers? and the persons of thy brethren? and to
think, if thou were a Judge, thou would be more just, or if thou were a
Minister thou would be more fruitful in Doctrine, and more faithful in
overseeing? Or if thou had had the managing of other men's business, thou
would have carried it more honestly and wisely? If these Symtomes be
undeniably in thy heart, beyond doubt thou art a proud person. I will not talk
of thy following the fashions, of thy bravery and comportment, thy proud
gestures, and arrogant speeces, thy living at a rate above thy abilities:
Perhaps thy incompetency of estate, or thy competency of wit, may suffice to
restrain these unmanly fooleries; perhaps thou may rather seem sordid to
others, and to live at a rate below thy worth, and yet if thou be guilty of the
former accusations, be it known to thee, thou art a person abominably proud, it
has seized on thy heart, which is the principal Fort; there is too much of
hell abiding in thee, for thee to have any acquaintance at heaven; thy soul is
too like the devil, for thee to have any familiarity with God: A proud man is
all in the flesh, and he that will be heavenly must be much in the Spirit. Is
it likely that the man whom I have here described, has either will or skill to
go out of Himself, and out of the Flesh, as it were, and out of the world, that
so he may have freedom for converse above? A proud man make himself his God,
and admires and sets up himself as his Idol; how then can he have his
affections set on God? As the humble godly man, is the Zealot in forward
worshipping of God, so the Ambitious man is the great zealot in Idolatry; for
what is his Ambition, but a more hearty and earnest desire after his Idol, then
the common and calmer Idolaters do reach? And can this man possibly have his
heart in heaven? Its possible his invention and memory may furnish his tongue
both with humble and heavenly expressions, but in his spirit the^^ is no more
heaven then there is humility.

I entreat you Readers, be very jealous of your souls in this point; There Is
nothing in the world will more estrange you from God. I speak the more of it,
because it is the most common and dangerous sin in Morality, and most promoting
the great sin of Infidelity: you would little think (yea, and the owners do
little think) what humble carriage, what exclaiming against pride, what moanful
self-accusing may stand with this divelish sin of pride: O Christian, if thou
would live continually in the presence of thy Lord, lie in the dust, and he
will thence take thee up; descend first with him into the grave, and thence
thou may ascend with him to glory. Learn of him to be meek and lowly, Matthew.
11.28, 29. Isai. 57.20.
and then thou may taste of this Rest to thy soul. Thy soul else will be as
the troubled Sea, still casting out mire and dirt, which cannot rest: And in
stead of these sweet delights in God, thy pride will fill thee with perpetual
disquietness. Scitum est illud Rabbi Levitae: Maxim humili spiritu esto:
Expectatio ^^im hominis sunt vermes.
It is the humble soul that forgets not God, and God will not forget the
humble, Psalm. 10.12. and 9.12. As he that humbles himself as a little child,
shall hereafter be greatest in the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 18.4. So shall he now
be greatest in the forecastes of the Kingdom: For as whosoever exalts himself
shall be abased; so he that humbles himself shall be (in both these respects)
exalted, Matthew. 23.12. God therefore dwells with him that is humble and
contrite, to revive the Spirit of such with his presence, Isai. 57.15. I
conclude with that counsel of James and Peter, Humble your selves therefore in
the sight of the Lord, and he shall (now in the Spirit) lift you up, Jam. 4 10.
and in due time shall (perfectly) exalt you, Prove. 15.33. and 18.12.
1 Pet. 5.6. And when others are cast down, then shall thou say, There is
lifting up, and he shall save the humble person, Job 22.29.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
6. ANother impediment to this Heavenly Life, is, Wilful laziness, and
slothfulness of Spirit: And I verily think for knowing men, there is nothing
hinders more then this. O, if it were only the exercise of the Body, the
moving of the Lips, the bending of the Knee; then it were an easy work indeed,
and men would as commonly step to Heaven, as they go a few miles to visit a
friend; yea, if it were to spend most of our days in numbering Beads, and
repeating certain words and Prayers, in voluntary humility, and neglecting the
body, after the commandments and doctrines of men, ( Col. 2.21, 22, 23.) yea,
or in the outward part of duties commanded by God, yet it were comparatively
easy: Further, if it were only in the exercise of parts and gifts, though we
made such performance our daily trade, yet it were easy to be heavenly-minded.
But it is a work more difficult then all this: To separate thoughts and
affections from the world; to force them to a work of so high a nature; to draw
forth all our graces in their order, and exercise each on its proper object; to
hold them to this, till they perceive success and till the work does thrive and
prosper in their hands! This, this is the difficult task. Reader, Heaven is
above thee, the way is upwards. Do thou think, who art a feeble, short-winded
sinner, to travel daily this steep ascent, without a great deal of labor and
resolution? Can thou get that earthly heart to Heaven, and bring that
backward mind to God, while thou lie still, and take thine ease? If lying
down at the foot of the Hill, and looking toward the top, and wishing we were
there, would serve the turn, then we should have daily travelers for Heaven.
Matthew. 11.12.
But the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force: There must be violence used to get these first fruits, as well as to get
the full possession. Do thou not feel it so, though I should not tell thee?
Will thy heart get upwards, except thou drive it? Is it not like a dull and
jadish horse, that will go no longer, then he feels the spur? Do thou find
it easy to dwell in the delights above? Its true, the work is exceeding sweet,
and no condition on Earth so desirable; but therefore it is that our hearts
are so backward, especially in the beginning, till we are acquainted with it. O
how many hundred Professors of Religion, who can easily bring their hearts to
ordinary duties, as Reading, Hearing, Praying, Conferring; could never yet in
all their lives, bring them, and keep them to a heavenly contemplation, one
half hour together! Consider here, Reader, as before the Lord, whether this be
not thine own case. Thou have known that Heaven is all thy hopes; thou know
thou must shortly be turned hence, and that nothing below can yield thee rest;
thou know also, that a strange heart, a seldom and careless thinking of
Heaven, can fetch but little comfort thence; and do thou not yet for all
this, let slip thy opportunities, and lie below in dust, or mere duties, when
thou should walk above, and live with God? Do thou not commend the
sweetness of heavenly life, and judge those the excellentest Christians that use
it; and yet did never once try it thy self? But as the sluggard that
stretched himself on his bed, and cried, O that this were working! So do thou
talk, and trifle, and live at thy ease, and say, O that I could get my heart to
Heaven! This is to lie a bed and wish, when thou should be up and doing. How
many a hundred do read Books, and hear Sermons, in expectation to hear of some
easy course, or to meet with a shorter cut to comforts, then ever they are
like to find in the Word! And if they can hear of none from the Preachers of
Truth, they will snatch it with rejoicing from the Teachers of Falsehood; and
presently applaud the excellency of the doctrine, because it has fitted their
lazy temper; and think there is no other doctrine will comfort the soul,
because it will not comfort it with hearing, and looking on. They think their
Venison is best, though accompanied with a lie, because it is the easiest
catched, and next at hand, and they think will procure the chiefest blessing,
(and so it may, if God be as subject to mistake as blind Isaac.) And while
they pretend enmity only to the impossibilities of the Law, they oppose the
easier conditions of the Gospel, and cast off the burden that is light also,
and which all must bear that will find rest to their souls; and in my
judgment, may as fitly be styled enemies to the Gospel Antinomists. Many are
hindered, because they refuse to give themselves to Prayer or Meditation,
except they feel themselves brought to it by devotion; and except it be when
these duties delight them, and go to their hearts; otherwise, all seems to them
unprofitable. But these kind of men are like him, that being vexed with cold,
will not go to the fire, except he were first warm; or like one that is ready
to perish with famine, and will not ask meat, except he were first satisfied.
For why does a man give himself to Prayer or Meditation, but that he might be
warmed with the fire of Divine Love? or, that he may be filled with the gifts
and grace of God! These men are mistaken, in thinking the time lost in Prayer
or Meditation, if they be not presently watered with a shower of devotion: For
I answer them, That if they strive as much as in them lies for this, and do
their duty, and are in war, and in continual sight against their own thoughts,
with displeasure, because they depart not, nor suffer them to be quiet: Such
men for this time, are more accepted, then if the heat of devotion had come to
them suddenly, without any such conflict. The reason is, Because they go to
warfare for God, as it were, at their own cost and charges, and serve him with
greater labor and pains, etc. Gerson, part. 3. fol. 386. De monte
contemplationis, cap. 43. Read this you Libertines, and learn better the way of
Devotion from a Papist.
, as enemies to the Law (from whence they receive their common title.) The Lord
of light, and Spirit of comfort, show these men in time, a surer way for
lasting comfort. The delusions of many of them are strong, and ungrounded
comforts they seem to have store, I can judge it to be of no better a kind,
because it comes not in the Scripture way: They will some of them profess, That
when they meditate and labor for comfort themselves, they either have none, or
at least but humane, and of a lower kind; but all the comforts that they own
and value, are immediately injected without their pains: So do I expect my
comforts to come in, in Heaven, but till then, I am glad if they will come with
labor, and the Spirit will help me to suck them from the breasts of the promise,
and to walk for them daily to the face of God. It was an established Law among
the Argi, That if a man were perceived to be idle and lazy, he must give an
account before the Magistrate, how he came by his victuals and maintenance: And
sure, when I see these men lazy in the use of Gods appointed means for comfort,
I cannot but question how they come by their comforts: I would they would
examine it thoroughly themselves; for God will require an account of it from
them. Idleness, and not improving the Truth in painful duty, is the common
cause of men's seeking comfort from Error; even as the people of Israel, when
they had no comfortable answer from God, because of their own sin and neglect,
would run to seek it from the Idols of the Heathens: So when men-were
falshearted to the Truth, and the Spirit of Truth did deny them comfort,
because they denied him sincere obedience; therefore they will seek it from a
lying spirit.

A multitude also of professors there are, that come and enquire for Marks and
signs, How shall I know whether my heart be sincere? and they think the bare
naming of some mark, is enough to discover; but never bestow one hour in trying
themselves by the marks they hear. So here, they ask for directions for a
Heavenly Life* and if the hearing, and knowing of these directions, will serve,
then they will be heavenly Christians; But if we set them to task, and show
them their work, and tell them, they cannot have these delights on easier
terms; then, here they leave us, as the young man left Christ with sorrow
(How our comforts are only in Christ, and yet this labor of ours is necessary
thereto, I have showed you already in the beginning of this book; and therefore
still refer you thither, when any shall put in that objection.) My advice to
such a lazy sinner is this: As thou art convict that this work is necessary to
thy comfortable living, so resolvedly set upon it: If thy heart draw back, and
be undisposed; force it on with the command of Reason; and if thy Reason begin
to dispute the work, force it with producing the command of God; and quicken it
up with the consideration of thy necessity, and the other Motives before
propounded: And let the enforcements that brought thee to the work, be still in
thy mind to quicken thee in it. Do not let such an incomparable treasure lie
before thee, while thou lie still with thy hand in thy bosom: Let not thy
life be a continual vexation, which might be a continual delightful feasting,
and all because thou will not be at the pains. When thou have once tasted of
the sweetness of it, and a little used thy heart to the work, thou will find
the pains thou take which thy backward flesh, abundantly recompensed in the
pleasures of thy spirit. Only ^it not still with a disconsolate spirit, while
comforts grow before thine eyes, like a man in the midst of a Garden of
Flowers, or delightful Meadow, that will not rise to get them that he may
partake of their sweetness. Neither is it a few formal lazy running thoughts,
that will fetch thee this consolation from above: No more then a few lazy
formal words will prevail with God in stead of fervent prayer. I know Christ is
the fountain, and I know this, as every other gift, is of God: But yet if thou
ask my advice, How to obtain these waters of consolation? I must tell thee,
There is something also for thee to do: The Gospel has its conditions, and
work; though not such impossible ones as the Law; Christ has his yoke and his
burden, In omni disciplina infirma est artis praeceptio sine summa assiduitate
exercitation^ Cicer. ad Heren.
though easy, and thou must come to him weary, and take it up, or thou will
never find Rest to thy soul. The well is deep, and thou must get forth this
water, before thou can be refreshed and delighted with it, What answer would
you give a man that stands by a Pump, or draw-Well, and should ask you, How
shall I do to get out the water? Why, you must draw it up, or labor at the
Pump, and that not a motion or two, but you must pump till it comes, and then
hold on till you have enough. Or if a man were lifting at a heavy weight; or
would move a stone to the top of a mountain, and should ask you, How he should
get it up? Why what would you say, but that he must put to his hands, and put
forth his strength? And what else can I say to you, in direct^ing you to this
Art of a Heavenly Life, but this? You must deal roundly with your hearts, and
drive them up; and spur them on; and follow them close till the work be done,
as a man will do a lazy unfaithful servant, who will do nothing longer then
your eye is on him; or as you will your horse or ox at his labor, who will not
stir any longer then he is driven; And if your heart lie down in the midst of
the work; force it up again till the work be done, and let it not prevail by
its lazy pol^^es. I know so far as you are spiritual, you need not all this
striving and violence; but that is but in part, and in part you are carnal; and
as long as it is so, there is no talk of ease. Though your renewed (...) do
delight in this work* yea no delight on earth so great (...) so far as it is
freshly and unrenewed, will draw back and rest, and necessitate your industry.
It was the Parthians custom, the none must give their children any meat in the
morning, before the saw the sweat on their faces, with some labor. And you
shall find this to be Gods most usual course, not to give his children the
tastes of his delights, till they begin to sweat in seeking after them*
Therefore lay them both together, and judge whether a heavenly (...) or thy
carnal ease be better? and as a wise man make thy choice accordingly. Yet this
let me say to encourage thee; Thou need^st not expend thy thoughts more then
thou now do; it is but only to employ them better; I press thee not to busy
thy mind much more then thou do; but to busy it upon better and more
pleasant objects. As Socrat^s said to a lazy fellow that would fain go up to
Olympus, Eras. Apotheg. lib. 3.
but that it was so far off; Why, says he, walk but as far every day, as thou
d^st up and down about thy house, and in so many days thou will be at
Olympus,. So say I to thee, Employ but so many serious thoughts every day, upon
the excellent glory of the life to come, as thou now imployest on thy necessary
affairs in the world; nay, as thou daily losest on vanities and impertinencies,
and thy heart will be at heaven in a very short s^ace.

To conclude this, As I have seldom known Christians perplexed with doubts of
their estate, for want of knowing right evidences to try by, so much as for
want of skill and diligence in using them* so have I seldom known a Christian,
that wants the joys of this heavenly Life, for want of being told the means to
get it, but for want of a heart to set upon the work, and painfully to use the
means they are directed to. It is the field of the slothful that is overgrown
with weeds, Pro. 24.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. And the desires of the slothful kills
his [Joyes] because his hands refuse to labor, Prove. 21.25. whiles he lies
wishing, his soul lies starving. He says, There is a Lion (there is difficulty)
in the way, and turns himself on the bed of his ease as a nor turns on the
hinges; he bideth his hand in his bosom, and it gr^^veth him to bring it to
his (...) (though it be ^o feed himself with the food of life,) Prove. 26^ 13,
14, 15, 16. what is this, b^^ espising the feast prepared? and setting light by
the dear^bough pleasures? and consequently by the precious blood that bough
them? and throwing away our own consolations? For the S^rit has told us, That
he also that is slothful in his work, is bro^^^r to him that is a great waster*
Prove. 18.9. Apply this to the spiritual Work, and study well the meaning of it.

. 7.
SECT. VII.
7. ITs alo a dangerous and secret hinderance, to content our sel^es with the
mere preparatives to this heavenly Life, while we are ^tter strangers to the
life it self: when we take up with the mere studies of heavenly things, and the
notions and thoughts of the^ in our brain, or the talking of them with one
another, as if this were all that makes us heavenly people: There Is none in more
danger of this snare, then those that are much in public duty, especially
Preachers of the Gospel. O how easily may they be deceived here, while they do
nothing more then read of heaven, and study of heaven, and preach of heaven,
and pray, and talk of heaven? what is not this the heavenly Life? O that God
would reveal to our hearts the danger of this snare* Alas, all this is but mere
preparation: This is not the life we speak of, but its indeed a necessary help
thereto. I entreat every one of my Brethren in the Ministry, that they search,
and watch against this Temptation: Alas, this is but gathering the materials,
and not the erecting of the building it self; this is but gathering our Manna
for others, and not eating and digesting our selves; as he that sits at home
may study Geography, and draw most exact descriptions of Countries, and yet
never see them, nor travel toward them: so may you describe to others the joys
of heaven, and yet never come near it in your own hearts; as a man may tell
others of the sweetness of meat which he never tasted, or as a blind man by
learning may dispute of light and of colors* so may you study and preach most
heavenly matter, which y^^ never sweetened your own spirits, and set forth to
others that heavenly Light, wherewith your own souls were never illightened,
and bring that fire for the hearts of your people, that never once warmed your
own hearts: If you should study of nothing but heaven while you lived, and
preach of nothing but heaven to your people, yet might your own hearts be
strangers to it; What heavenly passages had Balaam in his Prophesies?
Verissimum istud Senecae Apothegma: Nullos pejus mercri de omnibus mortalibus
judico, quam qui aliter vivunt, quaem vivendum praecipiuut.
yet little of it (its like) in his spirit; Nay, we are under a more subtle
temptation then any other men, to draw us from this heavenly life; If our
employments did lie at a greater distant from heaven, and did take up our
thoughts upon worldly things, we should not be so apt to be so contented and
deluded; but when we find our selves employed upon nothing else, we are easier
drawn to take up here: Studying and preaching of heaven is likes to an heavenly
Life, then thinking and talking of the world is, and the likeness is it that is
like to deceive us: This is to dye the most miserable death, even to famish our
selves, because we have bread on our tables, which is worse then to famish when
we cannot get it, and to die for thirst while we draw water for others;
thinking it enough that we have daily to do with it, though we never drink it
to our souls refreshing. All that I will say to you more of this, shall be in
the words of my godly and ^udicious friend Who died, as I understand, since
about the hour that I was preaching these words, or very near.
Mr. George A^^ot, which I will transcribe, lest you have not the Book at hand
in his Vindiciae Sabathi, page 147, 148, 149.

And here let me in a holy Jealous^e annex an Exhortation to some of the
Ministers of this Land (for blessed be God it needs not to all) that they would
carefully provide, and look that they do not build the Tabernacle on the Lords
Day; I mean, that they rest not in the Opus operatum of their holy employments,
and busying themselves about the carnal part of holy things, in putting off
the studying of their Sermons, or getting them by heart, (except it be to work
them upon the heart, and not barely commit them to memory) till that day, and
so though they take care to build the Tabernacle of Gods Church, yet they in
the mean time neglect the Temple of their own hearts in serving God in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter or outward performance only: But it were well if
they would gather and prepare their Manna, sees it, and bake it the day
before, that when the Sabbath came they might have nothing to do, but to chew
and concoct it into their own spirits, and so spiritually in the experience of
their own hearts (not heads) dish it out to their hearers, which would be a
happy means to make them see better fruit of their labors: for commonly that
which is not ^o^ally delivered, is notionally received, and that which is
spiritually and powerfully delivered in the evidence of the Spirit, is
spiritually and savingly received, for spirit begets spirit, as fire begets
fire, etc. It is an easy thing to take great pains in the outward part, or
performance of holy things, which often proves a snare, causing the neglect of
the spirit of the inner man; for many are great laborers in the Work of the
Lord, that are starvelings in the Spirit of the Lord, satisfying themselves in
a Popish peace of conscience in the deed doing, in stead of Joy in the Holy
Ghost, bringing indeed meat to their Guests, but through haste or laziness
eating none themselves, or like Tailors, make clothes for other men to wear;
so they, never assaying their own points how they (...) may suit with their own
spirits; but think it is their duty to ^each, and other men's duty to do. So far
the Author.

CHAP. V. Some general helps to a Heavenly Life.
. 1.
SECT. I.
HAving thus showed thee the blocks in thy way* and told thee what hindrances
will resist thee in the Work: I shall now lay thee down some positive helps,
and conclude with a Directory to the (...) in duty it self. But first, I expect
that thou resolve against the forementioned impediments, that thou read them
seriously, and avoid them faithfully* or else thy labor will be all in vain;
thou do but go about to reconcile Light and Darkness* Christ and Belial, and
to conjoyn Heaven and Hell in thy spirit; thou may sooner bring down Heaven to
earth, then do this. I must tell thee also that I here expect thy promise,
faithfully to set upon the helps which I shall prescribe thee, and that the
Reading of them will not bring heaven into thy heart, but in their constant
practice the Spirit will do it; It were better for thee I had never written
them, and thou had never seen this Book, nor read them, if thou do not buckle
thy self to the duty.

As thou valuest then the delights of these foretastes of Heaven, make
conscience of performing these following duties.

SECT. II.. 2.

1. KNow Heaven to be the only Treasure, and labor to know also what a
Treasure it is; be convinced once that thou have no other happiness, and then
he convinced what happiness is there; If thou do not soundly believe it to be
the chiefest good, thou will never set thy heart upon it; and this conviction
must sink into thy affections* for if it be only a notion, it will have
little operation: And sure we have reason enough to be easily convinced of
thi^^s, as you may see in what has been spoken already. Read over the
Description and Nature of this Rest, in the beginning of this Book, and the
Reasons against thy Resting below, in Chapter First, and conclude, That this is
the only Happiness: As long as your judgments do undervalue it, your
affections must needs be cold toward it. If your judgments do mistake
Blear-eyed Leah, for Beautiful Rachel, so will your affections also mistake
them: If Evah do once suppose she sees more worth in the forbidden fruit, then
in the love and fruition of God, no wonder if it have more of her heart then
God; If your judgments once prefer the delights of the Flesh, before the
delights in the Presence of God, its impossible then your hearts should be in
heaven; as it is the ignorance of the emptiness of things below, that makes men
so overvalue them, so it is ignorance of the high delights above, which is the
cause that men so little mind them: If you see a purse of gold, and believe it
to be but Stones or Counters, it will not entice your affections to it; it is
not a things excellency in it self, but its an excellency known, that provokes
desire; If an ignorant man see a Book containing the secrets of Arts or
Sciences, yet he values it no more then a common piece, because he knows not
what is in it, but he that knows it, does highly value it, his very mind is
set upon it, he can pore upon it day and night, he can forbear his meat, and
drink, and sleep to read it: As the Jews enquired after Elias, Matthew. 17.11.12.
when Christ tells them, that verily Elias is already come, and ye knew him
not, but did unto him whatsoever ye listed; so men enquire after Happiness and
Delight, when it is offered to them in the promise of Rest, and they know it
not, but trample it under foot; and as the Jews killed the Messiah, while they
waited for the Messiah, and that because they did not know him ( For had they
known him they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, Joh. 1.10.
Acts 13.27. 1 Cor. 2.8.) So does the world cry out for Rest, and busily seek
for Delight and Happiness, even while they are neglecting and destroying their
Rest and Happiness, and this because they thoroughly know it not; for did they
know thoroughly what it is, they could not so slight the everlasting Treasure.

. 2.
SECT. II.
2. LAbor as to know Heaven to be the only happiness, so also to be thy
happiness. Though the knowledge of excellency and suitableness may stir up that
love, which works by desire; yet there must be the knowledge of our interest
or propriety, to the setting awork of our love of complacency. We may confess
Heaven to be the best condition, though we despair of enjoying it; and we may
desire, and seek it, if we see the obtainment to be but probable and hopeful:
But we can never delightfully rejoice in it, till we are somewhat persuaded of
our title to it. What comfort is it to a man that is naked, to see the rich
attire of others? or to a man that has not a bit to put in his mouth, to see a
feast which he must not taste of? What delight has a man that has not a house
to put his head in, to see the sumptuous buildings of others? Would not all
this rather increase his anguish, and make him more sensible of his own misery?
So for a man to know the excellencies of Heaven, and not to know whether he
shall ever enjoy them, may well raise desire, and provoke to seek it, but it
will raise but little joy and content. Who will set his heart on another man's
possessions? If your houses, your goods, your cattle, your children, were not
your own, you would less mind them, and delight less in them. O therefore
Christians, rest not till you can call this Rest your own; sit not down without
assurance; get alone, and question with thy self; bring thy heart to the bar of
trial; force it to answer the interrogatories put to it; set the conditions of
the Gospel, and qualifications of the Saints on one side, and thy performance
of those conditions, and the qualifications of thy soul on the other side; and
then judge how near they resemble: Thou have the same word before thee, to judge
thy self by now, by which thou must be judged at the great day: Thou art there
before told the questions that must then be put to thee* put these questions
now to thy self: Thou may there read the very Articles, upon which thou shall
be tried; why try thy self by those Articles now. Thou may there know
beforehand, on what terms men shall be then acquit and condemned; why try now
whether thou art possessed of that which will acquit thee, or whether thou be
upon the same terms with those that must be condemned; and accordingly acquit
or condemn thy self: Yet be sure thou judge by a true touchstone, and mistake
not the Scriptures description of a Saint, that thou neither acquit nor condemn
thy self upon mistakes. For as groundless hopes do tend to confusion, and are
the greatest cause of most men's damnation; so groundless doubtings do tend to
discomforts, and are the great cause of the disquieting of the Saints.
Therefore lay thy grounds of trial safely, and advisedly; proceed in the work
deliberately and methodically; follow it to an issue resolutely and
industriously; suffer not thy heart to give thee the ^lip, and get away before
a judgment, but make it stay to hear its sentence: If once or twice, or thrice,
will not do it, nor a few days of hearing bring it to issue, follow it on with
unwearied diligence, and give not over till the work be done, and till thou
can (...) knowingly off or on; either thou art, or art not, a member of
Christ; either that thou have, or that thou have not yet title to this Rest. Be
sure thou rest not in wilful uncertainties. If thou can no^ dispatch the work
well thy self, get the help of those that are skilful; go to thy Minister, if
he be a man of experience; or go to some able experienced friend, open thy case
faithfully, and wish them to deal plainly: And thus continue till thou have got
assurance. Not but that some doubtings may still remain; but yet thou may
have so much assurance as to master them, that they may not much interrupt thy
peace. If men did know Heaven to be their own inheritance, we should less need
to persuade their thoughts unto it, or to press them to set their delight in
it. O if men did truly know, that God is their own Father, and Christ their own
Redeemer and Head, and that those are their own Everlasting habitations, and
that there it is that they must abide and be happy for ever; how could they
choose but be ravished with the forethoughts thereof? If a Christian could but
look upon Sun, and Moon and Stars, and reckon all his own in Christ, and say,
These are the portion that my Husband does bestow, These are the blessings that
my Lord has procured me, and things incomparably greater then these; what holy
raptures would his spirit feel? The more do they sin against their own
comforts, as well as against the Grace of the Gospel, who are wilful
maintainers of their own doubtings, and plead for their unbelief, and cherish
distrustful thoughts of God, and scandalous injurious thoughts of their
Redeemer who represent the Covenant, as if it were of works and not of grace,
and represent Christ as an enemy, rather then as a Savior; as if he were glad
of advantages against them, and were willing that they should keep off from him
and dye in their unbelief; when he has called them so often, and invited them so
kindly, and born the hell that they should bear. Ah wretches that we are! that
be keeping up Jealousies of the Love of our Lord, when we should be rejoicing
and bathing our souls in his love! That can question that love, which has been
so fully evidenced! and doubt still, whether he that has stooped so low, and
suffered so much, and taken up a nature and office of purpose, be yet willing
to be theirs who are willing to be his! As if any man could chose Christ,
before Christ has chosen him! or any man could desire to have Christ, more
then Christ desires to have him! or any man were more willing to be happy, then
Christ is to make him happy! Fie upon these injurious (if not blasphemous)
thoughts! If ever thou have harbored such thoughts in thy breast; or if ever
thou have uttered such words with thy tongue, spit out that venom, vomit out
that rancor, cast them from thee, and take heed how thou ever entertainest them
more. God has written the names of his people in heaven, as you use to write
your names in your own books, or upon your own Goods, or set your Marks on your
own sheep: And shall we be attempting to raze them out, and to write our names
on the doors of hell? But blessed be our God, 2 Timothy 2.19.
whose foundation is sure, and who keeps us by his mighty power through Faith
unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Well then; this is my second advice to thee, that
thou follow on the work of self-examination, till thou have got assurance that
this rest is thy own; and this will draw thy heart unto it; and feed thy
spirits with fresh delights, which else will be but tormented so much the more,
to think that there is such Rest for others, but none for thee.

SECT. III.. 3.

3. ANother help to sweeten thy soul with the foretasts of Rest, is this; Labor
to apprehend how near it is, Think seriously of its speedy approach That which
we think is near at hand, we are more sensible of, then that which we behold at
a distance. When we hear of war or famine in another country, it troubles not
so much: or if we hear it prophesied of a long time hence, so if we hear of
plenty a great way off, or of a golden age that shall fall out, who knows when;
this never rejoices us. But if Judgments or Mercies begin to draw near, then
they affect us, If we were sure we should see the golden Age, then it would
take with us. When the plague is in a Town but twenty miles off, we do not fear
it; nor much prehaps, if it be but in another street: but if once it come to
the next door, or if it seize on one in our own family; then we begin to think
on it more feelingly; It is so with mercies as well as Judgments. When they
are far off, we talk of them as marvells; but when they draw close to us, we
rejoice in them as Truths. This makes men think on Heaven so insensibly,
because they conceit it at too great a distance: They look on it as twenty, or
thirty, or forty years off; and this is it that duls their sense. As wicked
men are fearless and senseless of judgment, because the sentence is not
speedily executed, Eccles. 8.11. So are the godly deceived of their comforts,
by supposing them further off then they are. This is the danger of putting the
day of death far from us; When men will promise themselves longer time in the
world, then God has promised them; and judge of the length of their lives by
the probabilities they gather from their Age, Luke 12.17, 18, 19, 20.
their health, their constitution and temperature; this makes them look at
heaven as a great way off. If (...) the rich fool in the Gospel had not
expected to have lived many years, he would sure have thought more of providing
for Eternity, and less of his present store and possessions; And if we did not
think of staying many years from Heaven, we should think on it with far more
piercing thoughts. This expectation of long life, does both the wicked and the
godly a great deal of wrong. How much better were it to receive the sentence of
death in our selves, and to look on Eternity as near at hand? 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10.
Surely, Reader, thou stand at the door, and hundreds of diseases are ready
waiting, to open the door and let thee in. Is not the thirty, or forty years
of thy life that is past quickly gone? Is it not a very little time when thou
look back on it? And will not all the rest be shortly so too? Do not days
and nights come very thick? Do thou not feel that building of flesh to shake?
and perceive thy house of clay to totter? Look on thy glass, and see how it
runs: Look on thy watch, how fast it gets? what a short moment is between us
and our Rest? what a step is it from hence to Everlastingness? While I am
thinking, and writing of it, it hastes near; and I am even entering into it
before I am aware. While thou art reading this, it p^steth on and thy life will
be gone as a tale that is told. May thou not easily foresee thy dying time?
and look upon thy self as ready to depart? Its but a few days till thy friends
shall lay thee in the grave, and others do the like for them. If you verily
believed you should dye to morrow, how seriously would you think of Heaven to
night? The condemned prisoner knew before that he (...) dye, and yet he was
then as Jovial as any: but when he hears the sentence, and knows he has not a
week to live, then how it sinkes his heart within him? So that the true
apprehensions of the neerness of Eternity does make men's thoughts of it to be
quick and piercing; and put life into their fears and sorrows, if they are
unfitted, and into their desires and Joys if they have assurance of its glory.
When the Witches Samuel had told Saul, By to morrow this time thou shall be
with me; this quickly worked to his very heart, and laid him down as dead on
the earth. And if Christ should say to a believing soul, 1 Samuel 28.19.
By to morrow this time thou shall be with me, this would be a working word
indeed, and would bring him in spirit to Heaven before. As Melanchton was wont
to say of his uncertain station, because of the persecution of his enemies, Ego
jam sum hic, Dei beneficio, 40. annos et nunquam potui dicere aut certus esse,
me per unam septimanam mansurum esse. i. e. I have now been here this forty
years, and yet could never say, or be sure, that I shall tarry here for one
week: so may we all say of our abode on earth: As long as thou have continued
out of heaven, thou can not say, thou shall be out of it one week longer. Do
but suppose that you are still entering in it, and you shall find it will much
help you more seriously to mind it.

SECT. IV.
4. ANother help to this Heavenly Life, is, To be much in serious discoursing
of it, especially with those that can speak from their hearts, and are seasoned
themselves with an heavenly nature. Its pity, (says Mr. Bolton) that
Christians should ever meet together, without some talk of their meeting in
Heaven, or the way to it before they part: Its pity so much precious time is
spent among Christians, in vain discourses, foolish janglings, and useless
disputes, and not a sober word of Heaven among them; Methinks we should meet
together of purpose, to warm our spirits with discoursing of our Rest. To hear
a Minister or private Christian set forth that blessed Glorious State, with
power and life from the Promises of the Gospel; Methinks should make us say, as
the two Disciples, Luke 24.32.
Did not our hearts burn within us, while he was opening to us the Scripture?
while he was opening to us the windows of Heaven? Actcts 24.25.
If a Felix, or wicked wretch will tremble, when he hears his judgment
powerfully denounced, why should not the believing soul be revived, when he
hears his Eternal Rest revealed? Get then together, fellow Christians, and talk
of the affairs of your Country and Kingdom, and comfort one another with such
words, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. If Worldlings get together, they will be talking of the
World; when Wantons are together, they will be talking of their Lusts, and
wicked men can be delighted in talking of wickedness; and should not Christians
then delight themselves in talking of Christ? and the heirs of heaven in
talking of their Inheritance? This may make our hearts revive within us, as it
did Jacobs to hear the Message that called him to Goshen, and to see the
Chariots that should bring him to Joseph O that we were furnished with skill and
resolution, to turn the stream of men's common discourse, to these more sublime
and precious things! And when men begin to talk of things unprofitable, that we
could tell how to put in a word for heaven, Acts 10.
and say (as Peter of his bodily food) Not so, for I eat not that which is
common and unclean; this is nothing to my eternal Rest: O the good that we
might both do, and receive by this course! If it had not been needful to deter
us from unfruitful conference, Christ would not have talked of giving an
account of every idle word at judgment; Matthew. 12.36.
say then as David, when you are in conference, Psalm. 137.5, 6.
Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth if I prefer not Jerusalem above
my chiefest mirth, And then you shall find the truth of that, Prove. 15.4.
Prove. 15.4. A wholesome tongue is a Tree of Life.

. 5.
SECT. V.
5. ANother help to this Heavenly Life, is this. Make it thy business in every
duty, to wind up thy affections nearer Heaven. A man's seize and
receivings from God, are answerable to his own desires and ends; that which he
sincerely seeks, he finds; Gods end in the institution of his Ordinances, was,
that they be as so many stepping stones to our Rest, and as the stairs by
which (in subordination to Christ) we may daily ascend unto it in our
affections: Let this be thy end in using them, as it was Gods end in ordaining
them, and doubtless they will not be unsuccessful; though men be personally far
asunder, yet they may even by Letters have a great deal of intercourse. How
have men been rejoiced by a few lines from a friend, though they could not see
him face to face? what gladness have we when we do but read the expressions of
his Love? or if we read of our friends prosperity and welfare? Many a one that
never saw the fight, has triumphed and shouted, made Bonefires, and rung Bells,
when he has but heard and read of the Victory; and may not we have intercourse
with God in his Ordinances, though our persons be yet so far remote? May not
our spirits rejoice in the reading those lines, which contain our Legacy and
Charter for heaven? with what Gladness may we read the expressions of Love? and
hear of the state of our Celestial Country? with what triumphant shoutings may
we applaud our Inheritance, though yet we have not the happiness to behold it?
Men that are separated by sea and land, can yet by the mere intercourse of
Letters, carry on both great and gainful trades, even to the value of their
whole estate; and may not a Christian in the wise improvement of duties, drive
on this happy trade for Rest? Come not therefore with any lower ends to duties:
Renounce Formality, Customariness, and Applause. When thou kneelest down in
secret or public prayer, let it be in hope to get thy heart nearer God before
thou risest off thy knees; when thou openest thy Bible or other Books, let it
be with this hope, to meet with some passage of Divine truth, and some such
blessing of the Spirit with it, as may raise thine affections nearer Heaven,
and give thee a fuller taste thereof: when thou art setting thy foot out at thy
door, to go to the public Ordinance and Worship, say, I hope to meet with
somewhat from God, that may raise my affections before I return; I hope the
Spirit will give me the meeting, and sweeten my heart with those celestial
delights, I hope that Christ will appear to me in that way, and shine about me
with light from heaven, and let me hear his instructing and reviving voice, and
causa the scales to fall from mine eyes, that I may see more of that glory*
then I ever yet saw; I hope before I return to my house, my Lord will take my
heart in hand, and bring it within the view of Rest, and set it before his
Fathers presence, that I may return as the Shepherds, from the heavenly Vision,
glorifying and praising God, for all the things that I have heard and seen,
Luke 2.20. and say, as those that behold his Miracles, We have seen strange
things to day: Luke 5.26. Remember also to pray for thy Teacher, that God would
put some Divine Message into his mouth, which may leave a heavenly relish on
thy spirit.

If these were our ends, and this our course when we set to duty, we should not
be so strange as we are to heaven.

When the Indian first saw the use of Letters by our English, they thought
there was sure some spirit in them, that men could so converse together by a
paper; If Christians would take this course in their duties, they might come to
such holy fellowship with God, and see so much of the Mysteries of the Kingdom,
that it would make the standers by, admire what is in those Lines, what is in
that Sermon? what is in this praying? that fills his heart so full of joy* and
that so transports him above himself, Certainly God would not fail us in our
duties, if we did not fail our selves, and then experience would make them
sweeter to us.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
6. ANother help is this, Make an advantage of every object thou see, and of
every passage of Divine providence, and of every thing that befalls in thy labor
and calling, to mind thy soul of its approaching Rest. As all providence and
creatures are means to our Rest, so do they point us to that as their end.
Every creature has the name of God and of our final Rest written upon it;
which a considerate believer may as truly discern, as he can read upon a post
or hand in a cross way, the name of the Town or City which it points to. This
spiritual use of creatures and providence, is Gods great End in bestowing them
on man; And he that overlooks this End, must needs rob God of his chiefest
praise, and deny him the greatest part of his thanks. The Relation that our
present mercies have to our great Eternal mercies, is the very quintessence and
spirits of all these mercies. Therefore do they loose the very spirits of their
mercies, and take nothing but the husks and bran, who do overlook this
Relation, and draw not forth the sweetness of it in their contemplations. Gods
sweetest dealings with us at the present, would not be half so sweet as they
are, if they did not intimate some further sweetness. As our selves have a
fleshly and a spiritual substance, so have our mercies a fleshly and spiritual
use, and are fitted to the nourishing of both our parts. He that receives the
carnal part and no more, may have his body comforted by them, but not his soul.
It is not all one to receive six pence merely as six pence, and to receive it
in earnest of a thousand pound; though the sum be the same, yet I trow the
relation makes a wide difference. Thou take but the bear earnest, and
overlookest the maine sum, when thou receivest thy mercies, and forgettest thy
crown. O therefore that Christians were skilled in this Art! You can open your
Bibles, and read there of God and of Glory: O learn to open the creatures, and
to open the several passages of providence, and to read of God and Glory there.
Certainly by such a skilful industrious improvement, we might have a fuller
taste of Christ and Heaven, in every bit of bread that we eat, and in every
draught of Beer that we drink, then most men have in the use of the Sacrament.
If thou prosper in the world, and thy labor succeed, let it make thee more
sensible of thy perpetual prosperity: If thou be weary of thy labors, let it
make thy thoughts of Rest more sweet: If things go cross and hard with thee in
the world, let it make thee the more earnestly desire that day, when all thy
sorrows and sufferings shall cease: Is thy body refreshed with food or sleep?
Remember thy unconceivable refreshings with Christ. Do thou hear any news
that makes the glad? Remember what glad tidings it will be, to hear the sound
of the trump of God, and the absolving sentence of Christ our Judge. Art thou
delighting thy self in the society of the Saints? Remember the Everlasting
amiable fraternity, thou shall have with perfected Saints in Rest. Is God
communicating himself to thy spirit? Why remember that time of thy highest
advancement, when thy Joy shall be full, as thy communion is full. Do thou
hear the raging noise of the wicked? and the disorders of the vulgar? and the
confusions in the world? like the noise in a crowd, or the roaring of the
waters? Why think of the blessed agreement in Heaven, and the melodious harmony
in that Quire of God. Do thou hear or feel the tempest of wars? or see any
cloud of blood arising? Remember the day when thou shall be housed with Christ,
where there is nothing but calmness and amiable union, and where we shall
solace our selves in perfect Peace, under the wings of the Prince of Peace for
ever. Thus you may see, what advantages to a Heavenly Life, every condition and
creature does afford us, if we had but hearts to apprehend and improve them: As
its said of the Turks, that they will make bridges of the dead bodies of their
men, to pass over the trenches or ditches in their way: So might Christians of
the very ruins and calamities of the times, and of every dead body or misery
that they see, make a bridge for the passage of their thoughts to their Rest.
And as they have taught their Pigeons which they call carriers in diverse
places, to bear letters of intercourse from friend to friend, at a very great
distance: so might a wise industrious Christian get his thoughts carried into
Heaven, and receive, as it were, returns from thence again, by creatures of
slower wing then Doves, by the assistance of the Spirit the Dove of God. This
is the right Daedalian flight: and thus we may take from each bird a feather,
and make us wings, and fly to Christ.

. 7.
SECT. VII.
7. ANother singular help is this, Be much in that Angelical work of Praise. As
the most heavenly Spirits will have the most heavenly employment, so the more
heavenly the employment, the more will it make the Spirit heavenly: Though the
heart be the Fountain of all our actions, and the actions will be usually of
the quality of the heart; yet do those actions by a kind of reflection, work
much on the heart from whence they spring: The like also may be said of our
speeches. So that the work of praising God, being the most heavenly work, is
likely to raise us to the most heavenly temper. This is the work of those
Saints and Angels, and this will be our own everlasting work; if we were more
taken up in this employment now, we should be liker to what we shall be then.
When Aristotle was asked what he thought of Music? he answers, Jovem neque
canere, neque citharam pulsare, That Jupiter did neither sing, nor play on the
Harp; thinking it an unprofitable art to men, which was no more delightful to
God. But Christians may better argue from the like ground, that singing of
praise is a most profitable duty, because it is so delightful, as it were, to
God himself, that he has made it his peoples Eternal work; for they shall sing
the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb. As Desire, and Faith, and Hope,
are of shorter continuance, then Love and Joy; so also Preaching, and Prayer,
and Sacraments, and all means for confirmation, and expression of Faith and
Hope, shall cease, when our Thanks and Praise, and triumphant expressions of
Love and Joy shall abide for ever. The liveliest emblem of Heaven that I know
upon Earth, is, When the people of God in the deep sense of his excellency and
bounty, from hearts abounding with Love and Joy, do join together both in heart
and voice, in the cheerful and melodious singing of his praises. Those that
deny the lawful use of singing the Scripture Psalms in our times, do disclose
their unheavenly unexperienced hearts, I think, as well as their ignorant
understandings. Had they felt the heavenly delights, that many of their
Brethren in such duties have felt, I think they would have been of another
mind: And whereas they are wont to question, whether such delights be genuine,
or any better then carnal or delusive? Surely, the very relish of Christ and
Heaven that is in them, the example of the Saints in Scripture, whose spirits
have been raised by the same duty, and the command of Scripture for the use of
this means, one would think should quickly decide the controversy. And a man
may as truly say of these delights, as they use to say of the testimony of the
Spirit, That they witness-themselves to be of God, and bring the evidence of
their heavenly parentage along with them. And whereas they allow only
extemporate Psalms, immediately dictated to them by the Spirit: When I am
convinced, that the gift of extemporate singing, is so common to the Church,
that any man who is spiritually merry can use it, Jam. 5.13. And when I am
convinced, that the use of Scripture Psalms, is abolished, or prohibited, then
I shall more regard their judgment. Certainly, as large as mine acquaintance
has been with men of this Spirit, I never yet heard any one of them sing a
Psalm ex tempore, that was better then David's; yea, or that was tolerable to a
judicious hearer, and not rather a shame to himself and his opinion. But sweet
experience will be a powerful Argument, and will teach the sincere Christian to
hold fast his exercise of this soul-raising duty.

Little do we know how we wrong our selves, by shutting out of our prayers the
praises of God, or allowing them so narrow a room as we usually do, while we
are copious enough in our Confessions and Petitions. Reader, I entreat thee
remember this: Let praises have a larger room in thy duties: Keep ready at hand
matter to feed thy praise, as well as matter for Confession and Petition. To
this end, study the excellencies and goodness of the Lord, as frequently as thy
own necessities and vileness; study the mercies which thou have received, and
which are promised, both their own proper worth, and their aggravating
circumstances, as often as thou studiest the sins thou have committed. O let
Gods praise be much in your mouths, Psalm. 34.1. and 35.28.
for in the mouths of the upright his praise is comely, Psalm. 33.1. Seven times
a day did David praise him. Psalm. 119.164. Yea, his praise was continually of
him, Psalm. 71.6. As he that offers praise, glorifieth God, Psalm. 50.23. So
does he most rejoice and glad his own soul. Psalm. 98.4. Offer therefore the
sacrifice of praise continually. and 22.25.
Heb. 13.15. In the midst of the Church, let us sing his praise. Heb. 2.12.
Praise our God, for he is good, sing praises unto his Name, for it is pleasant.
Psalm. 135.3. and 147.1. Yea, let us rejoice and triumph in his praise, Psalm.
106.47.

Do you think that David had not a most heavenly Spirit, who was so much
employed in this heavenly work? Does it not sometime, very much raise your
hearts, when you do but seriously read that divine Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. And
those heavenly iterated praises of David, having almost nothing sometime, but
praise in his mouth? How much more would it raise and refresh us, to be skilled
and accustomed in the work our selves? I confess, to a man of a languishing
body, where the heart does faint, and the spirits are feeble, the cheerful
praising of God is more difficult, because the body is the souls instrument;
and when it lies unstringed, or untuned, the music is likely to be accordingly
but dull. Yet a spiritual cheerfulness there may be within, and the heart may
praise, if not the voice. But where the body is strong, the spirits lively, the
heart cheerful, and the voice at command, what advantage have such for this
heavenly work? with what alacrity and vivacity may they sing forth praises? O
the madness of healthful youth that lay out this vigor of body and mind, upon
vain delights and fleshly lusts, which is so fit for the noblest work of man!
And O the sinful folly of many of the Saints, who drench their spirits in
continual sadness, and wast their days in complaints and groans, and fill their
bodies with wasting diseases, and so make themselves both in body and mind,
unfit for this sweet and heavenly work! That when they should join with the
people of God in his praises, and delight their souls in singing to his Name;
they are questioning their worthiness, and studying their miseries, or raising
scruples about the lawfulness of the duty, and so rob God of his praise, and
themselves of their solace. But the greatest destroyer of our comfort in this
duty, is our sticking in the carnal delight thereof, and taking up in the tune
and melody, and suffering the heart to be all the while idle, which must
perform the chiefest part of the work, and which should make use of the melody,
for its reviving and exhilerating.

SECT. VIII.. 8.

8. IF thou would have thy heart in Heaven, keep thy soul still possessed
with true believing thoughts of the exceeding, infinite love of God. Love is
the attractive of love. No man's heart will be set upon him that hates him, were
he never so excellent; nor much upon him, that does not much love him. There is
few so vile, but will love those that love them, be they never so mean. No
doubt it is the death of our heavenly life, to have hard and doubtful thoughts
of God; to conceive of him as a hater of the Creature (except only of
obstinate Rebels,) and as one that had rather damn us, then save us, and that
is glad of an opportunity to do us a mischief, or at least has no great good
will to us* This is to put the Blessed God into the similitude of Satan. And
who then can set his heart and love upon him? When in our vile unbelief and
ignorance, we have drawn the most ugly picture of God in our imaginations, then
we complain, that we cannot love him, and delight in him. This is the case of
many thousand Christians. Alas, that we should thus belie and blaspheme God,
and blast our own joys, and depress our spirits! Love is the very essence of
God. 1 John 4.16. Isai. 27.4. Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.
The Scripture tells us, That God is Love; it tells us, That Fury dwells
not in him; that he delights not in the death of him that dies, but rather,
that he repent and live. Much more has he testified his love to his chosen;
and his full resolution effectually to save them. O, if we could always think
of God, but as we do of a friend; as of one that does unfeignedly love us, even
more then we do our selves; whose very heart is set upon us to do us good, and
has therefore provided us an everlasting dwelling with himself, it would not
then be so hard to have our hearts still with him! Where we love most heartily,
we shall think most sweetly, and most freely: And nothing will quicken our love
more then the belief of his love to us. Get therefore a truer conceit of the
loving Nature of God, and lay up all the experiences, and discoveries of his
love to thee; and then see if it will not further thy heavenly-mindedness.

. 9.
SECT. IX.
9. ANother thing I would advise you to, is this, Be a careful observer of the
drawings of the Spirit, and fearful of quenching its motions, or resisting its
workings; If ever thy soul get above this earth, and get acquainted with this
living in heaven, the Spirit of God must be to thee as the Chariot to Elijah;
yea, the very living principle by which thou must move and ascend. O then
grieve not thy Guide, Ephesians. 4.30. 1 These. 5.19.
quench not thy Life, knock not off thy Chariot-wheels; if thou do, no wonder
if thy soul be at a loss, and all stand still, or fall to the earth; you little
think how much the life all your Graces, and the happiness of your souls does
depend upon your ready and cordial Obedience to the Spirit; I speak not of any
drawing of Spirit above, or contrary to the Word, but its enforcing the
precepts and prohibitions of the Word upon our hearts. And that not persuading
the will, I think, immediately by himself, but exciting and so using our Reason
and Conscience, as his Instruments to persuade the Will, and affect the Heart.
When the Spirit urges thee to secret prayer, and thou refusest obedience;
when he forbids thee thy known transgressions, and yet thou will go on; when he
tells thee, which is the way, and which not, and thou will not regard, no
wonder if heaven and thy soul be strange: if thou will not follow the Spirit
while it would draw thee to Christ, and to thy duty, how should it lead thee to
heaven, and bring thy heart into the presence of God? O what supernatural help!
what bold access shall that soul find in its approaches to the Almighty, that
is accustomed to a constant obeying of the Spirit! And how backward, how dull,
and strange, and ashamed, will he be to these addresses, who has long used to
break away from the Spirit that would have guided him: Even as stiff, and
unfit, will they be for this Spiritual motion, as a dead man to natural. I
beseech thee, Christian Reader, learn well this lesson, and try this course;
let not the motions of thy body only, but also the very thoughts of thy heart,
be at the Spirits be^k. Do thou not feel sometimes a strong impulsion, to
retire from the world, and draw near to God? O do not now disobey, but take the
offer, and horse up sail while thou may have this blessed gale. When this
wind blows strongest, thou go fastest, either forward or backward. The more
of this Spirit we resist, the deeper will it wound; and the more we obey, the
speedier is our pace: As he goes heaviest that has the wind in his face, and
he easiest that has it in his back.

SECT. X.. 10.

10. LAstly, I advise as a further help to this heavenly work. That thou
neglect not the due care for the health of thy body, and for the maintaining a
vigorous cheerfulness in thy spirits; nor yet over-pamper and please thy flesh.
Learn how to carry thy self with prudence to thy body. It is a useful servant,
if thou give it its due, and but its due: It is a most devouring tyrant, if
thou give it the mastery, or suffer it to have what it unreasonably desires.
And (...) as a blunted Knife, as a Horse that is lame, as thy Ox that is
famished, if thou injuriously deny it what is necessary to its support. When we
consider how frequently men offend on both extremes, and how few use their
bodies aright, we cannot wonder if they be much hindered in their heavenly
conversing. Most men are very slaves to their sensitive appetite, and can
scarce deny any thing to the flesh, which they can give it on easy rates,
without much shame, or loss, or grief. The flesh thus used, is as unfit to
serve you, as a wild colt to ride on. When such men should converse in Heaven,
the flesh will carry them to an Alehouse, or to their sports, to their profits,
or credit, or vain company; to wanton practices, or sights, or speeches, or
thoughts: It will thrust a whore, or a pair of Cards, or a good bargain into
their minds, in stead of God. Look to this specially, you that are young, and
healthful, and lusty: As you love your souls, remember that in Romans 13.14.
which converted Austin, Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill its
desires; and that Romans 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14. Some few others do much
hinder their heavenly joy, by over rigorous denying the body its necessaries,
and so making it unable to serve them. But the most by forfeiting and excess;
do overthrow and disable it. You love to have your knife keen, and every
instrument you use in order: when your horse goes lustily how cheerfully do you
travel? As much need has the soul of a sound and cheerful body. If they who
abuse their bodies, and neglect their health, did wrong the flesh only, the
matter were small, but they wrong the soul also: As he that spoils the house,
does wrong the inhabitant. When the body is sick, and the spirits do languish,
how heavily move we in these Meditations, and Joys? Yet where God denies this
mercy, we may the better bear it, because he often occasioneth our benefit by the
denial.

CHAP. VI. Containing the Description of the great Duty of Heavenly
Contemplation.
. 1.
SECT. I.
THough I hope what is already spoken be not unuseful, and that it will not by
the Reader be cast aside, yet I must tell you, that the main thing intended is
yet behind, and that which I aimed at when I set upon this Work. I have
observed the Maxim, that my principal end be last in execution, though it was
first in my intention. All that I have said, is but for the preparation to
this: The Doctrinal part is but to instruct you for this; the rest of the Uses
are but introductions to this; The Motives I have laid down, are but to make
you willing for this; The Hindrances I mentioned, were but so many blocks in
the way to this; The general Helps which I last delivered, are but the
necessary Attendants of this: So that, Reader, If thou neglect this that
follows, thou do frustrate the main end of my design, and make me lose (as
to thee) the chief of my labor. I once more entreat thee therefore, as thou art
a man that make conscience of a revealed duty, and that dare not wilfully
resist the Spirit, as thou valuest the high delights of a Saint, and the soul
ravishing exercise of heavenly Contemplation, as all my former moving
Considerations seem reasonable to thee, and as thou art faithful to the peace
and prosperity of thine own soul, that thou diligently study these Directions
following, and that thou speedily and faithfully put them into practice:
Practice is the end of all sound Doctrine, and all right Faith does end in
duty: I pray thee therefore, rosolve before thou read any further, and (...)
here as before the Lord, that if the following Advice be wholesome to thy soul,
thou will conscionably follow it, and seriously set thy self to the Work, and
that no laziness of spirit shall take thee off, nor lesser business interrupt
thy course, but that thou will approve thy self a Doer of this Word, and not an
idle hearer only. Is this thy promise? and will thou stand to it? Resolve man,
and then I shall be encouraged to give thee my Advice; if I spread not before
thee a delicious feast, if I set thee not upon as gainful a trade, and put not
into thy hand as delightful an employment as ever thou dealt'st with in all thy
life, then cast it away, and tell me I have deceived thee, only try it
thoroughly and then judge; I say again, if in the faithful following of this
prescribed course, thou do not find an increase of all thy graces, and do
not grow beyond the stature of common Christians, and art not made more
serviceable in thy place, Tamen haec via and scientia non discitur ex libris,
sed de sursum est: and cui vult participat eam pater luminum, his quidem
clarius, his vero obscurius. Gerson part 3. in Alphabet. divini amoris Cap. 14.
and more precious in the eyes of all that are discerning; if thy soul enjoy
not more fellowship with God, and thy life be not fuller of pleasure and
solace, and thou have not comfort readier by thee at a dying hour, when thou
have greatest need, then throw these Directions back in my face, and exclaim
against me as a deceiver for ever. Except God should leave thee uncomfortable
for a little season, for the more glorious manifestation of his Attributes and
thy integrity, and single thee out as he did Job, for an example and mirror of
constancy and patience, which would be but a preparative for thy fuller
comfort. Certainly God will not forsake this his own Ordinance thus
conscionably performed, but will be found of those that thus diligently seek
him. God has, as it were, appointed to meet thee in this way: Do not thou fail
to give him the meeting, and thou shall find by experience that he will not
fail

SECT. II.. 2.

THe duty which I press upon thee so earnestly, I shall now de^scribe and open
to thee: for I suppose by this time thou art ready to enquire What is this so
highly extolled work? Description.
Why, it is, The set and solemn acting of all the powers of thy soul upon this
most perfect object [Rest] by Meditation.

I will a little more fully explain the meaning of this description, that so
the duty may lie plain before thee. 1. The general title that I give to this
duty is [Meditation] Not as it is precisely distinguished from Cogitation,
Consideration and Contemplation, but as it is taken in the larger and usual
sense, for Cogitation on things spiritual, and so comprehending consideration
and contemplation.

That Meditation is a duty of Gods ordaining, not only in his written Law, but
also in nature it self, I never met with the man that would deny: But that it
is a duty constantly and conscionably practiced even by the godly, so far as my
acquaintance extends, I must, with sorrow, deny it: It is in word confessed to
be a Duty by all, but by the constant neglect denied by most. And (I know not
by what fatal customary security it comes to pass, that) men that are very
tender conscienc't toward most other duties, yet do as easily overslip this,
as if they knew it not to be a duty at all: They that are presently troubled in
mind, if they omit but a Sermon, a Fast, a Prayer in public or private, yet
were never troubled that they have omitted Meditation perhaps all their life
time to this very day: Though it be that duty by which all other duties are
improved, and by which the soul digesteth Truths, and draws forth their
strength for its nourishment and refreshing. Certainly I think, that as a man
is but half an hour in chewing and taking into his stomach, that meat which he
must have seven or eight hours at least to digest;; so a man may take into his
understanding and memory more Truth in one hour, then he is able well to digest
in many. A man may eat too much, but he cannot digest too well: Therefore God
commands Joshua, That the book of the Law depart not out of his mouth, but
that he Meditate therein day and night, that he may observe to do according to
that which is written therein, Josh. 1.8. As Digestion is the turning of the
raw food into chyle, and blood, and spirits, and flesh: So Meditation rightly
managed, turns the Truths received and remembered, into warm affection,
raised resolution, and holy and upright conversation. Therefore what good those
men are like to get by Sermons or providence, who are unacquainted with, and
unaccustomed to this work of Meditation, you may easily judge. And why so much
preaching is lost among us, and professors can run from Sermon to Sermon, and
are never weary of hearing or reading, and yet have such languishing starved
souls; I know no truer nor greater cause, then their ignorance, and
unconscionable neglect of Meditation. If a man have the Lientery, that his meat
pass from him as he took it in; or if he vomit it up as fast as he eats it,
what strength and vigor of body and senses is this man like to have? Indeed he
may well eat more then a sounder man, and the small abode that it makes in the
stomach, may refresh it at the present, and help to draw it out a lingering,
languishing, uncomfortable, unprofitable life: And so do our hearers that have
this disease; perhaps they hear more then otherwise they needed; and the clear
discovery and lively delivery of the Truth of God, may warm and refresh them a
little, while they are hearing, and perhaps an hour or two after; and it may be
it may linger out their Grace, in a languishing, uncomfortable, unprofitable
life: But if they did hear one hour and meditate seven, if they did as
constantly digest their Sermons as they hear them, and not take in one Sermon
before the former is well concocted, they would find another kind of benefit
by Sermons, then the ordinary sort of the forwardest Christians do. I know many
carnal persons do make this an Argument against frequent preaching and hearing,
who do it merely from a lothing of the word, and know far less how to Meditate,
then they know how understandingly to hear: Only they pretend Meditation
against often hearing, because that being a duty of the mind, you cannot so
easily discern their omission of it. These are sick of the Anorexia and Apepsy,
they have neither appetite nor digeston: the other of the Boulimos, they have
appetite, but no digestion.

SECT. III.. 3.

2. BUt because Meditation is a general word, and it is not all Meditation that
I hear intend; I shall therefore lay thee down the difference, whereby this
Meditation that I am urging thee to, is discerned from all other sorts of
Meditation. And the difference is taken from the Act, and from the object of it.

1. From the Act, which I call [The set and solemn acting of all the powers of
the soul.]

1. I call it the [Acting of them] for it is* Action that we are directing you
in now, and not relations or dispositions yet these also are necessarily
presupposed: It must be a soul that is qualified for the work, by the
supernatural renewing grace of the spirit, which must be able to perform this
Heavenly exercise. Its the work of the Living, and not of the dead. Its a work
of all others most spiritual and sublime, and therefore not to be well
performed by a heart that is merely carnal and terrene. Also they must
necessarily have some relation to heaven, before they can familiarly there
converse: I suppose them to be the sons of God, when ^ persuade them to love
him: and to be of the family of God, ye^ the spouse of his Son, when I persuade
them to press into his presence, and to dwell with him: I suppose them to be
such as have title to Rest, when I persuade them to rejoice in the Meditation
of Rest. These therefore being all presupposed, are not the duty here intended
and required: But it is the bringing of their sanctified dispositions into Act,
and the delightful reveiwing of their high relations: Habits and Powers are but
to enable us to Action To say [I am able to do this, or I am disposed to do it]
does nei^ther please God, nor advantage our selves, except withal we really do
it. God does not regenerate thy soul, that it may be able to know him, and not
know him* or that it may be able to believe and yet not believe; or that it may
be able to love him and yet not love him: But he therefore makes thee able to
know to believe, and love, that thou may indeed both know, believe and love
him. What good does that power which is not reduced into Act? Therefore I am
not now exhorting thee, to be an able Christian, but to be an Active Christian,
according to the degree of that ability which thou have. As thy store of money,
or food, o^ raiment, which thou let lie by thee and never usest, does the^
no good, but to please thy fancy, or raise thee to an esteem in the eyes of
others; so all thy gifts, and powers, and habits which lie still in thy soul,
and are never Acted, do profit or comfort thee little or nothing, but in
satisfying thy fancy, and raising thee to the repute of an able man, so far as
they are discernable to the standers by.

SECT. IV.. 4.

1. I Call this Meditation [ The acting of the powers of the Soul] meaning the
soul as Rational, to difference it from the cogitations of the soul as
Sensitive; the Sensitive soul has a kind of Meditation by the common sense,
the Fantasy, and Estimation: The fleshly man minds the things of the flesh:
Romans 8.
If it were the work of the Ear, or the Eye, or the Tongue, or the Hands, which
I am setting you on, I doubt not but you would more readily take it up; but it
is the work of the soul, for bodily exercise does here profit but little. The
soul has its labor and its ease, its business and its idleness, its intention
and remission, as well as the body: And diligent students are usually as
sensible of the labor and wea^^ness of their spirits and brain, as they are of
that of the members of the body. This action of the soul, is it I persuade thee
to.

SECT. V.. 5.

3. I Call it the acting of [ All] the powers of the soul, To difference it
from the common Meditation of Students, which is usually the mere employment of
the Brain. It is not a bare thinking, that I mean, nor the mere use of
Invention or Memory; but a business of a higher and more excellent nature: when
Truth is apprehended only as Truth, this is but an unsavory and loose
apprehension; but when it is apprehended as Good, as well as True, this is a
fast and delightful apprehending: As a man is not so prone to live according to
the Truth he knows, except it do deeply affect him, so neither does his soul
enjoy its sweetness, except Speculation do pass to Affection: The Understanding
is not the whole soul, and therefore cannot do the whole work; As God has made
several parts in man, to perform their several Offices for his nourishing and
life, so has he ordained the faculties of the soul to perform their several
Offices for his spiritual life; the Stomach must chy lisy and prepare for the
Liver, the Liver and Spleen must sanguify and prepare for the Heart and Brain,
and these must beget the vital and animal spirits etc. so the Understanding
must take in Truths, and prepare them for the Will, and it must receive them,
and commend them to the Affections: The best digestion is in the bottom of the
Stomach; the Affections are as it were the bottom of the soul, and therefore
the best digestion is there: While Truth is but a speculation swimming in the
Brain, the Soul has not half received it, nor taken fast hold of it; Christ
and Heaven has various Excellencies, and therefore God has formed the soul
with a power of diverse ways of apprehending, that so we might be capable of
enjoying those diverse Excellencies in Christ, even as the creatures having
their several uses, God has given us several senses, that so we might enjoy
the delights of them all: What the better had we been for the pleasant
oderiferous flowers and perfumes, if we had not possessed the sense of
Smelling? or what good would Language or Music have done us, if God had not
given us the sense of hearing? or what delight should we have found in meats or
drinks, or sweetest things, if we had been deprived of the sense of tasting?
Why so, what good could all the glory of Heaven have done us? or what pleasure
should we have had, even in the goodness and perfection of God himself, if we
had been without the affections of Love and Joy, whereby we are capable of
being delighted in that Goodness? so also, what benefit of strength or
sweetness, can thou possible receive by thy Meditations on Eternity, while
thou do not exercise those Affections, which are the senses of the soul, by
which it must receive this sweetness and strength?

This is it that has deceived Christians in this business; They have thought
that Meditation is nothing but the bare thinking on Truths, and the rolling of
them in the Understanding and Memory? when every Schoolboy can do this, or
persons that hate the things which they think on.

Contemplationis accessus duo sunt, unus in intellectu, alter in affectu unus
in lumine, alter in fervore, unus in acquisitione, alter in Devotione. Bernard.
in Cant. Ser. 46.
Therefore this is the great task in hand, and this is the work that I would set
thee on; to get these Truths from thy head to thy heart, and that all the
Sermons which thou have heard of Heaven, and all the notions that thou have
conceived of this Rest, may be turned into the blood and spirits of Affection,
and thou may feel them revive thee, and warm thee at the heart, and may so
think of heaven as heaven should be thought on.

There are two accesses of Contemplation (says Bernard) one in Intellection,
the other in Affection, one in Light, the other in Heat, one in Acquisition,
the other in Devotion. If thou should study of nothing but Heaven while thou
live, and should have thy thoughts at command, to turn them hither on every
occasion, and yet should proceed no further then this; this were not the
Meditation that I intend, nor would it much advantage or better thy soul; as it
is thy whole soul that must possess God hereafter, so must the whole in a lower
measure possess him here. I have showed you in the beginning of this Treatise,
how the soul must enjoy the Lord in Glory, to wit, by knowing, by loving, and
joying in him; why, the very same way must thou begin thy enjoyment here.

So much as thy Understanding and Affections are sincerely acted upon God, so
much do thou enjoy him: And this is the happy Work of this Meditation. So
that you see, here is somewhat more to be done, then barely to remember and
think of Heaven; as Running, and Ringing, and Moving, and such like labors, do
not only stir a hand or a foot, but do strain and exercise the whole body, so
does Meditation the whole soul.

As the Affections of Sinners are set on the world, and turned to Idols, and
fallen from God, as well as the Understanding; so must the Affections of men be
reduced to God, and taken up with him, as well as the Understanding; and as the
whole was filled with sin before, so the whole must be filled with God now; as
St. Paul says of Knowledge, and Gifts, and Faith to remove mountains, that if
thou have all these without Love, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
Thou art but as sounding Brass, or as a tinkling Cymbal; so I may say of the
exercise of these, If in this work of Meditation, thou do exercise Knowledge,
and Gifts, and Faith of Miracles, and not exercise Love, and Joy, thou do
nothing, thou playest the child and not the man, the Sinners part, and not the
Saints, for so will Sinners do also: If thy Meditation tends to fill thy
Note-Book with notions and good sayings concerning God, and not thy heart with
longings after him, and delight in him, for ought I know thy Book is as much a
Christian as thou. Mark but David's description of the blessed man, Psalm. 1.3.
His delight is in the Heb. Doctrine.
Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate day and night.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
4. I Call this Meditation [Set and Solemn] to difference it from that which is
Occasional and Cursory. As there is Prayer, which is solemn, (when we set our
selves wholly to the duty) and Prayer, which is sudden and short, commonly
called, Ejaculations, (when a man in the midst of other business does send up
some brief request to God;) so also there is Meditation solemn, (when we apply
our selves only to that work;) and there is Meditation which is short and
cursory, (when in the midst of our business we have some good thoughts of God
in our minds.) And as solemn Prayer is either, First, See, (when a Christian
observing it as a standing duty, does resolvedly practice it in a constant
course;) or secondly, Occasional, (when some unusual occasion does put us upon
it at a season extraordinary;) so also Meditation admits of the like
distinction. Now, though I would persuade you to that Meditation which is mixed
with your common labors in your callings; and to that which special occasions
do direct you to; yet these are not the main thing which I here intend: But
that you would make it a constant standing duty, as you do by Hearing, and
Praying, and Reading the Scripture; and that you would solemnly set your selves
about it, and make it for that time your whole work, and intermix other matters
no more with it, then you would do with prayer, or other duties. Thus you see,
as it is differenced by its act, what kind of Meditation it is that we speak
of, viz. It is the set and solemn acting of all the powers of the Soul.

. 7.
SECT. VII.
THe second part of the Difference is drawn from its object, which is [Rest] or
the most blessed estate of man, in his everlasting enjoyment of God in Heaven.
Meditation has a large field to walk in, and has as many objects to work
upon, as there are matters, and lines, and words in the Scripture, as there are
known Creatures in the whole Creation, and as there are particular discernable
passages of Providence, in the Government of the persons and actions, through
the world: But the Meditation that I now direct you in, is only of the end of
all these, and of these as they refer to that end: It is not a walk from
Mountains to Valleys, from Sea to Land, from Kingdom to Kingdom, from Planet to
Planet: But it is a walk from Mountains and Valleys, to the Holy Mount Zion;
from Sea and Land, to the Land of the Living; from the Kingdoms of this world,
to the Kingdom of Saints; from Earth to Heaven; from Time to Eternity: It is a
walking upon Sun, and Moon, and Stars; it is a walk in the Garden, and Paradise
of God* It may seem far off; but spirits are quick; whether in the body, or out
of the body, their motion is swift: They are not so heavy, or dull, as these
earthly lumps; nor so slow of motion, as these clods of flesh. I would not have
you cast off your other Meditations; but surely, as Heaven has the
pre-eminence in perfection, so should it have the pre-eminence also in our
Meditation. That which will make us most happy when we possess it, will make us
most joyful when we meditate upon it; especially, when that Meditation is a
degree of Possession, if it be such affecting Meditation as I here describe.

You need not here be troubled with the fears of the world, lest studying so
much on these high matters, should craze your brains, and make you mad, unless
you will go mad with delight, and joy, and that of the purest and most solid
kind: If I set you to meditate as much on Sin and Wrath, and to study nothing
but Judgment and Damnation, then you might justly fear such an issue. But its
Heaven and not Hell, that I would persuade you to walk in; its Joy and not
Sorrow, that I persuade you to exercise. I would urge you to look upon no
deformed object, but only upon the ravishing glory of Saints, and the
unspeakable excellencies of the God of glory, and the beams that stream from
the face of his Son. Are these such sadding, and madding thoughts? will it
distract a man to think of his only happiness? will it distract the miserable
to think of mercy? or the captive and prisoner, to fores^^ deliverance? or the
poor to think of riches and honor approaching? Neither do I persuade your
thoughts to matters of great difficulty, or to study thorny and knotty
controversies of Heaven, or to search out things beyond your reach: If you
should thus set your wit and invention upon the Tenters, you might be quickly
distracted or distempered indeed. But it is your Affections, more then your
wits and inventions, that must be used in this heavenly employment we speak of:
They are Truths which are commonly known and professed, which your souls must
draw forth and feed upon. The Resurrection of the body, and the Life
everlasting, are Articles of your Creed, and not nicer controversies. Me thinks
it should be liker to make a man mad, to think of living in a world of woe, to
think of abiding in poverty and sickness, among the rage of wicked men, then to
think of living with Christ in bliss: Me thinks, if we be not mad already, it
should sooner distract us, to hear the Tempests and roaring Waves, to see the
Billows, and Rocks, and Sands, and Gulfs, then to think of arriving safe at
Rest. But Wisdom is justified of all her children; Knowledge has no enemy,
Matthew 11.19. Luke 7.35.
but the ignorant. This heavenly course was never spoke against by any, but
those that never either knew it or used it. I more fear the neglect of men that
do approve it, then the opposition or Arguments of any against it. Truth
loses more by loose friends, then by sharpest enemies.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the fittest time and place for this contemplation, and
the preparation of the heart unto it.
. 1.
SECT. I.
THus I have opened to you the nature of this duty, and by this time I suppose
you pa^tly apprehend what it is, that I so press upon you; which when it is
opened more particularly, you will more fully discern. I now proceed to direct
you in the work; where I shall first show you how you must set upon it; and
secondly, how you must behave your self in it; and thirdly, how you shall shut
it up. And here I suppose thee to be a man that do conscionably avoid the
forementioned hindrances, and conscionably use the forementioned helps, or
else it is in vain to set thee a higher lesson, till thou have first learned
that: Which if thou have done, I then further advise thee: First, Somewhat
concerning the time and season; secondly, somewhat concerning the place; and
thirdly, somewhat concerning the frame of thy Spirit.

And first for the time, I advise thee, that as much as may be, it may be set
and constant. Proportion out such a part of thy time to the work.

Stick not at their scruple, who question the stating of times as
superstitious: If thou suit out thy time to the advantage of the work, and
place no more Religion in the time it self, thou need not to fear lest this
be superstition. As a workman in his shop will have a set place for every one
of his Tools and Wares, or else when he should use it, it may be to seek: So a
Christian should have a set time for every ordinary duty, or else when he
should practice it, its ten to one but he will be put by it. Stated time is a
hedge to duty, and defends it against many temptations to omission. God has
stated none but the Lords day himself, but he has left it to be stated, and
determined by our selves, according to every man's condition and occasions,
least otherwise his Law should have been a burden, or a snare. Yet has he left
us general rules, which by the use of Reason, and Christian Prudence, may help
us to determine of the fittest times. Its as ridiculous a question of them that
ask us, [Where Scripture commands us to pray so often, or at such hours,
privately or in families?] as if they asked, [Where the Scripture commands, that
the Church-House, (or Temple) stand in such a place? or the Pulpit in such a
place? or my seat in such a place? or where it commands a man to read the
Scriptures with a pair of Spectacles, etc.] Most that I have known to break
this bond of duty, and to argue against a stated time, have at last grown
careless of the duty it self, and showed more dislike against the work, then
the time. If God give me so much money or wealth, and tell me not in Scripture,
how much such a poor man must have, nor how much my family, nor how much in
clothes, and how much in expenses; is it not lawful, yea and necessary that I
make the division my self, and allow to each the due proportion? So if God do
bestow on me a day or a week of time, and give me such and such work, to do in
this time, and tell me not how much I shall allot to each work; Certainly, I
must make the division my self, and cut my coat according to my cloth, and
proportion it wisely and carefully too, or else I am like to leave something
undone. Though God has not told you, at what hour you shall rise in the
morning, or what hours you shall eat and drink, yet your own Reason, and
experience will tell you, that ordinarily you should observe a stated time.
Neither let the fear of customariness and formality deter you from this. That
Argument has brought the Lords Supper from once a week to once a quarter, or
once a year; and it has brought family duties with too many of late, from
twice a day to once a week, or once a month; and if it were not, that man
being proud, is naturally of a Teaching humor, and addicted to works of
popularity and ostentation, I believe it would diminish Preaching as much: And
will it deal any better with secret duties? especially this of Holy Meditation?
I advise thee therefore, if well thou may, to allow this duty a stated time,
and be as constant in it, as in Hearing and Praying: Yet be cautious in
understanding this. I know this will not prove every man's duty; some have not
themselves, and their time at command, and therefore cannot set their hours;
such are most servants, and many children of poor or carnal parents; and many
are so poor, that the necessity of their Families will deny them this freedom. I
do not think it the duty of such, to leave their labors for this work, at
certain set times, no nor for Prayer, or other necessary worship: No such duty
is at all times a duty, Affirmatives specially. Positives bind not semper and
ad semper. When two duties come together, and cannot both be performed, it were
then a sin to perform the lesser. Of two duties we must choose the greater,
though of two sins we must choose neither. I think such persons were best to be
watchful, to redeem time as much as they can, and take their vacant
opportunities as they fall, and especially to join Meditation and Prayer, as
much as they can, with the very labors of their callings. There is no such
enmity between laboring and meditating, or praying in the Spirit, but that both
may conveniently be done together* Yet I say (as Paul in another case) if thou
can be free, use it rather: Those that have more time a spare from worldly
necessaries, and are Masters to dispose of themselves, and their time, I still
advise, That they keep this duty to a stated time. And indeed, it were no ill
husbandry, nor point of folly, if we did so by all other duties: If we
considered of the ordinary works of the day, and ^^ited out a fit season, and
proportion of time to every work, and fixed this in our memory and resolution,
or wrote it in a Table, and kept in our Closets, and never brake it, but upon
unexpected, or extraordinary cause. If every work of the day, had thus its
appointed time, we should be better skilled, both in redeeming time, and
performing duty.

SECT. II.. 2.

2. I Advise thee also, concerning thy time for this duty, That as it be
stated, so it be frequent; Just how often it should be, I cannot determine,
because men's several conditions may vary it: But in general, Psalm. 1.2. and
119.97. and 148.99.
that it be frequent the Scripture requires, when it mentions meditating
continually, and day and night. Circumstances of our condition, may much vary
the circumstances of our duties. It may be one man's duty to hear or pray oftener
then another; and so it may be in this Meditation. But for those that can
conveniently omit other business, I advise, That it be once a day at least.
Though Scripture tell us not, how often in a day we should eat or drink, yet
prudence and experience will direct us, to twice or thrice a day, according to
the temper and necessities of our bodies. Those that think they should not tie
themselves to order or number of duties, but should then only meditate or
pray, when they find the Spirit provoking them to it, do go upon uncertain and
unchristian grounds. I am sure, the Scripture provokes us to frequency, and our
necessity secondeth the voice of Scripture; and if through my own neglect, or
resistance of the Spirit, I do not find it so to excite and quicken me, I dare
not therefore disobey the Scripture, nor neglect the necessities of my own soul
In the same sense as Justin Martyr said, He would not believe Christ himself,
if he had preached any other God, besides him who is the Creator of all; so may
I say, I would not believe the Spirit, that should take me off my duty and
obedience to God. Vid. Nicephor. Eccles. histor. tom. 1. lib. 4. cap. 6.
. I should suspect that Spirit which would turn my soul from constancy in duty;
if the Spirit in Scripture bid me meditate or pray. I dare not forbear it,
because I find not the Spirit within me, to second the command: if I find not
incitation to duty before, yet I may find assistance, while I wait in
performance. I am afraid of laying my corruptions upon the Spirit, or blaming
the want of the Spirits assistance, when I should blame the backwardness of my
own heart; nor dare I make one corruption a plea for another; nor urge the
inward rebellion of my Nature, as a Reason for the outward disobedience of my
life: And for the healing of my natures backwardness, I more expect, that the
Spirit of Christ should do it in a way of duty, (which I still find to be his
ordinary season of working) then in a way of disobedience, and neglect of duty.
Men that fall on duty according to the frame of their spirits only, are like
our ignorant vulgar, (or if you will, like the Swine) who think their appetite
should be the only rule of their eating: When a wise man judges both of
quantity and quality, by Reason and Experience; least when his appetite is
depraved, he should either surfeit or famish. Our Appetite is no sure rule for
our times of duty, but the Word of God in general, and our Spiritual Reason,
Experience, Necessity, and convenience in particular, may truly direct us.

Three Reasons especially should persuade thee to frequency in this Meditation
on Heaven.

1. Because seldom conversing with him will breed a strangeness betwixt thy
soul and God: Frequent society breeds familiarity, and familiarity increases
love and delight, and makes us bold and confident in our addresses. This is
the main end of this duty, that thou may have acquaintance and fellowship
with God therein. Therefore if thou come but seldom to it, thou will keep thy
self a stranger still, and so miss of the end of the work. O, when a man feels
his need of God, and must seek his help in a time of necessity, when nothing
else can do him any good, you would little think what an encouragement it is,
to go to a God that we know, and are acquainted with. O, says the heavenly
Christian, I know both whither I go, and to whom; I have gone this way many a
time before now: It is the same God that I daily conversed with; it is the same
way that was my daily walk: God knows me well enough, and I have some knowledge
of him. On the other side, What a horror and discouragement to the soul it will
be, when it is forced to fly to God in streights, to think: Alas, I know not
whither to go; I never went the way before; I have no acquaintance at the Court
of Heaven: My soul knows not that God, that I must speak to; and I fear he will
not know my soul! But especially when we come to die, and must immediately
appear before this God, and expect to enter into this Eternal Rest, then the
difference will plainly appear: Then what a joy will it be to think, I am going
to the place that I daily conversed in; to the place from whence I tasted so
frequent delights; to that God whom I have met in my Meditations so often. My
heart has been at Heaven before now, and tasted the sweetness that has often
revived it; and (as Jonathan by his honey) if mine eyes were so illightened, 1 Samuel 14.29.
and my mind refreshed, when I tasted but a little of that sweetness, what
will it be when I shall feed on it freely? On the other side, what a terror
must it be to think, I must die, and go I know not whither; from a place where
I am acquainted, to a place where I have no familiarity, or knowledge. O, Sirs,
it is an unexpressible horror to a dying man, to have strange thoughts of God
and Heaven: I am persuaded there is no cause so common, that makes death even
to godly men unwelcome and uncomfortable. Therefore I persuade thee to
frequency in this duty, That seldomness breed not estrangedness from God.

2. And besides that, seldomness will make thee unskilful in the work, and
strange to the duty, as well as to God. How unhandsomly and clumsily do men set
their hands to a work that they are seldom employed in! Whereas frequency will
habituate thy heart to the work, and thou will better know the way which thou
daily walk; yea, and it will be more easy and delightful also: The Hill
which made thee pant and blow at the first going up, thou may run up easily
when thou art once accustomed to it. The heart which of it self, is naturally
backward, will contract a greater unwillingness through disuse: And as an
untamed Colt not used to the hand, it will hardly come to hand, when thou
should use it.

3. And lastly, Thou will lose that heat and life by long intermissions, which
with much ado thou did obtain in duty. If thou eat but a meal in two or three
days, thou will lose thy strength as fast as thou gettest it; if in holy
Meditation thou get near to Christ, and warm thy heart with the fire of Love;
if thou then turn away, and come but seldom, thou will soon return to thy
former coldness. If thou walk or labor, till thou have got thee heat, and then
sit idle all day after, will thou not surely lose thy heat again? especially,
it being so spiritual a work, and so against the bent of nature, we shall be
still inclining to our natural temper.

If water that is heated be long from the fire, it will return to its coldness,
because that is its natural temper. I advise thee therefore that thou be as often
as may be in this soul-raising duty, least when thou have long rowed hard,
against the stream or tide, and wind, the boat should go further down by thy
intermission, then it was got up by all thy labor; And least when thou have
been long rolling thy stony heart toward the top of the hill, it should go
faster down when thou do slack thy diligence. Its true, the intermixed use of
other duties, may do much to the keeping thy heart above, especially secret
prayer; but Meditation is the life of most other duties: and the veiws of
heaven is the Life of Meditation.

. 3.
SECT. III.
3. COncerning the Time of this duty, I advise thee that thou choose the most
seasonable Time. All things are beautiful and excellent in their season.
Unseasonableness may lose thee the fruit of thy labor; It may rise up
disturbances and difficulties in the work; Yea it may turn a duty to a sin:
when the seasonableness of a duty does make it easy, does remove impediments,
does embolden us to the undertaking, and does ripen its fruit.

The seasons of this duty are either first, extraordinary or secondly, ordinary.

1. The ordinary season for your daily performance, cannot be particularly
determined by man: Otherwise God would have determined it in his word; But men's
conditions of employment, and freedom, and bodily temper are so various, that
the same may be a seasonable hour to one, which may be unseasonable to another.
If thou be a servant, or a hard laborer, that thou have not thy self, nor thy
time at command, thou must take that season which thy business will best afford
thee: Either as thou sit in the shop at thy work, or as thou travellest on
the way, or as thou lie waking in the night. Every man best knows his own
time, even when he has least to hinder him of his business in the world. But
for those whose necessities tie them not so close, but that they may well lay
aside their earthly affairs, and choose what time of the day they will, My
advice to such is, that they carefully observe the temper of their body and
mind, and mark when they find their spirits most active, and fit for
contemplation, and pitch upon that as the stated time. Some men are freest for
all duties when they are fasting, and some are then unfittest of all. Some are
fit for duties of humiliation at one season and for duties of exaltation at
another. Every man is the meetest judge for himself. Only give me leave to
tender you my observation, which time I have always found fittest for my self,
and that is, The evening, from Sun setting to the twilight: and sometime in
the night when it is warm and clear. Whether it be any thing from the
temperature of my body, I know not: But I conjecture that the same time would
be seasonable to most tempers; for several natural reasons, which I will not
now stand to mention. Neither would I have mentioned my own experience in this,
but that I was encouraged hereunto by finding it suit with the experience of a
better and wiser man then my self, and that is Isaac: for it is said in Genesis
24.63. That he went to Meditate in the field at the eventide: and his
experience I dare more boldly recommend unto you then my own. And as I remember
Doctor Hall in his excellent Treatise of Meditation, gives you the like account
of his own experience.

SECT. IIII.. 4.

2. THe Lords day is a time exceeding seasonable for this exercise. When should
we more seasonably contemplate on Rest, then on that day of Rest which does
typ^fie it to us? Neither do I think that typifying use is ceased, because the
Antitype is not fully yet come. However it being a day appropriated to Worship
and spiritual duties, me thinks we should never exclude this duty which is so
eminently spiritual. I think verily this is the chiefest work of a Christian
Sabbath, and most agreeable to the intent of its positive institution. What
fitter time to converse with our Lord, then on that day, which he has
appropriated to such employment, Rev. 1.10.
and therefore called it, The Lords Day? What fitter day to ascend to heaven,
then that on which our Lord did arise from earth, and fully triumph over death
and hell, and take possession of Heaven before us? The fittest temper for a
true believer, is to be in the spirit on the Lords Day: This was Saint John's
temper on that day. And what can bring us to this ravishment in the spirit, but
the spiritual beholding of our ravishing glory? Surely though an outward
ordinance may delight the ear, or tickle the fancy, yet it is the viewes of God
that must ravish the soul. There is a great deal of difference betwixt the
receiving of the word with joy, Mat. 13.20. and being in the spirit on the
Lords Day, Rev. 1 10.

Two sorts of Christians I would entreat to take notice of this especially.

1. Those that spend the Lords day only in public worship; either through the
neglect of this spiritual duty of Meditation, or else by their overmuch
exercise of the public, allowing no time to private duty: Though there be few
that offend in this last kind, yet some there are, and a hurtful mistake to
the soul it is. They will grow but in gifts, and common accomplishments* if
they exercise but their gifts in outward performances.

2. Those that have time on the Lords day, for idleness, and vain discourse;
and find the day longer then they know how well to spend: Were these but
acquainted with this duty of contemplation, they would need no other recreation
nor pastime; they would think the longest day short enough, and be sorry that
the night has shortened their pleasure.

Whether this day be of positive Divine Institution, and so to us Christians of
necessary observation, is out of my way to handle here: I refer those that
doubt, to what is in Print on that subject, especially Master George Abbot
against Broad, and (above all) Master Cawdrey and Master Palmer their Sabbatum
Redivivum. Its an encouragment to the doubtful, to find the generality of its
rational opposers, to acknowledge the usefulness, yea necessity of a stated day,
and the fitness of this above all other days. I would I could persuade those
that are convinced of its morality, to spend a greater part of it in this true
spirituality. But we do in this as in most things else; think it enough that we
believe our duty, as we do the articles of our faith, and let who will put it
in practice. We will dispute for duty, and let others perform it: As I have
known some drunkards upon the Ale bench will plead for godly men, while
themselves are ungodly: So do too many for the observation of the Lords day,
who themselves are unacquainted with this spiritual part of its observation.
Christians, let heaven have some more share in your Sabbaths, where you must
shortly keep your everlasting Sabbath. As you go from stair to stair till you
come to the top, so use your Sabbaths as steps to glory, till you have passsed
them all, and are there arived. Especially you that are poor men, and servants,
that cannot take time in the week as you desire, see that you well improve this
day: Now your labor lies not ^o much upon you, now you are unyoaked from your
common business; Be sure as your bodies Rest from their labors, that your
spirits seek after Rest with God. I admonish also those that are possessed with
the censorious devil, that if they see a poor Christian walking privately in
the fields on the Lords Day, they would not Pharisaically conclude him a
Sabbath breaker, till they know more: It may be he takes it as the opportunest
place, to withdraw himself from the world to God; Thou see where his body
walks, but thou see not where he is walking in the spirit. Hannah was
censured for a woman drunk, till Eli heard her speak for her self; and when he
knew the truth, he was ashamed of his censure. The silent spiritual worshipper
is most liable to their censure, because he gives not the world an account of
his worship.

Thus I have directed thee to the fittest season for the ordinary performance
of this heavenly work.

SECT. V.. 5.

2. FOr the extraordinary performance, Joh. 15.5. As Gerson in the forecited
place says, This Art or way of Meditation is not learned chiefly out of Books:
but the spirit of God bestows it as he pleases; on some more plentifully,
and on some more sparingly.
these following are seasonable times. 1. When God does extraordinarily revive
and enable thy spirit. When God has kindled thy spirit with fire from above,
it is that it may mount aloft more freely. It is a choice part of a Christians
skill, to observe the temper of his own spirit, and to observe the gales of
grace, and how the spirit of Christ does move upon his. Without Christ we can
do nothing. Therefore let us be doing, when he is doing: and be sure not to be
out of the way, nor asleep when he comes. The sails of the windmill stir not
without the wind: therefore they must set them a going when the wind blows: Be
sure that thou watch this wind and tide, if thou would have a speedy voyage
to Heaven. A little labor will set thy heart a going at such a time as this,
when another time thou may study and take pains to little purpose. Most
Christians do sometime find a more then ordinary reviving and activeness of
spirit; take this as sent from heaven to ^alse thee thither: And when the
spirit is lifting thy heart from the earth* be sure thou then lift at it thy
self. As when the Angel came to Peter in his prison and Irons, and smo^e him on
the side, and raised him up saying, Arise up quickly, gird thy self, ^inde on
thy sandals* and cast thy garment about thee, and follow me; And Peter arose
and followed till he was delivered, Act. 12.7.8, etc. So when the spirit finds
thy heart in prison and Irons, and smites it, and bids thee, Arise quickly and
follow me, be sure thou then arise, and follow, and thou shall find thy chains
fall off, and all doors will open, and thou will be at Heaven before thou art
aware.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
2. WHen thou art cast into perplexing troubles of mind, through suffering, or
fear, or care, or temptations, then is it seasonable to address thy self to
this duty. When should we take our cordials but in our times of fainting? When
is it more seasonable to walk to heaven, then when we know not in what corner
on earth to live with comfort? or when should our thoughts converse above, but
when they have nothing but grief to converse with below? Where should. Noah's
Dove be but in the Arc, Genesis 8.8, 9.
when the waters do cover all the earth; and she cannot find Rest for the sole
of her foot? What should we think on but our fathers house, when we want even
the husks of the world to feed on? Surely God sends thee thy afflictions to
this very purpose. Happy thou poor man, if thou make this use of thy poverty:
and thou that art sick, if thou so improve thy sickness. It is seasonable to go
to the Promised Land, when our burdens and taskes are increased in Egypt; and
when we endure the dolors of a grievous wilderness. Believe it, Reader, if thou
knew but what a cordial in thy griefs and care, the serious views of glory
are, thou would less fear these harmles troubles, and more use that
preserving reviving Remedy: I would not have thee, as Mountebanks, take poison
first, and then their Antidote to show its power; so to create thy affliction
to try this remedy: But if God reach thee forth the bitterest cup, drop in but
a little of the Tastes of Heaven, and I warrant thee it will sufficiently
sweeten it to thy spirit; If the case thou art in, seem never so dangerous,
take but a little of this Antidote of Rest, and never fear the pain or danger.
I will give thee to confirm this, but the Example of David, and the Opinion of
Paul, and desire thee thoroughly to consider of both. In the multitude of my
thoughts within me (says David) thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94.19. As
if he should say, I have multitudes of sadding thoughts that crowd upon me,
thoughts of my sins, and thoughts of my foes, thoughts of my dangers, and
thoughts of my pains; yet in the midst of all this crowd, one serious thought
of the comforts of thy Love, and especially of the comfortable life in Glory,
does so dispel the throng, and scatter my cares, and disperse the clouds that
my troubles had raised, that they do even revive and delight my soul. And Paul
when he had cast up his full accounts, gives thee the sum in Romans 8* 18. For I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us: Study these words well, for every
one of them is full of life. If these true sayings of God, were truly and
deeply fixed in thy heart, and if thou could in thy sober Mediditation, but
draw out the comfort of this one Scripture, I dare them it would sweeten the
bitterest cross, and in a sort make thee forget thy trouble (as Christ says,
Joh. 16 21.
A woman forgets her travail for joy that a man is born into the world) yea,
and make thee rejoice in thy tribulation. I will add but one Text more, 2 Cor
4.16.17. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet
the inward is renewed day by day, For our light affliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory; While we
look not at the things which are seen, but the things which are not seen; For
the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal.

SECT. VII.. 7.

3. ANother fit Season for this heavenly duty is, When the Messengers of God do
summon us to die; when either our gray hairs, or our languishing bodies, or
some such like forerunners of death, do tell us that our change cannot be far
off; when should we most frequently sweeten our souls, with the believing
thoughts of another life, then when we find that this is almost ended? and
when Flesh is raising fears and terrors? Surely no men have greater need of
supporting joys, then dying men; and those joys must be fetched from our
eternal joy. Men that have earthly pleasures in their hands, may think they are
well, though they taste no more, but when a man is dying and parting with all
other pleasures, he must then fetch his pleasure from Heaven, or have none;
when health is gone, and friends lie weeping about our beds, when houses, and
lands, and goods, and wealth cannot afford us the least relief, but we are
taking our leave of earth for ever, except a hole for our bodies to rot in;
when we are daily expecting our final day, its now time to look to heaven, and
to fetch in comfort and support from thence; and as heavenly delights are
sweetest, when they are unmixed and pure, and have no earthly delights
conjoined with them, so therefore the delights of dying Christians are ofttimes
the sweetest that ever they had: Therefore have the Saints been generally
observed to be then most Heavenly when they were nearest dying; what a
Prophetical blessing has Jacob for his sons, when he lay a dying? And so
Isaac? what a heavenly Song! what a Divine Benediction does Moses conclude his
life withal, Deuteronomy. 32. and 33. Nay, as our Savior increased in Wisdom and
Knowledge, so did he also in their blessed expressions, and still the last, the
sweetest, what a heavenly prayer? what heavenly advice does he leave his
Disciples when he is about to leave them? when he saw he must leave the world
and go to the Father, how does he weane them from worldly expectations? How
does he mind them of the Mansions in his Fathers House? and remember them of
his coming again to fetch them thither? and open the union they shall have with
him, and with each other? and promise them to be with him to behold his Glory?
There Is more worth in those four Chapters, John 14.15.16.17. then in all the
Books in the world beside; When Blessed Paul was ready to be offered up, what
heavenly Exhortation does he give the Philippians? what advice to Timothy? what
counsel to the Elders of the Ephesian Church? Acts 20. How near was S. John to
heaven in his banishment in Patmos, a little before his translation to Heaven?
what heavenly discourse has Luther in his last sickness? How close was Calvin
to his Divine studies in his very sickness, that when they would have dissuaded
him from it, He answers, Vultisne me otiosum a domino apprehendi? What, would
you have God find me idle? I have not lived idly, and shall I dye idly? The
like may be said of our famous Reignolds. When excellent Bucholcer was near his
end, he wrote his Book De Consol^ti^ne Decumbentium. Then it was that Tossianus
wrote his Vade mecum. Then Doctor Preston was upon the Attribut^s of God; And
then Mr Bolton was on the Joys of Heaven. It were end less to enumerate the
eminent examples of this kind. It is the general temper of the spirits of the
Saints, to be then most Heavenly when they are nearest to Heaven. As we use to
say of the old and the weak, that they have one foot in the grave already, so
may we say of the godly, when they are near their Rest, they have one foot (as
it were) in Heaven already; When should a Traveller look homewards with joy,
but when he is come within the sight of his home? Its true, the pains of our
bodies, and the fainting of our spirits may somewhat abate the liveliness of
our joy, but the measure we have, will be the more pure and spiritual, by how
much the less it is kindled from the Flesh. O that we who are daily
languishing, could learn this daily heavenly conversing! and could say as the
Apostle in the forecited place, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18! O that every gripe that
our bodies feel, might make us more sensible of future ease! and that every
weary day and hour might make us long for our eternal rest! That as the pulling
down of one end of the balance is the lifting up of the other, so the pulling
down of our bodies might be the lifting up of our souls! that as our souls were
usually at the worst when our bodies were at the best, so now they might be at
the best when our bodies are at the worst* why should we not think thus with
our selves? why every one of these gripes that I feel are but the cutting of
the stitches for the ripping off mine old attire, that God may cloathe me with
the glory of his Saints; Had I rather live in these rotten rags, then be at
the trouble and pains to shift me? Should the Infant desire to stay in the
womb, because of the straitness and pains of the passage? or because he knows
not the world that he is to come into? nor is acquainted with the fashions or
inhabitants thereof? Am I not nearer to my desired rest, then ever I was? If
the remembrance of these griefs will increase my joy, when I shall look back
upon them from above; why then should not the remembrance of that joy abate my
griefs, when I look upwards* to it from below? And why should the present
feeling of these dolors so much diminish the foretasts of Glory, when the
remembrance of them will then increase it? All these gripes and woes that I
feel, are but the farewell of sin and sorrows: As Nature uses to struggle hard
a little before death, and as the devil cast the man to the ground and tore
him, when he was going out of him, Mark 9.26. so this tearing and troubling
which I now feel, is but at the departure of sin and misery; for as the effects
of Grace are sweetest at last, so the effects of sin are bitterest at the last,
and this is the last that ever I shall taste of it: when once this whirlwind
and earthquake is past, the still voice will next succeed; and God only will
be in the voice, though sin also was in the earthquake and whirlwinde.

Thus Christian, as every pang of sickness should mind the wicked of their
eternal pangs, and make them look into the bottom of hell, so should all thy woe
and weakness mind thee of thy near approaching joy, and make thee look as high
as heaven: and (as a Ball) the harder thou art smitten down to earth; the
higher should thou rebound up to heaven. If this be thy case who read
these lines, (and if it be not now, it will be shortly) if thou lie in
consuming painful sickness, if thou perceive thy dying time draw on, O where
should thy heart be now but with Christ? Methinks thou should even behold
him, as is were, standing by thee, and should bespeak him as thy Father, thy
Husband, thy Physician, thy Friend! Methinks thou should even see, as it
were, the Angels about thee waiting to perform their last office to thy soul,
as thy friends wait to perform theirs to thy body; Those Angels which disdained
not to bring the soul of a scabbed Beggar to heaven, will not think much to
conduct thee thither. O look upon thy sickness, as Jacob did on Joseph's
Chariots, and let thy spirit revive within thee, and say, It is enough, that
Joseph, that Christ, is yet alive, for because he lives I shall live also, Joh.
14.19. As thou art sick and need the daintiest food, and choicest Cordials,
so here are choices then the world affords, here is the food of Angels and
glorified Saints; here is all the joys that heaven does yield, even the Vision
of God, the sight of Christ, and whatsoever the blessed there possess; This
Table is spread for thee to feed on in thy sickness, these dainties are offered
thee by the hand of Christ: He has written thee the Receipt in the Promises of
the Gospel, He has prepared thee all the ingredients in Heaven, only put
forth the hand of Faith, and feed upon them, and rejoice and live; The Lord
says to thee, as he did to Elias, Arise and eat, because the journey is too
great for thee, 1 Kings 19.7. Though it be not long, yet the way is foul: I
counsel thee therefore that thou obey his voice, and arise and eat, and in the
strength of that meat thou may walk till thou come to the Mount of God; Dye
not in the ditch of horror or stupidity; Deuteronomy. 32* 49 50.
but (as the Lord said to Moses) Go up into the Mount, and see the Land that
the Lord has promised, and dye in the Mount; And as old Simeon when he saw
Christ in his infancy in the Temple, so do thou behold him in the Temple of the
New Jerusalem as in his Glory, and take him in the arms of thy Faith, and say,
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eye (of Faith) has
seen thy salvation; As thou wast never so near to Heaven as now, so let thy
spirit be nearer it now then ever.

So you have seen which is the fittest season for this duty: Read Master
Symmonds Deserted soul. p. 225, 226, 227.
I should here advise thee also of some times unseasonable; but I shall only
add this one Caution; The unseasonable urging of the most spiritual duty, is
more from the Tempter then from the Spirit of God: When Satan sees a Christian
in a condition wherein he is unable and unfit for a duty, or wherein he may
have more advantage against us by our performance of it, then by our omitting
it, he will then drive on as earnestly to duty, as if it were the very spirit
of Holiness: that so upon our omitting or ill performance, he may have somewhat
to cast in our teeth and to trouble us with. And this is one of his ways of
deceiving, when he transformes himself into an Angel of Light. It may be when
thou art on thy knees in prayer, thou shall have many good thoughts will come
into thy mind: or when thou art hearing the word, or at such unseasonable
times: Resist these good thoughts as coming from the devil, for they are
formally evil, though they are materially good; Even good thoughts in
themselves may be sinful to thee. It may be when thou should be diligent in
thy necessary labors, thou shall be moved to cast aside all, that thou may
go to Meditation or to Prayer; These motions are usually from the spirit of
delusion: The spirit of Christ does nothing unseasonably: God is not the God of
confusion but of order.

. 8.
SECT. VIII.
Vide Gerson, ubi infra, cap. 24.
THus much I thought necessary to advise thee concerning the time of this duty.
It now follows that I speak a word of the fittest place. Though God is every
where to be found by a faithful soul; Yet some places are more convenient for a
duty then others.

1. As this is a Private and spiritual duty, so it is most covenient that thou
retire to some private place. Our spirits had need of every help, and to be
freed from every hinderance in the work: And the quality of these
circumstances, though to some they may seem small things, does much conduce to
our hinderance or our help. Dominus docet nos, ut opera sua imitemur, and sicut
ipse secit ita et nos saciamus: Ecce oraturus erat, and asce^dit in montem;
Oportet etiam nos a negotijs otiosos orare and non in medio multorum; sed
pernoctantes ne statim ut caeperimus cessemus. The ophylact. in Luc. c. 6. Yet
the principal secrecy and silence must be in the soul within, rather then
without: that is, that the soul shut out of it self all humane worldly cares;
all vain and hurtful thoughts, and whatsoever may hinder it from reaching to
the end which it does intend. For it often falls out that a man is alone,
separated from the company of men, and yet by fantasies, thoughts, and
melancholies does suffer the most grievous and burdensome company in himself:
Which fantasies do beget him various tumults and conferences and pratlings;
bringing before the eyes of his understanding sometime one thing, sometime
another: leading him sometime into the Kitchen, sometime into the Market;
bringing thence to him the unclean delights of the flesh; showing him dances,
and beauties, and songs, and such kind of vanities drawing to sin. As Saint
Jerome humbly confesses of himself, That when he was in the wilderness without
any company save wild beasts and Scorpions, yet he was often in his thoughts in
dances and in the company of the Ladies at Rome. So these fantasies will make
the soul even when it is alone to be angry and quarrel with some one that is
absent, as if he were present: To be counting money; It will pass over the
seas, it will fly abroad the land, sometime it will be in high dignities, and
so of innumerable fancies the like: such a soul is not secret nor alone; Nor is
a devout soul in contemplation alone, For it is never less alone. It is in the
best company, even with God and Saints by holy desires and cogitations. Gerson.
par. 3. fol 382. De monte contemplationis cap. 23.
Christ himself thought it not vain to direct in this circumstance of private
duty, Mat. 6.4, 6, 18, If in private prayer we must shut our door upon us, that
our Father may hear us in secret; so is it also requisite in this Meditation.
How often does Christ himself depart to some mountain, or wilderness, or other
solitary place? For occasional Meditation I give thee not this advise, but for
this daily set and solemn duty, I advise, that thou withdraw thy self from all
society, yea though it were the society of godly men, that thou may a while
enjoy the society of Christ: If a student cannot study in a crowd, who
exercises only his invention and memory, much less when thou must exercise
all the powers of thy soul, and that upon an object so far above nature: When
thy eyes are filled with the persons and actions of men, and thine ears with
their discourse; its hard then to have thy thoughts and affections free for
this duty. Though I would not persuade thee to Pythagoras his Cave, nor to the
Hermets Wilderness, nor to the Monks Cell; yet I would advise thee to frequent
solitariness, that thou may sometimes confer with Christ and with thy self,
as well as with others. We are fled so far from the solitude of superstition,
that we have cast off the solitude of contemplative devotion. Friends use to
converse most familiarly in private, and to open their Secrets, and let out
their affections most freely. Public converse is but common converse. Use
therefore (as Christ himself did, Mark 1.35.) to depart sometimes into a
solitary place, that thou may be wholly vacant for this great employment. See
Mat. 14.23. Mark 6.47. Luke 9.18* 36. John 6.15, 16. We seldom read of Gods
appearing by himself, or his Angels, to any of his Prophets or Saints in a
throng; but frequently when they were alone.

And as I advise thee to a place of retiredness; so also that thou observe more
particularly, what place and posture best agrees with thy spirit: Whether
within doors, or without; whether siting still, or walking. I believe Isaacs
example in this also, will direct us to the place and posture, which will best
suit with most, as it does with me, viz. His walking forth to meditate in the
field at the eventide. And Christ's own example in the places forecited; gives
us the like direction. Christ was used to a solitary Garden, that even Judas
when he came to betray him, knew where to find him, John 18.1, 2. And though
he took his Disciples thither with him, yet did he separate himself from them
for more Secret devotions, Luke 22.41. And though his meditation be not
directly named but only his praying yet it is very clearly implied, Matthew.
26.38, 39. His soul is first made sorrowful with the bitter meditations on his
death and sufferings, and then he pours it out in prayer, Mark 14.34. So that
Christ had his accustomed place, and consequently accustomed duty, and so must
we: Christ has a place that is solitary, whither he retireth himself even from
his own Disciples, and so must we: Christ's meditations do go further then his
thought; they affect, and p^erce his heart and soul, and so must ours. Only
there is a wide difference in the object: Christ meditates on the suffering
that our sins had deserved, that the wrath of his Father even passed through
his thoughts upon all his soul; But the meditation that we speak of, is on the
glory he has purchased; that the love of the Father, and the joy of the
Spirit, might enter at our thoughts, and revive our affections, and overflow
our souls. So that as Christ's meditation was the sluice or floodgate, to let in
Hell to overflow his Affections: so our meditation should be the sluice to let
in Heaven into our affections.

. 9.
SECT. IX.
SO much concerning the Time and Place of this duty. I am next to advise thee
somewhat concerning the preparations of thy heart. The success of the work does
much depend on the frame of thy heart. When man's heart had nothing in it that
might grieve the Spirit, then was it the delightful habitation of his Maker.
God did not quit his residence there, till man did expel him by unworthy
provocations. There grew no strangeness, till the heart grew sinful, and too
loathsome a dungeon for God to delight in. And were this soul reduced to its
former innocence, God would quickly return to his former habitation; yea, so
far as it is renewed and repaired by the Spirit, and purged of its lusts, and
beautified with his Image; the Lord will yet acknowledge it his own, and Christ
will manifest himself unto it, and the Spirit will take it for his Temple, and
Residence. So far as the soul is qualified for conversing with God, so far it
does actually (for the most part) enjoy him. Therefore with all diligence keep
thy heart; for from thence are the issues of life, Prove 4.23.

More particularly, when thou fettest on this duty, First, Get thy heart as
clear from the world as thou can; wholly lay by the thoughts of thy business,
of thy troubles, of thy enjoyments, and of every thing that may take up any
room in thy soul. Get thy soul as empty as possibly thou can, that so it may
be the more capable of being filled with God. It is a work (as I have said)
that will require all the powers of thy soul, if they were a thousand times
more capacious and active then they are; and therefore you have need to lay by
all other thoughts and affections, while you are busied here. If thou could
well perform some outward duty with a piece of thy heart, while the other is
absent, yet this above all I am sure thou can not. Surely, if thou once
address thy self to the business indeed, thou will be as the covetous man at
the heap of Gold; that when he might take as much as he could carry away,
lamented that he was able to bear no more: So when thou shall get into the
Mount in contemplation, thou will find there, as much of God and Glory, as thy
narrow heart is able to contain; and almost nothing to hinder thy full
possession, but only the uncapableness of thy own Spirit. O then (will thou
think) that this understanding were larger, that I might conceive more! that
these affections were wider to contain more! it is more my own unfitness, then
any thing else, which is the cause, that even this place is not my Heaven! God
is in this place, and I know it not. This Mount is full of the Angels of God,
but mine eyes are shut and cannot see them. O the words of love that Christ
has to speak! O the wonders of love that he has to show! But, alas, I cannot
bear them yet! Heaven is here ready at hand for me, but my incapable heart is
unready for Heaven! Thus would thou lament, that the deadness of thy heart
does hinder thy joys; even as a sick man is sorry that he wants a stomach,
when he sees a feast before him.

Therefore, Reader, seeing it is much in the capacity, and frame of thy heart,
how much thou shall enjoy of God in this contemplation; be sure that all the
room thou have be empty: and (if ever) seek him here with all thy soul: Thrust
no^ Christ into the stable, and the manger, as if thou had better guests for
the chiefest rooms. Say to all thy worldly business and thoughts, as Christ to
his Disciples, Sit you here, while I go and pray yonder, Matthew. 26.36. Or as
Abraham when he went to sacrifice Isaac, left his servants and Ass below the
Mount, saying, Stay you here, and I and the Lad, will go yonder and worship,
and come again to you: So say thou to all thy worldly thoughts, Abide you
below, while I go up to Christ, and then I will return to you again. Yea, as
God did terrify the people with his threats of death, if any one should dare
to come to the Mount, when Moses was to receive the Law from God; so do thou
terrify thy own heart, and use violence against thy intruding thoughts, if
they offer to accompany thee to the Mount of Contemplation. Even as the Priests
thrust Vzziah the King out of the Temple, where he presumed to burn incense,
when they saw the Leprosy to arise upon him; so do thou thrust these thoughts
from the Temple of thy heart, which have the badg of Gods prohibition upon
them. As you will beat back your dogs, yea, and leave your servants behind
you, when your selves are admitted into the Princes presence; so also do by
these. Your selves may be welcome, but such followers may not.

. 10
SECT. X.
2. BE sure thou set upon this work, with the greatest seriousness that
possibly thou can. Customariness here, is a killing sin. There is no trifling
in holy things; God will be sanctified of all that draw near him. These
spiritual, excellent, soul-raising duties, are the most dangerous, if we
miscarry in them, of all. The more they advance the soul, being well used, the
more they destroy it, being used unfaithfully: As the best meats corrupted, are
the worst. To help thee therefore to be serious when thou set on this work;
First, Labor to have the deepest apprehensions of the presence of God, and of
the incomprehensible Greatness of the Majesty which thou approachest. If
Rebecca vail her face at her approach to Isaac; if Esther must not draw near,
till the King hold forth the Scepter; if dust and worms-meat must have such
respect, Think then with what reverence thou should approach thy Maker: think
thou art addressing thy self to him, that made the Worlds with the word of his
mouth; that upholds the Earth as in the palm of his hand; that keeps the Sun,
and Moon, and Heavens in their courses; that bounds the raging Sea with the
Sands, and says, Jer. 5.22.
Hitherto go, and no farther: Thou art going about to converse with him, before
whom the Earth will quake, and Devils tremble; before whose bar thou must
shortly stand, and all the world with thee, to receive their doom. O think, I
shall then have lively apprehensions of his Majesty; my drowsy spirits will
then be wakened, and my stupid unreverence be laid aside: Why should I not now
be rouzed with the sense of his Greatness, and the dread of his Name possess my
soul?

Secondly, Labor to apprehend the greatness of the work, which thou attemptest,
and to be deeply sensible both of its weight and height; of its concernment and
excellency. If thou were pleading for thy life at the bar of a Judge, thou
would be serious; and yet that were but a trifle to this: If thou were
engaged in such a work as David was against Goliath, whereon the Kingdoms
deliverance did depend, in it self considered, it were nothing to this. Suppose
thou were going to such a wrestling as Jacobs; suppose thou were going to see
the sight, which the three Disciples saw in the Mount: How seriously! how
reverently would thou both approach and behold? If the Sun do suffer any
notable Eclipse, how seriously do all run out to see it? If some Angel from
Heaven should but appoint to meet thee, at the same time and place of thy
contemplations, how dreadfully, how apprehensively would thou go to meet him?
Why, consider then with what a Spirit thou should meet the Lord; and with
what seriousness and dread thou should daily converse with him: When Manoah
had seen but an Angel, he cries out, We shall surely die, because we have seen
God, Judge 13.22.

Consider also, the blessed Issue of the work, if it do succeed; it will be an
admission of thee into the presence of God, a beginning of thy Eternal Glory on
Earth; a means to make thee live above the rate of other men, and admit thee
into the next room to the Angels themselves; a means to make thee live and die,
both joyfully and blessedly: So that the prize being so great, thy preparations
should be answerable. There is none on Earth that live such a life of joy and
blessedness, as those that are acquainted with this Heavenly conversation: The
joys of all other men are but like a childs play, a fools laughter, as a
dream of health to the sick, or as a fresh pasture to a hungry Beast. It is he
that trades at Heaven, that is the only gainer; and he that neglects it,
that is the only loser. And therefore how seriously should this work be done!

CHAP. VIII. Of Consideration, the instrument of this Work; and what force it
has to move the Soul.
. 1.
SECT. I.
HAving showed thee how thou must set upon this work, I come now to direct thee
in the work it self, and to show thee the way which thou must take to perform
it. All this has been but to set the Instrument (thy heart) in tune; and now
we are come to the Music it self: All this has been but to get thee an
appetite; it follows now, That thou approach unto the Feast; that thou sit
down, and take what is offered, and delight thy soul, as with marrow and
fatness. Whoever you are, that are children of the Kingdom, I have this message
to you from the Lord, Matthew. 22.4. Luke 14.17.
Behold, the dinner is prepared; the Oxen and fatlings are killed: Come, for
all things are now ready. Heaven is before you; Christ is before you; the
exceeding Eternal weight of Glory is before you: Come therefore, and feed upon
it: Do not make light of this invitation, ( Matthew. 22.5.) nor put off your own
mercies with excuses; ( Luke 14.18.) what ever thou art, Rich or poor, though
in Almshouses or Hospitals though in Highways or Hedges, my Commission is, if
possible, to compel you to come in; Luke 14.23.
And blessed is he that eats bread in the Kingdom of God, Luke 14.15. The
Manna lies about your Tents; walk forth into the Wilderness, gather it up,
take it home, and feed upon it: so that the remaining Work is only to direct
you, how to use your hands and mouth to feed your stomach, I mean, how to use
your ^nderstandings for the warming of your Affections, and to fire your Hearts
by the help of your Heads. And herein it will be necessary that I observe this
Method; First, to show you what instrument it is that you must work by.
Secondly, Why, and how this way of working is like to succeed and attain its
end. Thirdly, What powers of the soul should here be acted, and what are the
particular Affections to be excited, and what objective Considerations are
necessary thereto, and in what order you should proceed. Fourthly, By what acts
you must advance to the height of the work. Fifthly, What advantages you must
take, and what helps you must use for the facilitating your success. Sixthly,
In what particulars you must look narrowly to your hearts through the whole:
And I will be the briefer in all, left you should love my meaning in a crowd of
words, or your thoughts be carried from the Work it self, by an overlong and
tedious Explication of it.

SECT. II.. 2.

1. THe great Instrument that this Work is done by, is Ratiocination, Reasoning
the case with your selves, Discourse of mind, Cogitation, or Thinking, or, if
you will, call it Consideration. I here suppose you to know the things to be
considered, and therefore shall wholly pass over tha^ Meditation of Students,
which tends only to Speculation or Knowing; They are known Truths that I
persuade you to consider; for the grossly ignorant that know not the Doctrine
of everlasting Life, are, for the present, incapable of this duty.

Man's soul as it receives and retains the Idea's or Shapes of things, so has
it a power to choose out any of these deposited Idea's, and draw them forth, and
act upon them again and again; even as a Sheep can fetch up his meat for
rumination; otherwise nothing would affect us, but while the sense is receiving
it, and so we should be somewhat below the Bruits. This is the power that here
you must use: To this choice of Idea's or subjects for your Cogitation, there
must necessarily concur the act of the Will, which indeed must go along in the
whole Work; for this must be a voluntary, not a forced Cogitation; Some men do
consider whether they will or no, and are not able to turn away their own
thoughts, so will God make the wicked consider of their sins when he shall set
them all in order before them, Psalm. 50.21.22. And so shall the damned consider
of Heaven, and of the excellency of Christ whom they once despised, and of the
eternal joys which they have foolishly lost. But this forced Consideration, is
not that I mean, but that which thou do willingly and purposely chose; but
though they will be here requisite, yet still Consideration is the instrument
of the Work.

. 3.
SECT. III.
2. NExt let us see what force Consideration has for the moving of the
affections, and for the powerful imprinting of things in the heart.

Why, First, Consideration does, as it were, open the door, between the Head
and the Heart: The Understanding having received Truths, lays them up in the
Memory, now Consideration is the conveyer of them from thence to the
Affections: There Is few men of so weak Understanding or Memory, but they know
and can remember that which would strangely work upon them, and make great
alterations in their spirits, if they were not locked up in their brain, and if
they could but convey them down to their hearts: Now this is the great work of
Consideration. O what rare men would they be, who have strong heads, and much
learning, and knowledge, if the obstructions between the Head and the Heart
were but opened! and their Affections did but correspond to their
Understandings! why, if they would but bestow as much time and pains in
studying the goodness and the evil of things, as they bestow in studying the
Truth and Falsehood of Enunciations, it were the readiest way to obtain this; he
is usually the best Scholar, who has the quick, the clear, and the tenacious
apprehension; but he is usually the best Christian, who has the deepest,
piercing, and affecting Apprehension: He is the best Scholar who has the
readiest passage from the Ear to the Brain, but he is the best Christian, who
has the readiest passage from the Brain to the Heart; now Consideration is
that on our parts that must open the passage, though the Spirit open as the
principal cause; inconsiderate men are stupid and senseless.

SECT. IV.. 4.

2. MAtters of great weight, which do nearly concern us, are aptest to work
most effectually upon the Heart; now Meditation draws forth these working
Objects, and presents them to the Affections in their worth and weight: The
most delectable Object does not please him that sees it not, nor does the
joyfullest news affect him that never hears it; now Consideration presents
before us those Objects that were as absent, and brings them to the Eye, and
the Ear of the soul: Are not Christ and Glory, think you, affecting Objects?
would not they work wonders upon the soul if they were but clearly discovered?
and strangely transport us, if our apprehensions were any w^it answerable to
their worth! why, by Consideration it is that they are presented to us. This is
the Prospective Glass of the Christian, by which he can see from Earth to
Heaven.

SECT. V.. 5.

3. AS Consideration draws forth the weightiest Objects, so it presents
them in the most affecting way, and presses them home with enforcing
Arguments. Man is a Rational Creature, and apt to be moved in a Reasoning way,
especially when Reasons are evident and strong: Now Consideration is a
reasoning the case with a man's own heart; and what a multitude of Reasons both
clear and weighty, are always at hand for to work upon the heart? When a
Believer would reason his heart to this heavenly work, how many Arguments do
offer themselves? from God, from the Redeemer, from every one of the Divine
Attributes, from our former Estate, from our present Estate, from Promises,
from Seals, from Earnest, from the Evil we now suffer, from the Good we partake
of, from Hell, from Heaven? every thing does offer it self to promote our joy;
now Meditation is the Hand to draw forth all these; as when you are weighing a
thing in the Balance, you lay on a little more, and a little more till it
weigh down; so if your Affections do hang in a dull indifferency, why, due
Meditation will add Reason after Reason till the scales do turn: Or as when you
are buying any thing of necessity for your use, you bid a little more and a
little more till at last you come to the sellers price: so when Meditation is
persuading you to Joy, it will first bring one Reason, and then another, till
it have silenced all your distrust and sorrows, and your cause to rejoice lies
plain before you. If another man's reasons will work so powerfully with us,
though we are uncertain whether his heart do concur with his speeches, and
whether his intention be to inform us or deceive us; how much more should our
own Reasons work with us, when we are acquainted with the right intentions of
our own hearts? Nay how much more rather should Gods Reasons work with us,
which we are sure are neither fallacions in his intent, nor in themselves?
seeing he did never yet deceive, nor was ever deceived? Why now Meditation is
but the Reading over and repeating Gods reasons to our hearts, and so disputing
with our selves in his Arguments and terms: And is not this then likely to be a
prevailing way? What Reasons does the prodigal plead with himself, why he
should return to his fathers house? And as many and strong have we to plead
with our affections, to persuade them to our Fathers Everlasting habitations.
And by Consideration it is that they must all be set a work.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
4. MEditation puts reason in its Authority and pre-eminence. It helps to
deliver it from its captivity to the senses, and sets it again upon the
throne of the soul. When Reason is silent, it is usually subject: For when it
is asleep, the senses domineer: Now consideration wakeneth our reason from its
sleep; till it rowse up it self as Sampson, and break the bonds of sensuality
wherewith it is fettered: and then as a Giant refreshed with wine, it bears
down the delusions of the flesh before it. What strength can the Lion put forth
when he is asleep? What is the King more then another man, when he is once
deposed from his throne and authority? When men have no better Judge then the
flesh; or when the joys of heaven go no further then their fantasy, no wonder
if they work but as common things: sweet things to the eye, and beautiful
things to the ear, will work no more then bitter and deformed: every thing
works in its own place, and every sense has its proper object: Now it is
spiritual reason excited by Meditation, and not the fantasy or fleshly sense,
which must favor and judge of those superior Joys. Consideration exalts the
objects of faith, and disgraceth comparatively the objects of sense. The most
inconsiderate men are the most sensual men.

SECT. VII.. 7.

5. MEditation also puts reason into his strength. Reason is at the
strongest when it is most in action: Now Meditation produces reason into Act.
Before it was as a standing water, which can move nothing else when it self
moves not: but now it is as the speedy stream which violently bears down all
before it. Before it was as the still and silent air, but now it is as the
powerful motion of the wind, and overthrows the opposition of the flesh and the
devil. Before it was as the stones which lay still in the brook; but now when
Meditation does set it awork, it is as the stone out of David's sling, which
smites the Goliath of our unbelief in the forehead. As wicked men continue
wicked, not because they have not reason in the principle, but because they
bring it not into Act and use, so godly men are uncomfortable and sad, not
because they have no causes to rejoice, nor because they have not reason to
discern those causes; but because they let their reason and faith lie asleep,
and do not labor to set them a going, nor stir them up to action by this work
of Meditation. You know that our very dreams will deeply affect: What fears!
What sorrows! What Joy will they stir up? How much more then would serious
Meditation affect us?

SECT. VIII.. 8.

6. MEditation can continue this Discou^sive employment: That may be
accomplished by a weaker motion continued, which will not by a stronger at the
first attempt. A plaster that is never so effectual to cure, must yet have
time to do its work, and not to be taken off as soon as its on. Now Meditation
does hold the plaster to the sore: It holds Reason and Faith to their work,
and blows the fire till it thoroughly burn. To run a few steps will not get a
man heat, but walking an hour together may: So though a sudden occasional
thought of Heaven, will not raise our affections to any spiritual heat; yet
Meditation can continue our thoughts, and lengthen our walk till our hearts
grow warm.

And thus you see what force Meditation or consideration has, for the
effecting of this great elevation of the soul, whereto I have told you it must
be the Instrument.

CHAP. IX. What Affections must be Acted, and by what Considerations and
objests, and in what order.
. 1.
SECT. I.
THirdly, To draw yet nearer the heart of the work; The third thing to be
discovered to you is, What Powers of the soul must here be acted? What
affections excited? What considerations of their objects are necessary thereto?
and in what order we must proceed? I join all these together, because though in
themselves they are distinct things, yet in the practice they all concur to
the same Action.

The matters of God which we are to think on, have their various
qualifications, and are presented to the soul of man in diverse relative and
Modal considerations: According to these several considerations of the objects,
the soul it self is distinguished into its several faculties, powers, and
capacities* That as God has given man five senses to partake of the five
distinct excellencies of the objects of sense; so he has diversifyed the soul
of man either into faculties, powers or ways of acting, answerable to the
various qualifications and considerations of himself and the inferior objects
of this soul: And as, if there be more sensible excellencies in the creatures,
yet they are unknown to us who have but these five senses to discern them by,
so whatever other excellencies are in God and our happiness, more then these
faculties or powers of the soul can apprehend, must needs remain wholly unknown
to us, till our souls have senses (as it were) suitable to those objects. (...)
as it is unknown to a tree or a stone, what sound, and light (...) sweetness
are; or that there are any such things in the world (...).

Now these matters of God are primarily diversifyed to our consideration under
the Distinction of True and Good, accordingly the primary For I am (...) I call
them di^stinct faculties because it is the common Judgment and not my own.
Distinction concerning the soul, is into the faculties of Understanding and
Will; the former having Truth for its object, and the latter Goodness. This
Truth is sometime known by evident Demonstration, and so it is the object of
that we call knowledge (which also admits of diverse distinctions according to
several ways of demonstration, which I am loath here to puzzle you with)
Sometime it is received from the Testimony of others, which receiving we call
belief. When any thing else would obscure it, or stands up in competition with
it; then we weigh their several evidences, and accordingly discover and
vindicate the Truth, and this we call Judgment. Sometime by the strength, the
clearness, or the frequency of the understandings apprehensions, this Truth
does make a deeper impression, and so is longer retained, which imp^^ssion and
retention we call memory. And as truth is thus variously presented to the
understanding and received by it; so also is the goodness of the object
variously represented to the will, which does accordingly put forth its various
acts. When it appears only as good in it self, and not good for us, or
suitable* it is not the object of the will at all; but only this Enuntiation
[It is good] is passed upon it by the Judgment, and withal it raises an
admiration at its excellency. If it appear evil to us, then we Nill it. But if
it appear both good in it self, and to us, or suitable, then it provokes the
affection of Love: If the good thus loved do appear as absent from us, then it
exciteth the passion of Desire: If the good so Loved and Desired do appear
possible and feasible in the attaining, then it exciteth the passion of Hope,
which is a compound of Desire and Expectation; when we look upon it as
requiring our endeavor to attain it, and as it is to be had in a prescribed
way, then it provokes the passion of courage or boldness, and concludes in
resolution. Lastly, if this good be apprehended as present, then it provokes
to delight or Joy: If the thing it self be present, the Joy is greatest: If but
the Idea of it (either through the remainder or memory of the good that is
past, or through the fore-apprehension of that which we expect) yet even this
also exciteth our Joy. And this Joy is the perfection of all the rest.

. 2.
SECT. II.
SO that by this time, I suppose you see, both what are the objects that must
move our affections, and what powers of the soul apprehend these objects: you
see also, I doubt not, what affections you must excite, and in what order it is
to be done: Yet for your better assistance I will more fully direct you in the
several particulars.

1. Then, you must by cogitation go to the memory (which is the Magazine or
Treasury of the understanding) thence you must take forth those heavenly
doctrines, which you intend to make the subject of your Meditation; for the
present purpose, you may look over any promise of eternal life in the Gospel,
any description of the glory of the Saints, or the very Articles of the
Resurrection of the body, and the Life everlasting: some one sentence
concerning those Eternal Joys, may afford you matter for many years
Meditation; yet it will be a point of our wisdom here, to have always a stock
of matter in our memory, that so when we should use it, we may bring forth out
of our treasury things new and old. For a good man has a good Treasury in his
heart, from whence he brings forth good things, Luke 6.45. and out of this
abundance of his heart, he should speak to himself as well as to others. Yea if
we took things in order, and observed some Method in respect of the matter, and
did Meditate first on one Truth concerning Eternity, and then another, it would
not be amiss. And if any should be barren of Matter through weakness of memory,
they may have notes or books of this subject for their furtherance.

SECT. III.. 3.

2. WHen you have fetched from your memory the matter of your Meditation, your
next work is to present it to your Judgment: open there the case as fully as
thou can; set forth the several ornaments of the Crown, the several dignities
belonging to the Kingdom, as they are partly laid open in the beginning of this
Book; Let judgment deliberately view them over, and take as exact a survey as
it can, Then put the question, and require a determination, Is there happiness
in all this? or not? Is not here enough to make me blessed? Can he want any
thing, who fully possesses God? Is there any thing higher for a creature to
attain? Thus urge thy judgment to pass an upright sentence, and compel it to
subscribe to the perfection of thy Celestial happiness, and to leave this
sentence as under its hand upon Record. If thy senses should here begin to
mutter, and to put in a word for fleshly pleasure or profits; let judgment hear
what each can say: weigh the Arguments of the world and flesh in one end, and
the Arguments for the pre-eminence of Glory in the other end, and judge
impartially which should be preferred. Try whether there be any comparison to
be made; which is more excellent? which more manly? which is more satisfactory?
and which more pure? which freeth most from misery? and advances us highest?
and which do thou think is of longer continuance? Thus let deliberate
judgment decide it; and let not Flesh carry it by noise and by violence; And
when the sentence is passed and recorded in thy heart, it will be ready at hand
to be produced upon any occasion, and to silence the flesh in its next attempt,
and to disgrace the world in its next competition.

Thus exercise thy Judgment in the contemplation of thy Rest; thus Magnify and
Advance the Lord in thy heart, till a holy admiration has possessed thy Soul.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
3. BUt the great work (which you may either promise or subjoyn to this as you
please,) is, To exercise thy belief of the truth of thy Rest: And that both in
respect of the truth of the Promise, and also the truth of thy own Interest and
Title. As unbelief does cause the languishing of all our Graces, so Faith would
do much to revive and actuate them, if it were but revived and actuated it
self: Especially our belief of the verity of the Scripture, I conceive as
needful to be exercised and confirmed, as almost any point of Faith. But of
this I have spoken in the Second Part of this Book, whither I refer thee for
some confirming Arguments. Though few complain of their not believing
Scripture, yet I conceive it to be the commonest part of unbelief, and the very
root of bitterness, which spoileth our Graces. Perhaps thou have not a positive
belief of the contrary, nor do not flatly think that Scripture is not the
Word of God; that were to be a downright Infidel indeed: And yet thou may
have but little belief, that Scripture is Gods Word, and that both in regard of
the habit, and the act. Its one thing, not to believe Scripture to be true; and
another thing, positively to believe it to be false. Faith may be idle, and
suspend its exercise toward the Truth, though it do not yet act against the
Truth. It may stand still, when it goes not out of the way; it may be asleep,
and do you little service, though it do not directly fight against you.
Besides, a great deal of unbelief may consist with a small degree of Faith. If
we did soundly believe, That there is such a Glory; that within a few days our
eyes shall behold it: O what passions would it raise within us! Were we
thoroughly persuaded, That every Word in the Scripture concerning the
unconceivable joys of the Kingdom, and the unexpressible Blessedness of the
life to come, were the very Word of the Living God, and should certainly be
performed to the smallest tittle; O what astonishing apprehensions of that life
would it breed! what amazing horror would seize upon our hearts, when we found
our selves strangers to the conditions of that life! and utterly ignorant of
our portion therein! what love, what longings would it raise within us! O, how
it would actuate every affection! how it would transport us with joy upon the
least assurance of our title! If I were as verily persuaded, that I shall
shortly see those great things of Eternity, promised in the Word, as I am, that
this is a chair that I sit in, or that this is paper that I write on; would it
not put another Spirit within me? would it not make me forget, and despise the
world? and even forget to sleep, John 4.32.
or to eat? And say (as Christ) I have meat to eat, that ye know not of. O,
Sirs, you little know what a through belief would work. Not that every one has
such affections, who has a true Faith: But thus would the acting and
improvement of our Faith advance us.

Therefore let this be a chief part of thy business in Meditation. Produce the
strong Arguments for the Truth of Scripture; plead them against thy unbelieving
nature; answer, and silence all the cavils of infidelity: Read over the
Promises; study all confirming Providence; call forth thine own recorded
experiences: Remember the Scriptures already fulfilled; both to the Church and
Saints in former ages, and eminently to both in this present age; and those
that have been fulfilled particularly to thee: Get ready the clearest and most
convincing Arguments, and keep them by thee, and frequently thus use them.
Think it not enough, that thou wast once convinced, though thou have now forgot
the Arguments that did it; no, nor that thou have the Arguments still in thy
Book, or in thy Brain: This is not the acting of thy Faith; but present them to
thy understanding in thy frequent meditations, and urge them home, till they
force belief. Actual convincing, when it is clear and frequent, will work those
deep impressions on the heart, which an old neglected forgotten conviction will
not. O, if you would not think it enough, that you have Faith in the habit, and
that you did once believe, but would be daily setting this first wheel a going:
Surely, all the inferior wheels of the Affections would more easily move. Never
expect to have Love and Joy move, when the foregoing Grace of Faith stands
still.

And as you should thus act your assent to the Promise, so also your
Acceptance, your Adherence, your Affiance, and your Assurance: These are the
four steps of Application of the Promise to our selves. I have said somewhat
among the Helps, to move you to get Assurance: But that which I here aim at,
is, That you would daily exercise it. Set before your Faith, the Freeness, and
the Universality of the Promise: Consider of Gods offer, and urging it upon
all; and that he has excepted from the conditional Covenant, no man in the
world; nor will exclude any from Heaven, who will accept of his offer. Study
also the gracious disposition of Christ, and his readiness to entertain, and
welcome all that will come: Study all the Evidences of his love, which appeared
in his sufferings; in his preaching the Gospel; in his condescension to
sinners; in his easy conditions; in his exceeding patience; and in his urgent
invitations: Do not all these discover his readiness to save? did he ever yet
manifest himself unwilling? remember also his faithfulness to perform his
engagements. Study also the Evidences of his Love in thy self; look over the
works of his Grace in thy soul: If thou do not find the degree which thou
desire, yet deny not that degree which thou find; look after the
sincerity, more then the quantity. Remember what discoveries of thy state, thou
have made formerly in the work of self-examination; how often God has convinced
thee of the sincerity of thy heart: Remember all the sonner testimonies of the
Spirit; and all the sweet feelings of the favor of God; and all the prayers
that he has heard and granted, and all the rare preservations and
deliverances; and all the progress of his Spirit in his workings on thy soul;
and the disposals of providence, conducing to thy good: The vouchsafing of
means, the directing thee to them, the directing of Ministers to meet with thy
state, the restraint of those sins that thy nature was most prone to. And
though one of these considered alone, may be no sure evidence of his special
love, (which I expect thou should try by more infallible signs) yet lay them
altogether, and then think with thy self, Whether all these, do not testify
the good will of the Lord, concerning thy salvation? and may not well be
pleaded against thine unbelief? And whether thou may not conclude with
Sampsons Mother, when her husband thought they should surely die, If the Lord
were pleased to kill us, he would not have received an offering at our hands,
neither would he have showed us all these things; nor would, as at this time,
have told us such things as these, Judge. 13.22, 23.

SECT. V.. 5.

^. WHen thy Meditation has thus proceeded about the truth of thy Happiness,
the next part of the work is to meditate of its Goodness; That when the
Judgment has determined, and Faith has apprehended, it may then past on to
raise the Affections.

1. The first Affection to be acted is Love; the object of it (as I have told
you) is Goodness: Here then, here Christian, is the Soul reviving part of thy
work; Go to thy Memory, thy Judgment, and thy Faith, and from them produce the
excellencies of thy Rest; take out a copy of the Record of the Spirit in
Scripture, and another of the sentence registered in thy Spirit, whereby the
^^anscendent glory of the Saints is declared: Present these to thy affection of
Love; open to it the Cabinet that contains the Pearl; show it the Promise, and
that which it assures: Thou need not look on Heaven through a multiplying
Glass; open but one Casement, that Love may look in: Give it but a glimpse of
the back parts of God, and thou will find thy self presently in another world:
Do but speak out, and Love can hear, do but reveal these things, and Love can
see: Its the brutish love of the world that is blind; Divine love is
exceeding quick sighted. Let thy Faith, as it were, take thy heart by the hand,
and show it the sumptuous buildings of thy Eternal Habitation, and the Glorious
Ornaments of thy Fathers house; show it those Mansions which Christ is
preparing, and display before it the Honors of the Kingdom: Let Faith lead thy
heart into the presence of God, and draw as near as possibly thou can, and
say to it, He that doubts whether the Philosophers themselves did acknowledge
these Divine Excellencies, Let him read Fernel. De abditis Rerum causis, cap 9.
Plato in Epinom. Deos asserit scire, videre, audireque omnia; nihil ipsos
fugere; quod aut sensu aut mente percipi posset: Eos omnia posse quaecunque
mortales immortalesve possunt: Bonos illos, immo optimos esse. Quicquid mortale
est, quicquid vivit and spirat, quicquid usquam est, coelum, terram, maria, ab
iis omnia and facta esse and possideri. Et in Parmenide, Nullum nisi Deum
supremam habere rerum scientiam, neque illarum cognitione privandum. Et in
Epinomide, Ego assero Deum causam omnium esse, nec aliter peri posse. Lege
etiam Aristotel. de caelo. lib. 1. Jum nona.
Behold, the Ancient of days; the Lord Jehovah, whose name is, I am: This is he
who made the Worlds with his Word; this is the Cause of all Causes, the Spring
of Action, the Fountain of Life, the first Principle of the Creatures Motions;
who upholds the Earth, who rules the Nations, who disposes of events, and
subdueth his foes, who governs the depths of the great Waters, and boundeth
the rage of her swelling Waves; who rules the Winds, and moves the Orbs, and
causes the Sun to run its race, and the several Planets to know their courses:
This is he that loved thee from Everlasting, that formed thee in the Womb, and
gave thee this Soul; who brought thee forth, and showed thee the Light, and
ranked thee with the chiefest of his earthly Creatures; who endued thee with
thy understanding, and beautified thee with his gifts; who maintains thee
with life, and health, and comforts; who gave thee thy preferments, and
dignified thee with thy honors, and differenced thee from the most miserable
and vilest of men: Here, O here, is an object now worthy thy love; here
should thou even pour out thy soul in love; here thou may be sure thou
caust not love too much: Psalm. 23.4, 5.
This is the Lord that has blessed thee with his benefits, that has spread thy
table in the sight of thine enemies, and caused thy cup to overflow. This is he
that Angels and Saints do praise; and the Host of Heaven must magnify for ever.

Thus do thou expatiate in the Praises of God, and open his Excellencies to
thine own heart, till thou feel the life begin to stir, and the fire in thy
breast begin to kindle: As gazing upon the dusty beauty of flesh, does kindle
the fire of carnal love; so this gazing on the Glory and Goodness of the Lord,
will kindle this Spiritual love in the-soul. Bruising will make the Spices
odoriferous, and rubbing the Pomander will bring forth the sweetness: Act
therefore thy soul upon this delightful object; toss these cogitations
frequently in thy heart, rub over all thy Affections with them, as you will do
your cold hands, till they begin to warm: What though thy heart be Rock and
Flint, this often striking may bring forth the fire; but if yet thou feel
not thy love to work, lead thy heart further, and show it yet more; show it the
Son of the living God, whose name is, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God,
Isai. 9.6.
The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace; show it the King of Saints on the
Throne of his Glory, who is the first and the last, who is, and was, and is to
come; who lives, and was dead, and behold, he lives for evermore; who has
made thy peace by the blood of his Cross, and has prepared thee with himself,
an Habitation of Peace: His office is, to be the great Peacemaker; his Kingdom
is, a Kingdom of Peace; his Gospel is, the Tidings of Peace; his Voice to thee
now is, the Voice of Peace: Draw near and behold him: Do thou not hear his
voice? He that called Thomas to come near, Luke 24.36, 37, 38, 39.
and to see the print of the Nails, and to put his finger into his Wounds; He
it is that calls to thee, Come near, and view the Lord thy Savior, and be not
faithless, but believing: Joh. 7.27. Isai. 59.1. Joh. 20.19.21.26.
Peace be unto thee, fear not, It is I: He that calls, Behold me, behold me,
to a rebellious people that calls not on his Name, does call out to thee a
Believer to behold him: He that calls to them who pass by, to behold his Sorrow
in the day of his Humiliation, does call now to thee to behold his Glory in the
day of his Exaltation: Look well upon him; Do thou not know him? why, its He
that brought thee up from the pit of hell: Its He that reversed the sentence of
thy Damnation; that bore the Curse which thou should have born, and restored
thee to the blessing that thou had forfeited and lost, and purchased the
Advancement which thou must inherit for ever: And yet do thou not know him?
why his Hands were pierced, his Head was pierced, his Sides were pierced, his
Heart was pierced with the sting of thy sins, that by these marks thou might
always know him; Do thou not remember when he found thee lying in thy blood,
Lam. 1.12. Ezekiel. 16.6, 7, 8.9. Luke 10 30. etc.
and took pity on thee, and dressed thy wounds, and brought thee home, and said
unto thee, Live? Have thou forgotten since he wounded himself to cure thy
wounds, and let out his own blood to stop thy bleeding? Is not the passage to
his heart yet standing open? If thou know him not by the face, the voice, the
hands; If the Love of God in us were but as the love of the world in others, it
would make us wholly despise this world and forget it, as worldly love makes
men forget God: and it would be so strong, and ardent, and rooted a in man's
heart that he would not be able voluntarily and freely to think of any thing
else: He would not fear contempt, nor care for disgrace or the reproaches of
persecutions; nor would he be afraid of death it self, because of this Love of
God; and all the things of this world which he sees and hears, would bring
God to his memory, and themselves would seem to him but as a dream, or a fable,
and he would esteem them as nothing in respect of God and his Glory. And (to be
short) in the judgment of the world he would be taken for a fool or a drunken
man, because he so little cares for the things of this world; -- This is that
Love of God to which we should aim to attain by this contemplative life. Gerson
de monte Contemplationis in part operum tertia fol. 382.
if thou know him not by the tears and bloody sweat, yet look nearer, thou
may know him by the Heart: That broken-healed heart is his, that dead-revived
Heart is his, that soul-pittying melting Heart is his: Doubtless it can be
none's but his, Love and Compassion are its certain Signatures: This is He,
even this is He, who would rather dye then thou shoulst dye, who chose thy life
before his own, who pleads this blood before his Father, and makes continual
intercession for thee; if he had not suffered, O what had thou suffered? what
had thou been if he had not Redeemed thee? whether had thou gone if he had
not recalled thee? there was but a step between thee and Hell, when he stepped
in, and bore the stroke; He slew the Bear, and rescued the prey, he delivered
thy soul from the roaring Lion; And is not here yet fuel enough for Love to
feed on? Does not this Loadstone snatch thy heart unto it? and almost draw it
forth of thy breast? Can thou read the History of Love any further at once?
Does not thy throbbing heart here stop to ease it self? and do thou not, as
Joseph, seek for a place to weep in? or do not the tears of thy Love bedew
these lines? Go on then, for the field of Love is large, it will yield thee
fresh contents for ever, and be thine eternal work to behold and love: thou
need not then want work for thy present Meditation. Have thou forgotten the
time when thou wast weeping, and he wiped the tears from thine eyes? when thou
wast bleeding, and he wiped the blood from thy soul? when pricking cares and
fears did grieve thee, and he did refresh thee, and draw out the Thorns? Have
thou forgotten when thy folly did wound thy soul, and the venomous guilt did
seize upon thy heart? when he sucked forth the mortal poison from thy soul,
though therewith he drew it into his own? I remember its written of good
Melancthon, Melanc. Epist. 457. Memini cum infantula mihi lacrimas a genis
detergeret suo indusiolo, quo uno aerat induta mane. Hic gestus penetravit in
animum meum, etc.

Genesis 21.15* 16, 17, 18, 19. 1 Kings 19.9.


that when his child was removed from him, it pierced his heart to remember,
how he once sat weeping with the Infant on his knee, and how lovingly it wiped
away the tears from the fathers eyes; how then should it pierce thy heart to
think, how lovingly Christ has wiped away thine! O how often has he found thee
sitting weeping like Hagar, while thou gave up thy state, thy friends, thy
life, yea, thy soul for lost? and he opened to thee a Well of Consolation, and
opened thine eyes also that thou might see it. How often has he found thee in
the posture of Elias, sitting down under the tree forlorn and solitary, and
desiring rather to dye then to live? and he has spread thee a Table of relief
from Heaven, and sent thee away refreshed, and encouraged to his Work? How often
has he found thee in the trouble of the Servant of Elisha, crying out, Alas,
what shall we do, for an Host does compass the City? 2 Kings 6.16, 17.
and he has opened thine eyes to see more for thee then against thee, both in
regard of the enemies of thy soul and thy body? How often has he found thee in
such a passion as Jonas, in thy peevish frenzy aweary of thy life? and he has
not answered passion with passion, though he might indeed have done well to be
angry, but has mildely reasoned thee out of thy madness, and said, Do thou
well to be angry, or to repine against me? Matthew. 14.37. Luke 22.45, 46.
How often has he set thee on watching and praying, on repenting, and believing,
and when he has returned has found thee fast asleep? and yet he has not
taken thee at the worst, but in stead of an angry aggravation of thy fault, he
has covered it over with the mantle of Love, Matthew. 26.41.
and prevented thy overmuch sorrow with a gentle excuse, The Spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak? He might have done by thee as Epaminondas by
his Soldier, who finding him asleep upon the VVatch, run him through with his
Sword, and said, Dead I found thee, and dead I leave thee; but he rather chose
to awake thee more gently, that his tenderness might admonish thee, and keep
thee watching; How often has he been traduced in his Cause or Name, and thou
have, like Peter, denied him, (at lest by thy silence) whilst he has stood in
sight? yet all the revenge he has taken has been a heart-melting look, Luke
22.61.
and a silent remembering thee of thy fault by his countenance. How often has Law
and Conscience haled thee before him, as the Pharisees did the adulterous
woman? and laid thy most heinous crimes to thy charge? And when thou have
expected to hear the sentence of death, he has shamed away thy Accusers, and
put them to silence, and taken on him he did not hear thy Indictment, and said
to thee, Neither do I accuse thee, Go thy way and sin no more.

And art thou not yet transported and ravished with Love? Can thy heart be cold
when thou think of this? or can it hold when thou remembrest those boundless
compassions? Remembrest thou not the time when he met thee in thy duties? when
he smiled upon thee, and spoke comfortably to thee? when thou did sit down
under his shadow with great delight, and when his fruit was sweet to thy taste?
when he brought thee to his Banqueting House, and his Banner over thee was
Love? when his left hand was under thy head, and with his right hand he did
embrace thee? And do thou not yet cry ou^, Cant. 2 3, 4, 5.
Stay me, comfort me for I am sick of Love? Thus Reader, I would have thee deal
with thy heart; Thus hold forth the goodness of Christ to thy Affections; plead
thus the case with thy frozen soul, till thou say as David in another case, My
heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned. Psalm. 39.3. If
these forementioned Arguments will not rouse up thy love, thou have more enough
of this nature at hand: Thou have all Christ's personal excellencies to study:
thou have all his particular mercies to thy self, both special and common: thou
have all his sweet and near relations to thee, and thou have the happiness of
thy perpetual abode with him hereafter; all these do offer themselves to thy
Meditation, with all their several branches and adjuncts. Only follow them
close to thy heart; ply the work, and let it not cool: Deal with thy heart, as
Christ did with Peter, when he asked him thrice over, Love thou me? till he
was grieved, and answers, Lord, thou know that I love thee. So say to thy
Heart, Love thou thy Lord? and ask it the second time, and urge it the third
time, John. 21.15, 16, 17.
Love thou thy Lord? till thou grieve it, and shame it out of its stupidity,
and it can truly say, Thou know that I love him.

And thus I have showed you how to excite the affection of Love.

. 6.
SECT. VI.
2. THe next Grace or Affection to be excited, is Desire. The Object of it is
Goodness considered as absent, or not yet attained. This being so necessary an
attendant of Love, and being excited much by the same forementioned objective
considerations, I suppose you need the less direction to be here added; and
therefore I shall touch but briefly on this. If love be hot, I warrant you
desire will not be cold.

When thou have thus viewed the goodness of the Lord, and considered of the
pleasures that are at his right hand; then proceed on with thy Meditation thus;
Think with thy self, Where have I been? what have I seen? O the
incomprehensible astonishing Glory! O the rare transcendent beauty! O blessed
souls that now enjoy it! that see a thousand times more clearly, what I have
seen but darkly at this distance, and scarce discerned through the interposing
clouds! What a difference is there betwixt my state and theirs! I am sighing,
and they are singing: I am sinning, and they are pleasing God: I have an
ulcerated cancrous soul, like the loathsome bodies of Job or Lazarus, a
spectacle of pity to those that behold me; But they are perfect and without
blemish: I am here entangled in the love of the world, when they are taken up
with the love of God: I live indeed amongst the means of grace, and I possess
the fellowship of my fellow-believers; But I have none of their immediate views
of God, nor none of that fellowship which they possess; (...) Si in Cor hominis
non ascendit, Cor hominis illuc ascendat. Cor ibi habeamus: surfum Corda
levemus ne putrescant in terra: quoniam placet nobis quod ibi aguct ange^^.
August. ^.3. de Symb.c. 11.
They have none of my cares and fears: They weep not in secret: They languish
not in sorrows; These tears are wiped away from their eyes: O happy, a thousand
times happy souls! Alas, that I must dwell in dirty flesh, when my Brethren and
companions do dwell with God! Alas, that I am lapt in earth, and tied as a
mountain down to this inferior world; when they are got above the Sun, and have
laid aside their lumpish bodies! Alas, that I must lie and pray and wait, and
pray and wait as if my heart were in my knees; when they do nothing but Love
and Praise, and Joy and Enjoy, as if their hearts were got into the very breast
of Christ, and were closely conjoined to his own heart. How far out of sight
and reach, and hearing of their high enjoyments do I here live; when they feel
them, and feed and live upon them! What strange thoughts have I of God? What
strange conceivings? What strange affections? I am fain to superscribe my best
services, as the blind Athenians [To the unknown God] when they are as well
acquainted with him, as men that live continually in his house; and as familiar
in their holy praises, as if they were all one with him! What a little of that
God, that Christ, that spirit, that life, that love, that joy have I! and how
soon does it depart and leave me in sadder darkness! Now and then a spark does
fall upon my heart, and while I gaze upon it, it strait goes out; or rather, my
cold resisting heart does quench it! But they have their light in his light,
and live continually at the spring of Joys! Here are we vexing each other with
quarrels, and troubling our peace with discontents, when they are one in heart
and voice. and daily sound forth their Hallelujah's to God with full delightful
Harmony and concent. O what a Feast has my faith beheld! and O what a famine
is yet in my spirit! I have seen a glympse into the Court of God, but alas I
stand but as a beggar at the doors, when the souls of my companions are
admitted in. O blessed souls! I may not; I dare not envye your happiness, I
rather rejoice in my brethrens prosperity, and am glad to think of the day when
I shall be admitted into your fellowship: But I cannot but look upon you as a
child does on his brother who sits in the mothers lap while himself stands by,
and wish that I were so happy as to be in your place; not to displace you, but
to Rest there with you. Why must I stay and groan, and weep and wait? My Lord
is gone; he has left this earth and is entered into his Glory: my Brethren are
gone; my friends are there, my house, my hope, my All is there! and must I stay
behind to sojourn here? what precious Saints have left this earth? of whom I
am ready to say as Amerbachius when he heard of the death of Zuingerus, Melch
Adam in vita Zuingeri inter vitas Medicorum Germanorum.
Piget me vivere post tantum virum, cujus magna fuit doctrina, sed exigua si
cum pietate conferatur. It is irksome to me to live after such a man, whose
learning was so great, and yet compared with his godliness, very small: If the
Saints were all here; if Christ were here, then it were no grief for me to
stay, if the bridegroom were present, who could mourn? But when my soul is so
far distant from my God, wonder not what aileth we, if I now complain; An
ignorant Micah will do so for his idol, Judge. 18.24.
and shall not then my soul do so for God? And yet if I had no hope of
enjoying, I would go and hide my self in the deserts, and lie and howl in some
obscure wilderness, and spend my days in fruitles wishes: But seeing it is the
promised land of my Rest, and the state that I must be advanced to my self, and
my soul draws near and is almost at it; I will love and long; I will look and
desire; I will breathe out blessed Calvin's Motto, Vsquequo Domine, Beza in tit.
Calvin.
How long, Lord, How long! How long Lord, Holy and True, will thou suffer this
soul to pant and groan! and wilt not open and let him in, who waits and longs
to be with Thee?

Thus, Christian Reader, let thy thoughts aspire: Thus whet the desires of thy
soul by these Meditations; Till thy soul long (as David's for the waters of
Bethlehem) and say, O that one would give me to drink of the wells of
salvation! 2 Samuel 23.15. and till thou can say as he, Psalm. 119.174. I have
longed for thy salvation, O Lord. And as the mother and brethren of Christ when
they could not come at him because of the press, sent to him, saying, Thy
mother and brethren stand without, desiring to see thee; send thou up the same
message; tell him, thou stand here without, desiring to see him, he will own
thee (...) near relations, for he has said, They that hear (...) and do it,
are his mother and brethren. Luke 8.20, 21.
And thus I have ^ne^ted you, in the acting of your desire after your Rest.

SECT. VII.. 7.

3. THe next Affection to be acted, is Hope. This is of singular use to the
soul. It helps exceedingly to support it in sufferings; it encourages to
adventure upon the greatest difficulties; it firmly establishes it in the most
shaking trials; and it mightily enlivens the soul in duties; and is the very
spring that sets all the wheels a going: Who would Preach, if it were not in
hope to prevail with poor sinners for their Conversion and Confirmation? who
would pray, but for his hope to prevail with God? who would believe, or obey,
or strive, or suffer, or do any thing for Heaven, if it were not for the hope
that he has to obtain it? Would the Mariner sail, and the Merchant adventure,
if they had not hope of safety and success? would the Husbandman plough, and
sow, and take pains, if he had not hope of increase at Harvest? would the
Soldier fight, if he hoped not for victory? Sure^io man does adventure upon
known impossibilities. Therefore it is, that they who pray merely from custom,
or merely from conscience, considering it as a duty only, but looking for no
great matters from God by their prayers, are generally formal and heartless
therein; whereas the Christian that has observed the wonderful success of
prayer, and as verily looks for benefit by it, and thriving to his soul in the
use of it, as he looks for benefit by his labors, and thriving to his body in
the use of his food, how faithfully does he follow it? and how cheerfully go
through it? O, how willingly do we Ministers study? how cheerfully do we
Preach? What life does it put into our instructions and exhortations, when we
have but hope that our labor will succeed? when we discern a people attend to
the Word, and regard the Message, and hear them inquire what they shall do, as
men that are willing to be ruled by God, and as men that would fain have their
souls to be saved; you would not think how it helps us, both for invention
and expression! O who can choose but pray heartily for, and preach heartily to
such a people! As the sucking of the young one does draw forth the milk, so
will the peoples desire and obedience draw forth the Word: So that a dull
people, make dull Preachers, and a lively people, make a lively Preacher. So
great a force has hope in all our duties. As hope of speeding increases, so
does diligence in seeking increase; besides the great conducement of it to our
joy: Even the false hope of the wicked does much support, and maintain a kind
of comfort answerable to their hope; though, its true, their hope and joy will
both die with them: How much more will the Saints hopes refresh and support
them! All this I have said, to show you the excellency and necessity of this
Grace, and so to provoke you to the more constant acting of it. If your hope
dies, your duties die, yours endevors die, your joys die, and your souls die.
And if your hope be not acted, but lie asleep, its next to dead, both in
likeness and preparation.

Therefore, Christian Reader, when thou art winding up thy affections to
Heaven, do not forget to give one lift at thy Hope; remember to wind up this
peg also. The object of Hope has four qualifications; First, It must be good,
secondly, Future, thirdly, Difficult, fourthly, yet Possible. For the goodness
of thy Rest, there is somewhat said before, which thou may transfer hither as
thou find it useful; so also of the difficulty and futurity. Let Faith then
show thee the truth of the Promise, and Judgment the goodness of the thing
promised, and what then is wanting for the raising of thy hope? Show thy soul
from the Word, and from the Mercies, and from the Nature of God, what
possibility, yea, what probability, yea, what certainty thou have of possessing
the Crown. Think thus, and reason thus with thine own heart: Why should I not
confidently, and comfortably hope, when my soul is in the hands of so
compassionate a Savior? and when the Kingdom is at the disposal of so
bounteous a God? Did he ever manifest any backwardness to my good? or discover
the least inclination to my ruin? Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.
Has he not sworn the contrary to me in his Word? that he delights not in the
death of him that dies, but rather that he should repent and live? Have not
all his dealings with me witnessed the same? Did he not mind me of my danger,
when I never feared it? and why was this, if he would not have me to escape it?
Did he not mind me of my happiness, when I had no thoughts of it? and why was
this, but that he would have me to enjoy it? How often has he drawn me to
himself, and his Christ, when I have drawn backward, and would have broken from
him? What restless importunity has he used in his suit? how has he followed
me from place to place? and his Spirit incessantly solicited my heart, with
winning suggestions and persuasions for my good? And would he have done all
this, if he had been willing that I should perish? If my soul were in the hands
of my mortal foes, then indeed there were small hopes of my salvation; yea if
it were wholly in my own hands, my flesh, and my folly would betray it to
damnation. But have I as much cause to distrust God, as to distrust my foes? or
to distrust my self? Sure I have not. Have I not a sure Promise to build and
rest on? and the Truth of God engaged to fulfill it? Would I not hope, if an
honest man had made me a promise of any thing in his power? And shall I not
hope, when I have the Covenant, and the Oath of God? Its true, the glory is out
of sight; we have not beheld the Mansions of the Saints: Who has ascended up
to discover it, and descended to tell us what he had seen? why, but the Word is
near me: Have I not Moses, and the Prophets? Christ and his Apostles? Is not
the promise of God more certain then our sight? it is not by sight, but by hope
that we must be saved; and hope that is seen is not hope; for if we see it, why
do we yet hope for it? but if we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it, Romans 8.24, 25. I have been ashamed of my hope in the arm
of flesh, but hope in the promise of God, makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5. I will
say therefore in my greatest sufferings, with the Church, Lam. 3.24. etc. The
Lord is my portion, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good to them that
wait for him, to the soul that seeks him. It is good that I both hope, and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. It is good for a man, that he bear
the yoke in his youth. I will sit alone, and keep silence, because I have born
it upon me. I will put my mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. For
the Lord will not cast off for ever. But though he cause grief, yet will he
have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. Though I languish
and die, yet will I hope; for he has said, The righteous has hope in his
death, Prove. 14.32. Though I must lie down in dust and darkness, yet there my
flesh shall rest in hope, Psalm. 16.9. And when my flesh has nothing, in which
it may rejoice, yet will I keep the rejoicing of hope firm to the end, Heb.
3.6. For he has said, The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, Prove.
10.28. Indeed, if I had lived still under the Covenant of Works, and been put
my self to the satisfying of that Justice, then there had been no hope; But
Christ has taken down those impossibilities, and has brought in a better
hope, by which* we may now draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.19. Or if I had to do with
a feeble Creature, there were small hope; for how could he raise this Body from
the dust? and lift me up above the Sun? But what is this to the A mighty Power,
who made the Heavens and Earth of nothing? Cannot that same power that raised
Christ, raise me? and that has glorified the Head, also glorify the Members?
Doubtless by the blood of Christ's Covenant, will God send forth his prisoners
from the pit, wherein is no water; therefore will I turn to this strong hold,
as a prisoner of hope, Zach. 9.11, 12.

And thus you see how Meditation may excite your Hope.

. 8.
SECT. VIII.
4. THe next Affection to be acted, is Courage or Boldness; which leads to
Resolution, and concludes in Action. When you have thus mounted your Love, and
Desire, and Hope; go on, and think further thus with your selves: And will God
indeed dwell with men? And is there such a glory within the reach of hope? O,
why do I not then lay hold upon it? where is the cheerful vigor of my spirit? 1 Timothy 6.12, 19. 1 Pet. 1.13. Heb. 12.1. 1 Cor. 9.24. Matthew. 11.12.
why do I not gird up the loins of my mind? and play the man for such a prize?
why do I not run with speed, the race before me? and set upon mine enemies on
every side? and valiantly break through all resistance? why do I not take this
Kingdom by force? and my fervent soul catch at the place? do I yet sit still,
and Heaven before me? If my Beast do but see his Provender; if my greedy senses
perceive but their delightful objects, I have much ado to stave them off: And
should not my soul be as eager for such a blessed Rest? why then do I not
undauntedly fall to work? what should stop me? or what should dismay me? Is God
with me, or against me in the work? will Christ stand by me, or will he not? If
it were a way of sin that leads to death, then I might expect that God should
resist me, and stand in my way with the drawn sword of his displeasure; or at
least overtake me to my grief at last: But is he against the obeying of his own
commands? is perfect good against any thing but evil? does he bid me seek, and
will he not assist me in it? does he set me awork, and urge me to it, and will
he after all, be against me in it? Romans 8.31.
It cannot be. And if he be for me, who can be against me? In the work of sin,
all things almost are ready to help us, and God only, and his Servants are
against us; and how ill does that work prosper in our hands? But in my course
to Heaven, almost all things are against me, but God is for me; and how happily
still does the work succeed? Do I set upon this work in my own strength, or
rather in the strength of Christ my Lord? And cannot I do all things through
him that strengthens me? was he ever foiled, or subdued by an enemy? He has
been assaulted indeed; but was he ever conquered? Can they take the sheep, till
they have overcome the Shepherd? why then does my flesh lay open to me the
difficulties, and urge me so much with the greatness and troubles of the work?
It is Christ that must answer all these Objections; and what are the
difficulties that can stay his power? Is any thing too hard for the Omnipotent
God? May not Peter boldly walk on the Sea, if Christ do but give the word of
command? and if he begin to sink, is it from the weakness of Christ, or the
smalness of his Faith? The water indeed is but a sinking ground to tread on;
but if Christ be by, and countenance us in it, if he be ready to reach us his
hand; who would draw back for fear of danger? Is not Sea and Land alike to him?
shall I be driven from my God, and from my Everlasting Rest, as the silly Birds
are feared from their food, with a man of clouts, or a loud noise, when I know
before there is no danger in it? How do I see men daily in these wars,
adventure upon Armies, and Forts, and Cannons, and cast themselves upon the
instruments of death? and have not I as fair a prize before me? and as much
encouragement to adventure as they? What do I venture? my life is the most; and
in these prosperous times, there is not one of many that ventures that: What
do I venture on? are they not unarmed foes? A great hazard indeed, to venture
on the hard thoughts of the world! or on the scorns and slanders of a wicked
tongue! Sure these Serpents teeth are out; these Vipers are easily shaken into
the fire; these Adders have no stings; these Thorns have lost their prickles:
As all things below are silly comforters, so are they silly toothless enemies:
Bugbears to frighten fools and children, rather then powerful dreadful foes. Do
I not well deserve to be turned into Hell, if the scorns and threats of blinded
men, if the fear of silly rotten Earth, can drive me thither? do I not well
deserve to be shut out of Heaven, if I will be frighted from it, with the
tongues of sinners? Surely my own voice must needs condemn me, and my own hand
subscribe the sentence, and common Reason would say that my damnation were
just. What if it were Father, or Mother, or Husband, or Wife, or the nearest
Friend that I have in the world, (if they may be called Friends that would draw
me to damnation) should I not run over all that would keep me from Christ?
Will their friendship countervail the enmity of God? or be any comfort to my
condemned soul? shall I be yielding, and pliable to the desires of men, and
only harden my self against the Lord? Let men, let Angels beseech me upon
their knees, I will slight their tears, I will scorn to stop my course to
behold them, I will shut mine ears against their cries: Let them flatter, or
let them frown; let them draw forth tongues and swords against me, I am
resolved to break through in the might of Christ, and to look upon them all as
naked dust. If they would entice me with preferment, with the Kingdoms of the
world; I will no more regard them, then the dung of the Earth. O Blessed Rest!
O most unvaluable Glorious State! who would sell thee for dreams and shadows?
who would be enticed or affrighted from thee? who would not strive, and fight,
and watch, and run, and that with violence, even to the last breath, so he
might but have hope at last to obtain thee? Surely none but those that know
thee not, and believe not thy glory. Thus you see with what kind of
Meditations you may excite your Courage, and raise your Resolutions.

. 9.
SECT. IX.
5. THe last Affection to be acted is Joy. This is the end of all the Rest,
Love, Desire, Hope and Courage, do all tend to the raising of our Joy. This is
so desirable to every man by nature, and is so essentially necessary to the
constituting of his happiness, that I hope I need not say much to persuade you
to any thing that would make your life delightful. Supposing you therefore
already convinced, That the pleasures of the flesh are brutish and perishing,
and that your solid and lasting joy must be from Heaven, in stead of
persuading, I shall proceed in directing.

Well then, by this time if thou have managed well the former work, thou art
got within the ken of thy Rest; thou believe the Truth of it; thou art
convinced of the excellency of it, thou art fallen in Love with it, thou longest
after it; thou hopest for it, and thou art resolved courageously to venture for
the obtaining it: But is here any work for joy in this? we delight in the good
which we do possess: Its present good that is the object of joy; but (thou will
say) alas, I am yet without it. Well, but yet think a little further with thy
self; Though the Real presence do afford the choicest joy, yet the presence of
its imperfect Idea or image in my understanding, may afford me a great deal of
true delight, Is it nothing to have a deed of gift from God? Are his infallible
promises no ground of joy? Is it nothing to live in daily expectation of
entering into the Kingdom? Is not my assurance of being glorified one of these
days a sufficient ground for unexpressible joy? Gal. 4.1.
Is it no delight to the Heir of a Kingdom, to think of what he must hereafter
possess, though at present he little differ from a servant? Am I not commanded
to rejoice in hope of the glory of God? Romans 5.2, and 12.12.

Here then, Reader, take thy heart once again, as it were, by the hand, Bring
it to the top of the highest Mount; if it be possible to some Atlas above the
clouds; show it the Kingdom of Christ and the glory of it; say to it, All this
will thy Lord bestow upon thee, who have believed in him, and been a worshipper
of him; It is the Fathers good pleasure to give thee this Kingdom; See thou
this astonishing Glory above thee? Why all this is thy own inheritance. This
Crown is thine, these pleasures are thine, this company, this beauteous place
is thine, all things are thine, because thou art Christ's, and Christ is thine;
when thou wast married to him, thou hadstall this with him.

Thus take thy heart into the Land of Promise; show it the pleasant hills, and
fruitful valleys; Show it the clusters of Grapes which thou have gathered; and
by those convince it that it is a blessed Land, flowing with better then milk
and honey; enter the gates of the holy City; walk through the streets of the
New Jerusalem, walk about Sion, go round about her, tell the towers thereof;
mark well her bulwarks; consider her palaces, that thou may tell it to thy
soul ( Psalm. 48.12, 13.) Has it not the Glory of God, and is not her light
like to a stone most precious? See the twelve foundations of her walls, and the
names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb therein; The building of the walls of
it are of Jasper, and the City is of pure gold as clear as glass; The
foundation is garnished with precious stones, and the twelve gates are twelve
pearls; every several gate is of one Pearl, and the street of the City is pure
Gold, as it were transparent glass; There is no temple in it, for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. It has no need of Sun or Moon to
shine in it, for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, and the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it.
These sayings are faithful and true; and the Lord God of the holy Prophets,
has sent his Angels (and his own Son) to show unto his servants the things
that must shortly be done, Rev. 21.11, 12, 13. etc. to the end, and 22.6. What
say thou now to all this? This is thy Rest, O my soul, and this must be the
place of thy Everlasting habitation: Let all the sons of Sion then rejoice, and
the daughters of Jerusalem be glad, for great is the Lord, and greatly is he
praised in the City of our God; Beautiful for situation, the Joy of the whole
earth, is Mount Sion, God is known in her palaces for a refuge, Psalm. 48.11, 1,
2, 3.

Yet proceed on: Anima quae amat ascendit, etc. The soul (says Austin) that
loves, ascends frequently, and runs familiarly through the streets of the
heavenly Jerusalem, visiting the Patriachs and Prophets, saluting the Apostles,
admiring the Armies of Martyrs and Confessors, etc. So do thou lead on thy
heart as from street to street, bring it into the Palace of the Great King;
lead it, as it were, from chamber to chamber; say to it, Here must I lodge,
here must I live, here must I praise, here must I love, and be beloved: I must
shortly be one of this Heavenly Quire, I shall then be better skilled in the
music; Among this blessed company must I take my place; My voice must join to
make up the Melody, my tears will then be wiped away, my groans are turned to
another tune, my cottage of clay will be changed to this Palace, and my prison
rags to these splendid robes: my sordid nasty stinking flesh shall be put off,
and such a Sun-like spiritual body put on, For the former things are done away.
Psalm. 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God: There it is that trouble
and lamentation cease, and the voice of sorrow is not heard: O when I look
upon this glorious place: what a dunghill and dungeon, me thinks, is earth. O
what a difference betwixt a man feeble, pained, groaning, dying, rotting in the
grave; and one of these triumphant, blessed, shining Saints? Psalm. 46.4.
Here shall I drink of the river of pleasure, the streams whereof make glad the
City of our God. For the Lord will create a New Jerusalem and a New Earth, and
the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, we shall be glad and
rejoice for ever in that which he creates: for he will create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy; And he will rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in
his people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the
voice of crying: there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old
man that has not filled his days, Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 20. Must Israel on
earth under the bondage of the Law, serve the Lord with joyfulness and gladness
of heart, because of the abundance of all things which they possess? sure then
I shall serve him with joyfulness and gladness, who shall have another kind of
service, and of abundance in Glory? Deuteronomy. 28.47. Did the Saints take joyfully
the spoiling of their goods? Heb. 11.34. and shall not I take joyfully the
receiving of my good, and such a full reparation of all my losses? Was it such
a remarkable, celebrated day, when the Jews rested from their enemies, because
it was turned to them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day?
Est. 9.22. What a day then will that be to my soul, whose Rest and change will
be so much greater? When the wise men saw but the Star of Christ, they rejoiced
with exceeding great Joy, Mat. 2.10. But I shall shortly see the Star of Jacob,
even himself who is the bright and morning Star, Numb. 24.17. Rev. 22.16. If
they returned from the Sepulcher with great Joy, when they had but heard that
he was risen from the dead, Mat. 28.8. What Joy then will it be to me, when I
shall see him risen and reigning in his glory, and my self raised to a blessed
communion with him? Then shall we have Beauty for ashes indeed, and the oil of
joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa.
61.3. When he has made Sion an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations,
Isa. 60.15.

Why do I not then arise from the dust, and lay aside my sad complaints, and
cease my doleful mourning note? Why do I not trample down vain delights, and
feed upon the foreseen delights of Glory? why is not my life a continual Joy?
and the favor of Heaven perpetually upon my spirit? And thus, Reader, I have
directed thee in Acting of thy Joy.

. 10.
SECT. X.
HEre also when thou find cause, thou have a singular advantage from thy
Meditations of Heaven, for the acting of the contrary and more mixed passions,
As 1. Of thy hatred and detestation of sin, which would deprive thy soul of
these immortal Joys. 2. Of thy godly and filial Fear, least thou should
either abuse or hazard this mercy. 3. Of thy necessary grief, for such thy
foolish abuse and hazard. 4. Of thy godly shame, which should cover thy face
for the forementioned folly. 5. Of thy unfeigned repentance, for what thou have
done against thy Joys. 6. Of thy holy anger or indignation against thy self
for such miscarriage. 7. Of thy zeal and jealousy over thy heart, least thou
should again be drawn to the like iniquity. 8. And of thy pity toward those,
who are ignorantly walking in the contrary course, and in apparent danger of
losing all this.


But I will confine my self to the former chief affections, and not meddle with
these, least I be too prolix, but leave them to thy own spiritual prudence.

I would here also have thee to understand, that I do not place any flat
necessity in thy Acting of all the forementioned affections in this order at
one time, or in one duty: perhaps thou may sometime feel some one of thy
affections more flat then the rest, and so to have more need of exciting; or
thou may find one stirring more then the rest, and so think it more
seasonable to help it forward: or if thy time be short, thou may work upon
one affection one day, and upon another the next, as thou find cause: All
this I leave still to thy own Prudence.

And so I have done with the third part of the direction, viz. What powers of
the soul are here to be acted; what Affections excited; by what objective
considerations, and in what order.

CHAP. X. By what Actings of the soul to proceed in this work of Heavenly
contemplation.
SECT. I.. 1.

FOurthly; The fourth part of this Directory is, To show you how and by what
Acts you should advance on to the height of this work.

The first and maine Instrument of this work, is that Cogitation, or
consideration which I before have opened, and which is to go along with us
through the whole. But because mere Cogitation if it be not pressed home, will
not so pierce and affect the heart, Therefore we must here proceed to a second
step, which is called Soliloquy, which is nothing but a pleading the case with
our own souls. As in preaching to others, the bare propounding and opening of
truths and duties, does seldom find that success as the lively application:
so it is also in meditating and propounding Truths to our selves. The moving,
pathetical pleadings with a sinner, will make him deeply affected with a common
Truth, which before, though he knew it, yet it never stirred him: What
heart-meltings do we see under powerful application, when the naked
explication did little move them? If any where there be a tenderhearted,
affectionate people, it is likely under such a moving, close-applying,
Ministry. Why thus must thou do in thy Meditation to quicken thy own heart:
Enter into a serious debate with it: Plead with it in the most moving and
affecting language: Urge it with the most weighty and powerful Arguments: This
soliloquy, or self-conference, has been the practice of the holy men of God in
all times; How does David plead with his soul against its dejections, and argue
it into a holy confidence and comfort? Psalm. 42.5, 11. and 43.5. Why art thou
cast down O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Trust in God,
for I shall yet give him thanks who is the health of my countenance and my God.
Gen 49.6. Judge. 5.21. Psalm 16.2. Jer. 4.19.
So in the 103. Psalm. 1, 2. etc. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits, etc. so does he also end the Psalm: and so does he begin and end the
104. Psalm. So 146.1. So Psalm. 116.7. Return unto thy Rest O my soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. The like you may see in the Meditations
of holy men of later times; Austin, Bernard, etc. So that this is no new path
which I persuade you to tread, but that which the Saints have ever used in
their Meditation.

. 2.
SECT. II.
THis Soliloquy has its several parts, and its due method wherein it should be
managed. The parts of it are, according to the several Affections of the soul,
and according to the several necessities thereof; according to the various
Arguments to be used, and according to the various ways of Arguing. So that
you see if I should attempt the full handling hereof, it would take up more
time and room then I intend or can allow it. Only thus much in brief. As every
good Master and Father of a Family, is a good Preacher to his own Family; so
every good Christian, is a good Preacher to his own soul. Soliloquy is a
Preaching to ones self. Therefore the very same Method which a Minister should
use in his Preaching to others, should a Christian use in speaking to himself.
Do thou understand the best Method for a public Preacher? Do thou know the
right parts and order of a Sermon? and which is the most effectual way of
application? why then I need to lay it open no further: thou understandest the
Method and parts of this soliloquy. Mark the most affecting, heart-melting
Minister; observe his course both for matter and manner; set him as a pattern
before thee for thy imitation; and the same way that he takes with the hearts
of his people, do thou also take with thy own heart. Men are naturally addicted
to imitation, especially of those whom they most affect and approve of: How
near do some Ministers come in their Preaching to the imitation of others, whom
they usually hear, and much reverence and value? so may thou in this duty of
preaching to thy heart: Art thou not ready sometime when thou hear a
Minister, to remember diverse things which thou think might be moving and
pertinent, and to wish that he would have mentioned and pressed them on the
Hearers? why, remember those when thou art exhorting thy self, and press them
on thy own heart as close as thou can.

As therefore this is accounted the most familiar Method in Preaching,
Explication.
so is it for thee in Meditating, viz. First, Explain to thy self the subject
on which thou do Meditate, both the Terms and the subject Matter,
Confirmation.
study the difficulties till the Doctrine is clear. Secondly, Then confirm thy
Faith in the Belief of it, by the most clear convincing Scripture-Reasons.
Application.
Thirdly, Then Apply it according to its nature and thy necessity. As in the
case we are up^on, That there is a Rest remaining for the people of God.

1. Consider of the useful Consectaries, Use of Information.
or Conclusions that thence arise, for the clearing and confirming of thy
judgment, which is commonly called a Use of Information. Here thou may press
them also by other confirming Arguments, and adjoyn the confutation of the
contrary Errors.

2. Proceed then to consider of the Duties, Use of Instruction.
which do appear to be such from the Doctrine in hand, which is commonly
called, A use of Instruction, as also the reprehension of the contrary vices.

3. Then proceed to question and try thy self, how thou have valued this Glory
of the Saints? Of Examination.
how thou have loved it, and how thou have laid out thy self to obtain it? This
is called A use of Examination. Here thou may also make use of discovering
Signs, drawn from the Nature, Properties, Effects, Adjuncts, etc.

4. So far as this Trial has discovered thy neglect, and other sins against
this Rest, Of Reproof.
proceed to the reprehension and censuring of thy self: chide thy heart for its
Omissions and Commissions, and do it sharply till it feel the smart; as Peter
Preached Reproof to his Hearers, till they were pricked to the heart, and cried
out; And as a Father or Master will chide the child till it begin to cry and
be sensible of the fault; so do thou in chiding thy own heart; This is called a
use of Reproof. Here also it will be very necessary, that thou bring forth all
the aggravating Circumstances of the sin, that thy heart may feel it in its
weight and bitterness; and if thy heart do evade or deny the sin, convince it
by producing the several Discoveries.



Consolation: It is to be furthered by first laying open the excellency of the
State; and secondly, the certainty of it in it self, and thirdly, our own
interest in it; by clearing and proving all these, and confuting all sadning
objections that may be brought against them: thirdly, So also for the provoking
of Love, of Hope, and all other the Affections in the way, before more largely
opened.

And secondly, press on thy heart also to all outward duties, that are to be
performed in thy way to Rest, whether in worship or in civil conversation,
whether public or private, ordinary, or extraordinary; This is commonly
called, A use of Exhortation. Here bring in all quickening Considerations,
either those that may drive thee, or those that may draw; which work by Fear,
or which work by Desire: These are commonly called Motives; but above all be
sure that thou follow them home: Ask thy heart what it can say against them? Is
there weight in them? or is there not? and then, what it can say against the
duty; Is it necessary? is it comfortable? or is it not? when thou have silenced
thy heart, and brought it to a stand, then drive it further, and urge it to a
Promise: As suppose it were to the duty of Meditation, which we are speaking
of: Force thy self beyond these lazy purposes; resolve on the duty before thou
stir: Enter into a solemn Covenant to be faithful; let not thy heart go, till
it have without all halting and reservations flatly promised thee, That it will
fall to the work; write down this promise, show it to thy heart the next time
it loiters; then study also the Helps and Means, the Hindrances, and the
Directions that concern thy duty. And this is in brief the exercise of this
Soliloquy, or the Preaching of Heaven to thy own Heart.

SECT. III.. 3.

Object.
BUt perhaps thou will say, Every man cannot understand this Method, this is for
Ministers, and learned men, every man is not able to play the Preacher. I
Answer thee, First, There is not that ability required to this, as is to the
work of public Preaching; here thy thoughts may serve the turn, but there must
be also the decent Ornaments of Language, here is needful but an honest
understanding heart, but there must be a good pronunciation and a voluble
tongue; here if thou miss of the Method, thou may make up that in one piece
of Application which thou have neglected in another, but there thy failings are
injurious to many, and a scandal and disgrace to the Work of God; thou know
what will fit thy own heart, and what Arguments take best with thy own
Affections, but thou art not so well acquainted with the dispositions of
others. Secondly, I answer further, Every man is bound to be skilful in the
Scriptures as well as Ministers: Kings and Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
Josh. 1.8. And the people also, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. Do you think, if you did as is
there commanded, Write it upon thy heart, lay them up in thy soul, bind them
upon thy hand, and between thine eyes, meditate in them day and night; I say,
if you did thus, would you not quickly understand as much as this? See Psalm.
1.3. Deuteronomy. 11.18. -- 6.6, 7. Does not God command thee, to teach them
diligently to thy children? and to talk of them when thou sit in thy house,
when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up?
And if thou must be skilled to teach thy children, much more to teach thy self;
and if thou can talk of them to others, why not also to thine own heart?
Certainly our unskilfulness and disability, both in a Methodical and lively
teaching of our Families, and of our selves, is for the most part merely
through our own negligence, and a sin for which we have no excuse: You that
learn the skill of your Trades and Sciences, might learn this also if you were
but willing and painful.

And so I have done with this particular of Soliloquy.

. 4.
SECT. IV.
2. ANother step to arise by in our Contemplation, is, from this speaking to
our selves to speak to God: Prayer is not such a stranger to this duty, but
that ejaculatory requests may be intermixed or added, and that as a very part
of the duty it self: How often does David intermix these in his Psalms, sometime
pleading with his soul, and sometime with God? and that in the same Psalm, and
in the next verses? The Apostle bids us speak to our selves in Psalms, and
Hymns, and no doubt we may also speak to God in them; this keeps the soul in
mind of the Divine Presence; it tends also exceedingly to quicken and raise
it; so that as God is the highest Object of our Thoughts, so our viewing of
him, and our speaking to him, and pleading with him, does more elevate the
soul, and actuate the Affections then any other part of Meditation can do. Men
that are careless of their carriage and speeches among children and Idiots,
will be sober and serious with Princes or grave men* so, though while we do but
plead the case with our selves, we are careless and unaffected yet when we turn
our speech to God, it may strike us with awfulness, and the holiness and
Majesty of him whom we speak to, LXX Legunt (...) ad Ludendum, se exercendum:
sed aliene inquit Paraeus.
may cause both the matter and words to pierce the deeper. Isaac went forth to
pray, (says the former Translation) To Meditate (says the latter;) The Hebrew
Verb says Paraeus, in loc. signifies both ad Orandum and Meditandum. The men
of God, both former and later, who have left their Meditations on Record for
our view, have thus intermixed Soliloquy and Prayer; sometime speaking to their
own hearts, and sometime turning their speech to God: And though this may seem
an indifferent thing, yet I conceive it very suitable and necessary, and that it
is the highest step that we can advance to in the Work.

Object. But why then is it not as good take up with Prayer alone, and so save
all this tedious work that you prescribe us?

I Answer. They are several duties, and therefore must be performed both:
Secondly, We have need of one as well as the other, and therefore shall wrong
our selves in the neglecting of either. Thirdly, The mixture, as in Music,
does more affect; the one helps on, and puts life into the other. Fourthly, It
is not the right order to begin at the top; therefore Meditation and speaking
to our selves, should go before Prayer, or speaking to God; want of this makes
Prayer with most to have little more then the name of Prayer, and men to speak
as lightly and as stupidly to the dreadful God, as if it were to one of their
companions, and with far less reverence and affection, then they would speak to
an Angel if he should appear to them, yea, or to a Judge or Prince if they were
speaking for their lives: and consequently their success and answers are often
like their prayers. O, speaking in the God of Heaven in prayer, is a weightier
duty then most are aware of*

SECT. V.. 5.

THe Ancients had a Custom by Apostrophe's and (...)* to speak, as it were, to
Angels and Saints departed (...) it was used by them, I take to be lawful; but
what they spoke in Rhetorical Figures, were interpreted by the succeeding Ages,
to be spoken in strict propriety, and Doctrinal Conclusions for praying to
Saints and Angels, were raised from their speeches: Therefore I will omit that
course, which is so little necessary, and so subject to scandalize the
less-judicious Readers.

And so much for the fourth part of the Direction, by what steps or Acts we
must advance to the height of this Work. I should clear all this by some
examples, but that I intend shall follow in the end.

CHAP. XI. Some Advantages and Helps for raising and affecting the Soul by this
Meditation.
. 1.
SECT. I.
Fetch help from Sense.
FIfthly. The fifth part of this Directory is, To show you what advantages you
should take, and what helps you should use to make your Meditations of Heaven
more quickening, and to make you taste the sweetness that is therein. For that
is the main work that I drive at through all; that you may not stick in a bare
thinking, but may have the lively se^^e of all upon your hearts: And this you
will find to be the most difficult part of the work, and that its easier
barely to think of Heaven a whole day, then to be lively and affectionate in
those thoughts one quarter of an hour. Therefore let us yet a little further
consider what may be done, to make your thoughts of Heaven to be piercing,
affecting, raising thoughts.

Here therefore you must understand, That the mere pure work of Faith, has
many disadvantages with us, in comparison of the work of Sense. Faith is
imperfect, for we are renewed but in part; but Sense has its strength,
according to the strength of the flesh: Faith goes against a world of
resistance, but Sense does not. Faith is supernatural, and therefore prone to
declining, and to languish both in the habit and exercise, further then it is
still renewed and excited; but Sense is natural, and therefore continues while
nature continues. The object of Faith is far off; we must go as far as Heaven
for our Joys: But the object of Sense is close at hand. It is no easy matter
to rejoice at that which we never saw, nor ever knew the man that did see it;
and this upon a mere promise which is written in the Bible; and that, when we
have nothing else to rejoice in, but all our sensible comforts do fail us: But
to rejoice in that which we see and feel, in that which we have hold of, and
possession already; this is not difficult. Well then, what should be done in
this case? Why sure it will be a point of our Spiritual Prudence, and a
singular help to the furthering of the work of Faith, to call in our
Quantalibet intention se humana men's extenderit, etiamsi phantasiaes imaginum
corporalium a cognitione compescat, si omnes circumscriptos spiritu ab oculis
cordis admoveat, adhuc tamen in carne mortali pasita videre gloriam Dei non
valet, sicut est. Sed quicquid de illa quod in mente resplendet, similitudo,
and non ipsa est. Greg. sup. hom. 8.
Sense to its assistance: If we can make us friends of these usual enemies, and
make them instruments of raising us to God, which are the usual means of
drawing us from God, I think we shall perform a very excellent work. Sure it is
both possible and lawful, yea, and necessary too, to do something in this
kind; for God would not have given us, either our Senses themselves, or their
usual objects, if they might not have been serviceable to his own praise, and
helps to raise us up to the apprehension of higher things: And it is very
considerable, How the Holy Ghost does condescend in the phrase of Scripture, in
bringing things down to the reach of Sense; how he sets forth the excellencies
of Spiritual things, in words that are borrowed from the objects of Sense; how
he describes the glory of the New Jerusalem, in expressions that might take
even with flesh it self: As that the Streets and Buildings are pure Gold, that
the Gates are Pearl, that a Throne does stand in the midst of it, etc. Revel.
21. and 22. That we shall eat and drink with Christ at his Table in his
Kingdom; that he will drink with us the fruit of the Vine new, that we shall
shine as the Sun in the Firmament of our Father* These, with most other
descriptions of our glory, are expressed as if it were to the very flesh and
sense; which though they are all improper and figurative, yet doubtless, if
such expressions had not been best, and to us necessary, the Holy Ghost would
not have so frequently used them: He that will speak to man's understanding,
must speak in man's language, and speak that which he is capable to conceive.
And doubtless as the Spirit does speak, so we must hear; and if our necessity
cause him to condescend in his expressions, it must needs cause us to be low in
our conceivings. Aequum est meminisse, and mi qui disseram and vos qui
judicabitis homines esse, ut si probabilia dicentur nihil ulterius requiratis.
Plato in Timaeo. Idem in Epistola ad Dionys monet ut eos tanquam barathrum
declinet, qui de Diis tanquam de iis quae manibus teneri and apprehendi
possunt, certas exigunt demonstrationes. Et in Phaedone eo nomine gravissime
reprehendit eos quod ambitiosis inter se verborum pugnis and inani
demonstrationum conatu, principe^ senovor^m and pugnantium dogmatum
constituant, de rebus ipsis nihil certum, nihil stabile, nihil firmum habeant.
Ipseque suam deplorat ^aecitatem; qui quae se prius persp^^ve scire
existimaret, ne per umbram quidem sibi unquam visa esse compererit: Et quorum
aliquam esse ratus fuerat soliditatem, ea nunc omnia non secus ac inanes
somniorum imagines vanescere.
Those conceivings and expressions which we have of Spirits, and things merely
Spiritual, they are commonly but second Notions, without the first; but mere
names that are put into our mouths, without any true conceivings of the things
which they signify; or our conceivings which we express by those notions or
terms, are merely negative; what things are not, rather then what they are: As
when we mention [Spirits] we mean they are not corporeal substances, but what
they are we cannot tell; no more then we know what is Aristotle's Materia Prima.
It is one reason of Christ's assuming and continuing our nature with the
Godhead, that we might know him the better, when he is so much nearer to us;
and might have more positive conceivings of him, and so our minds might have
familiarity with him, who before was quite beyond their reach

But what is my scope in all this? is it that we might think Heaven to be made
of Gold and Pearl? or that we should Ex operibus quidem opificem ^anc causam
effestoremque mundi Deum nosse datur: Ex imagine autem and simula^ro (ut
Socratis auditor Antistines dicebat) is non agnoscitur, nullis oculis
conspicuus, nullius rei similis, ut ex ulla effigy nosci possit. Atque (ut a
Zen^phonte Socratico Scriptum legimus) qui cuncta concussat, ipse intrepidus
and inconcussus; magaus nimirum potensque esse cognoscitur: Quali autem sit
facie ignoratur. Fernelius, de abditis rerum causis, cap. 9.
Picture Christ as the Papists do, in such a shape? or that we should think
Saints and Angels do indeed eat and drink? No; Not that we should take the
Spirits figurative expressions, to be meant according to strict propriety; or
have fleshly conceivings of Spiritual things, so as to believe them to be such
indeed: But thus; To think that to conceive or speak of them in strict
propriety, is utterly beyond our reach and capacity; and therefore, we must
conceive of them as we are able; and that the Spirit would not have represented
them in these notions to us, but that we have no better notions to apprehend
them by; and therefore that we make use of these phrases of the Spirit to
quicken our apprehensions and affections, but not to pervert them; and use
these low notions as a Glass, in which we must see the things themselves,
though the representation be exceeding imperfect, till we come to an immeditae
and perfect sight; yet still concluding, That these phrases though useful, are
but borrowed and improper. The like may be said of those expressions of God in
Scripture, wherein he represents himself in the imperfections of Creatures, as
anger, repenting, willing what shall not come to pass, etc. Though these be
improper, drawn from the manner of men, yet there is somewhat in God which we
can see no better yet, then in this glass, and which we can no better conceive
of, then in such notions, or else the Holy Ghost would have given us better. (I
would the Judicious Reader would (on the by) well weigh also, how much this
conduces to reconcile us, and Of which I have spoken more fully in my Treatise
of Redemption.
the Arminians, in those ancient and like-to-be continuing Controversies.)

SECT. II.. 2.

1. GO too then: Draw strong suppositions from Sense.
When thou set thy self to meditate on the joys above, think on them
boldly as Scripture has expressed them: Bring down thy conceivings to the
reach of sense. Excellency without familiarity, does more amaze then delight
us: Both Love and Joy are promoted by familiar acquaintance: When we go about
to think of God and Glory in proper conceivings without these Spectacles, we
are lost, and have nothing to fix our thoughts upon: We set God and Heaven so
far from us, that our thoughts are strange, and we look at them as things
beyond our reach, and beyond our line, and are ready to say, That which is
above us, is nothing to us. To conceive no more of God and Glory, but that we
cannot conceive them; and to apprehend no more, but that they are past our
apprehension; will produce no more love, but this* To acknowledge that they are
so far above us, that we cannot love them; and no more joy but this. That they
are above our rejoicing. And therefore put Christ no further from you, then he
has put himself, least the Divine Nature be again inaccessible. Think of
Christ as in our own nature glorified; think of our fellow Saints as men there
perfected; think of the Ibi jacet gratia, ibi virentibus campi^ terra luxurians
alumno so induit gramine, and redolente p^scitur ^^^re: ibi altum nemora
tol^untur in verticem, and ibi arbor densiore coma vestit; quicquid curantibus
ramis scena dejacens inumbrarit. Omnia illic non frigoria nec ^^doris, nec uti
i^ autumno ^^va requiescant, aut ut iterum vere novo tellus foecunda parturiat.
Vnius cuncta sunt temporis; unius po^^a feruntur aestatis; quippe cum nec
mensibus suis tunc luna deserv^at, nec sol per horarum momenta decurrat, aut in
^octem lux fugata concedat. Habet populos quier laeta, fedes tenet placidas,
^^i sons scaturiens medio sinu alvei prorumpentis emergit, and ^au^o per
interv^lla ^^rcui^^^, finuosis flexibus lavitur, ut in ora nascentium si^i
fluminum dividatur. Cyp^ian. de laud Martyr.
City and State, as the Spirit has expressed it, (only with the Caution and
Limitations before mentioned.) Suppose thou were now beholding this City of
God; and that thou had been companion with John in his Survey of its Glory;
and had seen the Thrones, the Majesty, the Heavenly Hosts, the shining
Splendour which he saw. Draw as strong suppositions as may be from thy sense for
the helping of thy affections: It is lawful to suppose we did see for the
present, that which God has in Prophecies revealed, and which we must really
see in more unspeakable brightness before long. Suppose therefore with thy self
thou had been that Apostles fellow-traveller into the Celestial Kingdom, and
that thou had seen all the Saints in their White Robes, with Palms in their
hands: Suppose thou had heard those Songs of Moses, and of the Lamb; or did
even now hear them praising and glorifying the Living God: If thou had seen
these things indeed, in what a rapture would thou have been? And the more
seriously thou put this supposition to thy self, the more will the
Meditation elevate thy heart. I would not have thee, as the Papists, draw them
in Pictures, nor use mysterious, significant Ceremonies to represent them.
This, as it is a course forbidden by God, so it would but seduce and draw down
thy heart: But get the liveliest Picture of them in thy mind that possibly
thou can; meditate of them, as if thou were all the while beholding them, and
as if thou were even hearing the Hallelujahs, while thou art thinking of them;
till thou can say, Methinks I see a glympse of the Glory! methinks I hear the
shouts of joy and praise! methinks I even stand by Abraham and David, Peter and
Paul, and many more of these triumphing souls! methinks I even see the Son of
God appearing in the clouds, and the world standing at his bar to receive their
doom; methinks I even hear him say, Come ye blessed of my Father! and even see
them go rejoicing into the Joy of their Lord! My very dreams of these things
have deeply affected me; and should not these just suppositions affect me much
more? What if I had seen with Paul, those unutterable things? should I not have
been exalted (and that perhaps above measure) as well as he? What if I had
stood in the room of Stephen, and seen Heaven opened, and Christ sitting at the
right hand of God? Surely, that one sight was worth the suffering his storm of
stones. O that I might but see what he did see, though I also suffered what he
did suffer! What if I had seen such a sight as Michaiah saw? 2 Chro. 18.18.
The Lord sitting upon his throne, and all the hosts of Heaven standing on his
right hand and on his left? Why these men of God did see such things; and I
shall shortly see far more then ever they saw, till they were loosed from this
flesh, as I must be. And thus you see, how the familiar conceiving of the state
of blessedness, as the spirit has in a condescending language expressed it;
and our strong raising of suppositions from our bodily senses, will further our
Affections in this Heavenly work.

SECT. III.. 3.

2. THere is yet another way by which we may make our senses here serviceable
to us; 2. Compare objects of sense with objects of faith.
and that is, By comparing the objects of sense with the objects of faith; and
so forcing sense to afford us that Medium, from whence we may conclude the
transcendent worth of Glory, By arguing from sensitive delights as from the
less to the greater. And here for your further assistance I shall furnish you
with some of these comparative Arguments.

And first, You must strongly argue with your hearts, from the corrupt delights
of sensual men. Think then with your selves, when you would be sensible of the
joys above; Is it such a delight to a sinner to do wickedly? and will it not
be delightful indeed then to live with God? Quae ergo nos angit vesania,
vitiorum siti^e absynthium, hujus mundi sequi naufragium, vitae praesentis pati
infortunium, impiae tyrannidis far dominium, et non magis convolare ad
sanctorus faelicitatem, ad angelorum societatem, ad solemnitatem supernae
laetitiae, et ad jucunditatem contemplativae vitae, ut poss^mus intrare in
potentias domini, and videre superabundantes divitias bonitatis ejus? Bernard.
de praemio pat. Caelest.
Has a very drunkard such delight in his cups and companions, that the very
fears of damnation will not make him forsake them? Has the brutish
whoremaster such delight in his whore, that he will part with his credit, and
estate, and salvation, rather then he will part with her? Sure then there are
high delights with God! If the way to hell can afford such pleasure, what are
the pleasures of the Saints in Heaven? If the coveteous man has so much
pleasure in his wealth, and the ambitious man in his power and titles of honor;
what then have the Saints in the everlasting treasures? and what plasure do the
Heavenly honors afford, where we shall be set above principalities and powers,
and be made the glorious spouse of Christ? What pleasure do the voluptuous
find in their sensual courses? how closely will they follow their hunting and
hawking and other recreations from morning to night? How delightfully will they
sit at their Cards and Dice, hours, and days, and nights together? O the
delight that mustneeds then be, in beholding the face of the Living God, and in
singing forth praises to him and the Lamb! which must be our recreation when we
come to our Rest!

. 4.
SECT. IIII.
Si homines de gaudio terre^o jubilant, nos de gaudio caelesti jubilare non
debemus? quod verbis vere explicare non possumus? Et quem decet ista jubilatio
nisi ineffabilem Deum? Et si Deum fari non potes, and tacere non debes, quid
restat nisi ut jubiles? August. in Psalm. 94. Si consideremus quae et quanta
sunt quae sanctis dabuntur in die judicij, quae and quanta quae nobis
promittuntur in caelis, vilescent omnia quae habentur in terris. Terrena namque
substantia, aeternae faelicitati comparata, pondus est, non subsidium. Gregor.
in homil.
2. COmpare also the delights above, with the lawful delights of moderated
senses. Think with thy self* how sweet is food to my taste when I am hungry?
especially, as Isaac said, that which my soul loves? that which my temperature
and appetite do incline to? What delight has the taste in some pleasant
fruits? in some well relished meats? and in diverse junkets? O what delight
then must my soul needs have in feeding upon Christ the living bread? and in
eating with him at his table in his Kingdom? Was a mess of pottage so sweet to
Esau in his hunger, that he would buy them at so dear a rate as his
birthright? How highly then should I value this never perishing food? How
pleasant is drink in the extremity of thirst? The delight of it to a man in a
fever or other drought, can scarcely be expressed: It will make the strength
of Sampson revive: O then how delightful will it be to my soul, to drink of
that fountain of living water, which who so drinks shall thirst no more? So
pleasant is wine and so refreshing to the spirits, that its said to make glad
the heart of man: How pleasant then will that wine of the great marriage be?
even that wine which our water was turned into? that best wine which will be
kept till then? How delightful are pleasant odors to our smell? how delightful
is perfect music to the ear? how delightful are beauteous sights to the eye?
such as curious pictures; sumptuous, adorned, well-contrived buildings;
handsome, necessary rooms, walks, prospects; Gardens stored with variety of
beauteous and odoriferous flowers; or pleasant Medows which are natural
gardens? O then think every time thou see or remembrest these, what a
fragrant smell has the precious ointment which is poured on the head of our
glorified Savior, and which must be poured on the heads of all his Saints?
which will fill all the room of heaven with its odor and perfume? how
delightful is the music of the heavenly host? how pleasing will be those real
beauties above? and how glorious the building not made with hands? and the
house that God himself does dwell in? and the walks and prospects in the City
of God? and the beauties and delights in the Celestial Paradise? Think
seriously what these must needs be. The like may be said of the delight of the
sense of Feeling, which the Philosopher says is the greatest of all the rest.

SECT. V.. 5.

3. COmpare also the delights above, Celestia horum principia Deo nota sunt,
atque ei qui Dei sit ami^us: inquit Plato in Timaeo.
which the delights that are found in natural knowledge: This is far beyond the
delights of sense; and the delights of heaven are further beyond it. Think
then, can an Archimedes be so taken up with his Mathematical invention, that
the threats of death will not take him off, but he will dye in the midst of
these his natural contemplations? Should I not much more be taken up with the
delights of Glory, and dye with these contemplations fresh upon my soul?
especially when my death will perfect my delights; but those of Archimedes dye
with him? What a pleasure is it to dive into the secrets of nature? to find
out the mystery of Arts and sciences? Ferunt magnum Melancthonem dicere
solitum, Non credere se in univers^a Germania reperi^i posse ullum, qui unicam
integram paginam in Aristotelis O^gano recte intelligat.
to have a clear understanding in Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, Music,
Astronomy, Geometry? etc. If we make but any new discovery in one of these, or
see a little more then we saw before, what singular pleasure do we find
therein? Why think then what high delights there are in the knowledge of God
and Christ his Son; If the face of humane learning be so beautiful, that
sensual pleasures are to it but base and brutish, how beautiful then is the
face of God? When we light of some choice and learned book, how are we taken
with it? we could read and study it day and night: we can leave meat and drink
and sleep to read it: what delights then are there at Gods right hand, where we
shall know in a moment all that is to be known?

. 6.
SECT. VI.
4. COmpare also the delights above, with the delights of Morality, and of the
natural affections: What delight had many sober Heathens in the rules and
Practice of Moral duties? so that they took him only for an honest man, who
did well through the love of Virtue, and not only for fear of punishment? yea,
so highly did they value this moral Virtue, that they thought the chief
happiness of man consisted in it. Why, think then, what excellency there will
be in that rare perfection which we shall be raised to in heaven? and in that
uncreated perfection of God which we shall behold? what sweetness is there in
the exercise of natural Love? whether to Children, to Parents, to Yoakfellows,
or to Friends? The delight which a pair of special faithful friends, do find
in loving and enjoying one another, is a most pleasing, sweet delight: It
seemed to the Philosophers to be above the delights of Natural, or Matrimonial
friendship; and I think it seemed so to David himself, so he concludes his
Lamentation for him; I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan, very
pleasant have thou been unto me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love
of women, 2 Samuel 1.26. Yea, the soul of Jonathan did cleave to David Even
Christ himself; Ibi Hymnidici Angelorum chori, ibi societas civium supernorum;
ibi dulcis solemnitas a peregrinationis hujus tristi labor redeuntium; ibi
festivitas fine fine, aeternita^ sine labe, serenitas sine nube, August. in
Johan.
as it seems had some of this kind of love, for he had one Disciple whom he
especially loved and who was wont to lean on his breast: why, think then, if the
delights of close and cordial friendship be so great, what delight shall we
have in the friendship of the most High? and in our mutual amity with Jesus
Christ? and in the dearest love and consort with the Saints? Surely this will
be a closer and stricter friendship then ever was betwixt any friends on earth;
and these will be more lovely and desirable friends than any that ever the Sun
beheld; and both our affections to our Father, and our Savior, but especially
his affection to us will be such as here we never knew; as Spirits are so far
more powerful then Flesh, that one Angel can destroy an Host, so also are their
affections more strong and powerful, we shall then love a thousand times more
strongly and sweetly then now we can: and as all the Attributes and Works of
God are incomprehensible, so is the attribute and work of Love; He will love us
many thousand times more, then we even at the perfectest are able to love him,
what joy then will there be in this mutual Love?

SECT. VII.. 7.

5. COmpare also the Excellencies of heaven with those glorious works of the
Creation which our eyes do now behold: What a deal of wisdom, and power, and
goodness appears in and through them to a wise Observer? What a deal of the
Majesty of the great Creator does shine in the face of this fabric of the
world? Psalm. 92.4, 5.
surely his Works are great and admirable, sought out of them that have
pleasure therein: Psalm. 111.2. Psalm. 145.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 10.7.22.
This makes the study of natural Philosophy so pleasant, because the Works of
God are so excellent: What rare workmanship is in the body of a man? yea, in
the body of every beast? which makes the Anatomical studies so delightful?
Psalm. 136.4, 5, 6, etc. Job 36.24.25, 26.
what excellency in every Plant we see? in the beauty of Flowers? in the
nature, diversity, and use of Herbs? in Fruits, in Roots, in Minerals, and what
not? But especially if we look to the greater works: if we consider the whole
body of this earth, and its creatures, and inhabitants; the Ocean of waters,
with its motions and dimensions, the variation of the Seasons, and of the face
of the earth; the intercourse of Spring and Fall, of Summer and Winter; what
wonderful excellency do these contain? Why, think then in thy Meditations, if
these things which are but servants to sinful man, are yet so full of
mysterious worth; what then is that place where God himself does dwell? and is
prepared for the just who are perfected with Christ? When thou walk forth
in the Evening, look upon the Stars, how they glissen, and in what numbers they
bespangle the Firmament: If in the day time, In Civitate Dei Rex veritas, Lex
Charitas, dignitas aequitas, pax foelicitas, vitae aeternitas. Aug. de Civit
Dei.
look up to the glorious Sun; view the wide expanded encompassing heavens, and
say to thy self, what glory is in the least of yonder Stars? what a vast, what
a bright resplendent body has yonder Moon, and every Planet? O what an
unconceiveable glory has the Sun? Why, all this is nothing to the glory of
Heaven; yonder Sun must there be laid aside as useless, for it would not be
seen for the brightness of God: I shall live above all yonder glory, yonder is
but darkness to the luster of my Fathers House, I shall be as glorious as that
Sun my self; yonder is but as the wall of the Pallace-yard; as the Poet ^aith,
If in Heavens outward Court such beauty be,
What is the glory which the Saints do see?
So think of the rest of the Creatures: This whole earth is but my Fathers
footstool; this Thunder is nothing to his dreadful voice; these winds are
nothing to the breath of his mouth: So much wisdom and power as appears in
all these; so much, and far much more greatness and goodness, and loving
delights shall I enjoy in the actual fruition of God. Surely, if the Rain which
rains, and the Sun which shines on the just and unjust, be so wonderful; the
Sun then which must shine on none but Saints and Angels, must needs be
wonderful and ravishing in glory.

. 8.
SECT. VIII.
6. COmpare the things which thou shall enjoy above, with the excellency of
those admirable works of Providence, which God does exercise in the Church, and
in the World. What glorious things has the Lord wrought? and yet we shall see
more glorious then these. Would it not be an astonishing sight, to see the Sea
stand as a Wall on the right hand, and on the left, and the dry Land appear in
the midst, and the people of Israel pass safely through, and Pharaoh and his
people swallowed up? what if we should see but such a sight now? If we had seen
the ten Plagues of Egypt, or had seen the Rock to gush forth streams, or had
seen Manna or Quails rained down from Heaven, or had seen the Earth open, and
swallow up the wicked, or had seen their Armies slain with Hailstones, with an
Angel, or by one another. Would not all these have been wondrous, glorious
sights? But we shall see far greater things then these. And as our sights shall
be more wonderful, so also they shall be more sweet: There shall be no blood
nor wrath intermingled; we shall not then cry out as David, Who can stand
before this Holy Lord God? Would it not have been an astonishing sight, to have
seen the Sun stand still in the Firmament? or to have seen Ahaz Dyal go ten
degrees backward? Why, we shall see when there shall be no Sun to shine at all;
we shall behold for ever a Sun of more incomparable brightness. Were it not a
brave life, if we might still live among wonders and miracles? and all for us,
and not against us? if we could have drought or rain at our prayers, as Elias?
or if we could call down fire from Heaven to destroy our enemies? or raise the
dead to life, as Elisha? or cure the diseased, and speak strange languages, as
the Apostles? Alas, these are nothing to the wonders which we shall see and
possess with God! and all those wonders of Goodness and Love! We shall possess
that Pearl and Power it self, through whose virtue all these works were done;
we shall our selves be the subjects of more wonderful mercies then any of
these. Jonas was raised but from a three days burial, from the belly of the
Whale in the deep Ocean; but we shall be raised from many years rottenness and
dust; and that dust exalted to a Sun-like glory; and that glory perpetuated to
all eternity. What say thou, Christian, Is not this the greatest of
miracles or wonders? Surely, if we observe but common providence, the Motions
of the Sun, the Tides of the Sea, the standing of the Earth, the warming it,
the watering it with Rain as a Garden, the keeping in order a wicked confused
world, with multitudes the like; they are all very admirable: But then to think
of the Sion of God, of the Vision of the Divine Majesty, of the comely Order of
the Heavenly Host; what an admirable sight must that needs be? O what rare and
mighty works have we seen in Britain, in four or five years? what changes? what
subduing of enemies? what clear discoveries of an Almighty Arm? what magnifying
of weakness? what casting down of strength? what wonders wrought by most
improbable means? what bringing to Hell, and bringing back? what turning of
tears and fears into safety and joy? such hearing of earnest prayers, as if God
could have denied us nothing that we asked? All these were wonderful
heart-raising works. But O, what are these to our full deliverance? to our
final conquest? to our eternal triumph? and to that great day of great things?

SECT. IX.. 9.

7. COmpare also the Mercies which thou shall have above, Temporalis vita
aeternae comparata, mors est dicenda potius quam vita. Ipse enim quotidi^nus
defectus corruptionis, quid est aliud quam prolixitas mortis? Quae autem lingua
dicere, vel quis intellectus capere sufficit illa supernae civitatis quanta
sint gaudia? Angelorum choris interesse, cum beatissimis spiritibus gloriae
conditoris assistere; praesentem Dei vultum cer^ere, incircumscriptum lumen
videre, nullo mortis dolor affici, incorruptionis perpe^uae mun^re laetari?
Greg. in hom.
with those particular Providence which thou have enjoyed thy self, and those
observable Mercies which thou have recorded through thy life. If thou be a
Christian indeed, I know thou have, if not in thy Book, yet certainly in thy
Heart, a great many precious favors upon record. The very remembrance and
rehearsal of them is sweet: How much more sweet was the actual enjoyment? But
all these are nothing to the Mercies which are above. Look over the excellent
Mercies of thy Youth and Education; the mercies of thy riper years or age; the
mercies of thy prosperity, and of thy adversity; the mercies of thy several
places and relations; are they not excellent, and innumerable? Can not thou
think on the several places thou have lived in, and remember that they have
each had their several mercies? the mercies of such a place, and such a place;
and all of them very rich and engaging Mercies? O how sweet was it to thee,
when God resolved thy last doubts? when he overcame and silenced thy fears and
unbelief? when he prevented the inconveniences of thy life, which thy own
counsel would have cast thee into? when he eased thy pains? when he healed thy
sickness, and raised thee up as from the very grave and death? when thou
prayedst, and wepst, as Hezekiah, and said, My days are cut off, I shall go
to the gates of the grave, I am deprived of the residue of my years: I said I
shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the Living, I shall behold
man no more with the Inhabitants of the World. Mine age is departed and removed
from me as a Shepherds Tent: I have cut off like a Weaver my life; he will cut
me off with pining sickness; from day to day will thou make an end of me, etc.
Yet did he in love to thy soul deliver it from the pit of corruption, and cast
thy sins behind his back; and set thee among the living, to praise him as thou
do this day: That the fathers to the children might make known his Truth: The
Lord was ready to save thee, that thou might sing the songs of praise to him
in his house all the days of thy life, Isai. 38.10. to the 20. I say, were not
all these most precious mercies? Alas, these are but small things for thee in
the eyes of God; he intends thee far greater things then these, even such as
these are scarce a taste of. It was a choice mercy that God has so notably
answered thy prayers; and that thou have been so often and so evidently a
prevailer with him: But O think then, Are all these so sweet and precious that
my life would have been a perpetual misery without them? Has his providence
lifted me so high on Earth, and his merciful kindness made me great? How sweet
then will the Glory of his presence be? And how high will his eternal love
exalt me? And how great shall I be made in Communion with his greatness? If my
pilgrimage, and warfare have such mercies, what shall I find in my home, and
in my Triumph? If God will communicate so much to me while I remain a sinner;
what will he bestow when I am a perfect Saint? If I have had so much in this
strange Country at such a distance from him; what shall I have in Heaven in his
immediate presence, where I shall ever stand about his Throne?

SECT. X.. 10.

8. COmpare the comforts which thou shall have above with those which thou have
here received in the Ordinances. Has not the written Word been to thee as an
open fountain, flowing with comforts day and night? when thou have been in
trouble, there thou have met with refreshing: when thy faith has staggered, it
has there been confirmed: what suitable Scriptures has the Spirit set before
thee? What seasonable promises have come into thy mind? so that thou may
say with David, If thy Word had not been my delight, I had perished in my
trouble? Think then If the Word be so full of consolations, what overflowing
springs shall we find in God? if his letters are so comfortable, what are the
words that flow from his blessed lips? and the beams that stream from his
Glorious Face? If Luther would not take all the world for one leaf of the
Bible, what would he take for the Joys which it reveals? If the promise be
so sweet, what is the performance? If the Testament of our Lord, and our
charter for the Kingdom be so comfortable, what will be our possession of the
Kingdom it self? Think further; what delights have I found also in this Word
preached? when I have sit under a heavenly heart-searching Teacher, how has my
heart been warmed within me? how has he melted me, and turned my bowels? me
thinks I have felt my self almost in Heaven: me thinks I could have been
content to have sat and heard from morning to night, I could even have lived
and dyed there: How often have I gone to the congregation troubled in spirit, and
returned home with quietness and delight? How often have I gone doubting,
concluding damnation against my own soul; and God has sent me home with my
doubts resolved, and satisfied me, and persuaded me of his love in Christ? How
often have I gone with darkness and doubtings in my Judgment, and God has opened
to me such precious truths, and opened also my understanding to see them, that
his light has been exceeding comfortable to my soul? what Cordials have I met
with in my saddest afflictions? what preparatives to fortify me for the next
encounter? Well then, if Moses face do shine so gloriously, what Glory is in
the Face of God? If the very feet of the Curaeus cum Diem recordaretur quo
primo Melancthonem legentum audiss^t, illud recitare solebat, quod in suis
init^ationibus ^^nunt pontificit: Quem vidi, quem amav^, quem dilexi.
Messengers of these tidings of Peace be beautiful, how beautiful is the face
of the Prince of Peace? If the word in the mouth of a fellow servant be so
pleasant, what is the living Word himself? If this Treasure be so precious in
earthen Vessels, what is that Treasure laid up in Heaven? Think with thy self,
If I had heard but such a Divine Prophet as Isaiah, or such a persuading moving
Prophet as Jeremy, or such a worker of Miracles as Elijah or Elisha, how
delightful a hearing would this have been? If I had heard but Peter, or John,
or Paul, I should rejoice in it as long as I lived; but what would I give that
I had heard one Sermon from the mouth of Christ himself? sure I should have
felt the comfort of it in my very foul; why but, alas, all this is nothing to
what we shall have Patriam nostram Paradisum computamus: Parents Patriarchas
habere jam caepimus: Quid non properamus and currimus ut Patriam nost^am
videre, ut parents salutare possimus? Magnus illic nos charorum numerus
expectat, parentum, f^atrum, filiorum, frequens nos and copiosa turba
desiderat, jam de sua immortalitate secura, and adhuc de nostra salute
solicita. Ad horum conspectum and complexum venire quanta and illis and nobis
in commune laetitia est? Qualis illic coelestium regnorum voluptas, sine timore
moriendi and cum aeternitate vivendi? Quam summa and perpetua faelicitas? Illic
Apostolorum gloriosus chorus; illic Prophetarum exultantium numerus; illic
Marty^um innumerabilis populus, ob certaminis and passionis victoriam
Coronatus; Triumphantes illic Virgins, quae concupiscentiam carnis and
corporis, continentiae robore subegerunt: Remunerati misericordes qui alimentis
and largitionibus pauperum, justitiae opera fecerunt, etc. Cyprian. de
Immortalitate.
above: O blessed are the eyes that see what there is seen, and the ears that
hear that things that there are heard! There shall I hear Elias, Isaiah,
Daniel, Peter, John, (not preaching to an obstinate people in imprisonment, in
persecution, and reproach, but) triumphing in the praises of him that has
advanced them. Austin was wont to wish these three wishes; first, That he might
have seen Christ in the flesh; secondly, That he might have heard Paul Preach;
thirdly, That he might have seen Rome in its glory: Alas, these are small
matters all to that which Austin now beholds; there we see not Christ in the
form of a servant, but Christ in his Kingdom, in Majesty and Glory; not Paul
Preach in weakness and contempt, but Paul with millions more rejoicing and
triumphing; not pesecuting Rome in a fading glory, but Jerusalem which is
above, in perfect and lasting glory.

So also think, what a joy it is to have access and acceptance in Prayer, that
when any thing aileth me, I may go to God and open my case, and unbosom my soul
to him as to my most faithful friend? especially knowing his sufficiency and
willingness to relieve me? O but it will be a more surpassing unspeakable joy,
when I shall receive all blessings without asking them; and when all my
necessities and miseries are removed, and when God himself will be the portion
and inheritance of my soul.

What consolation also have we often received in the Supper of the Lord? what a
privilege is it to be admitted to sit at his Table? to have his Covenant
sealed to me by the outward Ordinance, and his special Love sealed by his
Spirit to my heart? Why, but all the life and comfort of these, is their
declaring and assuring me of the comforts hereafter; their use is, but darkly
to signify and seal those higher mercies: when I shall indeed drink with him
the fruit of the vine renewed, it will then be a pleasant feast indeed. O the
difference between the last Supper of Christ on earth, and the marriage Supper
of the Lamb at the great day! Here he is in an upper room, accompanied with
twelve poor selected men, feeding on no curious dainties, but a Paschal Lamb
with sow^e Herbs, and a Judas at his table ready to betray him: But then his
room will be the Glorious Heavens; his attendants all the host of Angels and
Saints; no Judas nor unfurnished guest comes there; but the humble believers
must sit down by him, and the Feast will be their mutual Loving and Rejoicing.
Yet further think with thy self thus; The communion of the Saints on earth, is
a most delectable mercy: What a pleasure is it to live with understanding, and
heavenly Christians ^ Even David says, Psalm. 16.
they were all his delight? O then what a delightful society shall I have
above? The Communion of Saints is there somewhat worth, where their
understandings are fully cleared, and their affections so highly advanced. If I
had seen but Job in his sores upon the Dunghill, it would have been an excellent
sight to see such a mirror of patience: what will it be then to see him in
glory, praising that power which did uphold and deliver him? If I had heard but
Paul and Sylas singing in the stocks, it would have been a delightful hearing,
what will it be then to hear them sing praises in heaven* If I had heard David
sing praises on his Lute and Harp, it would have been a pleasing Melo^dy; and
that which drove the evil spirit from Saul, would sure have driven away the
dullness and sadness of my spirit, and have been to me as the Music was to
Elisha, that the Spirit of Christ in joy would have come upon me; why, I shall
shortly hear that sweet Singer in the heavenly Chore advancing the King of
Saints; and will not that be a far more melodious hearing? If I had spoke with
Paul when he was new come down from the third Heavens, and he might have
revealed to me the things which he had seen, O what would I give for an hours
such conference? how far would I go to hear such an Narration? why, I must
shortly see those very things my self; yea, and far more then Paul was then
capable of seeing, and yet shall I see no more then I shall possess. If I had
spoke but one hour with Lazarus when he was risen from the dead, and heard him
describe the things which he had seen in another world (if God would permit and
enable him thereto,) what a joyful discourse would that have been? How many
thousand books may I read before I could know so much as he could have told me
in that hour? If God would have suffered him to tell what he had seen, the Jews
would have more thronged to hear him, then they did to see him; O but this
would have been nothing to the sight it self, and to the Erit ibi Deus omnia in
omnibus, and illius praesentia omnes animae and corporis implebit appetitus;
cessabun^que de caetero consummatis omnibus, ministratorii Angelicarum virtutum
discursus? Et impleta ordinataque omnino civitate Dei, nec innovabitur, nec
mutabitur ultra fixae and consummatae beatitudinis status. Cyprian. de laud
Martyr.
fruition of all that which Laza^us saw.

Once again, think with thy self, what a soul raising employment is the
praising of God? especially in consort with his affectionate Saints? What if I
had been in the place of those Shepherds, and seen the Angels, and heard the
multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men? Luke 2.13, 14. what a
glorious sight and hearing would this have been? but I shall see and hear more
glorious things then this. If I had stood by Christ when he was thanking his
Father, Joh, 17. I should have thought mine ears even blessed with his voice,
how much more when I shall hear him pronounce me blessed? If there were such
great joy at the bringing back of the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.15. and such great joy at
the reedifying the material Temple, Nehe. 12.43. what joy will there be in the
New Jerusalem? why, If I could but see the Church here in Unity and Prosperity,
and the undoubted Order and Discipline of Ipse per se placet, and per se
sufficit ad meritum, sufficit ad praemium, nec extra illum quicquam quaerit,
quia totum in illo invenitur quicquid desideratur. Semper libet eum adsp^^ere,
semper habere, semper in illo delectari, and illo perfrui; In illo clarificatur
intellectus, and parificatur affectus, ad cognoscendam and diligendam
veritatem. Et hoc est totum bonum hominis, nosse scilicet and amare Creatorem
suum, Bernard. de praemio caelesti.
Christ established, and his Ordinances purely and powerfully administered, what
an unspeakable joy to my soul it would be? If I could see the Congregations
provided with able Teachers, and the people receiving and obeying the Gospel,
and longing for Reformation, and for the Government of Christ, O what a blessed
place were England? If I could see our Ignorance turned into Knowledge and Error
turned into soundness of Understanding, and shallow Professors into solid
Believers, and Brethren living in Amity, and in the life of the Spirit, O what
a fortunate Island were this? Alas, alas, what is all this to the Reformation in
Heaven? and to the blessed condition which we must live in there? There Is
another kind of change and glory then this? What great joy had the people and
David himself, to see them so willingly offer to the Service of the Lord? And
what an excellent Psalm of Praise does David thereupon compose? 1 Chro. 29.9,
10, etc. When Solomon was anointed King in Jerusalem, the people rejoiced with
so great joy, that the earth rent at the sound of them, 1 Kings 1.40. what a
joyful shout will there be then at the appearing of the King of the Church? If
when the foundations of the earth were fastened, and the corner stone thereof
was laid, the morning stars did sing together, and all the sons of God did
shout for joy, Job 38 6, 7. why then when our glorious world is both founded
and finished, and the corner stone appears to be the top stone also, and the
Holy City is adorned as the Bride of the Lamb, O Sirs, what a joyful shout will
then be heard?

SECT. XI.. 11.

9 COmpare the joy which thou shall have in heaven, with that which the Saints
of God have found in the way to it, and in the foretastes of it; when thou
see a heavenly man rejoice, think what it is that so affects him? it is the
property of fools to rejoice in toys, and to laugh at nothing; but the people
of God are wiser then so, they know what it is that makes them glad: When did
God ever reveal the least of himself to any of his Saints, but the joy of their
hearts were answerable to the Revelation? Paul was so lifted up with what he
saw, that he was in danger of being exalted above measure, and must have a
prick in the flesh to keep him down; when Peter had seen but Christ in his
Transfiguration, which was but a small glimpse of his glory, and had seen Moses
and Elias, talking with him, what a rapture and ecstasy is he cast into? Master
(says he) it is good for us to be here, let us here build three Tabernacles,
one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias, as if he should say, O let
us not go down again to yonder persecuting rabble; let us not go down again to
yonder drossy dirty world, let us not return to our mean and suffering state,
is it not better that we stay here now we are here? is not here better company?
and sweeter pleasures? but the Text says, He knew not what he said, Matthew.
17.4. When Moses had been talking with God in the Mount, it made his Visage so
shineing and glorious, that the people could not endure to behold it, but he
was fain to put a vail upon it: No wonder then if the face of God must be
veiled, till we are come to that state where we shall be more capable of
beholding him, 2 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18.
when the vail shall be taken away, and we all beholding him with open face,
shall be turned into the same Image from glory to glory. Alas, what is the
backparts which Moses saw from the clefts of the Rock, to that open face which
we shall behold hereafter? what is the Revelation to John in Patmos, to this
Revelation which we shall have in heaven? How short does Paul's Vision come of
the Saints Vision above with God? How small a part of the glory which we must
see, was that which so transported Peter in the Mount? I confess these were all
extraordinary foretastes, but little to the full Beatifical Vision: when David
foresaw the Resurrection of Christ and of himself, and the pleasures which he
should have for ever at Gods right hand, how does it make him break forth and
say, Therefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall
rest in hope, Psalm. 16.9. Why think then; If the foresight can raise such
ravishing joy, what will the actual possession do? How often have we read and
heard of the dying Saints, who when they had scarce strength and life enough to
express them, have been as full of joy as their hearts could hold? And when
their bodies have been under the extremities of their sickness, yea ready to
feel the pangs of death, have yet had so much of heaven in their spirits, that
their joy has far surpassed their sorrows; and if a spark of this fire be so
glorious, and that in the midst of the sea of adversity; what then is that Sun
of Glory it self? O the joy that the Martyrs of Christ have felt in the midst
of the scorching flames? sure they had life and sense as we, and were flesh and
blood as well as we: therefore it must needs be some excellent thing that must
so rejoice their souls, while their bodies were burning: When Bilney can burn
his finger in the Candle, and Cranmer can burn off his unworthy right Hand:
Sancti Martyrs praesentem vitam non despexissent, nisi certiorem animarum
vitam subsequi Scirent. Greg. Dial. l. 4.
when Bainham can call the Papists to see a Miracle, and tell them, that he
feels no more pain then in a bed of Down, and that the fire was to him as a bed
of Roses: when Farrer can say, If Istir, believe not my Doctrine. Think then,
Reader, with thy self in thy Meditations, sure it must be some wonderful
foretasted glory that can do all this, that can make the flames of fire easy,
and that can make the King of Fears so welcome; O what then must this glory it
self needs be? when the very thoughts of it can bring Paul into such a
straight, Nihil crus Sentit in nervo, quum animus est in coelo. Tertul. ad
Martyr.
that he desired to depart and to be with Christ, as best of all; when it can
make men never think themselves well till they are dead; O what a blessed Rest
is this? Shall Sanders so delightfully embrace the Stake, and cry out, Welcome
Cross; and shall not I more delightfully embrace my blessedness, and cry,
Welcome Crown? Shall blessed Bradford kiss the Faggot, and shall not I then
kiss the Son himself? Shall the poor Martyr rejoice that she might have her
foot in the same hole of the Stocks that Mr. Philpots foot had been in before
her? and shall not I rejoice that my soul shall live in the same place of glory
where Christ and his Apostles are gone before me? Shall Fire and Faggot, shall
Prisons and Banishment, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 14. c. 17. Idem. l. 11. c. 9.
shall Scorns and cruel Torments be more welcome to others, then Christ and
Glory shall be to me? God forbid: What thanks did Lucius the Martyr give them,
that they would send him to Christ from his ill masters on earth? How
desirously did Basil wish, when his persecuters threatened his death the next
day, that they might not change their resolution, lest he should miss of his
expectation! What thanks then shall I give my Lord, for removing me from this
loathsome prison to his Glory! and how loath should I be to be deprived thereof!
When Luther thought he should dye of an Apoplexy, it comforted him, and made
him more willing, because the good Duke of Saxony, and before him the Apostle
John had died of that disease, how much more should I be willing to pass the
way that Christ has passed, and come to the glory where Christ is gone? If
Luther could thereupon say, Feri Domine, feri clementer, ipse paratus sum, quia
verbo tuo a peccatis absolutus; Strike Lord, strike gently, I am ready, because
by thy Word I am absolved from my sins; how much more cheerfully should I cry,
come Lord and advance me to this glory, and repose my weary soul in Rest!

. 12.
SECT. XII.
10. COmpare also the Glory of the Heavenly Kingdom, with the glory of the
imperfect Church on earth, and with the Glory of Christ in his state of
Humiliation: And you may easily conclude, If Christ under his fathers wrath,
and Christ standing in the room of sinners, were so wonderful in excellencies,
what then is Christ at the Fathers right hand? And if the Church under her sins
and enemies, have so much beauty; something it will have at the marriage of the
Lamb. How wonderful was the Son of God in the form of a servant? When he is
born, the Heavens must proclaim him by miracles: A new Star must appear in the
firmament, and fetch men from remote parts of the world to worship him in a
manger; Cum Christo semper vivemus facti per ipsum filii Dei: cum ipso
exultabimus semper ipsius cruore ^parati. Erirmus Christiani cum Christo simul
gloriosi, de Deo patre beati, de perpetua voluptate laetantes, semper in
conspectu Dei, and agentes Deo gratias semper: Neque enim poterit nisi and
laetus esse semper, and gratus, qui cum morti fuisset obnoxus, factus est de
immortalitate securus. Cyprian. ad Demetriad.
The Angels and Heavenly host must declare his Nativity, and solemnize it with
praising and glorifying God. When he is but a child he must dispute with the
Doctors and confute them. When he sets upon his office, his whole life is a
wonder. Water turned into wine, thousands fed with five loaves and two fishes;
multitudes following him to see his miracles; The lepers cleansed, the sick
healed, the lame restored, the blind receive their sight, the dead raised; if
we had seen all this, should we not have thought it wonderful? The most
desperate diseases cured with a touch, with a word speaking; the blind eyes
with a little clay and spittle, the Devil departing by Legions at his command;
the winds and the seas obeying his Word; are not all these wonderful? Think
then, How wonderful is his Celestial Glory? If there be such cutting down of
boughs, and spreading of Garments, and crying Hosanna, to one that comes into
Jerusalem riding on an Ass; what will there be when he comes with his Angels
in his Glory? If they that heard him preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, have
their hearts turned within them, that they return and say, Never man spoke
like this Man: Then sure they that behold his Majesty in his Kingdom, will say,
There was never glory like this Glory. If when his enemies come to apprehend
him, the word of his mouth does cast them all to the ground; if when he is
dying, the earth must tremble, the vail of the Temple rent, the sun in the
firmament must hide its face, and deny its light to the sinful world, and the
dead bodies of the Saints arise, and the standers by be forced to acknowledge,
Verily this was the Son of God: O then what a day will it be, when he will once
more shake, not the Earth only, but the Heavens also, and remove the things
that are shaken? when this Sun shall be taken out of the firmament, and be
everlastingly darkened with the brightness of his Glory? when the dead must all
arise and stand before him; and all shall acknowledge him to be the Son of God,
and every tongue confess him to be Lord and King? If when he rises again, the
Grave and Death have lost their power, and the Angels of Heaven must roll away
the stone, and astonish the watchmen till they are as dead men, and send the
tidings to his dejected Disciples; If the bolted doors cannot keep him forth;
If the sea be as firm ground for him to walk on; If he can asend to Heaven in
the sight of his Disciples, and send the Angels to forbid them gazing after
him: O what Power, and Dominion and Glory then is he now possessed of! and must
we for ever possess with him! Yet think further; Are his very servants enabled
to do such miracles when he is gone from them? Can a few poor fishermen and
tent-makers and the like Mechanics, cure the lame, and blind, and sick? open
their prisons? destroy the disobedient? raise the dead? and astonish their
adversaries? O then what a world will that be, where every one can do greater
works then these? and shall be highlier honored then by the doing of wonders?
It were much to have the Devils subject to us: but more to have our names
written in the book of Life. If the very preaching of the gospel be accompanied
with such power, that it will pierce the heart, and discover its secrets, bring
down the proud, and make the stony sinner tremble If it can make men burn
their books* sell their lands, bring in the price, and lay it down at the
Preachers feet; If it can make the spirits of Princes stoop, and the Kings of
the Earth resign their Crowns, and do their homage to Jesus Christ; If it can
subdue Kingdom, and convert thousands, and turn the world thus upside down; If
the very mention of the Judgment and Life to come, can make the Judge on the
bench to tremble, when the prisoner at the bar does preach this Doctrine; O
what then is the Glory of the Kingdom it self? What an absolute Dominion has
Christ and his Saints? And if they have this Power and Honor in the day of
their abasement, and in the time appointed for their suffering and disgrace,
what then will they have in their full advancement?

. 13.
SECT. XIII.
11. COmpare thy mercies thou shall have above, with the mercies which Christ
has here bestowed on thy soul; and the glorious change which thou shall have
at last, with the gracious change which the Spirit has wrought on thy heart:
Compare the comforts of thy glorification, with the comforts of thy
sanctification. There is not the smallest grace in thee, which is genuine and
sincere, but is of greater worth then the riches of the Indies; not a hearty
desire and groan after Christ, but is more to be valued, then the Kingdoms of
the World: A renewed nature is the very Image of God; Scripture calls it by
the name of [Christ dwelling in us] and [the Spirit] of God abiding in us: It
is as a beam from the face of God himself; it is the Seed of God remaining in
us; it is the only inherent beauty of the rational soul; it innobleth man
above all nobility; it fitteth him to understand his Makers pleasure, to do his
Will, and to receive his Glory. Why think then with thy self, If this grain
of Mustard seed be so precious, what is the Tree of Life in the midst of the
Paradise of God? If a spark of life which will but strive against corruptions,
and flame out a few desires and groans, be so much worth; how glorious then is
the Fountain and End of this life? If we be said to be like God, and to bear
his Image, and to be holy as he is holy; when, alas, we are pressed down with a
body of sin; Sure we shall then be much liker God, when we are perfectly holy
and without blemish, and have no such thing as sin within us. Is the desire
after Heaven so precious a thing? what then is the thing it self which is
desired? Is the love so excellent? what then is the beloved? Is our joy in
foreseeing and believing, so sweet? what will be the joy in the full
possessing? O the delight that a Christian has in the lively exercise of some
of these affections! What good does it to his very heart, when he can
feelingly say, He loves his Lord? what sweetness is there in the very act of
loving? yea, even those troubling Passions of Sorrow and Fear, are yet
delightful, when they are rightly exercised: How glad is a poor Christian, when
he feels his heart begin to melt? and when the thoughts of sinful unkindness
will dissolve it? Even this Sorrow does yield him matter of Joy. O what will it
then be, when we shall do nothing but know God, and love, and rejoice, and
praise; and all this in the highest perfection? what a comfort is it to my
doubting soul, when I have a little assurance of the sincerity of my graces?
when upon examination I can but trace the Spirit in his sanctifying works? How
much more will it comfort me, to find that this Spirit has safely conducted
me, and left me in the arms of Jesus Christ? what a change was it, that the
Spirit made upon my soul, when he first turned me from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God? To be taken from that horrid state of nature,
wherein my self and my actions were loathsome to God, and the sentence of death
was past upon me, and the Almighty took me for his utter enemy; and to be
presently numbered among his Saints, and called his Friend, his Servant, his
Son; and the sentence revoked which was gone forth; O what a change was this*
To be taken from that state wherein I was born, and had lived delightfully so
many years, and was rivetted in it by custom and engagements, when thousands of
sins did lie upon my score; and if I had so died, I had been damned for ever;
and to be justified from all these enormous crimes, and freed from all these
fearful plagues, and put into the title of an Heir of Heaven; O what an
astonishing change was this? Why then consider, how much greater will that
glorious change then be? Beyond expressing; beyond conceiving! How often when I
have thought of this change in my Regeneration, have I cried out, O blessed
day! and blessed be the Lord that I ever saw it! why how then shall I cry out
in Heaven, O blessed Eternity! and blessed be the Lord that brought me to it!
Was the mercy of my conversion so exceeding great, that the Angels of God did
rejoice to see it? Sure then the mercy of my salvation will be so great, that
the same Angels will congratulate my felicity. This Grace is but a spark that
is raked up in the ashes; it is covered with flesh from the sight of the world,
and covered with corruption sometime from mine-own sight: But my Everlasting
glory will not so be clouded, nor my light be under a bushel, but upon a hill,
even upon Sion, the Mount of God.

. 14.
SECT. XIIII.
12. LAstly, compare the joys which thou shall have above, with those
foretastes of it, which the Spirit has given thee here. Judge of the Lion by
the Paw, and of the Ocean of Joy, by that drop which thou have tasted: Thou
have here thy strongest refreshing comforts, but as that man in Hell would have
had the water to cool him; Ibi non gustabunt quam suavis sit Deus, sed
implebuntur and satiabuntur dulcedine mirifica: Nihil eis d^erit; nihil oberit;
omne desiderium little Christus praesens implebit. Non senescent, non tabescent,
non putrescent amplius: Perpetua sanitas, faelix aeternitas, beatitudinis
illius sufficientiam confirmabunt. Non erit concupiscentia in membris, non
ultra ulla exurget rebellio carnis, sed t^tus status hominis pacificus, sine
omni macula and ruga permanebit^ ^yprian de laud Martyr. Quaecunque supra
coelum sunt, mentes and formae olympici, illius habitac^li cives, si non candem
atque Deus, illi tamen dignitate and natura proximam conditionem acceperunt.
Fe^nel. de abdit. rerum causis, cap. 9. Ex Platone.
a little upon the tip of the finger for thy tongue to taste; yet by this
little thou may conjecture at the quality of the whole. Has not God sometime
revealed himself extraordinarily to thy soul, and let a drop of glory fall upon
it? Have thou not been ready to say, O that it might be thus with my soul
continually, and that I might always feel what I feel sometimes! Did thou
never cry out with the Martyr after thy long and doleful expectations, He is
come, he is come? Did thou never in a lively Sermon of Heaven, nor in thy
retired contemplations on that blessed State, perceive thy drooping spirits
revive, and thy dejected heart to lift up the head? and the light of Heaven to
break forth to thy soul, as a morning Star, or as the dawning of the day? Did
thou never perceive thy heart in these duties, to be as the child that Elisha
revived? to wax warm within thee, and to recover life? Why think with thy self
then, what is this earnest to the full Inheritance? Alas, all this light that
so amazeth, and rejoices me, is but a Candle lighted from Heaven, to lead me
thither through this world of darkness! If the light of a Star in the night be
such, or the little glimmering at the break of the day; what then is the light
of the Sun at noontide? If some godly men that we read of, have been
overwhelmed with joy, till they have cried out, Hold Lord, stay thy hand; I can
bear no more! like weak eyes that cannot endure too great a light. O what will
then be my joys in Heaven, when as the object of my joy shall be the most
glorious God, so my soul shall be made capable of seeing, and enjoying him; and
though the light be ten thousand times greater then the Suns, yet my eyes shall
be able for ever to behold it?

Or if thou be one that have not felt yet these sweet foretastes (for every
believer has not felt them) then make use of the former delights which thou
have felt, that thou may the better discern what hereafter thou shall feel.

And thus I have done with the fifth part of this Directory, and showed you on
what grounds to advance your Meditations, and how to get them to quicken your
affections, by comparing the unseen delights of Heaven, with those smaller
which you have seen, and felt in the flesh.

CHAP. XII. How to manage and watch over the Heart, through the whole Work.
SECT. 1.. 1.

SIxthly. The sixth and last part of this Directory, is, To guide you in the
managing of your hearts through this work, and to show you wherein you have
need to be exceeding watchful. I have showed before, what must be done with
your hearts, in your preparations to the work, and in your setting upon it: I
shall now show it you, in respect of the time of performance. Our chief work
will here be to discover to you the danger, and that will direct you to the
fittest remedy. Let me therefore here acquaint you beforehand, That when ever
you set upon this Heavenly employment, you shall find your own hearts your
greatest hinderer, and they will prove false to you in one or all of these four
degrees. First, They will hold off, that you will hardly get them to the work;
secondly, or else they will betray you by their idleness in the work;
pretending to do it, when they do it not; or thirdly, they will interrupt the
work by their frequent excursions, and turning aside to every object; or
fourthly, they will spoil the work by cutting it short, and be gone before you
have done any good on it. Therefore I here forewarn you, as you value the
unvaluable comfort of this work, that you faithfully resist these four
dangerous evils, or else all that I have said hitherto is in vain.

1. Thou shall find thy heart as backward to this, I think, as to any work in
the world. O what excuses it will make! what evasions it will find out! and
what delays and demurs, when it is never so much convinced! Either it will
question, whether it be a duty or not? or if it be so to others, yet whether it
be so to thee? It will rake up any thing like reason to plead against it; it
will tell thee, That this is a work for Ministers that have nothing else to
study on; or for Cloysterers or persons that have more leisure then thou have:
If thou be a Minister, it will tell thee, This is the duty of the people; it is
enough for thee to meditate for the instructing of them; and let them meditate
on what they have heard, as if it were thy duty only to cook their meat, and
serve it up, and perhaps a little to taste the sweetness, by licking thy
fingers while thou art dressing it for others; but it is they only that must
eat it, digest it, and live upon it. Indeed, the smell may a little refresh
thee, but it must be digesting it, that must maintain thy strength and life. If
all this will not serve, thy heart will tell thee of other business; thou have
this company stays for thee, or that business must be done: It may be it will
set thee upon some other duty, and so make one duty shut out another; for it
had rather go to any duty then to this. Perhaps it will tell thee, that other
duties are greater, and therefore this must give place to them, because thou
have not time for both: Public business is of more concernment; to study, to
preach for the saving of souls must be preferred before these private
contemplations: As if thou had not time to see to the saving of thy own soul,
for looking after others! or thy charity to others were so great, that it draws
thee to neglect thy comfort and salvation! or, as if there were any better way
to fit us to be useful to others, then to make this experience of our doctrine
our selves! Certainly Heaven where is the Father of Lights, is the best fire to
light our candle at, and the best book for a Preacher to study; and if they
would be persuaded to study that more, the Church would be provided of more
heavenly lights: And when their Studies are Divine, and their Spirits Divine,
their preaching will then be also Divine; and they may be fitly called Divines
indeed. Or, if thy heart have nothing to say against the work, then it will
trifle away the time in delays; and promise this day and the next, but still
keep off from the doing of the business. Or lastly, If thou will not be so
baffled with excuses or delays, thy heart will give thee a flat denial, and
oppose its own unwillingness to thy Reason: Thou shall find it come to the
work, as a Bear to the stake, and draw back with all the strength it has. I
speak all this of the heart, so far as it is carnal, (which in too great a
measure is in the best) for I know so far as the heart is Spiritual, it will
judge this work the sweetest in the world.

Well then, what is to be done in the forementioned case? will thou do it, if I
tell thee? Why, what would thou do with a servant that were thus backward to
his work? or to thy beast that should draw back when thou would have him go
forward? Would thou not first persuade, and then chide, and then spur him,
and force him on? and take no denial, nor let him alone, till thou had got
him closely to fall to his work? Would thou not say, Why, what should I do
with a servant that will not work? or with an Ox or Horse that will not travel
or labor? Shall I keep them to look on? Will thou then faithfully deal thus
with thy heart? If thou be not a lazy self deluding Hypocrite, say, I will; by
the help of God, I will: Set upon thy heart roundly; persuade it to the work;
take no denial; chide it for its backwardness; use violence with it; bring it
to the service, willing, or not willing: Art thou master of thy flesh or art
thou a servant to it? have thou no command of thy own thoughts? cannot thy will
choose the subject of thy Meditations, especially when thy judgment thus
directs thy will? I am sure God once gave thee mastery over thy flesh; and
some power to govern thy own thoughts: Have thou lost thy authority? art thou
become a slave to thy depraved nature? Take up the authority again which God
has given thee* command thy heart; if it rebel, use violence with it, if thou
be too weak, call in the Spirit of Christ to thine assistance: He is never
backward to so good a work, nor will deny his help in so just a cause: God will
be ready to help thee, if thou be not unwilling to help thy self. Say to him,
Why Lord, thou gave my Reason the command of my Thoughts and Affections; the
authority I have received over them, is from thee, and now, behold they refuse
to obey thine authority: Thou command me to set them to the work of Heavenly
Meditation; but they rebel and stubbornly refuse the duty: Will thou not assist
me to execute that authority which thou have given me? O send me down thy
Spirit and Power, that I may enforce thy commands, and effectually compel them
to obey thy Will.

And thus doing, thou shall see thy heart will submit; its resistance will be
brought under; and its backwardness will be turned to a yielding compliance.

. 2.
SECT. II.
2. WHen thou have got thy heart to the work, beware least it delude thee by a
loitering formality: Least it say, I go, and go not; least it trifle out the
time, while it should be effectually meditating. Certainly, the heart is as
likely to betray thee in this, as in any one particular about the duty: When
thou have perhaps but an hours time for thy Meditation, the time will be spent
before thy heart will be serious. This doing of duty, as if we did it not, does
undo as many as the flat omission of it. To rub out the hour in a bare lazy
thinking of Heaven, is but to lose that hour, and delude thy self. Well, what
is to be done in this case? why, do here also as you do by a loitering servant;
keep thine eye always upon thy heart; look not so much to the time it spends
in the duty, as to the quantity and quality of the work that is done: You can
tell by his work, whether your servant has been painful; ask, what affections
have yet been acted? how much am I yet got nearer Heaven? Verily many a man's
heart must be followed as close in this duty of Meditation, as a Horse in a
Mill, or an Ox at the Plow, that will go no longer then you are calling or
scourging: If you cease driving but a moment, the heart will stand still; and
perhaps the best hearts have much of this temper.

I would not have thee of the judgment of those, who think that while they are
so backward, it is better let it alone; and that if mere love will not bring
them to the duty, but there must be all this violence used to compel it, that
then the service is worse then the omission. These men understand not; first,
That this Argument would certainly cashiere all Spiritual obedience, because
the hearts of the best, being but partly sanctified, will still be resisting so
far as they are carnal; Secondly, Nor do they understand well the corruptness
of their own natures; Thirdly, Nor that their sinful undisposedness will not
baffle or suspend the commands of God; Fourthly, Nor one sin excuse another;
Fifthly, Especially they little know the way of God to excite their Affections;
and that the love which should compel them, must it self be first compelled, in
the same sense as it is said to compel: Love I know is a most precious grace,
and should have the chief interest in all our duties: But there be means
appointed by God to procure this love; and shall I not use those means, till I
can use them from love? that were to neglect the means, till I have the end.
Must I not seek to procure love, till I have it already? There are means also
for the increasing of love where it is begun; and means for the exciting of it
where it lies dull: And must I not use these means, till it is increased and
excited? Why, this reasoning considering-duty that we are in hand with, is the
most singular means, both to stir up thy love, and to increase it; and
therefore stay not from the duty, till thou feel thy love constrain thee, (that
were to stay from the fire, till thou feel thy self warm) but fall upon the
work, till thou art constrained to love; and then love will constrain thee to
further duty.

My jealously, least thou should miscarry by these sotish opinions, has made
me more tedious in the opening of its error. Let nothing therefore hinder thee
while thou art upon the work, from plying thy heart with constant watchfulness
and constraint; seeing thou have such experience of its dullness and
backwardness, let the spur be never out of its side; and when ever it slacks
pace, be sure to give it a remembrance.

. 3.
SECT. III.
3. AS thy heart will be loitering, so will it be diverting. It will be turning
aside like a carless servant, to talk with every one that passes by: When
there should be nothing in thy mind, but the work in hand, it will be thinking
of thy calling, or thinking of thy afflictions, or of every bird, or tree, or
place thou see, or of any impertinency, rather then of Heaven. Thy heart in
this also will be like the Husbandmans Ox or Horse; if he drive not, he will
not go; and if he guide not, he will not keep the furrow; and it is as good
stand still, as go out of the way. Experience will tell thee, thou will have
much ado with thy heart in this point, to keep it one hour to the work without
many extravagancies and idle cogitations. The cure here is the same with that
before; to use watchfulness, and violence with your own imaginations, and as
soon as they step out, to chide them in. Say to thy heart, What? did I come
hither to think of my business in the world? to think of places, and persons,
of news, or vanity, yea, or of any thing but Heaven, be it never so good? what?
can thou not watch one hour? would thou leave this world, and dwell in
Heaven with Christ for ever? and can thou not leave it one hour out of thy
thoughts, nor dwell with Christ in one hours close Meditation? Ask thy heart as
Absalom did Hushai, Is this thy love to thy friend? Do thou love Christ, and
the place of thy Eternal, Blessed abode, no more then so? When Pharaohs Butler
dreamed, Genesis 40.10, 11, etc.
That he pressed the ripe Grapes into Pharaohs Cup, and delivered the Cup into
the Kings hand, it was a happy dream, and signified his speedy access to the
Kings presence: But the dream of the Baker, That the Birds did eat out of the
Basket on his head, the baked meats prepared for Pharaoh, had an ill omen, and
signified his hanging, and their eating of his flesh. So when the ripened
Grapes of Heavenly Meditation are pressed by thee into the Cup of Affection,
and this put into the hands of Christ by delightful praises (if thou take me
for skilful) this is the interpretation, That thou shall shortly be taken from
this prison where thou lie, and be set before Christ in the Court of Heaven,
and there serve up to him that Cup of praise (but much fuller, and much
sweeter) for ever, and for ever. But if the ravenous fowls of wandering
thoughts, do devour the Meditations intended for Heaven, I will not say flatly
it signifies thy death, but this I will say, That so far as these intrude,
they will be the death of that service; and if thou ordinarily admit them, That
they devour the life, and the joy of thy thoughts; and if thou continue in such
a way of duty to the end, It signifies the death of thy soul, as well as of thy
service. Drive away these birds of prey then from thy sacrifice, and strictly
keep thy heart to the work thou art upon.

SECT. IV.. 4.

4. LAstly, Be sure also to look to thy heart in this, That it cut not off the
work before the time, and run not away through weariness, before it have leave.
Thou shall find it will be exceeding prone to this; like the Ox that would
unyoke, or the Horse that would be unburdened, and perhaps cast off his burden,
and run away. Thou may easily perceive this in other duties; If in secret
thou set thy self to pray, is not thy heart urging thee still to cut it short?
do thou not frequently find a motion to have done? art thou not ready to be
up as soon almost as thou art down on thy knees? Why, so it will be also in thy
contemplations of Heaven: As fast as thou gettest up thy heart, it will be down
again; it will be weary of the work; it will be minding thee of other business
to be done; and stop thy Heavenly walk, before thou art well warm. Well, what
is to be done in this case also? why the same authority and resolution, which
brought it to the work, and observed it in the work, must also hold it to it,
till the work be done. Charge it in the Name of God to stay; do not so great a
work by the halves; say to it, Why foolish heart! If thou beg a while, and go
away before thou have thy alms, do thou not lose thy labor? if thou stop
before thou art at the end of thy journey, is not very step of thy travel lost?
Thou came hither to fetch a walk to Heaven, in hope to have a sight of the
glory which thou must inherit; and will thou stop when thou art almost at the
top of the Hill? and turn again before thou have taken thy survey? Thou came
hither in hope to speak with God, and will thou go before thou have seen him?
Thou came to bathe thy self in the streams of Consolation, and to that end
did uncloath thy self of thy Earthly thoughts; and will thou put a foot in,
and so be gone? Thou came to spy out the Land of Promise; O go not back
without the bunch of Grapes, which thou may show to thy Brethren, when thou
come home, for their Confirmation and Encouragement; till thou can tell
them by experience, That it is a Land flowing with Wine and Oil, with Milk and
Honey. Psalm. 104.15.
Let them see that thou have tasted of the Wine, by the gladness of thy heart;
and that thou have been anointed with the Oil, by the cheerfulness of thy
countenance: Let them see that thou have tasted of the Milk of the Land, by thy
feeding, and by thy mild and gentle disposition; and of the Honey, by the
sweetness of thy words and conversation. The views of Heaven would heal thee of
thy sinfulness, and of thy sadness; but thou must hold on the Plaster, that it
may have time to work: This Heavenly fire would melt thy frozen heart, and
refine it from the dross, and take away the earthy part, and leave the rest
more spiritual and pure; but then thou must not be presently gone, before it
have time, either to burn or warm. Stick therefore to the work, till something
be done; till thy graces be acted; thy affections raised, and thy soul
refreshed with the delights above; or if thou can not obtain these ends at
once, ply it the closer the next time, and let it not go till thou feel the
blessing. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so
doing, Matthew. 24.46.

CHAP. XIII. The Abstract or Sum of all, for the use of the weak.
SECT. I.. 1.

THus I have by the gracious assistance of the Spirit, directed you in this
work of Heavenly Contemplation, and lined you out the best way that I know for
your successful performance, and lead you into the path where you may walk with
God. But because I would bring it down to the capacity of the meanest, and help
their memories who are apt to let slip the former particulars, and cannot well
lay together the several branches of this method, That they may reduce them to
practice: I shall here contract the whole into a brief sum, and lay it all
before you in a narrower compass. But still Reader, I wish thee to remember,
that it is the practice of a duty, that I am directing thee in; and therefore,
if thou will not practice it, do not read it.

The sum is this, As thou make conscience of praying daily, so do thou of the
acting of thy Graces in Meditation; and more especially in meditating on the
joys of Heaven. To this end, Set apart one hour or half hour every day,
wherein thou may lay aside all worldly thoughts, and with all possible
seriousness and reverence, as if thou were going to speak with God himself, or
to have a sight of Christ, or of that blessed place; so do thou withdraw thy
self into some secret place, and set thy self wholly to the following work: If
thou can, take Isaacs time and place, who went forth into the Field in the
Evening to meditate: But if thou be a servant or poor man that cannot have that
leisure; take the fittest time and place that thou can, though it be when
thou art private about thy labors.

When thou setst to the work, look up toward Heaven, let thine eye lead thee as
near as it can; remember that there is thine Everlasting Rest; study its
excellency, study its reality, till thy unbelief be silenced, and thy Faith
prevail* If thy judgment be not yet drawn to admiration, use those sensible
helps and advantages which were even now laid down. Compare thy heavenly joys,
with the choicest on earth, and so rise up from Sense to Faith: If yet this
mere consideration prevail not (which yet has much force, as is before
expressed,) then fall a pleading the case with thy heart: Preach upon this Text
of Heaven to thy self; convince, inform, confute, instruct, reprove, examine,
admonish, encourage, and comfort thy own soul from this Celestial Doctrine;
draw forth those several considerations of thy Rest, on which thy several
affections may work, especially that Affection or Grace which thou intendest to
act. If it be Love which thou would act, show it the loveliness of Heaven,
and how suitable it is to thy condition; if it be Desire, consider of thy
absence from this lovely object; if it be Hope, consider the possibility and
probability of obtaining it; if it be Courage, consider the singular assistance
and encouragements which thou may receive from God; the weakness of the
enemy, and the necessity of prevailing; if it be Joy, consider of its excellent
ravishing glory, of thy interest in it, and of its certainty, and the neerness
of the time when thou must possess it. Urge these considerations home to thy
heart; whet them with all possible seriousness upon each affection: If thy
heart draw back, force it to the work; if it loyter, spur it on; if it step
aside, command it in again; if it would slip away, and leave the work, use
thine authority; keep it close to the business, till thou have obtained thine
end: Stir not away, if it may be, till thy Love do flame, till thy Joy be
raised, or till thy Desire or other Graces be lively acted. Call in assistance
also from God; mix Ejaculations with thy Cogitations and Soliloquies: Till
having seriously pleaded the case with thy heart, and reverently pleaded the
case with God; thou have pleaded thy self from a clod to a flame, from a
forgetful sinner, to a mindful lover; from a lover of the world, to a thirster
after God; from a fearful coward, to a resolved Christian; from an unfruitful
sadness, to a joyful life. In a word, What will not be done one day, do it the
next, till thou have pleaded thy heart from Earth to Heaven; from conversing
below, to a walking with God; and till thou can lay thy heart to rest, as in
the bosom of Christ, in this Meditation of thy full and Everlasting Rest.

And this is the sum of these precedent Directions.

CHAP. XIV. An Example of this Heavenly Contemplation, for the help of the
unskilful. There remains a Rest to the people of God
. 2.
SECT. II.
REst! How sweet a word is this to mine ears? Methinks the sound does turn to
substance, and having entered at the ear, does possess my brain, and thence
descends down to my very heart; methinks I feel it stir and work, and that
through all my parts and powers; but with a various work upon my various parts;
to my wearied senses and languid spirits, it seems a quieting powerful Opiate;
to my dulled powers it is spirit and life; to my dark eyes, it is both
eye salve and a prospective; to my taste it is sweetness; to mine ears it is
melody; to my hands and feet it is strength and nimbleness: Methinks I feel it
digest as it proceeds, and increase my native heat and moisture, and lying as a
reviving cordial at my heart* from thence does send forth lively spirits, which
beat through all the pulses of my soul. Rest! Not as the stone that rests on
the earth, nor as these clods of flesh shall rest in the grave; so our beast
must rest as well as we; nor is it the ^atisfying of our fleshly lusts, nor
such a rest as the carnal world desires; no, no, we have another kind of rest
then these: Rest we shall from all our labors, which were but the way and means
to Rest, but yet that is the smallest part: O blessed Rest, where we shall
never rest day or night, crying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbaths! when
we shall rest from sin, but not from worship! from suffering and sorrow, but
not from solace! O blessed day, when I shall rest with God Praemium est videre
deum, vivere cum Deo, vivere de Deo, esse cum Deo, esse in in Deo, qui erit
omnia in omnibus; habere deum qui est summum bonum, and ubi est summum bonum
ibi est summa faelicitas, summa jucunditas, vera libertas, perfecta charitas,
and aeterna securitas, Bern. de praemio coelest. Zeph. 3.17.
! when I shall rest in the Arms and Bosom of my Lord! when I shall re^t in
Knowing, Loving, Re^oycing and Praising! when my perfect soul and body
together, shall in these perfect actings perfectly enjoy the most perfect God!
when God also who is Love it self, shall perfectly love me! yea, and rest in
his Love to me, as I shall rest in my love to him! and rejoice over me with joy
and singing, as I shall rejoice in him! How near is that most blessed joyful
day? it comes apace, even he that comes will come, and will not tarry: Though
my Lord do seem to delay his coming, yet a little while and he will be here:
What is a few hundred years when they are over? How surely will his sign
appear? and how suddenly will he seize upon the careless world? Even as the
lightning that shines from East to West in a moment! He who is gone hence will
even so return: Methinks I even hear the voice of his foregoers! Methinks I see
him coming in the clouds, with the attendants of his Angels in Majesty, and in
Glory! O poor secure sinners, what will you now do? where will you hide your
selves? or what shall cover you? mountains are gone, the earth and heavens that
were are passed away; the devouring fire has consumed all, except your selves,
who must be the fuel for ever: O that you could consume as soon as the earth!
and melt away as did the heavens! Ah, these wishes are now but vain; the Lamb
himself would have been your friend, he would have loved you, and ruled you,
and now have saved you; but you would not then, and now too late: Never cry
Lord, Lord; too late, too late man; why do thou look about? can any save
thee? whether do thou run? can any hide thee? O wretch! that have brought thy
self to this! Now blessed Saints that have Believed and Obeyed! This is the end
of Faith and Patience: This is it for which you prayed and waited; Do you now
repent your sufferings and sorrows? your self-denying and holy walking? Are
your tears of Repentance now bitter or sweet? O see how the Judge does smile
upon you! there is love in his looks, The titles of Redeemer, Husband, Head, are
written in his amiable, shining face: Hark, does he not call you? He bids you
stand here on his right hand; fear not, for there he sets his Sheep: O joyful
Sentence pronounced by that blessed mouth! Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world; see how
your Savior takes you by the hand, go along you must, the door is open, the
Kingdom's his, and therefore yours; there is your place before his Throne; The
Father receives you as the Spouse of his Son, he bids you welcome to the Crown
of Glory, never so unworthy crowned you must be: this was the project of free
redeeming Grace, and this was the purpose of eternal Love. O blessed Grace! O
blessed Love! O the frame that my soul will then be in! O how Love and Joy will
stir! but I cannot express it! I cannot conceive it.

This is that Joy which was procured by Sorrow; this is that Crown which was
procured by the Cross; my Lord did weep, that now my tears might be wiped away;
he did bleed that I might now rejoice; he was forsaken, that I might not now be
forsaken; he did then dye, that I might now live. This weeping, wounded Lord,
shall I behold, this bleeding Savior shall I see, and live in him that dyed
for me: O free Mercy that can exalt so vile a wretch! free to me, though dear
to Christ! Free Grace that has chosen me, when thousands were forsaken! when
my companions in sin must burn in hell, and I must here rejoice in Rest! here
must I live with all these Saints! O comfortable meeting of my old
acquaintance! with whom I prayed, and wept, and suffered; with whom I spoke of
this day and place! I see the Grave could not contain you, the sea and earth
must give up their dead; the same love has redeemed and saved you also: This
is not like our Cottages of Clay, nor like our Prisons, or earthly Dwellings:
This voice of Joy is not like our old complainings, our groans, our sighs, our
impatient moans; nor this melodious praise like our scorns and revilings, nor
like the oaths and curses which we heard on earth; this body is not like the
body we had, nor this soul like the soul we had, nor this life like the life
that then we lived: we have changed our place, we have changed our state, our
clothes, our thoughts, our looks, our Language: we have changed our company
for the greater part, and the rest of our company is changed it self: Before a
Saint was weak and despised, so full of pride and peevishness and other sins,
that we could scarce oft-times discern their graces: But now how glorious a
thing is a Saint! where is now their body of sin, which wearyed themselves and
those about them? Where are now our different Judgments? our reproachful
titles? our divided spirits? our exasperated passions? our strange looks? our
uncharitable censures? Now we are all of one judgment of one name, of one
heart, of one house, and of one glory. O sweet reconcilement! O happy Union!
which makes us first to be one with Christ, and then to be one among our
selves! Now our differences shall be dashed in our teeth no more, nor the
Gospel reproached through our folly or scandal. O my soul, thou shall never
more lament the sufferings of the Saints; never more condole the Churches
ruins; never bewail thy suffering friends; nor lie wailing over their
deathbeds or their graves. Thou shall never suffer thy old temptations, from
Satan, the world, or thy own flesh: Thy body will no more be such a burden
to thee: thy pains and sicknesses are all now cured: thou shall be troubled
with weakness and vveariness no more: Thy head is not now an aching head; nor
thy heart now an aching heart; Thy hunger and thirst, and cold and sleep, thy
labor and study are all gone. O what a mighty change is this! From the
dunghill to the throne! from persecuting sinners to praising Saints! from a
body as vile as the carrion in the ditch, to a body as bright as the Sun in the
firmament! from complainings under the displeasure of God, to the perfect
enjoyment of him in Love! from all my doubts and fears of my condition, to this
possession which has put me out of doubt! from all my fearful thoughts of
death, to this most blessed Joyful life! O what a blessed change is this!
Farevvell sin and suffering for ever: Farevvell my hard and rocky heart,
farevvell my proud and unbelieving heart: farewell atheistical, idolatrous,
vvorldly heart, farewell my sensual carnal heart; And now welcome most holy,
heavenly nature; which as it must be employed in beholding the face of God, so
is it full of God alone, and delighted in nothing else but him. O who can
question the love which he does so sweetly taste? or doubt of that which with
such joy he seeleth? Farewell repentance, confession and supplication, farewell
the most of hope and faith: and welcome love and joy and praise. I shall now
have my harvest without plowing or sowing; my wine without the labor of the
vintage: my joy without a Preacher or a promise: even all from the face of God
himself. That's the sight that's worth the seeing: that's the book that's worth the
reading: What ever mixture is in the streams, there is nothing but pure joy in
the fountain. Here shall I be incircled with Eternity, and come forth no more:
here shall I live and ever live; and praise my Lord, and ever, ever, ever
praise him. My face will not wrinkle nor my hair be gray, but this mortal
shall have put on immortality, and this corruptible incorruption; and death
shall be swallowed up in victory, O death where is now thy sting! O grave where
is thy victory! The date of my lease will no more expire, nor shall I trouble
my self with thoughts of death; nor loose my joys through fear of losing them.
When millions of ages are past, my glory is but beginning, and when millions
more are past, it is no nearer ending. Every day is all noontide, and every
month is May or harvest, and every year is there a jubilee, and every age is
full manhood; and all this is one Eternity. O blessed Eternity! the glory of my
glory! the perfection of my perfection!

Ah drowsy, earthy, blockish heart! How coldly do thou think of this
reviving day? Do thou sleep when thou think of eternal Rest? Art thou
hanging earthward, when heaven is before thee? Had thou rather sit thee down
in dirt and dung, then walk in the court of the Palace of God? Do thou now
remember thy worldly business? Art thou looking back to the Sodom of thy lusts?
Art thou thinking of thy delights and merry company? wretched heart! Is it
better to be there, then above with God? is the company better? are the
pleasures greater? Come away; make no excuse, make no delay, God commands, and
I command thee, That even the philosophers understood that there was a heaven,
see Fernelius de abdit. rer. cause. cap. 9. And Aristol. de Caelo, l. 1. c 9.
Manifestum est quod neque locus, neque vacuum, neque tempus est extra caelum.
In omni enim loco corpus esse possibile est: Vacuum autem esse dicunt in quo
non est corpus; possibile autem est esse. Tempus autem est numerus motus, motus
autem sine naturali corpore non est, etc. Quapropter neque quae illic sunt,
nata sunt in loco esse; neque tempus ipsa facit sen^scere, neque ulla
transmulatio ullius eorum est, quae super extima disposita sunt latione, sed
inalterabilia and impassiblia optimam habentia vitam, and per se
sufficientissimam perseverant toto aevo; etc.
come away, gird up thy loins: ascend the mount; and look about thee, with
seriousness and with faith. Look thou not back upon the way of the wilderness,
except it be when thine eyes are dazzled with the glory, or when thou would
compare the Kingdom with that howling desert; that thou may more sensibly
perceive the mighty difference. Fix thine eye upon the Sun it self; and look
not down to Earth as long as thou art able to behold it; except it be to
discern more easily, the brightness of the one, by the darkness of the other.
Yonder, far above yonder, is thy Fathers glory; yonder must thou dwell when
thou leavest this Earth; yonder must thou remove, O my soul, when thou
departest from this body: And when the power of thy Lord has raised it again,
and joined thee to it; yonder must thou live with God for ever. There is the
glorious New Jerusalem, the Gates of Pearl, the foundations of Pearl, the
Streets and Pavements of transparent Gold: See thou that Sun which lights
all this world; why, it must be taken down as useless there, or the glory of
Heaven will darken it, and put it out; even thy self shall be as bright as
yonder shining Sun: God will be the Sun, and Christ the Light, and in his Light
shall thou have light.

What think thou, O my soul, of this most blessed state? What! Do thou
stagger at the Promise of God through unbelief? Though thou say nothing, or
profess belief; yet thou speak so coldly and so customarily, that I much
suspect thee: I know thy infidelity is thy natural vice. Did thou believe
indeed, thou would be more affected with it? Why, have thou not it under the
hand and seal, and oath of God? Can God lie? or he that is the Truth it self,
be false? Foolish wretch! What need has God to flatter thee, or deceive thee?
why should he promise thee more, then he will perform? Art thou not his
Creature? a little crum of dust? a scrawling worm? ten thousand times more
below him, then this fly or worm is below thee? would thou flatter a flea,
or a worm? what need have thou of them? If they do not please thee, thou will
crush them dead, and never accuse thy self of cruelty: Why yet they are thy
Fellow Creatures, made of as good metal as thy self; and thou have no
Authority over them, but what thou have received: How much less need has God
of thee? or why should he care, if thou perish in thy folly? Cannot he govern
thee without either flattery or falsehood? cannot he easily make thee obey his
will? and as easily make thee suffer for thy disobedience? Wretched unbelieving
heart! Tell a fool, or tell a Tyrant, or tell some false and flattering man of
drawing their subjects by false promises, and procuring obedience by deceitful
means: But do thou not dare to charge the Wise, Almighty, Faithful God, with
this. Above all men it beseems not thee to doubt, either of this Scripture
being his infallible Word, or of the performance of this Word to thy self. Has
not Argument convinced thee? may not thy own experience utterly silence thee?
How often has this Scripture been verified for thy good? how many of the
promises have been performed to thee? has it not quickened thee? and converted
thee? have not thou felt in it something more then humane? would God perform
another promise? or would he so powerfully concur with a feigned word? If thou
had seen the miracles that Christ and his Apostles wrought, thou would
never sure have questioned the truth of their doctrine: why they delivered it
down by such undoubted testimony, that it may be called Divine as well as
Humane. Nay, have thou not seen its Prophecies fulfilled? have thou not lived
in an age, wherein such wonders have been wrought, that thou have now no cloak
for thy unbelief? have thou not seen the course of Nature changed? and works
beyond the power of nature wrought? and all this in the fulfilling of this
Scripture? have thou so soon forgotten since nature failed me, and strength
failed me, and blood, and spirits, and flesh, and friends, and all means did
utterly fail? and how Art and Reason had sentenced me for dead? and yet how God
revoked the sentence? and at the request of praying, believing Saints, did turn
thee to the Promise which he verified to thee? And can thou yet question the
truth of this Scripture? have thou seen so much to confirm thy faith, in the
great actions of seven years past, and can thou yet doubt? Thou have seen
signs and wonders, and art thou yet so unbelieving? O wretched heart! Has God
made thee a promise of Rest, and will thou come short of it? and shut out thy
self through unbelief? Thine eyes may fail thee, thy ears deceive thee, and all
thy senses prove delusions, sooner then a promise of God can delude thee. Thou
may be surer of that which is written in the Word, then if thou see it with
thine eyes, or feel it with thy hands. Art thou sure thou live? or sure that
this is Earth which thou stand on? art thou sure thine eyes do see the Sun?
As sure is all this glory to the Saints; as sure shall I be higher then yonder
stars, and live for ever in the Holy City, and joyfully sound forth the praise
of my Redeemer; if I be not shut out by this evil heart of unbelief, causing me
to depart from the living God.

And is this Rest so sweet, and so sure? O then, what means the careless world?
Do they know what it is they so neglect? did they ever hear of it? or are they
yet asleep? or are they dead? Do they know for certain that the Crown's before
them, while they thus sit still, or follow trifles? undoubtedly they are quite
beside themselves, to mind so much their provision in the way, and strive, and
care, and labor for trifles, when they are hasting so fast to another world,
and their eternal happiness lies at stake Were there left one spark of Wit or
Reason, they would never sell their Rest for toil, nor sell their Glory for
worldly vanities, nor venture Heaven for the pleasure of a sin. Ah poor men!
That you would once consider what you hazard, and then you would scorn these
tempting baits. O blessed for ever be that love, that has rescued me from this
mad bewitching darkness!

Draw nearer yet then, Love acted.
O my soul; bring forth thy strongest burning Love; here is matter for it to
work upon; here is something truly worth thy loving. O see what beauty presents
it self: Is it not exceeding lovely? is not all the beauty in the world
contracted here? is not all other beauty deformity to it? Do thou need to be
persuaded now to love? Here Is a feast for thine eyes; a feast for all the
powers of thy soul: do thou need to be entreated to feed upon it? Can thou
love a little shining Earth? can thou love a walking piece of clay? and can
thou not love that God, that Christ, that Glory, which is so truly and
unmeasurably lovely? Thou can love thy friend, because he loves thee: And is
the love of thy friend, like the love of Christ? Their weeping or bleeding for
thee, does not ease thee, nor stay the course of thy tears or blood: But the
tears and blood that fell from thy Lord, have all a sovereign healing virtue,
and are waters of Life, and Balsam to thy faintings, and thy sores. O my soul!
If love deserve, and should procure love, what incomprehensible love is here
before thee? Pour out all the store of thy affections here; and all is too
little. O that it were more! O that it were many thousand times more! Let him
be first served, that served thee first; let him have the first born, and
strength of thy love, who parted with strength and life in love to thee: If
thou have any to spare when he has his part, let it be imparted then to
standers-by. See what a Sea of love is here before thee; cast thy self in, and
swim with the arms of thy love in this Ocean of his love: Fear not least thou
should be drowned, or confirmed in it; Though it seem as the scalding In
which it is said Saint John was cast and came out anointed only.
furnace of lead, yet thou will find it but mollifying oil; Though it seem a
furnace of fire, and the hottest that ever was kindled upon earth, yet is it
the fire of love and not of wrath; a fire most effectual to extinguish fire;
never intended to consume, but to glorify thee: venture into it then in thy
believing meditations, and walk in these flames with the Son of God; when thou
art once in, thou will be sorry to come forth again. O my soul! what want
thou here to provoke thy love? Do thou love for excellency? why thou see
nothing below but baseness, except as they relate to thy enjoyments above.
Yonder is the Goshen, the region of light, this is a Land of palpable darkness.
Yonder twinkling Stars, that shining moon, the radiant Sun; are all but as the
Lanthorns hanged out at thy fathers house, to light thee while thou walk in
the dark streets of the earth: But little do thou know (ah little indeed) the
glory and blessed mirth that is within! Do thou love for suitableness? why
what person more suitable then Christ? his Godhead, his manhood, his fullness
his freeness, his willingness, his constancy, do all proclaim him thy most
suitable friend. What state more suitable to thy misery, then that of mercy? or
to thy sinfulness and baseness, then that of honor and perfection? What place
more suitable to thee then heaven? Thou have had a sufficient trial of this
world: Do thou find it agree with thy nature or desires? are these common
abominations, these heavy sufferings, these unsatisfying vanities suitable to
thee? or do thou love for interest and near relation? Why where have thou
better interest then in heaven? or where have thou nearer relation then there?
Do thou love for acquaintance and familiarity? Why though thine eyes have
never seen thy Lord, yet he is never the further from thee: If thy son were
blind; yet he would love thee his father, though he never saw thee; Thou have
heard the voice of Christ to thy very heart, thou have received his benefits;
thou have lived in his bosom, and art thou not yet acquainted with him? It is
he that brought thee seasonably and safety into the world: It is he that nursed
thee up in thy tender infancy, and helped thee when thou could not help thy
self: He taught thee to go, to speak, to read, to understand: He taught thee to
know thy self and him; he opened thee that first window whereby thou saw
into heaven: Have thou forgotten since thy heart was careless, and he did
quicken it? and hard and stubborn, and he did soften it, and made it yield?
when it was at peace, and he did trouble it? and whole, till he did break it?
and broken, till he did heal it again? Have thou forgotten the time* nay the
many, very many times, when he found thee in secret all in tears; when he heard
thy dolorous sighs and groans; and left all to come and comfort thee? when he
came in upon thee, and took thee up, as it were in his arms, and asked thee,
Poor soul what does aile thee? do thou weep, when I have wept so much? Be of
good cheer; thy wounds are saving, and not deadly. It is I that have made them,
who mean thee no hurt, Though I let out thy blood, I will not let out thy life.

O me thinks I remember yet his voice, and feel those embracing arms that took
me up, How gently did he handle me! how carefully did he dress my wounds and
bind them up! Me thinks I hear him still saying to me, Poor sinner, though
thou have dealt unkindly with me, and cast me off; yet will not I do so by
thee; though thou have set light by me and all my mercies, yet both I and All
are thine; what would thou have, that I can give thee? and what do thou
want that I cannot give thee? If any thing I have will pleasure thee, thou
shall have it; If any thing in heaven or earth will make the happy, why it is
all thine own; Would thou have pardon? thou shall have it, I freely forgive
thee all the debt: would thou have grace and peace? thou shall have them
both; would thou have my self? why, behold, I am thine, thy friend, thy Lord,
thy brother, thy husband, and thy head; would thou have the Father? why I
will bring thee to him; and thou shall have him in and by me. -- These were my
Lords reviving words; These were the melting, healing, raising, quickening
passages of love. After all this, when I was doubtful of his love; me thinks I
yet remember his overcoming and convincing Arguments. -- Why sinner, have I
done so much to testify my Love, and yet do thou doubt? Have I made thy
believing it, the condition of enjoying it, and yet do thou doubt? Have I
offered thee my self and love so long, and yet do thou question my
willingness to be thine? Why what could I have done more then I have done? At
what dearer rate should I tell thee that I love thee? Read yet the story of my
bitter passion, will thou not believe that it proceeded from love? Did I ever
give thee cause to be so jealous of me? Or to think so hardly of me, as thou
do? Have I made my self in the Gospel, a Lion to thine enemies, and a Lamb to
thee, and do thou so overlook my Lamb like nature? Have I set mine arms and
heart there open to thee, and will thou not believe but they are shut? why, if
I had been willing to let thee perish, I could have done it at a cheaper rate,
what need I then have done and suffered so much? what need I follow thee with
so long patience and entreating? what do thou tell me of thy wants? have I
not enough for me and thee? and why do thou foolishly tell me of thy
unworthiness, and thy sin? I had not died, if man had not sinned? if thou were
not a sinner, thou were not for me; if thou were worthy thy self, what should
thou do with my worthiness? Did I ever invite the worthy and the righteous? or
did I ever save or justify such or is there any such on earth? Have thou
nothing? art thou lost and miserable? art thou helpless and forlorn? do thou
believe that I am a sufficient Savior? and would thou have me? why then take
me, Lo, I am thine; if thou be willing I am willing, and neither sin nor devils
shall break the match.

These, O these were the blessed words, which his Spirit from his Gospel spoke
unto me, till he made me cast my self it his feet, ye into his arms, and to cry
out, My Savior and my Lord: Thou have broke my heart, thou have revived my
heart, thou have overcome, thou have wone my heart, take it, it is thine; if
such a heart can please thee, take it, if it cannot, make it such as thou
would have it. -- Thus, O my soul, may thou remember the sweet familiarity
thou have had with Christ; therefore if acquaintance will cause affection, O
then let out thy heart unto him; it is he that has stood by thy bed of
sickness, that has cooled thy heats, and eased thy pains, and refreshed thy
weariness, and removed thy fears; He has been always ready; when thou have
earnestly sought him; He has given thee the meeting in public and in private;
He has been found of thee in the Congregation, in thy house, in thy chamber,
in the field, in the way as thou wast walking, in thy waking nights, in thy
deepest dangers. O if bounty and compassion be an attractive of Love how
unmeasurably then am I bound to love him? All the mercies that have filled up
my life, do tell me this, all the places that ever I did abide in, all the
societies and persons that I have had to deal with, every condition of life
that I have passed through, all my employments, and all my relations, every
change that has befaln me, all tell me, That the Fountain is Overflowing
Goodness. -- Lord, what a sum of love am I indebted to thee? and how does my
debt continually increase? how should I love again for so much love? But what?
shall I dare to think of making thee requital? or of recompencing all thy love
with mine! will my mite requite thee for thy golden Mines? my seldom wishes for
thy constant bounty? or mine which is nothing or not mine, for thine which is
infinite and thine own? shall I dare to contend in love with thee? or set my
borrowed languid spark, against the Element and Sun of Love! Can I love as
high, as deep, as broad, as long Quemadmodum umbram nostram superare non datur
quippe quae tantum praeit quantum progredimur, and aequa portiene semper
antecedit, neque supra caput esse potest corporis magnitudo, cum illud semper
corpori superpositum sit; sic neque Deum largiendo vincere possumus. Neque enim
quippiam largimur quod illius non sit, aut magnificentiam and liberalitatem
antecedat; considera unde sit tibi id ipsum quod es, quod spiras, quod sapis,
and id quod maximum est, quod Deum cognoscis, quod speras regnum coelorum,
aequalem angelis dignitatem, puram, perfectamque gloriae quam nunc in speculis
and aenigmatibus cernis contemplationem; quod factus es filius Dei, cohaeres
Christi (audacter dicam) and Deus ipse. Nazianzen. in orat. de pauper. amand.
etc.
as Love it self? as much as he that made me? and that made me love? that gave
me all that little which I have* both the heart, the hearth where it is
kindled, the bellows, the fire, the fuel, and all were his: As I cannot match
thee in the works of thy Power, nor make, nor preserve, nor guide the worlds;
so why should I think any moreof matching thee in Love? No, Lord, I yield, I am
unable, I am overcome; O blessed conquest! Go on victoriously, and still
prevail, and triumph in thy love: The Captive of Love, shall proclaim thy
victory; when thou leadest me in triumph from Earth to Heaven, from Death to
Life, from the Tribunal to the Throne, my self, and all that see it, shall
acknowledge that thou have prevailed, and all shall say, Behold how he loved
him. -- Yet let me love thee in subjection to thy Love, as thy redeemed
Captive, though not thy Peer; shall I not love at all because I cannot reach
thy measure? or at least, let me heartily wish to love thee. O that I were
able! O that I could feelingly say, I love thee! even as I feel I love my
friend, and my self! Lord, that I could do it! but alas, I cannot, fain I
would, but alas, I cannot. Would I not love thee, if I were but able? Though I
cannot say as thy Apostle, Thou know that I Love thee, yet can I say, Lord,
thou know that I would love thee; but I speak not this to excuse my fault,
it is a crime that admits of no excuse, and it is my own, it dwells as near
me as my very heart; if my heart be my own, this sin is my own, yea and more my
own then my heart is. -- Lord, what shall this sinner do? the fault is my own,
and yet I cannot help it; I am angry with my heart that it does not love thee,
and yet I feel it love thee never the more; I frown up on it, and yet it cares
not, I threaten it, but it does not feel, I chide it, and yet it does not mend,
I reason with it, and would fain persuade it, and yet I do not perceive it
stir, I rear it up as a carcass upon its legs, but it neither goes nor stands,
I rub and chafe it in the use of thine Ordinances, and yet I feel it not warm
within me. -- O miserable man that I am -- unworthy soul! is not thine eye now
upon the only lovely object? and art thou not beholding the ravishing glory of
the Saints? and yet do thou not love? and yet do thou not feel the fire
break forth? why, art thou not a soul? a living spirit? and is not thy love the
choicest piece of thy life? Art thou not a rational soul? and should not thou
love according to Reasons conduct? and does it not tell thee, that all is dirt
and dung to Christ? that earth is a dungeon to the celestial glory? Art thou
not a spirit thy self? and shoulst thou not love spiritually? even God, who is
a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits? Does not every creature love their like?
why, my soul? art thou like to flesh^ or gold? or stately buildings? art thou
like to meat and drink, or clothes? will thou love no higher then thy horse or
swine? have thou nothing better to love then they? what is the beauty that thou
have so admired? can thou not even wink or think it all into darkness or
deformity? when the night comes, it is nothing to thee, while thou have gazed
on it, it has withered away; a Botch or Scab, the wrinkles of consuming
sickness, or of age, do make it as loathsome as it was before delightful;
suppose but that thou saw that beautiful carcass lying on the Bier, or
rotting in the grave, the skull dig'd up, and the bones scattered; where is now
thy lovely object? could thou sweetly embrace it, when the soul is gone, or
take any pleasure in it, when there is nothing left that's like thy self? Ah,
why then do thou love a skinful of dirt, and can love no more the heavenly
Glory? What think thou? shall thou love when thou come there? when thou
see? when thou do enjoy? when the Lord shall take thy carcass from the
grave, and make thee shine as the Sun in glory, and when thou shall
everlastingly dwell in the blessed presence? shall thou then love, or shall
thou not? is not the place, a meeting of lovers? is not the life a state of
love? is it not the great marriage day of the Lamb? when he will embrace and
entertain his Spouse with love? is not the employment there the work of love?
where the souls with Christ do take their fill? Cant. 5.8.
O then, my soul, begin it here; be sick of love now* that thou may be well
with love there; keep thy self now in the love of God ( Jude 21.) and let
neither life nor death, Romans 8.35.
nor any thing separate thee from it, and thou shall be kept in the fullness of
love for ever, and nothing shall imbitter or abate thy pleasure, for the Lord
has prepared a city of love, a place for the communicating of love to his
chosen, and those that love his Name shall dwell there, Psalm. 69.36.

Awake then, Joy.
O my drowsy soul! who but an Owl or Mole would love this worlds uncomfortable
darkness, when they are called forth to live in light? to sleep under the light
of Grace is unreasonable, much more in the approach of the light of Glory: The
night of thy ignorance and misery is past, the day of glorious Light is at
hand, this is the daybreak betwixt them both: Though thou see not yet the Sun
it self appear, methinks the twilight of a promise should revive thee! Come
forth then, O my dull congealed spirits! and leave these earthly Cells of
dumpish sadness! and hear thy Lord that bids thee Rejoice, and again Rejoice;
thou have lain here long enough in thy prison of flesh, where Satan has been
thy Jailer, and the things of this world have been the Stocks for the feet of
thy Affections, where cares have been thy Trons, and fears thy Scourge, and the
bread and water of Affliction thy food, where sorrows have been thy lodging,
and thy sins and foes have made the bed, and a carnal, hard, unbelieving heart
have been the iron gates and bars that have kept thee in, that thou could
scarce have leave to look through the Lattices, and see one glimpse of the
immortal light: The Angel of the Covenant now calls thee, and strikes thee, and
bids thee Arise and follow him: up, O my soul, and cheerfully obey, and thy
bolts and bars shall all fly open; do thou obey, and all will obey: follow the
Lamb which way ever he leads thee: Art thou afraid because thou know not
whither? Can the place be worse then where thou art? Should thou fear to
follow such a guide? Can the Sun lead thee to a state of darkness? or can he
mislead thee that is the light of every man that comes into the world? will he
lead thee to death, who died to save thee from it? or can he do thee any hurt,
who for thy sake did suffer so much? follow him, and he will show thee the
Paradise of God, he will give thee a sight of the New Jerusalem, he will give
thee a taste of the Tree of Life: Sit no longer then by the fire of earthly
common comforts, whether the cold of carnal fears and sorrows did drive thee;
thy Winter is past, and will thou house thy self still in earthly thoughts, and
confine thy self to drooping and dullness? even the silly Flies will leave their
holes when the Winter is over, and the Sun draws near them; the Ants will stir,
the Fishes rise, the Birds will sing, the earth look green, and all with joyful
note will tell thee the Spring is come; Come forth then, O my drooping soul,
and lay aside thy Winter mourning Robes, let it be seen in thy believing Joys
and Praise, that the day is appearing, and the Spring is come; and as now thou
see thy comforts green, thou shall shortly see them white and ripe for
Harvest; and then thou who art now called forth to see and taste, shall be
called forth to reap, and gather, and take possession. Shall I suspend and
delay my joys till then? should not the joys of the Spring go before the
joys of Harvest? Is Title nothing before possession? Is the heir in no better
a state then the slave? My Lord has taught me to rejoice in hope of his glory,
Romans 5.2.
and to see it through the bars of a Prison: and even when I am persecuted for
righteousness sake, when I am reviled, and all manner of evil sayings are said
against me falsely for his sake, then has he commanded me to rejoice and be
exceeding glad, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
because of this my great reward in Heaven. How justly is an unbelieving heart
possessed by sorrow; and made a prey to cares and fears, when it self does
create them, and thrust away its offered peace and joy? I know it is the
pleasure of my bounteous Lord, that none of his family should want for Comfort:
nor live such a poor, and miserable life, nor look with such a famished
dejected face: I know he would have my joys exceed my sorrows; And as much as
he delights in the humble and contrite, yet does he more delight in the soul
as it delights in him: I know he takes no pleasure in my self-procured
sadness; nor would he call on me to weep or mourn, but that it is the only way
to these delights. Would I spread the Table before my guest, and bring him
forth my best provision, and bid him sit down, and eat and welcome, if I did
not unfeignedly desire he should do so? Has my Lord spread me a table in this
Wilderness, and furnished it with the promises of Everlasting Glory, and set
before me Angels food, and broched for me the side of his beloved Son, that I
might have a better wine then the blood of the Grape? Does he so frequently and
importunately invite me to sit down, and draw forth my faith, and feed, and
spare not? Nay has he furnished me to that end with reason, and faith, and a
rejoicing disposition? And yet is it possible that he should be unwilling of my
joys? Never think it, O my unbelieving soul; nor dare to charge him with thy
uncomfortable heaviness, who offers thee the foretaste of the highest
delights, that heaven does afford, and God bestow. Does he not bid thee delight
thy self in the Lord? and promise to give thee then the desires of thy heart?
Psalm. 37.4. 1 These. 5.16. Psalm. 32.11.
Has he not charged thee to rejoice evermore? Yea to sing aloud, and shout for
joy? Psalm. 47.1. Why should I then draw back discouraged? My God is willing, if
I were but willing. He is delighted in my delights. He would feign have it my
constant frame, and daily business, to be near to him in my believing
Meditations; and to live in the sweetest thoughts of his goodness, and to be
always delighting my soul in himself. O blessed work! Employment fit for the
sons of God!

But, ah my Lord, thy feast is nothing to me without an appetite: Thou must
give me a stomach as well as meat. Thou have set the dainties of heaven before
me, but alas, I am blind, and cannot see them; I am sick, and cannot relish
them; I am so benumbed, that I cannot put forth a hand to take them. What is
the glory of Sun and Moon to a clod of earth? Thou know I need thy
subjective grace, as well as thine objective, and that thy works upon mine own
distempered soul, is not the smallest part of my salvation. I therefore humbly
beg this grace, that as thou have opened heaven unto me in thy blessed word, so
thou would open mine eyes to see it, and my heart to affect it: else heaven
will be no heaven to me. Awake therefore O thou Spirit of Life, and breath upon
thy Graces in me; blow upon the garden of my heart, that the spices thereof may
flow out; Let my beloved come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruits (
Cant. 4.16.) And take me by the hand, and lift me up from earth to thy self,
(...) I may fetch one walk in the garden of glory, and see by Faith what thou
have laid up for them that love thee and wait for thee.

Away then you soul-tormenting cares and fears! Away you importune heart-vexing
sorrows! At least forbear me a little while; stand by, and trouble not my
aspiring soul; stay here below, whilst I go up, and see my Rest. The way is
strange to me, but not to Christ. There was the eternal dwelling of his
glorious deity; And thither has he also brought his assumed glorified flesh.
It was his work to purchase it; it is his work to prepare it, and to prepare me
for it, and to bring me to it. The Eternal God of truth has given me his
promise, his seal, and his oath to assure me, John 3.16.
that believing in Christ I shall not perish, but have everlasting life;
Thither shall my soul be speedily removed, and my body very shortly follow. It
is not so far* but he that is every where can bring me thither, nor so
difficult and unlikely, but Omnipotency can effect it. And though this
unbelief may diminish my delights, and much abate my joys in the way, Yet
shall it not abate the love of my Redeemer, nor make the promise of none
effect. And can my tongue say, that I shall shortly and surely live with God;
and yet my heart not leap within me? Can I say it believingly, and not
rejoycingly? Ah faith! how sensibly now do I perceive thy weakness? Ah
unbelief! if I had never heard or known it before, yet how sensibly now do I
perceive thy malicious tyranny? But, though thou darken my light, and dull my
life, and suppress my joys, yet shall thou not be able to conquer and destroy
me. There shall I, and my joys survive, when thou art dead, and though thou
envy all my comforts, yet some in despite of thee, I shall even here receive;
But were it not for thee, what abundance might I have? The light of Heaven
would shine into my heart; and I might be as familiar there as I am on earth.

Come away my soul then, stop thine ears to the ignorant language of
infidelity; Thou art able to answer all its Arguments; Or if thou be not, yet
tread them under thy feet. Come away, stand not looking on that grave, nor
turning those bones, nor reading thy lesson now in the dust; Those lines will
soon be wiped out: But lift up thy head and look to heaven; and read thy
instructions in those fixed Stars: Or yet look higher then those eyes can see
into that foundation which stands sure; 2 Timothy 2.19. Rev. 13.8. and 18. Luke
10.20.
and see thy name in golden letters written before the foundations of the
world, in the book of life of the slain Lamb. What if an Angel from Heaven
should tell thee, that there is a mansion prepared for thee? that it shall
certainly be thine own, and thou shall possess it for ever? would not such a
message make thee glad? And do thou make light of the infallible word of
promises, which were delivered by the spirit, 2 King. 2.11.
and by the Son himself? Suppose thou had seen a fiery chariot come for thee,
and fetch thee up to Heaven like Elias! would not this rejoice thee? Why, my
Lord has acquainted me, and assured me, that the soul of a Lazarus, a beggar,
goes not forth of its corrupted flesh, but a Convoy of Angels are ready to
attend it, and bring it to the comforts in Abraham's bosom. Shall a drunkard be
so merry among his cups? and a glutton in his delicious fare? and the proud in
his bravery and dignity? and the lustful wanton in the enjoyment of his mate?
And shall not I rejoice who must shortly be in Heaven? How glad is voluptuous
youth of their playtimes and holidays? Why, in Heaven I shall have an
everlasting Holyday of Pleasure. Can meat and drink delight me when I hunger
and thirst? Can I find pleasure in walks and gardens and convenient dwellings?
Can beauteous sights delight mine eyes? and odors my smell? and melody mine
ears? And shall not the forethought of the Celestial bliss delight me? my beast
is glad of his fresh pasture, and his liberty, and his Rest: And shall not I?
What delight have I found in my private studies, especially when they have
prospered to the increase of my knowledge! me thinks I could bid the world
farewell, and immure my self among my books, and look forth no more (were it a
lawful course) but (as Heinsius in his Library at Leyden) shut the doors upon
me, and as in the lap of Eternity, among those divine souls, employ my self in
sweet content, and pity the rich and great ones that know not this happiness.
Sure then it is a high delight indeed, which in the true lap of Eternity is
enjoyed! If Lipsius thought when he did but read Seneca, that he was even upon
Olympus top, above mortality and humane things: What a case shall I be in when
I am beholding Christ? If Julius Scaliger thought twelve verses in Lucan better
then the whole German Empire. Leon. Diggs praefat. ad perpet. prognost.
What shall I think mine inheritance worth? If the Mathematics alone are so
delectable, that their students do profess, that they should think it sweet to
live and dye in those studies: How delectable then will my life be, when I
shall fully and clearly know those things, which the most learned do now know
but doubtfully and darkly? In one hour shall I see all difficulties vanish; and
all my doubts in Physics, Metaphysics, Politics, Medicine, etc. shall be
resolved; so happy are the students of that University. Yea all the depths in
divinity will be uncovered to me, and all the difficult knots untyed; and the
book unsealed, and mine eyes opened. For in knowing God; I shall know all
things, that are fit or good for the creature to know. There Commeni'us attempt
is perfected; and all the sciences reduced to one. Seneca thought, that he that
lived without books, was but buried alive: But had he known what it is to enjoy
God in glory, he would have said indeed, that to live without him, is to be
buried alive in hell.

If Apollonius traveled into Aethiopia and Persia to consult with the learned
there: And if Plato and Pythagoras left their country to see those wise
Egyptian Priests: And if (as Hierom says) many traveled thousand miles to see
and speak with eloquent Livy: And if the queen of Sheba came from Ethiopia to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, and see his glory; O how gladly should I leave
this Country! how cheerfully should I pass from earth to Heaven! to see the
glory of that Eternal Majesty; and to attain my self that height of wisdom, in
comparison of which the most learned on earth, are but silly, brutish fools
and Idiots! If Bernard were so ravished with the delights of his Monastery
(where he lived in poverty, without the common pleasures of the world) because
of its green banks, and shady bowers, and herbs and trees, and various objects
to feed the eyes, and fragrant smells, and sweet and various tunes of Birds,
together with the opportunity of devout contemplations, that he cries out in
admiration, Lord, What abundance of delights do thou provide, even for the
poor? How then should I be ravished with the description of the Court of
Heaven? where in stead of herbs and trees and birds and bowers, I shall enjoy
God and my Redeemer, Angels, Saints, and unexpressible pleasures? and therefore
should with more admiration cry out, Lord, what delights have thou provided,
for us miserable and unworthy wretches that wait for thee! If the heaven of
glass which the Persian Emperor framed, were so glorious a piece: and the
heaven of silver which the Emperor Ferdinand sent to the great Turk; because of
their rare artificial representations and motions; What will the Heaven of
Heavens then be? which is not formed by the Art of man, nor beautified like
these childish toys; but is the matchless Palace of the great King, built by
himself for the residence of his glory, and the perpetual entertainment of his
beloved Saints. Can a poor deluded Mohammedan rejoice in expectation of a
feigned sensual Paradise? Du Bartas in the second day of the first week.

The Empyreal Palace, where the eternal Treasures
Of Nectar flow; where everlasting pleasures
Are heaped up, where an immortal May
In blisful beauties flourishes for aye:
Where life still lives: where God his Sizes hold's
Environd round with Seraphins, and souls
Bought with his precious blood, whose glorious flight
Yerst mounted earth above the heavens bright.

And shall not I rejoice in expectation of a certain Glory? If the honor of the
ambitious, or the wealth of the covetous person do increase, his heart is
lifted up with his estate, as a boat that rises with the rising of the water:
If they have but a little more lands or money then their neighbors, how easily
may you see it in their countenance and carriage? How high do they look? how
big do they speak? how stately and loftily do they demean themselves? And shall
not the heavenly loftiness and height of my spirit, discover my title to this
promised land? shall I be the adopted Son of God, and coheir with Christ of
that blessed inheritance, and daily look when I am put into possession? and
shall not this be seen in my joyful countenance? What if God had made me
commander of the earth? What if the mountains would remove at my command? What
if I could heal all diseases with a word or a touch? What if the infernal
spirits were all at my command? Should I not rejoice in such privileges and
honors as these? yet is it my Saviors command, not to rejoice that the devils
are subject to us: but in this to rejoice, that our names are written in heaven.

I cannot here enjoy my parents, or my near and beloved friends without some
delight: especially when I did too freely let out my affections to my friend,
how sweet was that very exercise of my love! O what will it then be to live in
the perpetual love of God! For brethren here to live together in Unity, how
good and pleasant a thing is it? To see a family live in love: husband, wife,
parents, children, servants, doing all in love to one another; To see a Town
live together in love, without any envyings, brawlings, heart-burnings or
contentions, Boeth. l. 2. Met. 8. O foelix hominum genus Si vestros animos amor
Quo caelum regitur regat.
scorns lawsuits, factions or divisions; but every man loving his neighbor as
himself, and thinking they can never do too much for one another, but striving
to go beyond each other in love; O how happy and delectable a sight is this? O
sweetest bands (says Seneca) which bind so happily, that those that are so
bound, do love their binders, and desire still to be bound more closely, and
even reduced into one! O then, what a blessed society will be the Family of
Heaven? and those peaceable Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem? where is no
division, nor dissimilitude, nor differing Judgments, nor disaffection, nor
strangeness, nor deceitful friendship, never an angry thought or look, never a
cutting unkind expression, but all are one in Christ, who is one with the
Father, Eras. Apotheg. Anima est ubi amat, non ubi animat.
and live in the love of Love himself? Cato could say, That the soul of a Lover
dwells in the person whom he loves; and therefore we say, The soul is not
more where it lives and enlighteneth then where it loves. How near then will
my soul be closed to God, and how sweet must that conjunction be, when I shall
so heartily, strongly, and uncessantly love him? As the Be lies sucking and
satiating her self with the sweetness of the Flower; or rather as the child
lies sucking the Mothers breast, enclosed in her arms, and sitting in her lap;
even so shall my loving soul be still feeding on the sweetness of the God of
Love. Ah wretched, fleshly, unbelieving heart! that can think of such a day,
and work, and life as this, with so low and dull and feeble joys! But my
enjoying Joys will be more lively.

How delectable is it to me to behold and study these inferior works of God? to
read those Anatomical Lectures of Du Bartas upon this great dissected body!
what a beautiful fabric is this great house which here we dwell in? The floor
so dressed with various Herbs, and Flowrs, and Trees, and watered with Springs
and Rivers, and Seas! the roof so wide expanded! so admirably adorned! Such
astonishing workmanship in every part! The studies of an hundred Ages more (if
the world should last so long) would not discover the mysteries of divine
skill, which are to be found in the narrow compass of our bodies. What
Anatomist is not amazed in his Search and Observations? What wonders then do
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Orbs, and Seas, and VVindes, and Fire, and Air,
and Earth, etc. afford us! And has God prepared such a house for our silly
sinful corruptible flesh! and for a soul imprisoned* and does he bestow so many
millions of wonderful rarities, even upon his enemies! O then what a dwelling
must that needs be, which he prepares for pure, refined, spiritual, glorified
ones! and which he will bestow only upon his dearly beloved children, whom he
has chosen out, to make his mercy on them glorified and admired! As far as our
perfected glorified bodies will excel this frail and corruptible flesh, so far
will the glory of the New Jerusalem exceed all the present glory of the
creatures. The change upon our Mansion, will be proportionable to the change
upon our selves. Arise then, O my soul, by these steps, in thy Contemplation!
and let thy thoughts of that glory (were it possible) as far in sweetness
exceed thy thoughts of the excellencies below: Fear not to go out of this body,
and this world, when thou must make so happy a change as this; but say, as
Zuingerus when he was dying [ Gaudeo ego atque adeo exulto, jam tandem
illuxisse tempus, quo ille, ille praepotens; Jehova cujus Majesta^em in naturae
indagatione miratus sum, veneratus quoque bonitatem, quem fide desideravi, quem
suspiravi, a facie jam se mibi ad faciem visendum exhibebit. Melchior Adam in
vitis Germanorum m^dicorum. page 416.
I am glad, and even leap for joy, that at last the time is come wherein that,
even that mighty Jehovah, whose Majesty in my search of Nature I have admired,
whose Goodness I have adored, whom in faith I have desired, whom I have sighed
for, will now show himself to me face to face.] And let that be the unfeigned
sense of thy heart, which Camerarius left in his Will should be written on his
Monument; Vita mihi mors est, mors mihi vita nova est; Life is to me a Death,
Death is to me a new Life.

Moreover, how wonderful and excellent are the works of Providence even in this
life? to see the great God to engage himself, and set a work his Attributes for
the safety and advancement of a few humble, despicable, praying persons! O what
a joyful time will it then be, when so much Love and Mercy, and Wisdom, and
Power, and Truth shall be manifested and glorified in the Saints glorification?

How delightful is it to my soul, to review the workings of Providence for my
self? and to read over the Records and Catalogues of those special mercies
wherewith my life has been adorned and sweetened? How often have my prayers been
heard, and my tears regarded? and my groaning troubled soul relieved? and my
Lord has bid me, Be of good cheer? He has healed me, when in respect of means
I was uncurable: He has helped me when I was helpless: In the midst of my
supplications has he eased and revived me: He has taken me up from my knees,
and from the dust where I have lain in sorrow and despair, even the cries which
have been occasioned by distrust, has he regarded; what a support are these
experiences to my fearful unbelieving heart? These clear Testimonies of my
Fathers Love, do put life into my afflicted drooping spirit.

O then, what a blessed day will that be, when I shall have all mercy,
perfection of mercy, nothing but mercy, and fully enjoy the Lord of Mercy
himself! When I shall stand on the shore, and look back upon the raging Seas
which I have safely passed! when I shall in safe and full possession of glory,
look back upon all my pains and troubles and fears and tears, and upon all the
mercies which I here received; and then shall behold the glory enjoyed there,
which was the End of all this! O what a blessed view will that be! O glorious
prospect which I shall have on the celestial mount Zion! Is it possible that
there should be any defect of joy? or my heart not raised, when I am so raised?
If one drop of lively faith were mixed with these considerations, O what work
they would make in my breast! and what a Heaven-ravished heart, should I carry
within me! Feign would I believe; Lord help my unbelief.

Yet further, consider O my soul, How sweet have the very ordinances been unto
thee? What raptures have thou had in prayer and under heavenly Sermons? What
gladness in days of thanksgiving, after eminent deliverances to the Church or
to thy self? What delight do I find in the sweet society of the Saints? To be
among my humble faithful neighbors and friends? To join with them in the
frequent worship of God? To see their growth and stability and soundness of
understanding? To see those daily added to the Church which shall be saved? O
then what delight shall I have, to see the perfected Church in Heaven? and to
join with these and all the Saints in another kind of worship then we can
here conceive of? How sweet is it to join in the high praises of God in the
solemn assemblies? How glad have I been to go up to the house of God?
Especially after long restraint by sickness, when I have been as Hezekiah,
released, and readmitted to join with the people of God and to set forth the
praises of my great deliverer? How sweet is my work in Preaching the Gospel,
and inviting sinners to the marriage feast of the Lamb? and opening to them the
treasures of free Grace? Especially when God blesses my endeavors with
plenteous success, and gives me to see the fruit of my labors: even this alone
has been a greater joy to my heart, that if I had been made the Lord of all
the riches on earth.

O how can my heart then conceive that joy, which I shall have in my admittance
into the Celestial Temple, and into the Heavenly Host, that shall do nothing
but praise the Lord for ever: When we shall say to Christ, Here am I, and the
children thou have given me; and when Christ shall present us all to his
Father, and all are gathered, and the Body completed! If the very Word of God
were sweeter to Job then his necessary food; Job 23.12. Jer. 15.16.
and to Jeremy, was the very joy and rejoicing of his heart; and to David, was
sweeter then the Honey and Honicomb; Psalm. 119.97. Psalm. 119.92.70.77, etc.
so that he cries out, O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation continually:
and if thy Law had not been my delight, I had perished in my troubles. O then
how blessed a day will that be, when we fully enjoy the Lord of this Word! and
shall need these written precepts and promises no more! but shall in stead of
these love letters, enjoy our beloved; and in stead of these promises, have the
happiness in possession; and read no book but the face of the glorious God! How
far would I go to see one of those blessed Angels, which appeared to Abraham,
to Lot, to John etc. Or to speak with Henoch or Elias or any Saint, who had
lived with God? especially if he would resolve all my doubts, and describe to
me the celestial habitacions? How much more desirable must it needs be to live
with those blessed Saints and Angels, Discendi adeo fuit cupidus, ut mori
fuerit ipsi suave, modo ex dubiis questionibus in quibus sibi ipse satissacere
non poterat, se posset expedire. Melch. Adam. in vita Erasti.
and to see and possess as well as they? It is written of Erastus, that he was
so desirous to learn, that it would be sweet to him even to dye, so he might
but be resolved of those doubtful questions wherein he could not satisfy
himself. How sweet then should it be to me to dye, that I may not only be
resolved of all my doubts, but also know what I never before did think of, and
enjoy what before I never knew? It was a happy dwelling that the twelve
Apostles had with Christ; to be always in his company, and see his face, and
hear him open to them the mysteries of the Kingdom: But it will be another
kind of happiness to dwell with him in Glory. It was a rare privilege of
Thomas to put his fingers into his wounds to confirm his faith, and of John to
be called the Disciple whom Jesus loved, on whose breast at supper he was wont
to lean* But it will be another kind of privilege which I shall enjoy, when I
shall see him in his glory, and not in his wounds; and shall enjoy a fuller
sense of his Love then John then did; Luke 2.43.
and shall have the most hearty entertainment that Heaven affords. ^f they
that heard Christ speak on earth, were astonished at his Wisdom and answers;
and wondered at the gracious Words which proceeded from his mouth: How shall I
be affected then to behold him in his Majesty?

Rowse up thy self yet O my soul, and consider: Can the foresight of this glory
make others embrace the stake, and kiss the faggot* and welcome the cross, and
refuse deliverance. And can it not make thee cheerful under lesser sufferings?
Can it sweeten the flames to them? and can it not sweeten thy life, If thy
first glance so powerful be,
A mirth but opened and sealed up again:
What wonders shall we feel when we shall see,
Thy full-ey'd Love!
When thou shall look us out of pain.
And one aspect of thine spend in delight.
More then a thousand sun's disburse in light
In Heaven above.
Herberts Poems, The Glance.
or thy sickness, or natural death? If a glympse could make Moses his face to
shine, and Peter on the mount so transported, and Paul so exalted, and John so
rapt up in the spirit? Why should it not somewhat revive me with delight?
Doubtless it would, if my thoughts were more believing* Is it not the same
Heaven which they and I must live in? Is not their God, their Christ, their
Crown and mine the same? Nay how many a weak woman, or poor despised Christian
have I seen, mean in parts, but rich in faith, who could rejoice and triumph in
hope of this inheritance? And shall I look upon it with so dim an eye? So dull
a heart? So dejected a countenance? some small foretastes also I have had my
self (though indeed small and seldom through mine own belief) and how much more
delightful have they been, then ever was any of these earthly things? The full
enjoyment then will sure be sweet. Remember then this bunch of Grapes which
thou have tasted of: and by them conjecture the fruitfulness of the Land of
Promise. A Grape in a wilderness cannot be like the plentiful Vintage.

Consider also, O my soul; What a beauty is there in the imperfect Graces of
the spirit here? so great that they are called the Image of God: Col. 3.10.
and can any created exceellencie have a more honorable title? Alas how small a
part are these of what we shall enjoy in our perfect state? O how precious a
mercy should I esteem it, if God would but take off my bodily infirmities, and
restore me to any comfortable measure of health and strength, that I might be
able with cheerfulness to go through his work? How precious a mercy then will
it be; to have all my corruptions, quite removed, and my soul perfected; and my
body also raised to so high a state, as I now can neither desire nor conceive?
Surely as health of body, so health of soul does carry an unexpressible
sweetness along with it. Were there no reward besides, yet every gracious act
is a reward and comfort. Never had I the least stirring of Love to God, but I
felt a heavenly sweetness accompanying it: even the very act of loving was
unexpressibly sweet. What a happy life should I here live, could I but love as
much as I would? and as often, and as long as I would? Could I be all love, and
always loving! O my soul; what would thou give for such a life! O had I such
true and clear apprehensions of God; and such a true understanding of his words
as I desire; Could I but trust him as fully in all my streights: Could I have
that life which I would have in every duty: Could I make God my constant desire
and delight; I would not then envy the world their honors or pleasures; nor
change my happiness with a Caesar or Alexander. O my soul, what a blessed state
will thou shortly be in, when thou shall have far more of these then thou can
now desire? and shall exercise all thy perfected graces upon God in presence
and open sight, and not in the dark, and at a distance, as now.

And as there is so much worth in one gracious soul, so much more in a gracious
society, and most of all in the whole body of Christ on earth: If there be any
true beauty on earth, where should it be so likely as in the Spouse of Christ?
It is her that he adorneth with his Jewels; and feasteth at his table; and
keeps for her always an open house and heart: he reveals to her his
secrets, and maintains constant converse with her: he is her constant
guardian, and in every deluge incloseth her in his Ark: He says to her, Du
Bartas in the seventh day of the first week. p. 187.
Thou art all beautiful, my beloved! And is his Spouse, while black, so comely?
Is the afflicted, sinning, weeping lamenting, persecuted Church, so excellent?
O what then will be the Church, With cloudy cares the ^n's muffled up
somewhiles,
The others face is full of pleasing smiles:
For never grief, nor fear of any fit
Of the lest care, shall dare come near to it:
It Is the grand Jubilee, the feast of feasts,
Sabbath of Sabbaoths, endless Rest of Rests:
Which with the prophets and Apostles zealous,
The constant Martyrs, and our Christian fellows,
Gods faithful servants, and his chosen sheep,
In Heaven we hope within short time to keep.

when it is fully gathered and glorified? When it is ascended from the valley
of tears to Mount Sion? When it shall sin no more: nor weep, nor groan, nor
suffer any more? The Stars, or the smalest candle are not darkened so much by
the brightness of the Sun, as the excellencies of the first Temple will be by
the celestial Temple. The glory of the old Jerusalem will be darkness and
deformity to the glory of the New. It is said in Ezr. 3.12. that when the
foundations of the second Temple were laid, many of the ancient men, who had
seen the first house did weep, i.e. because the second did come so far short of
it: what cause then shall we have to shout for joy, when we shall see how
glorious the heavenly Temple is, and remember the meaness of the Church on
earth?

But alas, what a loss am I at in the midst of my contemplations! I thought my
heart had all this while followed after, but I see it does not; And shall I let
my Understanding go on alone? or my tongue run on without Affections? what life
is in empty thoughts and words? Neither God nor I find pleasure in them.

Rather let me turn back again, and look, and find, and chide this lazy
loytering heart, that turns off from such a pleasant work as this: Where have
thou been, unworthy heart, while I was opening to thee the everlasting
Treasures? Did thou sleep? or wast thou minding something else? or do thou
think that all this is but a Dream or Fable? or as uncertain as the predictions
of a presumptu^ous Astrologer? Or have thou lost thy life and rejoicing power?
Art thou not ashamed to complain so much of an uncomfortable life, and to
murmur at God for filling thee with sorrows, when he offers thee in vain the
delights of Angels, and when thou treadest under foot these transcendent
pleasures? Thou wilfully pinest away in grief, and art ready to charge thy
Father with unkindness for making thee only a vessel of displeasure, a sink of
sadness, a skinful of groans, a snow ball of tears, a channel for the waters of
affliction to run in, the fuel of fears, and the carcass which cares do
consume and prey upon, when in the mean time thou might live a life of Joy;
Had thou now but followed me close, and believingly applied thy self to that
which I have spoken, and drunk in but half the comfort that those words hold
forth, it would have made thee revive and leap for joy, and forget thy sorrows
and diseases and pains of the flesh: but seeing thou judge thy self unworthy
of comfort, it is just that comfort should be taken from thee.

Lord, what is the matter that this work does go on so heavily? Did I think my
heart had been so backward to rejoice? If it had been to mourn, and fear, and
despair, it were no wonder: I have been lifting at this stone, and it will not
stir, I have been pouring Aqua Vitae into the mouth of the dead: I hope, Lord,
by that time it comes to heaven, this heart by thy Spirit will be quickened and
mended, or else even those Joys will scarce rejoice me.

But besides my darkness, deadness, and unbelief, I perceive there is something
else that forbids my full desired Joys: This is not the time and place where
so much is given: The time is our Winter and not our Harvest; The place is
called the Valley of tears; there must be great difference betwit the Way and
the End, the Work and Wages, the small foretastes and full fruition.

But, Desire.
Lord, Though thou have reserved our Joys for Heaven, yet have thou not so
suspended our Desires! They are most suitable and seasonable in this present
life, therefore, O help me to desire till I may possess, and let me long when I
cannot as I would rejoice: There is love in Desire, as well as in Delight; and
if I be not empty of Love, I know I shall not long be empty of Delight. --

Rowse up thy self once more then, O my soul, and try and exercise thy
spiritual Appetite; though thou art ignorant and unbelieving, yet art thou
reasonable, and therefore must needs desire a Happiness and Rest: Nor can
thou sure be so unreasonable as to dream of attaining it here on earth: Thou
know to thy sorrow that thou art not yet at thy Rest, and thy own feeling
does convince thee of thy present Unhappiness, and do thou know that thou art
restless, and yet art willing to continue so? Art thou neither happy in deed,
nor in Desire? Art thou neither well, nor would be well? when my flesh is
pained, and languisheth under consuming sickness; how heartily and frequenly do
I cry out, O when shall I be eased of this pain? when shall my decaying
strength be recovered? There Is no dissembling nor formality in these Desires and
Groans. How then should I long for my final full recovery? There is no
sickness nor pain, nor weeping, nor complaints. O when shall I arrive at that
safe and quiet Harbor, where is none of these storms and waves and dangers?
when I shall never more have a weary, restless night or day! Then shall not my
life be such a medley or mixture of hope and fear, of joy and sorrow, as now it
is; nor shall Flesh and Spirit be combating within me, nor my soul be still as
a pitched Field, or a Stage of contention, where Faith and Unbelief, Affiance
and Distrust, Humility and Pride, do maintain a continual distracting conflict:
then shall I not live a dying life for fear of dying, nor my life be made
uncomfortable with the fears of losing it. O when shall I be past these
soul-tormenting fears and cares, and griefs, and passions! When shall I be out
of this frail, Herberts Poems, Dotage. False glozing pleasures: Casks of
happiness:
Foolish night fires: Women's, and Childrens wishes:
Chases in Arras: Gilded Emptiness:
Embroidered Lies: Nothing between two dishes:
These are the Pleasures here.
True earnest Sorrows: Rooted Miseries:
Anguish in grain: Vexations ripe and blown:
Sure-footed Griefs: Solid Calamities:
Plain Demonstrations, evident and clear,
Fetching their proof even from the very bone:
These are the Sorrows here.
But, O the folly of distracted men,
Who griefs in earnest, Joys in jest pursue!
Preferring like bruit Beasts, a loathsome den
Before a Court; even that above so clear,
Where are no Sorrows, but Delights more true
Then Miseries are here.

this corruptible, ruinous body! This soul contradicting, ensnaring, deceiving
flesh! When shall I be out of this vain, vexatious World! Whose pleasures are
mere deluding dreams and shadows; whose miseries are real, numerous, and
uncessant? How long shall I see the Church of Christ lie trodden under the feet
of persecutors? or else as a ship in the hands of foolish guides (though the
supreme Master does moderate all for the best.) Alas, that I must stand by and
see the Church, and Cause of Christ, like a Footbal in the midst of a crowd of
Boys, tossed about in contention from one to another; every one running, and
sweating with foolish violence, and laboring the downfall of all that are in his
way, and all to get it into his own power, that he may have the managing of the
work himself, and may drive it before him, which way he pleases; and when all
is done, the best usage it may expect from them, is, But to be spurned about in
the dirt, till they have driven it on to the Goal of their private interests,
or deluded fancies! There is none of this disorder in the Heavenly Jerusalem;
there shall I find a Government without imperfection, and obedience without
the least unwillingness, or rebellion; even a harmonious concent of perfected
Spirits, in obeying and praising their Everlasting King. O how much better is
it to be a Doorkeeper there, and the least in that Kingdom, then to be
Antigonus cum audiret se a vetula-propter opes and dignitatem beatum praedi
cari, Mea Matercula, inquit, si nosses quantis malis hic panniculus (viz.
Diadema) sit refertus, ne in sterquilinio quidem jacentem tolleres.
the Conqueror or Commander of this tumultuous World? there will our Lord
govern all immediately by himself, and not put the Reins in the hands of such
ignorant Riders, nor govern by such foolish and sinful deputies, as the best of
the sons of men now are. Do thou so mourn for these inferior disorders, O my
soul? and yet would thou not be out of it? How long have thou desired to be a
Member of a more perfect, reformed Church? and to join with more holy, humble,
sincere souls, in the purest and most Heavenly worship? Why, do thou not see
that on Earth thy desires fly from thee? Art thou not as a child that
thinks to travel to the Sun. when he sees it rising or setting, as it were
close to the Earth; but as he travelleth toward it, it seems to go from him;
and when he has long wearied himself, it is as far off as ever; for the thing
he seeks, is in another world. Even such has been thy labor in seeking for
so holy, so pure, so peaceable a Society, as might afford thee a contented
settlement here. Those that have gone as far as America for satisfaction, have
confessed themselves unsatisfied still. When wars, and the calamities attending
them, have been over, I have said, Psalm. 116.
Return now my soul unto thy Rest: But how restless a condition has next
succeeded? When God had given me the enjoyment of Peace, and Friends, and
Liberty of the Gospel; and had settled me even as my own heart desired; I have
been ready to say, Soul take thy ease and rest: But how quickly has Providence
called me Fool? and taught me to call my state by another name? When did I ever
begin to congratulate my flesh its felicity, but God did quickly turn my tune?
and made almost the same breath to end in groaning which did begin in laughter?
I have thoughts oft-times in the folly of my prosperity, [Now I will have one
sweet draught of Solace and Content;] but God has dropped in the Gall, while
the Cup was at my mouth. We are still weary of the present condition, and
desire a change; and when we have it, it does not answer our expectation; but
our discontent and restlesness is still unchanged. In time of peace, we thought
that war would deliver us from our disquietments; and when we saw the Iron red
hot, we catched it inconsiderately, thinking that it was Gold; till it burned
us to the very bone, and so stuck to our fingers, that we scarce know yet
whether we are rid of it, or not. In this our misery, we long for peace; and so
long were we strangers to it, that we had forgot its name, and begun to call it
REST or HEAVEN: But as soon as we are again grown acquainted with it, we shall
better bethink us, and perceive our mistake. O, why am I then no more weary of
this weariness? Jere. 50.6.
and why do I so forget my resting place? Up then, O my soul, in thy most
raised and fervent desires! Stay not till this Flesh can desire with thee; its
Appetite has a lower and baser object. Thy Appetite is not sensitive, but
rational; distinct from its; and therefore look not that Sense should apprehend
thy blessed object, and tell thee what and when to desire. Believing Reason in
the Glass of Scripture may discern enough to raise the flame: And though Sense
apprehend not that which must draw thy desires, yet that which may drive them,
it does easily apprehend. It can tell thee, that thy present life is filled
with distress and sorrows, though it cannot tell thee what is in the world to
come. Thou need not Scripture to tell thee, nor Faith to discern, that thy
head aketh, and thy stomach is sick, thy bowels griped, and thy heart grieved;
and some of these, or such like, are thy daily case. Thy friends about thee are
grieved to see thy griefs, and to hear thy dolorous groans and lamentations;
and yet art thou loath to leave this woeful life? is this a state to be preferred
before the Celestial glory? or is it better to be thus miserable from Christ,
then to be happy with him? or can thou possibly be so unbelieving, as to
doubt whether that life be any better then this? O my soul! do not the dullness
of thy desires after Rest, accuse thee of most detestable ingratitude and
folly? Must thy Lord procure thee a Rest at so dear a rate, and do thou no
more value it? Must he purchase thy Rest by a life of labor and sorrow, and by
the pangs of a bitter, cursed death? and when all is done, had thou rather be
here without it? Must he go before to prepare so glorious a Mansion for such a
wretch; and art thou now loath to go and possess it? must his blood, and care,
and pains be lost? O unthankful, unworthy foul! Shall the Lord of glory be
willing of thy company, and art thou unwilling of his? are they fit to dwell
with God, that had rather stay from him? Must he crown thee, and glorify thee
against thy will? or must he yet deal more roughly with thy darling flesh? and
leave thee never a corner in thy ruinous cottage for to cover thee, but fire
thee out of all, before thou will away? Must every Sense be an inlet to thy
sorrows? and every friend become thy scourge? and Jobs Messengers be thy daily
intelligencers? and bring thee the Curranto's of thy multiplied calamities,
before that Heaven will seem more desirable then this Earth? Must every joint
be the seat of Pain? and every Member deny thee a room to rest in? and thy
groans be indicted from the very heart, and bones, before thou will be willing
to leave this flesh? Must thy heavy burdens be bound upon thy back? and thy
so-intolerable Paroxysms become incessant? and thy intermittent agueish woes be
turned into continual burning Fevers? Yea, must Earth become a very Hell to
thee, before thou will be willing to be with God? O impudent soul, if thou be
not ashamed of this! what is loathing, if this be love? Look about thee, O my
soul; behold the most lovely Creature, or the most desirable State; and tell
me, Where would thou be, if not with God? Poverty is a burden, and riches a
snare: Sickness is little pleasing to thee, and usually health as little safe;
the one is full of sorrow, and the other of sin. The frowning World does bruise
thy heel; and the smiling World does sting thee to the heart: When it seems
ugly, it causes loathing; when beauteous, it is thy bane; when thy condition
is bitter, thou would fain spit it out; and when delightful, it is but
sugered misery and deceit: The sweetest poison does often bring the surest death.
So much as the world is loved and delighted in, so much it hurts and
endangereth the lover; and if it may not be loved, why should it be desired? If
thou be applauded, it proves the most contagious breath; and how ready are the
sails of Pride to receive such winds? so that it frequently adds to thy sin,
but not one cubit to the stature of thy worth: And if thou be vilified,
slandered or unkindly used, methinks this should not entice thy love! Never
did thou sit by the fire of prosperity and applause, but thou had with it
the smoke that drew water from thy eyes; never had thou the Rose without the
pricks; and the sweetness has been expired, and the beauty faded, before the
scars which thou had in gathering it, were healed. Is it not as good be
without the honey, as to have it with so many smarting stings? The highest
delight thou have found in any thing below, has been in thy successful labors,
and thy godly friends: And have these indeed been so sweet, as that thou
should be so loath to leave them? If they seem better to thee, then a life
with God, it is time for God to take them from thee! Thy studies have been
sweet, and have they not been also bitter? My mind has been pleased, but my
body pained; and the weariness of the flesh, has quickly abated the pleasures
of the Spirit. When by painful studies I have not discovered the truth, it
has been but a tedious way to a grievous end; discontent and trouble purchased
by toilsom wearying labors* And if I have found out the truth (by Divine
assistance) I have found but an exposed naked Orphan, that has cost me much to
take in and cloth, and keep; which (though of noble birth, yea, a Divine
offspring, and amiable in mine eyes, and worthy I confess of better
entertainment, yet) from men that knew not its descent, has drawn upon me
their envy, and furious opposition; and has brought the blinded Sodomites
(with whom I lived at some peace before) to crowd Memini quid Bucholcerus de
Melancthone convitiis lacerato dicere solebat: Quidam sunt Anathema secundum
dici, quidam secundum esse: Mallem ego cum Philippo Anathema secundum dici,
quam cum illo secundum esse. Josh. 22. Eccl. 1.18. Jere. 20.9.
about me, and assault my doors, that I might prostitute my heavenly Guests to
their pleasure, and again expose them, whom I had so gladly and lately
entertained; yea, the very Tribes of Israel have been gathered against me,
thinking that the Altar which I built for the interest of Truth, and Unity, and
Peace, had been erected to the Introduction of Error and Idolatry: And so the
increase of Knowledge, has been the increase of Sorrow. My heart indeed is
ravished with the beauty of naked Truth; and I am ready to cry out, [I have
found it] or, as Aquinas, [ Conclisum est contra, etc.] But when I have found
it, I know not what to do with it. If I confine it to my own breast, and keep it
secret to my self, it is as a consuming fire, shut up in my heart and bones. I
am as the Lepers without Samaria, or as those that were forbidden to tell any
man of the works of Christ, I am weary of forbearing, I cannot stay. If I
reveal it to the Nihil modo quietis aut securitatis invenire possumus, dum
adhuc in nobis ipsis ingemiscimus, gravati adoptionem expectantes: Cum autem
mortale hoc induerit immortalitatem, tunc nulla erit diabolicae fra^dis
impugnatio, nullum haereticae pravitatis dogma, nulla infidelis populi
impi^tas; omnibus ita pacatis and compositis, ut in tabernaculis justoru^ sola
audiatur vox exultationis and salutis* Greg. in 7. Psalm. paenitent.
world, I can expect but an unwelcome entertainment, and an ungrateful return:
For they have taken up their standing in religious knowledge already, as if they
were at Hercules Pillars, and had no further to go, nor any more to learn: They
dare be no wiser then they are already, nor receive any more of Truth, then
they have already received, lest thereby they should accuse their Ancestors and
Teachers, of Ignorance and Imperfection, and themselves should seem to be
mutable and unconstant, and to hold their opinions in Religion with reserves.
The most precious Truth not apprehended, does seem to be Error, and fantastic
novelty: Every man that reads, what I write, will not be at the pains of
those tedious studies to find out the truth, as I have been; but think it
should meet their eyes in the very reading. If the mere writing of Truth, with
its clearest Evidence, were all that were necessary to the apprehension of it
by others, then the lowest Scholar in the School might be quickly as good as
the highest. So that if I did see more then others, to reveal it to the lazy
prejudiced world, would but make my friends turn enemies, or look upon me with
a strange and jealous eye. And yet Truth is so dear a friend it self (and he
that sent it much more dear) that what ever I suffer I dare not stifle, or
conceal it. O what then are these bitter sweet studies and discoveries, to the
everlasting views of the face of the God of Truth? The Light that here I have,
is but a knowing in part; and yet it costeth me so dear, that in a temptation I
am almost ready to prefer the quiet silent night, before such a rough
tempestuous day. But there I shall have Light and Rest together, and the
quietness of the night without its darkness. I can never now have the Lightning
without the Thunder, which makes it seem more dreadful then delightful. And
should thou be loath then, O my soul, to leave this for the Eternal perfect
Light? and to change thy Candle, for the glorious Sun? and to change thy
Studies, and Preaching, and Praying, for the Harmonious Praises, and fruition
of the Blessed God?

Nor will thy loss be greater in the change of thy company, then of thine
employment. Thy friends here have been indeed thy delight: And have they not
been also thy vexation, and thy grief? They are gracious; and are they not also
sinful? they are kind and loving; and are they not also peevish, froward, and
soon displeased? they are humble; but withal, alas, how proud! they will scarce
endure to hear plainly of their disgraceful faults; they cannot bear
undervaluing, or disrespect; they itch after the good thoughts, and applause of
others; they love those best, that highliest esteem them: The missing of a
courtesy, a supposed sleighting or disrepect; the contradicting of their words
or humors, a difference in opinion, yea, the turning of a straw, will quickly
show thee the pride, and the uncertainty of thy friend. Their graces are sweet
to thee, and their gifts are helpful; but are not their corruptions bitter, and
their imperfections hurtful? Though at a distance they seem to thee most Holy
and Innocent; yet when they come nearer thee, and thou have thoroughly tried
them, alas, what silly, frail, and froward pieces are the best of men! Then the
knowledge which thou did admire, appears clouded with ignorance; and the
virtues that so shined as a Glowworm in the night, are scarcely to be found
when thou seek them by daylight. When temptations are strong, how quickly
do they yield? what wounds have they given to Religion by their shameful falls?
Those that have been famous for their Holiness, have been as infamous for their
notorious heinous wickedness; those that have been thy dearest bosom friends,
that have prayed and conferred with thee, and helped thee toward Heaven, and by
their fervor, forwardness, and heavenly lives, have shamed thy coldness, and
earthliness, and dullness; whom thou have singled out, as the choicest, from a
world of professors; whom thou made the daily companions and delights of thy
life; are not some of them fallen to Drunkenness, and some to Whordome, some to
Pride, Perfidiousness and Rebellion, and some to the most damnable Heresies and
Divisions? And has thy very heart received such wounds from thy friends? and
yet art thou so loath to go from them to thy God? Thy friends that are weak are
little useful or comfortable to thee: and those that are strong are the abler
to hurt thee; and the best if not heedfully used, will prove the worst. The
better and keener thy knife is, the sooner and deeper will it cut thy fingers,
if thou take not heed. Yea, the very number of thy friends is a burden and
trouble to thee: every one supposes he has some interest in thee, yea the
interest of a friend, which is not a little: and how insufficient art thou to
satisfy all their expectations? When it is much if thou can answer the
expectations of one. If thou were divided among so many, as each could have but
little of thee, so thy self and God (who should have most) will have none. And
almost every one that has not more of thee then thou can spare for all, is
ready to censure thee as unfriendly, and a neglecter of the duty or respects
which thou owe them: And should thou please them all, the gain will not be
great; nor art thou sure that they will again please thee.

Awake then, O my drowsy soul, and look above this world of sorrows! Have thou
born the yoke of afflictions from thy youth, and so long felt the smarting rod,
and yet can no better understand its meaning? Is not every stroke to drive
thee hence? and is not the voice of the rod like that to Elijah, What do thou
here? Up and away. Do thou forget that sure prediction of thy Lord, In the
world ye shall have trouble; but in me ye shall have peace? The first thou have
found true by long experience: and of the later thou have had a small
foretaste; but the perfect peace is yet before, which till it be enjoyed cannot
be clearly understood.

Ah my dear Lord, I feel thy meaning; its written in my flesh; its engraven in
my bones: My heart thou aymest at, thy rod does drive; thy silken cord of love
does draw; and all to bring it to thy self: And is that all, Lord? is that the
worst? Can such a heart be worth thy having? Make it so Lord, and then it is
thine; Take it to thy self, and then take me. I can but reach it toward thee,
and not unto thee: I am too low; and it is too dull; This clod has life to
stir, but not to rise, Legs it has, but wings it wants. As the feeble child
to the tender mother, it looks up to thee, and stretches out the hands, and
feign would have thee take it up. Though I cannot so freely say [My heart is
with thee, my soul longs after thee] yet can I say, I long for such a longing
heart. The twins are yet a striving in my bowels: The spirit is willing; the
flesh is weak, the spirit longs, the flesh is loath. The flesh is unwilling to
lie rotting in the earth: The soul desires to be with thee. My spirit cries,
Let thy Kingdom come, or else let me come unto thy Kingdom; but the flesh is
afraid least thou should hear my prayer, and take me at my word. What
frequent contradictions do thou find in my requests? because there is such
contradiction in my self. My prayers plead against my prayers; and one part
begs a denial to the other. No wonder if thou give me such a dying life, when I
know not whether to ask for life or death. With the same breath do I beg for a
reprival and removal: And the same groan does utter my desires and my fears.
My soul would go, my flesh would stay. My soul would feign be out, my flesh
would have thee hold the door. O blessed be thy Grace that makes advantage of
my corruptions, even to contradict and kill themselves. For I fear my fears,
and sorrow for my sorrows, and groan under my fleshly groans: I loath my
lothness, and I long for greater longings; And while my soul is thus tormented
with fears and cares, and with the tedious means for attaining my desires, it
adds so much to the burden of my troubles, that my wearyness thereby is much
increased, which makes me groan to be at Rest. Indeed, Lord, my soul it self
also is in a straight, and what to choose I know not well; but yet thou know
what to give: To depart and be with thee, is Best; but yet to be in the flesh
seems needful. Thou know I am not weary of thy work, but of sorrow and sin
I must needs be weary: I am willing to stay while thou will here employ me, and
to dispatch the work which thou have put into my hands: till these strange
thoughts of thee be somewhat more familiar, and thou have raised me into some
degree of acquaintance with thy self; But I beseech thee, stay no longer when
this is done. Stay not till sin shall get advantage, and my soul grow earthly
by dwelling on this earth, and my desires and delights in thee grow dead; But
while I must be here, let me be still amending and ascending, make me still
better, and take me at the best. I dare not be so impatient of living, as to
importune thee to cut off my time, and urge thee to snatch me hence unready;
because I know my everlasting state does so much depend on the improvement of
this life. Nor yet would I stay when my work is done; and remain here sinning
when my brethren are triumphing: I am drowning in tears while they swim in
joys: I am weeping, while they are singing; I am under thy feet, while they
are in thy bosom: Thy footsteps bruise and break this worm, while those Stars
do shine in the Firmament of glory: Thy frowns do kill me, while they are
quickened by thy smiles: They are ever living, and I am daily dying; Their
joys are raised by the knowledge of their endlesness, my griefs are enlarged by
still expecting more; while they possess but one continued pleasure; I bear the
successive assaults of fresh calamities; One billow falls in the neck of
another, and when I am rising up from under one, another comes and strikes we
down. Yet I am thy child as well as they; Christ is my head as well as theirs:
why is there then so great a distance? How differently do thou use us when
thou art Father to us all? They sit at thy table, whilst I must stand without
the doors. But I acknowledge the equity of thy ways: Though we all are children,
yet I am the Prodigal; and therefore meeter in this remote country to feed on
husks, while they are always with thee and possess thy glory. Though we all are
members, yet not the same: they are the tongue and fitter to praise thee; They
are the hands and fitter for thy service, I am the feet and therefore meeter to
tread on earth, and move in dirt; but unfit to stand so near the head as they.
They were once themselves in my condition; and I shall shortly be in theirs.
They were of the lowest form, before they came to the highest; They suffered
before they reigned; They came out of great tribulation, who now are standing
before thy throne: And shall not I be content to come to the crown as they did?
and to drink of their cup, before I sit with them in the Kingdom? The blessed
souls of David, Paul, Austin, Calvin, Perkins, Bayne, Parker, Ames, Bradshaw,
Dod, Preston, Stoughton, Sibbes, with all the spirits of the just made perfect,
were once on earth as I am now, as far from the sight of thy face and glory; as
deep in sorrows; as weak and sick and full of pains as I; Their souls were
longer imprisoned in corruptible flesh: I shall go but the way that they all
did go before me: Their house of clay did fall to dust, and so must mine. The
world they are now in, was as strange to them before they were there, as it is
to me. And am I better then all these precious souls? I am contented therefore,
O my Lord, to stay thy time, and go thy way, so thou will exalt me also in thy
season, and take me into thy barn when thou see me ripe. In the mean time, I
may desire, though I may not repine; I may look over the hedge, though I may
not break over; I may believe and Wish, though not make any sinful have; I am
content to wait, but not to lose thee; And when thou see me too contented
with thine absence, and satisfying and pleasing my self here below; O quicken
up then my dull desires, and blow up the dying spark of love: And leave me not
till I am able unfeignedly to cry out, Psalm. 42.1, 2. Phil. 3.19, 20, 21. 2
Cor. 5.1, 6, 7, 8. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
As the heart pants after the brooks, and the dry land thirsts for the
water streams, so thirsts my soul after thee O God; when shall I come and
appear before the living God? Till my daily conversation be with thee in
Heaven, and from thence I may longingly expect my Savior: Till my affections
are set on things above, where Christ is reigning and my life is hid: Till I
can walk by Faith and not by sight; willing rather to be absent from the body
and present with the Lord. What interest has this empty world in me? and what
is there in it that may seem so lovely, as to entice my desires and delight
from thee, or make me loath to come away? when I look about me with a deliberate
undeceived eye; me thinks this world's a howling wilderness, and most of the
inhabitants are untamed hideous monsters. All its beauty I can wink into
blackness, Not that we may not here
Taft of the cheer:
But as birds drink and then lift up the head:
So must we sip and think,
Of better drink,
We may attain to after we are dead.
Herbert in Temple.

and all its mirth I can think into sadness; I can drown al its pleasures in a
few penitent tears, and the wind of a sigh will scatter them away. When I look
on them without the spectacles of flesh, I call them nothing, as being vainty,
or worse then nothing, as vexation. O let not this flesh so seduce my soul, as
to make it prefer this weary life before the Joys that are about thy Throne!
And though Death of it self be unwelcome to Nature, yet let thy Grace make thy
Glory appear to me so desirable, that the King of Terrors may be the Messenger
of my Joy; O let not my soul be ejected by violence, and dispossessed of its
Habitation against its will, but draw it forth to thy Self by the secret power
of thy Love, as the Sunshine in the Spring draws forth the creatures from
their Winter Cells; meet it half way, and entice it to thee, as the Loadstone
does the Iron, and as the greater flame does attract the less: Dispel therefore
the Clouds that hide from me thy Love, or remove the Scales that hinder mine
Eyes from beholding Thee; for only the beams that stream from thy Face, and
the foresight or taste of thy great Salvation can make a soul unfainedly to
say, Now Let thy Servant depart in peace; Reading and Hearing will not serve,
my meat is not sweet to my Ear, or to my Eye, it must be a taste or feeling
that must entice away my soul: Though arguing is the means to bend my will, yet
if thou bring not the matter to my hand, and by the influence of thy Spirit
make it not effectual, I shall never reason my soul to be willing to depart. In
the Winter, when its cold and dirty without, I am loath to leave my Chamber and
fire; but in the Summer, when all is warm and green, I am loath to be so
confined; show me but the Summer fruits and pleasures of thy Paradise, and I
shall freely quit my earthly Cell. Some pleasure I have in my Books, my
friends, and in thine Ordinances; till thou have given me a taste of something
more sweet, my soul will be loath to part with these: The Traveller will hold
his Cloak the faster when the winds do bluster, and the storms assault him,
but when the Sun shines hot, he will cast it off as a burden; so will my soul,
when thou frownest, or art strange, be lother to leave this garment of flesh;
but thy smiles would make me leave it as my prison; but it is not thy ordinary
discoveries that will here suffice; as the work is greater, so must be thy
help: O turn these fears into strong desires, and this lothness to dye, into
longings after thee! while I must be absent from thee, let my soul as heartily
groan under thine absence, as my pained body does under its want of health: And
let not those groans be counterfeit or constrained, but let them come from a
longing, loving heart, unfeignedly judging it best to depart and be with
Christ: And if I have any more time to spend on earth, let me live as without
the world in thee, as I have sometime lived as without thee in the world. O
suffer me not to spend in strangeness to thee another day of this my
Pilgrimage! while I have a thought to think, let me not forget thee; while I
have a tongue to move, let me mention thee with delight; while I have a breath
to breathe, let it be after thee, and for thee; while I have a knee to bend,
let it bow daily at thy Footstool: and when by sickness thou confinest me to my
Couch, do thou make my bed, and number my pains, and put all my tears into thy
Bottle. And as when my spirit groaned for my sins, the flesh would not second
it, but desired that which my spirit did abhor; so now, when my flesh does
groan under its pains, let not my spirit second it, but suffer the flesh to
groan alone, and let me desire that day which my flesh abhors, that my
friends may not with so much sorrow wait for the departure of my soul, as my
soul with joy shall wait for its own departure, and then let me dye the death
of the Righteous, and let my last end be as his, even a removal to that Glory
that shall never end: Send forth thy Convoy of Angels for my departing soul,
and let them bring it among the perfected spirits of the Just, and let me
follow my dear friends that have died in Christ before me; und when my friends
are weeping over my Grave, let my spirit be reposed with thee in Rest; and when
my Corpse shall lie there rotting in the dark, let my soul be in the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light: And O thou that numberest the very hairs of my head, do
thou number all the days that my body lies in the dust; and thou that writest
all my members in thy Book, do thou keep an account of all my scattered bones:
and hasten, O my Savior, the time of thy return, send forth thine Angels, and
let that dreadful, joyful Trumpet sound; delay not, lest the living give up
their hopes; delay not, lest earth should grow like hell, and lest thy Church
by division be crumbled all to dust, and dissolved by being resolved into
individual unites: Delay not, lest thine enemies get advantage of thy Flock,
and lest Pride and Hypocrisy, and Sensuality, and Unbelief should prevail
against thy little Remnant, and share among them thy whole Inheritance, and
when thou come thou find not Faith on the earth. Delay not, lest the Grave
should boast of Victory; and having learned Rebellion of its guest, should
plead prescription, and refuse to deliver thee up thy due: O hasten that great
Resurrection Day! when thy command shall go forth, and none shall disobey; when
the Sea and Earth shall yield up their Hostages, and all that slept in the
Graves shall awake, and the dead in Christ shall first arise; when the seed
that thou sowedst corruptible, shall come forth incorruptible; and Graves that
received but rottenness, and retained but dust, shall return thee glorious
Stars and Suns; therefore dare I lay down my carcass in the dust, entrusting
it, not to a Grave, but to Thee: and therefore my flesh shall rest in Hope,
till thou raise it to the possession of the Everlasting REST. Return, O Lord,
how long? O let thy Kingdom come! Thy desolate Bride says, Come; for thy
Spirit within her says, Come, who teaches her thus to pray with groanings
after thee, which cannot be expressed; The whole Creation says, Come, waiting
to be delivered from the bondage of Corruption into the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God: Thy Self have said, Surely I come quickly; Amen, Even so come LORD
JESUS.

The Conclusion.
THus, Reader, I have given thee my best advice, for the attaining and
maintaining a Heavenly Conversation. The manner is imperfect, and too much mine
own; but for the main matter, I dare say, I received it from God. From him I
deliver it thee, and his charge I lay upon thee, That thou entertain and
practice it. If thou can not do it methodically and fully, yet do it as thou
can; only, be sure thou do it seriously and frequently. If thou will believe
a man that has made some small trial of it, thou shall find, it will make
thee another man, and elevate thy soul, and clear thine understanding, and
polish thy conversation, and leave a pleasant savor upon thy heart; so that thy
own experience will make thee confess, That one hour thus spent will more
effectually revive thee, then many in bare external duties; and a day in these
contemplations will afford thee truer content, then all the glory and riches of
the Earth. Be acquainted with this work, and thou will be (in some remote sort)
acquainted with God: Thy joys will be spiritual, and prevalent, and lasting,
according to the nature of their Blessed Object; thou will have comfort in
life, and comfort in death: When thou have neither wealth, nor health, nor the
pleasure of this world, yet will thou have comfort: Comfort without the
presence, or help of any Friend, without a Minister, without a Book, when all
means are denied thee, or taken from thee, yet may thou have vigorous, real
comfort. Thy graces will be mighty, and active, and victorious; and the daily
joy which is thus fetched from Heaven, will be thy strength. Thou will be as one
that stands on the top of an exceeding high Mountain; he looks down on the
world as if it were quite below him: How small do the Fields, and VVoods, and
Countries, seem to him? Cities and Towns seem but little spots. Thus despicably
will thou look on all things here below. The greatest Princes will seem below
thee but as Grasshoppers; and the busy, contentious, coveteous world, but as a
heap of Ants. Men's threatenings will be no terror to thee; nor the honors of
this world, any strong enticement: Temptations will be more harmless, as having
lost their strength; and Afflictions less grievous, as having lost their sting;
and every Mercy will be better known and relished.

Reader, it is, under God, in thine own choice now, whether thou will live thus
blessed, or not; and whether all this pains, which I have taken for thee, shall
prosper or be lost. If it be lost through thy laziness, (which God forbid) be
it known to thee, thou will prove the greatest looser thy self. If thou value
not this Heavenly Angelical life, how can thou say that thou valuest Heaven?
And if thou value not it, no wonder if thou be shut out. The power of godliness
lies in the actings of the soul: Take heed that thou stick not in the vain
deluding form. O man! What have thou to mind, but God and Heaven? Art thou
not almost out of this world already? Do thou not look every day, when one
disease, or other, will let out thy soul? Does not the Bier stand ready to
carry thee to the Grave? and the Worms wait to feed upon thy face and heart?
What if thy Pulse must beat a few strokes more? and what if thou have a few
more breathes to fetch, before thou breathe out thy last? and what if thou have
a few more nights to sleep, before thou sleep in the dust? Alas, what will this
be, when it is gone? And is it not almost gone already? Very shortly thou will
see thy glass run out, and say thy self, My life is done! my time is gone! its
past recalling! there is nothing now, but Heaven or Hell before me! O where then
should thy heart be now, but in Heaven? Did thou but know what a dreadful
thing it is, to have a strange and doubtful thought of Heaven; when a man lies
dying, it would sure rowze thee up. And what other thoughts, but strange, can
that man have, that never thought seriously of Heaven, till then? Every man's
first thoughts are strange about all things: Familiarity and acquaintance comes
not in a moment, but is the consequent of Custom, and frequent Converse. And
strangeness naturally raises dread, as familiarity does delight. What else
makes a Fish or a wild Beast fly from a man; when domestic Creatures take
pleasure in his company? So will thou fly from God (if thou knew how) who
should be thy only happiness, if thou do not get this strangeness removed in
thy life time? And is it not pity, that a child should be so strange to his
own Father, as to fear nothing more, then to go into his presence? and to think
himself best, when he is furthest from him? and to fly from his face, as a
wild Creature will do from the face of a man? Alas, how little do many godly
ones differ from the world, either in their comforts, or willingness to die?
and all because they live so strange to the place, and Fountain of their
comforts. Besides, a little verbal, or other outside duties, or talking of
controversies and doctrines of Religion, or forbearing the practice of many
sins, how little do the most of the Religious differ from other men? when God
has prepared so vast a difference hereafter. If a word of Heaven fall in now
and then in their conference, alas, how slightly is it, and customary, and
heartless? And if their Prayers or Preaching have heavenly expressions, they
usually are fetched from their mere invention, or memory, or Books, and not from
the experience, or feeling of their hearts. O what a life might men live, if
they were but willing and diligent! God would have our joys to be far more
then our sorrows; yea, he would have us to have no sorrow, but what tends to
joy; and no more then our sins have made necessary for our good. How much do
those Christians wrong God and themselves, that either make their thoughts of
God, the inlet of their sorrows, or let these offered joys lie by, as
neglected or forgotten? Some there be that say, It is not worth so much time
and trouble, to think of the greatness of the joys above; so we can make sure
they are ours, we know they are great. But as these men obey not the Command of
God, which requires them to have their Conversation in Heaven, and to set
their Affections on things above; so do they wilfully make their own lives
miserable, by refusing the delights that God has set before them. And yet if
this were all, it were a smaller matter; if it were but the loss of their
comforts, I would not say so much: But see what abundance of other mischiefs do
follow the absence of these Heavenly Delights.

First, It will damp, if not destroy, our very love to God; so deeply as we
apprehend his bounty and exceeding love to us, and his purpose to make us
eternally happy* so much will it raise our love: Love to God, and delight in
him, are still conjunct. They that conceive of God, as one that desires their
blood and damnation, cannot heartily love him.

Secondly, It will make us have seldom and unpleasing thoughts of God; for our
thoughts will follow our love and delight.

Thirdly, And it will make men to have as seldom and unpleasing speech of God:
For who will care for talking of that which he has no delight in? What makes
men still talking of worldliness or wickedness, but that these are more
pleasant to them then God?

Fourthly, It will make men have no delight in the service of God, when they
have no delight in God, nor any sweet thoughts of Heaven, which is the end of
their services. No wonder if such Christians complain, That they are still
backward to Duty; that they have no delight in Prayer, in Sacraments, or in
Scripture it self: If thou could once delight in God, thou would easily
delight in duty; especially, that which brings thee into the nearest converse
with him: But till then, no wonder if thou be weary of all; (further then some
external excellency may give thee a carnal delight.) Does not this cause many
Christians to go on so heavily in secret duties? like the Ox in the Furrow,
that will go no longer then he is driven, and is glad when he is unyoaked?

Fifthly, Yea, it much endangereth the perverting of men's judgments, concerning
the ways of God, and means of Grace, when they have no delight in God and
Heaven. Though it be said, Perit omne judicium cum res transit in affectum,
That Judgment perishes, when things pass into Affection; yet that is but when
Affection leads the Judgment, and not when it follows. Affection holds
its object faster then bare Judgment does. The Soul will not much care for that
Truth, which is not accompanied with suitable goodness; and it will more easily
be drawn to believe that to be false, which it does not delightfully apprehend
to be good; which doubtless is no small cause of the ungodlies prejudice,
against the ways of God, and of many formal men's dislike of extemporate
Prayers, and of a strict observation of the Lords day: Had they a true delight
in God, and heavenly Things, it would rectify their judgments better then all
the arguments in the world. Lose this delight once, and you will begin to
quarrel with the Ordinances and Ways of God, and to be more offended at the
Preachers imperfections, then profited by the Doctrine.

Sixthly, And it is the want of these Heavenly Delights in God, that makes men
so entertain the delights of the flesh: This is the cause of most men's
voluptuousness, and flesh-pleasing. The Soul will not rest without some kind
of delights: If it had nothing to delight in, either in hand, or in hope, it
would be in a kind of Hell on Earth, vexing it self with continual sorrow and
despair. If a Dog have lost his Master, he will follow somebody else. Men must
have their sweet Cups, or delicious Fare, or gay Apparel, or Cards, or Dice, or
Fleshly Lasts, to make up their want of delight in God: (How well these will
serve in stead of God, our fleshly youths will be better able to tell me, when
we meet at Judgment.) If men were acquainted with this Heavenly Life, there
would need no Laws against Sabbath breaking, and riotousness; nor would men
need to go for mirth to an Alehouse or a Tavern: They would have a far sweeter
pastime, and recreation nearer hand.

Seventhly also, This want of Heavenly Delights, will leave men under the power
of every Affliction; they will have nothing to comfort them, and ease them in
their sufferings, but the empty, uneffectual pleasures of the flesh; and when
that is gone, where then is their delight?

Eighthly, Also it will make men fearful, and unwilling to die: For who would
go to a God, or a place that he has no delight in? or, who would leave his
pleasure here, except it were to go to better? O, if the people of God would
learn once this Heavenly Life, and take up their delights in God, whilst they
live, they would not tremble, and be disconsolate at the tidings of death.

Ninthly, Yea, this want of Heavenly Delight, does lay men open to the power of
every Temptation: A little thing will tice a man from that which he has no
pleasure in.

Tenthly, Yea, it is a dangerous preparative to total Apostasy. A man will
hardly long hold on in a way that he has no delight in; nor use the means, if
he have no delight in the end: But as a Beast, if you drive him a way that he
would not go, will be turning out at every gap. If you be Religious in your
actions, and become over to God in your outward Conversa^ion, and not in your
delight, you will shortly be gone, if your trial be strong. How many young
people have we known, who by good education, or the persuasion of friends, or
for fear of Hell, have been a while kept up among Prayers, and Sermons, and
good company, as a Bird in a Cage; when, if they durst, they had rather have
been in an Alehouse, or at their sports; and at last, they have broke loose,
when their restraint was taken off, and have forsaken the way that they never
took pleasure in. You see then, that it is not a matter of indifferency,
whether you entertain these Heavenly Delights, or not; nor is the loss of your
present comfort, all the inconvenience that follows the neglect.

And now Christian Friends, I have here lined you out a Heavenly precious Work;
would you but do it, it would make you men indeed: To delight in God, is the
work of Angels, and the contrary is the work of devils. If God would persuade
you now to make conscience of this duty, and help you in it by the blessed
influence of his Spirit, you would not change your lives with the greatest
Prince on the Earth. But I am afraid, if I may judge of your hearts by the
backwardness of my own, that it will prove a hard thing to persuade you to the
work, and that much of this my labor will be lost. Pardon my jealousy; it is
raised upon too many and sad experiments. What say you; Do you resolve on this
Heavenly course, or no? Will you let go all your sinful fleshly pleasures, and
daily seek after these higher delights? I pray thee hear, shut the Book, and
consider of it, and resolve on the duty, before thou go further. -- Let thy
Family perceive, let thy Neighbors perceive, let thy Conscience perceive, yea,
let God perceive it, that thou art a man that have thy daily Conversation in
Heaven. God has now offered to be thy daily delight: Thy neglect is thy
refusal. What? Refuse delight? and such a Delight? If I had propounded you
only a course of Melancholy, and Fear, and Sorrow, you might better have
demur'd on it. Take heed what thou do; Refuse this, and refuse all: Thou must
have Heavenly Delights, or none that are lasting. God is willing that thou
should daily walk with him, and fetch in consolations from the Everlasting
Fountain; if thou be unwilling, even bear thy loss: And one of these days, when
thou lie dying, then seek for comfort where thou can get it, and make what
shift for contentment thou can: Then see whether thy fleshly delights will
stick to thee, or give thee the slip; and then Conscience, in despite of thee,
shall make thee remember, That thou wast once persuaded to a way for more
excellent pleasures, that would have followed thee through death, and have
lasted thee to Everlasting. What man will go in rags, that may be clothed with
the best? or feed on pulse, that may feed of the best? or accompany with the
vilest, that may be a companion to the best? and admitted into the presence,
and favor of the greatest? And shall we delight so much in our clothing of
flesh? and feed so much on the vain pleasures of Earth? and accompany so much
with sin and sinners? When Heaven is set open, as it were, to our daily view,
and God does offer us daily admittance into his presence? O how is the unseen
God neglected! and the unseen Glory forgotten, and made light of? and all
because they are unseen! Heb. 11.1.
and for want of that Faith, which is the Substance of things hoped for, and
the Evidence of things that are not seen?

But for you, sincere Believers, whose hearts God has weaned from all things
here below, I hope you will value this Heavenly Life, and fetch one walk daily
in the New Jerusalem! I know God is your Love, and your desire; and I know you
would fain be more acquainted with your Savior; and I know it is your grief,
that your hearts are not more near him; and that they do no more feelingly and
passionately love him, and delight in him. As ever you would have all this
mended, and enjoy your desires, O try this Life of Meditation on your
Everlasting Rest! Here is the Mount Ararat, where the fluctuated Ark of your
Souls must Rest. O let the World see by your Heavenly Lives, That Religion
lies in something more then Opinions, and Disputes, and a task of outward
Duties: Let men see in you, what a Life they must aim at. If ever a Christian
be like himself, and answerable to his Principles and Profession, it is when he
is most serious, and lively in this Duty, when, as Moses before he died, went
up into Mount Nebo, to take a survey of the Land of Canaan; so the Christian
does ascend this Mount of Contemplation, and take a survey by Faith of his
Rest. He looks upon the glorious delectable Mansions, and says, Glorious
things are deservedly spoken of thee, O thou City of God: He hears, as it
were, the melody of the Heavenly Chore, and beholds the excellent employment
of those Spirits, and says, Blessed are the people that are in such a case,
yea, blessed are they that have the Lord for their God: He next looks to the
glorified Inhabitants of that Region, and says, Happy art thou, O the Israel
of God, a people saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy Strength, the Sword of
thine Excellency. When he looks upon the Lord himself, who is their Glory, he
is ready with the rest, to fall down and worship him that lives for ever, and
say, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come;
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power. When he looks
on the Glorified Savior of the Saints, he is ready to say, Amen, to that new
Song, Blessing, honor, glory, and power be to him that sits on the Throne,
and to the Lamb for ever and ever; for he has redeemed us out of every Nation
by his blood, and made us Kings, and Priests to God. When he looks back on
the Wilderness of this World, he blesses the believing, patient, despised
Saints; he pitieth the ignorant, obstinate, miserable World; and for himself,
he says as Peter, It is good to be here; or as David, It is good for me to
draw near to God; for all those that are far from him, shall perish.

Thus as Daniel in his captivity, did three times a day open his window toward
Jerusalem, though far out of sight, when he went to God in his Devotions; so
may the believing Soul in this captivity to the flesh, look toward Jerusalem
which is above: And as Paul was to the Colossians, so may he be with the
Glorified Spirits, Col. 2.5.
Absent in the flesh, but present in Spirit, joying in beholding their
(Heavenly) Order. And as Divine Bucholcer in his last Sermon, before his death,
did so sweetly descant upon those comfortable words, John 3.16. [ Whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life.] That he raised,
and ravished the hearts of his (otherwise sad) hearers: So may the Meditating
Believer do, (through the Spirits assistance) by his own heart. And as the
pretty Lark does sing most sweetly, and never cease her pleasant ditty, while
she hovereth aloft, as if she were there gazing into the glory of the Sun; but
is suddenly silenced when she falls to the Earth: So is the frame of the
Soul, most Delectable and Divine, while it keeps in the views of God by
Contemplation: But, alas, we make there too short a stay, but down again we
fall, and lay by our music.

But, O thou, the Merciful Father of Spirits, the Attractive of Love, and Ocean
of Delights, draw up these drossie hearts unto thy self, and keep them there,
till they are spiritualized and refined; and second these thy Servants weak
Endevors, and persuade those that read these lines, to the practice of this
Delightful, Heavenly Work. And, O suffer not the Soul of thy most unworthy
Servant to be a stranger to those Joys which he unfoldeth to thy people, or to
be seldom in that way, which he has here lined out to others: But, O keep me
while I tarry on this Earth, in daily serious Breathings after thee, and in a
Believing, Affectionate Walking with thee: And when thou come, O let me be
found so doing; not hiding my Talent, nor serving my Flesh, nor yet asleep with
my Lamp unfurnished; but waiting, and longing for my Lords return. That those
who shall read these Heavenly Directions, may not read only the fruit of my
Studies, and the product of my fancy; but the hearty breathings of my active
Hope and Love: That if my heart were open to their view, they might there read
the same most deeply engraven, with a Beam from the Face of the Son of God; and
not find Vanity, or Lust, or Pride within, where the words of Life appear
without: That so these lines may not witness against me; but proceeding from
the heart of the Writer, may be effectual through thy Grace, upon the heart of
the Reader; and so be the savor of Life to both. Amen.

Glory be to God in the highest:
On Earth Peace:
Good-wil toward Men.
FINIS.
BROVGHTON In the Conclusion of His Concent of Scripture: Concerning the
New-Jerusalem, and the Everlasting Sabbatism meant in my Text, as begun here,
and perfected in Heaven.
THe Company of faithful Souls called to the blessed Marriage of the Lamb, are
a Jerusalem from Heaven, Apoc. 3. and 21. Heb. 12. Though such glorious things
are spoken concerning this City of God, the perfection whereof cannot be seen
in this Vale of Tears yet here God wipeth all tears from our eyes, and each
blessing is here begun: The name of this City much helps Jew and Gentile, to
see the state of peace: for this is called Jerusalem, and that in Canaan has
Christ destroyed: This Name should clearly have taught both the Hebrews not to
look and pray daily for to return to Canaan, and Pseudo-Catholikes not to fight
for special holiness there: We live in this by Faith, and not by Eyesight; and
by Hope we behold the perfection: Of this City Salvation is a Wall, goodly as
Jasper, clear as Crystal; the foundations are in number twelve; of twelve
precious stones, such as Aaron ware on his breast, all the Work of the Lambs
twelve Apostles: the Gates are twelve, each of Pearl, upon which are the names
of the twelve Tribes of Israel, of whose Faith all must be which enter in:
Twelve Angels are conductors from East, West, North and South, even the Stars
of the Churches: The City is square: of Burgesses settled for all turns. Here
God sits on a Throne like Jasper and Ruby, Comfortable and Just; The Lamb is
the Temple, that a third Temple should not be looked for to be built: Thrones
twice twelve are for all the Christians born of Isreal's twelve, or taught by
the Apostles, who for dignity are Seniors, for infinity are termed but four and
twenty, in regard of so many Tribes and Apostles. Here the Majesty is
Honorable, as at the delivery of the Law, from whose Throne, Thunder, Voices,
and Lightnings do proceed: Here oil of Grace is never wanting, but burning with
seven Lamps, the spirits of Talmud in Sanedrim, Cha. Chelec, fol. 73. b.
Messiah, of Wit and Wisdom, of Counsel and Courage, of Knowledge and
Understanding, and of the Fear due to the Eternal: Here the Valiant, Patient,
Witty and Speedy, with sharp Sight, are winged as those Saraphims that waited
on Christ, when ten Calamities, and utter destruction was told for the low
Jerusalem: They of this City are not as Israel after the flesh, which would not
see, for all the Wonders that our Lord did, but these Redeemed with his
precious blood, are full of Eyes, lightened by Lamps, the glory of Jehovah, and
behold Christ through all the Prophets, a performer of our Faith, Joh. 6. Dan.
9.24. Apoc. 6.
sealed of God, Sealer of all Vision, opener of Seals for the Stories of the
Church. Here is the true Light where the saved walk, hither Kingdoms bring
their glory, hither the blessed Nations carry their Jewels; This is a Kingdom
uncorrupted, which shall not be given to a strange and unclean people; Isai.
60. Apo. 21.
they must be written in the Book of the Lamb, and chosen of eternity,
sanctified of God, Isai. 35.8. Haggi. 2.8.
which here are Citizens; Through this there gusheth a stream better then the
four in Eden, a stream of lively waters by belief in Christ, Dan. 2.44.
as those waters flowing from Lebanon: Here is that Tree of Life in the midst
of the Paradise of God, Ephesians. 1.4. Ephesians. 2.19.
with leaves to heal the Nations that will be cured while it is said to day,
with twelve fruits to give food continually, Joh. 7 38. Cant. 4.15.
to such as feed also upon the hidden Manna, who after death receive the Crown
of Justice and Life, Apoc 2. Psalm. 95.7.
the morning star, white Clothing, and the white Stone, wherein a name is
written equal to all the Law, Deuteronomy. 27, 2. 2. Tim. 4 8. Apoc. 2.
The first seat of the first Adam in the first Paradise was glorious, this is
better; and as Moses began with the Terrestrial, so the holy Word ends in the
Celestial; Apoc. ^.
that to Wheels full of eyes may the Writ of Truth be compared: The full
concent and melody of Prophets and Apostles, how their Harps are tuned on Mount
Sion, Phil. 3.21.
it will sully appear in the full sight of Peace, when our bodies are made
conformable to Christ his glorious body in the world to come, and our eyes
shall see the Lord in that Sic^ For that Coming, O thou whom my soul loves, be
like to the Roe upon the mountains. Amen. Cant. 1. and 3.
Even so come Lord Jesus. Then we shall in perfect holiness worship thee, to
whom the Angels always give holy Worship, saying, Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom,
and Thanks, and Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God for evermore. Amen.

A Poem of Master I. Herberts in his Temple.
HOME.
COme Lord, my head does burn, my heart is sick,
While thou do ever, ever stay,
Thy long deferrings wound me to the quick;
My spirit gaspeth night and day.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
How can thou stay, considering the pace
The blood did make which thou did waste?
When I behold it trickling down thy face,
I never saw thing make such have.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
When man was lost, thy pity looked about,
To see what help in the earth or sky:
But there was none; at least no help without;
The help did in thy bosom lie.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee,
There lay thy Son: and must he leave that nest,
That hive of sweetness, to remove
Thraldom from those, who would not at a feast
Leave one poor apple for thy love?
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee,
He did, he came. O my Redeemer dear,
After all this can thou be strange?
So many years baptized, and not appear?
As if thy Love could fail or change.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee,
Yet if thou stayest still, why must I stay?
My God, what is this world to me?
This world of woe? Hence, all ye clouds, away,
Away; I must get up and see.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee,
What is this weary world: This meat and drink,
That chain's us by the teeth so fast?
What is this woman-kinde, which I can wink
Into a blackness and distaste?
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
With one small sigh thou gav'st me the other day,
I blasted all the joys about me;
And scouling on them as they pined away,
Now come again, said I, and flout me.
O show thy self to me.
Or take me up to thee.
Nothing but drought and dearth, but bush and brake
Which way so ere I look, I see:
Some may dream merrily; but when they wake
They dress themselves, and come to thee.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
We talk of Harvests: there are no such things,
But when we leave our Corn and Hay:
There is no fruitful year, but that which bring's
The last and loved, though dreadful day.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
O loose this frame; this knot of man unty,
That my free soul may use her wing,
Which now is pinioned with mortality
As an entangled, hampered thing.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
What have I left that I should stay and groan?
The most of me to Heaven is fled:
My thoughts and joys are all pack't up and gone,
And for their old acquaintance plead.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
Come dearest Lord; pass not this holy season;
My flesh and bones and joints do pray;
And even my verse, when by the rhyme and reason
The word is, Stay, says ever, Come.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
FINIS.
If you will read nothing but What Was intended by the Author, amend these
misprintings: The rest are but small.
PAge 8. line 14. blot out [ Sect 7.] p. 9. for [your] read [their] p. 81. l.
3. for [prop] r. [proper] p. 85. l. 15. r. [Colluvione] p. 87. l. 21. after
[be] add [so] p. 95. l. 5. for [when] r. [whom] p. 96. l. 37. for [in] r. [to]
p. 97. l. 8. blot out [to] p. 99. l. ult after [Rest] add [is] p. 145. l. 10.
blot out [with] p. 161. l. 22. before [thee] put [making] p. 200. l. 21. for
[former] r. [formall] and in the Margin l. 19. for [sed] r. [suae] p. 240. l.
37. for [which] r. [what] p. 242. l. 26. for [Monensis] r. [Aponensis] and in
the Margin, for [Grainerius] r. [Guainerius] p. 269. l. 14. for [mortall] r.
[morall] p. 389. l. 23. for [Promises] r. [Premises] p. 394. l. 21 for
[distinguished] r. [extinguished] p. 517. l. 23. for [Pebugius] ^. [P^stugius]
p. 530. l. 7. before [think] write [that] p. 543. l. 18. for [your] r. [our] p.
648. l. 15. for [Heavenly blessing] r. [Heavenly believer] p. 669. l. 20. for
[things] r. [this] p. 674. l. 18. for [waiting] r. [writing] p. 720. l. 9. for
[they] r. [the] p. 763. l. 15. for [which] r. [with] p. 776. l. 16. for [whose]
r. [whole] p. 728. l. 2. for [promise] r. [premise]


