A Second Sheet for the MINISTRY Justifying our CALLING Against Quakers,
Seekers, and Papists, and all that deny us to be the Ministers of Christ.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by R. White. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster,
1657.

A second Sheet for the MINISTRY: Justifying our Calling against Quakers,
Seekers and Papists, and all that deny us to be the Ministers of Christ.
THe corruption of the Romish Church being most in the errors and vices of the
Priests, which made men abhor the offering of the Lord (1 Samuel 2.17.) the
Reproach which they brought upon themselves, did much prepare men to hearken to
the Reformers: The observing of this, and of the necessary dependence of the
people on their Pastors, has caused the Papists to bend their force against
the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, and to use all their wit to defame
their persons, and callings, and make them seem ignorant, unworthy, or no
Ministers to the people. On this errand they send abroad their agents; This is
the saving Gospel that the Seekers, Quakers, and their brethren preach; that
the Scripture is not the Gospel or word of God, and that we are no true
Ministers. Whatever Doctrine we are preaching, the Opposers*work is, to call us
deceivers, and ask, How we prove our selves true Ministers? My work therefore
at this time, for the sake of the ignorant in our Assemblies, shall be, to
acquaint them with our answer to this demand. And I shall give it you in order,
in certain Propositions.

Prop. 1. Both in the Old and New Testament there is mention of two distinct
sort of Ministers, of Gods appointment. First, such as received some new
Revelation* (either a Law, or a particular Message) immediately from God; so
that the people could not be sure that their Doctrine was true, till they were
sure that the men were sent of God. These were called Prophets, in the Old
Testament, and Apostles, Prophets, etc. in the New. So Moses received the Law
from God: and the following Prophets their particular Messages. So the Apostles
received the Gospel from Christ; and so did the seventy* and other Disciples
that conversed with him: and other Prophets and Evangelists had it by immediate
inspiration. All these were Necessarily by Miracles, or some infallible
Evidence to prove their own call, before the hearers could receive their
Doctrine: for this was their Message; [ The Lord has commanded me to say thus
or thus to you] or [ The word which the Lord spoke to me is thus or thus] This
sort of Ministers the Papists and Seekers do confess.

But besides these, there is a second sort of true Ministers, whose Office is
not to receive from God any new Doctrine, Law, or Message; but to proclaim the
Laws already delivered, and teach men the doctrine already revealed, and to
Oversee and govern the Churches of Christ according to his Laws, and to go
before the people in the worship of God: The Prophets and Apostles did both
these; both Reveal the doctrine which they received from Christ, and teach and
guide the Church by it when they had done: but the latter sort of Ministers do
but* the later sort of the work. The Papists and Seekers cheat men by jumbling
all together, as if there were no Ministers of Gods appointment but those of
the former sort; and therefore they call for miracles to prove our Ministry.
Here therefore I shall first prove, that the second sort of Ministers are of
Gods institution: 2. That such need not prove their calling by miracles; though
yet God may work Miracles by them if he please. 3. That we are true Ministers
of Christ, of this sort.

1. Christ found such Ministers under the Law, that were to teach and Rule by
the Law before received, and not to receive new Laws or Messages: I mean the
ordinary Priests and Levites, as distinguished from Prophets. These Priests
were to keep the Law, and teach it the people, and the people were to seek it
at their mouth, and by it they were to judge men's causes: and also they were to
stand between the people and God in public worship, as is expressed, Deuteronomy.
31.26. Josh. 23.6. Neh. 8.1, 2, 3, 8, 18. and 9.3. Levit. 1. and 2. and 4. and
5. and 7. and 13. and 14. throughout, Number. 5. and 6. Deuteronomy. 17.12. Mal. 2.7.
Ier. 18.18. The Prophet had visions: but the Priest had the Law, Ezekiel. 7.26.
Isa 8.16, 20. Hag. 2.11, 12. Number. 1.50. 1 Chronicles. 9.26. and 16.4. 2 Chronicles.
19.11. and 20.19. and 30.17, 22. He was called A Teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles.
15.13. Lev. 10 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 24.8. 2 Chronicles. 17.7.9. Ezekiel. 44.23* 2 Chronicles. 35.3.
And Christ himself sends the cleansed to the Priest, and commands them to
hear the Pharisees that sat in Moses Chair, though they were no Prophets: so
that besides the Prophets that had their message immediately from God, there
were Priests that were called the Ministers of the Lord, Joel 1.9.2.17. and
Levites that were not to bring new Revelations, but to Teach, and Rule, and
worship according to the old. For Moses of old time has in every City them
that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15.21.
The Jews rejected Christ because they knew him not, nor the voice of the
Prophets which are read every Sabbath day, Acts 13.27. And even unto this day,
when Moses is read the Vail is on their heart, 2 Cor. 3.15. And they that would
not believe Moses and the Prophets (thus read and preached) neither will they
be persuaded though one rose from the dead, Luke 16.29, 31.

2. And as Priests and Levites were distinct from Prophets before Christ, so
Christ appointed besides the Apostles and Prophetical revealers of his Gospel,
a standing sort of Ministers, to 1. Teach, 2. Rule, 3. And worship according to
the Gospel which the former had Revealed, and attested, and proved to the
world. These were called Overseers, or Bishops, Presbyters, or Elders, Pastors
and T^achers; and also the Deacons were joined to assist them, Acts 14.23. They
ordained them Elders (not Prophets or Apostles) in every Church, Tit. 1.5.
Titus was to ordain Elders in every City. Timothy has full direction for the
Ordaining of Bishops or Elders and Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.

That their work was not to bring new Doctrine, but to Teach, Rule, and worship
according to that Received, I now prove, 2 Timothy 2.2. The things that thou have
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also] Mark, that its the same, and not a new
Doctrine: and that as heard from Paul among many witnesses, and not as received
immediately from God: and others were thus to receive it down from Timothy. And
v. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth,] It is not to bring new Truths,
but rightly to divide the old. And 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of words
which thou have heard of me (not which thou had immediately from God) in
Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus; that Good thing which was committed
unto thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. The Holy Ghost is to
help us in keeping that which is committed to us, and not to reveal more, 2 Timothy 6.13, 14. [ I give thee charge in the sight of God -- that thou keep this
Commandment without spot, unrebukable, till the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. There was a form of Doctrine delivered to the Church of Rome, Romans
6.17. And 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that Rule well are worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in the word and Doctrine. You see their work was to
Rule and labor in the word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Till I come,
give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; meditate upon these
things: give thy self wholly to them, that thy prof(...)ing may appear to all:
Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine: continue in them: for in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.] 1. Tim. 4.6. [ If
thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of good
doctrine whereunto thou have attained:] Mark here the description of a good
Minister of Christ; One that's nourished up in* the words of faith and good
doctrine, (which is the use of Schools and Universities) and having attained
it, makes it his work to teach it, and put others in remembrance of it, Tit.
1.7, 9, 10, 11. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God --
holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught (mark that) that he may
be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers. For
there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, whose mouths must be
stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, etc.]
So 1 Timothy 3.1, 5. The office of a Bishop is to Rule and take care of the Church
of God:] To take heed to themselves, and to all the flock, and feed the Church
of God: and to watch hereunto, according to the word of Gods grace, which is
fully and wholly delivered by his Apostles, and is able to build us up, and
give us an inheritance among the sanctified: as Act. 20.28, 20, 27, 35, 32. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you (this is their Office) and to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake (and not revile them as
the servants of Satan do) and be at peace among your selves, Heb. 13.7, 17, 24.
Remember them which have the Rule over you, which have spoken to you the word
of God: Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves: for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with
Joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Salute all them that
have the Rule over you: The Elders of the Church are to pray with, and for the
sick, Jam. ^.14. They must feed the flock of God among them, taking the
oversight of it, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. Thus you see their Office and work.

2. And that they were not to bring any new Doctrine, further appears, in that
they have a charge to Preach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. Nor to be tossed as
children with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Nor carried about with diverse
and strange doctrines, Heb. 13.9.

3. Yea, if any man bring not the doctrine of Christ, we must not receive him
into our houses, or bid him God speed, lest we be partakers of his evil deeds,
for be that abides not in this doctrine has not God, 2 John 9.10, 11. Gal.
1.8, 9. [ Though we or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel to you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said
before, so say I now again: If any man preach any other Gospel to you then that
ye have received, let him be accursed.] And Romans 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you
Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.] 1 Timothy 6.3. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is proud,
knowing nothing, but do(...)ing. -- ]

4. And if all Ministers must be receivers of new Doctrines, the Church would
never know when it has all, but would be still obeying an imperfect Law. 5.
And it would be an oppression to the Church instead of a Direction, to be so
overwhelmed with new Doctrines and Precepts. 6. And it would accuse Christ the
Lawgiver of such mutability, as wise Princes are not guilty of; to be still
changing or adding to his Laws. 7. There was great occasion for the New
Testament or Gospel, upon the great work of our Redemption: but there is no
such cause for alterations since. 8. The Priests before Christ were not to
receive new Laws, as is said. 9. The companions of the Apostles that wrought
Miracles, had not all new Revelations; but did it to seal up this Gospel. 10.
What need we more then actual experience, that God does not give New
Revelations to the world, and none since the Scripture-times, have sealed any
other by Miracles.

And thus I have proved to you the two sorts of Ministers: as Paul plain(...)
distinguishes them, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 2.20. There are Planters and
Waterers, Master builders that lay the foundation, and others that build
thereon: (...)there foundation can no man lay then that which is laid: but every
man that (...)ildeth hay or stubble and loses his work, does not nullify the
Ministry. We are built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the head cornerstone: but we are not built on the foundation of
every Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Bishop or Deacon: Though both in their places
(Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers) are given for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. That we might be one united Body, having one
fixed standing doctrine, ver. 14, 15, 16. And how shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him: (mark whence the Church receives it)
God also bearing them witness (but not every Elder or Teacher) both with signs
and wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost according to
his own will, Heb. 2.3, 4.

Prop. 2. And now that these later Ministers need not prove their calling by
Miracles, I prove thus: 1. God never imposed such a task upon them, nor
commanded the people to require such a proof, and not to believe any but
workers of Miracles. 2. God gave not all the gift of Miracles that were
employed in his work even in the Apostles days: Are all workers of Miracles?
says Paul; some had by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, and of knowledge, and
others Tongues, and others Interpretation, and others Miracles, 1 Cor. 12.29,
7, 8, 9, 10. 3. They that have the Holy Ghost are owned by Christ; and so have
many without working Miracles. See Romans 8.9. 1 Cor. 12.3. Gal. 5.18, 22, 23,
24. 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephesians. 3.16. and 5.9, 18. 1 Pet. 1.2, 22. Romans 15.13, 16. Tit.
3.5. 4. The Law of Moses was kept and taught by Priests and Levites that
wrought not Miracles. 5. If the Laws of all Nations may be kept without
Miracles, so may the Laws of Christ. 6. If humane writings are kept without
Miracles, (as Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Cicero, Livy, etc.) so may the Laws of God
much more, as being the daily subject of the belief, meditation, conference,
preaching, controversies, devotions of Christians through the world, and
translated into so many Tongues. 7. There is nothing in the Nature of the thing
that requires ordinary Miracles. Cannot men sufficiently prove without
Miracles, that there have been such men as Caesar, Pompey, Aristotle, or which
be Calvin's or Bellarmines writings, etc. Much more evidently may they prove
what doctrine is essential to Christianity, and the Scripture that contains the
whole. 8. Else Parents could not teach their children, nor bring them up in the
Nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Nor teach them with Timothy, from
a child to know the Scriptures, which are able to make men wise to salvation
through faith in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15. Must no Parents teach their children to
know Christ, but such as can work Miracles? 9. The Doctrine which we preach is
fully confirmed by Miracles already, by Christ and his Apostles: There needs no
greater then Christ's own Resurrection, nor more then were done; which Universal
unquestionable History and Tradition has brought down to our hands. 10. It is
a ridiculous expectation, that every person should see the Miracles before they
do believe. Then if Christ had done Miracles before all Jerusalem, save one
man, that one man should not be bound to believe: Or if I could do miracles in
this Town or Country, none must believe me ever the more but those that see
it. And so you may as well say, I should not believe that there is any Sea or
Land, City or Kingdom, France, Spain, Rome, etc. but what I see. Are these men
worthy to be talked with? that believe no body, and confess themselves such
Liars that they would have no body believe them. It was not all that saw
Christ's Miracles or Resurrection, or the Apostles miracles! It seems the rest
were not bound to be Christians? Even as Clem. Writer told me, that no man is
bound to believe that Christ did Rise again, or the rest of Christianity, that
sees not Miracles himself to prove it: adding withal, that indeed Antichrist
may do Miracles; and so it seems for all the talk, miracles themselves would
not serve if they saw them. 11. Is it not to put a scorn on God Almighty, to
say that the Glory of all his most miraculous works should be buried to all
that saw them not; and that Parents should not tell them to their children, or
children should not believe them if they do? 12. Its injurious to Posterity,
that the knowledge of the most wonderful works of God shall be only for the
good of them that see them; and that all ages after shall be never the better.
13. It tends to make men mad and as Idiots, that must know and believe no more
then they see: what* kind of folks must these be? that know not that there is
either Prince or Parliament, City or Country, or any folks in the world but
those they have seen? This will not stand with trading, converse, Subjection,
Societies; and its doubtful whether such are capable of managing estates; or
should not be put under others as Idiots? 14. Children cannot learn to read nor
speak without some kind of belief of them that teach them: nor can they obey
their parents nor learn any trade: nor obey Physicians: so that this conceit of
incredulity is against the Nature, livelihood, and life of man. 15. And they
would tie God to be at the beck of every unreasonable Infidel that shall say, [
Though all the Town have seen thy Miracles, yet I will see my self, or else I
will not believe.] 16. They expect that God should overturn the course of
Nature: for if Miracles be as ordinary as the operations of Nature, they are
confounded. 17. And by this they would cross themselves, and make Miracles
uneffectual: For if they were ordinary, few would be moved by them as any proof
of a Divine Testimony: were it as ordinary for the Sun to go backward as
forward, who would take it for a Miracle? To this Clem. Writer answers me, that
[ Miracles were convincing in the first Age when they were common.] Answ. How
common? Not as natural operations: Nor so as for all Countries or persons to
see them; 500 saw Christ at once after his Resurrection: 5000. were once
miraculously fed: but as this was not every days work, so what was this to
others? And in that it was but for an age, and rarely in after ages, shows that
they were not for every man's eyes. 18. What need we more proof then actual
experience, that God does not often now work miracles! And he that says the
Gospel, and Christian faith, and Church, and Ministry are therefore ceased, its
like will not take it ill to be taken himself for an Heathen or Infidel. 19.
And we have experience of millions that still do actually and steadfastly
believe in Christ without Miracles: and many have laid down their lives on that
belief: therefore without miracles men may believe. But to this Clem. Writer
says to me, [ These believers of all sorts condemn each other as Heretics.]
Answ. But not as Infidels. None but the ignorant or passionate condemn all
other sorts as Heretics. The sober do not. And it is not enough to prove you a
bastard, if an angry Brother call you so. 20. Because this sheet allows me
not room, I entreat the Reader to peruse these Texts, which tell him aloud that
the word and works of God must be believed by Tradition, though without
Miracles, Exodus 10.1, 2. and 12.14, 17, 26, 27, 42. Deuteronomy. 11.2. to the 22. and
29.22. to 28. Josh. 4.6, 7. and 22.24. to 32. Psalm 48.13. and 78.1. to 9. and
102.18. and 145.4. and 89.1. Joel 1.2, 3, 4. Acts 1.8. and 2.32. and 5.30, 31,
32. and 10.38. to 42. and 13.30, 31. and 1.22. and 4.33. and 22.15. and 26.16.
and 23.11. 2 Timothy 2.2. John 20.29. and 19.35. and 15.27. and 12.17. and 5.33.
and 1.15, 32, 34. Luke 4.22. 1 Pet. 5.1. And that you would read my
Determination of this very Question, in my Book against Infidelity, I proceed
to the next.

Proposition 3. This ordinary Ministry for Teaching, Ruling, and Public
worship, was ordained by Christ* to continue till his coming, and does yet
continue, and did not cease when the extraordinary Ministry ceased. I prove it,
Matthew. 16.18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.] The Church never did nor can subsist without its
Officers, who are an Essential part of it, as it is a Political Body, and the
first and most eminent part, as it is a Community. And therefore if the
Ministry be extinct, the gates of hell have prevailed against the Church. And
then Christ is overcome, or has broke his Promise. And then he were not
Christ: so that if Christ be Christ, the Church and Ministry continue. So Luke
1.33. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end; Isa. 9.6, 7. Of the increase of his government and Peace there
shall be no end; Psalm 145.13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy
dominion endures throughout all generations. Christ rules by his Officers in
his Church. If Church or Ministry had an end, his Kingdom had an end, and he
reigned nor for ever, Matthew. 28.20. Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of
the world. To this express promise, Clem. Writer has no wiser an answer, but
that, [ It is conditional. If they teach men to observe all things that Christ
has commanded, then he will be with them, else not.] Repl. This is your
forgery: here is no such words; but an absolute promise. His being with them,
is to support and help them in his work. And will you feign Christ to promise
them help on condition they do it without? The further cavils against this Text
and others, the London Ministers in their Vindication have answered at large,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. The Pastors and Teachers are given to the Church for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the says, and of the
knowledge of the son of God to a perfect man, etc.] Extraordinary and ordinary
Officers are here conjoined, who between them are to perfect the building, the
first laying the foundation, and the others building thereon, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.
I give thee charge in the sight of God -- that thou keep this commandment
without spot, unrebukable, unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ] which
must needs extend to his successors. The faithful and wise stewards that give
the children their meat in due season, will be found so doing by the Lord at
his coming, Luke 12.42, 43. And it is not till the last day that Christ will
give up the Kingdom to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.25. 2. The Apostles actually
settled an ordinary Ministry in their time, as is proved. 3. There are commands
for settling successors of these, as 2 Timothy 2.2. Tit. 1.5. as is proved. 4.
These Ministers are described, and the way of their ordination settled by
Canons, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 5. We find the several Angels of the Churches in
their places, Revel. 2. and 3. and promises to some of them for the future,
with a command [ Hold fast till I come, 2.23.] and 3.10. [ I will keep thee
from the hour of temptation which shall come on all the world: Behold, I come
quickly.] 6. Christ has commanded the Ministerial work to continue to the end:
As the Preaching of the word must be to all Nations and every creature, Matthew.
28.19. Mark 16.15. And these most cruel men would have all the Preachers give
over their work, and leave the world to perish in Infidelity. So for the
Assembling of our selves together, and exhorting one another, we are commanded
not to forsake it, as is the manner of some, and so much the more, as we see
the day approaching, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. So that the nearer we are to Christ's
coming, the closer must we stick to Church Communion and holy Assemblies:
considering that its but a little while, and he that comes will come, and shall
not tarry: ver. 37. God does on purpose forbear his coming because he is long
suffering, and will continue the means to call men to repentance, and then the
day of the Lord will come suddenly, 2 Pet. 3.9, 10. [ The word of the Lord
endures for ever: and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached to you,
1 Pet. 1.25. The Lords Supper is Instituted to be used to show the Lords death
till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Church Government or Discipline is a fixed
Ordinance, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. And if the work continue, the workmen must
continue. 7. The mercy of God, and the Efficacy of Christ's blood, and the
necessities of the Church continue: we still need a Teaching Ministry, Heb.
5.11. and for our need it is Instituted till the Church be perfect, that we be
not as children tossed up and down, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. What enemies to us and to
the love and mercy of God are they that would persuade men that he so quickly
withdrew so great a mercy, when the gifts and calling of God are without
Repentance? 8. The Law and its Priesthood was not removed but by the Glory of a
better Law and Ministry: And Christ is the Mediator of a better Covenant and
Promises, Heb. 7.22. and 8.7, 8. Therefore he will not deal so much worse. 9.
Christ tells us that a wise man will consider whether he can go through with
it, before he build or make war? Therefore he would not himself begin to build
his Church, and enter himself the Captain of our Salvation, and presently let
his enterprise fall. 10. If the Ministry continue not, then the Church
continues not; for as the Head, Liver, and Stomach, or Lungs are to the body,
so is the ministry to the Church, 1 Cor. 12.13, 19, 20, 28, 29. They Plant and
water it, 1 Cor. 3.6. and build it, ver. 10. For how shall we believe on him of
whom we have not heard, and how shall we hear without a Preacher? and how shall
they preach unless they be sent? Romans 10.14. But the Church does continue: for
first, else Christ were no longer the Head of it, the King, Prophet, or Priest,
and so not Christ: But he is a Priest for ever, abiding continually: he
continues ever, and has an unchangeable Priesthood; he ever lives to make
intercession for those that come to God by him, Heb. 7.3, 22, 24, 25. 2. Those
that deny the Church, must needs deny themselves Christians and members of that
Church. 3. There is no Salvation promised but to the Church, Ephesians. 5.23, 25, 26,
27. Mark 16.16. 4. Blindness is on the Jews but till the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved: Therefore it is most
evident that the Gentile Church shall not cease till the fullness have prepared
for the re-ingrassing of the Jews, Romans 11.25, 26. 5. It is an everlasting
Kingdom, which cannot be moved, and the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, whereof even the Angels and perfected spirits of the just are a
part, to which we come by faith: therefore it cease not, Heb. 12.22, 23, 28.
6. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done
away, 1 Cor. 13.10 but not before. 11. If nothing can separate us from the love
of God, no not any distress or tribulation, then are not all the Ministers and
Church cut off, Romans 8.34. to 39. Yea, those that in all ages suffer for his
sake are not cut off from him: but so many faithful Ministers do. 12. But what
should I say any more against that assertion which carries stark Heathenism or
Infidelity in its forehead, reproaching Christ as no Christ, and teaching men
that they are not bound to be Christians, and believe the Gospel, and
persuading the world to despise Christ's messengers and Ordinances; and
Ministers to cast off their Masters work; which in two words is, to turn
Infidels, or Apostates. I must refer you for my fuller answer to such men, to
my Book against Infidelity.

Prop. 4. God has in his Law appointed a standing way for the calling of these
ordinary Teaching, Ruling, worshipping Ministers, in all ages; and does himself
call them in this way. 1. He Instituteth the Office. 2. He commands that fit
persons be ordained to this Office. 3. He describes them by their necessary
Qualifications. All this is at large, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. Act. 20. 1 Pet. 5. etc.
This is his work by his standing Law. By which also he commands the people to
choose, consent to, or accept the fit, and to hear and obey them, Acts 14.23. 2
These. 5.12. Acts 6.3, 5. Heb. 13.7, 17. And then by providence, 1. He gives
them those gifts of the Spirit that may competently qualify them for their
Office. 2. He assisteth the choosers and ordainers to discern those
qualifications, and do their duties. 3. He causes some special fitness of a
Minister to the special province or charge, which he is to undertake, and
special inviting occasions and opportunities, and oft-times causes Necessity
to make the choice. 4. He coweth the heart of the person called to consent, and
usually to desire the work, (for the right ends.) 5. And if he be called to be
the Pastor of a particular Church; he moves the people to consent or accept
him. And thus God according to his appointed Order does call his Ministers.
Besides which, he afterward 1. Helps them in his work 2. And procures them
liberty, and often furtherance from Christian Magistrates. 3. And gives them
success.

Proposition 5. The faithful Pastors of the Reformed Churches, are these
ordinary Ministers of Christ, approved by him, and given in great mercy to his
people, who are bound to know, honor and obey them in the Lord.

I exclude not all others, but I now prove that these are true Ministers.
Argument 1. They that have all that is essential to true Ministers, are true
Ministers: But such are these Pastors of the Reformed Churches: as I prove
thus: If the Office it self be of Gods Institution, and their Qualifications
competent, and their entrance right in every point of flat Necessity, then they
have all that is essential to true Ministers: But the former is true, as I
shall prove in the three several parts. 1. That the Office it self is of Gods
appointment, is proved fully before, and confessed by all Christians that ever
I knew, Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. 1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.7,
17, 24. Acts 20.28. 2. For Qualifications, they have 1. competent Knowledge, 2.
and Utterance, 3. and Godliness: and these are the Qualifications that God
accepts, 1 Cor. 12.8. 1 Timothy 2.15. 1 Timothy 5.17. Mark the Canons of the Holy
Ghost, 2 Timothy 2.2. They must be 1. Faithful men, 2. Able to teach others: But
such are those in Question, 1 Timothy 3. A Bishop must be blameless (that is, not
scandalous) the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given
to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of
filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not covetous, one that rules well
his own house, having his children in subjection, with all gravity.] To which
is added, Tit. 1.8, 9. A lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate,
holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers.] Let all here
Note, 1. That here is not only the mention of the Virtues necessary to the
Being, but to the well-being also of a Minister: 2. And yet through the great
mercy of God, all these are the Qualifications of multitudes of the Pastors of
the Reformed Churches, as malice it self must be forced to confess. But if any
deny it of any particular men, as that is nothing to the rest; so an unproved
accusation is not by honest men to be believed. The world knows that the Act
for rejecting scandalous, insufficient, negligent Ministers is very strict, and
Commissioners in each County forward to execute it, and Ministers have enemies
enough to search out their faults, and yet none are more forward then Ministers
themselves to have the act put in execution, so that their standing Justifies
them before the world: Or, if any will yet deny them the necessary
Qualifications, I here challenge and provoke them to accuse all that are
guilty, and cast them out; or else to confess themselves mere slanderers, and
backbiters, and learn more truth and modesty hereafter. 3. And for the third
point, their entrance into the Office: They have all that God has made
Necessary to a just entrance, as I prove: They that have a true Ordination, and
the Peoples consent, and the Magistrates allowance, have all that God has made
necessary to a just entrance, and more then all: But the said Pastors of the
Reformed Churches have true Ordination, and the Peoples consent, and the
Magistrates allowance: That they have true Ordination, I shall show anon in
answering all that can be said against it. The Peoples consent, by Electing, or
Accepting is known by the fact: and so is the Magistrates by Law and fact: I
put in all this* though more then necessary, that all Objections may be
satisfied at once: So that the Enumerations being unquestionable, the
conclusion is so to. In short: All those are true Ministers, that are in an
Office of Gods own Institution, and are competently fitted for that office by
Knowledge, Godliness, and Utterance, and have all, and more then all that God
has made necessary to a right entrance or admission, even true Ordination,
consent of the flock, and the Magistrates allowance. But such are the said
Pastors of the Reformed Churches, therefore they are true Ministers of Christ.

Argument 2. Those that have not only the essentials, but excel all other
Ministers on earth (that are known to the world) are certainly the true
Ministers of Christ. But such are the Ministers before mentioned of the
Reformed Churches, Ergo. This will be proved at once with the next, which is,

Argument 3. Either these Pastors of the Reformed Churches, are the true
Ministers of Christ, or else there are none such visible in the world: But
there are such visibly and certainly in the world, as was proved: Else there is
no Church, no Ordinances, no Christianity, no Christ: For he can be no King
without Subjects and Laws: no Master without a School and Scholars: no
Physician without Patients: no Husband without his Spouse: no Head without a
Body: no Intercessor without a Church to intercede for. And to Believe the holy
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, is part of our Belief and
therefore the Christian faith is gone if these be gone. And that either we, or
None are Christ's true Ministers, I prove thus: 1. We challenge the adversary to
name us the true Church and Ministry; if these be none of them, where be they,
and who are they? speak out, or give up your wicked cause. If you know not who
they be or where, then how know you that there are any such? True Ministers are
like a Light that shines to all the house, even the lights of the world, and
like a City on a hill that cannot be hid, Matthew. 5.14, 15, 16. 2. But let us
try the particulars: 1. The Seekers have no Church or Ministry. 2. The Quakers
have no Ordination, that we know of, and are every way so unworthy, and had no
being in the world till a few years ago, that he is either no Christian, or of
a crazed brain, that thinks Christ has no Church or Ministry but them. 3. The
Anabaptists, Socinians, Swenkfeldians, Familists, Paracelsians, Weigelians, and
such like, have no more to show for their Ministry and Churches then we, but
their errors; and are so few and so lately sprung up, that of them also I may
say, that he that takes them for the only Church, or Ministers, is either out
of the faith, or much out of his wits. 4. The Eastern and Southern Churches
have no more to show for their Ministry and Churches then we: but are
incomparably more ignorant., and erroneous: few of them doing more then Read
their Liturgies and Homilies, and so administer the Sacraments. 5. All the
controversy therefore lies between us and the Papists. Either they are true
Ministers and a Church, or not. If not, then its left to us. If they are, then
we are so much more. For we have much more unquestionable evidence of our
Title. 1. The Office of a T^aching, Guiding, worshipping Presbyter which we are
in, is beyond all question, and yielded by themselves, to be of Divine
Institution. But the office of a Mass-Priest, to make a god of a piece of
bread, and turn bread into flesh, so that there shall be Quantity, color,
taste, etc. without bread, or any subject; and a man's eyes, taste, or feeling
shall not know that its bread or wine, when we see, taste, and feel it; as also
to celebrate public worship in an unknown tongue; this Office is more
questionable then ours. 2. It remains a great doubt, whether the Pope be not
the Antichrist: but of our Ministry there is no such doubt. 3. For Knowledge,
Godliness and Utterance, and all true Ministerial abilities, as its well known
what an ignorant Rabble their common secular Mass-Priests are, so those
military Friars and Jesuits that are chosen of purpose to play their game
among us, and credit their cause: if they have any relics of truth or
modesty, will confess that the generality of our Ministers are much beyond
theirs for parts and Piety; or at least, that we cannot be denied to be true
Ministers for want of necessary Abilities: We should rejoice if their
Ministers, Priests, or Jesuits were near of such Piety as those of the
Reformed Churches. Some of their Jesuits and Friars are learned men: in which
also we have those that equal the best of them: but for the learning, ability,
or Piety of the common Ministers on both sides, there is no comparison to be
made. 4. All the Question then is of the way of entrance. And there 1. The
Papists seek not the Peoples consent so much as we do. 2. They despise the
Magistrates consent, in comparison of us. 3. And for Ordination, which is it
that all the stress must be laid on, we have it, and nearer the Rule of God
then they. Are (...) ordained with fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands? so
are we. M(...) it be by one of a superior Order? Who then shall Ordain or
consecrate the Pope? And yet a multitude of our Ministers are ordained (...)
Bishops, if that be necessary: But the great Objection is, that we have not an
uninterrupted succession from the Apostles, and so those that ordained us had
no Power; and therefore could not give it to us.

Proposition 6. The want of an uninterrupted succession, and so of Power in the
Ordainers does not disable our title to the Ministry, or set us in a worse
condition then the Papists. For if it be only the succession of possession of
the Office, there is no man of brains can deny, but we have an uninterrupted
succession down from the Apostles. But if it be a succession of Right
Ordination that is questioned, 1. The Papists have none such themselves. 2. We
have more of it then they. 3. It is not necessary that this be uninterrupted.
All these I prove: 1. The Popes themselves from whom their power flows, have
been Heretics, denied the immortality of the soul, Whoremongers, Sodomites,
Simonists, Murderers, so that for many of them successively the Papists confess
they were Apostatical, and not Apostolical: see in their own Writers the lives
of Silvest. 2. Alexand. 3 and 6. John 13. and 22. and: 23. Greg. 7. Urban. 7.
and abundance more. Joh. 13. was proved in Council to have ravished maids and
wives at the Apostolic doors, murdered many, drunk to the Devil, asked help at
dice of Jupiter and Venus: and was killed in the act of Adultery. Read the
proofs in my Book against Popery, page 269, 270, 255, 101. The Council at Pisa
deposed two Popes at once, called them Heretics departed from the faith. The
Council at Constance deposed Joh. 23. as holding that there was no eternal
life, immortality of the soul or Resurrection: The Council at Basil deposed
Eugenius 4. as a Simonist and perjured wretch, a Schismatic, and obstinate
Heretic. Now these men are incapable of the Ministry, as an Infidel is, for
want of Essential Qualifications: As Copper is no current coin, though the
stamp of the Prince against his will be put upon it: Undisposed matter cannot
receive the form. A fit man unordained is nearer the Ministry, then such a man
ordained. So that here was a Nullity. 2. And all the following Popes were the
successors of Eugenius, that was deposed and thus judged by a general Council;
but by force brought them to submit and held the place. 3. Either the Election,
Ordination, or both is it that gives them the Essence of their Papacy. If
Election, then there has been a long interruption: For somewhile the People
chose, and in other ages the Emperors chose, and in these times the Cardinals;
and therefore some of them had no lawful choice: And for Ordination, or
Consecration. 1. There have been three or four Popes at once, and all were
consecrated, that yet are now confessed to have been no true Popes. 2.
Inferiors only consecrated. 3. And such as had no power themselves. Besides
that, the Sea has been very many years vacant, and some score years the Pope
has been at Avignion, and had but the name of P. of Rome. And when three or
four have been Pope at once, Bellarmine confesses, learned men knew not which
was the Right, yea, General Councils knew not. The Council at Basil thought
Faelix the fifth was the right Pope, but it proved otherwise, so that many
palpable intercisions have been made at Rome.

2. Our Ordination has been less interrupted then theirs.

Object. But you are not ordained by Bishops. Answ. 1. Almost all in England
are till of late, if that will serve. 2. Presbyters may or^^^^ in case of
Necessity, as the generality of the old Episcopal men grant, and their
Ordination is not Null. 3. Presbyters have power to Ordain, and were restrained
only from the exercise by humane Laws, as many of the Schoolmen confess. 4.
Presbyters have still ordained with the Bishop: therefore they had authority to
it, and the work is not alien to their Function. 5. Our Parish Presbyters are
Bishops, having some of them Assistants, and Deacons under them. Or as Grotius
notes, at least, they are so, as being the chief Guides of that Church: Their
own Rule is, that every City should have a Bishop: and every corporation is
truly a City, (...), and therefore must have a Bishop. 6. The Jus Divinum of
Prelacy is lis sub judice. 7. Bishop Usher maintaining to me the validity of
the Ordination of the Presbyters without a Bishop, told me how he answered King
C. who asked him for an instance in Church History, viz. That Hierom ad Evag.
tells us of more; that the Presbyters of Alexandria, till the days of Heroclas
and Dionysius took one from among themselves, and made him Bishop: therefore
they may make a Presbyter, which is less. 8. Its at last confessed, that in
Scripture-times there were no Presbyters under Bishops, but the single Churches
had single Pastors. 9. No man can prove Ordination by fixed Bishops over many
Churches (now called Diocesan) in the first age: The fixed Bishops had no more
at first but single Churches. Object. But you never received power from the
Bishop to ordain: and therefore cannot have that which was never given you.
Answ. If they put men into that Office, to which God has affixed the power of
Ordination, then they do their part to convey the power. As if you marry a
couple, and express not the man's authority over the woman, yet he has it
nevertheless by being made her husband. So he that is made a Pastor in City or
Country, may do the work of a Pastor, though each particular was not named.

Proposition 7. Ordination is ordinarily necessary as a means of our right
entrance, but not absolutely necessary to the Being of our Office or Power. For
1. God, having already settled the Office, Duty, and Power, and what
Qualifications shall be necessary, and giving these Qualifications to men, he
has left nothing to man but mutual consent, and to judge of the person
qualified, and solemnly introduce him. 2. God has not tied himself or us
absolutely to the judgment of Ordainers. If a Bishop ordain a Heathen, or any
man void of essential Qualifications, its Null, as being against a flat command
of God: And if Bishops refuse to ordain us Pastors, the people must take them
without: because the command of Preaching, Hearing, Sacraments, etc. is greater
then that of Ordination, and before it. Positives yield to natural morals, and
matters of Order to the substance and end of the Duty ordered. See my Christian
Concord, page 82, 83, 84. 3. Ordination is no more necessary to the Ministry
then Baptism to Christianity. As those that are first Princes by Title, must be
crowned, and those that are Soldiers by contract, must be listed and take
colors, and those that are husband and wife by contract, must be solemnly
married, which are celebrating, perfecting actions; so they that are first
heart-Christians by Believing, or by parents Dedicating them to God, must be
solemnly entered under the hand of the Minister: And those that are by
approbation and consent initially Ministers, must by solemnization have the
Office publicly delivered them by the Ministers of Christ. So that as a man is
a Christian indeed before Baptism initially, and is justified initially before,
and in case of Necessity may be saved without it (the Papists confessing that
the vow will serve) so is it in the case of Ordination to the Ministry.

Proposition 8. It is only Christ and not the Ordainers, People or Magistrates
that give us our Office and Power: Only the people and approvers design the
person which shall receive it from Christ: and our own consent, and the peoples
is of necessity thereto (and our own much as theirs) and the Ordainers do
Instrumentally invest us in it: But the Power and Duty arise directly from Gods
Institution, when the person is designed. Now I proceed to prove our calling.

Argument 4. We have a far clearer Call then the Priests before Christ had to
the Priesthood: For they were not of the true Line: they bought the Priesthood:
they corrupted the Doctrine and worship, and were of wicked lives. And yet
Christ commanded submission to their Ministry, Ergo.

Argument 5. If we have as clear a call to our Office as any Magistrates on
earth have to theirs, then we are true Ministers of Christ. For they are true
Magistrates: and God is the Fountain of their power too: and its impossible
they should have any but from him. Or from him but by his means. Officers have
no power but from the Sovereign. The Prince was at first chosen by God,
immediately, as well as the Apostles were by Christ, yet no Prince can plead an
uninterrupted succession thence: And if they may Reign without it, we may be
Pastors without it: and yet I cannot say that we are without it, though Princes
be. Kings were formerly anointed by inspired Prophets, and were Prophets
themselves. And as the continuance of this is not necessary to them, so neither
to us. The differences between their power and ours, makes nothing against this
Argument: If conquest, or the peoples consent, or Birth, or directing
Providence can prove their Title, then Consent, Ordination, Providence, with
due Qualifications, will sure prove ours: were it not for fear, they should
soon hear the Arguments more set home against themselves, that are now bent
against the Ministers.

Argument 6. If besides all this God own us by such a blessing on our labors,
that he makes us the means of propogating and continuing his Gospel and
Church, and brings most of his chosen to Union with Christ, Reconciliation,
Holiness, and to Heaven by our Ministry, then certainly we are his true
Ministers; But experience assures us of the former: therefore -- so much for
Argument.

Proposition 9. If a Minister be in quiet possession of the place, and fit for
it, the people are bound to obey him as a Minister, without knowing that he was
justly ordained or called. Argum. 1. We must obey a Magistrate without
assurance of his call and title, Romans 13. therefore a Minister. 2. Christ
commanded hearing and obeying them that were not called as God appointed:
because they were Priests, or sat in Moses Chair, and taught the truth, Luke
16.29. Matthew. 23.2. Luke 5.14. Matthew. 8.4. Mark 1.44. 3. Else the people are
put upon Impossibilities: Can all the poor people tell before they submit to
Minister, what is essential to his call, and whether he have all that is so,
and whether his Orders be true or forged, and whether they that ordained him
were truly ordained, or chosen themselves? Not one of twenty thousand knows all
this by their Pastors.

Proposition 10. The Ordinances are valid to the people when the Minister is
uncalled and unordained, if they know it not: He that has no just call, shall
answer for what he does as an Intruder; but the people shall have for all that
the fruit of his ministration; and Preaching, and Baptism, and other acts shall
not be Null to them. 1. The Papists themselves confess this. 2. Else scarce a
man could tell whether he be baptized, or may use any Ordinance because he
cannot have an exact account of the Ministers call, no nor know that he is
indeed a Christian, I knew diverse in the Bishops days that forged themselves
Orders, and acted long before it was discovered. 3. It is the Office which is
Gods Ordinance, that is blessed, and valid to the people, and not his call only.
4. It is he that sins that must suffer, and not the Innocent; therefore his
sin depriveth them not of their due. 5. As an usurping Magistrate owes us
protection, though he shall answer for his usurpation: so an usurping Minister
owes us his labor; so that the people are bound to hear and obey men, when
they are uncertain of their due call, if they possess the place: and shall have
the blessing of such Administrations. For we are sure the Office and work is of
God.

Proposition 11. The truth of our doctrine depends not on our calling. Were we
no Ministers, we can prove the Gospel true which we deliver. And any man must
be believed, that brings a truth that concerns our peace. Therefore let
Quakers, and Seekers, and Papists first disprove our Doctrine if they can: and
not cheat the people by persuading them that our calling must first be proved;
as a Prophets must be.

Object. But you have your learning only from Books, and Universities: and so
have not true Ministers. Answ. We have it from God in the Use of his means,
even by Prayer, Reading, study, and learning his works and word of our
Teachers, whether at Universities or elsewhere. And we are commanded to study
and meditate on these things, and give our selves wholly to them, and to
meditate on Gods Law day and night, Psalm. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.15 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.
Christ's Ministers must be Teachers or Tutors to others, and commit the things
which they have heard to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also,
2 Timothy 2.2. Good Ministers of Christ are nourished up in the words of faith and
good doctrine, and so attain to it, 1 Timothy 4.6. All should learn according to
their time of teaching, Heb. 5.11, 12, 14. We study nothing but the Word, and
works of God: and is not that a wretch and not a man that will reproach us as
no Ministers, for doing that which we have our Reason for, and which must be
the work of our lives! Poor Christians, as you love God and your souls, and
would not cast off Christ and Heaven, let not Deceivers draw you to cast off
the Ministry, Scripture, or the Ordinances of God.

October. 23. 1657.

FINIS.

