Mr. BAXTER's VINDICATION OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND In her Rites and Ceremonies,
Discipline, AND CHURCH-ORDERS. As faithfully taken out of his own Writings,
without either false Citation, or fraudulent Alteration.

To which is prefixed: His Epistle to the Non-conformists: being a just and
true Abstract of his Book, Entitled, A Defense of the Principles of Love.

Schismatics are they who unwarrantably separate from those Churches in which
they ought to abide, that they may gather new Congregations after their mind.

Mr. Baxter' s Reasons of the Christian Religion, p. 472. No Christian must
pretend Holiness against Unity and Peace, and every tender Conscience should be
as tender of Church-division and real Schisms, as of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or
such other enormous sins.

Mr. Baxter' s Reasons of the Christian Religion, p. 485. LONDON. Printed for
Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

TO THE READER.
IT being evidently apparent, as in most other cases, so in our
Church-divisions, that a resolved prostration to the Authority, and a confident
adhaesion to the opinion of reputed-good men, does commonly seduce the
Populace, first into Prejudice, then into Parties, and so to a tenacious
obstinacy in Error. Hereupon one probable way of Rescue and Remedy is, to
propose to the wandering People the Documents of one whose Authority is great
among them; Therefore have I thought on the Oracle Mr. Baxter, who in this Book
( His Defense of the Principles of Love) is not more Antesignanus than
Eirenarches, prescribing very well for Peace and Church-union, as the ensuing
Treatise, especially the Epistle, shows. And to anticipate that prejudice and
mistakes which a thing of this nature is very liable to, let no man think it my
design to accuse Mr. Baxter of Self-contradiction, Inconsistency, etc. but that
it is merely for the conviction of those whom that learned Author calls Honest
erroneous Christians: and to let the World see that Mr. B. and other
Nonconformist Ministers, do not believe that intrinsic evil and sinfulness to
be in Conformity, which their unwary Followers are induced, or rather seduced
to believe; and that there is more extrinsick danger and heinous sinfulness in
their separation, than his honest erroneous Christians do imagine, that the
difference between Conformists and Non-conformists is very small, and (as Mr.
Baxter tells Mr. Bagshaw in his Defense) that Non-conformists do injure
Conformists and make the Case (of Conformity) more odious than it is. And to
obviate Objections, let it be noted,

2. That if here be found any small alteration in words, it is merely for the
sake of brevity and ease in reading, and no other than what does fairly consist
with, and not at all, pervert the sense and meaning of the first Author.

And since the renouncing of the Covenant, (which Non-conformists call the
great Mountain in the way) is now removed, if the more peaceable
Non-conformists have a mind to come into the conforming Churches, here is that
in this small Treatise will help a little to justify and encourage their
practice in so doing. What acceptance this poor thing will have, I am ignorant,
but not sollicitous, since the testimony of my Conscience is, that it is in
vindication of Truth, and defense of a good Cause; nor would I fear the success
much more than I do the acceptance, would the honest erroneous Christian read
it, with as little partiality and prejudice, as he would if coming from the
first Authors hand.

Mr. BAXTER's EPISTLE TO THE Non-Conformists, Being a just and true Abstract of
his Defense of the Principles of Love.
BRETHREN,
IT grieves me to the heart that neither Party, Page 18.
Conformable or Non-conformable, is more sensible of the sin and danger of our
distance (though I know that in both Parties there are many wise and holy
persons, who, I suppose, lament it more than I do.) It lays my soul in daily
lamentations to see how we run further from each other, to the apparent danger
of the Protestant Cause, and of the Kingdoms welfare, and of all the hopes of
our Posterity.

Part 1. page 49.
Our narrow Judgment draws many to think that it is the Interest of Religion now
in England to have the Parish-Churches brought low in reputation, and deserted,
and God's public worship which they would have all religious People use, to be
only that of tolerated, or more private Churches, by which they little know
what they wish against the Interest of the Christian and Protestant Religion in
this Land, and what hurt they would do, if in this they had their wills.

Par. 1. page 36.
The Interest of the Christian Protestant Religion must be kept up, by keeping
up as much Truth, Piety, and Reputation, as may be, in the Parish-Churches.

Part. 1. page 56. The public to be preferred before the private: and come to
the beginning of Common Prayer.
I am very glad that the pious Lectures of Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Rogers, and such
other old Non-conformists, are in so good esteem among good people, where they
will read them urgeing the people, not only against Separation, but to come to
the very beginning of the public Worship, and preferring it before their
private duties. And I need not tell those that have read the Writings of the
good old Non-conformists, Part. 2. p. 176. Common Prayer preferred before all
private duties.
Ames, Parker, Bains, Fox, Dearing, Greenham, etc. that these did some of them
read the Common Prayer, and most of them judged it lawful to join in it, or
else Mr. Hildersham, Rogers, etc. would not write so earnestly to men to come
to the beginning, and prefer it before all private duties.

When I think what learned, holy, part. 1. p. 97. The heinousness of
Separation, in consideration of those excellent persons that they separated
from 1. the old Conformists* 2. the present Conformists.
incomparable men, abundance of the old Conformists were, my heart rises
against the thoughts of separating from them; If I had come to their Churches
when they read the Common Prayer and administered the Sacrament, could I have
departed and said, It is not lawful for a Christian here to communicate with
you. What! Such men as Mr. Bolton, Mr. Whateley, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Crook, Mr.
Dent, Mr. Dike, Mr. Stock, Mr. Smith, Dr. Preston, Dr. Sibbs, Dr. Tailor, and
abundance other such; yea, such as Bishop Jewel, Bishop Grindall Bishop Hall,
Bishop Potter, Bishop Davenant, Bishop Carleton, etc. yea, and the Martyrs too,
as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrar, Bradford, Philpot, Sanders, Part. 1. p.
12.13.
etc. I think not my self worthy to be compared with Mr. Bolton, Whateley,
Fenner, Preston, Sibbs, White, Field, Usher, Jewel, and abundance other old
Conformists; and you might forgive me, if I tell you again, that if they were
all alive, and used now the same Liturgy and Ceremonies as they did then, I
could not find in my heart to think their communion in Prayer and Sacrament
unlawful, nor to censure that man as injurious to the Church, who should write
to persuade others not to separate from them on that supposition, I am sure the
Assembly of Divines that sat heretofore at Westminster, were so conformable
when they went thither, that I never heard of five Non-conformists among them,
except the five dissenting Brethren; their Judgment was (as Mr. Sprints) that
Conformity was lawful in case of necessity, rather than to be deprived of
Liberty to preach the Gospel.

Part. 1. p. 10, 11, 12.
And as for the present Conformists, I know those of them, whom I think as
godly and humble Ministers [ N.B.] as most of the Non-conformists, whom I know
-- and as my acquaintance increases I know more and more; -- And I tell you
again, that I believe there are many hundred godly Ministers in the Parish
Churches of England, and that their Churches are true Churches. Part. 1. p. 40.
Mr. Baxter dares not go against his Conscience in not taking the Sacrament at
his Parish Church.
And for my part I forbore communion with the Parish Churches in the Sacrament
a long time, yet at last I saw that the reasons seemed to me to cease, and I
durst not go against my Conscience, for I knew not what.

Part. 1. p. 16, 68, 69.
But O that you would yet consider how much defect of love and patience there is
in you as well as others, How easily can we aggravate the faults of others, and
how hardly can we aggravate or see our own! The defects of the Liturgy, and the
faults of those by whom we suffer, are easily heightened even beyond desert, but
when many of us vend untruths and slanders against our Brethren about the Land,
who aggravates this, or repents of it? But above all I entreat the dividing
Brethren, if they can so long lay by their partiality, to judge by this of the
reasons of their separation from those Churches private or parochial, that they
differ from in tolerable things. You think it a sin to communicate in a Church
where the Liturgy is used, and where Discipline is not so strictly exercised
against some Offenders, as you and I desire. But public multiplied untruths in
men's mouths, do never make you scruple their communion. I entreat you do but
study an answer to one that would separate from you all upon such grounds as
these. First for the Sin, The Separatists that are so scrupulous about Church
communion, make no conscience of greater sins.
consider of these Texts, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report, etc.
Ephesians. 4.31. Let evil speaking be put away from you. J^mes 4.11. Speak not evil
one of another, etc. Tit. 3.1, 2. Prove. 25.23. Pet. 1.2, 1. etc. Have you more
or plainer Texts of Scripture against the Common Prayer than these are against
Slandering, etc. Now suppose one should say that a People of such sin as this,
should not be communicated with, what answer will you give to this, which will
not confute your own objections against communion with many Parish-Churches in
this Land. God hates every disorder in extemporate Prayer, Part 1. p. 84.
and yet he more hates that censoriousness and curiosity which would draw men
to forsake the substantials of Worship or Christian love and communion on that
pretense. If Christians should plead Gods jealousy about his Worship, as
censoriously against their own prayers, as they do against other men's, and
Churches in this case, they would turn prayer into the fuel of despair and
torment.

The evil of ^eparation. Part 1. p. 2, 3.
If Paul thought his Galatians foolish and bewitched, and his
Corinthian-Christians to be Babes, yea carnal, and not spiritual, because there
were among them (...), envyings, Mr. Baxter ^ounts Sepa^^tists no better than
foo^^sh and be^itched ^abes, carnal and not spiri(...)al.
strife, and divisions, or as the words signify, zeal, or aemulation, strife
and separation, factions and dividings in several Parties; while one says I am
of Paul, another I am of Apollo, what wonder if we are no better now. I will
not pretend Conscience for the defiling of my Conscience, and the forsaking the
sacred life of love. Do not you your selves condemn a carnal state? Remember
then that they are carnal, who are contentious dividers in the Churches: 1 Cor*
1, 2, 3. You will join with me in disallowing a fleshly life; Remember then
that the works of the flesh are these, as Adultery, Fornication, etc. so also
Hatred (or Enmities) Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, ((...)
dividing into Parties) etc. I know you will confess, that if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. Remember then that the
Spirit of Christ is the Spirit of Love, that the fruit of the Spirit is love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, etc. Gal. 5.20.

Old Mr. Wilson Pastor of Boston, being desired by the Elders of the Churches,
Part.2. p. 155. Separation and Koraism provoking sins.
assembled at his house, that (on his dying-bed) he would declare solemnly to
them, what he conceived to be those sins which provoked the displeasure of God
against the Country, told them, that he had long feared these sins following,
as chief among others, which God was greatly provoked by, 1. Separation, 2.
Anabaptistry, 3. Koraism, when People rise up, as Korah, against their
Ministers and Elders, as if they took too much upon them, when indeed they do
but rule for Christ, and according to Christ: and so for the Magistrates being
Gallio-like, not caring for these things, or not using their power and
authority for the maintenance of the Truth, and Gospel, and Ordinances, etc.

Here he speaks particularly to Mr. Bagshaw. Part 2. p. 6, 7.
Alas (dear Brother) that after so many years silencing and affliction, after
Flames and Plagues, and dreadful Judgments, after twenty years practice of the
sin it self, and when we are buried in the very ruins which it caused, we
should not yet know that our own uncharitable divisions, alienations, and
Separations, are a crying sin, yea the crying as well as the uncharitableness
and hurtfulness of others. Alas, will God leave Us, even Us also to the
obdurateness of Pharaoh? Is there not crying sin with Us? What have we done to
Christ's Kingdom, to this Kingdom, to our Friends, to our selves, and (alas) to
our enemies, by our Divisions? and do we not feel it, do we not know it? Woe to
us! into what hard-heartedness have we sinned our selves?

Part 1. p. 60. The sad effects of Church-divisions.
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Augustine, Theodoret, beside the rest, do sadly tell us
in their Catalogues and Controversies, how lamentably these Dividers then
hindered the Gospel, and distressed and dishonored the Church: And the sad
stories of Holland, Munster, and others in Germany, Poland, and especially
these twenty years past in England, do bring all closer to our sense. The
dissolution of the separated Churches of the English in the Low Countries, Part
2. p. 175.
by their own divisions, is a thing too well known to be concealed.

Brethren -- I know that our division gratifieth the Papists, Part 1. p 17. The
present separation a promoting cause of Popery, and greatly hazards the
Protestant Religion, advantageth profaneness, etc.
and greatly hazardeth the Protestant Religion, and that more than the most of
you seem to believe or regard. I know that our division advantageth
Profaneness, and greatly hinders the success on both sides, I know that it
greatly pleases Satan, and builds up his Kingdom, and weakeneth the Kingdom
of our Lord; his own mouth has told us so. I foresaw, that while we worried
and weakened one another, Papists were like to be the principal gainers: and
they would be ready to offer their service to strengthen one of the Parties
against the other, and would be glad to take up the reproaches against the most
religious people, that were by angry Adversaries brought unto their hands. Part
1. p. 32.
And that when we had made our selves the common scorn by our manifold
divisions, and by our biting and devouring one another, they would plead this
as their shame, to draw People to themselves, as the only stable and,
consistent Church; and would make us giddy, that we may rest on them, as our
Supporters, and when they saw us weak, would, be ready to devour us all.

Part 1. p. 52. The manner how Popery will grow out of our divisions.
Three ways especially will Popery grow out of our divisions:

1. By the odium and scorn of our disagreements, inconsistency and multiplied
Sects; they will persuade people, that we must either come for unity to them,
or else all run mad, and crumble into dust and individuals. Thousands have been
drawn into Popery and confirmed in it already by this Argument, and I am
persuaded that all the Arguments in Bellarmine, and all other Books that ever
were written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the
multitude of Sects among us: Yea some Professors of religious strictness, of
great esteem for godliness, have turned Papists themselves when they were giddy
and weary with turnings, and when they had run from Sect to Sect and found no
consistency in any: And,

2. Who knows not how fair a Game the Papists have to play by the means of our
divisions. Methinks I hear them hissing on each Party, and saying to one side,
Lay more upon them, and bate them nothing, and to the other, Stand it out, and
yield to nothing. And who is so blind then, as not to see their double game and
hopes ( viz.) that either our divisions and alterations will carry men to such
distances and practices, as shall make us accounted seditious, rebellious, and
dangerous to the public Peace; and so they ( i.e. Papists) pass for better
Subjects than we; or else that when so many Parties under sufferings are
constrained to beg for Liberty, the Papists may not be shut out alone, but have
toleration with the rest. And shall they use our hands to do their work? We
have already unspeakably served them in this.

And 3. It is not the least of our danger, (nor which does least affect me)
lest by our follies, extremities, and rigours, we should so exasperate the
common People, as to make them readier to join with the Papists than with us,
in case of any competitions, or their invasions, or insurrections against the
King and Kingdoms peace. -- Let us do nothing by unlawful alienations and
singularities, or fierce and disobedient oppositions, which tend to make the
People think better of Papists than of us.

In the Year 1634. Mr. Roger Williams Assistant to Mr. Ralph Smith Pastor of
Plymouth, The present Separation promoteth Anabaptistry, Quakerism, etc.
removed from thence to Salem, where in one years time he filled the place with
principles of rigid Separation, and tending to Anabaptistry. The prudent
Magistrates of the Massachusetts jurisdiction, sent to the Church of Salem,
desiring them to forbear calling him to Office; which they not hearkening to,
he proceeded more vigorously to vent many dangerous opipinions, as, that the
Magistrate had nothing to do in matters of the First Table, but only the
Second, and that there should be a general and unlimited toleration of all
Religions; and for any man to be punished for any matters of his Conscience,
was persecution: That if the Church of Salem would not separate, not only from
the Churches of England, but of New England too, he would separate from them.
The more prudent part of the Church being amazed at his way, would not yield to
him; whereupon he never came to the Church-Assembly more, professing separation
from them as Antichristian. Diverse of the weaker sort of Church Members did by
degrees fall off to him, insomuch that he kept a meeting in his own house, unto
which a numerous company did resort, -- Whereupon he was banished the
Massachusetts Colonie, and came to a place called Providence, was followed by
many of the Church of Salem, who zealously adhered to him, and cried out of the
persecution that was against them; others resorted to them from other places.
They had not been there long, but from rigid Separation, they fell to
Anabaptistry, [ N.B.] renouncing their Baptism received in Infancy, and taking
up another Baptism, and so began a Church in that way. But Mr. Williams stopped
not there long, for after some time he told the people that followed him, that
he was out of the way himself, and had misled them; for he did not find that
there were any upon Earth that could administer Baptism, and therefore their
last Baptism was a nullity as well as their first; and therefore they must lay
down all, and look for the coming of new Apostles; and so they dissolved
themselves and and turned Seekers.

To which I add, Mr. Baxters addition to this History.
that this man was one of the greatest Instruments, after all this, of
sublimating the English Separation to the same height, and gratifying the
Papists by raising up the Sect of Seekers.

And sad, Part 2. p. 175
sad indeed was the case of the Barmuda's, when in so disciplined a Plantation,
one Minister turned away the greater part from Church Communion, till they
became Aliens -- and the rest whom he gathered as the only worthy persons, so
many turned Quakers, Seekers, and such like.

Part 1. p. 50.
The case of three or four Churches in New England grieves my heart, but the
case of the Summer-Islands, as related to me by Mr. Vaughan, a worthy Minister,
lately discouraged and come from thence, would make a Christian heart to bleed,
to hear how strict, and regular, and hopeful that Plantation once was, and how
one godly Minister by Separation, selecting a few to be his Church, and
rejecting all the rest from the Sacrament, the rejected Party are grown to
doleful estrangedness in Religion, and the selected Party much turned Quakers,
and between both, how woeful are the Fruits!

But the case of England, Scotland, and Ireland (which I foretold in my Book of
Infant Baptism) is yet a more lamentable proof, what Separation has done
against Religion, so full a proof, that it is my wonder that any good man can
overlook it.

Part 1. p. 49.
Yea, before our eyes, the most pernicious Heresies, even that of Quakers, are
still not only continued, but increased; and we see men that to day condemn
communion with the Parish-Churches, and then with the Presbyterians, do shortly
fly from communion with the Independents too --. It Is commonly known how many
of late have turned Quakers, and shall we stand by and see such work and
neither lament their sins that drive men to this, nor warn them of the passions
and principles that lead to it. Separation will ruin the separated Churches
themselves at last, it will admit of no consistency; Parties will rise in the
separated Churches, and separate again from them, till they are dissolved. I
beseech my dear Brethren that are otherwise minded, to open their eyes so far
as to regard experience.

I am not able to bear the thoughts of Separating from almost all Christ's
Churches upon Earth; but he that separateth from one, Part 1. p. 54.
or many upon a reason common to almost all, does virtually separate from
almost all* and he that separateth from all among us upon the account of the
unlawfulness of our Liturgy, and the badness of all our Ministry, does separate
from them upon a reason common to almost all, or the far greatest part (as I
conceive*). Therefore pray we;

Mr. Baxters Prayer.
Part 2. p. 150.
O That the God of love would pity and undeceive the selfish and passionate
sort of professed Christians, and teach them to know what manner of spirits
they are of! O that he would rebuke the evil spirits that are gone forth; the
Spirit of Covetousness and Pride; the Spirit of Hypocrisy and religious
Imagery, of Self-conceitedness, of Malice and Wrath, of Back-bitings and
False-accusing, before that both Christianity and Humanity be turned into
Devillism, and before Earth be more conformable to Hell! O that the Spirit of
Light would make us of one mind, and the Spirit of Love would mortify both
men's malignant and religious passions, contentiousness and malice, and cause us
to love our Neighbors as our selves! That as the Envious and striving Wisdom
from beneath has caused Confusion, and every evil work; so the Wisdom from
above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
might bring forth mercy and good fruits, without partiality or hypocrisy, that
we might edify the body of Christ in love, Ephesians. 4.16. and frustrate the hopes
of the enemies of our peace, who wait for our total dissolution, and triumph
already in our Divisions, (when it is their own Mill which grindeth us to
Powder) but God can make their Oven to bake us into a more Christian and
salubrious consistency, (that I may use Ignatius's Allegory) but it must be
first by fermenting us with unfeigned love, and then we shall be lovely in his
sight, and the God of love and peace will be with us. Amen.

Mr. BAXTER's VINDICATION OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND In her Rites, and
Ceremonies, Discipline, AND CHURCH-ORDERS.
1. Standing up at the Creed and the Antiphones.
Mr. Baxter's Scripture Proof of Infant-Church-membership. Part. II. cap. 6. p.
121.
I Humbly propound (meaning to the Assembly of Divines) that the Custom of
standing up at the Creed, may be reduced to its Primitive nature and vigor [
i.e. as it is now in use in the Church of England; it being then quite out of
use.) And in the next Page he reckons this among one of those five plain
Duties, which he says must not be wiped out, lest the Directory be found more
defective than the Common Prayer Book.

In his Sacrilegious Desertion of the Ministry Rebuked,] he says, that the
Conformists in standing up at the Antiphones, (viz. Gloria Patri, Te Deum,
Jubilate, etc.) do better than the Non-conformists in not standing up.

2. Episcopal Confirmation.
Scripture Proof of Infant-Church-membership, Part. II. cap. 6. p. 120.
I humbly propound (says Mr. Baxter) that the ancient practice of Confirmation
may be reduced to its primitive nature ( i.e. as it is now used in the Church of
England) as plainly appears by his calling it (in the same page) The old Order
of Confirmation by Bishops: For this he cites Calvin as earnestly desiring it,
Instit. l. 4. cap. 19.

In the 122. page, he intimates Confirmation also to be one of those plain
Duties not to be wiped out, lest the Directory be found more defective than the
Common*Prayer-Book, and left the World be made believe that it is such things (
i.e. such plain Duties) as these that we find fault with. He adds, that since
there are so many learned and judicious opposers, (meaning the Episcopal
Divines) observing the alterations, therefore (says he) it is but modest and
rational to desire, either the establishment of the forementioned particulars,
viz. Confirmation, Standing up at the Creed, etc. or the publication of
satisfactory Reasons against them.

And in his Political Apherisms, These. 236. Let Ministers (says he) be
restrained by Law, from admitting the uncatechised and unconfirmed to
Communion, (intimating very well, that he would have them looked upon as
excommunicate persons that refuse to be chatechised and confirmed:) to which he
prefixeth, that if Magistrates force not the grossly ignorant to hear and learn,
and submit to chatechising, and such means of instruction, till they are
confirmed, their Baptism will but let in corruption and confusion into the
Churches. He has in his Treatise of Confirmation, p. 206, 307, 208. and alibi,
soundly asserted the cause of Conformity in this point, which his deluded
Followers do so profanely and scornfully, not only neglect, but contemn and
deride. Nor can I find that ever Mr. Baxter found much fault with the manner of
its Administration, as now in the Church of England. If he would have every
Parish-Minister invested with the power of Confirming, it is no more than what
the Canons of the Church allow, if the Bishop think fit, ( the Bishop or
Suffragan, says the 60. Canon.) Every Parish-Minister may be made a Suffragan,
if the Bishop so please.

3. Church-Musick by Organs, or such like Instruments.
In his Christian Directory, Ecclesiastical Cases. Q. 86.
Mr. Baxter renders these five Reasons for the Use and Lawfulness thereof.

1. God set it up long after Moses's Ceremonial Law, by David, Solomon, etc.

2. It is not merely an instituted Ceremony, but a natural help to the Minds
alacrity; and it is a duty, and not a sin to use the helps of Nature and lawful
Art: As it is lawful (says he) to use Spectacles in reading the Bible, so it is
to use Music (speaking of Church-Musick) to exhilarate the Soul.

3. Jesus Christ joined with the Jews that used it.

4. No Scripture forbids it, therefore it is not unlawful.

5. Nothing can be against it, that I know of, but what may be said against
Tunes and Melody; for whereas they say, it is humane invention, so are our Tunes
(Meter and Version:) nay, it is not a humane invention, as the last Psalm, and
many others show, which call us to praise the Lord with Instruments of Music.

The last Book he has printed (that I know of) viz. Poetical Fragments has in
its Preface more to the same purpose.

4. Godfathers and Godmothers.
Infant-Church-membership, p. preliminary to the Epistle.
Mr. Baxter there tells us, that the current consent of Historians assures us
of the use of Godfathers and Godmothers at the Baptizing of Infants in
Hyginus's time, who lived (as he alleges from Nicephorus, Paraeus, Prideaux,
and others) within about 40 Years of S. John the Apostle, and conversed with
the Disciples and Familiars of the Apostles, and therefore (says he) could not
be ignorant of the practice of the Apostles in Baptizing Infants. Thus has he
well proved the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, in all probability to be
Apostolical, at least, (...), and beyond all reach of scruple, to be of
greatest antiquity in the Church, viz. forty years within the Apostles times.
Yet this is that some of the Non-conformists have called one of the hardest
points in Conformity.


5. The Antiphones, or the Peoples bearing a Part with the Minister in Divine
Service.
Christian Direct. Cases Ecclesiast. Q. 83.
1. Says Mr. Baxter, the Scripture no where forbids this.

2. If the People may do this in the Psalms in Meter, there can be no reason
given, but they may lawfully do it in Prose.

3. The Primitive Christians, (says he) were so full of the zeal and love of
Christ, that they would have taken it for an injury, or quenching of the
Spirit, to have been wholly restrained from bearing a Part in the Praises of
the Church.

4. The use of the Tongue keeps awake the mind, and stirs up God's Graces in
his Servants.

5. It was the decay of Zeal in the People that first shut out Responses: while
they kept up the ancient zeal, they were inclined to take their part vocally in
the worship. Thus Mr. Baxter, with more to the same purpose in the place above
cited.

6. Bowing at the Name of JESUS.
Christian Directory Cases Ecclesiastical. Q. 86.
That we may lawfully express our reverence by bowing when the Names [GOD,
JEHOVAH, JESUS, etc.] are uttered, I have met with few Christians that deny,
nor know I any reason to deny it; it is true, he speaks of it as equally lawful
in it self to bow to the Name JEHOVAH, GOD, etc. as well as JESUS, but nothing
at all against the lawfulness of bowing at the name of JESUS.

7. It is certain from God's Word, that the Child so Baptized, dying before it
commit actual sin, is undoubtedly saved.
Mr. Baxter in his Plea for Peace makes angry exception against this in the
Rubric after Baptism, as one one of those things which it is sinful to assent
to; though whoever reads his Scripture Proof of Infants Church Membership, will
find it none of his (...),that Children (indefinitely, and in materia
necessaria, as will appear by and by) are holy by stated separation to God; and
that all Children of Believers, (whether sincere or hypocrites, if they are
Believers professedly) are undoubtedly saved, and we baptize the Children of no
others than of Believers, professedly at least. For this see in his

Scripture Proof of Infants Church Membership: His Animadversions on Mr.
Bedford's Tratise of Baptismal Regeneration.

P. 315. Speaking of Baptism, he has these words; The third Edition.
For the pardon of Original Sin, and other relative Grace, I affirm that we are
to judge it probably given to the Child of every Believer, and if any will say,
it is certainly given to every such Child, even the Non-Elect, I will not
gainsay him. These are his words ipsissime, which fully and plainly import that
the Children of Non-Elect Believers, ( i.e. Believers in profession only,) do
by Baptism receive remission of Original sin, and other relative Grace; whether
it be on the account of the Faith of the Church in which he is baptized, or of
the bare profession of the Parents Faith, is excentrick to my business to
dispute. To proceed; In the same page last cited, says Mr. Baxter, God has
clearly made the Parents Faith the condition of Infants pardon and salvation.
What Faith, and what Parents? Why, professedly-believing Parents, and the bare
profession of Faith. For which see his Infant Church Membership, Part. 1. cap.
29. p. 94. Profession (says he) is a probable sign, and a Professor is probably
a true Believer; and whether he be so or no, we are bound to admit him among
Believers; and p. 92. it is sufficient that the Parent be virtually and
dispositively a Believer, (in contradistinction to his being actually such,)
and in his Letter to Mr. Cranford, Is it not a large comfort to Parents (says
he) that God does pardon Infants their Original sin, and put them in statum
salutis; but what I first quoted of him, is instar omnium, viz. that the
Children even of the Non-Elect, have pardon of sin, and other relative grace by
Baptism.

8. Kneeling at the Sacrament.
Christian Directory, Cases Ecclesiastical. 98.
Had I my choice, says Mr. Baxter, I would receive the Lords Supper sitting,
but where I have not my choice, I will use the gesture which the Church uses.
There speaks an Oracle; good Reader, mark him; What could be said more Orthodox
and honest? And because he speaks so home in this one place, I Will forbear
citing those in his Cure of Church-divisions; and in his Reasons of the
Christian Religion, where in the one place he calls Kneeling an inoffensive
harmless Ceremony; in the other, he teaches that Vesture, Gesture, Time,
Place, etc. are all at the determination of the lawful Magistrate.

9. Episcopacy is Apostolical, and of Divine Institution.
Christian Directory, Cases Ecclesiastical. Q. 56. p. 127.
Having proved the particular Orders of Presbyters and Deacons, he gives his
Reasons for a larger Episcopacy, as the Margin shows;

Besides this, says he, in the Apostles days there were under Christ in the
universal Church many general Officers, that had the care of governing and
overseeing Churches up and down, and were fixed by stated relation, to none.
Such were the Apostles, Evangelists, and many of their Helpers in their days.
And most Christian Churches think, that though the Apostolical, extraordinary
Gifts, Privileges, and Offices cease, yet Government being an ordinary part of
their work, the same Forms of Government which Christ and the Holy Ghost did
settle in the first Age, were settled for all following Ages, though not with
the same extraordinary Gifts and Adjuncts.

Because 1. We read of the settling of that Form, viz. General Officers as well
as Particular, but we never read of any abolition, discharge, or cessation of
the Institution.

2. If we affirm a Cessation without proof, we seem to accuse God of
mutability, as settling one Form of Government for one Age only, and no longer.

3. We leave room for audacious Wits to question other Gospel-Institutions, as
Pastors, Sacraments, etc. and to say, that they were but for an Age only.

4. It was general Officers that Christ promised to be with to the end of the
World, Matthew. 28.20. Now, says he, this will hold good, or not; if not, then
this General Ministry is to be numbered among humane additions, to be next
treated of. If it do, then there is Diocesan Episcopacy.
another part of the Form of Government ( i.e. distinct from that of Presbyters
and Deacons) proved to be of Divine Institution. I say not another Church, but
another part of the Government of both Churches universal and particular,
because such general Officers are so in the universal, as to have a general
oversight of the particular. As an Army headed only by the General himself,
and a Regiment by the Colonel, and a Troop by the Captain; but the general
Officers of the Army, as the Lieutenants General, and Majors General, etc. are
under the Lord General, in and over the Army, and have a general oversight over
the particular Bodies, (Regiments and Troops.)

Now if this be the instituted Form of Christ's Church Government, that he
himself rule absolutely as General, and that he have some general Officers
under him, (not any one having the charge of the whole, but in the whole
unfixedly, or as they voluntarily part their Provinces) and that each
particular Church have their own proper Pastor, one or more; then who can say
that no Form of Church Government is of Divine Appointment or Command.

Thus Mr. Baxter (...), solidly proving the Divine Institution of Diocesan
Episcopacy, and sufficiently confuting all that he has so passionately wrote
against the Order of Bishops, and the Constitution of National Churches.

10. The Oath of Priests and Deacons for Canonical Obedience to their Diocesan.
Christian Directory, Cases Ecclesiastical. Q. 122.
The old Non-conformists, says he, who thought the English Prelacy an unlawful
Office, yet maintained that it is lawful to take the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, because they thought it was imposed by the King and Laws; and that
we swore to them not as Officers, claiming a divine right in the Spiritual
Government, but as Ordinaries or Officers made by the King, to exercise so much
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under him, as he can delegate. -- And if Prelacy
were proved never so unlawful, no doubt but by the Kings command we may swear,
or perform formal Obedience to a Prelate, as he is the King's Officer. Thus Mr.
Baxter; though in Plea this is in the enumeration of those things which he says
it is sinful to conform to. And here note that this concession of Mr. Baxter
speaks it lawful to swear Obedience, not only to the Bishop, but also to the
Chancellor, to the Bispops Officials, etc. because they are the Kings Officers:
though the Oath of Canonical Obedience requires no such thing, but to the
Bishop only and his chief Ministers.

11. The Surplice.
His Five Disputations, p. 409.
Some decent Habit is necessary, the Magistrate, Ministers, or associated
Pastors must determine what, -- If they tie all to one habit (and suppose it
were an indecent habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of power, it is a
thing within the Magistrates reach, he does not an alien, but his own work
amiss: And therefore the thing in it self being lawful, I would obey him, and
use that Garment, if I could not be dispensed with; yea though secondarily the
whiteness be to signify purity, and so be made a teaching sign, yet would I
obey.

12. The Cross at Baptism.
Christian Directory, Cases Ecclesiastical, Q. 113.
Mr. Baxter does there allow of the Sign of the Cross to be used out of
Baptism, before a Heathen, which shows that he does not believe the use of the
Cross to be simply and of it self unlawful.

That which Non-conformists urge for the unlawfulness of it, is its being
forbidden in the second Commandment, as a transient Image, and its being made a
Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace; whereas if it were either of these, it
would be so at other times as well as after Baptism; for the time or place
wherein it is used, cannot alter the nature of the thing. So that from Mr.
Baxter's own concession may be reasonably inferred the lawfulness of its use;
but in his 123. p. he is more positive.

Quest. May one offer his Child to be baptized with the sign of the Cross, or
the use of Chrism, the white garment, etc.?

Ans. When he cannot lawfully have better, he may and must offer his Child to
them that will so baptize him, rather than to do worse, or not at all; because
Baptism is God's Ordinance and the Child's Privilege, and the Sin the Ministers
and not his.

Mr. Baxter has a frequent distinction of Conformity into an Old and New. By
the Old Conformity he means those points of Conformity which were in being, and
were taken for Conformity-points, before the last Act for Uniformity was made,
and were there no more required now than Conformity to those points, he says,
many of the Nonconformists would conform. The New Conformity, which he seems to
say most stick at, is differenced from the old in the accession of these two
points in chief, Reordination and Renouncing the Covenant, of both which Mr.
Baxter has sufficiently asserted the lawfulness.

13. Reordination.
Christian Directory, Cases Ecclesiastical. Q. 21.
Mr. Baxter there grants, that the outward part of Ordination may be repeated:
Which I take to be a full and plain concession of the whole, for in
Reordination there is nothing repeated but the outward part, or Ceremony of
Investiture.

14. Renouncing the Covenant.
Plea for Peace. p. 213.
It is not in the Subjects power, by Vows to withdraw themselves from obedience
to Authority.

Directory, Sect. 43. A Vow is as null, says Mr. Baxter, when the matter is
morally or civilly out of our power; as if a Child or Servant vow a thing which
he cannot do lawfully without the consent of Parent or Master, though the thing
it self be lawful: For God having bound me to obey my Superiors in all lawful
things, I cannot oblige my self by my own Vows. Sect. 79. of his Directory.

15. The defects and faults of the Liturgy.
When Mr. Baxter in his Plea for Peace excepts against the whole Liturgy, all
the Common-Prayer-Book-Forms in gross, as faulty and defective: In the same
place he confesses the faults to be no other, than what with them the Forms of
Prayers may be used by a godly man either in obedience to Authority or for
Unity, or when better cannot be had.

16. The Error of demanding a Scripture-text, or rule, for Ceremonies and
Circumstances of Gods Worship.
Mr. Baxters Defense of the Principles of Love, Part 1. p. 97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 102.
There are men otherwise very honest, and truly godly, who think that the
Scripture is intended by God, not only as a general, but a particular Law, or
Rule, for all the very circumstances of Worship; and that the second
commandment in particular, condemns all that is the invention of men, in or
about the Worship of God; and that to deny this, is to deny the perfection of
Scripture -- I hope the number is but small that are of this opinion. We are
obliged to take heed of countenancing this Error -- For if it prevail, what
abundance of hurt will it do?

1. -- 2. It draws men into the dangerous guilt of adding to the Word of God,
under pretense of strict expounding it, and defending its perfection and extent.

3. -- 4. It alters the very definition of the the holy Scripture, and makes
it another thing. That which God made to be the Record of his holy Covenant,
and the Law and Rule of Faith and Holiness, and the general Law for outward
modes and circumstances, which are but accidents of Worship, is pretended by
men to be a particular Law, for that which it never particularly medleth with.

5. If sorely prepares men for Infidelity, and to deny the divine authority of
the Scripture, and utterly to undo all, by over-doing. If Satan could but once
make men believe, that the Scripture is a rule for those things which are not
to be found in it, and which God never made it to be a rule for. He will next
argue against it, as a delusory and imperfect thing -- he that believes it to
be given as such a particular rule, and then finds that it is silent, or
utterly insufficient to that use, is like next to cast it away as a delusion,
and turn an Infidel, or Antiscripturist.

6. This mistake tends to cast all rational Worship out of the Church and the
World.

7. This opinion will bring in all confusion, instead of pure reasonable
Worship, while every man is left to find that in Scripture, which never was
there, and that, as the only rule of his actions, one will think that he finds
one thing there, and another another thing, for it must be reality and verity
which must be the term of Unity, men cannot agree in that which is not.

8. It will let in Impiety and Error, for when men are sent to seek and find
that which is not there, every man will think that he finds that which his
own corrupted mind brings thither.

9. And hereby all possibility of Union among Christians and Churches must
perish, till this error perish; for if we must unite only in that which is
not in being, we must not unite at all.

10. Hereby is laid a Snare to tempt men into odious censures of each other;
(of which see my Author excellently at large.)

11. Hereby Christian love will be quenched, when every man must account his
Brother an Idolater, that cannot show a Scripture for the hour, the place of
Worship, etc.

12. And hereby backbiting, slandering, and railing must go current as no sin,
while every Calvin, Cartwright, Hildersham, Perkins, Sibbs, etc. that used a
Form of Prayer, yea, all the Christians in the World must be accused of
Idolatry, as if it were a true and righteous charge: And

13. All our sins will be fathered on God, as if the second Commandment, and
the Scripture-perfection required all this, and taught Children to disobey
their Parents and Masters, and say your Prayers and Catechisms are Images and
Idols, etc.

14. It will rack and perplex the Consciences of all Christians, when I must
take my self for an Idolater, till I can find a particular Law in Scripture for
every Tune, Meter, Translation, Method, Vesture, Gesture, etc. that I use in
the worshipping of God; when Conscience must build only in the Air, and rest
only on a word which never was.

15. It will have a confounding influence into all the affairs and business of
our lives.

Lastly, It will fright poor people from Scripture and Religion, and make Us,
our Doctrine and Worship ridiculous in the sight of all the World.

These are the consequences (which Mr. Baxter shows very well at large) of that
impracticable and erroneous doctrine of demanding a particular Text of
Scripture for the Ceremonies and Circumstances of Gods worship.

17. The Church of England not guilty of any kind of False-worship.
Defense of the Principles of Love. Part 2. p. 3, 4.
Mr. Baxter having recited the seven several kinds of false Worship, acquits
the Church of England from all, and proves at large (in the Pages here cited)
that it is not guilty of false Worship in any kind or any acceptance
whatsoever, any more than Mr. Bagshaw (whom he there speaks particularly to) or
the rest of the Non-conformists are in their extemporate Prayers.

18. A general Vindication of the Liturgy and Ceremonies.
Defense of the Principles of Love. Part 1.90, 91.
To do it ( i.e. to use, as he calls it, an unreformed Liturgy) out of choice,
is one thing; to do it as a duty put upon us by Gods providence and our
Governors, when we can do no better, is another thing: it is God that has
pulled down our liberty and opportunity to serve him better, and we must obey
him. It is no faulty mutability to change our practice, when God by changing
our condition does change our duty; no more than it was in Augustine, who
professes that he would worship God, as to Forms and Ceremonies, according as
the Church did with which he joined, wherever he came.

19. The soundness of the Doctrine of the Church of England.
Defense of the Principles of Love. Part 2. p. 3.
The Doctrine of the Church of England is so sound, that the Independents and
Presbyterians have still offered to subscribe to it, in the 39. Articles.

Thus has Mr. Baxter copiously vindicated the Church of England in almost
every point of Conformity which is any thing material; which shows that
Non-conformists themselves do not really believe what they have suggested to,
and imposed upon the belief of their Followers concerning the sinfulness of
Conformity.

And that what they except against in Conformity, is not upon the account of
its Sinfulness, but Inexpediency only; which neither the Law of God, Nature
nor Nations did ever allow the People to be Judges of, but the Rulers only:
and therefore ought in point of Christianity and right Religion, to be
submitted to, for the sake of those great Christian duties, Peace, Unity and
Obedience to Magistrates; for the conviction of our religious Enemies, for the
good and prosperity of the Church, for the safety, honor, and welfare of the
King and three Kingdoms, for the credit of Christianity, and for the glory of
God, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.

