A True Believer's CHOICE AND PLEASURE.

Instanced in The Exemplary LIFE OF Mrs MARY COXE, The Late Wife of Doctor
THOMAS COXE.

Preached for her Funeral By RICHARD BAXTER.

Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the
wicked shall rot.

LONDON, Printed by R.E. in the Year, 1680.

To my Worthy and much Honored FRIEND, Dr. THOMAS COXE.
SIR,
THough your great Kindness and Care of the health of me and mine, much oblige
me to you, and your Personal Worth much more, and your worthy Children command
my great Respect and Love; yet none of these should have moved me to say a word
of all that I have said of your deceased Wife, which I had not verily believed
to be true: And it was Gods Grace in her, which much more commanded it, than
all my debt to you and yours.

She was so Exemplary, as that I think it my Duty for the good of others, to
make this Publication of her Character, and of this Sermon.

But one great Defect is here to be notified to the Reader, That almost all her
secret way of Duty, and particular Converse is omitted, which you that were
still with her, could have described; For I thought meet to say no more than I
either knew my self, or was obvious and known to many.

The words which I heard but yesterday from the mouth of your Brother in
discourse, were such as I doubt can be said of few, that in so many Years, from
the hour of her Marriage, to her Death, she was never known to do one
disobliging action, or speak one disobliging word, of or to any one of her
Husbands Kindred or Relations.

Had it seemed meet to you, or to your worthy and ingenious Son, and your pious
Daughter (the true image of her Mother) to have been the Describer of the Soul
and Life, of this Exemplary Saint, how much more fully could you have done it,
than I, that was so much less acquainted with her.

She is gone home, and you and I are at the door; The Lord give us so to live
by Faith on the Promise and Love of God, and the things unseen, that thence we
may daily fetch our ruling Motives, and stablishing Consolations, and not from
a transitory deceitful world* and following Christ and his Saints under the
Cross, may with them possess the incorruptible Crown; and be found at his Call
among those that love his appearing, and be for ever with the Lord. Amen, Amen.

November. 19. 1679.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 1. for Angel read Angels. p. 16. l. 12. for suffient r.
sufficient. p. 27. l. 13. r. in which. p. 34. l. 21. r. sent for. p. 38. l. 11.
for It is r. Is it. p. 43. l. 6. for on r. of. l. 7. for of r. on. p. 58. l. 4.
for causes r. cures. p. 61. l. 12. for will r. would. p. 62. l. 14. for
received r. refused.

A True Believer's CHOICE and PLEASURE, etc.
PSALM. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken for an heritage for ever; for they
are the rejoicing of my heart.


A Text that speaks of Rejoicing, and that in an heritage, and an heritage
for ever, may seem unsuitable to a mournful Funeral: But it was chosen by our
deceased friend, and not without justifiable reason. That which was a day of
Sorrow to us, was a day of Rest and Joy to her; and it was meet that she should
foresee that Joy, and tasting it in the first fruits, should commend that to us
which she had found so sweet, and would bring us to the felicity which she has
now obtained. If the damned sensualist, Luke 16. would have had one sent from
another world, in hope to save his unbelieving Brethren, no wonder if a holy
person were desirous that others should partake of her pleasure and
inheritance: and like the Lepers that found the Siege of Sama^ia raised, would
not feast and rejoice alone. She chose this, no doubt, as that which was most
lively imprinted on her own heart, with a just desire that it might be
imprinted also on the hearts of others; that so we may not only rejoice with
her that now rejoices in the heavenly possession, but, as Paul says, Gal.
6.4. Every man may prove his own works, and so may have rejoicing in himself
alone, and not (only) in another. Let us therefore by God's assistance so
improve these words, as may conduce to this desired end.

By God's [ Testimonies] here is meant that supernaturally revealed Law and
Promise* which was possessed by the Church of the Jews, as God's peculiar
people, supposing the Law of Nature, and the common mercies which God had given
to all the rest of fallen mankind: Both the Precepts and Promises are here
included; the Types and their signification of the thing typified.

[ I have taken them] signifies, I have believed them, implying that God
revealed them; and I have Accepted them, implying, that God had Offered them;
and I have chosen them, implying the preferring them before all competitors;
and I have trusted them, as signifying their special use, for the guiding,
stablishing, quieting, and saving of the soul.

[ For an heritage] signifies

1. As that which I trust to as my security for an heavenly Inheritance.

2. And as that which now is my best portion while I am in the way, (including
the things connoted.)

3. And as that which I prefer before all Wealth and worldly Heritage.
Alexander and Caesar had larger Dominions than David; but neither of them was
King of God's peculiar People, that had possession of his Oracles, nor had the
Promises which he had, that Christ should be his Son and Successor on his
Throne.

The word [ for ever] relates both to the Inheritance as everlasting, and also
to David's choice, as immutably hereupon determined.

They are said to be the Rejoicing of the heart aptitudinally in themselves,
which caused him to choose them, and actually, because he had chosen, believed,
loved, and obeyed them.

So that this is the sum of the sense [ worldly men make choice of a worldly
Inheritance, and hopes, and on this they trust; and in this they seek their
chiefest pleasure: But I, though blessed largely with thy bounty, have suffered
many afflictions in the world: But thy Word has been my Guide, and thy
Promises still fulfilled to me; and experience has confirmed my Faith and
Resolution, to lay all my Hope upon thy Word or Covenant, both for this life,
and that to come, and from it I seek and fetch my comfort: It has been my joy
in all my sorrows, and in it to the last will I rejoyce] This is the sense of
the Text, from which we are all taught.

Doct. That God's Covenant or Testimonies are the true Believers Heritage for
ever, and as such are trusted and chosen by him; and therefore among all the
allurements and the crosses of this world, are the support and rejoicing of his
heart. In the handling this I shall show you
I. What it is in God's Testimonies which make them fit to be our Heritage, and
our Joy? II. How they are called an Heritage for ever? III. How they are so
taken by Believers? IV. How far they are their Joy?
I. In God's Covenant or Testimonies there is 1. The Author. 2. The Mediator.
3. The applying Agent. 4. The ascertaining Revelation. 5. The Donative or
Benefit given. 6. The Guiding Doctrine and Law. 7. And the Persons or Subjects
connoted to whom all this is suited, to be an Heritage for ever, and the
rejoicing of their hearts.

1. The Author is God, the Lord of us and all; in whose hand and will is our
Soul and Body, our Life and Death, our Health and Sickness, our Joy and Sorrow,
whose loving kindness is life, and better than life, Psalm. 63.3. who, if he
will can make us whole and happy, and who has told us what he will do by his
Covenant: He wants not Love, for he is Love it self; Essential, Infinite Self
love, communicating to his creatures such Love as his Wisdom sees meet for
them to receive. The Love that gave us the Mediator and the Covenant, will
certainly perform it: It was of mercy that he promised: It is now of mercy and
justice that he perform it. He wants not Wisdom to Rule the world by Truth
and Goodness, and needs not deceit and falsehood hereunto, nor to flatter such
worms as we into obedience. Nor does he that maintains Heaven and Earth, want
power to make good all his Word; nor is there any adverse power to make it
difficult, and hazard the success. Indeed, he that seriously considers the
Divine Perfection, will think it were more strange and incredible, that God
should not bless and glorify the faithful, according to his Word. If it be
credible that the Sun sends forth its illuminating and enlivening beams so far
and wide, to so many millions of various creatures (though it scorch the
unsuitable objects that are too near;) it is credible that God who is Infinite
Goodness, should bless the capable with heavenly Glory! And did we not see that
sin makes many incapable, it would be harder to reason to believe that all
shall not be blessed by such a God, than that all the faithful shall be
blessed. And we find, that though both be hard to unbelievers, they are of the
two more hardly brought to believe the Threatenings, than the Promises of God.
What wonder is it that Infinite Power, Wisdom and Love, should make some of his
creatures blessed by communication? and Man in special when he has made him
capable of it?

And what greater satisfaction and security can a fearful, troubled, dying man
have than the Infallible word of the most gloririous God. Sure he that firmly
believes it to be his Word, can hardly choose but believe that it is true, and
meet for our most quieting trust.

2. The Angel and Moses were the Mediators of the Jewish Law: But the Eternal
Word incarnate is the Mediator of the New Covenant; promised only before (to
Abraham, David, etc. yea to Adam) but sent when made man in the fullness of
time, Gal. 4.4. And it must needs be a sure and excellent Covenant which is
made and confirmed by such a Mediator, named in the Prophecy, Isa. 9.6.
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, of the increase of whose Government and Peace there is no end: he is the
heir of all things by whom the Worlds were made, the Brightness of God's Glory;
the express Image of his Person; and upholding all things by the word of his
power; made better than Angels; having by Inheritance obtained a more excellent
name; whom all the Angels of God do worship; and for whom they disdain not to
minister to the Faithful. It is a sure and comfortable Doctrine which must have
such a Preacher sent from Heaven, and a certain Covenant which has such a
wonderful Mediator.

3. But it is not like the powerless word of man, but the Holy Spirit of the
Father and the Son undertaketh to accompany it, and as the Arm of God to set it
home, and make it effectual to its proper ends: We have not only heard this
word, but felt it: As we hear and feel the powerful Winds, though we see them
not, and perceive not whence they come, or whither they go: All have felt this
who are born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.8. God spoke not like man when he said, Let
there be light, Genesis 1. And he teaches not like man, when his Spirit by his
Word does quicken, illuminate and regenerate Souls. It is a sure Covenant that
has such an inward Mediator, such an Agent, and Advocate, and Witness of
Christ, speaking operatively from God to man, and speaking prevailingly in man
to God.

4. And the sure manner of Revelation does make it fit to be our Trust and Joy.
As it bears on it self the Image or Impress of God's Power, Wisdom and
Goodness; so by powerful Miracles, and manifold Wisdom, and unmeasurable
Goodness it has been delivered, sealed, defended and propagated: And by a
communicated Spirit of Life, Light, and Love in all sound Believers, confirmed
to this day.

5. And what is it that with such glory and certainty is delivered to us from
Heaven? It is a Deed of Gift (thus sealed by Christ's Blood and Spirit) of
Grace and Glory; of Christ to be our Head, and Lord, and Husband, and Life, in
and with him. John 5.10, 12. of the free pardon of all our sins how many and
great soever, and of reconciliation with God, and of justification by the blood
and righteousness of our Redeemer, and of the continued teaching, preserving,
sanctifying, strengthening, comforting aid of the Holy Spirit; of adoption and
title to the Heavenly Inheritance; that being Sons, and having the Spirit of
the Son, by it we shall be sealed up to Glory, and be made the Habitation and
Temples of God: In a word, it is a promise of this Life, so far as that all
things shall work together for our good, Romans 8.28. and of the life which is to
come, where we shall live in Glory with Christ for ever. This is the sure and
blessed Covenant of God.

6. And what is the Doctrine and Laws of God, are they not also suited to our
Trust and Joy? Is it not a delightful thing to read that which no mere man
could tell us? How God made Man and all the World, and what Laws he gave him?
How sin came into the world, and death by sin? How God has governed the World
from the beginning, and how he has redeemed us? What Christ is, and what he
has done, and what he will do? And what man is, and what he should be, and
what he shall be, and do, and have for ever.

And what is there in God's Laws, but that which is our safety, and should be
our joy? If good Laws be the safety and honor of Kingdoms, are not God's Laws
so to all the World? What an ugly Dungeon were the World without them? and what
a worse than brutish thing were man? O how happy were Man, were Families, were
Cities, were Kingdoms, if all had made God's Laws their Rule, and all Men's Laws
and Lives had been ruled by them? Then there would have been none but wise,
just, and holy Rulers, that would have governed for God, and for the common
good, and Princes would have been indeed the Fathers of their Countries, and
Masters of their Families, abhorring all contradicting selfish Interests, and
all Injustice, Tyranny, and Oppression. Then Subjects would have with
reverence, readiness, and fidelity, obeyed God, in obeying and honoring their
Parents, Princes and Masters. Then all men would love their Neighbors as
themselves, and do as they would be done by; Love and Justice would reign among
all, and Injury, Partiality and Selfishness would be abhorred. And which of us
cannot say, Had I been ruled by God's Laws, I had escaped all the guilt, the
shame, the corrections, the terrors that have befallen me? It is our sin
against that sacred Rule, which is the cause of all our sorrows; else what
Peace might we have had in our Consciences, in our Bodies, in our Houses, in
our Cities and Country, as having Peace with God. God's strictest Laws, are
but his strict forbidding us to destroy or hurt our selves and others, as you
forbid fire and water, and Knives and Gunpowder, surfeiting and poison to your
Children, for their preservation.

O how glad would every true Christian be, if God's Laws were fuller written on
his heart, and he could but be and do all that God therein commands. For want
of this perfect Conformity it is, that he cries out with Paul, Romans 7. To will
is present with me, but to do I find not -- O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death.

How joyful should we be if we could but trust God, and love him, and obey him,
and be free from sin, as much as the Law of God commands us? We testify
therefore that the Law is holy, and just, and good, while we repent that we
break it, and wish that we could better keep it: For this would keep our Souls
from guilt and shame, and terrors, and our bodies from much calamity and pain;
all Gods ways are pleasantness, and all his paths are peace. Great peace have
they that love his Law, and nothing shall offend them; let Papists* hide it,
and accuse it, and let the ignorant and malignant scorn it, yet will Believers
judge it fit for their confidence and delight.

7. And the rather, because that all this is admirably suited to our necessity.
We are undone sinners! and had perished for ever, without a Savior, and a
pardoning Covenant. We are dark and foolish, and should have erred to
Damnation, without this sure and heavenly guide? We are beset with Temptations,
and how should we overcome them, without God's promise of better things than
this World can give us? We are under manifold pains and sorrows, and must
shortly dye: And how should we undergo all this in peace, if we had not hopes
of future happiness, and of that which will compensate all our losses? We have
a life of service to God, which must be faithfully and cheerfully done; and how
should we so do it, without good persuasion of this revvard? He that comes to
God, must believe that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

O then what a joyful Word should that be to us, which is sent from God himself
thus to guide, to secure, to strengthen and comfort us, by the promise of all
that we need, and can well desire, sealed by the Blood, Miracles, and Spirit of
Christ; and bearing the impress of God the Author; and that to such miserable
Sinners as we are.

II. But how are God's Testimonies our Heritage for ever? When in Heaven we
shall have no need of Scriptures.

Ans. 1. [ For ever] sometime signifies, to the end of my life] as David
says, Psalm. 23. I shall dwell in the House of the Lord for ever; and so often.
And so Gods Testimonies were taken for his Heritage, or chiefest Portion, and
rejoicing constantly, and to his lives end, as securing him of an everlasting
Heritage.

2. And the Heritage promised by them, and connoted, is everlasting; and the
holiness imprinted by them on his Soul, will be perpetuated, and perfected in
Heaven.

III. What is it for Believers to take God's Testimonies for their Heritage?

Ans. It is supposed that the flattering world, and the pleasures of the flesh,
do stand here in competition, and are by many taken for their best, and this
beeause they either think not of, or believe not the better things of a life to
come, and the comforts of a holy prospect and preparation. In this case every
true Believer, seriously weighing all, and what can be said on both sides, what
the world and flesh will be and do for him, and what God and grace, and glory
will be and do, does wisely discern and resolve,

1. That the world is vanity, and sin abominable.

2. That God is all suffient, infinitely good, and to be trusted, and his word
most wise, and just, and true: And therefore though his belief have its
imperfections and assaults, yet he so far believes Gods promises to be sure,
and his precepts to be good and necessary, as that he resolves here to place
his hope and trust for his whole felicity in this life and hereafter, and to
give up himself to the study, love, and obedience of Gods Laws, as the guide
and security, and comfort of his Soul, renouncing all the flatteries of the
flesh and world which stand against it, and are preferred by sensual
Unbelievers.

In few words, this was David's faith and choice, and this is the faith and
choice of all true Believers, by which we may discern whether we are such;
though all have not the same degree of trust and fixed resolution, yet all have
this much in sincerity.

IV. Quest But can all say, They are the Rejoicing of my heart?

Ans. All of them can say,

1. We see that there is in the Word and Covenant of God in Christ, unspeakably
more matter fit to be our Joy, than in all the pleasures, and wealth, and
honors of this world.

2. And therefore we prefer it before them all, in our desire and our fixed
choice.

3. And we find so much goodness and sutableness to us in this sacred Word, as
that we love it as our food and our security, though not with the appetite and
love which we desire.

4. And though we have not that joy in this our love to it, and in the hopes of
promised glory, which a stronger faith and love would cause, yet we find that
it is our best, and we perceive more good in it than in sinful pleasures; and
the true and chief support of our Souls in all our fears and troubles, and in
our prospect of another life, is from the love and Word of God through Christ.

And though our pleasure in it be not sensual and luscious, it is much more
solid and satisfying to our Souls, than we find in any other thing.

And the sweetness which we taste in it, is greater at some times than at other.

And the comfort which we have in our bodily health and welfare, is much as it
signifies to us the love of God performing to us his promises, and helping us
to serve him with joy and gladness, in order to everlasting joy.

This is the ordinary case of true believers; though extraordinarily; 1. Some
tempted, troubled, melancholy Christians overwhelmed with grief and fears, do
not perceive this much in themselves. 2. And the healthfuller stronger sort of
Christians have yet a more sweet and constant pleasure, in the Testimonies and
Ways of God.

Having said this much for Explication, a little more may suffice to show you
why and whence it is that Believers receive the Testimonies of God with this
fixed Choice, and Trust, and Pleasure.

1. It is from honest Self Love and Interest: They certainly find that it is
their best; that it is true and good, and that there is nothing else to be
found in this World, that will serve instead of it, to be a quieting security,
guide and comfort to the Soul. They perceive what they need; and that nothing
else can supply those needs: This must be their Hope, or they must despair.

2. It is from Holy Suitableness and Love to God, and the goodness which they
relish in his Word. As God gives every living Creature an Appetite suitable to
his Food, and Benefits, so does he to the New Creature. Holiness is mostly the
Souls Appetite to God, and spiritual good. The word which promises and guides
us to the incorruptible Crown of glory, is an incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.3,
4, 5, 6. and it is our Milk or Food, 1 Pet. 2.2. and by it we are made
Partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and it is the ingrafted or
innaturalized word which is able to save our Souls, Jam. 1.21. And as the whole
stock is marvellously turned to serve a little graft, which is planted into it,
and as if it had lost its former kind, does bring forth only the fruit of the
graft, so is God's Word implanted in us to the change of our nature, and our
fruits. And it is no sound Appetite which has no pleasure. No wonder if a
strong belief do cause us to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory,
that we may receive the end of our faith, our salvation, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8.

All God's Commands and Promises have by the divine impression of them on our
souls, lest somewhat there which is like them, and connatural; even a holy
light to understand their truth and goodness, and a holy love to them, and the
things revealed, to desire them, and take pleasure in them, and a holy
liveliness to pursue the good desired. And this is the writing of the Law and
Gospel on our hearts: And in this sense it may be said that God, that Christ,
that the Holy Ghost is in our souls, and dwells in us, even as an efficient
principle, and a beloved Object, and desired end. And if this be all that they
intend, those called Quakers have no reason to accuse us, for not preaching a
God, and a Christ within us. And if this be it that is meant by those who tell
the World, that by saying that the Holy Ghost is in us, we are more arrogant
than the Pope, that claims a visible Monarchy; we glory in this joyful
privilege, this earnest, seal and first fruits of heavenly glory, and humbly
thank him who has vouchsafed it, and assured us of it in his word, Romans 8.9,
11. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 3.17. 1 John 4.13. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Timothy 1.14. 1 John
3.24, and 4.12, 15, 16. And if the Scorners have any belief of the Scriptures,
let them read and tremble, Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
the same is none of his.

III. I have given you the sense and the reason of this Doctrine: We come
hither to learn what use to make of it. And I think if I preach also on the
Copy or Impress of this Text, whose Relics we have laid in the dust, and tell
us what use she made of such Doctrine, it will be a considerable help to our
own Application.

I have never loved or used to adorn Sepulchers, or hang out specious Signs at
the doors of Pride, Ambition, Tyranny, or worldliness, to entice others to
imitate prosperous sinners in their sin: were I to preach at the Funerals of an
Alexander, or a Caesar, I had rather say that which may save the living from
following them in Pride and Bloodshed, than to tempt men to the like sin and
misery.

To praise damned men, because they had the pleasures of sin for a season, is
to be more foolish and uncharitable, than the tormented Gentleman, Luk* 16. who
would have had one sent from the dead to warn his Brethren, lest they should
follow him to that place of torment, by preferring fleshly pleasure and
prosperity, before the life and hope of Saints. Our praises ease not tormented
souls. It is a mark of the Citizens of the holy City, That a vile person is
contemned in their eyes? but withal, That they honor those that fear the
Lord: for God does honor them.

My duty therefore to God, and my love to holiness, and holy persons, and to
you in special that are her Children, and other Relations, commands me to
tell you, (though some of you know it better than I) That our deceased Friend,
in the course of her Pilgrimage, did speak of her self by her constant
practice, what David professed in this Text. Though I speak but from eighteen
or nineteen years acquaintance with her my self, I have full evidence of it for
the former part of her life. And my acquaintance with herby Neighborhood, and
mutual esteem, has been such as has given me more advantage to know her than
most have had: though I remember not ever to have spoken with one person that
has known her, that did not take her for an extraordinary and eminent example
of the Piety and Virtues which I shall mention.

If the Hypocrites seek the praise of men, verily they have their reward (a
poor reward) but she seeking first the Kingdom of God, and the honor that is
of him, had this cast in as overplus: I never heard that any person of any
persuasion did speak evil of her, or question her eminent sincerity and worth.

Had she come to this by sinful compliance, She might have feared Christ's
words, Luke 6.26. Woe to you when all men speak well of (...). But as God has
not left himself without Witness to the very Heathens, so he has not left
innocence, wisdom, love, peace and piety, without some Witnesses in the
Consciences of the ungodly; few of them have the face to speak against these in
their proper names: And if he could not dishonor them by our mixed faults, and
by the slanderous affixed names of Heresy, Schism, Disobedience, Hypocrisy,
Phanaticism, Folly, and what else ignorance and malignity can devise, the Devil
knew not how to dishonor Holiness and Virtue, nor to encourage the blind world
to so common a hatred and opposition of them, as they show in all Nations of
the Earth.

When She chose this Text, it was from such a suitable spirit, as all men choose
the food, the friends and company, the business and discourse which by
agreeableness they most delight in. That She made Gods Word and Covenants,
(connoting Gods Love, Christ, Grace and Glory, the spring, matter and end) her
best, her heritage, her all, contemning all that stood in competition; and that
these were the rejoicing of her heart, She showed to us that knew Her by these
notable effects.

I. By her constant, serious, diligent use of the Word of God, by hearing,
reading, conference and meditation. Her food was not more constantly used, nor
I believe so sweet to her. Her hearing in the public Assemblies, nothing but
necessity could interrupt: And her private constancy her relations know. She
practically told us that the blessed man's delight is in the Law of the Lord,
and therein does he meditate day and night, Psalm. 1.2.

II. She made so much, (in esteem, use and thankfulness) of every little of the
help She could get in these spiritual things, as showed that they were her
heritage and joy. When some come home with accusations of the Sermon, as dry,
dull, or weak, She found in it something for profit and solace: I am sure my
own conversation and duties have been truly guilty of the foresaid faults, and
yet how gladly would She come over the way to us at prayer time. How much did
She value now and then a little (too dull unprofitable) conference, and took it
for a loss that She could have no more. How glad was she of now and then a too
dry and short Letter, and how carefully would she keep them. As if with the
Woman of Canaan, She had been begging for the crumbs. Alas our duller appetites
seldom so desire after, or delight in, much larger portions of well-drest food,
but fullness has loathing, and we call it dry manna, which we are weary of; or
every little fault in the dressing turns our stomach against it; full souls
loath the honeycomb, but to the hungry every bitter thing is sweet.

III. She loved and received the Word of God from any faithful. Minister that
brought it: Its true that She more frequented and desired some than others: But
her Religion was not Faction, or siding with this Party or with that: She was
far from a Shismatical mind or practice. When one Party separates from all that
Preach in the Parish Churches, and another from all that Preach elsewhere, She
separated from neither.

IV. Accordingly She loved all persons that feared God, as such: Not confining
her Affections or Kindness to those of this or that controvertible Opinion: But
that candor and holy simplicity, and serious practical Religion which She had
her self, was it that She loved in all others whomsoever.

V. And accordingly her conference was not about controversies, or matters of
contention, which too many spend their hours in these times, but that which
tends to edification, and to administer grace to the hearers: She was not
such as Paul often reproves for striving about words, and little things, that
tend not to edify but subvert.

VI. Much less was She tainted with any Heresy, or dangerous Error in
Religion, nor ever drawn from the truth, and her spiritual stedfastness; but
cleaved to the form of wholesome words, and the simplicity that is in Christ, and
to them that held the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; avoiding the
vain janglings of men of Contention, Pride and Corrupt minds.

VII. She was not of a censorious backbiting temper, nor used, as too many
faulty Christians, to make it her discourse, to find fault with others, and
make her self the judge of Controversies, Cases, Actions and Persons which she
understood not: but had learned that lesson, [ speak evil of no man,] and to
know and be called to it, before she judged.

VIII. She was very desirous of the good of all, and glad of any thing which
tended to promote the conversion and saving of men's souls.

IX. She was charitable and liberal also to their bodies; in an unusual degree;
as I am able to say by particular experience, in which I have known it
exercised to the poor.

X. Her humility and detestation of pride was manifest, not only in her Garb
and Behavior, but in her low thoughts of her self, and the lowliness of all
her Conversation, and great dislike of all that savoured of Pride.

XI. She was not morose, nor a refuser of Converse or useful Visits, when
reason required them: but She took it for a great Affliction to have much
diversion by company or by matters, from her constant course of better work:
And (besides her health) was therefore the more Inclined to be much in the
Country, that her mind and time might not be at the Mercy of too much intruding
diversions, and unprofitable discourse.

XII. Much more was She a verse to all sorts of sensuality: such pleasing of
the flesh as corrupts the mind, and turns it from holy work and pleasure;
and such vain recreations as waste precious time, and profit not our selves or
others: Holy things were her food and feast, her work and recreation.

XIII. Her prudence in all matters was very exemplary; being much more against
unadvised rashness, and actions which tend to ill effects, than most of us of
the stronger Sex: and I confess I should think much better of my self if I
could equal her herein. In which her Acquaintance commonly admired her, though
this is a point which all must acknowledge much imperfection in.

XIV. And her gentleness, meekness and calmness of mind and carriage was very
amiable to her friends and most that did converse with her: She was a great
Adversary to passionate behavior, which surely came from that Power of Grace,
which had made love and meekness become a nature in her, seeing no such thing
could be else expected in one of her Sex and Complexion, and bodily weaknesses.

XV. She did not, as the Hypocrite, give God the second place in her heart and
life, and the World the first, nor put off Christ with the leavings of the
flesh, nor take this World for her best or heritage, and the next only for a
reserve when she must needs leave this: She seemed to prize no Heritage but
God, nor to set much by any transitory vanity whatever.

XVI. She excelled in the earnest desire of her Childrens good, and in the care
of their well-doing and salvation. How often has she desired me to pray for
them? How glad was she if I would at any time but converse with them, and
advise them: they know better themselves (though I know much,) how much she
prayed for them? How often and tenderly she counseled them? What Letters of
serious holy Counsel she would write to them? And how like she was to Job, who
prayed and sacrificed for his Children, when they were merry and feasting
together, fearing lest they should forget God and sin against him?

XVII. This kind of life which I have described was her calling and trade, and
in a manner her only business in the World: It was not now and then in a good
mood, like a Feast or Recreation: but as she knew that one thing is needful, so
she chose that better part, which never was, nor will be taken from her. She so
lived as if she had but this one thing to mind and do in the world, to please
God by obeying him, and to cleave to Christ, and to do good, and to be saved.
Nothing else seemed to be much in her mind, thoughts, care, and business; her
life seemed to be but this one thing. But I must confess that poor and tempted
Persons, that are under many worldly wants, crosses and employments, cannot be
expected to reach her measure in this: Though one thing be their best and
portion, they may be tossed with many troublesome cares and businesses. But God
gave her both mind, opportunity and help to live in as even a course of
constant holiness in a Family, as Monks can pretend to or hope for in their
Community or solitude. Religion was her very life.

XVIII. In this life she had also a Constant peace of Conscience, bewailing her
imperfections, but not living in melancholy, despair, hard thoughts of God, or
an uncomfortable sort of Religion: I have often heard her speak of her lamented
weakness of Faith, Love, and heavenly desires and joy, but never, that I
remember, one doubting word of her own sincerity and salvation: But her
ordinary speech was lamenting that we were all so weak in our belief of the
Word of God, and the unseen World, and what execellent Persons we should be if
herein we had a stronger Faith that were liker unto sight; and how much it
should be the business of all believers, to pray and labor for an increased
powerful belief hereof, as that which would set all right in us

XIX. Her patience under her bodily infirmities also was exemplary. Her
weakness made her so liable to dangerous Coughs while she was in London air,
that by this she was constrained to live much from home. And most of all her
life she was tormented with a frequent headache? But in her patience in all
this She did possess her Soul; and patience furthered experience, and
experience hope, and she learnt more the quiet fruits of righteousness by being
much exercised herein.

XX. And as by this She daily learned to dye, so the expectation and
preparation for death, was her continual work and state. She lived and heard,
and prayed, and wrote her Letters to her Children as at the brink of the Grave,
and the Door of Eternity. Not that her Diseases did seem to us to be very
mortal, or threaten this sudden change. But she knew the brevity of man's life,
and that Death is ready to remove us all, and what a moment it is till that
certain hour.

And as she lived holily, and in peace with God and man, so she dyed with ease
and little likelihood of the ordinary miseries of Fear or Pain: A little
soreness and swelling of her Leg, and pain toward the Hip, turned to two
swooning fits, and in the third or fourth, having been in quiet discourse with
her Husband, she as quietly sunk and dyed away; desiring that I should be sent
to pray with her; she was dead before I came, without any signs of nature
striving: And she had said to her Daughter after her former fits, she did not
think that one could have dyed so easily as she had almost done. A death thus
expected, and thus prepared for is not to be called sudden! Thus God can make
death easy to some of us, that are apt to over-fear the antecedent pain. And
now what can be more, (almost) desired in this World, than such a life and such
a death. Our dear Friend is at home with Christ, and Gods will, which is
Goodness and Love it self, is so fulfilled; even that will which must dispose
of all things, and in which only we must seek our rest.

And having described this true Copy of the Text, I may boldly speak of it to
several sorts.

I. I may again ask both Quakers and Scorners, Whether the Holy Spirit do not
dwell and work in such among us, as our dear Friend now deceased was?

II. I may ask Unbelievers and Sadduces, Whether these operations of the spirit
of God on Believers, be not a sign that God owneth the Gospel by which he thus
works? And that Christ lives and reigns, who can thus still send a
sanctifying Spirit into Believers Souls? And whether it be not blasphemy to
think and say, either that these excellent endowments of Souls are not of God,
or that he gives them all in vain, and that Believers are all deceived by God,
and labor and hope all their days for that which has no being; and that the
better God makes them, the more deluded, vain and frustrate he makes them,
and rules and amendeth the world by falsehood.

III. I may ask the Papists, with what Face they can say as they use to do,
That they never heard of a Protestant Saint? And whether we may not be as
Religious in the places that God has set us in, as if we turned Recluses,
Monks or Nuns, and shut up our selves from doing any good in the world.

IV. I may ask the Malignant that call all serious Godliness Hypocrisy,
whether such a life as this does savor of dissimulation? And whether such
Seriousness and Hypocrisy are not contraries, and Hypocrisy be not a
Profession without that Seriousness which is sincerity* And whether they that
in Baptism solemnly vow to take God for their God, and Christ for their Lord
and Savior, and the Holy Ghost for Christ's Advocate and Witness, and their
Sanctifier and Comforter, and to renounce the Flesh, the World and the Devil,
and when they have done, perform none of this which they vowed, but live to the
Flesh and World which they renounced, and take a holy life as needless, yea and
hate it; I say, whether these be not the impudent Hypocrites that vow and
profess that holiness which they abhor, rather than they that with all their
deligence perform the holy Vow which they have made. And if Wives promise
Fidelity to their Husbands, Servants to their Masters, and Subjects to their
Princes, are they the Hypocrites that are serious and keep their promise? Or
they that were never serious in it, but scorn the keeping of it?

V. And as to those malignant persons that take this strict and serious
diligence for men's souls, to be but scrupulosity, or the Character of some
over-zealous Bigots or Puritans who are most inclined to Schism, and to be
troublesome or dangerous to States; I ask them,

1. What is there in all the description which I have here truly given you,
which is injurious or dangerous to Church or State, or any person? Will it hurt
any one that God and men are seriously loved? and that God's Testimonies are
trusted and delighted in and obeyed? and that God's Kingdom and Righteousness
is first sought?

2. It is not Christ, and Christianity, and Scripture that you accuse? If it be
schismatical and dangerous to be serious in performing what we profess and vow,
surely it is bad in Baptism to vow it, and still by calling our selves
Christians to profess it? To accuse, hate and scorn the serious Practice of
your own professed Religion, is to be the most foolish self-condemners, and in
some respects worse than Mahometans, Infidels, and Heathens.

VI. But my most earnest desire is to you the loving Husband, and beloved
Children of our departed Friend; that you will not overlook, 1. The Correction,
2. The Sin, 3. The Mercy, 4. Or the Duty which God now calls you seriously to
consider.


(1.) I need not persuade such as are rather apt to over much sorrow, not to
despise this chastening of the Lord, but rather not to faint under his rebuke.
But I cannot dissuade you from a just sense of your loss, we that are your
Neighbors feel it; but you much more, to whom it is much greater: what Saints
in Heaven do know of us, or think of us, or do for us, we shall better know
when we are there: But here you are deprived of the daily prayers which She
sent up for you; of the continuance of her loving care of your souls, and
watchfulness over you; of her wise and faithful counsels to you, and of her
imitable example, as it was still before you; a Husband of a pious prudent
helper, and Children of a tender affectionate Mother; your great sorrows tell
me you feel your loss.

(2.) And all correction is for sin, which is worse than suffering; O fall down
before God, and with penitent tears bewail your sin, which has caused your
loss: humbly confess how unworthy you were of such a Mother, and beg of God to
forgive that sin.

(3.) But Mercy also as well as Sin and Loss must be acknowledged. Your sorrow
must give due place to thankfulness and comfort. Your Mother is taken from you,
but remember.

1. What a mercy it was and is to you, that you are so related to such Parents,
seeing God has promised special mercy to the Faithful and their Seed; and if
any of you miss it, it will be through your own ingratitude and contempt.

2. What a mercy is it that all her prayers for you are yet in force, and more
of the answer of them may yet be sent you, if you reject it not?

3. You have yet all her holy counsels to remember, and they may profit you
while you live.

4. And though She be gone, I hope her example will never be forgotten by you.

5. And what a mercy is it, that under all her infirmities, you enjoyed her so
long?

6. And yet how much greater cause of thankfulness have you, that she so lived
and so dyed, and that you may think of her with comfort, as being with Christ,
and hope to be with her for ever. Every one has had a Mother, but every one
had not such a Mother as you have had.

(4) And I have intimated your Duty, while I have mentioned your Loss and Mercy.

1. Think over often what Sin she reproved in you, and what counsel she gave
you, and now revive your resolution to obey it.

2. Remember what she was wont to pray for on your behalf; and let it not now
be long of your neglect or wilfulness, that you are without it.

3. Remember her humble, moderate, holy example; and think whether your Souls
have not as much need of the greatest care and diligence as hers had? And why
should not you be as studious to please God and make sure of Heaven as she was?
Bless God that you have such a pattern, that has so long dwelt with you for
your imitation, next your imitation of Christ: Holy simplicity is despised by
the world, but it will prove the only wisdom at the last.

I have told you what use to make of the example of our deceased Friend: Let me
now tell you what use to make of the Text which she so much loved, transcribed,
and chose.

I. And first here you may learn, the nature of true Faith, and sound Religion:
It takes Gods testimonies and promises for our heritage, and for the comfort
of our hearts. It is not true Faith, unless we so trust Gods promises for this
life and that to come, as to take what he promises for our best and our
inheritance, and his promise for our best security and title, and his Law for
our governing Rule that we may obtain it.

So that, 1. Here you see how we differ from Infidels, that do not trust their
everlasting hopes and happiness on the promise of God.

2. And how we differ from hypocrites who speak best on Heaven, but really look
for their best of earth: which Christ calls [ Trusting in their Riches,]
because that is indeed their trust, from which they have their greatest
expectations, and for which they most labor and will leave all; this a
believer does for promised happiness: And this the worldly hypocrite does for
the prosperity of the flesh on Earth.

3. And here you see that faith and godliness are not melancholy uncomfortable
things, as the Devil and the flesh would persuade unexperienced fools and
unbelievers: Unless it be sad to have security from God of a Heavenly heritage,
and rejoice therein.

And here you see the differences between the mirth of a fleshly infidel and of
a believing Saint: One is like a drunkard that is merry for an hour in a
brutish kind of befooling pleasure; or like one that has a pleasant dream; or
one that hears a jest or merry tale, or sees a pretty Comedy or show: The
other is more rational and heart-contenting than it should be to any one of
you, to have good security for many hundred years life and health and
prosperity here on Earth; such a birthright do profane fools sell for such a
morsel; not knowing that the fear of God caused by true Faith is the beginning
of Wisdom.

2. Hence therefore we may learn how to try our sincerity of Faith. Does it
make us take Gods promise and the thing promised as our heritage? Though we are
not without Temptations to doubting, nay nor without the remnants of unbelief,
but our hearts are troubled when we look beyond death with many fears, yet if
we so far trust Gods Word, as resolvedly to take it for that which we will
adhere to, and lay our chiefest hopes upon, we have a faith that will entitle
us to the promised benefits.

Obj. But some may say, I cannot say that it is the Rejoicing of my heart.

Ans. 1. Can you say that you take it for that in which you place and seek your
joy, though you cannot yet attain it? And that you prefer not any other
pleasure in your esteem and choice and seeking? If so, you show that you truly
believe and trust to the faithfulness of God's Word, though yet you reach not
what you seek. Desire is the first-fruit of Faith and Love, and holy joy is the
flower and perfection.

2. Cannot you say that it is this Word that makes you hope that there is for
man a better life, and that you shall not perish like the Beasts? And that your
fears and sorrows are somewhat abated by the promises of God?

3. Cannot you say that you perceive a pleasing goodness in the Word of God,
which makes it welcome and acceptable to you?

By what I have mentioned, you may find,

1. That the Word has not been in vain unto you, when it has caused such
effects.

2. And that the same spirit is in you which wrote the Word; or else you would
not love and desire it, and take it for suitable food and pleasure, yea, your
heritage and joy.

3. And you may hence perceive that you are not without the love of God
himself, though you see him not, and have not such sensible conceptions of him
as you have of men and things which you have seen: For if you love truth and
goodness and holiness in Gods Word, because it is such, you sure love best the
greatest truth, goodness and holiness, and that is God.

4. And hence you may perceive that though our nature love not death, and a
weak faith will not overcome all fears, when we think of coming into an unseen
world, yet really you are lovers of Heaven, in that you are lovers of that
which constituteth Heaven, and is its desirableness to man; even holiness and
Gods Love and glorious presence, and our perpetual joy herein. If you desire
this you desire Heaven, though the fear of death do make you doubt of it.

5. And hence you may find that you are not Worldly Hypocrites? else it is not
Gods Promises, and Law, that you would take for your heritage and joy; but
worldly prosperity and fleshly pleasure, and God and Heaven should have but the
leavings of the flesh, for fear of an after reckoning at death.

6. And though your joy be small, you may know that it is of the right kind,
when it is chiefly sought in God's Love and Promises; and you would not let go
the word of God, and lose your part in it for all the vanities of this World.

III. Hence also you may learn why all true Christians so much value the
Testimonies or Word of God? Why they so much read it, think of it, talk of it,
and hear of it; and are loath that Papists should corrupt it, or conceal it in
an unknown Tongue; or that any should deny them the necessary use of it, or
silence the Ministers that preach it to them? who would willingly be deprived
of his heritage, or heart rejoicing?

IV. Yea, indeed hence we see, how much we should set by it, and use it, how
dear it should be to us? How strictly we should obey it? With what delight we
should read it and meditate in it? How diligent we should be to confirm our
belief of it, and how we should fetch our hope and comfort from it, in life and
at our death?

V. And You may see hence, that it is no wonder that the Devil and all his
Servants in the World are Enemies to the Word of God. because they are Enemies
to our heritage and joy: And there are few better signs while many pretend to
be for Christ, to know who are really for him, and who are against him and his
greatest Enemies; than to judge of men as they further or hinder; Love or Hate
the Word of God as to its proper use,, as the heritage and joy of holy souls.

VI. But the chief part of my application is, to commend this wise and holy
choice, and solid comfort to you all; and to beseech you presently to imitate
David, and turn away from all inconsistent pleasures. If you live in sorrow or
deceit, and die in desperation, it is not for want of an offer from God of
better things. Have you lived hitherto as thus resolved? If you have, the Lord
confirm you, and be sure such hopes shall not deceive you. If you have not,
what will you now choose and do? If you live not to some end, you live not like
men, according to reason. If you have chosen what end to live for and seek,
what is it? Consider, I bebeseech you, of these things following before it be
too late.

1. What will you take for your heritage, or your best, if not the future
promised joys, and what will you take for your security but Gods Word? What is
it that you place your chiefest hopes in? shall health and wealth, and pleasure
to the flesh, and honor among men, be taken for your heritage? Dare you under
your hands make a Covenant for these to quit all your hopes of the life to
come? if not, which is that you prefer, and which would you quit, if one must
be hazarded or lost? which has the nearest and highest place in your hearts?
which seek you first, and make all other things give place to? O Sirs, it is a
shame to our stupid hearts, that we have need to be so often told by Preachers,
that we must dye, and that our flesh must shortly lie neglected in dust and
darkness, till the resurrection, and that we and all the deceitful trifles of
this World are ready to part for ever! It is a shame that we must be often told
that which every Fool and Child at the use of reason may know, how poor and how
short an heritage or pleasure all those have, who have no better than this
World can give them.

What say you, Will you die in Hope or in Despair? If Unbelief make you hope
that there is no Hell, yet Hope of Heaven you can have none, unless you trust
the Word of God? The light of Nature indeed is such a natural Word or
Revelation, as may tell us much of a future life of retribution; but Gods
supernatural revelation is so much clearer, that we cannot expect that he will
see by a lesser, who wilfully rejects a greater light: sure all men would live
for ever if they could, and all would be for ever happy: you would not sure die
like Dogs, without any hope of a better life hereafter, if you could have good
security for such hopes? And what better security is there to be found, by
mortal men, than ( the Promises of God, confirmed by Christ's Blood and
Miracles, and by the Seal of his holy Spirit.)

In a word, without all doubt, Either Heaven must be your Heritage, or you must
have none that is worthy of a serious thought, and enough to keep a man from
wishing that he had never been born, or been a Brute, that had not reason to
know the matter of his griefs and fears. And either Gods Word seconding the
light of Nature, must give you hopes of a better life, or you must live and dye
in mere despair. And shall that be your wilful choice?

2. Consider how unvaluable a mercy it is, to man, yea, to sinful miserable
man, that God should vouchsafe to give him such an everlasting Heritage, and
such security for it, and that on the mere thankful acceptance of the sinner.
And how worthily will they be undone, that by wilful refusal are deprived of
freely offered Felicity?

3. And consider, how suitable an Heritage and Security it is that is offered
us, and how fit for our joyful acceptance and esteem.

The thing promised is no less than endless glory with God our Redeemer, and
all the blessed: it is in the world where we must be for ever! It is the
perfection of that which every holy Soul desires: It is our best, our all; it
must be that or nothing; that or Hell.

The Word or Covenant which is our Trust,

1. Is Gods own Word.

2. It perfecteth and secondeth natural revelation and hope.

3. It bears on it self the impress of God, even his power, wisdom and love,
in wonders, prophecies and grace, it is sealed by the blood of Christ; by his
own and his Disciples multitude of miracles; and by the gift of his sanctifying
Spirit to all true believers to the end: It is confirmed to our Souls by the
experience of the Power of it, and the blessed effects, and this in-dwelling
Spirit, the witness of Christ; and by the answer of prayers, by many
providence, and by the experience of all Believers to this day.

It is excellently suited to all our needs; to our wants, our dangers, our
fears, our doubts, yea, and our sinful unworthiness in the freeness of Gods
mercy, and all his gifts.

Indeed man had rather live by sight, and would fain know by seeing, whither
Souls go, and what they are, and have, and do hereafter. But it is not we, but
God that is the Ruler, and fittest to choose both the gift and means, the end
and way: If we thankfully trust and improve a promise, we shall quickly see,
and have possession. Blessed be God for the light of his Gospel, to guide us up
to the light of glory. O that we had hearts to trust it, love it, and rejoice
in it, as we have just cause.

4. And is it not a great mercy of God, that he has herein called us to a life
of happiness and present joy? If he had bid us only weep for sin to the last
breath, the condition had been easy as for pardon and hope of endless mercy;
but he has given us a word, which he would have to be the rejoicing of our
hearts; and do we not love joy? or have we any better?

I have not now time, and I much more want my self such a mind and heart as I
should have, to tell what cause of daily joy God has given us in his word and
Covenants. But this I will tell you, that our want of joy is our daily sin and
shame, as well as our loss and suffering; and among all the discoveries of the
sinful weakness of our Faith, Hope and Love, our want of rejoicing in the word
of promise, and hope of glory is not the less? O what an Enemy is Death in this
respect, that standing between it, darkneth and affrighneth us from our joys:
But Christ has conquered Death, to deliver those that through fear of it are
subject to Bondage, Heb. 2.14. And though we cry, O miserable men, who shall
deliver us? we ye thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And I must second the Testimony of our deceased Friend, in professing for your
encouragement, my own experience, I have taken God's Testimonies for my
Heritage, and they have been these fifty Years, or near, the pleasure of my
life, and sweeter than Honey, and preciouser than thousands of gold and silver.
As we tell men in charity of the things which we have found good, the Medicines
that have healed us, and commend the persons that have been friendly to us, and
as man's nature is inclined to propagate the knowledge, and communicate the
good which we partake of, and grace increases this inclination; so I take it
to be my duty, to add herein my own experience, if it may contribute to the
determining of your cho^ce: and reason teaches all men to regard that means
and remedy and good the more, which many have had experience of; and it is not
to be taken for vain ostentation, to profess that which all must have in some
degree that will be saved.

Though the natural and sinful fears of pain and death, too long deprived me of
much of the joy which I should have had in the thoughts of the unseen world,
and too much does so to this day, yet I must say that the Word of God, and the
persons that love and practice it, and the holy way of life and peace, and all
the means and things that here savor of Heaven, have been so good and pleasant
to me, as enableth me to assure you, that on earth there is nothing so worthy
of your desire and joy.

And to encourage you, I will tell you by my own experience, what benefit may
be expected from this kind of delight, agreeable to David's and our Friends
experience.

1. By this means my life has been almost a constant pleasure.

2. This pleasure has much upheld me under almost constant bodily infirmity
and pain.

3. It has made all my sufferings from men, and crosses in the world to be
tolerable and very easy to me; had not Gods Word been my delight, I had lived
uncomfortably, in constant pains and sorrows, and had perished in my trouble.

4. It has saved me from the snares of sinful pleasures: man's nature will seek
for some delight, and they that have it not in goodwill, seek it in things
hurtful and forbidden; it is only greater things that can overcome our mistaken
choice of lesser. In my Childhood I was sinfully inclined to the pleasure of
Romances, and of Childish Sports; but when I tasted the sweetness of Gods
Testimonies and Ways, I needed no other but spit out those luscious unwholesome
Vanities. And though common knowledge, called Learning, be pleasant to man's
nature, and I cannot say that I have not overvalued it, yet I must say, that
the relish of these greater matters, has made me see how much of it is vanity,
and has saved me from the pursuit of that part of it which does but please
curiosity and fancy, and tends not to use and to greater things; and sensual
pleasures I had no need of.

5. It has by this means made that pleasure which I had, to be such as my
reason did approve and justify, whereas if I had sought it in preferment,
wealth, or sensuality, a foreseeing Conscience would have afrighted me out of
all my pleasure, and I should have had more of the pricks than of the Rose; of
the sting, than of the Honey. Of this pleasure you need not fear too much; but
of the sensual pleasure, we more easily catch a mortal surfeit

6. This sweetness of Gods Word, has made also my calling and daily labor
sweet; so that it had my heart, and not my forced hand and tongue.

7. And this has helped my constancy herein: For when we have no delight in our
work, we grow weary; and weariness tends to give it over, or to do it
heartlesly and slubber it over in unacceptable hypocrisy.

8. And this has much saved me from the sinful loss of time: pleasure causes
trifling and delays; who needs vain pastimes, that delights in Gods Word
and Work?

9. And this has been to me an excellent help for the increase of knowledge:
For the mysteries of godliness have still more to be learned by the wisest man;
and as Boys at School, so the Scholars of Christ, learn best who have most
pleasure in their Books.

10. And this pleasure has much confirmed my belief of the truth of Scripture,
when it has born its own witness to my mind, and I have tasted that goodness
which is agreeable to its truth. I easily believe him that commends a thing
to me, when I taste or feel that it is good.

11. And this pleasure has helped me against vain thoughts and talk, while the
truths of God were sweet, and so continually welcome; it is easy to think of
that which we delight in; and sinful delights corrupt the thoughts and speech
with constant sin.

12. And this pleasure has somewhat fed my daily thankfulness to God, in the
constant experience of the goodness of his truth and ways.

13. And it cured the error of my beginnings, when I strove for nothing so much
as to weep for sin, and perceived not that the joy of the Lord is our strength,
and the flower of holiness, and likest to the heavenly state; and that the
Spirit sanctifies, by making God and goodness pleasant to us.

14. And hereby it made me find, that the praises of God are the sweetest and
noblest exercises of Religion; when before I placed more in lamenting sin and
misery.

15. And this makes many things needless to me, that else would seem needful;
I want not more company; I want no recreation but for my body; if I have not
what I would have, I see where only it is to be found.

16. And I am assured that the constant pleasure of my mind, has not only kept
me from melancholy, but from greater sicknesses, and tended to the lengthning
of my life (as Scaliger says, Pleasant Studies do.) For constant pleasure must
needs tend to health.

17. And this taste has made me long for more, and had I not felt that it is
good to draw near to God, and very desirable to know him and his will, I should
never have so earnestly begged for clearer light and more near and sweet
communion with him; pleasure is the cause of strong desire.

18. It has been one of my greatest helps against many temptations, of subtle
enemies that tempt men to sadducism and doubt of the life to come.

19. It has made me more communicative to others, for we would all have
partakers in our delights.

20. And it has greatly furthered my Repentance and hatred of sin, when I have
tasted what pleasure it depriveth us of; and the abhorrence and loathing of my
self that can delight in such a God and Savior, and word no more: when I taste
how good it is, and see so much reason to rejoice in it, and the hopes of Glory
a thousand fold-more than I do, none of all the actual sins of my life, do make
me half so much loath my naughty heart, as to think that my want of greater joy
in so great and near a good, does show so much weakness in my Faith, and Hope,
and Love! O that I had more Faith and Love that I might have more of this
delight!

Hearers I have sincerely told you what comfort you may have if you will not
refuse it from the Word of God, and from the experience of David, and (because
things near are aptest to affect) from the experience of our deceased friend,
and of my self, and indeed of all Gods Servants in their degree; you would live
in joy; you will dye in joy; we need it in a life of so much trouble, and for a
change that else is terrible; and its sure and near. O Sirs we need another
kind of comfort, than sport or appetite, or wealth, or any such fading vanity
will give us, you may have some of it, if you will. And though joy be the top
of grace which we arrive not at with a wish, nor in an hour, yet the nature of
the new creature relisheth or savoureth the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5, 6,
7. And the Spirit of Adoption is a Spirit of filial Love, and cries Abba
Father, and the Love of God the Father, the Grace of the Son, and the Communion
of the Holy Spirit, which are the believers part, are all of them the greatest
comforters; and Christ gives believers that seek and trust him, that spring of
living waters, which tends to everlasting satisfaction, and cures indigent
and sinful thirst.

Will you then have any portion, heritage and joy which will be worthy of a
man, and shall go further with you than the Grave? If you will you may: God and
this Congregation are witnesses that it was offered you. But think not to
refuse it, and prefer the transitory pleasures of Sin before it, and at last
have it, and find that which you received, or which you sought not first, Mat.
6.33. nor to find a Treasure in Heaven where you never laid it up or sought it.
The hopes of the Wicked perish, and the Hypocrites hopes are as the giving up
of the Ghost: But the Righteous has hope in his death, and therefore may dye
in Peace and Joy, Job 8.13, 14. and 11.20. Prove. 11.7. and 14.32

Perhaps some will say, that such a discourse of rejoicing is unsuitable to the
mourning of a Funeral. I think not of such a Funeral, in which we commemorate
the Holy Life and Death, and believe the present and everlasting joy of such a
Friend, and one with whom we have long joined in seeking and waiting for that
Felicity, and hope ere long and for ever to rejoice with Christ and her, and
all the blessed. And Funeral Sermons are not for the benefit (though for the
due honor) of the dead, but of the living, to teach us all to prepare for
death, which indeed is so much of the business of our whole life, that all the
rest is but a vain show, and foolish trifling or much worse. And wherein does
our preparation for death so much consi^t, as foreseeing what so great a
change will need, and what a Trial it will put our Faith and Hope to, to seek
and get such security for our everlasting state, and such sound belief of it,
and settled content and comfort in it, which the fears of Death, Judgment, and
Hell, may not shake or overcome, that so we may finish our course with joy, and
pass through the Valley of the shadow of death, and fear no evil, but may
comfort one another and our selves with this, that we shall for ever be with
the Lord, and may say with Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God
the Righteous Judge will give, to me and to all that love Christ's appearance;
when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that
do believe, and shall say, Well done good and Faithful Servant. Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord.

Woe and for ever woe to every soul of you, that shall finally reject or
neglect the offer of such an Heritage and Joy! And blessed be that Grace which
has caused all true Believers to prefer it in their highest esteem and choice
and seeking. I have looked about to see if there were any better and surer to be
had; and I am fully satisfied it must be this or none. I offer you but what God
has caused me, and all that he will save, to choose; and Lord grant that I may
never look back to any other; let the Love of God my Heavenly Father, the grace
of Jesus Christ my Lord, and the joy of the sanctifying Spirit, sealing up the
promise of God as my security, and writing his Law and Gospel in my heart, be
my Heritage and Joy; and I shall never envy the most prosperous sinner their
portion in this life, but shall live and dye in the thankful praise of the God
of my salvation, who is Essential, Infinite, Joyful Love. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

