TWO MEDITATIONS: 1. Of DEATH. 2. Of LIFE ETERNAL.


By N. B. a Sequestered MINISTER OF JESUS CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

To his dear Parents, Mr. C. T. B. and Mrs. E. B. increase of grace in this
Life, and everlasting glory in the life to come.
THat this world is Vanity and Vexation, E^les. 1.1
is no need to tell: your more then fourscore years apiece can preach Labor
and Sorrow. Psalm. 19.1
The Lord has sufficiently weaned us (if at least we will not be guilty of
wilful folly) from the frothy milk of this world; he has not spared his
mustard, wormwood and gall: And, as if that were not sufficient to take off our
doting appetites, he has even taken the world it self quite from us; we have
no breasts to suck, no world to love. Oh! what a sweet advantage have we now
(had we but wisdom and grace to improve it) to fix our loves only upon God and
Heaven, now we are freed from other suitors? Why do we not advance our
longings thither, where we may be yet more secure from Plunder and
Sequestration? Here we have a little, (though a very little, besides our lives)
there we shall have nothing that Thieves can med^le with. We have (I believe we
have) long ago learned, to be willing to live, and yet content to die, if God
so please: surely we have been trewants, if by this time we cannot add one
line to that lesson, and now be willing to die, and yet content to live, if God
so please. Tell me (for ingenuously I know not) what is there that may make us
in love with Life, or in fear of Death? For the first (love of the present
world) I do not much suspect you; you have been sufficiently knocked off from
that dotage. Against the second, there is none but wants encouragements. That
King of fears, and fear of Kings, That (...), Io^, 18.14.
That mighty Mawkin, That terrible Scarecrow, That ashcolour'd Vizard, is many
times ready to put us Children besides our little wits. One good preservation
against the frights of this Bugbear, is to get acquaintance with the Skeleton:
so have I known a fair Lady, and a Coy, by familiar conver^e, with an
hard-favour at last, by degrees to like and love. Why not so here? Surely
ignorance of Death, oftimes is one (if not the only) cause we are squeamish;
did we but know whence she is, and whither she tends, we should bid her better
welcome. These Meditations were my comfort as well as my employment in my late
long sickness: I present them to you now, as an express of my duty and
thanks for your care and cost from my Childhood until now; for even yet (such
is the will of God, whose justice I see quite through the malignity of the
world) I feed upon part of that little bread which is scarce sufficient for
your own nourishment. I hope and wish your Firkin and cruse may not be spent
till the influence of Heaven send peace and prosperity to our King and Country.
I know this present will be pleasing for my sake, I wish it may be profitable
for your own. You cannot but every day (one way or other) be put in mind of
your dissolution; you have pricks in the flesh, the Messengers of Death to
buffet you, and no entreaty can take them off, but they and you must remove
together. I wish you may improve these and other Meditations so to your
comfort, that at last, even Death it self may be your consolation. The God of
Heaven bless and keep you in his faith, in his fear, the Lord preserve and
restore our King, and in his good time send us peace, in the mean time send us
patience; God forgive and convert our Enemies; and once more look graciously
upon our Land and Nation. Amen. Amen

N. B.

Of Death.
1. THe thoughts of Death are not always pleasant: always profitable. What
Meditations more needful, (O my soul) or nearer allied to wisdom then those
of thy latter end? what more uncertain then Life, or more sure then Death? Mine
age is too little to learn to live, not enough to learn to Die. It Is good then
by frequent thoughts of Death, to make her familiar, that when she comes, she
may not look strangely.

2. And what is Death but the wink of life? the rest of Nature? the sleep of
flesh and sense? the taking down these few sticks thy earthly tabernacle was
built with? the putting off and laying up thy garments of flesh and blood for a
night, till the great and joyful day come? the Farewell and goodnight of two
old friends parted for a season? Our journey and passage into that other world,
for which we, and this world were made? our souls Gaoles delivery from the
prison of the body, or birth delivery into a better world? and so the way, the
gate of life?

3. And this is that which we commonly call Death: though there be others also
of her name. As, There is a Death in sin: Ephesians. 2.1,
this is a miserable, and yet this is thy condition (O my soul!) Dead in
trespasses and sins, till thy mercy (O God! Col. 2.13.
) in thy Son has quickened me by a full remission. And thus we come to another
Death; a Death to Sin, or a Death of sin: this may well be called the first
Death, for it is the best Death: Happy is he that has his part therein, Rev.
20.6.
for over him The last Death shall have no power: And well may this be called
last, for it is lasting, everlasting: it is so great, there can be none with
it; so infinite, there can be none beyond it. The horrors and terrors of this
Death, no mortal is able to see and live. Oh! what horror then is it to those
that feel them! But O Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and merciful
Redeemer, deliver me not unto the bitter pains of eternal Death. Thy death (O
Christ) has saved me from this: and thou wentest down to hell that I might
not go thither: ^^m. 6.4.
and my first death and burial with Thee by Baptism (which is my first
Resurrection too) shall be my pass port through and over the worst of Death.

4. (...). 1.13.
Thou (O Lord) made not death, but Man found it out by the works of his
hands: Man brought forth sin, and sin brought forth death; and no marvel if
the child be uglie that is begotten of such parents. And this generation of
vipers has so thriven in this world, ^^n. 1.18.
as if Increase and multiply, and Replenish the earth, had been only spoke to
them. What thing is there in the world that is not sin, or oft-times a
provocation thereunto? What thing is there in the world that is not Death, or
oft-times an instrument thereunto? Nothing so small but is big enough to hide a
Death under it. A Fly has choakt one, a Grape-stone another, an hair of the
head has done as much to a third: A prick of a thorn has let in Death, a
point of a Sword could do no more. Death lurks sometimes in our meat, and
sometimes in our drink, and sometimes in the very air: Man has not more helps
of living, then he has means of dying. But (O Lord) how sweetly did thy
Wisdom and Justice accord, when thou made Death the revenge of sin, and so
plagued us with a brood of our own begetting? But as the wages, ^om. 6.23.
so the end of sin is death: Thy Justice (O God) has made it the wages; thy
Mercy has made it the end: Death came in by sin, ^om. 5.12.
and sin goes out by death. Sin is a Viper descended of the old Serpent, and
Death is her offspring born to the destruction of her Mother. Thy mercy (O
Christ) that took away my sin, could also have taken away my death; but thy
wisdom chose rather to alter then abolish it. Cor. 15.55.
Thou have cut out the sting, crossed out the curse, and now with Esau it meets
not with frowns, but kisses: surely the bitterness of death is over. Genesis
33.4.
Thou (O Savior) by thy Death have so sweetened Death, Sam. 15.32.
and perfumed the Grave, that it shall not grieve me when my Sun is set, to
sleep a while in that silent bed.

5. Cor. 15.26.
And thus our last enemy is become our first friend we meet with in our passage
to that other world: who as she leads thy body through corruption and
rottenness, so she guides thy soul to life and happiness: as she closes the
eye of thy body, so she opens much more the eye of thy soul: if thy friends
mourn to see thee dead, thy soul rejoices much more to see him who was dead,
Rev. 1.18
and is alive: Psalm. 41.5.
thy Name and Memory perishes perhaps among the sons of men, but is
everlastingly recorded among the sons of God.

6. Surely it is but the worst part of Man that is in the reach and power of
death: our souls are so far from damage, that they gain more then the body
loses. The worst of Death is but corruption, and that works but upon a carkase
that neither feels nor cares. We carry heaven and earth about us while we live,
when we die, each part returns homewards. Kings and Prophets, Patriachs and
Apostles, have all gone the same way, and who can be so fond as to hope
exemption? Whoever is clothed with flesh and blood, is engaged unto death for
those garments, and Death can distraine no farther then her own, (these
garments.) It Is true, she desires and a spires higher, feign would she ravish
the soul, but our Joseph is too chaste for her embracements, Genesis 39.12
and flies away without his garments.

7. The time of Death for her coming is uncertain, because she would always be
expected: for sometimes she takes advantage, and strikes suddenly, though most
times she sends her harbingers (age and sickness) to give notice of her
coming. The time of Death for her continuante when she comes is but guest-wise
for a night; and her first word is, To bed: she must be our bedfellow for a
night, and the earth our bed, where claspt in her cold arms we be til we be as
cold as she. This is cold news thinks flesh and blood, who seldom bids her
guest welcome; fain would she make delays; she thinks the night will be long,
and therefore desires to sit up a little longer. But Death (though sometimes
she seem to admit of discourse, yet she) resolutely holds her conclusion, and
will not be denied, though still we desire (such is our weakness) to hug our
diseases, till they ravish us of all that is flesh and blood, and leave us fit
for none but Death. And now Death will forbear no longer, but thrusts out
sickness, and enters the bed her self. Yet she stays not long there, she and
her bedfellow are soon removed one Story lower to the floor, and then one
Story more to the grave. And yet there is no abiding: That which is to full of
alteration cannot be permanent. Psalm. 30.5.
Death may endure for a night, but lift comes in the morning. When that day
breaks, the shadows fly away, and Night and Death shall be no more.

But what company shall I meet with in the house of death? What? (...) 17.14.
Corruption and Worms: These are my near kindred. Curruption was my mother,
and begat me; she is now my daughter, I beget her. The worms are my sisters by
the mothers side; they are now my children: as a Mother I breed them; as a
Father I feed them: a lusty kindred! Surely they cannot but bid me welcome and
be glad to meet me there: Why should not I be so to them? However I may be coy
of their acquaintance here, yet there we shall be more then intimate, I shall
embrace them in my arms, and hug them in my bosom; I shall feast them with my
flesh, yea with all my heart and my Liver too: I shall give them free quarters;
for should I grudge, they would be so bold as to take it: But much good do it
them, it is the last banquet I shall ever make them, and the last time I shall
ever meet them; after this supper, goodnight kindred.

8. We do not then indeed, (and but scarcely in appearance seem to) lose by
Death, for what is the World and all that therein we leave behind us? her best
things are vanity, the rest vexation. (...). 107.34.
How is she fallen since our fall, from a fruitful Land, to a barren
wilderness? how is she fruitful now only in thorns and troubles? how are
all her pleasures vain, and but in appearance? while her sorrows are real.
What are all her pomps and honors, but empty bubbles and baubles to please
fond children? And what is our flesh, but a bundle of diseases, a bladder full
of muddy water, a lump of rottenness? And what was that thing which we once
called Life, but a perilous pilgrimage, a sea of troubles, a labyrinth of
perplexity?

But that which is worse then all the rest, without which the rest were not
evil; Rev. 4.40.
that which is the death in the pot, the leaven of the whole lump, Cor. 5.6.
and that which imbitters the whole life, is sin, and a necessity of so doing:
so that while we live, we cannot but sin: we are plunged into such an
inevitable habit of mischief and and misery, that to live and to sin are of
like necessity, and we must leave off both or neither. And that which makes
full this part of our misery, we delight in our prison, we sing in our cage, we
are proud of our chains, and too often take pleasure in the jingling of our
fetters. Death now is our freedom from all these. Why do thou droop then?
^^ke 21.28.
(O my soul) lift up thine head rather when thy redemption draws near; when
death shall open, thy prison doors, be not loath to go at liberty; Exo^ (...)
dote no longer on thy old master (the World) thy Wife and Children (thy flesh
and corruptions) as to repine at the year of Jubilee, or refuse thy Freedom:
away with these base follies, and mount thy thoughts to higher wisdom; yea, I
shall sing and rejoice, when my Soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of
the fowler, Psa. (...)
the snare is broken and I am delivered.

9. What is Death but a sleep, and the Grave a bed? all these are so near of
kind, that often times they are called by the same names, and the very feature of
their countenance give them to be of near alliance. It is the weakness then of
flesh and blood that desires the one, and abhors the other. When we are weary
of a days labor, we desire to go to bed, and rest at night, why should it
not be so with us here too? All our days are labor and sorrow, and we may
well be weary: Psalm. (...) 10.
Why should we, when night is come, be like froward children, loath to go to
bed? especially to that bed where we shall sleep in the Lord, Rev. (...) 13
and rest from our Labors; to that bed, that shall be more easy, and freer
from disturbance then any beds of Down; to that bed where we shall sleep more
securely, and rise again more surely then from any other bed we shall take up
in our strongest health. Away then (O my soul) away with whatsoever may nourish
distrust or distraction! The Tempest is almost over, and thou art entering the
harbor, and haven of safety! This present Earthquake shall break off thy
chains, Acts (...)
and open the prison doors for thy delivery: thou shall pass through the iron
gate of Necessity, and the earthen gate of Mortality, to the golden gate of
Liberty and Eternity: Thou art now trimming and making ready (O my soul) to go
to bed to thy spouse, thy Bridegroom: give it some other name, it is not
modesty that makes thee unwilling; either foolishness, or fearfulness, or at
least want of affection makes thee draw back. Why art thou so sad then, (O my
soul!) Psalm. 4 (...) Cant. (...)
and why art thou so disquieted within me? make cheerful speed to meet thy
Bridegroom: Thou art thy wel-beloveds, and thy wel-beloved is thine: The first
sleep ever man had, got him a wife, the last steep he has, Genesis (...)
gets him a husband.

10. But the names of things, oft-times, are more terrible then the things
themselves: How many great things have some great Conquerours effected by the
power only of the Name and Fame! Genesis (...) 2 Reg. (...) 24.13
Death is this Conqueror, this Nimrod, this mighty Hunter: more justly then
Senacherib can she boast, where I set my foot I dry up rivers, (rivers of blood
in the veins, of milk in the breasts, of marrow in the bones) where are the
gods of Heva, and Iva, and of Sepharvaim? yea where is proud Senacharib
himself! and of the Kings of the Earth she says, It is ^ that make you lick
the dust of the Earth, and the slime of the pit; Let not your idols of gold,
and greatness wherein you trust, deceive you. And yet what is this Death more,
(...).
or beyond a Name? More est morsus, quia mordet. Death is a biting, and it is
called Death because it does Eat: it takes a Morsel, and it swallows a
mouthfull, but it shall never digest it, (...) 2.10.
like Jonah's whale it shall cast it up again safe and entire. (...) m. 15
Death is called a departure, a parting of two old Friends for a season, (...)
15. (...) 9. (...) 47. (...) 25.8.
that they may receive each other again for ever. It is called an expiring, a
giving up of the Ghost, a sleeping with our Fathers, a gathering to our people:
And are not these fearful Names, (o my soul!) do thou not tremble? or not
blush rather, that thou have been frighted with these bug-beares! why should
thou be either coy or fearful? it is but a Mawkin, draw near, it will not, it
cannot hurt thee.

11. Neither do thou want witnesses of comfort or encouragement; holy
Scriptures are frequent upon this Theme. (...).
Solomon that was as famous for his Wisdom as for his Wealth; who had as much
as this world could afford to make a man in love with this Life, yet plainly
tells thee, ^^es. 7.2
That the day of Death is better then the day of thy Birth. And nature seems
to say as much, when Heathen (guided by her light only) would mourn at the
Birth, and Feast at the Funeral of their Friends and Children. Heathen knew but
the one half of the good of Death, (a cessation of miseries) thou (o my soul!)
know the other, (a fruition of felicity.) Let not an Heathen then out-die
thee in cheerfulness. Blessed indeed are those that live in the Lord; but that
is not all; Rev. 14.13 Cor. 14.13
Blessed also are the Dead that die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, for
they rest from their labors.

12. Ins. 1.
O Death! how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives in
pleasure, in his own possessions, and has nothing to vex him? But o Death! how
sweet, how acceptable is the remembrance of thee, and how welcome is thy
presence to him that dwells in miseries and vexations; and has hopes of glories
hereafter in everlasting possession? how sweet is that refreshing thou give
to weary Pilgrims? how welcome art thou to those that know whence thou come,
and whither rendest? who but he that is all flesh and blood, would desire to
lurk and hide himself among the stuff and trash of this vile world, (...) ^am.
10.
rather then go to that Crown and Kingdom thou leadst unto? who but he that
has quite lost his judgment, that shall consider the miseries of the present,
and the felicities of the world to come, but will say out of choice, what the
Prophet spoke out of passion, It is better for me to die, Ion^. (...)
then to live.

13. But what is the matter now (o my soul!) that thou art so loath to die? Why
art thou so fearful, o thou of little faith? Mat. (...)
how often have thou thought in thy Meditations, that thou could welcome
Death? And yet when it looks upon thee, and offers thee service, thou
shrinkest back, and thy face is pale, and thine eyes look wild, as if thou
were amazed: do thy longings now languish? thy hopes and expectations now end?
how often have thou prayed, Mat. (...)
Thy kingdom come? and now the gates are opening, art thou loath to go? How
often has thy ravished heart cried out, Come Lord Jesus come quickly? Rev.
(...)
and now he comes and calls, art thou loath to go? Does thy Redeemer send for
thee, and art thou loath to go? Do joys, and crowns, and everlasting
possessions now expect thee, and art thou loath to go? Do Saints and Angels,
Patriarchs, and Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors, and all the Quire of Heaven
desire thy company, and art thou loath to go? Away, for shame (o my soul!)
away, rouse up thy self, and let it never be said, that Heathen and Heretics
have embraced Death more cheerfully then thou: let it never be said, Thou have
encouraged others, and art thy self a coward. Away then with all unchristian
diffidence, and address thy self with joy and thankfulness to thy glory.

14. But (O Lord!) it is thou only that can make me willing; thou, by thy
Mercies can draw me, and by thy judgments can drive me; thou can woo me
to a better world, and weane me from this. Oh prepare my Soul so far for thee
then, that it may bid thy messenger welcome. Now, that thou O Savior have
tasted Death, and so sweetened that cup, let not me be loath to pledge thee. Thou
that give both to will, Phil. (...)
and to do, give them both to me, that I may not only die, but do it
willingly.

15. But (O Lord!) though the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak: Mat.
(...) 41.
my soul would draw near with courage and comfort, but my body boggles: so many
hindrances and hang-backs; so many clogs and temptations within me, without me,
about me, that if thou O Lord leave me but to my self, I shall shame my self,
and that name of thine that I have professed. Oh! I cannot welcome Death so
heartily, so worthily as I ought; instead of cheerful imbracements, I shrink
inward, and am scarce ashamed to let Death hale me, as if I would make the
world belive, that I durst not die. Lord how shall I shame and befoole my self,
if thou but leave me to my self!

16. Now whither shall I go for succor but unto thee O Lord? O God of all
Spirits, and of all Flesh too, make thou willing both my spirit and my flesh to
come unto thee: Oh! weaken my flesh to receive, encourage my spirit to contemn
Death: The nearer I draw unto my end, let my joys be the clearer, and my
desires enlarged. Oh draw this dark veil a little, that I may see my glory,
and then I cannot but desire it. And O God most holy, O God most mighty, O holy
and merciful Redeemer, suffer me not at my last hour for any fear or pain of
Death to fall from thee.

17. (...) 4. (...).
O Lord, thou see how soon I sink in these waters, unless thou help and hold
me up. Oh! show thy strength then in my weakness; help him that cannot help
himself; and let all the praise and glory be thine own. I ask no more then
what thou have given to others, and promised to me, and have given many
earnests by many former deliverances: perfect the work thou have begun, that
thy praise, and my happiness may be consummate together.

18. Yea, O Lord, I know it shall be so, I cannot only build upon thy promise,
but prove by former deliverances that thou will save me now. I cannot fear
drowning in these waters while my head is above. O Savior! thou have conquered
and triumphed over Death, how can I then fear a vanquished adversary? Thou have
overcome Death both for thy self and me, how then can I miscarry? O Death, then
where is thy sting! (...) 15. (...) 55. (...) 21 (...) 4.7 (...) 4.8.
O Grave where is thy victory? O my soul, thou have marched valiantly! Thou
have fought a good fight, and have finished thy course, henceforth is laid up
for thee a crown of glory. I will lay me down therefore, and sleep in peace,
since thou O God make me to dwell in safety.

19. (...). 15.57.
And now thanks be unto God who has given me victory through Jesus Christ our
Lord: And blessed be that Redeemer who has bought off the bitterness and
torments of my Death with his own: Blessed be he that has made the bed of
sickness tolerable; of Death, easy: Blessed be that strength of my salvation
who has covered my head in the day of battle: (...) 140.7
O Lord thou art my God and I will thank thee; thou art my King, (...) 1.8.28.
and I will praise thee.

Of Life Eternal.
1. WHat will thou muse on (O my soul!) what employment shall I find thee, or
thou find thy self? what meditations more worthy thy self next the glory of thy
Maker, then the glory of thy self? Ascend then (O my soul!) in thy thoughts to
that Nebo and Pisgag, Deuteronomy. (...)
whence thou may descry a glimpse of that Land of bliss and promise, which
thy faith believes, and thy heart desires.

2. And what is that life of glory but a full fruition of God and thy self,
with the society of Saints and Angels? the blessed vision of the all-glorious
Deity: Thy union to him, thy enjoying of him, and rejoicing in him: A life that
is all life, and has nothing of death or sorrow in it, where are fullness of
joies and pleasures for evermore. Psalm. (...)
A life whose glory cannot be described till it be enjoyed, 1 Cor. (...)
for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive those treasures of happiness that God has laid up for them
that love him: A life whereunto not our light afflictions only which are but
for a moment, Romans (...)
but whereunto the best things of this life, yea our life it self is not worthy
to be compared.

3. And this is the last of lives, and is a life everlasting: Our first Life is
a life of Nature, the marriage of soul and body together: Our next Life is a
life of Grace, an espousing of the Soul to Christ: Our last Life is a life of
Glory, when Soul and Body are married unto God for ever. The Soul is begotten
to this life, at our regeneration; it is borne at our death, or separation of
Soul and Body: from thence to the resurrection, and reunion of the Body to
the Soul, it is in its childhood; and then enters it into its full perfection.
In this glory there may be degrees, there can be no imperfection; though some
shine like stars of greater, some of lesser magnitude, yet all shall shine:
some shall hold more glory, some less, yet all shall be full: he that has
least shall neither want himself, nor annoy him that has a larger portion.

4. And whence is this life eternal but from him who is the fountain both of
life, and of eternity? The Father has made it and decreed it: The Son has
merited and procured it: The Holy Ghost has sealed and delivered it. Not thy
Free Will in doing good, but his free Mercy in Electing thee is that which
gives thee title to this Glory: Thou art not happy because thou have been holy,
but thou art holy because thou art ordained to be happy. And as this Glory, so
all things tending thereunto are from God: he that ordained thee to Glory, has
given thee a Savior to give thee this Glory; he has given thee Faith to bring
thee to this Savior; he has given thee his Word to bring thee to this Faith;
he has given thee his Merit, he has given thee his Spirit, he has given thee
the hive, and the honey too. Look up unto God then (O my soul!) as the beginner
and the finisher of thy Glory; and when thou art ravished with the glory of the
work, forget not to magnify him who is the Author. And indeed, he is both
the Author of thy glory, and thy glory too it self; in him is all thy
happiness. Can thou want any thing then (O my soul!) that injoyest him who
is all perfection? Can thou thirst while thou dwell in the fountain, and
wellspring of living Waters? Can thou hunger whilst thou art filled with
Manna, and bread of life? Can thou be naked, whilst thou art wrapped in glory?
(...) 6.11.
Can thou be sad (O my soul!) whilst thou art in his presence where is
fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore? yea, thou thy self art now
sufficient in him who is All-sufficient.

5. But what are the commodities of this kingdom of Glory? surely the fruit
must needs be both wholesome and pleasant that grows upon this Tree of life: if
the kingdom of God upon Earth be righteousness, and peace, (...) 14. (...) 17.
and joy in the Holy Ghost, oh! what is that kingdom then in Heaven? All
things must needs be pure there, where no unclean thing can enter; and they
must needs also be as peaceable, where there is no room for jarre or discord;
and shall they not also be as pleasant? (...) 21.4.
when sorrow and sadness shall be no more? shall not our eyes stand full with
joy when all tears are wiped off? When our hearts are then so merry, how shall
we choose but sing? or how can our mirth but be melodious? and how can our songs
but be continual, since our joys are everlasting? Our Hosannah's and
Hallelujah's shall never cease, because our joys shall never end; and our joys
are everlasting, because our glory is eternal: nor can we be weary of hearing,
or making that music which none can bear a part in and not be happy.

6. Who now are the Inhabitants of this happy Land, the Inheritours of this
bliss, the Citizens, and Subjects of this City of God? who are they but Saints
and Angels? glorious Spirits, or bodies transformed into a spiritual
perfection? Christ is King and God, and he makes his subjects Kings, (...)
1^.40.
and (as it were) Gods too, that they may reign with him for ever and ever.
These bodies of ours which were earthy are now heavenly, this terrestrial is
become celestial, and this natural body is made a spiritual. And thus are we
made fit to accompany Angels, and hold fellowship with Prophets and Patriarchs:
these immortal crowns of glory are not only prepared for us, but we are also
prepared for them, and made able to receive that bliss of which before we were
not only unworthy, but incapable. Our soul and body are not only reunited,
but improved to such an enlarged perfection, that they are able not only to
receive, but retain their fill, their full of glory; even of that transcendent
glory which is so pure and bright, that it would rather astonish, then delight
the best of mortals. What this bliss indeed is, we do not, we cannot know
until we have it, then shall we comprehend it as well as be comprehended by
it: here we know but in part, then shall we know it fully, and it is not less
then half our happiness that we are made so capable of knowing and receiving
it.

7. Nor is that a small bliss or glory that arises from the very place wherein
we enjoy it: The majesty even of earthly Princes is often seen in their stately
Palaces; they have had their houses of Cedar and Ivory. What is that Palace
then that the God of Majesty has made for himself? when we say, that this City
of God has her walls of Jasper, Rev. 2 (...)
her buildings of gold, her foundations precious stones, her gates pearl;
these are but low expressions stooping to our weak capacities: Psalm. 8 (...)
Oh! how excellent things are spoken of thee thou City of God? and yet all
short of thy Excellency! Even this world has some glimpses and reflections of
glory; her greatest is in her Canopie, her sealed roof that is so bespangled
with glorious stars; and yet even this is but the pavement of that City; What
then is her Canopie? Blessed, thrice-blessed, o God, are they whom thou shall
count worthy to come under thy roof.

And as the place, so the Company much more adds to our felicity: it is but
half an happiness to be happy alone: Genesis 2 (...)
When Adam had a Paradise to dwell in, and a world besides to encompasse him,
yet he was not perfect till he had a Partner. It is not so much a comfort to
have Companiens of our miseries, as of our joys; of which we lose the better
part if we have not some to bear a part. We have Friends and Companions in
this life, with whom sometime we have distasts and discontents, yet when Death
calls us, how loath are we to go and leave them! Death often times has not a
greater grief then this, to leave our Friends behind us. Oh! how glad shall we
be to meet again in that other world, where our joys and loves shall be
redoubled? to meet them in the midst of Myriads of Saints, and Legions of
Angels! to meet them with God our Father, and Christ our Savior, and that
blessed Spirit who is the God of joy and love: all which, have their full of
felicity, and yet we have never the less: Their joys and glories shall not
over shadow or eclipse, but add to ours: They shall joy in our happiness, and
we rejoice in theirs, for none shall think others much or their own little. The
joy must needs be answerable to the glory of the sight, to see the ancient
Kings and Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles in their glorious mansions: to meet
familiarly with the Fathers of the primitive and present Church! to see those
valiant and renowned troops of Martyrs and Confessors! to see those squadrons
of Angels marshalled in their glorious orders! nay, to see and be able to look
upon God himself! Oh! my soul! how can thou think on this and not be
ravished with desire to be added to this Company? But that which crowns our
comfort, and fills our joy unto the brim, is, this our happiness is eternal,
everlasting: That is not half an happiness that has an end, a period; nay,
it adds unto our grief if we might have been, to our misery if we have been
happy, and are not. In this life our wine is mixed with tears, our mirth with
mourning; (...) 14.13
we often laugh and cry in less then an hour; yea sometimes even in laughter
the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is heaviness. But our joys in
Heaven are as perpetual, as they are pleasant; our glory as permanent, as
excellent: Nor can they but be everlasting since they spring from a fountain
that cannot dry. (...) 84.1, 10.
Oh how amiable are thy dwellings on Earth, o Lord of hosts! how does an holy
soul long to go into thy courts! for one day in thine house is better then a
thousand otherwhere. Oh! what then are millions of years in thy courts in
Heaven? yea, what is Eternity? in comparison whereof millions of years are not
a moment.

8. Now this life of glory will seem to give the greater luster, if we do but
compare it with those other lives of the middle and lower regions. And first,
what is this World but a ship of vanity, floating upon a sea of misery? whose
richest fraught, and best commodities, are not better then those of Solomon
from Tharshish, Gold and Silver, and Ivory, and Apes, ^^ng. 10.22.
and Peacocks: Riches, honors, pleasures. And what are these at the best but
vanity? what is Gold and Silver but red and white clay? what is honor, but a
bubble? what is pleasure, but a squib? or worse, an Ignis fatuus? And if this
be the best, what is the rest? if this be her Welcome, what is her Farewell? if
when she meet us she be vanity, she cannot be less then vexation when she
leaves us. When the rust and the canker has consumed thy gold and thy silver;
(...) 6.19.
when Thieves have plundered thy goods, and worse then Thieves, have
sequestered thy Lands; when thy State is wracked, and thy Credit cracked; when
thine honors are flowen, and thy pleasures gone, then, thou shall not need an
O Edipus to tell thee, what this World is. And next, what is our whole Life on
Earth but a vast composure of sin and misery? A couple of Harlots that can
accord together to work our mischief, 1 Kin^ (...)
only here is the contention, which of the twain has the greatest right and
share in us; each pleads hard for all, and will not be contented with an half:
and surely sin would have the greatest part, were it not that sin it self is
a misery. What are our bodies but bundles of diseases, every member having more
infirmities then arteries? it is almost as impossible to know them, as to cure
them, and more impossible not to have them; if we could, yet it would be more
then tedious for to name them, how tedious then to feel them? And yet who is he
that is not continually accompanied with some one or more of them, our diseases
(which is strange) being more diverse then our Deaths: and (which is more
strange yet) our grounds of grief within our little world (our selves) being
more then all the great world beside can give us? Now then (O my soul) think
seriously on thy joys above, and thy miseries here, and then neglect Heaven if
thou can, and dote on Earth. But if neither sorrows within thee, nor troubles
about thee do not thoroughly affect thee, think on those horrors of that
lower world, if thou think those thoughts will not affright thee. Isa. 6
(...)
Where the damned are ever dying, never dead; ever burning, never consumed;
ever tumbling down, never come to the bottom; where the Worm dies not, but
her continual gnawings make way for continual gnashings. Mat. (...)
Where dismal fears and terrors, frights and amazements, utter darkness and
fire unquenchable, with rivers of brimstone; where roarings and howlings, Mat.
(...)
yellings and shriekings, Isa. 3 (...)
and cursings of ugly Fiends and ghastly Ghosts are but parcels of torments; and
all that men can say are not half expressions of those woes which none can
know but those that feel them. And that which is heavier then all the rest,
this infernal Vault is so thick seeled with Despair, that there is no getting
out for ever. Think on this then (O my soul) and then think again, that there
was but one step between thee and this Death, and if thy gracious Savior had
not stepped in that step, and caught thee, thou had fallen irrecoverable; yet
this not half; he not only redeemed thy life from Hell, but crowned thee also
in Heaven with mercy, and glory everlasting. Ps. 10 (...)
Think on this double mercy (O my soul) and be double thankful, double happy.

9. (...) 30
But whereunto shall we liken this Kingdom of God, or unto what shall we
compare it? It is like a Sea-scourged Merchant, that has been long tossed on
the raging waves by the churlish winds; beaten with many a billow; dashed on
many a rock; threatened with many a wrack and catarack; that has gone over many
a gulf; past over many a pool; fought with many a Pirate; and now at last
richly fraught is entered with joy, and triumph into the safe haven and harbor
of his own City. It is like unto a Joseph imprisoned in a dungeon, in stocks
and irons; and at last brought forth and set among Princes, (...) ^4. (...) 2.2
and made to inherit a throne of glory. It is like unto a David, hunted,
persecuted, banished, and at last return home, and be crowned a King in
Jerusalem. (...) ^5.9
It is like a year of Jubilee after fifty years bondage. Like a return from
Babylon after seventy years captivity, to a Temple more glorious then the
first. Or like a Sabbath of holy rest, (...) 6. (...) 20
after a week of hard labor. It is like a beggarly Lazarus full of sores, that
fain would have some crumbs of comfort from the seeming riches of this world,
but can get none tell he have his fill in Abraham's bosom. (...) 1
Or like that other Lazarus, sick, and dead, and buried, and perhaps stinking
in the grave of this Earth, the cold, and hard, and heavy stone of Misery and
Necessity pressing him down, till the voice of God cry, Lazarus come forth. It
is like liberty and pardon to a condemned prisoner. It is like a sumptuous
Wedding-feast at the marriage of a Kings son, who has married not the rich and
beautiful Daughter of a Noble, nor the homely Daughter of a Citizen or
Artizen, but the deformed Daughter of a miserable Beggar; for such were we,
whose first parents, by their fall, bemired both themselves and us, who since
have made our selves more filthy by continual wallowing; (...) 16. (...) 4.
thus are we naked, and wounded, and in our blood, even to the loathing of our
selves; no eye pitties, neither Priest, nor Levite can help us, (...) ^0. (...)
1.
till the Son of God come, who has compassion, who washes off our mud with his
blood, who takes our infirmities, and cures our deformities, wraps us in the
garments of his own rightrousnesse, gives us his grace and comeliness; and
then looks, and loves, and marries for ever, and keeps an everlasting wedding,
at which all rejoice, but devils and damned. These are glimples of our glory if
so much, suitable to our shallow fancies; here we know but in part, (...) 33.
and see darkly: even the Apostles themselves, though they had seen the
transfiguration; yet when they began to speak thereof, talk they know not what:
And S. Paul, when he had been in Paradise, and returned, though he wanted
neither memory nor expressions, 2 Co(...)
yet he can tell us only, that he had been there, but what he saw or heard was
impossible toutter. Content thy self then (O my soul!) with thy glory in that
manner, and measure, and method as God shall give it thee.

10. How sweet a thing is Life! even the naming of it invites to cheerfulness,
and its contrary, is of a dull sound; even this Life, which is not only
temporal, but miserable too; yet because it is a Life, how loath are we to
leave it? How shall we joy in our life, then when temporal shall be changed to
eternal, and misery to glory? Eccle^ (...)
How sweet a thing is Light! how pleasant to behold the Sun! how near are light
and life of kind! when even stones, because they have light in them, are said
to be lively, and are held for jewels! How excellent is the eye! which is not
only the beauty of the face, Mat. (...)
but the light of the body, what could we do without it? how much of our
happiness consists in light, even here! how much more hereafter! How sweet a
thing is glory! even the painted glory of this world, which most time is but a
bare name and shadow, yet is often preferred before life it self. And yet how
little a place does this glory fill; how short a time does it last? how hardly
is it got! how quickly forgot! how subject to be mistaken! fond man, often
thinking he embraces his honor when he hugs his shame. Our glory here at beft,
is but a gloeworme, hereafter it shall excel the Sun. How sweet a thing is our
Country! and is preferred before our Parents, our Children, or our selves: How
beloved a thing is our home! he is senseless, or worse, that does not highly
prize it: And yet even in our Country here we are but Pilgrims, at our home we
are but strangers; Heaven is our Country, and our Home, in comparison whereof,
the richest Palace on earth is homely. How sweet a thing is a Crown! how
desirable a Kingdom! How eagerly do ambitious men endanger their bodies, and
damn their souls, to have a pull at one of them! And yet what are Earthen
Crowns, but wreathes of thorns? clouts stuffed with cares? and how often have
those weighty Caps broke the necks of those that wore them? Not so with our
Crowns of glory, who as far excel these in security, as they do in majesty:
for none shall ever envy them, but those that shall never come near to trouble
them. Let the thought of these glories then (O my soul) be thy joy, till the
time come thou shall enjoy them.

11. We can but glance and guess at these stately glories; as eye has not
seen them, nor ear heard them, neither can the heart conceive them, (...) 1.9
what good things be those that God has provided for those that love him,
(...) 1.19
even before the sons of men: to please the sense, but cannot fill our little
heart. But what better things are those he has provided for them before the
sons of God, to fill and satisfy their enlarged souls! whereunto not our light
afflictions only which are but for a moment, (...) 8.18
but the greatest blessings this world has, are not worthy to be compared.
What can the heart desire more, then to be rid of evil and enjoy good? both are
here; (...) 6.11
here is fullness of that which causes fullness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore. Here is none of that which may cause sorrow: not only all tears,
(...) 21.4.
but all cause of tears shall be wiped away. nor can any thing enter here that
is soul or hurtful. Cease not these thoughts (O my soul) till they have
raised thee to joy and thankfulness.

12. Now farewell then fond pleasure, thou painted Witch: Farewell base earth,
(...) 13. (...) 46.
thou unweildie bulk: and farewell Flesh with thy filthy lusts. Fly away
vainglory with thy Peacock-feathers; Avaunt sin, Avoid Satan, I have found a
prize, a Pearl, I will sell all and buy it. Oh come then into my arms (my
Dear!) draw near, my Joy, and ravish him that cannot ravish thee. Oh let my
ravished thoughts attain some glimpses (though at too far a distance) of thy
rare beauties. Who can think on thee, and not long for thee? Who can hope for
thee, and not think those longings long? Who can love thee, and not be happy?
But how happy those be that enjoy thee, no tongue can tell. Oh bear me on thy
wings, (Dear Love) while I lightly trample over the dung of this world: Smile
but upon me, and I shall cheerfully pass the gates of death. He knows thee
not, that loves thee not. He loves thee not, that will not die to come unto
thee.

13. (...) 26.
But alas, though the Spirit be willing, the Flesh is weak: whatever the
matter be, my soul is heavy, as if there were some earth in that too: Mine
eyes are dim, I cannot see those glaunces of thy beauty which I might see: Mine
ears are deaf too often to thy sweet motions: My palate is dull, when I should
taste how gracious my Lord is: My smell is not well taken with the favor of
his precious ointments: And all the Arteries of my soul are often time so
benumbed, they can neither feel themselves nor thee. Oh heavens! whence is the
cause of all this coldness? is my soul so much in love with my body, it cannot
leave it a little to enjoy it self alone? is my body so much of kind unto the
Earth, that it must needs be more heavy then it? and must my soul needs be
heavy too for company? Are the treasures and pleasures of this world such
goodly things, thou can not sequester thy thoughts from them? Or are the
joys of heaven so poor, thou art loath to spend thy thoughts upon them? Or
do thou believe there are none there, or none for thee, and therefore wilt
not labor in vain? Surely these are not the causes, God and my soul know: but
either the graces of heaven withhold their dewes, and veyle their beauty, and
their influence; or else my stony, leaden, or at least my fleshly heart, draws
not in their blessing: Or else God that made heaven, and gives it, will give it
freely, we shall not be suspected to deserve it, so much as in a strong desire:
Or else the Divine wisdom and goodness sees that if we should have these
blessed visions and revelations in abundance we should be exalted above
measure, 2 (...)
and therefore sends this ballast in the flesh to humble us. This is thy
condition (O my soul!) thou complainest not without a cause, and mai'st well be
sorry for thy heaviness.

14. Thou see (O Lord!) that I am so weary and heavy laden, I cannot travel
upon this holy hill; Oh! that thou would ease me, Mat. (...) 2
as thou have promised! Oh! take off my burden, add to thy strength: pluck off
the plumets of my flesh, and put to the feathers of thy spirit, whose wings are
silver, and her feathers gold: Psalm. 6. (...) 57.
Oh! that I had the wings of that Dove, then should I fly away. Oh! that I
could but get up this Nebo, and see my Canaan; how dearly should I love, Deuteronomy.
(...)
and long for her! how boldly for her sake should I bid defiance unto
whatsoever this wilderness, or world can tempt me with!

15. But (O Lord!) thou know my soul neither has this happiness, nor can
deserve it: yea, neither can deserve to have it, nor to desire it. But look not
on my merits, but on thy mercy: if I had my desert, I should have been long ere
this past hope or help of Mercy: That thou have saved me from Hell, is a Mercy
no less then infinite; but that thou should also give me Heaven, is a Mercy
every way like thy self. How can I deserve so great a Glory, that am not able
to ask, or worthy to beg the least of thy Mercies! How is my soul benumbed
with Flesh! bemired with Earth! besetted with Sin! Lord thou art my hope, my
help: help then thy servant that cannot help himself; and as thou have prepared
glory for me, so Lord prepare me for my glory.

16. O God the Father of Light, and Life, from whom every good and perfect gift
descends; take this work into thine hand, Iam. 1 (...)
and the glory of it: perfect what thou have begun: O save my soul that puts
her trust in thee. Wean her from the frothy milk of this world; feed her with
that Mannah that came down from Heaven! thou that put Clay into the blind
man's eyes and cured them, (...) 9.6
wash out that clay in mine, wherewith they are so bedaubed, they can neither
see Heaven, nor thee. It is thine hand that made the Heavens, and it is thine
hand that gives them, and it is the same hand again that lifts mine heart unto
them: O Lord! though thou make not mine heart heavy, yet thou find it so:
thou have it in thine hand, turn it, and tune it as please thee: make it light
by the light of thy counteuance: quicken it by thy Spirit: take out her earth;
put in thy fire: carry her up to Nebo: show her Canaan: make her weary of this
wilderness: and enlarge her longings after Heaven: leave her not till thou
make her pant after thee, (...) 42.
as the heart after the waters; nor let her thirst ever be abated till she be
filled with the presence of thee, O God.

17. (...) 18 (...) 27.
And since I have begun to speak unto the Lord of glory, who am but dust and
ashes, pardon thy servant, if while he plead with thee, he urge thee with thy
promise. Have thou not said (O Lord!) that thou will give me life? (...) 6.10
have thou not bid me pray, Thy kingdom come? and have thou not promised to
give to them that ask, and open to them that knock? have thou not always
declared thy self, a God rich in mercy, and delights to show it? I beg that
which thou know I want, I perish without it; thou have in abundance, enough
to spare, to make Millions rich and happy: I can have supply from none, from
nothing else, the whole world besides is Misery, if thou give not, I shall
never have it: I beg no more but what thou have given others: how many thousand
Saints and Martyrs have thou crowned with glory? And (pardon me O Lord, and I
shall speak once more) have thou not bought Heaven for me, and paid for it? a
good price too, and sufficient? Oh! let these persuade with thee, and let thy
mercy in thy well-beloved Son prevail; in him look down on me, and make me
look up to thee; with his blood cement and link all thy graces in a chain, and
let them down to me, that laying hold thereon, I may be drawn up to my glory.

18. Yea, be thou confident (O my soul!) it shall be so: Faithful is he that
has promised, ^or. 1.9. ^or. 1.20. (...) 3.3.
even God that cannot lie: all thy sins cannot make his grace of none effect:
he counts his promise as a debt, and will surely pay it; yea, he has not only
bought Heaven for thee, but bought thee also for Heaven, and given earnest for
thee, the graces of his Spirit. Be thou sure (O my soul!) thy King and Savior
that has fought so valiantly, and paid so dearly for thy redemption, 2 Cor.
(...)
will not now lose thee. Who shall separate thee from this love of God? Romans
(...)
who can pull thee from thy glory? if thy sins cannot, thy afflictions shall
not: Go to thy rest then (O my soul!) and there be thankful.

19. Now praise the Lord (o my soul) and all that is within me bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord (O my soul) and forget not all his benefits. Ps. 103
(...) 2, (...)
Who pardons all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities; which has
redeemed thy life from destruction, and crowned thee too with everlasting
mercies. Oh! what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
What shall I? what can I render? Ps. 116 (...)
What can I give thee (O God) which is not thine own already? Thou ask mine
heart; thou have it; I give it thee, and thank thee too with all mine heart.
Oh! Pro. 23 (...)
that it were worthy thy acceptance; O Lord thou do accept it as it is, and
therefore My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1. (...)
and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior; for he has highly exalted the low
estate of his servant; he that is mighty has done great things for me, and
holy is his name; and bless be that God who has made me blessed to all
eternity. Amen.

FINIS.

