Select Arguments AND REASONS AGAINST POPERY.

By R. Baxter.

LONDON* Printed in the Year. ^^^^.

Select Arguments, AND REASONS, etc.
POpery, is a certain heap or mixture of many grievous Errors in the Doctrine
of Faith, Government, and Worship, expressed in the Authorized Writings of the
Romanists, especially in their Decretals and Counsels* corrupting the Christian
Religion which they profess, The whole being denominated from that one
Falsehood, The Pope of Rome is the Universal Bishop, and visible Head of the
Universal Church and Christ's Vicar General on Earth, and that, that only is the
Catholic Church, and those only Catholics that so believe; For the Papists
professing to be Christians do first own the substance of Christian Doctrine,
and then corrupt it, and contradict it by super-adding this Fardle of their own
Inventions; Now to show how dangerous such their opinion is, be pleased to
consider these Arguments.

Argument. 1. Those Doctrines which are sounded upon a notorious falsehood and
resolved into it, are not a safe way to Salvation, but such are the Doctrines
which we call Popery, Therefore Popery is no safe way to Salvation;

As for the minor the Papists confess, they are founded on and resolved into
the Doctrine of the Popes infallibility, or at least his Counsels, but that
this is a notorious falsehood is evident from their Histories of both Popes and
counsels that have erred, and their own confession, I mean, whilst one part of
them do confess that the Pope may err (as the French) and the other (that is
the Italians and Spaniards) that a counsel may err* nay Pope Adrian the 6 th.
(whose word fure may be taken in this case of himself) wrote his Judgment of
it, acknowledging that a Pope may err.

Arg. 2. The Papists are not agreed amongst themselves either Clergy or Layity
about the very fundaments of their Faith, o^ matters which they make necessary
to Salvation, for they maintain that we must receive our Faith and the
Scriptures upon the Authority of the infallible church, and yet are not agreed
amongst themselves nor ever like to be what the infallible Church is, whether
in the Pope, or in a counsel or in both together.

Arg. 3, Popery is a new devised way to Heaven, such as the Apostles never
knew, nor the Church after them for many a hundred year (in the main parts of
it) And therefore can be n^ s^^e way to Salvation.

Arg. 4. The Papists are the greatest Schismatics on Earth, most desperately
rending the Church, and separating themselves from the main body thereof, and
lay the grounds of a continual Schism in making a new Head, and center of the
unity of the Church; The Catholic Church for many hundred years after Christ
was that body of Christians who were united only in Christ the Head, and held
communion in the Fundament^ls of Faith and Worship and had no moral Head or
Center but the Worldly greatness of the City of Rome occasioning the usurpation
of her Bishop he would needs make himself the Center of union and Universal
Head, and is not this the vilest Schism that Men can be guilty of.

Arg. 5. The Doctrine of Popery derogateth from the written word of God, and
setleth the decrees of Men above it, enabling them to contradict it is most
express Institutions, and therefore is no way to salvation.

Arg. 6. Popery is Idolatry teaching Men to worship the Creature with divine
Worship, as the consecrated Host or Bread in their Mass, It Is true they tell
us, That it is no longer Bread but the Body of Christ, but this is a Fiction,
consider these Reasons, If the Bread were Christ's real Body, then Christ had
two real bodies, a sense and an insensible body both at once, and then the
Apostles did tear Christ's true flesh, and draw out his blood as well as the
Jews, and thence it will follow that Christ's glorified body is corruptible, and
may be digested by a Man's Stomach and become sinful as being a natural part of
a sinner, for the Bread and Wine do nourish us, and turn into our substance,
and that a Creature (the Baker or Priest) may make God, and that the Scriptures
are not true, which witness that the Heavens must receive him till the
restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. with many other abominable absurdities.

Arg. 7. The Doctrine of Popery teaches Men to turn the most of Gods Worship
into mere unreasonable ceremonies and vain formalities of Man's devising, and
who can think that the holy and blessed God will be delighted in their vain
bablings and childish cantings, and affected repetitions of words, and saying
and hearing we know not what.

Arg. 8. Popery is maintained most commonly by most wicked and abominable
means, the very business they so much contend for, Is Pomp, Greatness,
Dominion, yea Tyranny in the World, so that it is evidently pride, vain glory,
and covetousness sets them on, for the support of which, they care not what
wickedness they venture: As dispensing with the vilest sins, forging miracles,
raising egregious lies, and butchering where they have power, those that oppose
them.

Argument the 9 th. If all that part of the Christian World that was out of
reach of the Roman Empire did never submit to the Sovereignty of the Pope, Then
has he not been successively or at any time the actual Head of the Universal
Church, But it is certain vast numbers of Christians amongst the Indians,
Abissines, Poles, Muscovites and other parts did never so submit, Therefore the
Pope was never actual Head of the Universal Church.

Argument the 10 th. The Rule or Test of the Faith of Papists never had a real
being, or no succession from the Apostles, and therefore their Faith and Church
has either no real being, or no such succession, for either general Counsels,
or Popes, or the Church essential (as they call it, that is the whole Body) is
the rule of their Faith, if it be general Counsels. 1. They had no being from
the Apostles till the counsel of Nice, therefore the Rule of the Papists Faith
was then unborn. 2. Yea the truth is, they never had a being in the World, for
that of Nice was so far from being Universal, that it had but one or two
Bishops present, but those of the Empire, nor was there any thing like a free
general counsel since the days of the Apostles to this day; If it be the Pope
that is the rule of their Faith, then their Faith has been interrupted, yea
and turned to Heresy and Infidelity when the Pope has so turned. But lastly,
If it be the major part of the Universal Church, it is known that two to one are
against them, or at least the greatest part, if we reckon (as we must) the
Greek Church; and all others professing christianity in the World, therefore by
that Rule their belief in the Papal Sovereignty is false, and yet besides it
would be hard if a man must be of no belief till he have brought the World to
pole for it.

Arg. 11. If sense be either fallible or infallible, the Pope is fallible, but
sense is either fallible or infallible, Ergo, The consequence is proved thus,
If sense be fallible, the Pope is infallible, and all his Church, for their
senses and the Apostles and their Followers too must be fallible, but if sense
be infallible, still the Pope and his counsel are, because the common senses of
all sound men take that for Bread and Wine which they expressly say (as d^ fide
to be believed) Is not Either Bread or Wine.

Reasons to resolve any considerate Man against Popery.
Reas. 1. The Faith or Religion of Papists as described by themselves, is so
far from infallibility, that it is utterly uncertain unintelligible and mere
contradiction and confusion, a changeable thing that no Man knows whether he
have it or not, nor when he has it all, but whoever has it, has certainly a
hodge podge of Truth and Falshoood.

Reas. 2. Their Papacy which essentiateth their Church is a horrid usurpation
of Christ's own Prerogative, and of an office to do that which is incomparably
above the power or capacity of any mortal Man to take care of all the Souls on
Earth, and rule the Antipodes, and in those parts of the World which he has no
knowledge of.

Reas. 3. The said Papacy is an arrogant usurpation of the power of all
Christian Princes and Pastors, or of a power over them never given by Christ,
It sets up a Kingdom in a Kingdom, and takes from Pastors the power which
Christ gave them over their particular flocks.

Reas. 4. Their Church is often essentially unholy, Heretical and wicked, because
the Pope is often so, who is an essential part of it, and therefore it is not
the Holy Catholic Church, for whole Counsels have upon examination judged
their Popes to be Heretics, Schismatics, Adulterers, Blasphemers, etc. And
that Church cannot be holy, whose essential part is so unholy.

Reas. 5. Their Doctrine is not only contrary to many express Texts of holy
Scripture, but also contrary to it is self, one Pope and one counsel having
decreed one thing, and another the clean contrary.

Reas. 6. Their Religion tends greatly to mortify Christianity, and turn it
into a dead Image by destroying much of its life and power; by befriending
Ignorance, locking up the Scriptures blind devotion and external formalities.

Reas. 7. They plead for a Church that never had a being in the World, that is
all Christians Headed by one Pope, when all the Christian World did never take
him for their Head, nor were governed by him to this day.

Reas. 8. They dreadfully injure the holy Scriptures; as if Jesus Christ, and
the Prophets and Apostles in those sacred Records had not skill or will to
speak intelligibly, and plainly to deliver to us the Doctrines necessary to
Salvation, but they make their voluminous counsels more intelligible and
sufficient as if they had done it better, And whereas Men must only discern
God^ Laws, and judge causes by the Law, they make themselves Judge^ of the Law
it self; by which they must one day be judged.

Reas. 9 Every honest Godly Protestant may be as sure tha^ Popery is false, as
he is, that he is himself sincere, and loves God^ and is truly willing to obey
him; and no Man can turn Papist with ou^ self contradiction, who is a true
Christian, and an honest man for b^ turning Papist he confesses himself to be
before a fall heart^d Hypo^rite, for it is a part of Popery to believe that
non^ in a state of Salvation but the Subjects of the Pope, or Members of the
Papal Church, and consequently that no others have true Faith, Repentance, or
Love to God, all therefore that kno^ their own hearts to be truly devoted to
God are safe from Pope^ And since it is agreed on both sides that none ought or
can tu^^ Papists, but ungodly Hypocrites, no wonder if such are delud^^ by the
most palpable deceits and forsaking of God when they h^^^ before forsaken him.

To conclude this Paper, there is yet one Argument behind ^^quisite against
Popery, for it is professors plead not as other p^^ties, only by the Tongue, but
by exciting Princes and States against us, and disputing with the Faggot, or
Ha^chet in th^^^ hands, and therefore if we have not Arguments that will
con(...) a Navy, an Army, or a Powder Plot, we may still happen to (...)
worsted by them. Which I beseech the Lord for the sake of Church, and the
honor of the Gospel to prevent.

FINIS.

