A TREATISE OF Knowledge and Love COMPARED. In two Parts: I. Of Falsely
Pretended Knowledge. II. Of True Saving Knowledge and Love.
I. Against Hasty Judging, and False Conceits of Knowledge, and for necessary
Suspension. II. The Excellency of Divine Love, and the Happiness of being Known
and Loved of God. Written as greatly needful to the Safety and PEACE of every
Christian, and of the Church. The only certain way to escape false Religions,
Heresies, Sects, and Malignant Prejudices, Persecutions and Sinful Wars: All
caused by falsely pretended Knowledge, and hasty Judging, by Proud Ignorant men,
who know not their Ignorance.

By RICHARD BAXTER; Who by God's blessing on long and hard Studies, has
learned to know that he knows but little, and to suspend his Judgment of
Uncertainties, and to take Great, Necessary, Certain things, for the food of
his Faith, and Comforts, and the Measure of his Church Communion.

Prove. 14 16. A wise man fears and departs from evil: But the FOOL RAGES
and is CONFIDENT.

2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled EVE by his
subtilty; so your minds should be CORRVPTED from the SIMPLICITY which is in
Christ.

1 Cor. 1.25. The foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God
is stronger than men. v. 20. Has not God made f^oli^h the wisdom of this
world? c. 2.6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom
of this world.

2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved to God; a workman that needed not
be ashamed, rightly DIVIDING the word of Truth. 16. But shun profane and vain
o^^lings, for they will increase unto more ungodliness.

August. Enchirid. cap. 59. (De Corporibus Angelorum) Cum ista queruntur* and a
sicut potest quisque conjectat, non inutiliter exercentur ingenia si adhibeatur
disceptantia moderata, and absit error opinantium se scire quod nesciunt. Quod
enim opes est ut hec and hujusmodi affirmentur, vel negentur, vel definiantur
cum dis^rimine, quando sine crimine nesciuntur?

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower
end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1689.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir HENRY ASHHURST, AND THE Lady DIANA HIS WIFE.
SIR,
YOur Name is not prefixed to this Treatise, either as accusing you of the Sin
herein detected, or as praising you for those Virtues, which good Men are more
pleased to possess and exercise, than to have proclaimed, though they be as
Light, that is hardly hid. But it is to vent and exercise that Gratitude which
loves not the concealment of such Friendship and Kindness, as you and your
Lady Eminently, and your Relatives and Hers, [the Children of the Lord Paget]
have long obliged me by: And it is to Posterity that I record your Kindness,
more than for this Age, to which it has publicly notified it self, during my
public Accusations, Reproaches, Sentences, Imprisonments, and before and
since: Who knows you that knows not hereof? And it is to renew the record
of that Love and Honor which I owed to your deceased Father (formerly, pthough
too slenderly recorded,) to be the Heir and Imitater of whose Faith, Piety,
Charity, Patience, Humility, Meekness, Impartiality, Sincerity and
Perseverance, is as great an Honor and Blessing as I can wish you, next to the
conformity to our highest pattern. And though he was averse to worldly Pomp and
Grandeur, and desired that his Children should not affect it, yet God that will
honor those that honor him, has advanced his Children, I believe partly for
his sake: But I entreat you all (and some other of my Friends whom God has
raised as a Blessing to their Pious and Charitable Parents and themselves) to
watch carefully lest the deceitful World and Flesh, do turn such Blessings into
Golden Fetters, and to be sure to use them as they would find at last on their
account.

And as you are a Member of the present House of Commons, I think the Subject
of this Treatise is not unnecessary to your consideration and daily care: That
when proof, and notorious, and sad Experience tells us what distractions have
befaln Church and State, by Men's self-conceited, erroneous rushing upon sin and
falsehood, as if it were Certainly Good and True, and how little Posterity
fears and avoideth this confounding Vice, though History tell us that it has
been the Deluge that in all Ages has drowned the peace and welfare of the
World, you may be wary, and try before you venture, in doubtful cases,
especially where the Sacred and Civil Interest of this and many other Lands,
does probably lie on the determination? Do you think all that ventured upon the
Actions and Changes, that have tossed up and down both Churches and Kingdoms, by
Divisions, Persecutions and Wars, had not done better to suspend their
Judgments, till they could have more certainly determined? Who should proceed
more cautelously than Bishops? And where rather than in Councils? And in what
rather than about Faith and Public Government and Order? And had Bishops and
Councils torn the Church, and Empires, and Kingdoms, as they have done by
aspiring after Superiority, and by contentious Writings, and condemning each
other, and by contradictory and erroneous, and persecuting Canons, or by
raising Wars and Deposing Princes, ever since 400, or 500, or 600 years after
Christ, if not sooner, if they had known their ignorance, and suspended in such
dangerous cases till they were sure?

I know you are none of them who dare pretend to a Certain Knowledge, that all
those Oaths, Declarations, Covenants, Practices imposed by Laws and Canons on
Ministers and People in this Land, in the Act of Uniformity, the Corporation
Act, the Vestry Act, the Militia Act, the five Mile Act of Banishment, etc. are
so Good and Lawful, as will justify the Execution of them, and the silencing,
ejecting, ruining, and judging to lie from six Months to six in the common
Jails till they die, 2000 as faithful Ministers of Christ as any Nation has
under Heaven, unless they forbear to Preach the Gospel to which they are vowed,
or venture their Souls on that which they fear to be sins so great as they are
loath to name: When Christ will sentence them to Everlasting punishment, who did
not visit, feed, clothe him in the least of them, whom he calls his Brethren.
Before Men silence conditionally the whole Ministry of such a Kingdom, and
actually 2000 such, while the wounding, dividing consequents may be so easily
foreseen, and before men deliberately and resolutely continue and keep up such
Battering Engines on pretense of Uniformity and Obedience to Men, and before
they venture to own this to that Lord who has made other terms of Church Unity
and Peace, it nearly concerns them to think, and think on it a thousand
times: A suspended judgment is here safer than prefidence and confident rage.

And also they that desire an Abolition of Episcopacy, should a thousand times
bethink them first what True and Primitive Episcopacy is, and whether the
Episcopi Gregis, or eorum Praesides, or true Evangelists, or Apostolical
General Bishops, disarmed and duly chosen, be any injury to the Church? And
whether the Jews had not been a National Christian Church under the Twelve
Apostles and Seventy, if they had not rejected him that would have gathered
them as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings.

They that cannot deny that Christ settled a Superior Rank of Ministers,
appointing them besides their Extraordinaries, the work of Gathering and
Over-seeing many Churches, promising therein to be with them to the end of the
World, and that only Matthias must make up the National number of such, though
Justus had been with Christ as well as he, must be the Provers that this Rank
and Imparity was reversed by him that did Institute it, if they affirm it: And
not without proof charge Christ with seeming levity and mutability, as settling
a Form of Ministry and Government, which he would have continue but one Age:
Much less must they impose such an unproved affirmation as the terms of Church
Concord.

Woe, woe, woe! how effectually has Satan almost undone the Christian World,
by getting in naughty Ministers and Magistrates, where he could not utterly
Extirpate Christianity by Arms? Thereby making Rulers and Preachers the
Captains of the malignant Enemies of seriousness in that Religion which they
Profess and Preach themselves: And if in such Hypocrisy they Convert a Soul,
they hate him as an Enemy for believing them: And thereby tempt Religious Men
to mistake the Crime of the naughty Preacher, as the fault of the Office, and
to oppose the Office for the Persons sake; and so Ministry and Christianity is
despised by too many.

The shutting of their Church Doors, and condemning to Scorn and Beggary, and
Jails, those that were as wise and faithful as themselves (unless fearing
heinous sin made them worse,) should have been by the Persecutors long and
deeply thought on, twenty eight years ago* and ever since, by them that believe
that Christ will judge them. And so should all Doctrines and Practices that
tend to unwarrantable separations and divisions by others. Things of this
moment should not be ventured on, nor Papists made both Lords and Executioners
by our distracted Combats with each other, and the miserable Nation and undone
Church, left to no better a remedy than a non putaremus, and to hear the
worldly Tyrants, and the tempted Sufferers accusing each other, and disputing
when the House is burnt who was in the fault.

I think he was most faulty that could most easily have helped it, and would
not: But if Great and Rich Men will be the strength of the Factious, as they
have most to lose, they may be the greatest losers.

All this has been said, to tell you how nearly the Doctrine of this Book, for
necessary Doubting and a humble Understanding, and for Christian Love, and
against pretended Knowledge and rash Judging, does concern the duty and safety
of this Nation, Church and State.

My late Book of the English Nonconformity fully evinceth this, and more; but
blinding Prejudice, Worldliness and Faction, give leave to few of the guilty to
read it.

I rest your much obliged Servant, Rich. Baxter.
July 31. 1689.
TO THE READER.
Reader,
UPon the Review of this Book, written long ago, I find, 1. That it is a
Subject as necessary now as ever, Experience telling us that the Disease is so
far from being Cured, that it is become our public shame and danger, and if
the wonderful Mercy of God prevent it not, is like to be the speedy confusion
and ruin of the Land. 2. As to the manner of this writing, I find the effects
of the failing of my Memory, in the often repeating of the same things, with
little diversification: But I will not for that cast it away, considering, 1.
That perhaps often repeating may make the matter the better remembered; and if it
do the work intended, no matter though the Author be not applauded. 2. And men
may think justly that what is often repeated dropped not from the Author
inconsiderately, nor is taken by him to be small and useless; but is that
digested Truth which he would most inculcate. 3. And those who blame their
weakness, who accuse the Church Liturgy of too much repetition, I suppose will
not be much offended with it in our Writings, while the dullness and
forgetfulness of many Readers makes it needful.

Aug. 3. 1689. Rich. Baxter.

THE CONTENTS.
The First Part. 1 Cor. 8.2, 3.
CHap. 1. The Text opened: What Philosophy Paul depresseth, and why. Chapter 2.
What Wisdom and Esteem of it are not here condemned. Chapter 3. What Pretended
Knowledge is condemned, and what Learning or Philosophy it is which Paul
disliked further opened; with thirty Reasons. Chapter 4. What are the Certainties
which must be known and held fast, and why, where Certainty is distinctly
described. Chapter 5. Of the various Degrees of Certainty. Chapter 6. What are the
unknown things or Uncertainties, which we must not pretend a certain Knowledge
of, even Scripture Truths? Chapter 7. The first Inference: The True Reason and
Usefulness of the Christian simplicity, in differencing the Covenant and the
Principles of Religion from the rest of the holy Scriptures. Chapter 8. Infer. 2.
Of the Use of Catechizing. Chapter 9. Infer. 3. The true Preservative of puzzled
Christians, from the Errors of false Teachers, who draw them to their several
Parties. Chapter 10. Infer. 4. What is the great Plague and Divider of the
Christian World. Chapter 11. The common discoveries of Men's proud, self-conceited
understanding, and of pretended Knowledge. Chapter 12. Of the mischievous effects
of this proud pretense of more Knowledge than men have. Chapter 13. The Commodities
of a suspended Judgment and humble understanding, which pretends to no more
Knowledge or Certainty than it has. Chapter 14. The Aggravations of the Sin of
Prefidence. Chapter 15. Special Aggravations of it in Students and Pastors. Chapter 16.
Twenty clear proofs of the little Knowledge that is in the World, to move us to
a due distrust of our understandings. Chapter 17. Infer. 5. It is not the
dishonor, but the praise of Christ and his Apostles, and the Gospel, that they
speak in a plain style and manner, of the certain necessary things, without the
Vanity of School Uncertainty, and unprofitable Notions. Chapter 18. Infer. 6. The
true and false ways of restoring the Churches, and healing our Divisions, hence
opened and made plain. Chapter 19. Of the causes of Prefidence or proud pretended
Knowledge, in order to the Cure. Chapter 20. Objections Answered. Chapter 21.
Directions for the Cure.
The Second Part.
CHap. 1. Knowledge is a means to a higher End, according to which it is to be
estimated. Chapter 2. The End of Knowledge is to make us Lovers of God, and so to
be known of him. Chapter 3. Therefore Knowledge is to be sought, valued and used as
it tends to our Love of God. Chapter 4. Therefore they are the wisest and best
knowing Men that Love God best; and not they that have much unholy Knowledge.
Chapter 5. The first Inference: By what measures to estimate Knowledge. Chapter 6. The
second Inference: To abate our censures and contempt of the less-learned
Christians and Churches. Chapter 7. The third Inference: How to judge of the
Knowledge necessary to Church Communion. Chapter 8. The fourth Inference: The
aptness of the Teaching of Christ, to ingenerate the Love of God and Holiness.
Chapter 9. The fifth Inference: What great cause of thankfulness men have for the
Constitution of the Christian Religion: And how unexcusable they are that will
not learn so short and sweet, and safe a Lesson. Chapter 10. The sixth Inference:
How little reason ungodly men have to be proud of their Learning, or any of
their Knowledge. Chapter 11. The seventh Inference: Why the ungodly World hates
Holiness, and not Knowledge. Chapter 12. The eighth Inference: What is the work of
a faithful Preacher, and how it is to be done. Chapter 13. The ninth Inference:
Those that know God so far as to Love him truly, may have comfort,
notwithstanding their remaining ignorance. Chapter 14. Questions and Objections
Answered. Qu. 1. If so much Knowledge will save Men as causes them To Love
God, may not Heathens be saved who know God to be good, and therefore may Love
him? Qu. 2. May not a Papist or Heretic Love God and be saved? Qu. 3. At least
you make Ignorant Persons happy that can but Love God, though they know not
their Catechism? Qu. 4. How are Infants saved that have neither Knowledge nor
Love? Qu. 5. If this hold true, Universities, and most humane Learning should
be cast out as the Turks and Moscovites do; and the Armenians, Abassines,
Greeks, and Ignorant sort of Papists, are the wisest: Because multitudes of
other Notions must needs divert men's thoughts from God.
Chapter 15. Use, Exhort. I. Deceive not your selves by over-valuing an unholy sort
of Knowledge, or common Gifts. Chapter 16. Exhort. II. Love best those Christians
that Love God best, and live in Love and Peace with others. Chapter 17. Exhort.
III* Pretend not your Knowledge against the Love of God or Man, or against the
Interest of the Church and Souls. Chapter 18. Exhort. IV. Bend all your Studies to
a life of Increased and Exercised Love. How the Love of God must be Exercised
and Increased: The benefit hereof. Chapter 19. Exhort. V. Place your Comfort in
Health and Sickness in Mutual Divine Love. 1. See that you Love God. How known.
Doubts Answered. Chapter 20.2. But let it be the chief part of your Comfort that
you are known of God. What comfort this affords. What frame of Soul it
bespeaketh in us in Life, and at our Death.
PART I.
1 Cor. 8.2, 3. And if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet as he ought to know. But if any man Love God, the same is known of
Him.


Chap. I.
The Scope and Text opened; what Philosophy or worldly Wisdom Paul depresseth;
and why.

THE Calamitous Divisions of the Churches of Christ, Had I been supposed to
have written this Book, to hide my sloth and ignorance, men would not have
neglected my Methodus Theology and Catholic Theology through mere sloth, and
saying, That it is too high and hard for them.
and the Miscarriages and Contentions of too many particular Brethren, having
been sad upon my thoughts above forty years, by this time without imputation of
hastiness and rash judging, I may take leave to tell the World, what I have
discovered to be the principal cause, which is falsely PRETENDED KNOWLEDGE, or
IGNORANCE OF IGNORANCE, or a proud unhumbled understanding, confident that it
knows that which it knows not. And consequently what must be the cure (if
our calamity be here cureable,) viz. To know as much as we can; but withal to
know how little we know, and to take on us to know no more than we do know, nor
to be certain of our uncertainties.

The Text which I have chosen to be the ground of my discourse, is so plain,
notwithstanding some little difficulties, that did not the nature of the
Disease resist the clearest Remedy, so many good people had never here often
read their sin described, as insensibly as if they read it not.

The Chapter has so much difficulty, as will not stand with my intended
brevity to open it: I refer you to Expositors for that, whether they were the
Nicolaitans, or any other sort of Heretics that the Apostle deals with, I
determine not. It is plain that they were Licentious Professors of
Christianity, who thought that it was the ignorance of others that made them
judge it unlawful to eat things offered to Idols; and that their own greater
knowledge set them above that scruple. A mixture of Platonic Philosophy with
Christianity, made up most of the Primitive Heretics, (and for want of a due
digestion of each, too much corrupted many of the Greek Doctors of the Church.)
The unlearned sort of Christians, were so much despised by some of the
Philosophical Heretics, that they were not thought worthy of their Communion;
for as Jude says, they separated themselves, being sensual, having not the
Spirit, but more affected Philosophical fancies: which made Paul warn men to
take heed lest any seduced them by vain Philosophy; not using the name of
Philosophy, for that solid knowledge of Gods works which is desirable, but for
the Systemes of vain Conceits and Precepts, which the Word was then used to
signify, as every Sect derived them from their Masters. And so the Apostle
takes knowledge in this Text; not for solid knowledge indeed, but for
Gnosticism or Philosophical presumptions; such as even yet most Philosophers
are guilty of, who take a multitude of Precepts, some useful, some useless,
some true, and some false, and all but notionally or to little purpose, and
joining these do call them Philosophy. And Paul tells them, that opinionative
and notional knowledge (were it true, like the Devils Faith) is of no such
excellency as to cause them to shelter their sins under the confidence and
honor of it, and despise unlearned conscionable Christians; for such knowledge
by inflation often destroys the Possessors, or becomes the Fuel of the Devilish
sin of Pride, when Love builds up our selves and others to Salvation. And to
conceit that a man is wise because of such knowledge, and so to overvalue his
own understanding, is a certain sign that he is destitute of that knowledge in
which true wisdom does consist; and knows nothing with a wise and saving
knowledge, as every thing should be known: And indeed a man's excellency is so
far from lying in vain Philosophical Speculations, that the use of all true
knowledge is but to bring us up to the Love of God, (as the highest felicity)
to be approved and beloved by God: And those unlearned Christians that have the
Spirit of Sanctification, without your vain Philosophy, have knowledge enough
to bring them to this Love of God, which is a thing that passes all your
knowledge, or rather to be known of God as his own, and loved by him: For our
felicity lies in receiving from God, and in his loving us more than in our
loving him; but both set together, to love God, and so to be loved of him are
the ultimate end and perfection of man; and all knowledge is to be estimated
but as it tends to this.

This being the plain Paraphrase of the Text, I shall stay no longer on it, but
thence deduce and handle these two Observations.

Doct. I. Falsely pretended knowledge is often pernicious to the Possessor, and
injurious to the Church. And, over-valuing ones own Opinions and Notions, is a
certain mark of dangerous Ignorance.

II. A Man is so far truly wise, as he loves God, and consequently is approved
(or loved) by him, and as he loves others to their Edification.

I. The first is but the same that Solomon thus expresses, Prove. 26.12. See
thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him.
And Paul elsewhere, Romans 12.16. Be not wise in your own conceits: And Romans
11.25. and Prove. 26.5, 16. For it is certain that we are all here in great
darkness; and it is but little that the wisest know: And therefore he that
thinks he knows much, is ignorant both of the things which he thinks he
knows, and ignorant of his ignorance. Therefore 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man
deceive himself: If any man among you seems to be wise in this World, let him
become a Fool, that he may be wise: To be wise in this World, is the same with
that in the words following, The wisdom of this World is foolishness with God:
And 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 21, 22. It is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, etc. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of
this World? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this World? For after that,
in the wisdom of God, the World by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews require a
sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom etc. So Chap. 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And my
speech and my preaching was not with enticing words (or probable discourses) of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, that your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: Howbeit we
speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this World, nor
of the Princes of this World that come to naught: But we speak that wisdom of
God in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the World
unto our glory (even Christ the wisdom of God, chap. 1.24.) which none of the
Princes of this World knew --.

In all this note, 1. That there is a wisdom which Paul places Christianity it
self in: 2. That this is to know God in Christ objectively, and to be taught of
God by Christ and his Spirit efficiently. 3. That there is a Wisdom which Paul
comparatively vilifieth. 4. This is called the Wisdom of this world (or age.)
5. That most plainly he means by it, that which then was called Learning and
Philosophy; which the Greeks did value, and by which they judged of the Gospel;
which comprehended the methods of all the Sects, Epicureans, Academicks,
Peripateticks and Stoics; but not their true Morals, but their Physics, and
Logic, and Metaphysics; which Laertius and others tell us how variously they
held. 6. That Paul does not absolutely prohibit such studies, nor yet despise
any true knowledge. 7. But he vilifieth this Philosophy on these accounts. 1.
Because it was the exercise of a poor, low, insufficient Light: They did but
Grope after God in the dark, as Acts 17.27. 2. Because it was mostly taken up
with inferior things, of small concernment comparatively: As things corporeal
are good in themselves, and when sanctified and made subservient to things
spiritual; so the knowledge of Physics is to be esteemed: But as things
corporeal yet are objectively the snare and ruin of those that perish, and
therefore the world to be renounced and crucified, as it is our temptation, an
Enemy, or Competitor with Christ; just so it must be with Natural Philosophy.
3. Because it was greatly overvalued by the World, as if it had been the only
Wisdom, when indeed, it is of it self but an indifferent thing, or fit but to
make a by-recreation of, till it be made to serve to higher ends; even as
Riches, Honor and Pleasure are overvalued by worldlings, as if they were the
only felicity; when in themselves they are but more indifferent things, and
prove beneficial or hurtful as they are used. Therefore Paul was to take down
the pernicious esteem of this kind of Philosophy, as Preachers now must take
down men's esteem of worldly things, however they are the works and gifts of
God. And as Christ would by his actual poverty and sufferings, and not by words
only, take down the esteem of worldly wealth and pride; so Paul by neglecting
and forbearing the use of Artificial Logic, Physics and Metaphysics, would
depress their rate. 4. Because that there was abundance of falsehood mixed with
the truth which the Philosophers held; as their multitude of different Sects
fully proves. 5. Because the Artificial, Organical part was made so operous, as
that it drowned Real Learning instead of promoting it; and became but like a
game at Chess, a devise rather to exercise vain proud wits by, than to find out
useful truth. As to this day when Logic and Metaphysics seem much cultivated
and reformed, yet the variety of methods, the number of notions, the
precariousness of much, the uncertainty of some things, the falsehood of many,
makes them as fit for Boys to play with in the Schools, and to be a Wood into
which a Sophister may run, to hide his Errors, as to be a means of detecting
them. And therefore a knavish Cheater will often bind you strictest to the
pedantick part of the Rules of Disputation, that when he cannot defend his
Matter, he may quarrel with your Form and Artifice, and lose time by
questioning you about Mood and Figure. 6. Because by these operous diversions,
the minds of men were so forestalled or taken up, as that they had not leisure
to study great and necessary saving truth: And if men must be untaught in the
Doctrines of Life, till they had first Learnt their Logic, Physics and
Metaphysics, how few would have been saved? when at this day so many come from
our Universities after several years study, raw smatterers in these, and
half-witted Scholars, whose Learning is fitter to trouble than to edify: And
if Scripture had been written in the terms and method of Aristotle, how few
would have been the better for them? But great Good must be common.

And as Paul on all these accounts sets light by this Philosophy, so he calls
it, the wisdom of this world. 1. Because this world was its chief object. 2.
And the creatures were its only Light. 3. And it led but few to any higher than
worldly ends. 4. And it was that which worldly men that were strangers to
heavenly Light and Holiness, did then most magnify and use.

Yet as Christ when he said, how hard it was for a rich man to be saved, did
not make Riches absolutely unlawful, nor to have no goodness nor usefulness at
all, but teaches men, if they are wise, not to overvalue them, and to be too
eager for them; so is Paul to be interpreted about Philosophy, or the wisdom of
this world. (For it is not only craftiness for worldly ends that he so calls.)

And as God when he denies his Servants Riches and worldly fullness, does it
not because he takes it to be too good for them, but because it is not good
enough, and therefore he will give them better; even the Heavenly Riches, and
Honor and Delights: Even so when Paul comparatively vilifieth Philosophy, it
is not as being really a wisdom too high for Christians, but too low; Nor does
he depress Reason, or extol Ignorance; but would lead men to the truest
Learning, the highest Knowledge and Improvement of Reason, the only Wisdom,
from trifling, Pedantick, unprofitable Notions, and Ludicrous loss of Time and
Studies.

It is not therefore for want of wisdom that the Scripture is not written
according to the Philosophers art. Though Erasmus overvalued his Grammaticisms,
it was not for want of Learning in Philosophy that he so much despised the
Philosophical Schoolmen! (so that Speaking of the Bishop of London, who
maligned Dr. Colet, and was a subtle Scotist he says of such; [That he had
known some of them whom he would not call Knaves, but he never knew one of them
whom he could call a Christian.] Vid. Mr Smiths Life of Dr. Colet By Erasmus. A
smart charge: I suppose he meant it of them, rather as Scotists, than as
Bishops.

And therefore the Apostle aptly joyneth both together, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; Seeming
to equal worldly Wealth and Greatness, with worldly wisdom or Philosophy, as to
the interest of Religion and Salvation. And the foolish wits that think he
spoke against Learning because he had it not, may as truly say that he spoke
against worldly wealth and greatness because he had it not: For the Possession,
Use and Knowledge of worldly things, are near of Kin. But they knew not Paul so
well as Festus, who thought him not unlearned, though he thought him mad. Nor
was it the way of worldly wealth and greatness which he chose.

Doubtless neither Christ, nor Paul, did speak against any Real Knowledge, but
1. Against nominal, pretended Knowledge, which was set up to divert men from
Real Knowledge, and was full of Vanities and Falsehoods. 2. And against the
overvaluing of that Learning, which is of little use, in comparison of the
Knowledge of Great, and Excellent, and Necessary things. For knowledge is
valuable according to its Object and its use. The Knowledge of trifles for
trivial ends, is it self a trifle. The Knowledge of things great and necessary
for great and necessary ends, is the great and necessary Knowledge. And
therefore how unmeasureably must the knowledge of God and our eternal
happiness, excel the Pedantick Philosophy of the Gentiles. However Christians
may Sanctify and Ennoble this by making it a help to higher knowledge. And
therefore the Platonists and the Stoics were the noblest Philosophers; because
the former studied the highest things, and the other the necessary means of
felicity, amending of men's hearts and lives.

But in the present Text the thing which the Apostle reprehendeth is, the
esteeming of a man's self to be wiser than he is; and taking himself to be a
wise man because of his trifling Philosophical knowledge. A Countryman having
sent his Son to the University, when he came home asked him what he had learned.
He told him he had learnt Logic. He asked him what that Logic was, and what he
could do with it: And it being Supper-time, and the poor people having but two
Eggs for Supper, he told them that he could prove that those Eggs were three:
This is one, says he, and that is Two, and One and Two are three: The Father
gave him the better, and told him that his art was useful; for he had thought
himself to have gone without his Supper, but now, says he, I will take one
Egg, and your Mother the other, and take you the third. Such kind of Logic the
World has gloried in as learning.
And he would have them know that till they knew nobler things than those, and
were guided by a nobler light, they were very fools.

I have looked over Hutten, Vives, Erasmus, Scaliger, Salmasius, Casaubone, and
many other Critical Grammarians, and all Gruterus his Critical Volumes. I have
read almost all the Physics and Metaphysics I could hear of. I have wasted
much of my time among whole loads of Historians, Chronologers and Antiquaries:
I despise none of their learning. All truth is useful; Mathematics, which I
have least of, I find a pretty manlike sport. But if I had no other kind of
knowledge than these, what were my understanding worth! what a dreaming dotard
should I be? Yea had I also all the Codes and Pandects all Cujacius,
Wesenbechius, and their tribe at my fingers ends; and all other Volumes of
Civil, National and Canon Laws, with the rest in the Encyclopaedia, what a
poppet play would my life be, if I had no more?

I have higher thoughts of the Schoolmen, than Erasmus and our other
Grammarians had: I much value the method and sobriety of Aquinas, the subtility
of Scotus and Ockam the plainness of Durandus, the solidity of Ariminensis, the
profundity of Bradwardine, the excellent acuteness of many of their followers,
of Aureolus, Capreolus, Bannes, Alvarez, Zumel, etc. Of Mayro, Lychetus,
Trombeta, Faber, Meurisse, Rada, etc. Of Ruiz, Pennattus, Suarez, Vasquez, etc.
Of Hurtado, of Albertinus, of Lud. a Dola, and many others. But how loath should
I be to take such sauce for my food, and such recreations for my business? The
jingling of too much and too false Philosophy among them often drowns the noise
of Aarons Bells. I feel my self much better in Herberts Temple: Or in a
heavenly Treatise of faith and Love. And though I do not with Dr. Colet distaste
Augustine above the plainer Fathers, yet I am more taken with his Confessions,
than with his Grammatical and Scholastic treatises. And though I know no man
whose genius more abhors Confusion instead of necessary distinction and
method, yet I loath impertinent useless art, and pretended precepts and
distinctions, which have not a foundation in the matter.

In a word, There is a Divine knowledge, which is part of man's felicity, as it
promoteth Love and Union, and there is a solid Knowledge of Gods Word and
Works, a valuable Grammatical knowledge, and a true Philosophy, which none but
ignorant persons will despise. But the vain Philosophy and pretended Wisdom or
Learning of the World, has been and is, the cheat of Souls, and the hinderer
of wisdom, and a troubler of the Church and World.

Chap. 2.
What wisdom and esteem of it, are not here condemned.

THE order which I shall observe in handling the first Doctrine shall be this;
I. I will tell you Negatively what wisdom, and esteem of our own wisdom, is not
here condemned. II. What it is that is here condemned. III. What are the
certainties, which we must hold fast, and make our Religion of. IV. What
degrees of these certainties there are. V. What are the uncertainties, which we
must not pretend to be certain of; and the unknown things which we must not
pretend to know. VI. What are the mischiefs of falsely- pretended knowledge. VII.
What are the degrees or aggravations of this sin. VIII. What are the causes of
it. IX. What are the remedies. X. What are the uses which we should make of
this Doctrine.

I. What wisdom, and what esteem of our wisdom is not here condemned?

Ans. 1. Not any real useful knowledge at all, whilst every thing keeps its
proper place, and due esteem, (as is said.)

2. That which of it self primarily is of so small use, as that it falls
under the contempt of the Apostles, yet by accident, through the subtilty of
Satan, and the viciousness of the World, may become to some men in some measure
necessary. And here comes in the calamity of Divines. Of how little use is it
to me in it self to know what is written in many a hundred Books, which yet by
accident, it much concerns me to know? And if God restrain him not, the Devil
has us here at so great an advantage, that he can make our work almost
endless, and has almost done it already; yea can at any time divert us from
greatest Truth and Works, by making another at that time more necessary.

If he raise up Socinians, our task is increased; we must read their Books,
that we may be able to confute them: so must we when he raises up Libertines,
Familists, Seekers, Quakers, and such other Sects. If he stir up controversies
in the Church, about Government, Worship, Ceremonies, Circumstances, Words,
Methods, etc we must read so much as to understand all, that we may defend the
truth against them. If Papists will lay the stress of all their controversies
on Church History, and the words of Ancients, we must read and understand all,
or they will triumph. If Schoolmen will build their Theology on Aristotle, all
men have not the wit with the Iberian Legate at the Florentine Council in
Sagyrophilus, to cry against the Preacher, What have we to do with Aristotle?
But if we cannot deal with them at their own weapons, they will triumph. If
Cavillers will dispute only in mood and figure, we must be able there to
overtop them, or they will insult. If the Plica, Pox, Scurvey or other new
diseases do arise, the Physician must know them all, if he will cure them. And
hence it is that we say, that a Lawyer must know the Law, and a Physician must
know Physics and Medicine, etc. But a Divine should know all things that are
to be known: because the diseased world has turned pretended knowledge into the
great malady, which must be cured: but is the thing it self of any great worth?
Is it any great honor to know the vanity of Philosophical Pedantry? And to be
able to overdo such gamesters, any more than to beat one at a game at Chess, or
for a Physician to know the Pox or Leprosy?

3. Yet indeed, as all things are sanctified to the holy, and pure to the pure,
a wise man may and must make great use of common inferior kinds of knowledge:
especially the true Grammatical sense of Scripture words, the true precepts of
Logic, the certain parts of real Physics and Pneumatology: For God is seen in
his Works as in a Glass; and there to search after him and behold him, is a
noble pleasant Work and Knowledge. And I would that no Israelite may have need
to go down to the Philistines for instruments of this sort.

4. It is not forbidden to any man to know that measure of wisdom which he
truly has; God binds us not to err, nor to call Light Darkness, or Truth
Error, or to belie our selves, or deny his gifts. 1. It is desirable for a man
absolutely to know as much as he can, preferring still the greatest things, and
to know that he knows them, and not to be skeptical, and doubt of all. 2. It
is a duty for a converted sinner comparatively to know that he is wiser than he
was in his sinful state, and to give God thanks for it. 3. It is his duty who
grows in wisdom, and receives new accessions of Light, to know that he so
grows, and to give God thanks, and to welcome each useful truth with joy. 4.
It is the duty of a good and wise man comparatively to know that he is not as
foolish as the ungodly, nor to think that every wicked man, or ignorant person
whom he should pity and instruct is already wiser than he; every Teacher is not
to be so foolish as to think that all his flock are more judicious than
himself. In a word, it is not a true estimate of the thing or of our selves,
that is forbidden us; but a false: It is not belying our selves, nor
ingratitude to God, nor a contradiction (to know a thing, and not to know that
I know it) nor an ignorance of our own minds, which is commanded us under the
pretense of humility; But it is a Proud conceit, that we know what we do not
know that is condemned.

Chap. 3.
What pretended knowledge is condemned, and what Philosophy and Learning it is
that Paul disliked.

II. MOre distinctly, 1. It is condemnable for any man to think himself
Absolutely or Highly wise: because our knowledge here is so poor and dark and
low, that compared with our Ignorance it is little; we know not what or how
many or how great the things are which we do not know; but in general we may
know that they are incomparably more and greater than what we do know; we know
now but as Children, and Darkly, and in a Glass or Riddle, 1 Cor. 13.11, 12. In
the sense that Christ faith, none is good but God, we may say that none is wise
but God. For a man that must know (unless he be a very sot) that he knows
nothing perfectly in the World; that he knows but little of any Worm or Fly,
or pile of Grass which he sees, or of himself, his Soul or Body, or any
Creature, for this man to assume the Title of a Wise man, is arrogant, unless
comparatively understood, when he is ignorant of ten thousand fold more than he
knows, and the predominant part denominateth. The old enquirers had so much
modesty, as to arrogate no higher name than Philosophers.

2. It is very condemnable for any man to be proud of his understanding: while
it is so low and poor and dark, and has still so much matter to abase us. He
knows not what a Dungeon poor mortals are in, nor what a darkened thing a
sinful mind is, nor what a deplorable state we are in, so far from the Heavenly
light, no nor what it is to be a man in Flesh, who finds not much more cause
of humiliation than of pride in his understanding, O how much ado have I to
keep up from utter despondency under the consciousness of so great ignorance,
which no study no means, no time does overcome. How long Lord shall this
Dungeon be our dwelling? And how long shall our foolish Souls be loath to come
into the Celestial light?

3. It is sinful folly to pretend to know things unrevealed and impossible to
be known, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but
those things which are revealed belong to us, and to our Children for ever,
that we do them. Romans 11.34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who
has been his Counselor? And how many such compose the Theology of some, and
the Philosophy of more.

4. It is sinful folly to pretend to know that which is impossible or
unrevealed to him, though it be possible and revealed to others. For as the
Eye, so the Understanding must have its necessary light, and due constitution
and conditions of the object and of it self, or else it cannot understand.

5. It is sinful folly to pretend to certainty of knowledge, when either the
thing is but probable, or at best, we have but doubtful opinions or conjectures
of it, and no true certainty.

6. It is sinful folly to pretend that we know or receive any thing by Divine
Faith (or Revelation) when we have it but by Humane Faith, or probable
conjecture from natural evidence. As soon as men are persuaded by a Sect, a
Seducer, or a selfish Priest, to believe what he says, abundance presently
take such a persuasion for a part of their Religion, as if it were a Believing
God.

7. It is sinful folly to take on us that we know what we know not at all,
because we do but know that it is knowable, and that wise men know it, and as
soon as we understand that it should be known, and that wise men conclude it to
be true, therefore to pretend that we know it to be true.

8. And it is sinful folly to pretend that we truly know or apprehend the Thing
or Matter, or incomplex object, merely because we have got the bare words, and
second notions of it, which are separable from the knowledge of the thing. All
these are false and sinful pretenses of knowledge, which men have not.

But because Paul so warns us to take heed of vain Philosophy, M. Antomine l.
1.. 17. Does thank God that he made no greater progress in Rhetoric, Poetry,
and such like Studies, which might have hindered him from better things, if he
had perceived himself to have profited in them. And (in fine) quod cum
Philosophandi cupiditas incessisset, no^ in sophistam aliquem incidelin, nec
(...) evolvendis, vel syllogismis resolvendis, vel Mettorologicis dis^^^iendi^
tem^^^ des^s contriverim.
and Atheists, and Infidels deride him for speaking against the wisdom of the
World, as if he spoke against Learning, because he had it not; and because the
Disease which he attempted to Cure remains among Scholars to this day, and
instead of a Cure many contemn the Physician, and dislike Christ himself and
the Gospel, as defective of the Learning which they overvalue, I will once
again, and that more distinctly tell you some few of the faults of our common
Learning, even now that it is cultivated and augmented in this Age, that you
may see that Paul did not injuriously accuse it, or Christ injuriously neglect
it.

I. Natural Imperfection lays the Foundation of our common calamity; in that
it is so long before sense and reason grow up to a natural maturity, (through
the unripeness of Organs, and want of Exercise) that Children are necessitated
to learn words before things, and to make these words the means of their first
knowledge of many of the things signified; so that most furnish themselves with
a stock of names and words; before ever they get any true knowledge of the
matter.

II. And then they are exceeding apt to think that this treasury of words and
second notions is true wisdom, and to mistake it for the knowledge of the
thing: Even as in Religion we find almost all Children and ignorant people,
will learn to say by rote the Creed and Lords Prayer, and Commandments, and
Catechism, and then think that they are not Ignorants, when it is long after
before we can get them to understand the sense of the words which they can so
readily speak, yea though they are plain English words, which they use for the
most part in ordinary discourse.

III. When Children come to School also their Masters teach them as their
Parents did, or worse; I mean that they bestow almost all their pains to
furnish them with words and second notions: And so do their Tutors too often at
the University: So that by that time they are grown to be Masters of a
considerable stock of words, Grammatical, Logical, Metaphysical, etc. and can
set these together in Propositions and Syllogisms, and have learnt Memoriter
the Theorems or Axioms, and some distinctions which are in common use and
reputation, they are ready to pass for Masters of the Arts, and to set up for
themselves, and leave their Tutors, and to teach others the like sort and
measure of Learning, which they have thus acquired. Like one that sets up his
Trade as soon as he has gotten a Shop full of Tools.

IV. And indeed the memories of young men are strong and serviceable so many
years sooner than their judgments, that prudent Teachers think it meet to take
that time to furnish them with words and organical notions, while they are
unmeet to judge of things: Even as pious Parents must teach them the words of
the Catechism, that when they grow riper, their judgments may work upon that
which their Memories did before receive. And in this they are in the right upon
two suppositions. 1. That distinguishing things obvious and easily understood
from things remote, abstruse and difficult, they would teach them those of the
first sort with the words, though not the second: And while they make haste
with them in the Languages they would not make too much haste with the Notions
and Theorems of the Arts and Sciences. 2. That they still make them know that
words as to matter are but as the dish to the meat, and all this while they are
but preparing for wisdom and true Learning, and not getting or possessing it;
and that unless they will equalize a Parrot, and a Philosopher, they must know
how little they have attained, and must after Learn things, or not pretend to
know any thing indeed. As Children learn first to speak and then learn what to
speak of.

V. And the great mischief is, that multitudes of those notions which are
taught us are false, not fitted to the Things, but expressing the conceptions
of roving, uncertain, erroneous, bewildred minds. Words are the instruments of
Communication of thoughts. And when I hear a man speak I hear (perhaps) what he
thinks of things, but not always what they are. Our Universal notions are the
result of our own comparing Things with things. And we are so woefully defective
in such comparings that our Universal notions must needs be very defective, so
that they abound with error.

VI. And the penury and narrowness of words is a great impediment to the due
expressing of those poor confused conceptions which we have; For a man can
think more aptly and comprehensively than he can speak. And hence it comes to
pass that words and universal notions are become like Pictures or
Hieroglyphics, almost of arbitrary signification and use, as the speaker
pleases. And (as a multitude of School-distinctions tell us) you can know
little by the Grammatical use or Etymology of the words, what the meaning of
them is in a theorem or distinction, till the speaker tell it you by other
words.

VII. And the conceptions of men being as various as their Countenances, the
same words in the mouths of several men, have several significations. So that
when Tutors read the same books to their Scholars, and teach them the same
notions, it is not the same conceptions always that they thus communicate.

VIII. And when all is done, Recipitur ad modum recipientis. It Is two to one
but the Learner receives their notions with a conception somewhat different
from them all. And when he thinks that he has learnt what was taught him, and
is of his Teachers mind, he is mistaken, and has received another apprehension.

IX. And the narrowness of man's mind and thoughts is such, that usually there
must go many partial conceptions, to one thing or Object really indivisible: So
that few things, or nothing rather in the world, is known by us with one
conception, nor with a simplicity of apprehensions answerable to the simplicity
of the things: And hereby it comes to pass that Inadequate conceptions make up
a great part of our Learning and knowledge. And (yet worse) our words being
narrower than our Thoughts, we are fain to multiply words more than
conceptions, so that we must have ten conceptions perhaps of one thing, and
twenty words perhaps for those ten conceptions. And then we grow to imagine the
things to be as various as our conceptions, yea and our words: And so Learning
is become confused error, and the great and noble Actions of the Fantastical
world, are a pitiful confused agitation of Phantasms, and (whether fortuitous
or artificial) a congress of Atoms, sometimes digladiating, and sometimes
seeming by amicable embraces to compose some excellent piece of Art. And things
seem to us to be multiplied and ordered as our conceptions of them are. And the
Scotists may yet write as many more Treatises de formalitatibus, before men
will understand indeed what a conceptus formalis with them is, and whether
diverse formalities be diverse realities, or only ejusdem conceptus inadequati.
But thus Learning is become like a poppet play, or the raising of the dust.

X. The Entia Rationis being thus exceeding numerous, are already confounded
with objective Realities, and have compounded our common Systems of Logic,
Metaphysics, and too much of Physics: So that Students must at first see
through false Spectacles, and Learn by seducing notions, and receive abundance
of false conceptions, as the way to Wisdom, and Shadows and Rubbish, must
furnish their minds under the name of truth (though mixed with many real
Verities.) For young men must have Teachers: They cannot begin at the
foundation, and every one learn of himself, as if none had ever learnt before
him: He is like to make but a slow proficient, that makes no use of the
Studies and Experience of any that ever learnt before him. And he that will
learn of others, must receive their notions and words as the means of his
information.

XI. And when they grow up to be capable of real wisdom, O! what a labor is
it, to cleanse out this rubbish, and to unlearn all the errors that we have
learnt, so that it is much of the happiest Progress of extraordinary successful
Studies, to find out our old mistakes, and set our conceptions in better order
one by one: Perhaps in one year we find out and reform some two or three, and
in another year one or two more, and so on. Even as when at my removal of my
Library, my Servant sets up all my books, and I must take them half down again
to set them in their right places.

XII. And the difficulty of the matter is our great Impediment, when we come to
study things. For, 1. Their Matter, 2. Their Composure, 3. Their Numbers, 4.
Their Order and Relations, 5. And their Action and Operation, are much unknown
to us.

XIII. 1. The substance of Spirits is so little known, as tempts Sadduces to
dream that there are none. The notion of a Spirit to some (through ignorance)
is taken to be merely negative, as if it signified no more, but [not
corporeal.] The notion of Immateriality is lubricous, and he that knows not
the true bounds of the signification of Materia, knows not what it is to be
Immaterial. The purest Spirit is known only by many inadequate conceptions: One
must answer the similitude of Matter, in fundamental substantiality: Another
must be answerable to that of Forms of simple Elements; and another answerable
to Accidents. And though nothing be so notorious of Spirits as their
Operations, and from the Acts we know the Virtues or Powers, yet that these
Virtues are not Accidents, but the very Essential Form, and that they are (in
all Spirits) One in Three, and many other things concerning their Essentiality,
are quite overlookt by the greater part of Philosophers; and those few that
open it, do either with Campanella, lose it again in a wood of mistaken ill
gathered consequences; or with Lullius, drown it in a multitude of irregular
arbitrary notions; or with Commenius, give us a little undigested, with the
mixture of crudities and mistakes; or with our Learned Dr. Glisson de vita
Naturae, confound Spirits and Bodies, and make those Spirits which are the
Vital constitutive principle of Compounds, to be but the inadequate conception
of Bodies, as if they were all simply and formally Vital of themselves, and for
a Body to be inanimate were a contradiction, or impossible. And they that treat
more nobly of Spirits (as Mr. Got and many Platonists) do it so immethodically
and confusedly, as greatly disadvantageth the Learner.

And yet to treat of Bodies without treating of the Spirits that animate or
actuate them, is a lame, deluding, unedifying thing: As it is to treat of a
Kingdom, an Army, a School, without mentioning a King, a Captain, or a
Schoolmaster; or as to describe a Gun, without any mention of Gunpowder or
shooting: Or a Clock or Watch without the Poise or Spring, or Motion; or a Book
or words without the sense; and so of a Man without a Soul or Reason, or a
Brute without any Life or Sense. I mean when we speak of Compound Beings, and
not merely of Corporeity in the notion, as abstracted from all Vital moving
principles.

XIV. 2. And what the true notion of Matter or Corporeity it self is, it is but
darkly and uncertainly known, how confidently soever some decantate their moles
or quantity, divisibility or discerptibility, and impenetrability: Whether Fire
be material, and divisible and impenetrable, and how far Fire and Spirits
herein differ, and so Spirits and Bodies, and how far sensible must enter the
definition of Corpus, is not easily known.

XV. 3. Nor do we well know the Nature of the simple Corporeal Elements;
whether they agree only in materiality, quantity, and divisibility, and
impenetrability; and whether they differ only in magnitude, shape, sight and
contexture of parts; or by any essentiating Formal Virtues; or both; or (as Mr.
Got thought) by a differencing proper spirit.

XVI. 4. How little of the Divine Artifice is known in the composition of mixed
Bodies? (And we know of no existent Simples in the world, that are not found
only in Compositions.) All men confess that every Plant, every Worm, or Fly,
every sensitive, yea every sensible Being, is so little known to us, as that
the unknown part far exceeds the known.

XVII. 5. And we are not agreed of late of the number of the very Elements
themselves; much less of Compounds; of which, while we know so few, that which
we do know is the more defectively known; because (as in knowing of Letters and
Syllables) the knowledge of one thing is needful to the true and useful
knowledge of another.

XVIII. But the Order and Relations of things to one another is so wonderfully
unsearchable, and innumerably various, as quite surpasses all humane
understanding. Yea, though ORDER and Relation constitute all Morality, Policy,
Literature, etc. so that it is as it were that World which humane Intellects
converse in, and the business of all humane Wills and Actions, yet few men know
so much as what ORDER and RELATION is: Nay, nor whether it be Any thing or
nothing: And though health and sickness, harmony and discord, beauty and
ugliness, virtue and vice, consist in it, and Heaven and Hell depend upon it,
and Law and Judgment do make and determine it; yet is it not easy to know what
it is by an Universal Notion; nor whether it be truly to be called Any thing at
all. We doubt not but ORDER should be a most observable Predicament, in the
Series of humane Notions or nominanda: But yet I doubt not much but that
Gassendus who would make tempus and spatium two of his Predicaments, does
ascribe to them that Entity which they have not.

XIX. And though undoubtedly Action is a noble Predicament, and whatever the
Cartesians say, requires more causation than non agere does; yea is it self
the causation of the mutations in the World; yet men scarce know what to call
it. Some say it is res: others it is but accidens rei; and others modus rei;
some say, It is in passo: Some say it is in agente: Some say it is neither, but
is agentis: Some say immanent acts are Qualities, as Scotus, etc.

XX. And which is yet worse, the very name, Accident, Mode and Quality, are but
general unapt notions, not well understood by any that use them, nor suited
meetly to the severals contained under them. And when we call a thing, (or
nothing) a Quality, Accident or Mode, we are little the wiser, and know not
well what we have said. Sure I am that they are exceedingly heterogenea which
Aristotle comprizeth in the very predicament of Quality. And Gassendus thought
all Accidents may be as well called Qualities or Modes.

XXI. And which is yet worse, all humane language is so woefully Ambiguous, that
there is scarce a word in the World that has not many senses: and the learned
world never came to agreement about the meaning of their common words, so that
ambiguity drowneth all in uncertainty and confusion.

XXII. And which is yet worse, the certain apprehension of Sense and Reason, is
commonly by men called Learned, reduced to, and tried by, these dreaming
ambiguous names and universal notions: and men are drawn to deny their certain
knowledge, because they know not by what universal term to call it, e. g. I
know as far as is useful to me, by seeing what Light is; but whether it be
Substantia, Accidens, Modus, etc. or what to call it universally, few know! And
no wonder, for their universal notions are their own works or Entia rationis,
fabricated by the imperfect comparing of things with things, by ignorant
understandings; but the sensibility of objects and the sensitive faculty and
the Intellect, are the works of God. I know much better what Light is by seeing
it, than I know what an Accident or a Quality is.

So I know by feeling what Heat is, I know what Motion or Action is, I know
what pain and pleasure is, I know what love and hatred is, I know partly what
it is to think, to know, to will, choose and refuse; but what is the right
universal notion of these, what true definition to give of any one of them, the
Learned man does not well know; Insomuch, as I dare boldly say, that the
vulgar ordinarily know all these better without definitions, than the most
Learned man living can know them by definitions alone.

And here I will presume to step aside, to say as in the Ears of our over-doing
Separatists, who can take none into Christian Communion, that cannot tell you
how they were Converted, or at least give them a fair account of their
understanding all the Articles of the Faith, in words that are adapted to the
matter: I tell you 1. That the knowledge of Words, and second Notions and
Definitions, is one thing, and the knowledge of Matters or Things is another.
2. And it is the knowledge of the Things, and not of the Words, that is
primarily and absolutely necessary to Salvation. 3. And that many an
illiterate, ill bred person understand things long before they can utter their
understandings in any intelligible words. 4. And therefore if any man do but
these two things. 1. By Yea or Nay do signify to me, that he understands the
Truth, when I put the matter of (nothing but the Baptismal Covenant) into my
Questions; 2. And do manifest serious willingness accordingly, by avoiding
evil, and using Gods means; I dare not, I will not refuse that person from the
Communion of the Church; Though I would do as much as the rigidest censurer to
bring such up to greater knowledge.

XXIII. And on the other side men are made to think that they know the things
because they know the Names and Definitions: And so that they are learned and
Wise when they know little the more by all their learning. For to be able to
talk over all the Critical Books and Lexicons and Grammars; all the Logical
Notions and Definitions, is nothing but Organical Knowledge; Like the Shoemaker
that has a Shop full of Lasts, (and that most of them unmeet for any man's
foot) but never made a Shoe by any of them. And false and confused and idle
names and notions, fill the learned world with False, Confused and Vain
Conceptions, which Common-Countrey people escape, so that it costeth many a man
twenty years study, to be made more erroneous than he would have been, by
following an honest trade of life.

XXIV. Nay our very Articles of Faith and Practice, which Salvation lies on,
are commonly tried by these arbitrary Organical notions; whole loads of School
Volumes are witnesses of this. Though the Schoolmen, where our Grammarians
deride them as Barbarians, have often done well in fitting words to things, and
making the Key meet for the Lock: Yet old terms and notions and axioms too
often go for current, and overruled disputes, when they are not understood, nor
are proper or univocal. What work does Aristotle make with Actus and Potentia,
and the Schoolmen after him? What abundance of darkness do these two words
contain in all their writings? And for want of other words to supply our needs,
what abundance of distinctions of Actus and Potentiae are the Scotists and
other Schoolmen fain to use? What abundance of disputes are kept up by the
ambiguity of the word [Cause] while it is applied to things so different, as
Efficience, Constitution, and Finality? The like may be said of many more. And
then when it comes to a dispute of the Divine Nature, of the Soul, of the most
weighty things, these confounding notions must overruled the Case. We must not
have an argument for the Souls Immortality, but what these notions check or
vitiate; no nor scarce for an Attribute of God.

XXV. And it is so hard a thing to bring men to that self-denial and labor, as
at Age thoroughly and impartially to revise their juvenile conceptions, and for
them that learnt words before things, to proceed to learn things now as
appearing in their proper evidence, and to come back and cancel all their old
notions, which were not found, and to build up a new frame, that not one of a
multitude is ever Master of so much virtue as to attempt it, and go through
with it. Was it not labor enough to study so many years to know what others
say? but they must now undo much of it, and begin a new and harder labor? who
will do it?

XXVI. And indeed none but men of extraordinary Acuteness and Love of truth,
and Self-denial and Patience are fit to do it. For, 1. The Common dullards will
fall into the ditch when they leave their Crutches. And will multiply Sects in
Philosophy and Religion, while they are unable to see the truth in itself. And
indeed this has made the Protestant Churches, so liable to the derision and
reproach of their adversaries. And how can it be avoided, while all men must
pretend to know and judge, what indeed they are unable to understand?

2. Yea the half-witted men, that think themselves acute and wise, fall into
the same Calamity.

3. And the proud will not endure to be thought to err, when they plague the
world with error.

4. And the Impatient will not endure so long and difficult studies.

5. And when all is done, as Seneca says, they must be content with a very few
approvers, and must bear the scorn of the ignorant-learned crowd. Who have no
way to maintain the reputation of their own Wisdom, Orthodoxness and Goodness,
but by calling him Proud, or Self-conceited, or Erroneous, that differs from
them by knowing more than they. And who but the truly self-denying can be at so
much cost and labor for such reproach, when they foreknow that he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow?

XXVII. By these means men's minds that should be taken up with God and his
Service, are abused and vilified, and filled with the dust and smoke of vain,
and false, and confused notions. And man's life is spent (as David says) in a
vain show. And men dream waking with as great industry, as if they were about a
serious work. Alas how pitifully is much of the learned world employed.

XXVIII. By this means also men's precious time is lost: And he that had time
little enough to learn and do things necessary, for the common good, and his
own salvation, does waste half of it on he knows not what. And Satan that
finds him more ingenious than to play it away at Cards and Dice, or than to
Drink and Revel it away, does cast another bait before him, and get him
learnedly to dream it away about unprofitable words and notions.

XXIX. And by this means the Practice of goodness is hindered in the world, yea
and Holy Affections quenched. While these arbitrary Notions and Speculations,
(being man's own) are his more pleasant game; And Studies and Pulpits must be
thus employed, and heart and life thus stolen from God. Yea it is well if
Godliness grow not to be taken by such dreamers, for a low, a dull and an
unlearned thing; yea if they be not tempted by it to Infidelity, and to think
(not only the zealous Ministers and Christians, but even) Christ and his
Apostles to be unlearned men, below their estimation.

XXX. And by the same means the devilish sin of Pride will be kept up, even
among the Learned, yea and the Preachers of Humility: For what is that in the
world (almost) that men are prouder of than that Learning which consists in
such notions and words as are before described? And the proudest man, I think,
is the worst.

XXXI. And by this means the sacred Chairs and Pulpits will be possessed by
such men, whose spirits are most contrary to a Crucified Christ, and to that
Cross and Doctrine which they must preach. And when Christ's greatest Enemies
are the Pastors of his Churches, all things will be ordered and managed
accordingly; and the faithful hated and abused accordingly. Though I must add,
that it is not this Cause alone, but many more concurring to constitute a
worldly wicked mind, which use to procure these effects.

XXXII. And by false and vain Learning Contentions are bred and propagated in
the Churches. None are instruments so apt, and none have been so successful, as
all Church History records and the Voluminous contentions of many such
learned parties testify.

XXXIII. And this is an increasing malady, for new Books are yearly written,
containing the said arbitrary notions of the several Authors. And whereas real
and organical Learning should be orderly and conjunctly propagated, and Things
studied for themselves, and Words for Things, the systems of of Arts and
Sciences grow more and more corrupted, our Logicks are too full of unapt
notions, our Metaphysics are a mere confused mixture of Pneumatology and
Logic; and What part has totally escaped?

XXXIV. And the number of such Books does grow so great, that they become a
great impediment and snare; and how many years precious time must be lost, to
know what men say, and who says amiss, or how they differ?

XXXV. And the great diversity of Writers and Sects increases the danger and
trouble, especially in Physics; by that time a man has well studied the
several sects, the Epicureans and Somatists, the Cartesians, with the
by-parties, (Regius, Berigardus, etc.) the Platonists, the Peripateticks, the
Hermeticks, Lullius, Patricius, Telesius, Campanella, White, Digby, Glisson,
and other Novelists; and has read the most learned improvers of the curranter
sort of Philosophy, ( Scheggius, Wendeline, Sennertus, Hoffman, Honorat* Faber,
Got, etc.) how much of his life will be thus spent. And perhaps he will be as
far to seek, in all points saving those common evident certainties, which he
might have learned more cheaply in a shorter time, than he was before he read
them. And will wish that Antonine, Epictetus, or Plutarch had served instead of
the greater part of them. And will perceive that Physics are much fuller of
uncertainties, and emptier of satisfying usefulness than Morality, and true
Theology.

XXXVI. By such false methods and notions men are often led to utter
Skepticism, and when they have found out their own errors, they are apt to
suspect all the substance of Sciences to be error. And he speeds well that
comes but with Sanchez to a nihil scitur: And he better that comes but with
Cornel. Agrippa, to write Vanity and Vexation upon all the Sciences: for many
come to Infidelity it self, and some to Atheism: And, as Dr. Tho. Jackson
notes, by such distrust of men and humane things, are tempted into a distrust
or unbelief of Christ; or perhaps with Hobbs grow to cry down all Learning
besides their own, which is worse than the worst that they decry.

XXXVII. And by all this Princes and States are tempted to hate Learning it
self, and banish it as a pernicious thing: As the case of the Turkish,
Muscovian, and some other Empires testify.

All this I have said, not to dishonor true Learning, which I would promote
with all my power; but to show the Corruption and Vanity of that Philosophy and
humane false Learning, which Paul and the Ancient Writers did decry; and why
the Council of Carthage forbad the reading of the Gentiles Books, and
reproached Apollinarius, and other Heretics for their Gentile Learning.

Of the great uncertainty of our Physics and Metaphysics, almost all the
chief Authors themselves make free confessions. See Suarez, Metaph. disp. 35.
page 219, 221, 237. Fromondus de Anim. page 63. Gassendus often; and who not?

Pious Bonaventure has written a Tract de Reductione Artium ad Theologiam; and
another de non frequentandis quaestionibus; Cornel. Agrippa de Vanitate
Scientiarum, is well worth the reading beforehand to prevent men's loss of time.

Chap. 4.
III. What are the Certainties that must be known and held fast, and why?

IT is none of the Apostles meaning that men should be mere Scepticks: Nor am I
seconding Sanchez his nihil scitur, unless you take Science for adequate
Science, or in a transcendent notion, as it signifies that which is proper to
another World, and therefore may be denied of this. He can neither play the
part of a Christian or of a man, who doubts of all things, and is assuredly
confident of nothing.

That our discourse of this may be orderly and edifying, it is of great use
that I first help you rightly to understand what Certainty is. The word is
ambiguous, and sometime is applied to the Object, and sometime to the Act and
Agent. The former is called Objective Certainty; the latter Subjective
Certainty.

The Objective is either Certainty of the Thing, or Certainty of Evidence, by
which the thing is discernible or perceptible to us. And this either Sensible
Evidence, or Rational; and the latter is either self-evidence of principles, or
derived Evidence of Consequences.

Subjective Certainty is also either considered in the Nature of it, or in the
Degree: And as to the Nature it is either the Senses Certainty, or the
Intellects; and this either of Incomplex Objects, or Complex: The first is
either of sensed Objects, or purely Spiritual: The second of Principles, or of
Conclusions. Of all these there are Certainty.

The Degrees are these: It being first supposed that no Humane apprehension
here is absolutely perfect; and therefore all our Certainties subjective are
Imperfect: The word therefore signifies not only a perfect apprehension; but
it signifies non falli, not to be deceived, and such an apprehension of the
evidence as gives us a just resolving and quieting confidence. And so 1. The
due Objects of sense, and 2. The immediate acts of the Soul it self, are
Certain in the first and highest degree. I know certainly what I see clearly,
so far as I see it: And I know certainly that I think, and know, and will. The
next degree of Certainty is of Rational Principles, and the next of Consequents.

It Is like in a Scheme you will easilier understand it.

CERTAINTY being an ambiguous word, is either, I. Objective: which is, I. Of
Being of the Thing; which is nothing but Physical Verity. II. Of Evidence;
which makes things Perceptible; and it is Evidence, 1. Sensible; viz. 1. To the
External Senses. 2. To the Internal Senses.
2. Intelligible, 1. Of the Being of Things, viz. 1. Quod sint, 2. Quid sint,
3. Qualia sint, 1. Things sensed and imagined; as colors, light, heat, etc. 2.
The Acts of Intellection and Will.

2. Of Complex Verity, which is, 1. Of self-evident Principles. 2. Derivative
Evidence of Conclusions.



II. Subjective Certainty; by which I am certain of the Object; Considerable,
I. In its Nature; viz. Certainty, 1. Of Sense, 1. Of the Outward Senses, when
they are not deceived. 2. Of the Inward Sense and Imagination.
2. Of the Intellect; which is, 1. Of Beings, 1. Sensed and imagined, 2. Of the
Acts of the Soul. 1. Quod sint. 2. Quid sint. 3. Qualia sint.

2. Of the Complex Verities, 1. Of self-evident Principles. 2. Of Conclusions.

( N. Qu. Whether there be not a third sort of Certainty both Objective and
Subjective; viz. Goodness not-sensible, Certainly apprehended by the
Intellectual Soul, not only sub ratione Very, sed and Boni? and whether the
Will by its Natural Gust have not a Complacential Perception of it as well as
the Intellect? Vid. Pemble Vindic. Grot.)
II. In the Degrees of Certainty; which are in the order following. 1. Sense
perceiving the Object and it self, is the first perceiver; and hereof the
surest. 2. Imagination receiving from Sense, has more requisites to its
Certainty. 3. Intellection about things sensible, has yet more requisites to
its Certainty; viz. 1. That the Object be true; 2. The Evidence sensible; 3.
That the Sense be sound, and the Medium and other Conditions of Sense be just;
4. That the Imagination be not corrupt, 5. That the Intellect it self be sound.
4. But Intellection about It self and Volition has the highest Certainty 5. We
are surer of the Quod than the Quid and Quale; as that we Think, than What and
How. 6. We are certainer of self-evident Principles than of the Consequences.
7. Consequences have various degrees of Evidence and Certainty.





A few Propositions may further help your understandings.

I. All things in the world have their Certainty physical of Being; that is, it
is a Certainty, or a Truth that this thing is.

II. The thing which is most commonly called Objective Certainty, is such a
degree of Perceptibility or Evidence as may aptly satisfy the doubting
Intellect.

III. Evidence is called Infallible; 1. When he that receives it is never
deceived; and so all Truth is Infallible Truth; for he is not deceived who
believes it: 2. Or when a man cannot err about it. And there is no such
Evidence in the world, unless you suppose all things else agreeable.

IV. The Perception is called Infallible, 1. Either quia non falsa, because it
is not deceived: And so every man is Infallible in every thing which he truly
perceives: 2. Or because it Cannot or Will not err. And so Absolute
Infallibility is proper to God: But secundum quid, in certain cases upon
certain Objects, with certain Conditions, all sound men's Senses and Intellects
are Infallible.

V. Certainty of Evidence consists in such a Position of the thing evident,
as makes it an Object perceptible to the faculty perceiving; to which many
Conditions are required: As 1. That the Thing it self have such intrinsic
qualifications, as make it fit to be an Object. 2. That it have the due
extrinsick conditions concomitant.

1. To the Nature of an Object of perception it is necessary. 1. That it be a
thing which in its Nature is within the reach of the perceiving faculty: And
not (as Spirits are to sense) so above us, or alien to us, as to be out of the
Orb of our perception. 2. That they have a perceptible Quantity, Magnitude or
Degree. 3. That, if it be an Incomplex term and object, and not an Universal of
the highest notion, it be hoc aliquid, and have its proper Individuation. 4.
That it have some special distinct conformity to the distinct perceiving
faculty. In sum, that it be Ens, Unum, Verum, Bonum, vel hisce contraria
reductive and per accidens cognita.

2. To the extrinsick Conditions, it is necessary, 1. That the Object have a
due site or position. 2. And a due distance; neither too near, nor too far off.
3. And that it have a due medium, fitted to it and to the faculty. 4. And that
it have a due abode or stay, and be not like a Bullet out of a Gun,
imperceptible through the celerity of its motion.

VI. That the perception of sense be certain, it is necessary, 1. That the
Organ be sound, in such a measure as that no prevalent Distemper undispose it.
2. That it be not oppressed by any disturbing adjunct. 3. That the sensitive
Soul do operate on and by these Organs: For else its alienation will leave the
Organ useless: As some intense meditations make us not hear the Clock. 4. That
it be the due Sense and Organ which meets with the Object; as sounds with the
Ear, light with the Eye, etc. besides the foresaid necessaries.

VII. Common Notitiae or Principles are not so called, because men are born
with the Actual Knowledge of them; But because they are truths, which man's mind
is naturally so disposed to receive as that upon the first exercises of Sense
and Reason, some of them are understood, without any other humane teacher.

VIII. Even self-evident Principles are not equal, but some of them are more,
and some less evident. And therefore some sooner, and some later known. And
some of them are more commonly known than others.

IX. The self evidence of these Principles arises from the very nature of the
Intellect which inclines to Truth, and the Nature of the Will which
essentially inclines to Good, and the Nature and Posture of the Objects, which
are Truth and Goodness in the most evident position, compared together, or
Conjunct; some call it Instinct.

X. It is not necessary to the certainty of a Principle, that it be commonly
known of all or most. For Intellects have great Variety of Capacities,
Excitation, Helps, Improvements, and even Principles have various degrees of
evidence, and appearances to men.

XI. Man's mind is so conscious of its own darkness and imperfections, that it
is distrustful of its own Inferences unless they be very Near and Clear. When
by a long Series of Ergo's any thing is far fetched, the mind is afraid there
may be some unperceived error.

XII. He therefore that holds a true Principle as such, and at once a false
inference which contradicts it, is to be supposed to hold the principle first
and fastest, and that if he saw the Contradiction he would let go the
consequent, and not the principle.

XIII. He that denies the certainty of Sense, Imagination, and Intellective
perception of things sensed as such, does make it impossible to have any
certainty of Science or Faith about those same Objects but by miracle. And
therefore the Papists denying and renouncing all these (Sense, Imagination and
Intellective perception,) when they say, that there is no Bread nor Wine in the
Sacrament, do make their pretended contrary Faith impossible. For we are men
before we are Christians, and we have Sense and Intellects, before we have
faith. And as there is no Christianity but on supposition of humanity, so there
is no Faith, but on supposition of sense and understanding. How know you that
here is no Bread and Wine? Is it because Scripture or Councils say so? How know
you that? By Hearing or Reading? But how know you that ever you did hear or
read or see a Book or Man? By sense or no way! If sense be fallible here, why
not there? You Will say that sense may be fallible in one case, and not in others.
I answer, either you prove it infallible from Nature, even by Sense and
Intellective perception of and by sense, or else by supernatural Revelation. If
only by this Revelation, how know you that Revelation? How know you that ever
you heard, read or saw any thing which you call Revelation. If by a former
Revelation, I ask you the same question in infinitum. But if you know the
certainty of Sense by Sense and Intellective perception, then where there is
the same evidence and perception, there is the same certainty. But here is as
full Evidence and Perception as any other Object can have. 1. We see Bread and
Wine. 2. We taste it. 3. We smell the Wine. 4. We hear it poured out. 5. We feel
it. 6. We find the effects of it; It refreshes and nourishes as other Bread
and Wine. 7. It does so by any other creature as well as by a man. 8. It
corrupts. 9. It becomes true flesh and blood in us, and a part of our
bodies; Even in the worst: Yea part of the body of a Mouse or Dog. 10. It Is
possible for a Mouse or Dog to live only upon consecrated Bread and Wine. Is
his body then nothing but Christ. 11. In all this perception the Objects are
not rare, but commonly exhibited in all ages; They have all the Conditions that
other sensible evident objects have, as to site, magnitude, distance, medium.
12. And it is not one or two, but all men in the World of the soundest senses,
who sense and perceive them to be Bread and Wine. So that here is as full
evidence as the words which you read or hear can have to ascertain us.

Obj. But if God deny sense in this case and not in others, we must believe
sense in others and not in this.

Ans. But again I ask you, How you know that God bids or forbids you any
thing, if sense be not first to be believed?

Obj. But is it not possible for sense to be deceived? Cannot God do it?

Ans. 1. It is possible for sense to be annihilated, and made no sense; and it
is possible that the Faculty or Organ, or Medium, or Object, be depraved, or
want its due conditions, and so to be deceived. But to retain all these due
Conditions, and yet to be deceived is a Contradiction: For then it is not the
same Thing: It is not that which we call now formally Sense and Intellect, or
Sensation and Intellection. And Contradictions are not things for Omnipotency
to be tried about. God can make a man to be no Intellectual Creature: But
thereby he makes him no man: For to be a man, and not Intellectual, is a
contradiction. And so it is to be men, and yet to have no Sense nor Intellect,
that can truly perceive sensible Objects as before qualified: Therefore they
unman all the World, on pretext of asserting the power of God.

2. But suppose that all Sense be fallible, and Intellection of things
sensible, yet it is the first and only entrance of all things sensible into the
mind or knowledge of man: And therefore we must take it as God has given it
us, for we can have no surer: No sensible thing is in the Intellect which was
not first in the Sense: Whether my Eyes and Ears, and Taste be fallible or not,
I am sure I have no other way to perceive their Objects; but by them I must
take them and use them as they are. All the words and definitions in the World
will not give any man without sensation, a true conception of a sensible Object.

3. Such absurd suppositions therefore are not to be put, [What if God should
tell you by his Word, that all the senses of all men are deceived, in one
thing, or in all things? would you not believe him?] It is not to be supposed
that God will give us all our Senses and Intellective perception by them, to be
our discerner of things sensible, and then bid us not believe them, for they
are false; unless he told us that all our perceptions are false, and our whole
Life is but deceit. And I further answer, if God tell me so, it must be by some
word or writing of Man or Angel, or Himself: And how should I know that word
but by my sense?

But the great answer which seems to satisfy Bellarmine and the rest, is,
that sense is no judge of Substances, but of Accidents only; therefore it is
not deceived.

But 1. It is false that sense perceives not substances: It is not only
color, quantity, figure, which I see, nor only roughness and smoothness which
I feel, nor only sweetness which I taste; but it is a colored, extended,
figured substance which I see; a rough or smooth substance which I feel, and a
sweet substance which I taste: And if the Accident were the only primary
object, the Substance is the secondary and certain. Else no one ever saw a Man,
a Tree, a Bird, a Plant, the Earth, a Book, or any substance; but only the
color, quantity or figure of them! no man ever felt or touched a Body, but
only the Accidents of it.

2. And I pray you tell me how Substances come to the understanding if they
were never in the sense: Prove a Substance without sensation as a medium if you
can. Do you perceive any Substances Intellectually or not? If not, why pretend
you that there are any? if yea, it must be either as Conclusions, or as
Intellectual Principles, (which are both Logical complex Objects, and therefore
not substances) or as the immediate immaterial objects of Intellection (which
is only the Souls own acts) or what is by Analogy gathered from them; or else
the objects of sense it self. It can be none of the former; therefore it must
be the latter: And how can the understanding find that in sense which was never
there?

If it be said that it is there but by Accidents; I answer, 1. That is false,
though said by many: I do as immediately touch substance as accidents, though
not substance without the accidents. 2. Whether it be there by the mediation of
the accidents, or immediately it self, we are sure that the understanding no
otherwise receives it, than as the sense transmitteth it; we must know
material substance as it is sensed, or not at all.

We see then what a pass this Roman Religion brings the World to. That they
may be Christians, they must believe (and swear by the Trent Oath) that they
are not men; and that they may have Faith, they must renounce their Senses, and
that they may be sure Gods Word is true, (and the Churches decrees,) they must
be sure that they are sure of nothing; and how then are they sure of that? And
while they subvert all the order of Nature in the World, they pretend that God
can do it, and therefore we are to believe that he does it, merely because
these Doctors can call themselves the Church, and then can so expound the
Scripture. When it is Gods settled order in Nature, that a Man as an Animal
shall have Sense to perceive things sensible by, and as a Man shall have
understanding to receive from the Imagination and Sense these objects, we must
now suppose that God has quite overturned the course of Nature, either by
making sense no sense, or the object no object, or the medium no fit medium;
and yet this is to be believed by Men that have nothing but the same senses to
tell their understandings that it is written or spoken, or that there is a Man
in the World.

Suppose we grant it to be no contradiction, and therefore a thing that God can
do, no man can question but that he must do it as a Miracle, by altering and
overturning Natures course. And shall we fain, 1. Miracles to become ordinary
things, through all the Churches in the World, and every day in the week or
every hour to be done? 2. And Miracles to be made a standing Church Ordinance?
3. And every one in the Church, even all the wicked, and every Mouse that
eats the Host, to be partaker of a Miracle? 4. Yea that every such Man and
Mouse, may all the week long live on a continued Miracle, while Accidents
without substance do nourish them and turn to Flesh and Blood? 5. And all this
ordinary course of Miracles to be wrought at the will of every Priest, be he
never so ignorant or wicked a Man? 6. And yet the same words spoken by the
holiest of the Protestant Pastors will not do the Miracle. 7. But if a Papist
Priest should be unduely ordained, or forge his own orders, sobeit the Church
think him truly ordained, he can do the Miracle. All this must be believed.

And the Plague of all is, all men must be Burnt as Heretics, or exterminated,
that cannot believe all this, and disbelieve their Senses. And yet worse, all
temporal Lords must be dispossessed of their Dominions, who will suffer any such
to live therein, and not exterminate them.

An Epicure and a sensual Infidel who think man is but of the same species of
Brutes, do but unman us, and leave us the Honor of being Animals or Brutes.
But the Papists do not leave us this much, but must reduce us to a lower order,
and teach us to deny our sense it self; and Torment and Kill them that will not
do it.

And what is it that must persuade us to all this? Why merely a Hoc est corpus
meum, as expounded by the Councils of Laterane and Trent. And is not David's [ I
am a Worm and no Man, Psalm. 22.6.] as plain; yea and that in a Prophecy of
Christ? Must we believe therefore that neither David nor Christ was a Man, but
a Worm? Is not [ I am the Vine, and ye are the Branches, Joh. 15.1, 2.] as
plain? Must Sense be renounced and ordinary Miracles believed for such words as
these?

And does not Paul call it [Bread] after consecration three times in the three
next verses? 1 Cor. 11.
And is not he as good an expositor of Christ's Words as the Council of Trent?

And when did God work Miracles which were mere objects of belief against
sense? Miracles were done as sensible things, thereby to confirm Faith, and
that which no sense perceived was not taken for a Miracle.

To conclude, when the Apostle says, that Flesh and Blood cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, (plainly speaking of them formally as now called, and not
as they signify Sin,) and consequently that Christ's Body is now in Heaven a
Spiritual Body, and not formally Flesh and Blood, yet must the Bread and Wine
be turned into his Flesh and Blood on Earth, when he has none in Heaven?

And by their Doctrine no Baker nor Vintner is secured but that a Priest may
come into his Shop or Celler and turn all the Bread and Wine in it, into
Christ's Body and Blood: yea the whole City or Garrison may thus be deprived of
their Bread and Wine, if the Priest intend it: and yet it shall not be so in
the Sacrament it self, if the Priest intend it not. But I have staid too long
in this.

XIV. Next to the Act of Cogitation and Volition itself, and to the most
certain Objects of Sense, there is nothing in all the World so Certain, that
is, so Evident to the Intellect, as the Being of God: He being that to the Mind
which the Sun is to the Eye, certainliest known, though little of him be known,
and no Creature comprehend him.

XV. That God is True is part of our knowing him to be perfect, and to be God;
and therefore is most certain.

XVI. That Man is made by God and for God; that we owe him all our Love,
Obedience and Praise, that we have all from him, and should please him in the
use of all, with many such like, are Notitiae Communes, Certain Verities,
received by Nature, some as Principles, and some as such evident conclusions as
are not to be doubted of.

XVII. That the Scripture is the Word of God, is a certain Truth, not sensible,
nor a Natural Principle; but an Evident conclusion drawn from that Seal or
Testimony of the Spirit, Antecedent, Concomitant, Impressed and Consequent;
which I have often opened in other Treatises.

XVIII. That the Scripture is True is a Certain Conclusion drawn from the two
last mentioned premises, viz. That God is True (Verax) and that the Scripture
is his Word.

XIX. Those Doctrines or sayings which are parts of Scripture evidently
perceived so to be by Sense and Intellective perception, are known to be True,
by the same Certainty as the Scripture in general is known to be true.

XX. To conclude, then there are two sorts of Certain Verities in Theology. 1.
Natural Principles with their certain consequents. 2. Scripture in General,
with all those assertions which are Certainly known to be its parts. And all
the rest are to be numbered with uncertainties, except Prophetical certainty of
Inspiration, which I pass by.

Chap. V.
Of the several Degrees of Certainty.

1. AS Certainty is taken for Truth of Being, it admits of no Degrees: All
that is True, is equally True.

2. But Certainty of Evidence has various degrees: none doubts but there are
various degrees of Evidence: all the doubt is whether any but the highest may
be called Certainty.

And here let the Reader first remember that the question is but de nomine, of
the name, and not the thing. And next, the Evidence is called Certain, because
it is Certifying aptitudinally. It is apt to certify us.

3. And then the question will be devolved to subjective Certainty, whether it
have various degrees. For if it have so, then the Evidence must be said to have
so, because it is denominated respectively from the Apprehensive Certainty.

And here de re it must be taken as agreed, 1. That Certainty is a certain
Degree of apprehension. 2. That there are various degrees of apprehension. 3.
That no Man on Earth has a perfect Intellectual apprehension, at least, of
things Moral and Spiritual. For his apprehension, may be still increased, and
those in Heaven have perfecter than we.

4. That there are some degrees so low and doubtful, as are not fit to be
called Certainty.

5. That even these lowest degrees with the greatest doubting, are yet often
True apprehensions: and whenever they are True they are Infallible, that is,
not deceived: Therefore this Infallibility, which is but, not to be deceived,
is indeed one sort of Certainty, which is so denominated Relatively from the
natural Truth or Certainty of the object: But it is not this sort of Certainty
which we enquire after.

6. Therefore it follows that this subjective certainty, contains this
Infallible Truth of perception, and adds a degree which consists in the
satisfaction of the mind.

7. But if the mind should be never so confident and satisfied of a falsehood,
this deserves not the name of Certainty, because it includes not Truth. For
it is a Certain perception of Truth which we speak of; and Confident erring is
not Certainty of the Truth.

8. As therefore the degrees of doubting are variously overcome, so there must
needs be various degrees of Certainty.

9. When doubting is so far overcome, as that the mind does find rest and
satisfaction in the Truth, it may be called Certainty. But when doubting is
either prevalent, and so troublesome as to leave us wavering, it is not called
Certainty.

10. It is not the forgetting or neglect of a difficulty or doubt, nor yet the
wills rejecting it, which is properly called Certainty. This quieteth the mind
indeed, but not by the way of ascertaining Evidence. Therefore ignorant people
that stumble upon a truth by chance with confidence, are not therefore Certain
of it. And those that take it upon trust from a Priest or their Parents, or
good peoples Opinion, are not therefore Certain of it. Nor they that say as
some Papists, [Faith has not evidence, but is a Voluntary reception of the
Churches Testimony, and meritorious, because it has not Evidence: Therefore
though I see no cogent Evidence, I will believe, because it is my duty.]
Whether this man's Faith may be saving or no, I will not now dispute; but
certainly it is no Certainty of apprehension. He is not Certain of what he so
believes. This is but to cast away the doubt or difficulty, and not at all by
Certainty to overcome it. 11. When a man has attained a satisfying degree of
perception, he is capable still of clearer perception. Even as when in the
heating of water, after all the sensible cold is gone, the water may grow
hotter and hotter still. So after all sensible doubting is gone, the perception
may go clearer still. 12. But still the Objective Certainty is the same; that
is, There is that Evidence in the object which is in suo genere sufficient to
notify the thing to a prepared mind. 13. But this sufficiency is a respective
proportion; and therefore, as it respects man's mind in common, it supposes
that by due means and helps, and industry, the mind may be brought certainly to
discern this Evidence. But if you denominate the sufficiency of the Evidence,
from its respect to the present disposition of men's minds, so it is almost as
various as men's minds are. For recipitur ad modum recipientis; and that is a
certifying sufficient Evidence of truth, to one man, which to a thousand
others, is not so much as an Evidence of probability. Therefore mediate and
immediate sufficiency and certainty of Evidence, must be distinguished.

From all this I may infer, 1. That though God be the Original and End of all
Verities, and is ever the First in ordine essendi and efficiendi, and so a Jove
principium, in methodo synthetica; yet he is not the primum notum, the first
known, in ordine cognoscendi, nor the beginning in methodo inquisitiva (though
in such Analytical methods as begin at the ultimate end, he is also the first.)
Though all truth and evidence be from God, yet two things are more evident to
man than God is, and but two: viz. 1. The present evident objects of sense. 2.
Our own internal Acts, of Intellective Cogitation and Volition. And these being
supposed the Being of God is the third evident Certainty in the World.

2. If it be no disparagement to God himself, that he is less certainly known
of us, than sensibles, and our Internal acts, (de esse) it is then no
disparagement to the Scripture, and supernatural Truths, that they are less
certainly known: Seeing they have not so clear evidence as the Being of God
has.

3. The certainty of Scripture Truths, is mixed of almost all other kinds of
certainty conjunct. 1. By sense and Intellective perception of things sensed,
the Hearers and Seeers of Christ and his Apostles, knew the words and Miracles.
2. By the same sense we know what is written in the Bible, and in Church
History concerning it, and the attesting matters of Fact: And also what our
Teachers say of it. 3. By certain Intellectual inference I know that this
History of the words and fact is true. 4. By Intellection of a natural
principle I know that God is true. 5. By inference I know that all his Word is
true. 6. By sense I know (Intellectually receiving it by sense) that this or
that is written in the Bible, and part of that word. 7. By further inference
therefore I know that it is true. 8. By Intuitive knowledge, I am certain that
I have the Love of God, and Heavenly desires, and a Love of holiness, and
hatred of sin, etc. 9. By certain inference I know that this is the special
work of the Spirit of Christ by his Gospel Doctrine. 10. By experience I find
the predictions of this Word fulfilled. 11. Lastly, By Inspiration the Prophets
and Apostles knew it to be of God. And our certain Belief arises from diverse
of these, and not from any one alone.

5. There are two extremes here to be avoided, and both held by some not seeing
how they contradict themselves.

I. Of them that say that Faith has no Evidence, but the merit of it lies in
that we believe without Evidence. Those that understand what they say, when
they use these words, mean that Things evident to sense, as such, that is,
Incomplex sensible objects are not the objects of Faith. We live by Faith and
not by sight. God is not visible: Heaven and its Glory, Angels and perfected
Spirits are not visible. Future Events, Christ's coming, the Resurrection,
Judgment, are not yet visible: It does not yet appear (that is, to sense) what
we shall be. Our Life is hid (from our own and others senses) with Christ in
God. We see not Christ when we rejoice in him with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory. 1 Pet. 1.8. Heb. 11.1.
Thus Faith is the evidence of things not seen, or evident to sight. But
ignorant Persons have turned all to another sense; as if the objects of Faith
had no ascertaining Intellectual Evidence. When as it is impossible for man's
mind to understand and believe any thing to be true, without perceiving
evidence of its truth; as it is for the Eye to see without Light. As Rich.
Hooker says in his Eccl. Pol. Let men say what they will, men can truly
believe no further than they perceive Evidence. It is a natural Impossibility:
For Evidence is nothing but the perceptibility of the Truth: And can we
perceive that which is not perceptible?

It Is true that evidence from Divine Revelation is often without any Evidence ex
natura rei: But it may be nevertheless a fuller and more satisfying evidence.

Some say there is Evidence of Credibility, but not of Certainty. Not of
natural Certainty indeed. But in Divine Revelations (though not in humane)
evidence of Credibility, is Evidence of Certainty, because we are certain that
God cannot lie.

And to say, I will believe, though without Evidence of Truth, is a
contradiction or hypocritical self-deceit. For your will believes not. And
your understanding receives no Truth but upon evidence that it is Truth. It
acts of itself per modum naturae, necessarily further than it is sub imperio
Voluntatis; And the will rules it not despotically; Nor at all quoad
Specificationem, but only quoad exercitium. All therefore that your will can do
(which makes Faith a moral Virtue) is to be free from those vicious habits and
acts in itself which may hinder faith, and to have those holy dispositions and
acts in itself which may help the understanding to do its proper Office, (which
is to believe evident truth on the testimony of the revealer, because his
Testimony is sufficient Evidence. The true meaning of a good Christian, when he
says, I will believe, is, I am truly willing to believe, and a perverse will
shall not hinder me, and I will not think of suggestions to the contrary. But
the meaning of the formal hypocrite when he says, I will believe, is, I will
cast away all doubtful thoughts out of my mind, and I will be as careless as if
I did believe, or I will believe the Priest or my Party, and call it a
believing God. Evidence is an essentiating part of the Intellects act. As there
is no Act, without an Object, so there is no object sub formali ratione
objecti, without evidence. Even as there is no sight but of an Illustrated
object, that is, A visible object.

II. The other extreme (of some of the same men) is, that yet Faith is not true
and certain if it have any doubtfulness with it. Strange! That these men cannot
only see what is invisible; Believe what is inevident as to its truth, that is,
incredible, but also believe past all doubting, and think that the weakest true
believer does so too! Certainly there are various degrees of faith in the
sincere. All have not the same strength! Christ rebukes Peter in his fears,
and his disciples all at other times, for their little faith: When Peter's faith
failed not, it staggered, which Abraham's did not: Romans 4.
Lord increase our Faith, and Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, were prayers
approved by Christ. I will call a prevalent belief which can lay down Life and
all this world for Christ and the hopes of Heaven, by the name of certainty
(which has various degrees.) But if they differ de nomine, and will call
nothing certainty but the highest degree, they must needs yet grant that there
is true saving faith that reaches to no certainty in their sense. Yea no man
on Earth then attaineth to such a certainty, because that every man's faith is
imperfect.

To conclude. Though all Scripture in itself (that is indeed the true Canon) be
equally true, yet all is not equally certain to us, as not having equal
evidence that it is Gods word. But of that in the next Chapter of the
uncertainties.

Chap. 6.
What are the unknown things, and uncertainties, which we must not pretend a
certain knowledge of.

SOmewhat of this is said already, Cap. 3. But I am here to come to more
particular instances of it. But because that an enumeration would be a great
Volume of it self, I shall begin with the more general, that I may be excused
in most of the rest; or mention only some particulars under them as we go.

I. A very great, if not the far greatest part of that part of Philosophy
called Physics, is uncertain (or certainly false) as it is delivered to us in
any methodist that I have yet seen; whether Platonists, Peripateticks,
Epicureans, (the Stoics have little, but what Seneca gives us, and Barlaam
Collecteth, I know not whence, as making up their Ethics, and what in three or
four Ethical writers is also brought in on the by, and what Cicero reports of
them) or in our Novelists, Patricius, Telesius, Campanella, Thomas White,
Digby, Cartesius, Gassendus, etc. Except those whose modesty causes them to
say but little, and to avoid the uncertainties; or confess them to be
uncertainties. To enumerate instances would be an unseasonable digression.
Gassendus is large in his Confessions of uncertainties. I think not his Brother
Hobs, and his second Spinosa worth the naming. Nor the Paracelsians and
Helmontians as giving us a new Philosophy, but only as adding to the old. There
needs no other testimony of uncertainty to a man that has not studied the
points himself, than their lamentable difference, and confutation of each
other, in so many, very many things; even in the great Principles of the
Science.

Yet here no doubt, there are certainties, innumerable certainties, such as I
have before described. We know something certainly of many things, even of all
sensible objects. But we know nothing perfectly and comprehensively, not a
worm, not a Leaf, not a Stone, or a Sand, not the Pen, Ink or Paper, which we
write with; not the hand that writes, nor the smallest particle of our bodies;
not a hair or the least accident. In every thing nearest us, or in the world,
the uncertainties and incognita are far more than that which we certainly know.

II. If I should enumerate to you the many uncertainties in our common
Metaphysics, (yea about the Being of the Science) and our common Logic, etc.
It would seem unsuitable to a Theological discourse. And yet it would not be
unuseful, among such Theologues as the Schoolmen, who resolve more of their
doubts by Aristotle than by the Holy Scriptures; doubtless, as Aristotle's
Predicaments are not fitted to the kinds of beings, so many of his
distributions and orders, yea and precepts are arbitrary. And as he left room
and reason for the dissent of such as Taurellus, Carpenter, Jacchaeus,
Gorlaeus, Ritschel, and abundance more, so have they also for men's dissent from
them. Even Ramus has more adversaries than followers. Gassendus goes the
right way, by suiting verba rebus, if he had hit righter on the nature of
things themselves. Most novel Philosophers are fain to make new Grammars and
new Logicks, for words and notions, to fit their new conceptions, as
Campanella, and the Paracelsians, Helmontians, (and if you will name the
Behmenists, Rosicrucians, Weigelians, etc.) Lullius thought he made the most
accurate Art of notions; and he did indeed attempt to fit words to things: but
he has mist of a true accomplishment of his design, for want of a true method
of Physics in his mind, to fit his words to. As Cornelius, Agrippa, See a book
written long since this called the Samaritan of excellent use, by Mr. Jones of
Suffolk.
who is one of his chief commentators, yet freely confesses in his lib. de
Vanitate Scientiarum, which now I think of; I will say no more of this, but
desire the Reader to peruse that laudable book, and with it to read Sanchez his
Nihil Scitur, to see uncertainty detected, so he will not be led by it too far
into Skepticism. As also Mr. Glanviles Scepsis Scientifica.

As for the lamentable uncertainties in Medicine, the poor world pays for it.
Anatomy as being by ocular inspection has had the best improvement; And yet
what a multitude of uncertainties remain? Many thousands years have millions
yearly died of Fevers, and the medicating them is a great part of the
Physicians work; and yet I know not that ever I knew the man, that certainly
knew what a Fever is. I crave the pardon of the Masters of this noble art for
saying it; It is by dear experience that I have learnt how little Physicians
know; having passed through the trial of above thirty of them on my own Body
long ago, merely induced by a conceit that they knew more than they did, and
most that I got was but the ruin of my own body, and this advice to leave to
others, [ Highly value those few excellent men, who have quick and deep
conjecturing apprehensions, great reading and greater Experience, and Sober,
Careful, Deliberating minds, and had rather do too little than too much: But
use them in a due conjunction with your own experience of your self: But for
the rest, how Learned soever, whose heads are dull, or temper precipitant, or
apprehensions hasty or superficial, or reading small, but especially that are
young, or of small experience, love and honor them, but use them as little as
you can, and that only as you will use an honest ignorant Divine, whom you will
gladly hear upon the certain Catechistical Principles, but love not to hear him
meddle with Controversies. So use these men in common easy cases, if
necessary, and yet there the less the better, lest they hinder nature that
would Cure the Disease. If you dislike my counsel, you may be shortly past
blaming it; for though their successes have Tongues, their miscarriages are
mostly silent in the Grave. O how much goes to make an able Physician? But
enough of such instances.

III. But though Errors in Politics the World pays yet much dearer for, I
must not be too bold in talking here. But I will confess that here the
uncertainties are almost all in the Applicatory part, and through the
incapacity of the minds of men: For the truth is the main Principles of Policy
are part of the Divine Law, and of true Morality, and in themselves are plain,
and of a satisfying Certainty, could you but get men's heads and hearts into a
fitness duly to consider and receive them.

IV. But to come nearer to our own profession, there is much uncertainty in
those Theological Conclusions, which are built on such premises, where any one
of these Physical, Metaphysical or Logical Uncertainties are a part; yea,
though it be couched in the narrowest room, even in one ambiguous term of Art,
and scarce discerned by any but accurate observers. With great pomp and
confidence many proceed to their Ergo's, when the detection of the fraud not
only of an uncertain Medium, but of one ambiguous syllable, will mar all. And
the conclusion can be no stronger or furer, than the more weak and doubtful of
the premises.

V. When the Subject is of small and abstruse parts, far from the Principles
and Fundamentals of the Matter, usually the Conclusions are uncertain. Nature
in all matters begins with some few great and master parts, like the great
boughs or limbs of the Tree, or the great Trunks and Master Vessels in our
bodies; and from thence spring branches, which are innumerable and small: And
it is so in all Sciences, and in Theology it self. The great Essential and
Chief Integral parts, are few, and easily discerned: But two grand Impediments
hinder us from a Certain knowledge in the rest: one is the great Number of
Particles, where the understanding is lost, and, as they say, seeks a Needle
in a bottle of Hay, or a leaf in a Wood; and the other is the Littleness of the
thing, which makes it undiscernible to any but accurate and studious minds.
And therefore how much soever men that trade in little things, may boast of the
sublimity of them, and their own subtilty, their perceptions usually are
accompanied with uncertainty; though in some cases an uncertain knowledge,
known to be so, is better than none.

VI. Yea, though the Matters themselves may be more bulky, yet if in knowing
and proving them, we must go through a great number of Syllogisms and
Inferences, usually the conclusion is very uncertain to us, whatever it may be
to an extraordinary accurate and prepared mind: For 1. We shall be still
jealous (or may be) lest in so many terms and mediums some one of them should
be fallacious and insufficient, and weaken all. And we are so conscious of our
own weakness, and liableness to forget, oversee or be mistaken, that we shall
or may still fear lest we have mist it, and be overseen in something, in so
long a course and series of arguings.

VII. Those parts of History which depend merely on the credit of Men's Wisdom
and Honesty, and so are merely of Humane Faith, must needs be uncertain. For
the conclusion can be no surer than the premises, All men as such are liars,
that is, untrusty, or such as possibly may deceive. 1. They may be deceived
themselves. 2. And they may deceive others where they are not themselves
deceived. Every man has some Passion, some Ignorance, some Error, some Selfish
interest and some Vice. This age, if we never had known other instance, is so
sad a proof of this, that tears are fitter than words to express it, most
confident reporters totally differ about the most notorious matters of Fact. I
must not name them, but I pity strangers and posterity. If it come especially
to the characterizing of others, how ordinarily do men speak as they are
affected? And they are affected as self-interest and passion leads them, with
Cochlaeus, Bolseck, and such others, what villains were Luther, Zwinglius,
Calvin, etc. with their faithfullest acquaintance; what Good and Holy men
(saving Luthers animosity?) If the Inquisitors Torment Protestants, or Burn
them, is it not necessary that they call them by such odious names as may
justify their fact? If they banish and silence faithful, holy, able, Ministers,
they must accuse them of some villainies which may make them seem worthy of the
punishment, and unworthy to Preach the Gospel of Christ! what different
characters did Constantius and Valens and their party on one side, and
Athanasius and the Orthodox on the other side, give of one another? What
different characters were given of Chrysostom? How differently do Hunnerichus
and Gensericus on one side, and Victor Uticensis and other Historians on the
other side, describe the Bishops and Christians of Africa, that then suffered?
They were Traitors and Rebels, and Rogues, and Enemies to the King, and
Heretics to Hunnerichus: But to others, they are Holy blameless Men, and those
were Tyrants and Heretics that Persecuted them. What difference between the
Histories of the orthodox, and that of Philostorgius, and Sondius? What
different Characters do Eusebius and Eunapius give of Constantine? and Eunapius
and Hilary, etc. give of Julian? What different Characters are given of
Hildebrand on one side, and of the Emperors Henrys on the other side, by the
many Historians who followed the several parts? How false must a great number
of the Historians on one side be? I know that this does not make all Humane
Faith and History useless. It has its degree of credibility answerable to its
use. And a wise man may much conjecture whom to believe. 1. A Man that (like
Thuanus) shows modesty and impartiality, even toward Dissenters. 2. A man
that had no notable interest to byas him. 3. A man that manifests otherways
true honesty and conscience. 4. Supposing that he was himself upon the place,
and a competent Witness.

But there is little or no Credit to be given, 1. To a factious, furious
railer. 2. To one that was a flatterer of Great Men, or depended on them for
preferment, or lived in fear of speaking the truth, or that speaks for the
interest of his Riches and Honor in the World; or for his engaged personal
reputation, or that has espoused the interest of a sect or faction. 3. There
is little credit to be given to any Knave and Wicked Man. He that dare be
Drunk, and Swear and Curse, and be a Fornicator or covetous Worldling, dare Lie
for his own Ends. 4. Nor to the honestest man that takes things by rumors,
hearsay and uncertain reports, and knows not the things themselves.

But how shall strangers and posterity know when they read a History, whether
the Writer was an honest Man or a Knave? A man of credit, or an impudent Liar?
Both may be equal in confident asserting, and in the plausibility of the
narrative. Mere humane belief therefore must be uncertain.

From whence we see the pitiful case of the subjects of the King of Rome (for
so I must rather call him than a Bishop.) Why does a Layman believe
Transubstantiation, or any other Article of their Faith? Because the Church
faith it is Gods Word. What is the Church that says so? It is a faction of the
Popes, perhaps at Laterane, or forty of his Prelates at the Conventicle of
Trent. How does he know that these men do not lie? Because God promised that
Peter's Faith should not fail, and the Gates of Hell should not prevail against
the Church; and the Spirit should lead the Apostles into all truth. But how
shall he know that this Scripture is Gods Word? And also that it was not a
total failing, rather than a failing in some degree that Peter was by that
promise freed from? Or that the Spirit was promised to these Prelates which was
promised to the Apostles? Why, because these Prelates say so! And how know they
that they say true? Why, from Scripture, as before.

But let all the rest go. How knows the Layman that ever the Church made
such a decree? That ever the Bishops of that Council were lawfully called? That
they truly represented all Christ's Church on Earth? That this or that Doctrine
is the decree of a Council, or the sense of the Church indeed? Why, because the
Priest tells him so. But how knows he that this Priest says true, or a few
more that the man speaks with: there I leave you: I can answer no further;
but must leave the credit of Scripture, Council and each particular Doctrine,
on the credit of that poor single Priest, or the few that are his companions.
The Layman knows it no otherwise.

Q. But is not the Scripture it self then, shaken by this, seeing the History
of the Canon and incorruption of the Books, etc. depends on the word of Man?

Ans. No. 1. I have elsewhere fully showed how the Spirit has sealed the
substance of the Gospel. 2. And even the matters of fact are not of mere humane
Faith. For mere humane Faith depends on the mere honesty of the reporter: but
this Historical Faith depends partly on Gods attestation, and partly on
Natural proofs. 1. God did by Miracles attest the reports of the Apostles and
first Churches, 2. The consent of all History since, that these are the same
writings which the Apostles wrote, has a Natural Evidence above bare humane
Faith. For I have elsewhere showed, that there is a concurrence of humane
report or a consent of history, which amounts to a true Natural Evidence, the
Will having its Nature and some necessary acts, and nothing but necessary
ascertaining causes, could cause such concurrence. Such Evidence we have that
K. James, Q. Elizabeth, Q. Mary, lived in England: that our Statute books
contain the true Laws, which those Kings and Parliaments made whom they are
ascribed to. For they could not possibly rule the Land, and overruled all men's
interests, and be pleaded at the Bar, etc. without contradiction and detection
of the fraud, if they were forgeries: (though it is possible that some words in
a Statute Book may be misprinted. There is in this a Physical Certainty in the
consent of men, and it depends not as humane Faith, upon the honesty of the
reporter; but Knaves and Liars, have so consented, whose interests and
occasions are cross, and so is it in the case of the history of the Scripture
Books: which were read in all the Churches through the World, every Lords day,
and contenders of various opinions took their Salvation to be concerned in them.

VIII. Those things must needs be uncertain to any man, as to a particular
Faith or Knowledge, which are more in number than he may possibly have a
distinct understanding of; or can examine their Evidence whether they be
certain or not. For instance the Roman Faith contains all the Doctrinal
decrees, and their Religion also all the Practical decrees of all the approved
General Councils, (that is, of so much as pleased the Pope, such power has he
to make his own Religion.) But these General Councils (added to all the Bible,
with all the Apocrypha) are so large, that it is not possible for most men to
know what is in them. So that if the question be whether this or that Doctrine
be the Word of God, and the proof of the affirmative is, because it is decreed
by a General Council, this must be uncertain to almost all men, who cannot tell
whether it be so decreed or no: Few Priests themselves knowing all that is in
all those Councils: So that if they knew that all that is in the Councils is
Gods Word; they know never the more whether this or that Doctrine ( e. g. the
immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, etc.) be the Word of God. And if a
Heathen knew that all that is in the Bible is the Word of God, and knew not a
word what is in it, would this make him a Christian or Saint him?

You may object, that most Protestants also know not all that is in the
Scripture. Ans. True; nor any one. And therefore Protestants say not that all
that is in the Scripture is necessary to be known to Salvation, but they take
their Religion to have essential parts, and integral parts and accidents. And
so they know how far each is necessary. But the Papists deride this
distinction, and because all truths are equally true, they would make men
believe that all are equally Fundamental or Essential to Christianity: But this
is only when they dispute against us; at other times they say otherwise
themselves, when some other interest leads to it, and so cures this impudency.

It were worthy the enquiry whether a Papist take all the Bible to be Gods
Word, and de fide, or only so much of it as is contained particularly in the
decrees of Councils? If the latter, then none of the Scripture was de fide, or
to be particularly believed for above 300 years, before the Council of Nice. If
the former, then is it as necessary to Salvation to know how old Henoch was, as
to know that Jesus Christ is our Savior?

IX. Those things must needs be uncertain which depend upon such a number of
various circumstances as cannot be certainly known themselves. For instance,
the common rule by which the Papist Doctors do determine what particular
Knowledge and Faith are necessary to Salvation, is that so many truths are
necessary as are sufficiently propounded to that person to be known and
believed. But no man living, learned nor unlearned, can tell what is necessary
to the sufficiency of this proposal. Whether it be sufficient, if he be told it
in his Childhood only, and at what Age? Or if he be told it but once, or twice,
or thrice, or how often? whether by a Parent or Layman that can not tell him what
is in the Councils? or by a Priest that never read the Councils? and whether
the variety of natural capacities, bodily temperaments, education and course of
Life before, do not make as great variety of proportions to be necessary to the
sufficiency of this Proposal? And what mortal man can truly take the measure of
them? And how then can any man be Certain what those points are which are
necessary for him to believe?

X. Those things are uncertain which depend upon an uncertain Author or
Authority. For instance, the Roman faith depends on the exposition of the
Scriptures by the consent of the Fathers, and on the Tradition of the Church,
and the decrees of an authorized Council. And here is in all this, little but
uncertainties.

1. It is utterly uncertain who are to be taken for Fathers, and who not.
Whether Origin, Tatianus, Arnobius, Lactantius, Tertullian, and many such, be
Fathers or not. Whether such a man as Theophilus Alexandrinus, or Chrysostom
was the Father, when they condemned each other. Whether such as are justly
suspected of Heresy, (as Eusebius) or such as the Romanists have cast
suspicions on (as Lucifer Calaritanus called a Heretic, Socrates, Sozomens
falsely called Novatians, Hilary, Arelatensis Condemned by the Pope Leo, and
Claud. Turovens. Rupertus Tuitiens. and such others.) When the ancients
renounced each others Communion, (as Martin did by Ithacius and Idacius and
their Synod,) when they describe one another as stark Knaves, as Socrates does
Theophil. Alexandrin. and Sulpitius Severus does Ithacius, which of them were
the Fathers.

2. How shall we know certainly which are the true uncorrupted writings of
these Fathers among so many forgeries and spurious Scripts?

3. How shall it be known what exposition the Fathers consented on, when not
one of a multitude, and but few in all have commented on any considerable parts
of the Scripture, and those few so much often differ?

4. When in the Doctrine of the Trinity it self Petavius largely proves that
most of the writers of the three first Centuries after the Apostles were
unsound, and others confess the same about the Millennium, the corporeity of
Angels and of the Soul, and diverse other things; does their consent bind us to
believe them? If not, how shall we know in what to believe their consent,
according to this Rule?

2. And as to the Church, they are utterly disagreed among themselves, what
that Church is which has this authority.

1. Whether the Pope alone. 2. Or the Pope with a Provincial Council. 3. Or the
Pope with a General Council. 4. Or a General Council without the Pope. 5. Or
the universality of Pastors. 6. Or the universality of the people with them.

3. And for a Council. 1. There is no certainty what number of Bishops, and
what consent of the Comprovincial Clergy is necessary to make them the true
representatives of any Church. 2. And more uncertain in what Council the
Bishops had such consent. 3. And uncertain whether the Popes approbation be
necessary. (The great Councils of Constance and Basil determining the
contrary.) 4. And uncertain which were truly approved. 5. And most certain that
there never was any General Council in the world (unless you will call the
Apostles a General Council) but only General Councils of the Clergy of one
Empire (with now and then a straggling Neighbor,) even as we have General
Assemblies and Convocations in this Kingdom: And who can be certain of that
faith which depends upon all, or any of these uncertainties?

XI. That must needs be an uncertainty which depends on the unknown thoughts
of another man. For instance, with the Papists the Priests intention, which is
the secret of his heart, is necessary to the being of Baptism, and
Transubstantiation. And so no man can be certain whether he or any other man be
baptized or not. Nor whether it be Bread or Christ's Body which he eats. We
confess that it is necessary to the being of a Sacrament, that the Minister do
seem or profess to intend it as a Sacrament; But if the reality of his intent
be necessary to the being of it, no man can be certain that ever he had a
Sacrament.

XII. It is a hard thing to be certain on either side, in those controversies
which have multitudes, and in a manner equal strength, of Learned, Judicious,
Well-studyed, Godly, Impartial men for each part. I deny not but one
clear-headed man, may be certain of that which a multitude are uncertain of,
and oppose him in. But it must not be ordinary men, but some rare illuminated
person, that must get above a probability, unto a Certainty, of that which such
a company as aforesaid are of a contrary mind in.

XIII. There is great uncertainty in matters of private impulse. When a man
has nothing to prove a thing to be Gods will, but an inward persuasion or
impulse in his own Breast, let it never so vehemently incline him to think it
true, it is hard to be sure of it. For we know not how far Satan or our own
distempered Fantasies may go. And most by far that pretend to this, do prove
deceived. That which must be certain, must be somewhat equal to Prophetical
Inspiration. Which indeed is its own Evidence: But what that is, no man can
formally conceive but he that has had it. Therefore we are bid to Try the
Spirits.

XIV. It is a hard thing to gather certainties of Doctrinal conclusion from
Gods Providence alone. Providential changes have their great use, as they are
the fulfilling or execution of the word. But they that will take them instead
of the Scripture, do usually run into such mistakes, as are rectifyed to their
cost, by some contrary work of Providence ere long. These times have fully
taught us this.

XV. It is hard to gather Doctrinal certainties from Godly men's Experiences
alone. Even our Experimental Philosophers and Physicians find, that an
experiment that hits ofttimes, quite misseth afterward on other Subjects, and
they know not why. A course of effects may often come from unknown causes. And
it is no rare thing for the common Prejudices, Selfconceitedness, or corruption
of the weaker and greater number of good people, which needs great repentance
and a cure, to be mistaken, for the Communis Sensus Fidelium, the Inclination
and Experience of the Godly. Especially when consent or the honor of their
Leaders or Themselves has engaged them in it. In my time, the common sense of
the strictest sort was against long hair, and taking Tobacco and other such
things, which now their common practice is for. In one Country the common
consent of the strictest party is for Arminianism. In another they are
zealously against it. In Poland where the Socinians are for sitting at the
Sacrament, the Godly are generally against it. In other places they are for it.
In Poland and Bohemia where they had holy, humble, persuading Bishops, the
generality of the Godly were for that Episcopacy, as were all the ancient
Churches, even the Novatians: But in other places it is otherwise. So that it is
hard to be certain of Truth or Error, Good or Evil, by the mere Consent,
Opinion or Experience of any.

XVI. But the last and great instance is, that in the holy Scriptures
themselves, there is a great inequality in point of Certainty, yea many parts
of them have great uncertainty; Even these that follow.

I. Many hundred Texts are uncertain through various Readings in several Copies
of the Original. I will not multiply them on Capellus his opinion. Though
Claud. Saravius (Who got the Book Printed) and other worthy men approve it. I
had rather there were fewer Varieties, and therefore had rather think there are
fewer. But these that cannot be denied must not be denied: Nor do I think it
fit, to gather the discrepancies of every odd Copy and call them Various
readings. ^ut it is past denial that the world has no one ancient Copy which
must be the Rule or Test of all the rest, and that very many Copies are of such
equal credit, as that no man living can say that this, and not that where they
differ has the very words of the Holy Ghost; And that even in the New
Testament alone the differences or various Readings, of which no man is able to
say which is the right, are so great a number as I am not willing to give every
reader an account of; Even those that are gathered by Stephanus and Junius and
Brugensis, and Beza, if you leave out all the rest in the appendix to the
Polyglot Bible. In all or most of which we are utterly uncertain which Reading
is Gods Word.

II. There are many hundred words in the Scriptures that are ambiguous,
signifying more things than one; and the context in a multitude of places
determines not the proper sense; so that you may with equal Authority
translate them either thus or thus: The Margin of your Bibles gives you no
small number of them. It must needs here be uncertain which of them is the Word
of God.

III. There are many hundred Texts of Scripture, where the Phrase is General,
and may be applied to more particulars than one: In some places the several
particulars must be taken as included in the General. (And where there is no
necessity, a General Phrase should not be expounded as if it were particular.)
But in a multitude of Texts the General is put for the particular, and must be
interpreted, but of one sort, and yet the context gives us no certain
determination which particular is meant. This is one of the commonest
uncertainties in all the Scriptures. Here it is Gods will that we be uncertain.

IV. In very many passages of the History of Christ, the Evangelists set both
Words and Deeds in Various Orders, one sets this first, and another sets
another first. (As in the order of Christ's three Temptations, Mat. 4. and Luke
4. And many such like.) Though it is apparent that Luke does less observe the
order than the rest, yet in many of these cases it is apparent that it was Gods
will to notify to us the Matter only, and not the Order. And that it must
needs be uncertain to us, which was first said or done, and which was last.

The same is to be said of the time and place of some speeches of Christ
recorded by them.

V. Many of Christ's Speeches are recorded by the Evangelists in various words.
It is most probable that Christ and the Apostles then spoke in the Chaldee
called Hebrew, and so that the four Gospels are but translations of Christ's
words, and so not the the words, but the sense was Christ's: And what wonder
then if the translating Evangelists use diverse words?
Even the Lords Prayer it self, Mat. 6. and Luke 11. Besides that Matthew has
the doxology which Luke has not (which Grotius and many others think came out
of the Greek Liturgy into the Text.) And even in Christ's Sermon in the Mount,
and in his last Commission to his disciples, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. and Mar. 16.
Now in some of these cases (as of the Lords Prayer) it is uncertain whether
Christ spoke it once or twice: (Though the former is more likely.) In most of
them, it is plain that it was the Will of Gods Spirit to give us the true sense
of Christ's sayings in various words, and not all the very words themselves: For
the Evangelists that differ do neither of them speak falsely, and therefore
meant not to recite all the very words: If you say that one gives us the true
words and another the true sense, we shall never be certain that this is so,
nor which that one is. So that in such cases no man can possibly tell which of
them were the very words of Christ.

VI. There are many Texts of the Old Testament recited in the New, where it is
uncertain whether that which the Penman intended was an Exposition or Proof of
what he said, or only an Allusion to the Phrase of Speech, as if he should say,
[I may use such words to express my mind or the matter by.] As Matthew. 2.23. He
shall be called a Nazarene. So v. 16, 17. Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 18. and others. I
know the Excellent Junius in his Parallels has said much, and more than any
other that I know, to prove them all, or almost all to be expository and
probatory Citations: But withal confessing that the generality of Ancient and
Modern Expositors think otherwise, he thereby shows a great uncertainty; when
he himself says not that he is Certain of it; and few others thought it
probable.

VII. There are many Texts cited in the New Testament out of the Septuagint,
where it differs from the Hebrew: Wherein it is utterly uncertain to us,
whether Christ and his Apostles intended to justify absolutely the translation
which they use, or only to make use of it as that which then was known and used
for the sake of the sense which it contained. If they absolutely justify it,
they seem to condemn the Hebrew, so far as it differs. If not, why do they
use it, and never blame it? It seems that Christ would hereby tell us, that
the sense is the Gold, and the words but as the Purse; and we need not be
overcurious about them, so we have the sense. As if I should use the vulgar
Latin, or the Rhemists Translation with the Papist, because he will receive no
other.

VIII. There are many Aenigmatical and obscure expressions, which a few Learned
men only can probably conjecture at, and few or none be certain of the full
sense. If any certainly understand much of the Prophecies in Daniel and the
Revelations, it must needs be very few: When Calvin durst not meddle with the
latter: And though most of the famous Commentators on the Revelations are such
as have peculiarly made it their Study, and set their minds upon it above all
other things, and rejoiced in conceit that they had found out the true sense
which others had overseen, (as men do that seek the Philosophers Stone) yet how
few of all these are there that agree? And if ten be of nine minds, eight of
them at least are mistaken. Franc. du Jon, the Lord Napier, Brightman, Dent,
Mede, and my godly Friend Mr. Stephens yet living, (since dead,) with many
others, have studied it thus with extraordinary diligence, but with different
successes: And Lyra with other old ones turn all quite another way. And then
come Grotius and Dr. Hammond and contradict both sides, and make it all (saving
a few Verses) to have been fulfilled many Ages since. And can the unlearned, or
the unstudied part of Ministers then, with any modesty pretend a certainty,
where so many and such men differ?

I know it is said, Blessed is he that reads, Rev. 1.3.
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein: But that proves no more than 1. That some of it (as chapter 1, 2,
3.) is plain and commonly intelligible. 2. That it is a desirable thing to
understand the rest; and worthy men's endeavor in due time and rank; and he
that can attain to certainty may be glad of it.

I pass by the darkness of many Types and Prophecies of Christ in the Old
Testament, and how little the Jews or the Apostles themselves, till after
Christ's Resurrection, understood them. With very many other obscurities, which
yet are not written in vain, nay, which make up the true perfection of the
whole.

IX. There are very many proverbial Speeches in the Scripture, which are not to
be understood as the words properly signify, but as the sense of those
Proverbs then was among the Jews. But disuse has so totally obliterated the
knowledge of the sense of many of them, that no man living can certainly
understand them.

X. There are many Texts which have words adapted to the Places, the Animals,
the Utensils, the Customs, the Coins, the Measures, the Vegetables, etc. of
that place and time, which are some hard, and some impossible now to be
certainly understood: And therefore such as Bochart, Salmasius, Casaubone,
Scaliger, etc. have done well to add new Light to our conjectures; but leaving
great uncertainty still.

XI. Because the Jewish Law is by Paul plainly said to be ceased or done away,
it remains very difficult to be certain of abundance of passages in the Old
Testament, how far they are obligatory to us? For when they now bind no
otherwise than as the continued Law of nature, or as reassumed by Christ into
his special Law, where the latter is not found, in the former there is often
insuperable difficulty. For most lies upon the proof of a parity of Reason,
which puts us upon trying cases hardly tried, unless we knew more of the reason
of all those Laws. (As about Vows and Dispensations, Number. 30. about prohibited
degrees of Marriage, and such like; which makes Divines so much differ about
the obligation of the Judicials, (of which see Junius vol. 1. p. 1861, etc. de
Polit. Mos. observe.) and about Usury, Priesthood, Magistrates power in
Religion, and many such.

XII. There are abundance of Texts which only open the substance of the matter
in hand to us, and say nothing about abundance of difficulties of the manner,
and many circumstances, (as the manner of the Divine influx, and the Spirits
operation on the Soul, etc.) And here all that which is unrevealed must needs
be unknown.

XIII. There are many Precepts which were local, personal, particular, It is
very hard to be sure what the Apostles settled as an Universal perpetual Law, in
Church matters, and what they settled only as suited to that time and place by
the common rule of doing all to Edification: I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice being a standing Rule, it is hard to plead their use of any Rites
against common good: Perhaps more is mutable than most think.
and so temporary, and bind not universally all Persons, at all times
afterward: Such as the Rechabites Precepts from their Father, and such as the
Love Feasts, the Kiss of Love, Women's Veil and long Hair, Men's being uncovered,
etc. Now it is very hard to know in all instances whether the Precepts were
thus temporary or universal and durable: which makes Divines differ about the
Anointing of the Sick, the Office of Deacons and Deaconesses, the Power of
Bishops, and Extent of their Diocesses, the Eating things strangled, and Blood,
(against which Chr. Beckman in his Exercit. has abundance of shrewd Arguments,
though few are of his mind.) In these cases few reach a Certainty, and none so
full a Certainty as in plainer things.

XIV. It is very hard to be Certain when, and how far Examples of holy men in
Scripture bind us: Though I have elsewhere proved that wherever the Apostles
practice was the Execution of their Commission for settling Church Orders, in
which Christ promised them the help of his Spirit, their Practice was
obligatory. Yet in many instances the obligation of Examples is very doubtful:
Which occasioneth the Controversies about imitating John Baptist's Life in the
Wilderness, and Anna, and about Lent, and about Baptizing by dipping over Head,
and about the Lords Supper, whether it should be Administered to a Family, or at
Evening only, or after Supper, or Sitting, or in a private House, etc. And
about washing Feet, and many Church Orders and Affairs.

XV. There are many things in Scripture that are spoken but once or twice, and
that but as on the by, and not very plainly: And we cannot be so Certain of any
Doctrine founded on these, as on passages frequently and plainly written.

XVI. There are so many seeming differences in Scripture, especially about
Numbers, as that if they be reconcilable, few or none in the World have yet
found out the way. If we mention them not our selves, such paultry Fellows will
do it, as Bened. Spinosa in his Tractatus Theolog. Polit. I will not cite any,
but desire the Learned Reader to consider well of what that Learned and Godly
man, Without approving all that is in it, I may wish the Reader to peruse
Father Simon's second Book now newly Printed in London.
Ludov. Capellus says in his Critic. Sacr. l. c. 10. and l. 6. c. 7, 8. (I own
not his supposition of a better Hebrew Copy used by the Sept.) I think an
impartial considerer of his instances will confess, that as God never promised
all or any of the Scribes or Printers of the Bible any infallible Spirit, that
they should never write or print a word falsely, and as it is certain by the
various Lections that many such there have been in many and most Books; so
there is no one Scribe that had a promise above the rest, nor any one Hebrew or
Greek Copy which any man is sure is absolutely free from such miswritings. For
how should we be sure of that one above all the rest? And I wish the Learned
Reader to consider Bibliander's Preface to his Hebr. Grammar, and Casaubone's
Exercit. 1. 28. and Pellicanus his Preface to his Coment. on the Bible. Hierom
on Mic. 5.2. is too gross, de Matthew. 2. Quod Testimonium nec Haebraico nec 70
Interpretibus convenire, etc. Let him read the rest that will, which is
harsher; he that will not confess miswritings of numbers, and some names and
words heretofore, as well as some misprintings now, does but by his pretended
Certainty tempt men to question the rest for the sake of that, and injureth the
Sacred Word.

XVII. We have not the same degree of Certainty of the Canonicalness or
Divineness of every Book of Scripture: Though they are all Gods Word, they have
not all the same Evidence that they are so. The New Testament had a fuller
Attestation from Heaven for its Evidence to man, than most of the Old had. And
of the New Testament, it was long before many Churches received the Epist. to
the Hebrews, the second of Peter, Jude, Revel. etc. Even in Eusebius days, in
his Praepar. Evangel. he shows that they were not received by all. And of the
Old Testament, Moses, and the Psalms and Prophets have fuller Attestation than
the rest. And indeed, as it is probable that the Chronicles were written in or
after Ezra's time at soonest, so they do in so many places differ in numbers
from the Book of Kings, where all would agree with the rest of the History, if
those numbers were but reduced to those in the Kings, that if any man should
doubt of the Divine Authority of that Book, that thereby he may be the less
tempted to question any others, I should not think his Error inconsistent with
Salvation. Put but that man to prove what he says, who asserteth that we have
equal Evidence of the Divinity of the Chronicles, Canticles, Esther, as we have
of Moses, the Prophets, the Psalms, and the New Testament, and you shall
quickly find that he did but pretend an equal degree of Certainty which indeed
he had not. The Papists pretend that they are as certain of the Divinity of the
Apocrypha, as we are of the rest: But they do but pretend a Certainty, for
Interest and Custom sake.

XVIII. Though it be to be held that Certainly the Holy Writers had no
falsehoods in Doctrine or History, but delivered us the Truth alone, yet no one
of them delivers us all the Truth, no not of many particular Histories, and
Speeches of Christ which they mention: And therefore we must set them
altogether for the understanding of them: (As in the instance of Christ's
appearing and the Angels Speeches after his Resurrection.) And when all is done
we have not all that Christ said and did, but all that was necessary to our
Faith and Salvation. For as Paul cites Christ, saying, It is more honorable
to give, than to receive, so John tells us that the World could not contain the
Books that should be written, we must take heed therefore how far we go with
Negatives, of such unmentioned things.

XIX. Though all that the Holy Writers have recorded is true, (and no falsehood
in the Scripture but what is from the error of Scribes and Translators) yet we
are not certain that the Writers had not human infirmites in the Phrase, Method
and Manner of expression. It is apparent that their style, yea their Gifts were
various, as Paul often opens them, 1 Cor. 12. etc. Therefore Paul rather than
Barnabas was the Chief Speaker. And Apollo was more eloquent than others: Hence
some were of Paul and some of Apollo and some of Cephas: And Paul is put to
vindicate his ministerial abilities to the Corinthians. Therefore though weaker
men's gifts put no sinful imperfection into the Scriptures, yet a humane natural
imperfection of style, and order might be more in some than others. It is
certain that they were not all perfect in Knowledge and Holiness. And how far
every Sermon which they Preached was free from all that Imperfection (any more
than Peter's carriage, Gal. 2.) we are uncertain. And how far their Writings had
a promise of being free from Natural modal imperfections more than their
Preachings, we know not fully. And yet God turned this weakness of theirs to
the confirmation of our Faith; showing us that Heavenly power, and not human
wisdom and ability did his work. As David's sling in conquering Goliath showed
Gods power. And out of the mouths of Babes does God ordain strength, and the
weak things of the World are used to confound the strong.

XX. Lastly, though all be certainly true which they have recorded, yet we have
not the same degree of Certainty, that no Writer erred through lapse of memory
in some less material passage, as we have that they infallibly delivered us the
Gospel. But this I have said so much of already in a small Book called More
Reasons for the Christian Religion, that I must now refer you thither for the
rest.

Q. But if there be so many things either uncertain or less-certain* what is it
that we are or may be fully certain of?

Ans. 1. What you are or are not certain of your self, you should know if you
know your self without my telling you.

2. I deny not but you may come to a Certainty of all those things which are
never so difficult, that have any ascertaining evidence; if you live long
enough, and study hard enough, and have an extraordinary measure of Divine
illumination: I do not measure others by my self: You may know that which I
know not. God may bless your studies more, as being better men and fitter for
his blessing: he may give you extraordinary Inspirations, or Revelations if he
please. But I am thankful for my low degree, and confess my ignorance.

3. But I have told you before what Certainties we have. 1. We are certain of
things sensible. 2. And of our Elicite and Imperate acts. 3. And of Natural
principles. 4. And of clear inferences thence. 5. And of the Truth of all the
Certain holy Scriptures which are Evidently the Word of God 6. And particularly
therein of the plain Historical parts. 7. And of all that which is the main
design and scope of the Text in any Book or Chapter. 8. And of all that which
is purposely and often repeated, and not only obscurely once spoken on the by.
9. Therefore we may be Certain of all that is necessary to Salvation: of every
Article of the Creed; of every Petition in the Lords Prayer, and every
necessary common duty: We may be Certain of the Truth and Sense of all the
Covenant of Grace concerning the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, his Relation to
us, and our Relation and Duty to him, and of the benefits of the Covenant; of
the necessity and nature of Faith, Repentance, Hope, Love, Obedience, Patience,
etc. It Is tedious to recite all, in a word, all that is of common necessity,
and all (how small soever) which is plainly revealed and expressed. 10. And you
may be certain of the fulfilling of much of this Holy Word already by
sufficient History and Experience.

Chap. 7.
Inference 1. The true Reason and usefulness of the Christian Simplicity, in
differencing the Covenant, and Principles of Religion from the rest of the holy
Scriptures.

IT has ever been the use of the Church of God, to Catechize men before they
were Baptized; and therein to teach them the true meaning of the Baptismal
Covenant, by opening to them the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue:
And when they understood this Covenant they were admitted (upon consent) by
Baptism into the Church, As Antonine says,) in greater darkness) li. 2. 5.
[(...), etc.] Vides quam pauca sint, quae siquis tenuerit, prosperam ac divinam
propemodum vitam degere detur: Siquidem and Dii ipsi nihil amplius exigent ab
eo, qui ista observaverit.
and accounted Christians and members of Christ, without staying to teach them
any other part of the Bible, no not so much as the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. ( Though indeed the opening of Baptism was the opening of the Life of
that. Because it is the same Covenant which is Solemnized in both.

By doing thus the Church notoriously declared that they took not all the
Scripture to be equally necessary to be understood; but that the Govenant of
Grace, and the Catechism explaining it, is the Gospel it self, that is, the
Essence of it, and of the Christian Religion, and that all the rest of the
Scriptures contain but partly the Integrals, and partly the Accidents of that
Religion. He is the wisest man that knows Most and Best; and every man should
know as much of the Scriptures as he can: But if you knew all the rest, without
this (the Covenant of Grace, and its explication) it would not make you
Christians or save you. But if you know this (truly) without all the rest, it
will.

The whole Scripture is of great use and benefit to the Church. It is like the
body of a man; which has its Head, and Heart, and Stomach, etc. And has also
Fingers, and Toes, and flesh; yea Nails and Hair. And yet the Brain and Heart
it self fare the better for the rest, and would not be so well Seated separate
from them: Though a man may be a man that loses even a Leg or Arm. So is it
here. But it is the Covenant that is our Christianity and the duly Baptized are
Christians, whatever else they do not understand. These are the things that all
must know, and daily live upon.

The Creed is but the Exposition of the three Articles of the Baptismal
Covenant. [I believe in God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.] Though the Jews
that had been bred up to a preparing knowledge, were quickly baptized by the
Apostles upon their Conversion, Acts 2. Yet no man can imagine that either the
Apostles or other Ministers did use to admit the Ignorant Gentiles into the
Covenant of God, without opening the meaning of it to them; or Baptize them as
Christians without teaching them what Christianity is. Therefore Reason and the
whole Churches subsequent Custom assure us that the Apostles used to expound
the three great Articles to their Catechumens; And thence it is called, The
Apostles Creed.

Marcus Bishop of Ephesus told them in the Florentine Council (as you may see
Sgyropilus) that we have none of the Apostles Creed: And Vossius de Symbolis
(besides many others) has many Arguments to prove that this so called was not
formally made by the Apostles. Bishop Usher has opened the changes that have
been in it. Sandford and Parker have largely (de Descensu) showed how it came
in as an Exposition of the Baptismal Articles. Others stiffly maintain that the
Apostles made it. But the case seems plain. The Apostles used to call the
Baptized to the profession of the same Articles (which Paul has in 1. Cor.
15.1, 2, 3, etc.) and varied not the matter. All this was but more particularly
to profess Faith in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Two or three further
Expository Articles are put into the Creed since: Otherwise it is the same
which the Apostles used; not in the very syllables, or forms of words; but in
the same sense, and the words indeed being left free, but seldom much altered,
because of the danger of altering the matter. Of all the Antientest Writers,
not one repeateth the Creed in the same words that we have it; nor any two of
them in the same with one another. Irenaeus once, Tertullian twice has it, all
in various words, but the same sense. That of Marcellus in Epiphanius comes
nearest ours called the Apostles, and is almost it. Afterward in Ruffinus and
others we have more of it. Yet no doubt but the Western Churches (at least)
used it with little variation still. The Nicene Creed is called by some
Ancients the Apostles Creed too. And both were so; for both are the same in
sense and substance: For it is not the very words that are truly fathered on
the Apostles.

About 30^ years a go Mr. Ashwel having published a Book for the Necessity and
Honor of the Creed, I wrote in the Postscript to my Reformed Pastor, Ed. 2. a
Corrective of some* passages, in which he seems to say too much for it, or at
least to depress the Scripture too much in comparison of it. But long
experience now tells me, that I have more need to acquaint men with the
Reasons and Necessity of the Creed: Seeing I find a great part of ignorant
Religious people much to slight the use of it, and say, It is not Scripture,
but the work of man: Especially taking offense at the harsh translati^n of that
Article, [He descended into Hell.] which from the beginning it is like was not
in. It is the Kernel of the Scripture; and it is that for which the rest of the
Scripture is given us, even to afford us sufficient help to understand and
consent to the Covenant of Grace, that our Belief, our Desires, and our
Practice may be conformed principally to these Summaries. It is not every Child
or Woman that could have gathered the Essential Articles by themselves out of
the whole Scripture, if it had not been done to their hands: Nor that could
have rightly methodized the Rule of our desires, or gathered the just heads of
natural duty, if Christ had not done the first in the Lords Prayer, and God the
second in the Decalogue.

Obj. But I believe these only, because the Matter of the Creed, and the words
also of the other two are in the Scripture, and not on any other Authority.

Ans. If you speak of the Authority of the Author, which gives them their
truth, it is neither Scripture nor Tradition, but God, for whose Authority we
must believe both Scripture and them.

But if you speak of the Authority of the Deliverers, and the Evidence of the
Delivery, be it known to you, 1. That the Creed, Lords Prayer, Decalogue, and
the Baptismal Covenant have been delivered down to the Church from the Apostles
by a distinct Tradition, besides the Scripture Tradition. Even to all the
Christians one by one that were Baptized, and admitted to the Lords Table, and
to every particular Church. So that there was not a Christian or Church that
was not even Constituted by them.

2. Be it known to you, that the Church was long in possession of them, before
it had the Scriptures of the New Testament. It Is supposed to be about eight
years after Christ's Ascension before Matthew wrote the first Book of the New
Testament, and near the year of our Lord one hundred, before the Revelation was
written. And do you think that there were no Christians or Churches all that
while? Or that there was no Baptism? Or no Profession of the Christian Faith in
distinct Articles? No Knowledge of the Lords Prayer and Commandments? No
Gospel daily preached and practiced? What did the Church Assemblies think you,
do all those years? No doubt, those that had Inspiration used it by
extraordinary gifts: But that was not all. Those that had not did preach the
Substance of the Christian Religion contained in these forms, and did Pray and
Praise God, and celebrate the Lords Supper, provoking one another to Love and
to good works.

3. Be it known to you that these three Summaries come to us with fuller
Evidence of Certain Tradition from God, than the rest of the Holy Scriptures.
Though they are equally true, they are not equally Evident to us. And this I
thus prove. 1. The Body of the Scriptures were delivered but one way; but the
Covenant, Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue, are delivered two ways. They are
in the Scripture, and so have all the Evidence of Tradition which the
Scriptures have. And they were besides that delivered to the memories of all
Christians. If you say that the Creed is not in the Scripture, or that the
Scripture is not altered as it is; I answer, 1. That it is in the Scripture as
to the matter signified in as plain words, even of the same signification. 2.
There is no alteration made, but a small addition, which is no disparagement to
it, because the ancient substance of it is still known, and the additions are
not new made things, but taken out of Scripture. And if yet any Heretic should
deny that God is Wise and Good, and Just and Merciful, it were no dishonor to
the Creed nor weakening of its certainty to have these attributes yet added to
it.

2. These Summaries, as is said, were far ancienter than the rest of the New
Testament, as written and known, and used long before them.

3. These Summaries being in every Christians mind and memory were faster held,
than the rest of the Scriptures. Therefore Parents could and did teach them
more to their Children. You never read that the Catechizers of the people did
teach them all the Bible, nor equally ask them who Jared, or Mehaleel or Lamech
was, as they did who Christ was. Nor put every History into the Catechism, but
only the Historical Articles of the Creed.

4. Therefore it was far easier to preserve the purity of these Summaries, than
of the whole Body of the Scriptures: For that which is in every man's memory,
cannot be altered without a multitude of reprovers: Which makes the Greeks
since Photius keep such a stir about [Filioque,] as to think that the Latins
have changed Religion, and deserved to be separated from, for changing that
word. But no wonder that many hundred various Readings are crept into the
Bible, and whole Verses and Histories (as that of the Adulterous Woman,) are
out in some that are in others. For it is harder to keep such a Volume
incorrupt than a few words. Though writing as such is a surer way than memory,
and the whole Bible could never have been preserved by memory. Yet a few words
might, especially when they had those words in writings also.

5. Add to this, that the Catechistical Summaries aforesaid, were more
frequently repeated to the people, at least every Lords day. Whereas in the
reading of the Scriptures, one passage will be read but seldom, perhaps once or
twice in a year. And so a corruption not so easily observed.

6. And if among an hundred Copies: of the Scripture ten or twenty only should
by the Carelessness of the Scribes be corrupted, all the rest who saw not these
Copies would not know it, and so they might fall into the hands of Posterity,
when many of the sounder might be lost.

7. And Lastly, The danger of depravation had no end. For in every age the
Scripture must be written over anew, for every Church and person that would use
it. And who that knows what writing is, could expect that one Copy could be
written without errors, and that the second should not add to the errors of the
1st, as Printers now do, who print by faulty Copies. And though this danger is
much less since Printing came up, that is but lately. And the mischiefs of Wars
and Heretical Tyrants burning the truest Copies, has been some disadvantage to
us.

Obj. Thus you seem to weaken the Certain incorruption of the Scriptures.

Ans. No such thing: I do but tell you the case truly as it is. The wonderful
Providence of God, and care of Christians has so preserved them, that there is
nothing corrupted which should make one Article of faith the more doubtful. I
assert no more depravation in them than all confess; but only tell you how it
came to pass, and tell you the greater certainty that we have of the Essentials
of Religion than of the rest. And whereas every man of brains confesses that
many hundred words in Scripture (by Variety of Copies) are uncertain, I only
say, that: it is not so in the Essentials. And I do not wonder that Virgil,
Ovid, Horace, Cicero, etc. Have not suffered such depravations. For, 1. It is
not so easy for a Scribes error to pass unseen in oratione ligata as in
oratione soluta, in verse as in prose. 2. And Cicero with the rest was almost
only in the hands of Learned men; whereas the Scriptures were in the hands of
all the Vulgar, Women and Children. 3. And the Copies of these Authors were
comparatively but few: Whereas every one almost got Copies of the Scripture
that was able. And it is liker that some depravation should be found among ten
thousand Copies than among a hundred.

So that I have proved to you that the Creed, Lords Prayer, Commandments and
Covenant of Baptism are not to be believed only because they are in the
Scripture, but also because they have been delivered to us by Tradition, and so
we have them from two hands as it were, or ways of Conveyance, and the rest of
the Scriptures but by one, for the most part.

I will say yet more, because it is true, and needful. If any live among
Papists, that keep the Scripture from the people, or among the poor Greeks,
Armenians or Abassines where the people neither have Bibles commonly, nor can
read, or if any among us that cannot read, know not what is in the Bible; yea
if through the fault of the Priest, any should be kept from knowing that ever
there was a Bible in the world: Yet if those persons by Tradition receive the
baptismal Covenant, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Commandments as Gods Word, and
truly believe, and Love and Practice them, those persons shall be saved. For
they have Christ's promise for it. And the very Covenant itself is the Gift of
Christ and Life to consenters. Whereas he that knows all the Scripture can be
saved only by consenting to and performing this same Covenant. But having
greater helps to understand it, and so to Believe it and Consent, he has a
great advantage of them that have not the Scripture; And so the Scripture is an
unspeakable mercy to the Church. And it is so far from being too little without
the supplement of the Papists Traditions and Councils, as that the hundredth
part of it as to the bulk of words, is not absolutely it self of necessity to
Salvation.

Yet I say more; If a man that has the Scripture should doubt of some Books of
it, whether they be the Word of God) as of Ruth, Judges, Joshua, Chronicles,
etc.) Yea if he doubted of all the Old Testament, and much of the New; yet if
he believe so much as contains all the Covenant of Grace, and the foresaid
Summaries, though he sin, and lose much of his helps, yet he may and will be
saved, if he sincerely receive but this much. The reason is before given.
Though no man can believe any thing truly who believes not all that he knows
to be Gods Word, yet a man may doubt whether one thing be Gods Word, who
doubts not of another, by several occasions.

And here you see the Reason why a particular or explicit Belief of all the
Scripture it self, was never required of all that are baptized, nor of all or
any man that entered into the Ministry. For the wisest Doctor in the world does
not attain so high. For no man has a particular explicit Belief of that which
he does not understand. For it is the matter or sense that we believe: and we
must first know what that sense is before we can believe it to be true. And no
man in the World understands all the Scripture.

Yea more, it is too much to require as necessary to his Ministry, a
subscription in General that he implicitly believes all that is in that Bible
which you shall show him. For 1. Many faults may be in the Translation, if it
be a Translation. 2. Many errors may be in the Copy, as aforesaid.

Nay such a subscription should not, as absolutely necessary, be required of
him as to all the real Word of God. For if the man by error should doubt
whether Job or the Chronicles or Esther were Canonical, and none of the rest, I
would not be he that should therefore forbid him to Preach Christ's Gospel. I am
sure the ancient Church imposed no such terms on their Pastors, when part of
the new Testament was so long doubted of; and when some were chosen Bishops
before they were Baptized; and when Synesius was chosen a Bishop before he
believed the Resurrection. I would not have silenced Luther, Althamer or others
that questioned the Epistle of James.

What then shall we say of the Roman insolence, which thinks not all the
Scripture big enough, but Ministers must also subscribe to many additions of
their own, yea and swear to Traditions and the Expositions of the Fathers, and
take whole Volumes of Councils for their Religion? No wonder if such men do
tear the Churches of Christ in pieces.

1. By this time I hope you see to what use Baptism and the Summaries of
Religion are. 2. And of how great use Catechizing is. 3. And that Christianity
has its essential parts. 4. And how plain and simple a thing true Christianity
is which constituteth the Church of Christ; And how few things as to knowledge
are necessary to make a man a Christian, or to Salvation. Multitudes of
opinions have been the means of turning Pastors and People from the holy and
diligent improvement of these few truths in our practice, where we have much to
do which might take up all our minds and time.

Chap. VIII.
Inference 2. Of the use of Catechizing.

THough it be spoken to in what is said, I would have you more distinctly here
note the use of Catechizing. 1. It collecteth those few things out of many,
which the Ignorant could not themselves collect. 2. It collecteth those
necessary things, which all must know and believe that will be saved. 3. It
contains those Great practical things, which we have daily use for, and must
still live upon; which are as Bread and Drink for our food. Other things may be
well added; the more the better, which God has revealed. But our Life and our
comfort and our Hope is in these. 4. And it gives us the true method or order
of holy truths: which is a great advantage to understand them. Not but that the
things themselves have the same orderly respect to one another in the
Scripture, but they are not delivered in the same order of words.

Therefore 1. Catechisms should be very skilfully and carefully made. The true
fundamental Catechism is nothing else but the Baptismal Sacramental Covenant,
the Creed, the Lords Prayer and the Commandments, the Summaries of our Belief,
Desires and Practice. And our secondary Catechism must be nothing else, but the
plain expositions of these: the first is a Divine Catechism: the second is a
Ministerial Expository Catechism. And here 1. O that Ministers would be wiser
at last, than to put their superfluities, their controversies, and private
opinions into their Catechisms? and would fit them to the true end, and not to
the interest of their several sects. But the Roman-Trent Catechism (and many
more of theirs) must needs be defiled with their trash, and every sect else
must put their singularities into their Catechisms; so hard is it for the aged
decrepit body of the diseased Church (for want of a better concoction of the
common essentials of Christianity) to be free from these heaps of inconcocted
crudities, and excrementitious superfluities, and the many maladies bred
thereby.

I deny not but a useful controversy may be opened by way of Question and
Answer. But pretend it not then to be what it is not, Romans 14.1.
Milk for Babes. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations. The Servant of the Lord must be apt to teach, but must not strive.

2. And it is not commonly believed, how great skill is needful to make a
Catechism, that the method may be true, and that it may neither be too long for
the memory, nor too short for the understanding, for my part, it is the hardest
work save one (which is the full methodizing and explaining the whole body of
Divinity) that ever I put my hand to; And when all is done, I cannot satisfy my
self in it.

Since this I have published a Book called the Catechizing of Households.
II. Why is not Catechizing more used, both by Pastors and Parents? I mean not
the bare words unexplained without the sense, nor the sense in a mere rambling
way without a form of words. But the words explained. O how much fruit would
poor Souls and all the Church receive, by the faithful performance of this
work, would God but cure the profaneness and sloth of unfaithful Pastors and
Parents which should do it. But I have said so much of this in my Reformed
Pastor, that I may well forbear more here.

Chap. IX.
Inference 3. The true Preservative of puzzled Christians, from the Errors of
false Teachers, who vehemently solicit them to their several parties.

IT is the common outcry of the World. How shall we know which side to be on?
And who is in the right among so many who all with confidence pretend to be in
the right?

Ans. Your Preservative is obvious and easy: but men usually bestow more
labor and cost for Error and Hell, than for Truth and Heaven. Pretend not to
Faith or knowledge before you have it, and you are the more safe. SUSPEND your
judgments till you have true evidence to establish them. 1. It is only
Christians that I am now instructing: and if you are Christians you have
already received the Essentials of Christianity even the Baptismal Covenant,
the Creed, the Lords Prayer and Decalogue. And I need not tell you that
moreover you must receive all those Truths in Nature, and Scripture which are
so plain that all these dissenting sects of Christians are agreed in them. And
when you have all these, and faithfully love and practice them, you are sure to
be saved, if you do not afterward receive some contrary Doctrine which
destroys them. Mark then which is the safe Religion. As sure as the Gospel is
true, he that is meet for Baptism before God, is meet for pardon of sin, and he
that truly consents to the Baptismal Covenant, and so does dedicate himself
to God, is made a Member of Christ, and is justified, and an Heir of Heaven.
Your Church Catechism says truly of all such, that in Baptism each one is
made, a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Heir of Heaven. So that as
sure as the Gospel is true, every true Baptized Christian whose Love and Life
does answer that Faith, shall certainly be saved.

Ask all parties, and few of them but impudent designers can deny this. Well
then, the Baptismal Covenant expounded in the Creed, Lords Prayer and
Commandments is your Christian Religion. As a Christian you may and shall be
saved: that a True Christian is saved all confess. But whether a Papist be
saved is questioned by the Protestants; and so is the Salvation of many other
sects by others. You are safe then if you take in nothing to endanger you. And
is it not wisdom then to take heed how you go further, and on what grounds,
lest you overrun your safe Religion.

Obj. But then I must not be a Protestant: For the Papists say that they cannot
be saved.

Ans. A Protestant is either one that holds to the ancient simple
Christianity without the Papists manifold additions:
Or one that positively also renounceth and opposes those additions. In the
first sense, a Protestant and a mere Christian is all one; and so to say that a
Protestant cannot be saved is to say that a Christian as such cannot be saved.
If it be the mere name of a Protestant that the Papist accounts damnable,
tell him that you will not stick with him for the name: You are contented with
the old name of Christian alone.

But Protestantism in the second sense is not your Religion, but the
Defensative of your Religion; as flying from the Plague is not my Humanity or
Life, but a means to preserve it. And so Protestants are of many sizes: Some
oppose some points, and some others, some more, some less, which the Papists
have brought in:
And yet they are not of so many Religions.

But whoever condemns you, if Christ save you, he does but condemn himself as
uncharitable. Christianity is certainly a State of Salvation; but whether
Popery be, or whether the Greek Opinions be, or whether this or that difference
and singularity stand with Salvation, is the doubt. Cast not your self then
needlessly into doubt and danger.

Obj. But then you will have us be still but Infants, and to learn no more than
our Catechisms, and not to learn and believe all that God has revealed in his
Word.

Ans. No such matter. This is the sum of what I advise you to.

1. Hold fast to your simple Christianity as the Certain terms of Salvation.

2. Receive nothing that is against it.

3. Learn as much more as ever you can.

4. But take not men's words, nor their plausible talk for Certifying Evidence:
And do not think if you believe a Priest, that this is believing God, nor if
his Reasons seem plausible to you, and you are of his Opinion, that this is
Divine Knowledge. If you do incline to one man's Opinion more than another, tell
him that you incline to his Opinion, but tell him that you take not this for
Divine Knowledge or any part of your Religion. If you will needs believe one
side rather than another, about Church History, or the matters of their Parties
Interest, tell them, I believe you as fallible men; but this is none of my
Divine Faith or Religion. To learn to know, is to learn Scientifical Evidence,
and not to learn what is another man's Opinions; nor whether they are probable
or not; much less to read a Councils Decrees, or the Propositions of a
disputing Systeme, and then for the men's sake, to say, This is Orthodox: Nor
yet because it has a taking aspect. To learn of a Priest to believe God is one
thing; and to believe him, or his party, Church or Council is another thing.
Learn to know as much as you can; and especially to know what God has revealed
to be believed: And learn to believe God as much as you can: And believe all
your Teachers and all other men, as far as they are credible in that case, with
such a humane belief as fallible men may justly require. And where Contenders
do consent, suspect them the less. But where they give one another the Lie in
matters of Fact, try both their Evidences of credibility before you trust them*
and then trust them not beyond that Evidence.

But still difference your Divine Faith and Religion from your Opinion and
Humane Faith. And let men solicit you never so long; take not on you to know
or believe till you do; that is, not beyond the Evidence. I do but persuade you
against Presumption and Hypocrisy. Shall I say, SUSPEND TILL YOU HAVE TRUE
EVIDENCE, and you are safe? why if you do not, you will know never the more,
nor have ever the more Divine Faith: For I can mean no more than SUSPEND YOUR
PRESUMPTIONS, and do not foolishly or hypocritically take on you to know what
you do not, or to have a Faith which you have not. If you can know truly, do it
with fidelity, and be true to the Truth, whoever offer it, or whatever it cost
you. But suspend your Profession or hasty Opinions and Conceits of what you
know not.

Obj. But every side almost tells me that I am damned if I do not believe as
they do?

Ans. 1. By that you may see that they are all deceived at least save one
(which ever it be) while they differ, and yet condemn each other. 2. Thereby
they do but give you the greater cause to suspect them. For by this shall all
men know Christ's Disciples, if they love one another. Right Christians are not
many Masters, as knowing that themselves shall have the greater condemnation
else; for in many things we offend all. And the wisdom which has envy and
strife is not from above, but from beneath, and is earthly, sensual and
devilish, introducing confusion and every evil work, Jam. 3.1, 15, 16. Christ's
Disciples judge not, lest they be judged.

3. By this you may see that unless you can be of all men's minds, you must be
damned by the Censures of many. And if you can bear it from all the Sects save
one, why not from that one also?

4. But I pray you ask these damning Sectaries, Is it believing your Word, and
being of your Opinion that will save me? Or must I also know by scientifical
Evidence that you say true, and that God himself has said what you say? If he
say that believing him and his party (though he call it the Church) is enough
to save you, you have then less reason to believe him: For unless he can
undertake himself to save you, he cannot undertake that believing him shall
save you? If he say, God has promised to save you if you believe me, believe
that when he has proved it to you.

But if it be Knowledge and Divine Faith which he says must save you, it is
not your believing his Word or Opinion that will help you to that. I would tell
such a man, Help me to Knowledge and Faith, by Cogent or Certifying Evidence,
and I will learn, and thank you with all my Heart. But till I have it, it is
but mocking my self and you to say that I have it.

Obj. But the Papists herein differ from all other Sects: For they will say,
That if I believe the Church concerning Divine Revelations, and take all for
Divine Revelation which the Church says is so, and so believe it, then I have
a Divine Faith.

Ans. 1. And is this to you a Certifying Evidence that indeed God revealed it,
because their Church says so? If their Church agree with Greeks, Armenians,
Syrians, Copties, Abassines, Protestants, and all other Christian Churches,
then it will be no part of the contest in question; and it is a stronger
Foundation of the two, to believe it, because all say it, than because they say
it. But if they differ from the rest, know their proof that their Church can
tell Gods mind, and not the rest of the Christian World. And that about a third
part of the Christians in the World have such a promise, which all the rest
have not. 2. And how does their Church know that it is Gods Word? Is it by any
certifying Evidence, or by Prophetical Inspiration? If by Evidence, let it be
produced? Is it not revealed to others as well as to them? Must not we have a
Faith of the same kind as the Church has? If so, we must believe by the same
Evidence as that Church believes. And what is that? It is not their own words:
Does a Pope believe himself only? or a Council believe themselves only? Or has
God said, You shall be saved if you will believe your selves, and believe that
I have said all that you say I have said? Where is there such a promise? But if
Pope and Council be not saved for believing themselves, how shall I know that I
shall be saved for believing them, and that one kind of Faith saves me, and
another them.

I ask it of each particular Bishop in that Council, Is he saved for believing
himself or the rest? If no man be saved for believing himself, why should
another be saved for believing him? And the Faith of the Council is but the
Faith of the Individual Members set together.

Obj. But they are saved for believing themselves as consenters, and not singly.

Ans. All Consenters know nothing, as Consenters, but what they know as
Individuals. And what is the Evidence by which they know, and are brought to
consent? Must not that Evidence convince us also?

Obj. But the present Church are saved for believing not themselves but the
former Church.

Ans. Then so must we: It is not the present Church then that I must believe by
a saving Faith: But why then was the last Age saved, and so the former? and so
on to the first? Is any thing more evident than that all men must be saved for
Believing God? And that his Word must be known to be his Word, by the same
Evidence by one man and another? And that Evidence I have proved in several
Treatises to be another kind of thing, than the Decree of a Pope and his
Council.

But if it be not Evidence, but Prophetical Inspiration and Revelation by which
the Council or Church knows Gods Word, I will believe them when by Miracles
or otherwise they prove themselves to be true Prophets; till then, I shall take
them for Phanaticks, and hear them as I do the Quakers.

Should I here stay to bid you ask them, as before, How you shall be sure that
their Council was truly General, and more Authentic and Infallible than the
second at Ephesus, or that at Ariminum, or that at Constance and Basil, etc.
And whether the more General Dissent of all the other Christians from them be
not of as great Authority as they that are the smaller part? and how you shall
be sure of that? And also how but on the word of a Priest you can know all that
the Church has determined? with abundance such Questions, of the Meaning of
each Council, the ambiguity of words, the Error of Printers, the forgery of
Publishers, etc. I should help you to see, that saying as a Priest says, Is
not Knowing the thing, nor Believing God.

Stop therefore till you have Evidence: Follow no Party as a Party in the dark:
Or if probability incline you more to them than to others, call not this
Certainty, Religion, Divine Faith. Thus your Faith will be Faith indeed,
Fathering Errors on God, and saying that he says what he never said, and
forbade or commanded what he does not, is the most direct breach of the third
Commandment. To father lies on God, is the taking of his Name in vain.
and you will escape all that would corrupt and frustrate it. The business is
great. God requires you to refuse no Light: But withal he charge you to
believe no falsehood, nor put darkness for light: Much less to father men's Lies,
or Errors, or Conceits on God, and to lay your Salvation on it, that they are
all God's Word. How dreadful a thing is this if it prove false! Is it not
blaspheming God?

No man in his wits then but a partial designer can look that you should make
haste, or go any further than you have assuring or convincing Evidence: If you
Know that any Sect does Err, you need no Preservative: If you do not, tell
them, I am ignorant of this matter, I will learn as fast as I can; not
neglecting greater matters; and I will be neither for you, nor against you,
further than I can know.

And as to the former Objection, of being still Infants, I further answer, that
as feigned knowledge is no knowledge; so Manhood consists not in being of
many uncertain Opinions, no not so much in knowing many little controverted
things, as in getting a clearer, more affecting powerful practical Knowledge
and belief of our Christianity, and the great and sure things which we know
already; and in Love and Obedience practicing of them. He is the strongest
Christian who loves God best, and has most Holiness; and he knows God
better than any others do.

By this much you may see that the world is full of counterfeit Faith, and
Knowledge, and Religion; even fancy and belief of men, and their own Opinions,
which go under these names. One turns an Anabaptist, and another a
Separatist, and another an Antinomian, and another a Pelagian, and another a
Papist, when if you try them you shall find that they neither understand what
they turn to, nor what they are against: They do but turn to his side who has
the best advantage to persuade them, either by insinuating into their
affections, or by plausible reasonings; they talk for one Doctrine, and against
another, when they understand neither; much less discern true Evidence of their
truth. And as for the Papists, what wonder is it, when their Religion is to
believe as the Church believes? And what the Church believes, they know not
perhaps but by believing a Priest: And then though they know not what the
Church believes, some say they are Catholics, and others that this Implicit
Faith is that in the virtue of which all the Explicit must proceed. And if God
may but be allowed to be equal herein with their Church, and so that all should
be saved who Implicitly believe that all that he says is true, though they
know not what he says at all, then I think few Infidels would perish, that
believe there is a God.

Reader I advise thee therefore as thou love thy Soul, 1. Not to neglect or
delay any true knowledge that thou can attain. 2. But not to be rash and
hasty in judging. 3. Nor to take shows and men's opinions, or any thing below a
certifying or notifying Evidence of Truth, to make up thy Christian Faith and
Knowledge. 4. And till thou see such Certain Evidence, suspend, and tell them
that solicit thee that thou understandest not the matter, and that thou art
neither for them nor against them; but wilt yield as soon as Truth does
certainly appear to thee.

If an Anabaptist persuade thee, yield to him as soon as thou art sure that God
would not have Believers Children now to be Infant-Members of his Church, as
well as they were before Christ's coming; and that the Infants of believing Jews
were cut off from their Church State; and that there is any way besides Baptism
appointed by Christ, for the solemn initiating of Church Members with the rest
which in my Treat. of Baptism I have produced.

If thou art solicited to renounce Communion with other Churches of Christ as
unlawful, either because they use the Common Prayer and Ceremonies, or because
that Ministers are faulty (if tolerable) or the People undisciplined, before
thou venture thy Soul upon an uncharitable and dividing principle, make sure
first that Christ has Commanded it. Try whether thou art sure that Christ
sinned by Communicating ordinarily with the Jewish Church and Synagogues, when
the corruption of Priests, People and worship was so much worse than ours? Or
whether that be now a sin to us, which (in the General) Christ did then. And
whether Paul's compliance, and his precept, Romans 14. and 15. was an error; And
Peter's separation, Gal. 2. was not rather to be blamed. With much more the
like. Are you sure that notwithstanding all this, God would have you avoid
Communion with the Churches that in such Forms and Orders differ from you?

So if a Papist solicit you, yield to him as soon as you are Certain that the
Church is the body or Church of the Pope, and that none are Christians that are
not subject to him, and that therefore three or two parts of all the Christian
world are unchristened; and that when the Roman Emperor made Patriarchs in his
own dominion only, and there only called General Councils, all the world must
now take such as the Churches Heads, and must be their Subjects: When you can
be sure that all the senses of all the sound men in the world, are by a
constant Miracle deceived, in taking the consecrated Bread and Wine, to be
Bread and Wine indeed, and that it is none: And that the Bread only without the
Cup must be used, though Christ's Command be equal for both: when you are
Certain, truly Certain of these and many other such things, then turn Papist.
If you do it sooner, you betray your Souls by Pretending to know and believe
Gods word, when you do but believe and imbody with a faction.

Chap. X.
Inference 4. What is the Great Plague and Divider of the Christian World.

FALSELY PRETENDED KNOWLEDGE and FAITH, are the great Plague and Dividers of
the Christian world.

I. As to the Number of Articles, and Opinions, and Precepts, what abundance of
things go with many for Certain Truth of which no mortal man has certainty!
And abundance which some few rare wits may know, must go for Evident
certainties to all. It is not only our Philosophy books, nor only our
Philosophical Schoolmens Books, which are guilty of this. There is some modesty
in their Videtur's: And indeed, if they would not pretend to certainty, but
profess only to write for the sport and exercise of wit, without condemning
those that differ from them, a man might fetch many a pleasant vagari, if not
in an over subtle Cajetane (who so often feigneth notions and distinctions) yet
in a Scotus, Ockam, Ariminensis, with abundance of their disciples, and in
Thomas and many of his learned followers. But their Successors can hardly
forbear hereticating one another. How many such a wound has poor Durandus
suffered? From many for his doctrine of concurse; And by others for his pretty
device to save the credit of our senses in Transubstantiation, (that there is
still the Matter of Bread, but not the Form, as being informed by the Soul of
Christ, as digested bread in us is turned to flesh.) Which says Bellarmine is
an Heresy, but Durandus no Heretic, because he was ready to be taught of the
Church.

But no where do these Stinging Hornets so swarm as in the Councils and the
Canon Law: So that says the Preface to the Reformatio Legum Ecclesiast. Edw.
6. (John Fox.) In quo ipso jure, neque ullum modum tenet illius impudentia,
quin Leges Legibus, decreta decretis, aciis insuper decretalia, aliis alia,
atque item alia accumulet, nec ullum pene statuit cumulandi finem, donec tandem
suis Clementinis, Sixtinis, Intra and Extravagantibus, Constitutionibus
Provincialibus and Synodalibus, Paleis, Glossulis, Sententiis, Capitulis,
Summariis Rescriptis, Breviculis, Casibus longis and brevibus, ac infinitis
Rhapsodiis adeo orbem confarcinavit, ut Atlas mons quo sustineri coelum
dicitur, huic si imponeretur oneri, vix ferendo sufficeret. Which made these
two Kings, ( H. 8. and Edw. 6.) Appoint that Compendium of Ecclesiastical Laws
as their own, K. H. first abolishing the Popes Laws (whatever some say to the
contrary) his words being. [Hajus Potestatem huic cum divino munere sublatam
esse manifestum est, ut quid superesset, quo non plane fractam illius Vim esse
constaret, Leges omnes, decreta atque instituta, quae ab authore Episcopo
Romano profecta sunt Prorsus abroganda censuimus.]

Is it possible that all the Clergy and Nobles of the Roman Kingdom, can be so
Ignorant of their own and other men's Ignorance, as to take all the Decrees of
the huge Volumes of their Councils for Certain Truths? Either they were certain
in their Evidence of Truth, before they decreed them, or not: If they were so,
1. How came the debates in the Councils about them to be so hard, and so many
to be dissenters as in many of them there were. I know where Arrians or other
Heretics make up much of the Council, it is no wonder: But are the Certainties
of Faith so uncertain to Catholic Bishops, that a great part of them know not
Certain Truths till the majority of Votes have told them they are certain. Have
the poor Dissenting-Bishops in Council nothing of certainty on which their own
and all the poor peoples Faith and Salvation must depend, but only this, that
they are over-voted? As if the dissenters in the Council of Trent should say,
We thought beforehand the contrary had been true; But now the Italian Bishops
being so numerous as to over-vote us, we will lay our own and all men's
Salvation on it, that we were deceived, though we have no other reason to think
so. O noble Faith and Certainty! It Is possible one or two or three poor silly
Prelates may turn the Scales and make up a majority, though as Learned men as
Jansenius, Cusanus or Gerson were on the other side. And if the Jansenists
Articles were Condemned, or Cusanus his Antipapal Doctrine, lib. de Concordia,
or Gersons for the Supremacy of Councils and de Auferibilitate Papae, they must
presently believe that they were certainly deceived.

But what is become then of the contrary evidence which appeared before to these
dissenters? As suppose it were in the Council of Basil about the Immaculate
conception of Mary, or the Question whether the Authority of the Pope or
Council be greatest, decided there, and at Constance, and whereof at Trent the
Emperor and the French were of one opinion, and the Pope of another: Was it
evidently true before, which is made false after by a Majority of Votes?

2. And if all these Decreed things were Evident Truths before the said
Decrees, why have we not those Antecedent Evidences presented to us, to
convince us?

2. But if they were not Evident Truths before, what made those Prelates
conclude them for Truths? Did they know them to be such without Evidence? This
is grosser than a presumptuous man's believing that he shall be saved because he
believes it; or their Doctrine that teach men to believe the thing is true
(that Christ died for them) that thereby they may make it true; As if the
object must come after the act. For then these Prelates do decree that to be
true, which before was false (for ex-natura rei, one party had evidence of its
falsehood) that so they might make it true, by decreeing that it is so*

A man might Lawfully have believed his own and other men's senses, that Bread
is Bread, till the Council at Lateran sub Innoc. 3. decreed Transubstantiation.
And O what a change did that Council make! All Christ's Miracles were not
comparable to it, if its Decrees be true. From that day to this, we must
renounce sense, and yet believe; we must believe that by constant Miracles all
Christians senses are deceived: And so that this is the difference between
Christians, and Infidels, and Heathens, that our Religion deceives all men's
senses (even Heathens and all, if they see our Sacrament,) and their Religion
deceives no man's senses, says the grave Author of the History of the Trent
Council (Ed. Engl. p. 473.) [A better Mystery was never found, than to use
Religion to make men insensible.]

And what is the Omnipotent Power that does this? such a Convention as that of
Trent, while with our Worcester Pate, and Olaus Magnus, they made up a great
while two and forty things called Bishops: And after such a pack of beardless
Boys, and ignorant Fellows, created by, and enslaved to the Pope, as Dudithius
Quinqueccles. one of the Council describes to the Emperor; and which Bishop
Jewel in his Letter to Seign. Scipio says, he took for no Council, called by
no just Authority, etc. where were neither the Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Alexandria, or Antioch, nor Abassines, nor Graecians, Armenians, Persians,
Egyptians, Moors, Syrians, Indians, nor Muscovites, nor Protestants, page 143,
144. For, says he after, page 489. [ Nowadays (merciful God!) the intent or
scope of Councils is not to discover truth, or to confute falsehood: For these
latter Ages, this has been the only endeavor of the Popes to establish the
Roman Tyranny; to set Wars on foot, to set Christian Princes together by the
Ears, to raise Money -- to be cast into some few Bellies for Gluttony and Lust:
And this has been the only cause or course of Councils for some Ages last
past.] So here.

And can the Vote of a few such Fellows oblige all the World to renounce all
their senses, who were never obliged to it before?

And all this consists in PRETENDED FAITH and KNOWLEDGE, when men must take
on them to know what they do not know, and make Decrees and Canons, and
Doctrines suited to their conjectures, or rather to their carnal Interests, and
then most injuriously Father them on God, on Christ and the Apostles.

II. And as the number of Forgeries and Inventions detecteth this public
Plague, so does the number of Persons that are guilty of it. How many such
superfluities the And yet says Zaga-Zabo in Damnian a Go^s page 226. Nec
Patriarcha nec Episcopi nostri, per se, nec in Conciliis putant aut opinantur
ul^as leges se condere posse, quibus ad mortale peccatum obligari quis posset.
And page 231. Indignum est peregrinos Christianos tam acriter and hostiliter
reprehendi ut ego de hac re (de delectu ciborum) and de aliis, quae minime ad
fidem veram spectabant, reprehensus fui; sed multo Consultius, fuerit,
hujusmodi Christianos homines sive Graecos, sive Armenos, sive Aethiopes; sive
ex quavis Septem Christianarum Ecclesiarum in Charitate and Christi amplexibus
sustinere, and eos sine contumeliis permittere, inter alios fratres Christianos
vivere ac versari; quoniam omnes filii baptismi sumus, and de vera fide
unanimiter sentimus. Nec est causa cur tam acriter de caeremoniis disceptetur
nisi ut unusquisque suas observet, sine odio and insectatione aliorum, nec
commerciis Ecclesiae ob id excludendus est, etc. Learn of a ceremonious
Abassine.
Abassines (in their often Baptizings, and other trifles,) and the Armenians,
Syrians, Georgians, Jacobites, Maronites, the Russians, etc. Are guilty of, the
describers of their Rites and Religion tell us. Some would have the State of
the Church in Gregory, ^sts days to be the model of our Reformation (that Pope
whom Authors usually call the last of the good ones, and the first of the bad
ones:) But is there either Necessity or Certainty in all the superfluities
which the Churches then had, and which that Great Prelates Writings themselves
contain? Or were there not abundance of such things then used as things
Indifferent (of which see Socrates and Sozomene in the Chapters of Easter,) and
must all their Indifferents be now made necessary to the Churches Concord and
Communion? and all their uncertainties become certainties to us? some will have
the present Greek Church to be the Standard: But alas, poor men, how many of
these uncertainties, crudities and superfluities are cherished among them by
the unavoidable Ignorance which is caused by their oppressions? To say no more
of Rome, O that the Reformed Churches themselves had been more innocent? But
how few of them unite on the terms of simple Christianity and Certainties? Had
not Luther after all his Zeal for Reformation, retained some of this Leven, he
could better have endured the dissent of Zuinglius, Carolostadius and
Oecolampadius about the Sacrament. And if his Followers had not kept up the
same superfluities, they had never so torn the Churches by their Animosities,
nor resisted and wearied peaceable Melanchthon, nor frustrated so many
Conventions and Treaties for Concord, as they have done. Bucer had not been so
censured; agreement had not been made so impossible: All Dury's Travels had not
been so uneffectual. Schlusserburgius had not found so many Heresies to fill up
his Catalogue with; nor Calovius so much matter for his virulent Pen; nor so
many equalled Calvinism with Turcism; nor had Calixtus had such scornful Satyrs
written against him; nor the great Peacemakers, Lud. Crocius, Bergii,
Martinius, Camero, Amyraldus, Testardus, Capellus, Placaeus, Davenant, Ward,
Hall, and now Le Blank, had so little acceptance and success. Had it not been
for this spreading Plague, (the over-valuing of our own understandings, and the
accounting our crude conceits for certainties) all these Church Wars had been
prevented or soon ended: All those excellent endeavors for peace had been more
successful, and we had all been One.

Had it not been for this, neither Arminians nor Antiarminians had ever so
bitterly contended, nor so sharply censured one another, nor written so many
confident condemning Volumes against each other, which in wise men's Eyes do
more condemn the authors; and SELF-CONCEIT, or PRETENDED KNOWLEDGE, should have
been the title of them all: How far I am able to prove that almost all their
bitter and zealous contentions are about Uncertainties, and Words, the Reader
may perceive in my Preface to the Grotian Religion, and if God will, I shall
fuller manifest to the World. Since done in Catholic Theology.
The Synod of Dort had not had so great a work of it, nor the Breme and
Britain Divines so difficult a task, to bring and hold them to that moderation
of expressions which very laudably they have done: (one of the noblest
successful attempts for peace, though little noted, which these ages have made.)

In a word, almost all the contentions of Divines, the sects and factions, the
unreconciled fewds, the differences in religion which have been the Harvest of
the Devil and his Emissaries in the World, have come from Pretended Knowledge
and taking Uncertainties for Certain Truths.

I will not meddle with the particular Impositions of Princes and Prelates; not
so much as with the German Interim: Nor the Oaths which in some place they take
to their Synodical Decrees: much less will I meddle at all with any
Impositions, Oaths, Subscriptions Declarations, or usages of the Kingdom where
I live. As the Law forbids me to contradict them, so I do not at all here
examine or touch them, but wholly pass them by: which I tell the Reader once
for all, that he may know how to interpret all that I say. Nor is it the error
of Rulers that I primarily detect, but of humane corrupted Nature, and all
sorts of men: Though where such an Error prevails, alas, it is of far sadder
consequence in a Public person, a Magistrate, or a Pastor, that presumes to
the hurt of Public Societies, than of a private man, who erreth almost to
himself alone.

I profess to thee, Reader, that (next to God's so much deserting so Great a
part of this world) there is nothing under the Sun, of all the affairs of
mankind, that has so taken up my thoughts with mixtures of indignation,
wonder, pity and solicitude for a cure, as this one vice; A PROUD or UNHUMBLED
UNDERSTANDING by which men live in PRETENDED KNOWLEDGE and FAITH,
to the deceit of themselves and others, the bitter censuring and persecuting
of Dissenters, yea of their Modest Suspending Brethren, tear Churches and
Kingdoms, and will give no Peace, nor Hopes of Peace to themselves, their
Neighbors, or the World! Lord! Is there no Remedy, no Hope from Thee, though
there be none from Man?

1. Among Divines themselves, that should not only have Knowledge enough to
know their own Ignorance, but to Guide the People of God into the ways of
Truth, and Love, and Peace; O how lamentably does this vice prevail! To avoid
all offense, I will not here at all touch on the case of any that are supposed
to have a hand in any of the sufferings of me, and others of my mind; or of any
that in Points of Conformity differ from me: Remember that I meddle not with
them at all: But even those that do no way differ among themselves as Sect and
Sect, or at least, that all pretend to Principles of Forbearance, Gentleness
and Peace, yet are woefully sick of this disease.

And yet that I may wrong none, I will premise this public Declaration to the
World, that in the Country where I lived, God in great mercy cast my lot among
a company of so humble, peaceable, faithful Ministers (and People) as free from
this Vice as any that ever I knew in the world; who, as they kept up full
Concord among themselves, without the least disagreement that I remember, and
kept out Sects and Heresies from the People; so their converse was the joy of
my life, and the remembrance of it will be sweet to me while I live; and
especially the great success of our labors, and the quiet and concord of our
several Flocks, which was promoted by the Pastors humility and concord. Though
we kept up constant Disputations, none of them ever turned to spleen, or
displeasure, or discord among us.

And I add, in thankfulness to God, that I am now acquainted with many
Ministers in and about London, of greatest note, and labor, and patience, and
Success, who are of the same Spirit, Humble and Peaceable, and no confident
troublers of the Churches with their Censoriousness, and high esteem of their
own opinions: Who trade only in the simple Truths of Christianity, and love a
Christian as a Christian, and join not with Back-biters nor factious
self-conceited men, but study only to win Souls to Christ, and to live
according to the Doctrine which they preach: And both the former and these,
have these ten Now it is above 22 years that they have been ejected 1684.
years since they were ejected, continued their humility and peaceableness,
fearing God and honoring the King.

And I further add that those Private Christians with whom I most converse are
many of them of the same Strain, suspecting their own understandings, and
speaking evil of no man so forwardly as of themselves.

So that in these Ministers and people of my most intimate acquaintance,
experience convinces me, that this grand disease of corrupted nature is
cureable, and that God has a people in the world, that have learnt of Christ
to be meek and lowly, James 3.17.
who have the wisdom from above, which is first pure, and then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated full of mercy and good fruits, and the fruit of
mercy is sown in peace of these peacemakers. I see in them a true Conformity
to Christ, and a grand difference between them and the furious fiery pretenders
to more wisdom; And the two sorts of Wisemen and Wisdom excellently described
by James, Chap. 3. I have seen in two sorts of Religious people among us, most
lively exemplified before our Eyes. God has a people that truly honor him in
the world.

But O that they were more! And O that they were more perfect! Alas what a
number are there that are otherwise?

Even among Divines this Plague is most pernicious, as being of most public
influence. Take him that never had a natural acuteness of wit, nor is capable
of judging of difficult points, if he be but of long standing and gray hairs,
and can preach well to the people, and have studied long, he is not only
confident of his fitness to judge of that which he never understood, Yea now it
is also young ignorant Novices that are sick of the same feverish temerity.
but his Reputation of wisdom must be kept up among the people by his
Supercilious talking against what he understands not: Yea if he be one that
never macerated his flesh with the difficult and long studies of the matter,
without which hard points will never be well digested and distinctly
understood, yet if he be a Doctor, and have lived long in a reputation for
wisdom, his Ignorant flashy Conjectures, and hasty superficial apprehensions,
must needs go for the more excellent Knowledge: And if you put him to make good
any of his Contradictions to the truth, his Magisterial contempt, or his
uncivil wrath and unmannerly interruptions of you in your talk must go for
reason: And if he cannot resist the strength of your evidence, he cannot bear
the hearing of it, but like a scold rather than a Scholar, takes your words
out of your mouth before you come to the end: As if he said, Hold your tongue
and hear me who am wiser: I came to Teach, and not to Hear. If you tell him how
uncivil it is not patiently to hear you to the end, he thinks you wrong him,
and are too bold to pretend to a liberty to speak without interruption; Or he
will tell you that you are too long; he cannot remember all at once. If you
reply that the sense of the forepart of a Speech usually depends much on the
latter part; and he cannot have your sense till he have all; and that he must
not answer, before he understands you; and that if his memory fail he should
take notes, and that to have uninterrupted turns of speaking is necessary in
the order of all sober conferences, without which they will be but noise and
strife; he will let you know that he came not to hear or keep any Laws of Order
or Civility, but to have a combat with you for the reputation of wisdom or
Orthodoxness And what he wants in Reason and Evidence, he will make up in
ignorant Confidence and Reviling, and call you by some ill Name or other, that
shall go for a Confutation.

But yet this is not the usual way: It is too great a hazard to the reputation
of their wisdom to cast it on a dispute. The common way is never to speak to
the Person himself, but if any one cross their conceits, or become the object
of their envy, they backbite him among those that reverence their wisdom, and
when they are sure that he is far enough out of hearing, they tell their
credulous Followers, O such a man holds unsound or dangerous Opinions! Take
heed how you hear him, or read his writings, [this or that Heresy they savor
of:] when the poor man knows not what he talks of. And if any one have the
wit to say to him, [Sir, he is neither so sottish, nor so proud, as to be
incapable of instruction; if you are so much wiser than he, why do you not
teach him?] He will excuse his omission and his commission together with a
further calumny, and say, These erroneous persons will hear no reason: It is in
vain. If he be asked [ Sir, did you ever try?] it is like he must confess that
he did not; unless some magisterial rebuke once went for Evidence of truth. If
the hearers (which is rare) have so much Christian wit and honesty, as to say,
[Sir, Ministers above all men must be no back-biters, nor unjust: you know it
is unlawful for us to judge another man, till we hear him speak for himself: If
you would have us know whether he or you be in the right, let us hear you both
together:] His answer would be like Cardinal Turnon at the conference at
Poisie, and as the Papists ordinarily is, [ It is dangerous letting Heretics
speak to the People, and it agrees not with our zeal for God to hear such
odious things uttered against the Truth.

In a word, There are more that have the Spirit of a Pope in the World than
one, even among them that cry out against Popery; and that would fain be taken
for the Dictators of the World, whom none must dissent from, much less
contradict. And there are more Idolaters than Heathens, who would have their
Ignorant understandings to be instead of God, the uncontrolled director of all
about them.

But if these men have not any confidence in their self-sufficiency, if they
can but embody in a society of their minds, or gather into a Synod, he must
needs go for a proud and arrogant Schismatic at least, that will set any
Reason and Evidence of Truth, against their Magisterial Ignorance, when it is
the Major Vote.

The very Truth is, The great Benefactor of the World has not been pleased to
dispense his Benefits Equally, but with mavelous disparity: As he is the God
of Nature, he has been pleased to give a natural capacity for judiciousness
and acuteness in difficult speculations but to few. And as he is the Lord of
all, he has not given men equal educacation, nor advantages for such
extraordinary knowledge: Nor have all that have leisure and capacity, self
denial and patience enough for so long and difficult studies: But the Devil and
our selves have given to all men Pride enough to desire to be thought to be
wiser and better than we are: And he that cannot be equal with the wisest and
best would be thought to be so: And while all men must needs seem wise, while
few are so indeed, you may easily see what must thence follow.

2. And it is not Divines only, but all ranks of people, who are sick of this
disease. The most unlearned ignorant people, the silliest Women, if they will
not for shame say that they are wiser than their Teachers in the general, yet
when it comes to particular cases, they take themselves to be always in the
right; and O how confident are they of it! And who more peremptory and bold in
their judgments than those that least know what they say? It is hard to meet
with a person above eighteen or twenty years of age, that is not notably
tainted with this malady.

And it is not only these great mischiefs in matters of Religion which spring
from self-conceitedness, but even in our common converse, it is the cause of
disorder, ruin and destruction: For it is the common vice of blinded nature,
and it is rare to meet with one that is not notably guilty of it: When they are
past the state of professed Learners.

1. It is ordinary for self-conceited Persons to ruin their own Estates, and
Healths, and Lives. When they are rashly making ill Bargains, or undertaking
things which they understand not, they rush on till they find their error too
late, and their Poverty, Prisons or ruined Families, must declare their sin.
For they have not humility enough to seek Counsel in time, nor to take it when
it is offered them. What great numbers have I heard begging relief from others,
under the confession of this sin?

And far more, even the most of Men and Women, overthrow their Health, and lose
their Lives by it. Experience does not suffice to teach them, what is hurtful
to their Bodies; and as they know not, so you cannot convince them that they
know not. Most Persons by the excess in quantity of food, do suffocate Nature,
and lay the Foundation of future Maladies. And most of the Diseases that kill
men untimely are but the effects of former Gluttony or Excess. But as long as
they feel not any present hurt, no man can persuade them but their fullness is
for their Health, as well as for their Pleasure. They will laugh perhaps at
those that tell them what they do, and what Diseases they are preparing for:
Let Physicians (if they be so honest) tell them, [It is the perfection of the
nutritive Juices, the Blood and nervous Oil, which are the causes of Health in
man: Perfect Concoction causes that perfection: Nature cannot perfectly
concoct too much, or that which is of too hard digestion: While you feel no
harm, your Blood grows dis-spirited, and being but half concocted, and half
Blood, does perform its Office accordingly by the halves; till crudities are
heaped up, and obstructions fixed, and a Dunghill of Excrements, or the
dis-spirited humors are ready to take in any Disease, which a small occasion
offers; either Agues, Fevers, Coughs, Consumptions, Pleurisies, Dropsies,
Colicks and Windiness, Head-achs, Convulsions, etc. or till the Inflammations
or other Tumors of the inward Parts, or the torment of the Stone in Reins or
Bladder, do sharply tell men what they have been doing. A clean Body and
perfect Concoction, which are procured by Temperance and bodily Labors, which
suscitate the Spirits, and purify the Blood, are the proper means which God in
the course of nature has appointed, for a long and healthful Life.]

This is all true, and the reason is evident, and yet this talk will be but
despised and derided by the most; and they will say, [I have so long eaten what
I loved, and lived by no such rules as these, and I have found no harm by it.]
Yea if Excess have brought Diseases on them, if Abstinence do but make them
more to feel them; they will rather impute their illness to the Remedy, than to
the proper cause. And so they do about the quality as well as the quantity:
Self-conceitedness makes men uncureable. Many a one have I known that daily
lived in that fullness which I saw would shortly quench the Vital Spirits; and
fain I would have saved their Lives; but I was not able to make them willing:
Had I seen another assault them, I could have done somewhat for them, but when
I foresaw their death, I could not save them from themselves. They still said,
they found their measures of eating and drinking (between Meals) refresh them,
and they were the worse, if they forbore it, and they would not believe me
against both Appetite, Reason and Experience: And thus have I seen abundance of
my acquaintance wilfully hasten to the Grave: And all long of an unhumbled,
self-conceited understanding, which would not be brought to suspect it self,
and know its error.

2. And O how often have I seen the dearest Friends thus kill their Friends;
even Mothers kill their dearest Children, and too often their Husbands, Kindred,
Servants and Neighbors by their self-conceit and confidence in their ignorance
and error? Alas what abundance empty their own Houses, gratify covetous
Landlords, that set their Lands by Lives, and bring their dearest Relations to
untimely ends, and a wise man knows not how to hinder them! How often and often
have I heard ignorant Women confidently persuade even their own Children to eat
as long as they have an Appetite, and so they have vitiated their Blood and
Humors in their Childhood, that their Lives have been either soon ended, or
ever after miserable by Diseases! How often have I heard them persuade sick or
weak diseased Persons, to eat, eat, eat, and take what they have a mind to,
when unless they would Poison them, or cut their Throats, they could scarce
more certainly dispatch them? How often have these good Women been persuading my
self, that eating and drinking more would make me better, and that it is
Abstinence that causes all my illness, (when Excess in my Childhood caused
it;) as if every wise Woman that does but know me, knew better what is good for
me, than my self after threescore years experience, or than all the Physicians
in the City? And had I obeyed them, how many years ago had I been dead?

How ordinary is it for such self-conceited Women to obtrude their skill and
Medicines on their sick Neighbors, with the greatest confidence, when they
know not what they do? yea upon their Husbands and their Children? One can
scarce come about sick Persons, but one Woman or other is persuading them to
take that, or do that which is like to kill them: Many and many when they have
brought their Children to the Grave, have nothing to say but [I thought this or
that had been best for them.]

But you will say, [They do it in love; they meant no harm.] I answer, so false
Teachers deceive Souls in Love. But are you content your selves to be killed by
Love? If I must be killed, I had rather an Enemy did it than a Friend, I would
not have such have the guilt or grief. Love will not save men's lives if you
give them that which tends to kill them.

But you will say, [We can be no wiser than we are: If we do the best we can, what
can we do more?

I answer, I would have you not think your selves wiser than you are: I would
write over this word five hundred times if that would cure you. About matters
of Diet and Medicines, and Health, this is it that I would have you do to save
you from killing your selves and your Relations. 1. Pretend not to know upon
the report of such as your selves, or in matters that are difficult and beyond
your skill; or where you have not had long consideration and experience. Meddle
with no Medicining, but what in common easy cases the common judgment of
Physicians and common Experience have taught you.

2. If you have not Money to pay Physicians and Apothecaries, tell them so, and
desire them to give you their counsel freely, and take not on you to know more
than they that have studied and practiced it all their (riper part of their)
lives.

3. Suspect your understandings, and consider how much there may be unknown to
you, in the secrecy and variety of Diseases, difference of temperatures, and
the like, which may make that hurtful which you conceit is good. Therefore do
nothing rashly and in self-conceited confidence, but upon the best advice ask
the Physician whether your Medicines and Rules are safe.

4. And be sure that you do rather too little than too much: What abundance are
there, especially in the small Pox and Fevers, that would have escaped, if
Women (yea and Physicians) would have let them alone, that die because that
Nature had not leave to cure them, being disturbed by mistaken Usages or
Medicines. Diseases are so various and secret, and Remedies so uncertain, that
the wisest man alive that has studied and practiced it almost all his riper
days (were it an hundred years) must confess that Physic is a hard, a dark,
uncertain work, and ordinary cases (much more extraordinary) have somewhat in
them which does surpass his skill: And how then come so many Medicining Women
to know more than they?

But you will say, [We see that many miscarry by Physicians, and they speed worst
that use them most.]

I answer. But would they not yet speed worse if they used you as much? If they
are too ignorant, how come you to be wiser? If you are, teach them your Skill.

But I must add, that even Physicians guilt of the sin which I am reproving
does cost many a hundred persons their lives, as well as yours. Even too many
Physicians who have need of many days enquiry and observations truly to
discover a disease, do kill men by rash and hasty judging (I talk not of the
Cheating sort that take on them to know all by the Urine alone, but of honester
and wiser men.) It is most certain that old Celsus says, that a Physician is
not able faithfully to do his Office, for very many Patients: A few will take
up all his time. But they that gape most after money, must venture upon a short
sight, and a few words, and presently resolve before they know, and write down
their directions while they are ignorant of one half, which if they knew, would
change their Counsels! And such is man's body and its diseases, that the
oversight or ignorance of one thing among twenty is like enough to be the
patients death. And how wise, expedient and vigilant must he be that will
commit no such killing oversight?

And as too many medicine a man whom they know not, and an unknown disease, for
want of just deliberation; so too many venture upon uncertain and untryed
medicines, or rashly give that to one in another case, which has profited
others. In a word, even rash Physicians have cause to fear lest by prefidence
and hasty judging, more should die by their mistakes than do by murderers, that
I say not by Soldiers in the world: And lest their dearest friends should
speed worse by them, than by their greatest Enemies. For as Seamen and
Soldiers do boldly follow the trade, when they find that in several Voyages
and Battles they have escaped; but yet most or very many of them are drowned or
killed at the last; So he that is tampering overmuch with medicines, may escape
well and boast of the Success a while: But at last one blood-letting, one
Vomit, one Purge or other medicine may miscarry by a small mistake or accident,
and he is gone. And there are some persons so Civil, that if a rash or
unexperienced Physician be their Kinsman, Friend, or Neighbor, they will not
go to an abler man, lest they be accounted unfriendly, and disoblige him; And
if such escape long with their lives, they may thank Gods mercy and not their
own wisdom. Soldiers kill enemies, and unskilful rash Physicians kill their
friends.

But you will say; They do their best, and they can do no more. I answer as
before, 1. Let them not think that they know what they do not know; but
sufficiently suspect their own understandings. 2. Let them not go beyond their
knowledge: How little of our kind of Physic did the old Physicians (
Hypocrates, Galius, Celsus, etc.) give? Do not too much. 3. Venture not rashly
without full search, deliberation, Counsel and Experience. O how many die by
hasty judging, and rash mistakes! Physicians must pardon my free speaking or
endure it: for I conceive it necessary: It has not been the least part of the
Calamity of my Life to see my Friends and other worthy persons killed by the
Ignorance or Hastiness of Physicians: I greatly reverence and honor those few
that are men. 1. Of clear searching judicious heads, 2. Of great reading,
especially of other men's Experiences, 3. Of great and long Experience of their
own, 4. Of present Sagacity and ready memory to use their own experiments, 5.
Of Conscience and cautelousness to suspect and know before they hastily Judge
and Practice. I would I could say that such are not too few. But I must say to
the people, as you love your lives take heed of all the rest: A highway Robber
you may avoid or resist with greater probability of safety, than such men: How
few are they that are killed by Thieves or in Duels, in comparison of those
that are killed by Physicians, especially confident young men that account
themselves wits, and think they have hit on such Philosophical principles as
will better secure both their Practice and Reputation than old Physicians
Doctrine and Experiences could do? Confident young men of unhumbled
understandings presently trust their undigested thoughts, and rashly use their
poor short experiments, and trust to their new conceptions of the Reasons of
all Operations; and then they take all others for mere Empyricks in comparison
of them: And when all is done, their pretended Reason for want of full
Experience and Judgment to improve it, does but enable them to talk and boast,
and not to heal; and when they have killed men, they can justify it, and prove
that they did it Rationally, or rather that it was something else, and not
their error that was the cause. They are wits and men of rare inventions, and
therefore are not such fools as to confess the Fact. How often have I seen men of
great worth, such as few in an age arise too who having a high esteem of an
injudicious unexperienced Physician, have sealed their erroneous kindness with
their blood? How often have I seen worthy persons destroyed by a pernicious
medicine clear contrary to what the nature of the disease required, who without
a Physician might have done well? Such sorrows just now upon me make me the
more plain and copious in the Case. And yet alas I see no hope of amendment
probable! For, 1. Many hundred Ministers being forbidden to Preach the Gospel
and cast out of all their livelihood, for not Promising, Asserting, Swearing
and doing all that is required of them, many of these think that necessity
allows them to turn Physicians, which they venture on upon seven years study
when Seven, and Seven, and Seven, is not enough, though advantaged by the help
of other men's experiments. 2. And others rush on Practice in their youth,
partly because they have not yet knowledge enough to discern uncertainties and
difficulties in the Art, or to see what is further necessary to be known. And
partly, because they think that seeing Skill must be got by experience, use
must help them to that experience, and all men must have a beginning. 3. And
when they do their best, they say, God requires no more. 4. And they hope if
they kill one, they cure many.

But O that they had the Sobriety to consider, 1. That the Physician is but One
man; And will his maintenance or livelihood excuse him for killing many? 2.
That even one man's Life is more precious than one man's maintenance, or fuller
supply: Is it not honester to beg your bread? 3. That killing men by virtue of
your trade without danger to you does but hinder your Repentance, but not so
much extenuate your sin as many think: Which is aggravated in that you kill
your friends that trust you, and not Enemies that oppose you or avoid you. 4.
Your experience must not be got by killing men, but by accompanying experienced
Physicians till you are fit to practice: And if you cannot stay so long for
want of maintenance, beg rather than kill men, or betake you to some other
trade.

But if you be too Proud or Confident to take such Counsel, I still advise all
that love their lives, that they choose not a Physician under forty years old
at least, and if it may be, not under sixty, unless it be for some little
disease or remedy, which has no danger, and where they can do no harm, if they
do no good: Old men may be ignorant, but Young men must needs be so, for want
of experience, though some few rare persons are sooner ripe than others.

And whereas they say that they Cure more than they Kill; I wish that I had
reason to believe them: I suppose that if more of their patients did not live
than die, they would soon lose their practice: But it is like the far greatest
part of those that live, would have lived without them, and perhaps have been
sooner and easier cured, if nature had not by them been disturbed.

And what calling is there in which hasty judging and conceits of more
knowledge than men have, does not make great confusion and disappointment? If a
Fool that rages and is confident be a Pilot; woe to the poor Seamen and
Passengers in the Ship.

If such a one be Commander in an Army, his own and other men's Blood or
Captivity, must cure his confidence and stay his rage. For such will learn at
no cheaper a rate.

How often hear we such Workmen, Carpenters, Masons, etc. raging confident that
their way is right, and their work well done, till the ruin of it confute and
shame them?

If this disease take hold of Governors, who will not stay to hear all
parties, and know the Truth, but take up reports on trust, from those that
please or flatter them, or judge presently before impartial trial, and hearing
all, woe to the land that is so governed. The wisest and the best man must have
due information, and time, patience and consideration to receive it, or else he
may do as David between Mephibosheth and Ziba, and cannot be just.

What an odious thing is a partial, blind, rash, hasty and impatient judge,
that cannot hear, think and know before he judges? Such the old Christians had
to do with among their Persecutors, who knew not what they held or what they
were, and yet could judge them, and cruelly execute them. And such were Tacitus
and other old Historians that from common prejudice spoke words of contempt or
reproach of them. The Christians were glad when they had a Trajan, an Antonine,
an Alexander Severus, etc. to speak to, that had Reason and Sobriety, to hear
their cause. Among the Papists, the old Reformers and Martyrs took him for a
very commendable judge or Magistrate, that would but allow them a Patient
hearing, and give them leave to speak for themselves. Truth and Godliness have
so much evidence, and such a testimony for themselves in the Conscience of
Mankind, as that the Devil could never get them so odiously thought of and so
hardly used in the World, but only by keeping them unknown, which is much by
expelling and silencing their defenders, (who speed well sometime if an Obadiah
hide them by fifties in a Cave,) and by tempting their Judges to hear but some
superficial narrative of their cause, and to have but a glimpse of the outside
as in transitu, [and to see only the back-parts of it, yea but the clothing;
which is commonly such as are made by its Enemies; Good men and causes are too
often brought to them, and set out by them, as Christ with his Scarlet Robe, his
Reed and Crown of Thorns, and then they say, Behold the man; and when they have
cried out, [Blasphemy, and an Enemy to Caesar] they write over his cross in
scorn; The King of the Jews. Cain had not Patience to hear his own Brother* and
weigh the Case, no not after that God had admonished him: But he must first
hate and murder, and afterward consider why, when it is too late. Judas must
know his Masters Innocence, and what he had done, in despair to hang himself.
And so wise Achitophel comes to his end. If David would have pondred his usage
of Uriah as much in time as he did when Nathan had awakened his reason, O what
had he prevented: If Paul had weighed before, the case of Christians, as he did
when Christ did stop his rage, he had not incurred the guilt of Persecution and
the Martyrs Blood: But he tells us that he was exceedingly mad against them:
And it is madness indeed to venture on Cruelty and Persecution, and not stay
first to understand the cause, and consider why, and what is like to be the end.

How ordinarily in the world are the excellentest men on Earth, for Wisdom and
Holiness (such as Ignatius, Cyprian, and the rest of the Ancient Martyrs; and
such as Athanasius, Chrysostom, etc.) reviled, and used as if they were the
basest Rogues on Earth, laid in Jails, banished, silenced, murdered, and all
this by men that know not what they are, and have no true understanding of
their cause? Men of whom the world was not worthy, wandered up and down, in
Dens, and Caves, and suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods, yea and
death it self, Heb. 11. from men that Judged before they knew? Many a Great Man
and Judge that has condemned Christ's Ministers as Heretics, false Teachers,
unworthy to preach the Gospel, have been such as understand not their Baptism,
Creed or Catechism, and have need of many years teaching to make them know
truly but those Principles that every Child should know. There needs no great
learning, wisdom, sobriety or honesty to teach them to cry out, [ You are a
Rogue, a Seducer, a Heretic, a Schismatic, disobedient, seditious; or, Away
with such a fellow from the Earth; it is not fit that he should live, Act.
22.22. and 21.26. Or, Away with him, Crucify him, give us Barabbas: or to say,
We have found this man a pestilent fellow, a mover of Sedition, a Leader of a
Sect, that teaches contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, etc.] But patience till
the Cause were fully tried, and all things heard and equally weighed, would
prevent most of this.

I know that ignorance and weakness of Judgment is the common calamity of
mankind, and there is no hope of curing us by unity in high degrees of
knowledge. And though Teachers are, and must be a great stay to ignorant
Learners; yet alas! how can they tell which are the wisest Teachers, and whom
to choose? When all pretend to Wisdom, and no man can judge of that which he
neither has nor knows; and even the Roman Sect who pretend most to
Infallibility, have so exceeded all men in their Error, as to make it a part
of Religion, necessary to our possessions, communion, dominion, and salvation,
to maintain the falsehood of God's Natural Revelations to the senses of all
sound men in the world. How shall one that would learn Philosophy know in this
Age, what Sect to follow, or what Guide to choose? Hence is our Calamity, and
the Remedy will be but imperfect till the time of perfection come.

But yet we are not remediless 1,. If men would but well lay in, hold fast,
love, and faithfully improve the few necessary Essential Principles. 2. If they
would make them a Rule in trying what is built upon them; and receive nothing
that certainly contradicts them. 3. If they would stay, think and try, till
their thoughts are well digested, and all is heard, before they take in
doubtful things. 4. If they will carry themselves as humble Learners to those
whose wisdom is conspicuous by its proper light, especially the concordant
Pastors of the Churches. 5. And if they will not quarrel with Truth for every
difficulty which they understand not, but humbly, as Learners, suspect their
own wit, till their Teachers have helped them in a leisurely and faithful trial;
by such means the mischief of Error and Rashness might be much avoided.

In common matters necessity and undeniable experience does somewhat rebuke and
restrain this vice. If Children should set their wits against their Parents, or
Scholars presently dispute it with their Masters, Nature and the Rod would
rebuke their pride and folly. If they that never used a Trade, should presently
take themselves to be as wise as the longest practicers, who would be
Apprentices? And if an unskilful Musician, Painter, Poet, or other such like,
shall be confident that he is as good at his work as any, standers by will not
easily cherish his folly, as being not blinded by his self-love. A good workman
shall have most praise and practice. Buyers will convince the ignorant boasters
by forsaking such men's shops: As it is with self-conceited ignorant Writers,
who are restrained by the people, who will not buy and read their Books. And
usually Good and Bad Judges, Magistrates, Lawyers, Soldiers, Pilots,
Artificers, are discerned by most that are capable of judging; because, 1.
These are matters where the common sense and experience of mankind does render
them somewhat capable of judging, and save them from deceit. 2. And here is not
usually such deep and long Plots and endeavors to deceive as in matters of
Speculation, and specially Religion and Policy there is. 3. And the Devil is
not so concerned and industrious to deceive men in matters of so low
importance. 4. And if one be deceived, many are ready to rectify him. 5. And
Men's Interest here is better understood in bodily matters, and they are not so
willing to be deceived. A poor man can easily discern between a charitable man,
and an uncharitable; between a merciful and an oppressing Landlord: We discern
between diligent and slothful Servants; but in matters that are above our
reach, which we must take on trust, and know not whom to trust, the difficulty
is greater: Where the Error and Haste of either party will breed mischief, but
much more of both: If the Physician, or other Undertaker be Confident in his
Error, and precipitant, he will impose ruin on men's health, as I have said:
And if the Patient be self-conceited and rash in his choice, he is like to
suffer for it: But when both Physician and Patient are so, what hope of escape?
And especially when through the great imperfection of man's understanding, not
one of a multitude is clear and skilful in things that are beyond the reach of
sense: And if one man, after great experience, come to be wiser than the rest,
the hearer knows it not, and he must cast out his Notions among as many
assailing Warriors, as there are ignorant self-conceited hearers present (and
that is usually as there are persons:) And when every one has poured out his
confidence against it, and perhaps reproached the Author as erroneous, because
he will know more than they, and will not reverence their known mistakes, alas!
how shall the person that we would instruct (be it for Health or Soul) be able
to know which of all these to trust as wisest?

But the saddest work is that forementioned, in Churches, Kingdoms, Families
and Souls. I must expect that opening the Crime will exasperate the Guilty: But
what remedy? 1. Should I largely open what work this makes in Families, I have
too much matter for the complaint. If the Wife differ from the Husband, she
seems always in the right: If the Servant differ from the Master, and the
Child from the Parent (if a little past infancy) they are always in the right.
What is the Contention in Families, (and in all the World) but who shall have
his way and will? If they are of several Parties in Religion, or if any be
against Religion it self, if they be foolish, erroneous, or live in any sin,
that can without utter impudence be defended, still they are able to make it
good: And, except Children at School, or others that professedly go to be
taught, whom can we meet with so ignorant or mistaken, that will not still
think when even Superiors differ from them, and reprove them, that they are in
the right.

2. And what mischiefs does it cause in Churches? When the Papal Tyrannical
part are so confident that they are in the right, that when they silence
Preachers, and Imprison and burn Christians, they think it not their duty so
much as to hear what they have to say for themselves. Or if they hear a few
words, they have not the patience to hear all, or impartially to try the cause:
But they are so full of themselves and over wise, that it must seem without any
more ado a crime to dissent from them, or contradict them. And thus proud
self-conceitedness smites the Shepherds, scatters the flocks, and will allow
the Church of Christ no Unity or Peace. And the popular crowd are usually or
often as self-conceited in their way; And if they never so unreasonably oppose
their Teachers, how hard is it to make them know or once suspect that they are
mistaken? O what mutinies in Christ's Armies, what Schisms, what Confusions,
what Scandals, what persecutions in the Church, what false accusations, what
groundless censures, do proud self-conceited understandings cause?

But scarce any where is it more lamentably seen than among injudicious,
unexperienced Ministers. What work is made in the Christian world, by Sect
against Sect, and Party against Party, in cases of controversy, by most men's
bold and confident judging of what they never truly studied, tried or
understood? Papists against Protestants, Protestants against Papists, Lutherans
(or Arminians) and Calvinists, etc. usually charge one another by bare
hearsay, or by a few sentences or scraps Collected out of their writings by
their adversaries, contrary to the very Scope of the whole discourse or
context. And men cannot have leisure to peruse the books and to know before
they judge. And then they think that seeing their Reverend Doctors have so
reported their adversaries before them, it is arrogance or injury to think that
they knew not what they said, or else belied them. And on such supposition the
false judging does go on. Of all the Pulpits that often trouble the people with
Invectives against this side or that, especially in the Controversies of
Predestination, Grace and Free Will, how few do we hear that know what they
talk against?

Yea those young or unstudied men, who might easily be conscious how little
they know, are ready to oppose and contemn the most ancient studied Divines;
When if ever they would be wise men, they should continue Scholars to such even
while they are teachers of the people.

I will not presume to open the Calamities of the World, for want of Rulers
true knowing their Subjects case, but judging hastily by the reports of
Adversaries: But that Rebellions ordinarily hence arise I may boldly say: When
Subjects that know not the reasons of their Rulers actions, are so over wise as
to make themselves Judges of that which concerns them not: And how few be
they that think not themselves wiser than all their Guides and Governors?

And Lastly, by this sin it is that the wisdom of the wisest is as lost to the
world: For let a man know never so much more than others, after the longest,
hardest studies, the self-conceitedness of the ignorant rises up against it,
or makes them incapable of receiving it, so that he can do little good to
others.

I conclude again that this is the Plague and misery of mankind and the cause
of all Sin and Shame and Ruins, that Ignorant unhumbled understandings will be
still judging rashly before they have thoroughly tried the case, and will not
suspend till they are capable of Judging, nor be convinced that they know not
what they know not, but be confident in their first or ungrounded apprehensions.

Chap. 11.
The Signs and Common discoveries of a proud self-conceited understanding, and
of pretended knowledge.

BY such effects as these the most of men, do show their guilt, of overvaluing
their own appprehensions.

1. When they will be confident of things that are quite above their
understandings, or else which they never thoroughly studied; some are confident
of that which no man knows; And most are confident of that which I think they
are unlike to be certain of themselves, without miraculous inspiration, which
they give us no reason to believe that they have. Things that cannot ordinarily
be known, 1. Without the preparation of many other Sciences, 2. Or without
reading many books, 3. Or without reading or hearing what is said against it.
4. Or at least without long and serious studies we have abundance that will
talk most peremptorily of them, upon the trust of their teachers or party,
without any of this necessary means of Knowledge.

2. The hastiness of men's conclusions discovers this Presumption and
Self-conceit. When at the first hearing or reading, or after a few thoughts
they are as confident, as if they had grown old in studies; the best
understandings must have a long time to discern the Evidence of things
difficult, and a longer time to try that Evidence by comparing it with what is
brought against it: and yet a longer time to digest truths into that Order and
Clearness of Apprehension, which is necessary to distinct and solid Knowledge,
when without all this ado* most at the first lay hold of that which comes in
their way: And there they stick, at least till a more esteemed teacher or party
tell them somewhat that is contrary to it. It is but few of our first
apprehensions that are sound, and need not reformation; but none that are well
digested, and need not much consideration to perfect them.

3. Is it not a plain discovery of a presumptuous understanding, when men will
confidently conclude of things which their own tongues are forced to confess
that they do not understand? I mean not only so as to give an accurate
definition of them, but really not to know what it is that they talk of. Many a
zealous Anabaptist I have known, that knows not what Baptism is. And many a
one that has disputed confidently for or against Free Will, that knew not at
all what Free Will is. And many a one that has disputed about the Lords
Supper, and Separated from almost all Churches for want of sufficient
strictness in it, and especially for giving it to the ignorant, who upon
examination have not known the true Nature of a Sacrament, nor of the Sacred
Covenant which it seals. Many a one forsakes most Churches as no Churches,
that they may be of a right constituted Church, who know not what a Church is.
What abundance will talk against an Arminian, a Calvinist, a Prelatist, a
Presbyterian, an Independent, that really know not what any of them are? Like a
Gentleman the other day that after long talk of the Presbyterians, being urged
to tell what a Presbyterian was, could tell no more but that he was one that is
not so merry and sociable as other men, but stricter against sports or taking a
Cup. And if I should tell you how few that can judge the controversies about
Predestination, do know what they talk of, it were easy to evince it.

4. May I not discern their Prefidence, when men that hold contraries, five men
of five inconsistent opinions, are yet every one confident that his own is
right? When at best it is but one* that can be right. When six men confidently
expound a text in the Revelation six ways. When five men are so confident of
five several ways of Church Government, that they embody themselves into
several Policies or parties to enjoy them. Is not here Self-conceitedness in
all (at least) save one?

5. When men themselves by turning from opinion to opinion, shall confess their
former opinion was false; and yet made a Religion of it while they held it; was
not this a presumptuous understanding? When a man shall be one year of one
Sect, and another of another, and yet always confident that he is in the right.

6. When men that are known to be ignorant in other parts of Religion, shall
yet in some one opinion which they have espoused, seem to themselves much wiser
than their Teachers and make nothing of the Judgments of those that have
studied it many a year, is not this a presuming mind? Take the ablest Divine
that ever you knew living, suppose him to be Jewel, Andrews, Usher, Davenant,
Calvin, Chamier, Camero, Armesius, Gataker, etc. Let him be one that all
Learned men admire, whose Judgment is sent for from several Kingdoms; who has
spent a long life in hard and very successful studies, every Boy and Silly
Woman every ignorant vicious clown, that differs from him in any point, shall
slight all the wisdom of this man, as if in comparison of himself he were a
fool. Let it come but to the point of Anabaptistry, Separation, Antinomianism
yea the grossest opinions of the Quakers, and what senseless fellow or wench is
not much wiser than all these Divines? And they will pity him as a poor carnal
ignorant person, which has not the teaching of God which they have. Yea let
him but seek to draw a sensualist from his Voluptuousness, this poor sot does
presently take himself to be the wiser man, and can prove all his Gaming, his
Idleness, his Wantonness, his precious time wasted in Plays and long Feastings,
his Gluttony, his Tippling, his Prodigal wastefullness to be all lawful things,
whatever the Learned Pastor say.

But why do not such men suspect their understandings, and consider with
themselves, what likelihood is there that men as holy as I, that have studied
it all their days, should not be wiser than I that never searched as they have
done? Does not God say, he that seeks shall find; and wisdom must be
laboriously searched for, as a hidden treasure? and does not God use to give
his blessing on supposition of men's Faithful endeavors?

7. Is it not palpable Pride when a few men, no wiser nor better than others,
can easily believe that all the rest of the Christian World, the most Learned,
Godly and concordant Christians, are all deceived ignorant Souls, and they and
their few adherents only are in the right, in some doubtful controversies,
wherein they have no advantage above others, either for capacity or grace? I
know that when the World is drowned in wickedness, we must not imitate them, be
they never so many, nor follow a multitude to do evil; and I know that the
Certain Truth of the Gospel must be held fast though most of the World be
Infidels: And that when the Arrians were the most, they were not therefore the
rightest; And that even among Christians, Carnal Interests use to breed and
keep up such corruptions, as must not for the number of the vicious be
approved. But when those that truly fear God, and seek the Truth and
Faithfully serve him, as self-denyingly as any others, shall agree in any part
of Holy Doctrine or Worship, for a few among them to rise up in a conceit of
their own understandings, and separate from them as they separate from the
World, and this upon less study than many of the rest have used, to find out
the Truth; I am sure none but a Proud person will do this, without great
jealousy of his own understanding, and great fear of erring, and without long
and serious search and deliberation at the least.

8. Is it not Pride of understanding, when we see men confident upon
inconsiderable Reasons: when they bring nothing that should move a man of any
competent understanding, and yet they build as boldly on this Sand, as if they
built upon a Rock.

9. And when they slight the strongest and clearest arguments of another: And
in their prefidence disdain them, before they understand them, as not worthy of
consideration, and as silly things.

10. When they obtrude all their Conceits magisterially upon others; and expect
that all men presently be of their mind and say as they do: when they value men
just as they agree with or disagree from their opinion, and all are dear to
them that hold with them, and all are slighted that think they err. When a man
that without chewing presently swalloweth their conceits, is taken for a
sounder man than he that will take nothing as sure till Evidence prove it to
him: Is not this notorious Pride of understanding? And O how common is this
imposing Pride, even in them that cry out against it and condemn it? They that
will vilify one party as Imposing all their own conceptions, even in words and
forms and ceremonies, on the Churches of Christ, will yet themselves be rigid
Imposers; No man shall be of their Communion, nor judged meet for the Holy
Sacrament, who comes not to their opinions in many of their singularities; Nay
worse, that will not abstain from communion with other Churches; whom their
presumption separateth from.

11. And do not those people most value their own understandings, who choose
Teachers to please them, and not to Teach them, and hear them as Judges or
censurers, and not as Learners? How ordinary is this? If they be to choose a
Pastor, they will rather have the most injudicious man who thinks as they
think, than the wisest man that is able to teach them better. If they hear any
thing which agrees not with their former conceits, they go away magisterially,
censuring the Preacher; He taught unsound Doctrine, dangerous things; And
neither understand him, nor endeavor to Learn. I have seldom Preached in
strange congregations, nor seldom written on any subject, but among many
Learners, some such hearers and readers I have had that neither have
understanding enough to Teach, nor humility enough to know it, and to Learn:
but they go away prating among their Companions of what they never understood;
and if it fall out that I know of it, and answer them, they have nothing to
say; But a putarem, or non-putarem: I thought you had meant thus or thus
(contrary to what I spoke) or I noted not this or that word (which the sense
depended on.) Do but say as they would have you, and you are an excellent man!
But if you tell them more than they knew, if it detect any error or ignorance
which they had before, they condemn your teaching, instead of learning of you.
Poor Souls! If you are wise enough already, what need you a Teacher? If you are
not, why will you not learn? If you were wiser than He, why did you choose or
take him for your Teacher? If you are not, why will you not learn of him?

12. The deep and cruel censures which they pass against Dissenters, does show
their self-conceitedness. None more censorious than raw unexperienced persons,
not only Ignorant Preachers, but Women and Boys. How readily and boldly without
any fear of God does one seek to make his Brother odious as a Schismatic and a
Fanatic, and worse than words can describe him; and another to reproach others
as Antichristian and Carnal, whom he never understood? Nothing but Pride could
make men so ready and bold and fearless in their most foolish censures.

13. And it further shows their proud presumption, when they dare do all this
upon bare rumors and hearsay, and ungrounded suspicions. Were they not proud
and presumptuous, they would think, Alas, my understanding is not so clear and
sure, nor my Charity so safe and strong, as that I should in reason venture to
condemn my Brother, upon uncertain rumors, and so slight reports? Have I heard
him speak for himself? Or is it Charity or common Justice to condemn a man
unheard? What though they are godly men that report it? So was David that
committed Adultery and Murder, and hastily received a Lie against Mephibosheth;
and perhaps many of those Corinthians, against whose false censures, Paul was
put so largely to vindicate himself.

14. Yea, when they dare proceed to vend these false reports and censures upon
hearsay, to the destruction of the Charity of those that hear them. And so
entangle them all in sin: As if it were not enough to quench their own Love to
their Brother by false Surmises, but they must quench as many others also as
they can.

15. Yea, when they dare venture so far as to unchurch many Churches, yea, most
in the World, and degrade most Ministers, if not unchristen most Christians, or
at least themselves withdraw from the Communion of such Churches, and all for
something which they never understood; about a Doctrine, a Form, a
Circumstance, where self-opinion or self-interest draws them to all this bold
adventure.

To say nothing of Condemnations of whole Churches and Countries, the
tyrannical, proud Impositions, the cruel Persecutions, which the Papal Faction
has been guilty of by this Vice, judge now whether it be not too common a case
to be guilty of an unhumbled understanding, and of pretended knowledge?

Obj. If it be so, is it not best do as the Papists, and keep men from reading
the Scriptures, or meddling with divine things which they cannot master, any
further than to believe what the Church believes.

Ans. 1. It is best no doubt, to teach men to know the difference between
Teachers and Learners, and to keep in a humble learning state, and in that
state to grow as much in knowledge as they can: But not to cast away knowledge,
for fear of over-valuing it, nor renounce their reason, for fear of error. No
more than to put out their Eyes for fear of mistaking by them, or choosing
madness lest they abuse their wits: Else we might wish to be Brutes, because
abused Reason is the cause of all the errors and mischiefs in the World.

2. The Popish Clergy who give this counsel for the blinding of the vulgar, are
worse themselves, and by their proud Contendings, Censures and Cruelties, show
more self-conceitedness than the vulgar do.

3. The truth is, the cause is the common frailty of man, and the common
pravity of corrupted nature, and it is to be found in Persons of all Ranks,
Religions and Conditions; of which more after in due place.

Chap. 12.
Of the mischievous effects of this proud pretense of more knowledge than men
have.

IF the mischiefs of this sin had not been very great, I had not chosen this
subject to treat of.

1. It is no small mischief to involve men's Souls in the guilt of all the sins,
which I named in the last Chapter, as the discovery of this Vice. Sure all
those disorders, censures, slanders, and presumptions, should not seem small in
the Eyes of any man that fears God, and loves holiness, and hates sin.

2. Pretended knowledge wastes men some time in getting it, and much more in
abusing it: All the time that you study for it, preach for it, talk for it,
write for it, is sinfully lost and cast away.

3. It kindles a corrupt and sinful Zeal; such as James describes, Jam. 3.1,
15. which is envious and striving, and is but Earthly, Sensual and Devilish: A
Zeal against Love, and against good Works, and against the Interest of our
Brother, and against the Peace and Concord of the Church; a hurting, burning,
devouring, excommunicating, persecuting Zeal. And a Fever in the Body is not
so pernicious as such a sinful Zeal in the Soul. Such a Zeal the Jews had as
Paul bears them witness, Romans 11.1. Such a Zeal, alas, is so common among
persecuting Papists on one side, and censorious Sectaries and Separatists on
the other, that we must all bear the sad effects of it. And self-conceited
knowledge is the fuel of this Zeal, as James 3. fully manifests.

4. This pretended knowledge is the fixing of false Opinions in the minds of
men, by which the truth is most powerfully kept out. A Child will not wrangle
against his Teacher, and therefore will learn; but these over-wise Fools do
presently set their wits against what you say, to keep out knowledge. You must
beat down the Garrison of his pride, before you come within hearing to instruct
him: He is hardlier untaught the errors which he has received, than an
unprejudiced man is taught to understand most excellent truths.

5. By this the gifts of the most wise and excellent Teachers are half lost: It
is full Bottles that are cast into these Seas of knowledge, which have no room
for more, but come out as they went in: If an Augustine, or an Aquinas, or
Scotus were among them, yea, a Peter or Paul, what can he put into these
Persons that are full of their own conceits already? See thou a man wise in
his own conceit? there is more hope of a Fool than of him.

6. Yea, they are usually the perverters of the Souls of others: Before they
can come to themselves, and know that they were mistaken, what pains have they
taken to make others of their own erroneous minds, whom they are not able
afterward to undeceive again?

7. It is a vice that blemisheth many excellent qualifications: To hear of a
man that valueth his own Judgment but according to its worth, and pretends to
know but so much as he knows indeed, is no shame to him; though knowledge is
a thing fitter to be Used than Boasted of: But if a man know never so much, and
can never so well express it, if he think that he is wiser than he is, and
excels others more than indeed he does, and over-valueth that knowledge
which he has, it is a shame which his greatest parts cannot excuse or hide.

8. It exposes a man to base and shameful mutability. He that will be hasty
and confident in his apprehensions, is so often mistaken, that he must as often
change his mind, and recant, or do much worse. I know that it cannot be
expected that any man should have as sound apprehensions in his youth, as in
his age, and that the wisest should not have need of mutations for the better,
and retractations of some youthful Errors; and he that changes not, and
retracteth nothing, it seems is in his childish Ignorance and Error still: but
when natural frailty exposes us all to much of this disgrace, we should not
expose our selves to so much more. A hasty judger, or prefident man must be a
very Weathercock, or be defiled with a Leprosy of Error. Whereas if men would
but be humble and modest, and self-suspicious and suspend their presumption,
and not take on them to know before they know indeed, how safely might they
walk, and how seldom would they need to change their minds, or either stick in
the sink of Error, or make many shameful Retractations?

9. Prefidence and false judging engages a man in a very life of sin. For when
falsehood goes for truth with him, it will infect his affections, and pollute
his conversation, and all that he does in the obedience and prosecution of that
Error will be sin. Yea the greatest sin that he can but think no sin, may be
committed; as was the Persecution of Christ and Christians, by the Jews, and
Paul, and others like them; and the Papists bloodiness for their Religion
throughout Christendom.

10. It disturbeth the Peace of all Societies: This is the vice that
disquieteth Families: Every one is wisest in his own Eyes: The Servant thinks
his own way better than his Masters: What are all the contentions between
Husband and Wife, or any in the Family, but that in all their differences,
every one thinks himself to be in the right? His own Opinion is right, his
own Words and Ways are right; and when every one is wise and just, and every
one is in the right, the effects are such as if no one were wise or in the
right.

And in Civil Societies, Seditions, Rebellions Oppressions, Tyranny, and all
Confusions come from this, that men pretend to be sure of what they are not.
Rulers take up with false reports from idle malicious whisperers and accusers
against their inferiors, and have not the Justice and Patience to suspend
their Judgments, till they have searched out the matter, and fully heard men
speak for themselves. Subjects make themselves Judges of the secrets of
^overnment, and of the Councils and Actions of their Rulers, of which they have
no certain notice, but venture to conclude upon deceitful suspicions. And the
Contentions and Factions amongst Nobles and other Subjects, come from
misunderstandings, through hasty and ungrounded judgings.

But the wofullest effects are in the Churches; where, alas, whilst every
Pastor will be wiser than another, and the People wiser than all their Pastors,
and every Sect and Party much wiser than all that differ from them, their
divisions, their separations, their alienations and bitter censurings of each
other, their obtruding their own Opinions, and Rules and ^eremonies upon each
other, their bitter envyings, strife and persecutions of each other, do make
sober standers-by to ask, as Paul, Is there not a wise man among you? O happy
the World, happy Kingdoms, but most happy the Churches of Christ, if we could
possibly bring men but to know their Ignorance! If the Pastors themselves were
not prefident and presumptuous over-valuers of their own apprehensions! And if
the People knew how little they know! But now alas, men rage against each other
in their dreams, and few of them have the grace to awake before death, and find
to repentance, that they were themselves in error.

Hear me, with that remnant of meekness and humility which thou have left, thou
confident, bitter, censorious man! Why must that man needs be taken for a
Heretic, a Schismatic, a refractory, stubborn, self-willed person, an
Antichristian, carnal, formal man, who is not of thy Opinion in point of a
Controversy, of a Form, of an Order, of a Circumstance, or Subscription, or
such like? It Is possible it may be so! And its possible thou may be more so
thy self. But have thou so patiently heard all that he has to say, and so
clearly discerned the truth on thy own side, and that this truth is made so
evident to him as that nothing but wilful obstinacy can resist it, as will
warrant all thy censure and contempt? Or is it not an over-valuing of thy own
understanding, which makes thee so easily condemn all as unsufferable that
differ from it? Has not pride made thy silly wit to be as an Idol, to which
all must bow down on pain of the heat of thy displeasure? Do not some of those
men whom thou so Magisterially condemnest, study as hard and as impartially as
thy self? Do they not pray as hard for Gods assistance? Have they not the same
Books, and as good Teachers? Do they not live as well, and show as much
tenderness of Conscience, and fear of erring and sinning as thy self? why then
art thou so hasty in condemning them that are as fair for the reputation of
wisdom as thou art?

But suppose them mistaken; have thou tried that they are unwilling to be
instructed? It may be you have wrangled with them by disputes, which have but
engaged each other to defend his own Opinion: But call them to thee in Love,
and tell them, you are ignorant, and I am wise: I will teach you what you know
not, and open to them all the Evidence which causes your own confident
apprehensions: Wish them to study it, and hear patiently what they have to say;
and I am persuaded that many or most sober men that differ from you, will not
refuse thus to become as your Scholars, so far as to consider all that you have
to offer to convince them, and thankfully receive as much of the truth as they
can discern.

But, alas, no men rage so much against others as erroneous and blind, as the
blind and erroneous; and no men so furiously brand others with the marks of
Obstinacy, Factiousness and Schism, as the Obstinate, Factious and
Schismatical. The prouder the Obtruder of his own conceits is, the more he
condemns all Dissenters as proud, for presuming to differ from such as he?
and all for want of a humble mind.

11. Moreover it is this pretended knowledge which is the cause of all our
false Reformations. Men are so over-wise, that they presently see a Beam in
their Brothers Eye, which is but a Mote; and they magnify all the
imperfections of others, Pastors and Churches, into Mountains of iniquity:
Every mis-expression or disorder, or inconvenient phrase in a Prayer, or a
Sermon, or a Book, is an odious, damning, intolerable evil. O! say such, what
Idolaters are they that use a Form of Prayer, which God did not command? What
large Consciences have they that can join with a Parish Church? that can
communicate Kneeling, and among bad men, or those whose Conversion is not
tried? What abundance of intolerable evils do such men find in the Words and
Forms, and Orders, and Circumstances of other men's Worship, which God
mercifully accepts through Christ, taking all these but for such pardonable
imperfections as he mercifully bears with in all. And then the Reformation
must be presently answerable to the apprehension of the evil.

Yea, sometimes the very injudicious sort of zealous people make the cry of the
greatness of this or that corruption, how Antichristian and intolerable it is?
And then the Reformation must satisfy this vulgar error, and answer the cry
and expectation of the people.

I would here give instances of abundance of mis-reformings, which all need a
Reformation, both in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, but that I reserve it
for another Treatise if I live to finish it, and can get it printed, called
Overdoing is Undoing.

12. Lastly, This Vice of pretended certainty and knowledge, has set up
several false terms of Christian Unity and Peace, and by them has done more to
hinder the Churches Peace and Unity, than most devices ever did, which Satan
ever contrived to that end: by this Church-tearing Vice, abundance of
falsehoods, and abundance of things uncertain, and abundance of things
unnecessary, have been made so necessary to the Union and Communion of the
Churches and their Members, as that thereby the Christian World has been
grinded to powder by the names and false pretenses of Unity and Peace. Just as
if a wise Statesman would advise his Majesty, that none may be his Subjects
that are not of one Age, one Stature, one Complexion, and one Disposition, that
so he might have Subjects more perfectly concordant, than all the Princes on
Earth besides: and so might be the most Glorious Defender of Unity and Peace!
But how must this be done? Why, command them all to be of your mind? But that
prevails not, and yet it is undone? Why then they are obstinate, self-willed
Persons. Well, but yet it is undone! Why lay Fines and Penalties upon them?
Well, but yet it is undone: All the Hypocrites that had no Religion, are of the
Religion which is uppermost; and the rest are uncured. Why require more Bricks
of them, and let them have no Straw, and tell them that their Religion is their
idleness, stubbornness and pride, and let your little Finger be heavier than
your Fathers Loins! But hearken, young Counselors! Jeroboam will have the
advantage of all this, and still the sore will be unhealed. Why then Banish
them, and Hang them that obey not, till there be none left that are not of one
mind. But Sir, I pray you, who shall do it? and who shall that one man be that
shall be left to be all the Kingdom? You are not such a Fool as to be ignorant,
that no two men will agree in all things, nor be perfectly of the same
complexion: If there must be One King and but One Subject, I pray you, who
shall that one Subject be? I hope not he that counsels it; Neque enim Lex
justior ulla est, quam necis artifices art perire sua. But hark you Sir, shall
that one Man have a Wife or not? If not, the Kingdom will die with him? if yea,
I dare prognosticate he and his Wife will not be in all things of a mind. If
they be, take me for a mistaken man.

By this Vice of pretended knowledge and certainty, it is, that the Papacy has
been made the Center of the Unity of the Universal Church. Unity we must have,
God forbid else: There is no maintaining Christianity without it. But the POPE
must be PRINCIPIUM UNITATIS: And will all Christians certainly Unite in the
Pope? Well, and Patriarchs must be the Pillars of Unity: But was it so to the
Unity of the first Churches? Or is it certain that all Christians will Unite in
Patriarchs? But further all the Mass of Gregory the too great, and all the
Legends in his Dialogues, or at least all the Doctrines and Ceremonies which he
received, and the form of Government in his time, must be made necessary to
Church Union: Say you so? But it was not all necessary in the Apostles times,
nor in Cyprian's times, no nor in Gregory's own times; much of those things
being used arbitrarily: And what was made necessary by Canons of General
Councils in the Empire, (mark it) was never thereby made necessary in all the
rest of the Churches. And are you sure that mere Christians will take all these
for certain truths? Why, if they will not, Burn and Banish them. This is, as
Tertullian says, solitudinem facere and pacem vocare. But hark Sir, this way
has been tried too long in vain: Millions of Albigenses and Waldenses are said
by Historians to be killed in France, Savoy, Italy, Germany, etc. The French
Massacre killed about Forty or Thirty Thousand: The Irish Massacre in that
little Island killed about Two Hundred Thousand. But were they not stronger
after all these cruelties than before? Alas, Sir, all your labor is lost, and
your party is taken for a Blood-thirsty Generation, and humane Nature which
abhors the Blood-thirsty, ever after breeds Enemies to your way. This is
the effect of false Principles, and terms of Unity and Peace, contrived by
proud self-conceited men, that think the World should take their Dictates for a
Supreme Law, and obey them as the Directive Deities of Mankind.

If all this be not enough to tell you what proud pretended certainty is, read
over the Histories of the Ages past, and you shall find it written in Ink, in
Tears, in blood, in Mutations, in Subversions of the Empires and Kingdoms of
the World, in the most odious and doleful Contentions of Prelates, Lacerations
of Churches, and Desolations of the Earth. And yet have we not experience
enough to teach us?

Chap. XIII.
The Commodities of a suspended judgment, and humble understanding, which
pretends to no more Knowledge or Certainty than it has.

THE commodities of an humble mind, which pretends not to be Certain till he
is Certain, you may gather by contraries from the twelve forementioned
mischiefs of prefidence; which to avoid prolixity, I leave to your collection.

Moreover I add, 1. Such a humble suspended mind does not cheat it self with
seeming to have a knowledge, a Divine Faith, a Religion when it has none. It
does not live on air and dreams, nor feed on shadows, nor is puffed up with a
tympanite of vain conceits, instead of true substantial wisdom.

2. He is not prepossessed against the Truth, but has room for Knowledge, and
having the teachableness of a Child, he shall receive instruction, and grow in
true Knowledge, when the proud and inflated wits, being full of nothing, are
sent empty away.

3. He entangleth not himself in a seeming necessity of making good all that he
has once received and entertained: He has not so many Bastards of his own
Brain to maintain, as the prefident hasty judgers have: which saves him much
sinful study and strife.

4. He is not liable to so much shame of mutability: He that fixes not, till
he feel firm ground, nor builds till he feel a Rock, need not pull down, and
repent so often as rash presumers.

5. Unless the World be Bedlam mad in proud obtrudings of their own Conceits,
methinks such a wary humble man, should offend but few, and better keep both
his own, and the Churches peace than others. Can Persecutors for shame Hang and
Burn men for mere Ignorance, who are willing to learn, and will thankfully from
any man receive information? What if in Queen Marys days the poor Men and Women
had told my Lords of Winchester and London, [We are not persons of so good
understandings as to know what a spiritual body is, as Paul describes it, 1
Cor. 15. And seeing most say that the Sun it self is a body, and not a spirit;
and late Philosophers say, that Light is a substance, or body, which yet from
the Sun in a moment diffuseth it self through all the surface of the Earth and
Air, we know not how far locality, limitations, extension, impenetrability,
divisibility, etc. belong to the body of Christ, and consequently how far it
may be really present; we can say nothing, but that we know not. Would my good
Lord Bishops have burnt them for [I know not?] Perhaps they would have said,
You must believe the Church. But which is the Church, my Lord? Why, it is the
Pope and a General Council. But alas, my Lord, I have never seen or heard
either Pope or Council: Why, but we have, and you must believe us: Must we
believe you, my Lords, to be Infallible? or only as we do other men that may
deceive and be deceived? Is any Infallible besides the Pope and his Council?
Truly, my Lords, we are ignorant people, and we know not what the Pope and
Councils have said; and we are uncertain whether you report them truly, and
uncertain whether they are Fallible or not; but we are willing to hear any
thing which may make us wiser. Would their Lordships have burnt such modest
persons?

Suppose in a Church where men are put to profess or subscribe to, or against
the Opinions of Free Will, or Reprobation, or Predetermination, or such like, a
humble man should say, These are things above my understanding; I cannot reach
to know what Free Will is, nor whether all Causes natural and free be
predetermined by Divine Premotion, etc. I can say neither It is so, nor It is
not, They are above my reach; would they silence and cast out such an humble
person, and forbid him to preach the Gospel of Christ? Perhaps they would: But
there are not so many hardened to such inhumanity as there are men that would
deal sharply with one that is as confident as they are on the other side. And
those few that were thus silenced, would have the more peace, that they
procured it not by self-conceited singularities; and the silencers of them
would be the more ashamed, before all sober persons that shall hear it. Other
Instances I pass by.

Chap. 14.
The Aggravations of this sin of Prefidence.

THough there be so much evil in this sin of Presumption as I have noted, yet
is it not in all alike culpable or unhappy: But differs in both respects as I
shall tell you.

I. For culpability it is worst in these sorts and cases following.

1. It is a great sin in those who have least reason to think highly of their
own understandings, and greatest reason to distrust themselves: As. 1. In those
that are young and unexperienced, and must be miraculously wise, if they are
wiser than old experienced persons (caeteris paribus.) 2. In the unlearned or
half-learned who have had but little time or helps for study, or at least have
made but little use of them. 3. In duller wits, and persons that in other
matters are known to be no wiser than others. 4. In those that take up their
prefidence upon the slightest grounds, as bare surmises, and reports from
others that were uncertain. 5. In those that have been often deceived already,
and should by their sad experience have been brought to humble self-suspicion.

2. And it is an aggravated sin in those whose place and condition obliges
them to learn from others. As for the Wife to be self-con^eited of all her
apprehensions against her Husband (unless he be a fool:) For the Servant to set
his wit against his Masters; where he should obey him. For Children to think
that their wits are righter than their Parents or Masters, and Apprentices and
Learners to think that they know more than their teachers: And for the ignorant
people to censure over-hastily the Doctrine and Practice of their Pastors, as
if they were wiser than they: Perhaps they are. But it must be some rare person
who is fit to be a Teacher himself, or the Teacher some sot that has intruded
into the Office, or else it must be a wonder. For God usually gives men
Knowledge according to the Time, and Means, and Pains that they have had to get
it, and not by miraculous infusions without means. Does not the Apostle
expressly tell you this, Heb. 5.11, 12. When for the Time you ought to have been
Teachers, etc. Men should be wise according to Time and Means of Wisdom, which
they have had.

3. It is the greater crime when men will seem wisest in other men's matters and
concernments. When the Subject will know best what belongs to a King or
Governor, and the people will know best how the Pastor should teach them, and
when he fails, and whom he should receive into the Church or exclude. When
the Servant will know best his Masters duty, and every man his Neighbors, and
least his own.

4. It is the greater crime when men will be the Judges of their own
understandings, and think highly of them in cases where they should be tried by
others. As if an Empyrick, or Woman do think that they know better how to cure
a disease than the ablest Physicians; why do they not offer themselves to the
Trial, and before them make good their Skill by reason? If an unexperienced
young student think himself able to be a Physician, he is not to be Judge, but
must be Tried and Judged by Physicians: If a self-conceited Professor, or a
young Student think himself fit for the Ministry, he must not presently
contrive how to get in, and how to shift off Examination, but freely offer
himself to be tried by able Godly Ministers, and then by the ordainers, who are
to judge. But when such Persons can think themselves sufficient if no body else
do, or if but a few ignorant persons do, that are unfit to judge, this proves
their Pride and Presumption to be a great and heinous sin.

5. And it is yet more heinously aggravated, when to keep up the reputation of
their own understandings, they use to depress and vilify the wiser, even those
whom they never knew: As he that affects to be a Preacher and dare not pass
the Examination, has no way to hide his shame, but 1. By crying down the
Learning which he wants, as a humane carnal thing. And 2. By reproaching
those that should judge of him and ordain him, as poor carnal persons who
understand not the things of the Spirit as he does, and as proud self-seeking
men, that will approve of none but those that flatter them, and are of their
way. Some such there may be: But sure all are not such. Why do you not desire
the Judgment of the wisest most impartial men, but take up with the applause of
unlearned persons that are of your own mind and way, and magnify you for
humouring them?

So you shall hear Empyricks and She-Physicians vilify Doctors of Physic, as
men that have less knowledge than they, and are so Proud and Covetous and
Dishonest, that there is no trusting them. When Pretended Knowledge must have
so base a Cloak, it is the greater sin.

6. And it is the heinouser sin when they venture to do heinous mischief by it:
As a Papist, a Quaker, or a Separatist will in his confidence, be a perverter
of others, and a Condemner of the Just, and a defamer of those that are against
him, and a troubler of the Church and World. He that in his self-conceitedness
dare resist the wisest, and his Teachers, and Rulers, and set Countries on
Fire, is wickedly presumptuous.

So in the practice of Physic, when people will be self-conceited, when the
Lives of others lie upon it, and a silly Fellow or Woman will venture to purge,
to let blood, to give this or that, who know neither the disease nor proper
cure.

7. It is therefore a heinous sin in Rulers, who must judge for the life and
death of others, or for the peace or misery of thousands about them. I mean
Pastors and Commanders in Armies, and Navies, and other Governors on whom the
public welfare of the Church, or Army, or Navy, or Country does depend. O how
wise should that person be, whose errors may cost thousands, so dear as their
destruction! Or if their understandings be not extraordinary how cautelous
should they be in judging; upon hearing the wisest, and hearing dissenters, and
not only Flatterers or Consenters; and hearing men of several minds, and
hearing all Witnesses, and Evidence, and hearing every man speak for himself:
and after all considering thoroughly of it: Specially of Laws and Wars, and
Impositions in Religion, where thousands of Conscience, say what you can, will
expect Satisfaction. When a Woman called to Antigonus to hear her cause and do
her Justice, he told her that he could not have leisure: She answered, you
should not have while to be King then: Whereupon he heard her, and did her
right. Had it been to an inferior Judge she had spoken reason.

8. Lastly, Pretended Certainty is the greater sin when it is falsely fathered
on God. But the Pope and Council dare pretend that God has promised them
Infallibility, and God has certified them that the consecrated Bread is no
Bread, and that our senses are all deceived; and God has made the Pope the
universal Ruler of the World or Church, and made him and his Council the only
Judges by which all men must know what is the word of God. So when Fanatics
will pretend that by Revelation, Visions or Inspirations of the Spirit, God
has assured them that this or that is the meaning of a Text which they
understand not, or the truth in such or such a controversy. Alas among too many
well meaning persons, God is pretended for a multitude of sinful errors; And
they that preach false Doctrine, will do it as the old Prophet spoke to the
young, as from the Lord: And they that rail at godliness and they that censure,
backbite, cast out or persecute their Brethren, will do it as Rabshakeh; Has
not God sent me, etc. Men will not make any snares for the Church or their
Brethrens Consciences, but in the name of God: They will not divide the Church,
nor cast out Infants, nor refuse Communion with their Brethren, but in the name
of God. One man says, God forbids him all Book Prayers, or all Imposed
Forms of Prayer. And another says, God forbids him all but such. And all
belly God, and add this heinous abuse of his holy word and name unto their sin.

Chap. 15.
Some special aggravations more of this sin, in Students and Pastors, which
should deter them from pretended Knowledge or prefidence.

TO such I will suppose that to name the Evils may suffice (on my part) without
sharp amplifications. Though I have spoken to you first in what is said, I will
briefly add,

1. That this sin will make you slothful students. Few study hard who are
quickly confident of their first conceptions.

2. While you do study, it keeps out Knowledge: You are too full of your
selves to receive easily from others.

3. It is the Common Parent of Error and Heresy. Ignorance is the Mother, and
Pride the Father of them all: And Prefidence and Pretended Knowledge is but
Proud Ignorance in another name.

4. What a life of precious time will you waste in following the erroneous
thoughts of your bewildred minds.

5. As food alters the temperament of the body which it nourishes, so the
very temperament of your minds and wills and affections will become vain, and
frothy, and shadowy, or malignant and perverse, according to the quality of
your Error.

6. It is the common Parent of Superstition: It defiles God's Worship with
Humane Inventions, with duties and sins of our own making: All such men's dreams
will seem to them to be the Laws of God.

7. It will entail a corrupt Education of Youth upon us, and consequently a
corrupt degenerate kind of Learning, and so a degenerate Ministry on the
Churches. When Youths are possessed with abundance of Uncertainties under the
name of Learning and Religion, it will grow the custom to Teach, and Talk, and
Live accordingly: Do I say, It will do? If the Schoolmens Error in this
deserve but half as much as Faber, Valla, Hutten, Erasmus, charge upon them,
you should hear and take warning: Not to avoid the most accurate knowledge by
the hardest studies, but to avoid pretending that you know what you do not.

8. And you will make vain strife and contention about vanity, your very trade
and business when you come abroad in the world. They that make Uncertainties or
Errors to be their studies and honorable Learning, must keep up the honor of
it by Living as they Learnt, and talking vainly for the vanities of their minds.

9. And you are like hereby to become the chiefest Instruments of Satan, to
trouble the Church either with Heresies, Schisms or Persecutions.

10. And truly it should much turn your hearts against it, to know that it is a
continual habit or exercise of Pride. And Pride (the Devil's sin) is one of the
most heinous and odious to God. If you hate any sin, you should hate Pride. And
it is one of the worst sorts of Pride too. As Nature has three Principles,
active Power, Intellect and Will, and Man three Excellencies, Greatness, Wisdom
and Goodness; so Pride has these three Great Objects: Men are proud that they
are Greater, or Wiser, or Better than others: That is, They think themselves
Greater, or Wiser, or Better than they are, and they would have others think so
too. As for Pride of Beauty, or Clothing, or such like corporeal things and
appurtenances, it is the Vice of Children, and the more shallow and foolish
sort of Women. But Greater things make up a Greater sort of Pride. O what a
number of all Ranks and Ages do live in this great sin of Pride of Wisdom, or
an Over-valued Understanding, who never feel or lament it!

11. Moreover your Prefidence prepares you for Skepticism, or doubting of the
most certain necessary Truths: Like some of our Sectaries, who have been
falsely* confident of so many Religions, till at last they doubt of all
Religion. He that finds that he was deceived while he was an Anabaptist, and
deceived when he was a Separatist, and deceived while he was an Antinomian or
Libertine, and deceived when he was a Quaker, is prepared to think also that he
was deceived when he was a Christian, and when he believed the Immortality of
the Soul, and the Life to come. When you have found your Understandings often
deceive you, you will grow so distrustful of them, as hardly ever to believe
them when it is most necessary. He that often lies, will hardly be believed
when he speaks truth. And all this comes from believing your first and
slight apprehensions too easily and too soon, and so filling up your minds with
lies, which when they are discovered, make the Truth to be suspected. Like some
fanciful, lustful Youths, who hastily grow fond of some unsuitable unlovely
person, and when they know them, cannot so much as allow them the conjugal
affection which they are bound to.

12. Lastly, Consider what a shame it is to your Understandings, and how it
contradicts your pretense of Knowledge. For, how little knows that man who
knows not his own Ignorance? How can it be thought that you are like to know
great matters at a distance, the profundities, sublimities and subtilties of
Sciences, who know not yet how little you know?

Chap. 16.
Proofs of the Little Knowledge that is in the world, to move us to a due
distrust of our understandings.

IF you think this sin of a Proud Understanding, and Pretended Knowledge, does
need for the cure a fuller discovery of its vanity, I know not how to do it
more convincingly, than by showing you How little True Knowledge is in the
world, and consequently that all Mankind have cause to think meanly of their
Understandings.

I. The great Imperfection of all the Sciences, is a plain discovery of it:
When Mankind has had above 5000 years already to have grown to more
perfection; yet how much is still dark, and controverted? and how much unknown
in comparison of what we know? But above all, though nothing is perfectly known
which is not methodically known; yet how few have a true methodical knowledge?
He that sees but some parcels of Truth, or sees them but confusedly, or in a
false method, not agreeable to the things, does know but little, because he
knows not the place, and order, and respects of Truths to one another, and
consequently neither their composition, harmony, strength or use. Like a
Philosopher that knew nothing but Elements, and not mixed bodies, or animate
beings: Or like an Anatomist that is but an Atomist, and can say no more of the
body of a man, but that it is made up of Atoms, or at most, can only enumerate
the similar parts: Or like a man that knows no more of his Clock and Watch,
but as the pieces of it lie on a heap, or at best, sets some one part out of
its place, which disableth the whole Engine: Or like one that knows the
Chess-men only as they are in the Bag, or at best in some disorder. Who will
make me so happy as to show me one true Scheme of Physics, of Metaphysics, of
Logic, yea of Theology, which I cannot presently prove guilty of such mistake,
confusion, misorder, as tends to great error in the subsequent parts, I know
of no small number that have been offered to the world, but never saw one that
satisfied my understanding. And I think I scarce know any thing to purpose,
till I can draw a true Scheme of it, and set each compounding notion in its
place.

II. And the great Diversity and Contrariety of Opinions, of Notions and of
Methods, proves that our Knowledge indeed is yet but small. How many Methods
of Logic have we? How many Hypotheses in Physics, yea how many contentious
Volumes written against one another, in Philosophy and Theology it self* What
loads of Videtur's in the Schoolmen? How many Sects and Opinions in Religion?
Physicians agree not about men's Lives. Lawyers agree not about men's Estates; no
nor about the very fundamental Laws. If there be a Civil War, where both sides
appeal to the Law, there will be Lawyers on both sides. And does not this prove
that we know but little?

III. But men's rage and confidence in these Contrarieties does discover it yet
more. Read their contentious writings of Philosophy and Theology; observe their
usage of one another, what contempt, what reproach, what cruelties they can
proceed to? The Papist silenceth and burns the Protestant; the Lutheran
silenceth and revileth the Calvinist; the Calvinist sharply judges the
Arminians, and so round: And may I not judge that this wisest part of the world
is low in Knowledge, when not the vulgar only, but the Leaders and Doctors are
so commonly mistaken in their greatest Zeal? And that Solomon erred not in
saying, [The fool rages, and is confident.]

IV. If our knowledge were not very low, the long experience of the World would
have long ago reconciled our Controversies. The strivings and distractions
about them (both in Philosophy, Politics and Theology) have torn Churches, and
raised Wars, and set Kingdoms on Fire, and should in reason be to us as a Bone
out of Joint, which by the pain should force us all to seek out for a cure: And
sure in so many thousand years, many Remedies have been tried: The issues of
such disingenuous-ingenious Wars, do furnish men with such experience as should
teach them the cure. And yet after so many years War of wits, to be so witless
as to find no End, no Remedy, no Peace, does show that the wit of man is not a
thing to be proud of.

V. The great mutability of our apprehensions does show that they are not many
things that we are certain of. Do we not feel in our selves how new thoughts
and new reasons are ready to breed new conjectures in us, and that looks
doubtful to us, upon further thoughts, of which long before we had no doubt.
Besides the multitudes that change their very Religion, every studious Person
so often changes his conceptions, as may testify the shallowness of our minds.

VI. The general barbarousness of the World, the few Countries that have polite
Learning, or true Civility or Christianity, do tell us that knowledge in the
World is low: When besides the vast unknown Regions of the World, all that are
of late discovery in the West Indies, or elsewhere, are found to be so rude and
barbarous; some little differing from subtle Brutes: When the vast Regions of
Africa, of Tartary, and other parts of Asia, are no wiser to this day. When the
Roman Eastern Empire so easily parted with Christianity, and is turned to so
much barbarous ignorance; this shows what we are: For these men are all Born
as capable as we.

VII. Especially the sottish Opinions which the Heathen and Mohammedan World do
generally entertain, do tell us how dark a Creature man is. That four parts of
the whole World (if not much more, that is unknown) should receive all the
sottish Opinions as they do, both against the light of Nature (knowing so
little of God) and by such vain conceits of their Prophets and petty Deities:
That above the fifth part of the known World, should receive, and so long and
quietly retain, so sottish an Opinion as Mahometanism is, and Build upon it the
hopes of their Salvation. If the Greek Church can be corrupted into so gross a
foolery, why may not the Latin, and the English, if they had the same
temptations? O what a sad proof is here of humane folly.

VIII. But in the Latin Church (be it spoken without any comparing
Mahometanism with Christianity) the wonder is yet greater, and the discovery of
the fallaciousness of man's understanding is yet more clear: Were there no proof
of it, but the very being of Popery in the World, and the reception of it by
such and so many, it affords the strongest temptation that ever I thought of
in the World, to the Brutist, to question whether Instinct advance not Brutes
above man! The Brutes distrust not their right disposed senses; but the Papists
not only distrust them, but renounce them: Bread is no Bread, and Wine is no
Wine with them, All men's senses are deceived that think otherwise: It is
necessary to Salvation to believe that Gods natural Revelations to sense here
are false, Of this often before.
and not to be believed. Every man that will be saved must believe that Bread
is no Bread, that Quantity, Locality, Color, Weight, Figure, are the Quantity,
Locality, Color, Weight, Figure, of nothing: And God works Grand Miracles by
every Priest, as frequently as he Consecrateth in the Mass: And if any man
refuse to Swear to this Renunciation of Humane Sense, and the Truth of these
Miracles, he must be no Priest, but a combustible Heretic. And if any Temporal
Lord refuse to exterminate all those from their Dominions who will believe
their Senses, and not think it necessary to renounce them as deceived, he must
be Excommunicated and Dispossessed himself, his Subjects absolved from their
Oaths and Allegiance, and his Dominions given to another: And this is their
very Religion, being the Decree of a great General Council, (questioned indeed
by some few Protestants, but not at all by them, but largely vindicated:)
Later. sub. Innoc. 3. Can. 1, 3. The sum is, No man that will not renounce not
only his Humanity, but his Animality, must be suffered to live in any ones
Dominions, and he that will suffer men in his Dominions, must be himself turned
out? this is plain truth: And yet this is the Religion of Popes and Emperors,
and Kings, of Lords and Counselors, of Prelates and Doctors, Universities,
Churches and famous Kingdoms; and such as men, all these wise men dare lay
their Salvation upon; and dare Massacre men by Thousands and Hundred Thousands
upon, and Burn their Neighbors to Ashes upon; and what greater confidence of
certainty can be expressed! And yet shall man be proud of Wit? O what is man! How
dark, how sottish and mad a thing! All these great Princes, Doctors, Cardinals,
Universities and Kingdoms, are Born with Natures as capacious as ours. They are
in other things as wise: They pity us as Heretics, because we will not cease
to be men: The Infidel that denies man's Reason and Immortality, would but
level us with the Brutes, and allow us the pre-eminence among them in subtlety:
But all these Papists Forswear or Renounce that Sense which is common to Brutes
and us, and sentence us either below the Brutes, or unto Hell. Pretend no more,
poor man, to great knowledge* as the sight of a Grave and a rotten Carcass may
humble the Fool that is proud of Beauty, so the thought of the Popish,
Mohammedan and Heathen World, may humble him that is proud of his understanding.
I tell thee, man, thou art capable of that madness as to believe that an Ox or
an Onion is a God; or to believe that a bit of Bread is God; yea more, to
believe as necessary to Salvation that thy own and all men's senses about their
proper objects are deceived, and the Bread which thou see and eatest is no
Bread; yea though it be three times in the three next verses, 1 Cor. 11. Called
Bread after Consecration by an inspired Expositor of Christ's words.

IX. Moreover the poverty of man's understanding appears by the great time and
labor that must be bestowed for Knowledge: We must be Learning as soon as we
have the use of reason, and all our Life must be bestowed in it; I know by
experience; Knowledge will not be got, without long, hard and patient studies;
O what abundance of Books must we read! What abundance of deep Meditations must
we use! What help of Teachers, do we need? And when all is done, how little do
we obtain? Is this an Intellect to be proud of?

X. And it is observable how every man slighteth another Reasons, while he
would have all to magnify his own. All the Arguments that in disputation are
used against him, how frivolous and foolish are they? All the Books that are
written against him, are little better than Nonsense, or Heresy or Blasphemy.
Contempt is answer enough to most that is said against them. And yet the men in
other men's Eyes, are perhaps wiser and better than themselves. Most men are
fools in the judgment of others! Whatever side or party you are of, there are
many parties against you, who all pity your ignorance, and judge you silly
deceived Souls. So that if one man be to be believed of another, and if the
most of mankind be not deceived, we are all poor silly cheated Souls: But if
most be deceived, mankind is a very deceivable creature. How know I that I must
believe you when you befool twenty other Sects, any more than I should believe
those twenty Sects when they as confidently befool you; if no other Evidence
turn the Scales?

XI. And verily I think that the Wars and Contentions, and Distractions of the
Kingdoms of the World, do show us that man is a pitiful, silly deceiveable
thing. I am not at all so sharp against Wars and Soldiers as Erasmus was; But
I should think that if men were wise, they might keep their peace, and save the
lives of thousands, which must be dearly answered for. Were all the Princes of
Christendom as wise as proud wits conceit themselves to be, how easy were it
for them to agree among themselves, and equally to distribute the charge of two
or three Armies, which might quickly shake in pieces the Turks Dominions, and
recover Constantinople, and free the Greek Church from their Captivity.

XII. And what need we more than every days miscarriages to tell us of our
folly* Do we not miss it in one degree or other in almost all that we take in
hand! Hence comes the ruin of Estates, the ill education of Children, the
dissentions among Neighbors and in Families: Parents have scarce wit enough to
breed and teach a Child; Nor Husbands and Wives to live together according to
their Relations; nor Masters to teach their Servants. If I write a Book how
many can find folly and error in it: And I as easily in theirs. If I Preach,
how many faults can the silliest Woman find in it: And I as many perhaps in
other men's. Do we live in such weakness, and shall we not know it?

XIII. And the uncureableness of ancient errors is no small evidence of our
folly: If our ancestors have but been deceived before us, though their error
be never so Palpable, we plead their venerable antiquity, for an honor to
their Ignorance and mistakes: The wisdom of wise ancestors almost dies with
them; But the errors of the mistaken must be Successive, lest they be
dishonored. We will deny reason, and deny Scripture, and deny sense for fear
of being wiser for our Souls than some of our forefathers were.

XIV. The self-destroying courses of mankind, one would think should be enough
to evince man's folly. Who almost suffer but by themselves? Few sicknesses
befall us which folly brings not on us by excess of Eating or Drinking, or by
sloth or some unwise neglect. Few ruins of Estates but by our own folly! Few
calamities in Families and Relations but by our selves! What Churches
distracted and ruined, but by the Pastors and Children of the Church
themselves! What Kingdom ruined without its own procurement. It need not be
said, Quos perdere vult Jupiter hos dementat; It is enough to say, Insaniam
eorum non curat: If he cure not our madness, we shall certainly destroy our
selves. Whose hands kindled all the flames that have wasted the Glory, Wealth
and Peace of England in State and Church except our own? Were they Foreign
Enemies that did it, and still keep open our wounds, or is it our selves? And
yet are we wise men?

XV. But the greatest evidence in all the world of the madness of Mankind, is
the obstinate self-destruction of all the ungodly. Consider but 1. The weight
of the Case; 2. The plainness of the Case; 3. The means used to undeceive them;
4. And yet the number of the madly erroneous; and then bethink you what man's
Understanding is.

1. It is their Souls and everlasting Hopes that are cast away! It is no less
than Heaven and Endless Happiness which they reject: It is no better than Hell
and Endless Misery which they run into; and are these men in their wits?

2. It is themselves that do all this; neither Man nor Devils else could do it:
They do it for nothing: What have the wretches for their Salvation! a few cups
of drink; a filthy Whore; a little preferment or provision for a corruptible
flesh, which must shortly lie and rot in darkness: The applause and breath of
flatterers as silly as themselves. O profane persons, worse than Esau, who will
fell their birthright for so poor a morsel! Come see the madness of Mankind!
It is a doubt to them whether God or a filthy lust should be more loved and
obeyed! It is a doubt with them whether Heaven or Earth be better worth their
labor! Whether Eternity or an inch of Time; whether a Soul or a perishing Body
should be more cared for! Are these wise men? Did I say, It is a doubt? yea
their choice and practice shows that at the present they are resolved:
Vanity, and shadows and dreams are preferred: Heaven is neglected: They are
lovers of pleasure more than God: They set less than a Feather in the balance
against more than all the world, and they choose the first, and neglect the
latter! This is the wise world!

3. And all this they do, against common reason, against daily teaching of
appointed Pastors, against the Judgment of the Learnedest and Wisest men in the
world; against the express Word of God; against the obligation of daily
mercies; against the warnings of many afflictions; against the experience of
all the world, who pronounce all this Vanity which they sell their Souls for;
even while men die daily before their Eyes, and they are certain that they must
shortly die themselves; while they walk over the Churchyard, and tread on the
Graves of those that went before them; yet will they take no warning, but
neglect God and their Souls, and sin on to the very death.

4. And this is not the case only of here and there one; we need not go to
Bedlam to seek them. Alas! in how much more honored and splendid habitations
and conditions may they be found! In what reverend and honorable garbs! And in
how great numbers throughout the world! And these are not only Sots and Idiots,
that never were told of better things; but those that would be accounted witty,
or men of Learning and venerable aspect and esteem. But this is a subject that
we use to Preach on to the people; it being easy, by a multitude of arguments,
to prove the Madness of all ungodly persons. And is this nothing to humble us,
who were naturally like them, and who, so far as we are sinners, are, alas! too
like them still?

XVI. And the fewness of wise men in all Professions, does tell us how rare
true Wisdom is: Among men, whose Wisdom lies in Speculation, where the Effects
of it do not openly difference it much from Prefidence, the difference is not
commonly discerned: A prating Speculator goes for a wise man: But in
Practicals the difference appears by the Effects. All men see, that among
Physicians and Lawyers, those that are excellent are few. And even among the
Godly Preachers of the Gospel, O that it were more easy and common, to meet
with men suited to the majesty, mystery, greatness, necessity and holiness of
their works, that speak to God, and from God, like Divines indeed, and have the
true frame of found Theology ready in their Heads and Hearts; and that in
public and private speak to sinners, as beseems those that believe that they
and we are at the door of Eternity, and that we speak, and they hear for the
life of Souls, and that are uncertain whether ever they shall speak again.
Alas! Lord, thy Treasure is not only in Earthen Vessels, but how ordinarily in
polluted Vessels, and how common are empty sounding Vessels, or such as have
Dirt or Air instead of holy Treasure!

And as for Philosophers and Judicious Speculators in Divinity, do I need to
say, that the number is too small? Of such as are able judiciously to resolve a
difficulty, to answer Cases of Conscience, to defend the Truth, to stop the
mouths of all gainsayers, and to Teach holy Doctrine clearly and in true
Method, without confusion, or running into any extremes? We bless God this
Land, and the other Reformed Churches, have had a laudable degree of this
mercy: The Lord restore it to them and us, and continue the comfortable measure
that we possess.

XVII. And it is a notorious discovery of the common Ignorance, that a wise man
is so hardly known: And men that have not wisdom to imitate them, have not wit
enough to value them: So that as Seneca says, He that will have the pleasure
of wisdom, must be content with it for it self, without Applause: Two or three
approvers must suffice him. The Blind know not who has the best Eyesight.
Swine trample upon Pearls. Nay, it is well if when they have increased
knowledge they increase not sorrow? And become not the mark of Envy and Hatred,
and of the venom of malignant Tongues and Hands, yea and that merely for their
knowledge sake. All the Learning of Socrates, Demosthenes, Cicero, Seneca,
Lucane, and many more; and all the Learning and Piety of Cyprian, and all the
Martyrs of those ages; of Boethius, of the African Bishops that perished by
Hunnerichus; of Peter Ramus, Marlorate, Cranmer, Ridley, Philpot, Bradford and
abundance such, could not keep them from a cruel Death: All the excellency of
Greg. Nazianzene, Chrysostom, and many others could not keep them from
suffering by Orthodox Bishops: no nor all the Holiness and Miracles of Martin.
Insomuch that Nazianzene leaves it to his People as a mark of the man whom he
would have them value and choose, when he was dead. This one thing I require;
that he be one of those that are envyed, not pitied by others: who obey not all
men in all things; but for the love of Truth in some things incurreth men's
offense. And of himself he professes, that, Though most thought otherwise than
he did, that this was nothing to him who cared only for the truth, as that
which must condemn him or absolve him, and make him happy or miserable. But
what other men thought was nothing to him, any more than what another dreameth.
Orat. 27. page 468. And therefore he says, Orat. 26. p. 443. [As for me, I am
a small and poor Pastor, and to speak sparingly, not yet grateful and accepted
with other Pastors, which whether it be done by right judgment and reason, or
by malevolence of mind and study of contention, I know not] -- And Orat. 32. p.
523. [I am tired, while I fight both with Speech and Envy, with Enemies and
with those that are our own: Those strike at the Breast, and obtain not their
desire: For an open Enemy is easily taken heed of: But these come behind my
back and are more troublesome.]

Such obloquy had Hierome, such had Augustine himself, and who knows not that
Envy is Virtues Shadow? And what talk I of others, when all godly men are hated
by the world, and the Apostles and Christ himself were used as they were, and
Christ says, Which of the Prophets did not your Fathers Kill and Persecute,
Math. 23. If Hating, Persecuting, Slandering, Silencing, Killing men that know
more than the rest be a sign of wisdom, the world has been wise since Cains
Age until this.

Even a Galilaeus, a Savonarola, a Campanella, etc. Shall feel it, if they will
be wiser than the rest: So that Solomon's warning, Eccl. 7.16. concerns them
that will save heir Skin; Be not Righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
over wise: Why will thou destroy thy self? But again I may Prognosticate with
Antisthenes in Laert. Then Cities are perishing, when they are not wise enough
to know the good from the bad. And with Cicero, Rhet. 1. That man's safety is
desperate whose Ears are shut against the truth, so that even from a Friend he
cannot hear it.

XVIII. And this leads me to the next discovery, How rare wisdom is in the
world, in that the wisest men and Learned Teachers have so small Success. How
few are much the wiser for them? If they praise them, they will not Learn of
them, till they reach to their degree. Men may delight in the sweetness of
truth themselves; but it is a Feast where few will strive for part with them. A
very few men that have first sprung up in obscure times have had great Success;
So had Origin at Alexandria, and Chrysostom at Constantinople, but with bitter
sauce. Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle at Athens, and Augustine at Hippo had
the most that History makes mention of (with Demosthenes and Cicero in
Oratory;) Melanchthon at Wittenberge (with Luther) and Zwinglius in Helvetia,
and Calvin at Geneva prevailed much: And now and then an age has been fruitful
of Learned, Wise and Godly men: And when we are ready to expect, that each of
these should have a multitude of Scholars like themselves, suddenly all
declineth, and Ignorance and Sensuality get uppermost again. And all this is
because that all men are born Ignorant and Sensual; But no man attaineth to any
excellency of Wisdom, without so long and laborious studies, as the flesh will
give leave to few men to perform. So that he that has most laboriously searched
for knowledge all his days, knows not how to make others partakers of it: No
not his own Children of whom he has the education: Unless it be here and there
one Scaliger, one Paraeus, one Tossanus, one Trelcatius, one Vossius, etc. how
few excellent men do leave one excellent Son behind them! O what would a wise
man give, that he could but bequeath all his wisdom to others when he dies.

XIX. And it is evident that great Knowledge is more rare than Prefidence, in
that the hardest Students, and most knowing men, complain more than others of
Difficulties and Ignorance. When certainly other men have more cause. They that
study a little, know little, and think they know much: They that study very
hard, but not to maturity, often become Sceptick, and think nothing certain. But
they that follow it till they have digested their studies, do find a certainty
in the great and necessary things, but confess their ignorance in abundance of
things which the presumptuous are confident in. I will not leave this out, to
escape the carping of those that will say, that by this Character I proclaim my
self one of the wisest, as long as it is but the confession of my Ignorance
which is their occasion. But I will say as Augustine, to Hierome, Epist. 29.
Adversus eos qui sibi videntur scire quod nesciunt, hoc tutiores sumus, quod
hanc ignorantiam nostram non ignoramus.

XX. Lastly, Every man's nature, in the midst of his pride, is conscious of the
Fallibility and Frailty of his own understanding. And thence it is that men are
so fearful in great matters of being over-reacht. And where ever any conclusion
depends upon a contexture of many proofs, or on any long, operous work of
Reason, men have a natural consciousness of the uncertainty of it. Yea though
our Doctrines of the Immortality of our own Souls, and of the Life of
Retribution after this, and the Truth of the Gospel, have so much certain
Evidence as they have, yet a Lively certain Faith is the more rare and
difficult, because men are so conscious of the fallibility of their own
understandings, that about things unseen and unsensible, they are still apt to
doubt, whether they be not deceived in their apprehensions of the Evidence.

By these twenty instances it is too plain that there is little solid wisdom in
the world; that wise men are few, and those few are but a little wise. And
should not this suffice to make all men, but especially the unlearned,
half-learned, the young and unexperienced, to abate their ungrounded confidence
and to have humble and suspicious thoughts of their own apprehensions.

Chap. 17.
Inference 5. That it is not the dishonor, but the Praise of Christ, his
Apostles and the Gospel, that they speak in a plain manner of the Certain,
Necessary things, without the Vonity of School-uncertainties, and feigned
unprofitable nations.

Council. Carth. 4. Can. 16.
I Have been my self often Scandalized at the Fathers of the 4th Carthage Council,
who forbad Bishops the reading of the Heathens Books; and at some good old
unlearned Christian Bishops who spoke to the same purpose, and often reproach
Apollinaris, Aetius and other Heretics for their Secular or gentile Learning,
Logic, etc. And I wondered that Julian and they should prohibit the same
thing. But one that is so far distant from the action, is not a competent Judge
of the reasons of it. Perhaps there were some Christian Authors then, who were
sufficient for such literature as was best for the Church: Perhaps they saw
that the danger of reading the Heathens Philosophy was like to be greater than
the benefit: Both because it was them that they lived among, and were to gather
the Churches out of, and if they put an honor upon Logic and Philosophy, they
might find it more difficult to draw men from that party which excelled in it,
to the belief of the Scriptures which seemed to have so little of it: And they
had seen also how a mixture of Platonic notions with Christianity, had not
only been the Original of many heresies, but had sadly blemished many great
Doctors of the Churches.

Whatever the cause was, it appears that in those days it was the deepest
insight into the Sacred Scriptures which was reckoned for the most solid
Learning; Philosophy was so confounded by Differences, Sects, Uncertainties,
and Falsehoods, that made it the more despicable, by how much the less pure. And
Logic had so many precarious Rules and Notions, as made it fitter to wrangle
and play with, than to further grave men in their deep and serious enquiry in
the great things of God, and mysteries of Salvation.

But yet it cannot be denied but that true Learning of the Subservient Arts and
Sciences is of so great use, to the accomplishing of man's mind with wisdom,
that it is one of the greatest offenses that ever was taken against Christ and
the holy Scriptures, that so little of this Learning is found in them, in
comparison of what is in Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, or Cicero. But to
remove the danger of this offense, let these things following be well
considered.

I. Every means is to be judged of by its aptitude to its proper use and end:
Morality is the subject and business of the Scriptures: It is not the work of
it to teach men Logic and Philosophy, any more than to teach them Languages:
Who will be offended with Christ for not teaching men Latin, Greek, or Hebrew,
Architecture, Navigation, or Mechanic Arts? And why should they be more
offended with him for not teaching them Astronomy, Geometry, Physics,
Metaphysics, Logic, etc. It was none of his work.

II. Nature is presupposed to Grace; and God in Nature had before given man
sufficient helps to the attainment of so much of the knowledge of Nature, as
was convenient for him. Philosophy is the knowledge of Gods works of Creation.
It was not this (at least chiefly) that man lost by his fall: It was from God,
and not from the Creature that he turned: And it was to the knowledge of God,
rather than of the Creature that he was to be restored. What need one be sent
from Heaven to teach men the order and rules of speaking? Or to teach men those
Arts and Sciences which they can otherwise learn themselves. As it is
presupposed that men have reason, so that they have among them the common helps
and crutches of reason.

III. The truth is, it is much to be suspected, lest as an inordinate desire of
Creature-knowledge was a great part of our first Parents sin; so it has
accordingly corrupted our nature with an answerable vicious inclination
thereunto: Not that the thing in it self is evil to know Gods works; but good
and desirable in its place and measure: But it is such a good as by inordinacy
may become a dangerous evil: Why should we not judge of this desire of knowing
the Creatures, as we do of other Creature-affections? It is lawful and meet to
love all Gods Creatures: His works are good, and therefore amiable. And yet I
think no man is damned but by the inordinate loving of the Creature, turning
his Heart from the love of God. And as our Appetites are lawful and necessary
in themselves; and yet Natures pravity consists much in the prevalency of
them against reason, which is by reasons infirmity, and the inordinacy of the
sensitive Appetite; even so a desire to know Gods works, is natural and good;
but its inordinateness is our pravity and a sinful Lust.

Doubtless the mind and fantasy may find a kind of pleasure in knowing, which
is according to the nature and use of the thing known. When it is vain or low,
and base, the pleasure is vain, and low, and base! When the object is ensnaring
and diverting from higher things, it does this principally by delight. Verily
this inordinate desire of Creature-knowledge is a Lust, a vicious Lust. I have
been guilty of it in some measure my self since I had the use of reason. I have
lived a Life of constant pleasure, gratifying my Intellect and Fantasy with
seeking to know as much as I could know: And if I could not say truly, that I
referred it as a means to the knowledge and love of God, I should say that it
was all sin: But because I have loved it too much for it self, and not referred
it to God more purely and entirely, I must confess that it was never blameless.

And the corruption of the noblest faculty is the worst: The delights of
Eating, Drinking, Venery, are the matter of common Sensuality, when they are
inordinately desired: And is not the inordinate desire of Creature-knowledge,
(if it be desired from the like principle, and to the like ends) as bad or
worse in some respects. Consider,

1. I am sure that it does as much take up and pre-possess the mind, which
should be employed on God, and take up those thoughts and affections which
should be holy. Tell me why one man should be accounted carnal and ungodly, for
delighting to see his own Houses, Fields, Woods, Corn, Rivers, Cattle, etc.
rather than another that has as much delight to peruse a Map of pleasant
Countries (setting aside the covetous desire of having much.) Do we not justly
account it as unfit a work for the Lords day to be for pleasure perusing Maps,
as to be for pleasure viewing the Woods and Fields? Many a poor Student is as
long and perilously entangled in his thoughts and affections, and kept from God
and Heaven, and Holiness, by deep study of Languages, Customs, Countries,
Chronology, Logic, Physics, Mathematics, Metaphysics, Law, etc. as
worldlings are by over-minding the World.

2. And it wastes their precious time as much as other Lusts do. One
Sensualist spends his hours in Gaming, Feasting, Wantonness, idle Courtship,
Hunting, Hawking, Bowling, and other Excess of Sports: Another spends his
precious time in hearing Comedies; and another in reading Play-Books and
Romances; and another in reading true and useful History, and other parts of
useful Learning: And though the matter of the latter be better than the former,
a man may make up the same sensuality in one as in the other; in reading
Mathematics or History, as in reading or beholding, and hearing Comedies.

3. And some turn this Learning to as powerful a perversion of the mind, as
others do their sensual delights. Many think so highly of their Languages and
Chronology, and Philosophy, that secretly they are drawn by it to despise the
Gospel, and to think a holy Life to be but an Employment for Women, and Persons
that live more by Affection than by Judgment: So perniciously does Learning
make them Mad.

4. And abundance make it the Fuel of their pride, and think that they are
excellent Persons, because they have got some Ornaments of the mind; as vain
Women are proud of fine clothes instead of real comeliness and worth. I will
not dishonor some famous Writers by naming them here, lest I seem to take down
their due praise. But in general I may say, that it is more than one, of our
late famous Philological and Grammatical Critics, who openly show so much
pride of their kind of wordy knowledge, as may warn humble men to fear such
temptations, and to see that this Learning may be made a snare.

5. And the worst of all is, that while such Learned men think highly of
themselves for that, they are kept from the knowledge and sense of their sinful
corruption and misery, and feel not the need of a Savior and a Sanctifier;
they cry not for Grace; they seek not after God and everlasting happiness; they
neglect a holy heavenly Life: They take up some easy formalities and words to
make up an Image of Religion of; and then they think that (in their unhumbled,
unsanctified state) they have as good right to be esteemed godly, as any other,
and if any question it, they are accounted proud, self-conceited Phanaticks,
who appropriate the reputation of holiness to themselves: And to question a
Learned Formalists sincerity, (as Martin and Sulpitius Severus did Ithacius
his, and his Fellow Bishops) is to expose himself to the censure of proud
Hypocrisy. Yea, no man is so fit for Church preferment and honor, and to be
the Governor of all the Religious Persons and Affairs, as one of these
unsanctified Learned men is in his own Eyes; from whence it is, that the state
of the Churches is so low in the East and West (the Roman I mean) because those
that have truly no Religion must dispose of Religion, and the Churches of
Christ must be instructed and ruled by his real Enemies; and those that hate
godliness at the heart, must be the Teachers of godliness, and the chief
managers of the sacred work.

Lay all this together, and think whether our inordinate desire of common
Learning, which is the knowledge of the Creature, be not the fruit of Adams Sin.

And if it prove so, consider how far it was the work of Christ to cure it.
Sure he was sent to destroy the works of the Devil (Not Learning, but this
Inordinate desire of it.) And he was to mortify it in the same way, as he
mortified other sinful lusts. Therefore as he mortified venereous and all
sensual Lusts, by holy example, and by condemning them, and calling men off
them to spiritual delights; And as he mortified Worldliness in men, by living
himself a life of Poverty and Inferiority in the World, and calling men off
from the Love of the World, to the Love of God and Glory; Even so no wonder if
he mortified in men, the inordinate desire of greater knowledge, by calling
them up to higher things, and showing them the vanity of this alone. And as he
says, Love not the World, nor the things that are in the World; If any man
love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. When yet the
ordinate love of the World is lawful: And as he says, John 6.27. Labor not
for the meat that perishes, when he means, Labor not for it inordinately:
Even so no wonder if Christ omit this common Philosophy, and if Paul bid them
take heed that none deceive them by vain Philosophy, when it is the Inordinacy
only which they condemn.

If you ask me, when this desire of common Learning is inordinate? I answer 1.
When it is desired most for the fantastical, sensual or intellectual Delight of
Knowing! or from the overvaluing of the thing known? Not but a delight in
knowledge as such is good and lawful, but not as our Chief End. 2. When it is
desired as a step to serve a proud aspiring mind, that we may be magnified as
Learned men: or to serve any Worldly Covetous design. 3. When it is not duly
subordinate and subservient to the Love of God,
and to his Service, and the Common good: If God be not first Intended, and all
our Studies and Learning desired purely as a means to God, that is, as a means
to know him, and to love him, and to please him, and praise him, and do him
service in the World, and enjoy him for ever, but be desired for it self or
Carnal Ends, it is a Carnal lust. 4. When it has a greater measure of our Time
and affection and Industry comparatively than its due; and the study of higher
things is put behind it, or neglected by it, at least in a great degree. 5.
When it comes not in due order, but is taken first and in the hours and place
which higher things should have.

In a word; God, and our duty to him, and the common good, and our Salvation,
are the great and necessary things, in comparison of which, all other things
are vain: As Riches, and Pleasure, with its Appetite, may be used Holily, as
God's mercies, to raise us unto spiritual delights, and to serve him the better
our selves, and to be helpful to others: And for these ends they are given us,
and may be sought and used; when yet, as they are the fuel of Lust, they are
the snares of Satan, the Mammon, the God of this World, the damnation of Souls:
So is it with the knowledge of the creature; sanctified and made serviceable to
God and Holiness, it is of great utility; but out of its place it is poison and
perdition.

Yea, as Appetite and Sensual Delight is Necessary, while we are in a body in
which the Soul must operate and receive: Even so is some knowledge of Creatures
and common things (called Learning) of Necessity, as a means to better. And
while we see, as in a glass, we must not cast away the glass, nor neglect it,
though it be but a help to see the species.

I conclude then, 1. That it is hard to say that any man can know too much,
except it be, 1. Matter of Temptation: 2. And of penal Knowledge, raising
terrors, and tormenting the Soul. In these two cases we may know too much; And
I fear some men's knowledge is much of the first sort. But so far am I from
dissuading any from true knowledge, or studies to attain it, that I think
Ignorance is the Mother, as Pride is the Father of all heresies, and almost all
sins: And that the lazy student shall never be wise, though one may take his
years in the University, the greatness of his Library, or the titles which he
has obtained, instead of Wisdom; and another as slothful, may boast that the
Spirit has saved him the labor of long and hard studies; for my part I shall
account both sorts as they are, and leave them to be admired by such as
themselves: And verily they have their reward. He that will be wise, must spare
no pains, and be diverted by no worldly things, but take wisdom for his welfare
here, and the getting and using it for all his work. Never was slothful, or
impatient, or presumptuous person wise.

2. God has not made and set before us his works in vain: Psalm. 111,
Great and wonderful are all his works, sought out of them that have pleasure
therein: The Image of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness is imprinted on them all.
Who can look up to the Sun and Moon and Stars; to the vast and numerous Globes
above us; to this Earth and all its furniture and inhabitants, and not see the
footsteps of the Great and Wise, and Good Creator, and be edified and made more
holy; that does not use the Eye of sense alone, while he winketh with the eye
of reason? Our Redeemer came to recover us to the Knowledge, Love and
Obedience, of our Creator, and by Faith to lead us up to the love of God, and
to sanctify us to our Makers praise and Service. Far was it from his design to
call us from studying the works of Creation; which he prepares us better to
understand and use: Nor would he deprive Reason of its Spectacles, but help us
to better, than we had before. Man's wit and Tongue are apt to be so irregular,
that we have need of the Rules of true Logic to keep them to order, and save
them from deceit. Too little true Logic and Philosophy is much of their
unhappiness who think they have enough, to deserve veneration and applause.

3. But all this is dreaming, insignificant, incoherent nonsense, deliration,
worse than Childrens chat (as it troubles the world more) if God be not the
Beginning, Guide, and End of it, and if we know not how to please him and be
saved; And if all Learning be not directly or indirectly a Learning to know God
and life eternal: When Conscience is awakened all things are as dreams and
signify nothing in comparison of God and Life eternal, to be obtained by
Christ. When men come to die, the most Learned die in this mind. And further
than it is Divine and Holy and Felicitating, they cry out of all their Fame and
Learning, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. Though Learning be the most
splendid of all Vanities: Fear God and Keep his Commandments, is the end of
true Learning, and the whole Learning of Man. Of writing many Books there is no
end; and much reading is a weariness to the flesh, and he that increases
Knowledge Contracteth Envy and Contradiction, and increases sorrow: But
sanctified Learning makes a man indeed; so it be true, and not false pretended
Learning.

4. Therefore the industry of a man's study, the most of his time, the Zeal of
his Soul, must be laid out on God, and the great and endless concernments of
his own and others Souls; And Learning must be Desired, Esteemed, Sought and
Used, according to its usefulness to these high and glorious Ends: Then it is
the lower part of wisdom: Which all that want it must esteem and honor, and
desire: Else it is a dream and folly, which leaves the awakened Soul in shame.
But I have been too long on this.

IV. Consider next, that as this lower sort of Learning is presupposed by
Christ as true, and the desire of it Cured as it is a lust; so Plainness and
Intelligibleness were altogether necessary to his ends; what came he on Earth
to do, but to reconcile us to God, and make known his Kingdom, and his Love to
sinners: To procure us pardon and a Spirit of Vivification, Illumination, and
Sanctification? And the word that must be the means of this must be fitted to
its end, and be intelligible to the unlearned; or else he should have been the
Savior of a few Learned men only, and not of the World. Kings and Parliaments
write their Laws in a style suitable to the matter: And so do men draw up their
Covenants; and Princes their Pardons, and Physicians their Bills and
Directions: And none of these uses to write a Grammar or Logic instead of
their proper work, nor to fill their writings, with Ludicrous, Logical Tricks,
and Toys. He that is but to tell men how to be saved from sin and Hell, and
brought to Heaven, and live so here that he may live with God and Angels for
ever, must speak in plainness and in good earnest.

V. And consider that the Scripture is not void of so much Logic and
Philosophy as is suitable to its design. In a well flesht body the distinction
and compagination of the parts are hid, which in an ugly Sceleton are
discerned. So the Scripture is a Body of Essentials, Integrals and Accidentals
of Religion, and every unstudied fellow cannot anatomize it: But it has its
real and excellent Method, for all that it is hid to the unskilful. There is a
Method of Scripture Theology, which is the most accurate that ever the World
knew in Morality. I have drawn up the Body of Theology into Schemes. In which I
doubt not but I have shown, that the Method of Theology contained in the holy
Scriptures, is more accurate than any Logical Author does prescribe: And the
Lords Prayer and Decalogue, especially will prove this, when truly opened: And
the Doctrine of of the Trinity and the Baptismal Covenant, is the Foundation of
all true method of Physics, and Morality in the World. What if a novice cannot
Anatomize Cicero or Demosthenes, does it follow that they are immethodical?
Brand-miller and Flaccher upon the Scripture Text, and Steph. Tzegedine,
Sohnius, Gomarus, Dudley Fenner, and many others upon the Body of Theology have
gone far in opening the Scripture Method. But more may be yet done.

VI. Consider also that the Eternal Wisdom, Word and Son of God our Redeemer,
is the Fountain and giver of all Knowledge: Nature to be restored, and Grace to
restore it, are in his hands. He is that true Light that lighteneth every one
that comes into the World: The Light of Nature and Arts, and Sciences are from
his Spirit and Teaching, as well as the Gospel. Whether Clemens Alexandrinus
and some other Ancients were in the right or not, when they taught that
Philosophy is one way by which men come to Salvation, it is certain that they
are in the right, that say it is now the gift of Christ: And that as the Light
which goes before Sunrising (yea which in the night is reflected from the
Moon,) is from the Sun, as well as its more glorious Beams; So the Knowledge of
Socrates, Plato, Zeno, Cicero, Antonine, Epictetus, Seneca, Plutarch, were from
the Wisdom and Word of God, the Redeemer of the World even by a lower gift of
his Spirit, as well as the Gospel and higher illumination: And shall Christ be
thought void, of what he gives to so many in the World?

VII. Lastly, Let it be considered above all that the grand difference between
the teaching of Christ and other men, is that he teaches effectively (as God
spoke when he Created, and as he said to Lazarus, Arise.) He gives wisdom by
giving the Holy Ghost: All other Teachers speak but to the Ears; but he only
speaks to the Heart: Were it not for this he would have no Church. -- I
should never have else believed in him my self, nor would any other, seriously
and savingly. Aristotle and Plato speak but words, but Christ speaks LIFE and
LIGHT, and LOVE, in all Countries, through all Ages to this day. This above all
is his witness in the World. He will not do his work on Souls, by ludicrous
enticing words of the Pedantick wisdom of the World; but by illuminating Minds,
and changing Hearts and Lives by his effectual operations on the Heart. God
used not more Rhetoric nor Logic than a Philosopher, when he said only [Let
there be Light,] but he used more Power. Indeed the first Chapter of Genesis
(though abused by Ignorants and Cabalists) has more true Philosophy in it than
the presumptuous will understand, (as my worthy Friend Mr. Samuel Got lately
gone to God, has manifested in his excellent Philosophy, (excepting the style
and some few presumptions.) But operations are the glorious Oratory of God, and
his wisdom shines in his works, and in things beseeming the Heavenly Majesty,
and not in childish Laces and Toys of Wit.

Let us therefore cease quarrelling, and learn wisdom of God, instead of
teaching and reprehending him. Let us magnify the mercy and wisdom of our
Redeemer, who has brought Life and Immortality to light, and certified us of
the matters of the World above, as beseemed a Messenger sent from God; and has
taught us according to the matter and our capacity, and not with trifling
childish notions.

Chap. XVIII.
Inference VI. The true and false ways of restoring the Churches, and healing
our Divisions, hence opened and made plain.

HAving opened to you our Disease, it is easy, were not the Disease it self
against it, to discern the Cure. Pretended knowledge has corrupted and divided
the Christian World. Therefore it must be CERTAIN VERITIES which must Restore
us, and Unite us. And these must be Things PLAIN and NECESSARY, and such as God
has designed to this very use, or else they will never do the work. One would
think that it should be enough to satisfy men of this, 1. To read Scripture.
2. To peruse the terms of Concord in the Primitive Church. 3. To peruse the sad
Histories of the Churches Discord and Divisions, and the Causes. 4. To peruse
the state of the World at this day, and make use of Universal Experience. 5. To
know what a Christian is, what Baptism is, and what a Church is. 6. To know
what Man is, and that they themselves, and the Churches are but Men. But penal
and sinful Infatuation has many Ages been upon the minds of those in the
Christian World, who were most concerned in the Cure, and our sin is our
misery, as I think, to the damned it will be the chief part of their Hell.

But this subject is so great and needful, and that which the Wounds and Blood
of the Christian World do cry for a skilful Cure of, that I will not thrust it
into this corner, but design to write a Treatise of it by it self, as a second
part of this.

This Book is since Printed with some Alteration, and called, The true and Only
way of the Concord of the Churches.

Chap. XIX.
Of the Causes of this Disease of Prefidence, or Proud Pretended Knowledge, in
order to the Cure.

THE Cure of Prefidence and pretended knowledge could it be wrought, would be
the Cure of Souls, Families, Churches and Kingdoms. But alas, how low are our
hopes? yet that may be done on some, which will not be done on all or most. And
to know the causes, and oppugn them, is the chief part of the Cure, so far as
it may be hoped for.

1. The first and grand cause is the very Nature of ignorance it self; which
many ways disableth men, from knowing that which should abate their groundless
confidence. For 1. An ignorant man knows but little parcels and scraps of
things: And all the rest is unknown to him: Therefore he fixes upon that
little which he knows, and having no knowledge of the rest, he cannot
regulate his narrow apprehensions by any conceptions of them. And all things
visible to us (not light it self excepted which as seen by us is Fire
incorporated in Air) being Compounds, the very Nature or Being of them, is not
known where any Constitutive part is unknown. And in all Compounds each part
has such relation and usefulness to others, that one part which seems known
is it self but half known, for want of the knowledge of others. Such a kind of
knowledge is theirs that knowing only what they see, do take a Clock or Watch
to be only the Index moving by the Hours, being ignorant of all the causal
parts within: Or that know no more of a Tree or other Plant, than the
Magnitude, Site, Color, Odor, etc. Or that take a man to be only a Body
without a Soul; or the Body to be only the Skin and Parts discerned by the Eye
in converse.

Now that which such persons do sensibly apprehend, they are confident of,
because that Nature teaches them to trust their senses: But not knowing the
rest, their little partial conceptions are lame, defective and deceitful. For
most will hence rashly conclude of the Negative, that There is no more, because
they know no more. But if any be more wise and modest, yet do they want the
conception of the unknown parts, to make the rest to be true Knowledge, or to
tell them what is yet unknown: And such use to turn a Judicial Rule, into a
Physical, that non apparere and non esse are to them all one.

2. And an Ignorant man does not know what Conceptions other men have of the
same things which he is ignorant of: So that he neither knows the thing
intelligible (what it is) nor yet the Act of Knowing it, which he never had:
But as a man born blind has no formal conception either of sight, or of light,
or visible objects; so is it here.

3. Nor has he usually a true Knowledge of his own Ignorance; how imperfect
his understanding is, and how much to be suspected, as liable to mistake:
Though in some sensible matters it is easy to convince men of a total
Ignorance; yet when they know any thing, it is hard to convince them what more
is to be known, and to keep them from false and hasty conclusions. A man that
cannot read at all, is easily convinced that he cannot read: But he that can
read a little, is apt to think that he reads rightly when he does not. A man
that never heard of Physic, is easily convinced that he has no skill in it:
But if he have read, heard of, and tried a few Medicines, he is apt to grow
conceited, and venture men's lives upon his skill. A man that never saw
Building, Navigation, or any Art or Manufacture, is easily convinced that he is
ignorant of it: But if he have got some smattering knowledge, he is ready to
think that it is more than it is, because he knows not what he wants.

And to err, and know that a man erreth (at the same time, about the same
thing) is a contradiction: For he that erreth judges a falsehood to be a truth:
But to know that so to judge, is to err, is certainly not so to judge: For
Intellectus vult verum, that is, Truth is the object which it is naturally
inclined to. The same light which discovers Error cures it: And that light
which discovers the Thing it self, is it that must convince me that I before
erred about it, by misapprehensions.

4. And an ignorant man does not so much as know the difficulties of the case,
and what may be said on the other side: What contrary Evidence convinces
others, or what weight there is in the objections, which are or may be brought
against him. So that all men being naturally ignorant, and little being known
for much that is unknown, even to the wisest; alas, the temptation to Error and
false Confidence is so strong, that few escape it.

II. Another cause of it is, the Radical Master sin of Pride: An unhumbled
mind; never well acquainted with its own dark and erroneous condition, and its
great need of natural and supernatural helps. I find it hard to convince men of
this; but the formentioned Effects do certainly prove it. The Vice is Born with
us at the very Heart. It is the Devils Image: He that is not naturally proud is
not a Son of Adam: It lives first, and dies last: And there is nothing that a
man is apter to be proud of than his Reason, which is his Humanity, and next to
that of his Goodness, and of his Greatness. Men perceive not this in
themselves, because they know not what Pride is while it rules in them. They
think that it is only some womanish or childish extrinsical Ostentation,
(boasting) or perking up above others in Garb and Place, or Peacock-like
looking upon their own Train, or setting it up for others to look on. But Pride
is (as I said before) an over-valuing our selves, and a desire that others
should overvalue us: And how few be there that be not tickled when their
wisdom is applauded, and netled when it is accounted small: It Is hard to bear
to be accounted and reported a Fool, or a Person of little Wit. Many a man
spends all the studies of his Life, more for a Fame of Learning than for
Learning it self; what is Pride if this be not? What grosser Pride, than for a
Woman or unexperienced Lad, to scorn and despise the eldest and hardest
Students in Divinity as dark Souls in comparison of them? The Quakers in their
Shops, when I go along London Streets, say, Alas, poor man, thou art yet in
darkness: They have often come into the Congregation, (when I had liberty to
Preach Christ's Gospel) and cried out against me as a Deceiver of the people.
They have followed me Home, Crying out in the Streets, The day of the Lord is
coming, when thou shall perish as a Deceiver. They have stood in the
Marketplace, and under my Window year after year, Crying out to the people,
Take heed of your Priests, they deceive your Souls: And if they saw any one
wear a Lace or neat clothing, they cried to me, These are the fruit of thy
Ministry. If they spoke to me with greatest ignorance or nonsense, it was with
as much fury and rage, as if a bloody Heart had appeared in their Faces; so
that though I never hurt, or occasioned the hurt of one of them, that I know
of, their truculent countenances told me what they would have done had I been
in their power: (This was 1656, 57, 58, 59.) And yet they were poorly clothed:
(Some of them went through the Streets stark naked) and cried out over and over
all the year, [Woe to the Proud.] Wonderful! wonderful! O the blindness of a
corrupted mind! That these poor Souls did not perceive their superlative Pride.
How highly did these people think of their own wisdom and holiness, while they
cried down Laces, Points and Cuffs?

And when did I ever know either a true Church-Tyrant, or a true Sectarian
Separating Humorist, which were not both notorious proud over-valuers of their
own conceits. To which those that bowed not must be persecuted as unruly
Schismatics by the one sort, and Excommunicated, Separated from, and Damned as
Ungodly, Carnal or Antichristian by the other sort?

Several ways does PRIDE cause pretended knowledge. 1. By thinking that our
understandings are so good as that without great study we can know truth from
falsehood; and so making us venture to judge of things at the first hearing or
reading; which we cannot be capable of judging of under long and diligent
studies: Because recipitur ad modum recipientis. Therefore it is that when a
man by great success in Studies has made things as plain as words can make
them, so that you would think that all Students should presently be wise at
easy rates by the light which he has set up to them, they are half as long in
Learning for all that, as if he had never given them such a help. And therefore
it is that we cannot leave our Learning to Posterity; Because still the stop is
in the Receivers incapacity. And he cannot be capable of the plainest precepts,
but by much time and study.

2. Pride makes men hasty in concluding, because they are not humbled to a
just Suspicion of their own apprehensions. And men stay not to prove and try
things, before they judge.

3. Pride makes men insensible how much they are ignorant of, in all their
Knowledge.

4. And it causes men to slight the Reasons and Judgments of other men, by
which they might learn, or at least might be taught to Judge considerately, and
suspend their own.

If over-valuing a man's own apprehensions be Pride ( as it is) then certainly
Pride is one of the commonest sins in the world, and particularly among men
professing godliness who upon every poor surmise or report are condemning those
that they do not thoroughly know, and in every petty controversy, they are all
still in the right, though of never so many minds.

III Another cause of Pretended Knowledge is the want of a truly tender
Conscience: Which should make men fear, lest they should err, lest they should
deserve the curse of putting light for darkness, and darkness for light; evil
for good, Isa. 5.20.
and good for evil: and should make them afraid lest they should defile their
minds, resist the truth, blaspheme God or Dishonor him, by fathering Errors on
him, and lest they should prove snares to men's Souls, and a Scandal and Trouble
to the Church of God. A tender Conscience would not have espoused such opinions
under a year or two or manies deliberation, which an Antinomian, or other
Sectary will take up in a few days, (if they were true.) O says, the tender
Conscience, what if I should Err, and prove a Snare to Souls, and a Scandal and
Dishonor to the Church of God, etc.

IV. Another cause of Pretended Knowledge is a blind Zeal for Knowledge and
Godliness in the General, while men know not what it is that they are zealous
of. They think that it is a necessary part of sincerity, to receive the Truth
speedily without delay: And therefore they take a present concluding, for a
true Receiving it. And he that soonest takes up that which is offered him,
probably as a part of Godliness, is taken for the most resolved downright
convert. Which is true in case of Evident Truths, where it is the will that by
vice suspendeth the mind. But not in dark and doubtful cases.

V. Another cause is, an inordinate trust in man: When some admire the learned
too much, and some the Religious, and some this or that particular person, and
therefore build too confidently on their words: Some on great men, some on the
Multitude, but most on men of fame for great Learning, or great Piety. A credit
is to be given by every learner to his Teacher: But the confounding this with
o^ Belief of God, and making it a part of our Religion, and not trusting man as
man only, that is, as a fallible Wight, does cause this Vice of Pretended
Knowledge, to pass with millions for Divine Faith. Especially when men embody
themselves into a Sect as the only Orthodox or Godly party, or as the only true
Church (as the Papists do) then it emboldeneth them to believe any thing which
their Sect or Church believes. For they think that this is the Churches Faith,
which cannot err, or is the safest: And that God would not let so many good men
err. And thus they that should be made their Teachers, and the Helpers of their
Faith, become the Lords of it, and almost their Gods.

VI. And it much increases this sin, that men are not sufficiently acquainted
with the Original and Additional Corruption of man's nature, and know not how
Blind all Mankind is. Alas man is a dark Creature! What error may he not hold.
What villainy may he not do? Yea and maintain? Truly said David, All men are
Liars. Pitifully do many expound this, as an effect of his unbelief and
passion, because he says, ( I said it my haste;] When it is no more than Paul
says; Let God be true, and every man a Liar, Romans 3. And than Solomon and
Isaiah say, All men are Vanity: And Jeremy, cursed be he that trusts in man:
All men are untrusty in a great degree! Weak, False, and Bad. And his haste was
either as Dr. Hammond translateth it, his Flight, or else that his Trial and
distress made him more passionately sensible of the Vanity or Untrustiness of
man, than he was at other times. For Vanity and a Lie to the Hebrews were words
of the same importance, signifying Deceivableness and untrustiness. And indeed
among mankind there is so great a degree of Impotency, Selfishness,
Timorousness, Ignorance, Error, and Viciousness, as that few wicked men are to
be believed, where there is any strong Temptation to lying. And the Devil is
seldom unprovided of Temptations: And abundance of Hypocrites are as untrusty
as open wicked men: And abundance of sincere Godly persons, especially Women,
have loose Tongues, and hasty passions, and a stretching Conscience, but
specially injudicious heads, so that frequently they know not truth from
falsehood, nor have the tenderness of Conscience to be silent till they know: So
that if one say it, another will say it, till a hundred say it, and then it
goes for current truth.

Good-mens overmuch credulity of one another has filled the Church with Lies
and Fables: Many of the Papists S^^^rstitions, Purgatory, praying to Saints and
Angels, pray^^ for the dead, etc. were bred by this credulity: It is so visible
in Venerable Beda, Gregory the first, yea before them in Sulpitius Severus of
Martius Life, and abundance more, that to help up Christianity among the
Pagans, they laid hold of any old Woman's or Ignorant Man's Dreams, and Visions,
and stories of pretended Miracles and Revelations, that it made even Melchior
Canus, cry out of the shameful Ridiculous filth that hence had filled their
Legends: Even Baronius upon Trial, retains no small number of them, and with
his Brethren the Oratorians on their Prophesying days told them to the people.
I am ashamed that I recited one out of him before my Treatise of Crucifying the
World, though I did it not, as persuading any that it was true: For I quickly
saw, that Sophronious on whom he fathered it, was none of the reporters of it,
that Book being spurious, and none of Sophronius his work.

Indeed I know of such impudent false History lately Printed of matters of
public fact in these times, yea diverse concerning my own Words and Actions, by
persons that are far from Contemptible, that Strangers and Posterity will
scarce believe that humane nature could be guilty of it in the open light. And
I know it to be so customary a thing, for the Zealots professing the fear of
God, on one side and the other, to receive and rashly tell about lies of one
another, that I confess I am grown to take little heed of what such say in such
a case, unless the report continue a year uncontrolled! For it is common for
them to tell those things as unquestionable, which a few months prove false:
And yet never to manifest any repentance, but to go on with the like; one month
disproving what the former hatched and vended.

And indeed the very wisest and best of men are guilty of so much Ignorance,
Temerity, Suspiciousness of others partiality, etc. That we must believe them
(though far sooner than others, yet) still with a reserv^ ^o change our minds,
if we find them mistaken, (...) still on supposition that they are fallible
persons, and that all men are Liars.

VII. Another great cause of pretended false Knowledge and Confidence is the
unhappy prejudices which our minds contract even in our Childhood, before we
have time and wit and Conscience to try things, by true deliberation. Children
and Youth must receive much upon trust, or else they can learn nothing: But
then they have not wit to proportion their apprehensions to the Evidence,
whether of Credibility or Certainty: And so fame and tradition, and education
and the Countries Vote, do become the ordinary Parents of many Lies; and folly
makes us to fasten so fearlesly in our f^rst apprehensions, that they keep
open the door to abundance of more falsehoods; And it must be clear Teachers, or
great impartial studies, of a self-denying mind, with a great blessing of God,
that must deliver us from prejudice, and undeceive us. And therefore all the
World sees, that almost all men are of the Religion of their Country or their
Parents, be it never so absurd; Though with the Mahometans they believe the
Nonsense of a very sot, (once reading a quarter of whose Alcoran one would
think should cure a man of Common reason, of any inclination to his belief.)
And among the Japonians even the eloquent Bonzii believe in Amida and Xaca; To
mention the belief of the Chinenses, the People of Pegu, Siam, and many other
such; yea the Americans, the Brasilians, Lappians, etc. that correspond with
Devils, would be a sad instance of the unhappiness of men's first apprehensions
and education. And what does the foresaid instance of Popery come short herein,
which tells us how Prejudice and Education, and Company, can make men deny all
men's common sense, and believe common unseen Miracles pretended in the stead?

VIII. Another cause is the mistaking of the nature of the duty of submitting
our judgment to our Superiors and Teachers, especially to the Multitude or the
Church, or Antiquity: No doubt but much reverence and a humane belief, is due
to the Judgment of our Teachers credibly made known. But this is another thing*
quite different, 1. From knowing by Evidence. 2. And from believing God; (of
which before and after.)

IX. Another cause is base slothfulness, which makes men take up with the
judgment of those in most reputation (for Power, Wisdom, or Number) to save
them the labor of searching after the scientifical Evidence of things; or the
certain Evidence of Divine Revelations.

X. Another frequent cause is, an appearance of something in the Truth, which
frighteneth men from it; either for want of a clear, methodical, advantageous
representation; or by some difficult objection; or some miscarriage in the
utterance, carriage, or life of them that seem most zealous for it: such little
things deceive dark man: And when he is turned from the Truth, he thinks that
the contrary Error may be embraced without fear.

XI. Another great cause of Confidence in false Conceits, is the bias of some
personal Interest prevailing with a corrupted Will, and the mixture of Sense
and Passion in the Judgment. For, as interested men hardly believe what seems
against them, and easily believe that which they would have to be true; so
Sense and Passion (or Affections) usually so bear down Reason, that they think
it their right to possess the Throne. Not but that Sense is the only discerner
of its own sensible Object as such, (and Reason by Sense as it is
intelligible:) But that is not the matter in hand. But the Sensualist forces
his Reason to call that Best for him, which his Sense is most delighted with,
and that Worst which most offends Sense. The Drunkard will easily judge that
his drinking is good for him, and the Glutton that his pleasant meats are
lawful, and the Time-waster that his Plays are lawful, and the Fornicator, the
wrathful revenger, etc. that their lusts and passions are lawful, because they
think that they have Feeling on their side. It Is hard to carry an upright
Judgment against Sense and Passion.

XII. Sometimes a strong deluded Imagination, makes men exceeding confident in
Error; some by Melancholy, and some by a natural weakness of Reason, and
strength of Fantasy; and some by misapprehensions in Religion, grow to think
that every strong conceit which does but come in suddenly, at reading, or
hearing, or thinking on such a Text, or in time of earnest prayer, especially
if it deeply affect themselves, is certainly some suggestion or inspiration of
God's Spirit. And hence many Errors have troubled poor Souls and the Church of
God, which afterward they have themselves retracted. Hence are the confidence
of some ignorant Christians in expounding difficult Scriptures Prophecies; and
the boldness of others in expounding dark Providence; and also in foretelling
by their own surmises things to come.

XIII. And not a few run into this mischief in some extremes, by seeing others
run into Error on the other side. Some are so offended at the credulity of the
weak, that they will grow confident against plain certainties themselves. As
because there are many feigned Miracles, Apparitions, Possessions and
Witchcrafts in the World, divulged by the Credulity of the injudicious;
therefore they will more foolishly be confident that there are no such things
at all. And because they see some weak persons impute more of their opinions,
performances and affections to God's Spirit, than they ought; therefore they
grow mad against the true operations of the Spirit, and confident that there is
no such thing. Some deride Praying by the Spirit, and Preaching by the Spirit,
and Living by the Spirit; when as they may as well deride understanding,
willing, working by a Reasonable Soul; no holy thing being holily done without
God's Spirit, any more than any act of life and reason without the Soul: And
they may on the same grounds deride all that Live not after the flesh, and that
are Christians, Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. or that Love God, or that seek
Salvation. Yea, some run so far from spiritual Fanaticisms, that they deny the
very Being of Spirits; and many confidently set up a dead Image of true
Religion, in bitter hatred and opposition of all that has Life and serious
Holiness: So mad are some made by seeing some feverish persons dote.

XIV. Another Cause is conversing only with those of our own mind and side, and
interest, and not seeking familiar loving acquaintance with those that differ
from us: Whereby men deprive themselves of hearing half that is to be heard,
and of knowing much that is to be known. And their proud Vice hardens them in
this way, to say, I have read, and I have heard enough of them; I know all that
they can say: And if a man soberly speak to them, their Vices of Pride,
Presumption and Passion will scarce patiently bear him to go on without
interruption to the end; but the Wizzard says, I know already what you will
say, and you are tedious; and do you think that so wise a man as I, has
nothing to do but hear such a Fool as you talk? Thus proud men are ordinarily
so full of themselves, that they can scarce endure to hear, or at least learn
any thing from others, nor restrain their violent list to speak so long as
either just information, or humane civility requires.

XV. Another Cause is Malignity and want of Christian Love; whereby men are
brought if not to a hatred, yet to a proud contempt of others, who are not of
their mind, and side, and way. O they are all -- as foolish and bad as any one
has list to call them; and he that raileth at them most ingeniously, and
impudently, gives them but their due. And will a man full of Himself and his
Own, be moved from his presumptions, by any thing that such a hated or scorned
people can say? Nay, will he not be hardened in his self-conceit, because it is
such as these that contradict him?

Many such Causes of this Vice there be, but PRIDE and IGNORANCE are the proper
Parents of it, whatever else be the Nurse or Friend.

Chap. XX.
Objections answered.

I Easily foresee that besides the foresaid impediments, all these following
Objections will hinder the Cure of false pretended knowledge and
self-conceitedness, and false Belief, if they be not answered.

Obj. I. You move men to an Impossibility: To see without light; and for an
erring man to believe that he erreth. He that has not light to see the truth,
has not light to see his ignorance of it: This is no more than to persuade all
men to be wise and not to err; which you may do long enough to little purpose.

Ans. It is impossible indeed for an erring man, while such, to know that he
erreth: but it is not impossible 1. For an ignorant man to know that he is
ignorant, (nor for a man without light or sight to know that he sees not;
though he cannot see that he sees not.) For though Nescience be Nothing; and
Nothing is not properly and directly an Object of our Knowledge, no more than
of our Sight: Yet as we see the limited quantity of substances, and so know
little from big, by concluding that it has no more quantity than we see; so we
know our own knowledge, both as to Object and Act, and we know the degree of
it, and to what it does extend: And so can conclude, I know no more: And though
Nescience be nothing, yet this Proposition, [I know no more] is not nothing.
And so nothing is usually said to be known Reductively; but indeed it is not
properly known at all; but this proposition de nihilo is known, which is
something* (I will not here meddle with the question, whether God know
non-entities.)

2. To think and to know are not all one: For I may think that I may know, that
is, I study to know: Now I can know that I study or think; and I can perceive
that my studies reach not what I desire to reach, but fall short of
satisfaction: And so as in the Body, though emptiness be nothing, and therefore
not felt as nothing, yet a hungry man feels it in the consequents, by
accident; that is, feels that by which he knows that he is empty: And so it
is with a Student as to knowledge.

3. And a man that has so much experience as we all have of the stated
darkness of our understandings, and frequent errors, may well know that this
understanding is to be suspected, and so blind a Guide not over-confidently and
rashly to be trusted.

4. And a man that knows the danger of Error, may know that it is a thing
that he should fear: And fear should make him cautelous.

5. And though an erring man while such cannot know that he erreth, yet by the
aforesaid means he may cease to err, and know that he has erred.

6. And lastly, It is a shame for a man to be unacquainted with himself, and
especially with his understanding, and not to know the measure of his knowledge
it self.

Obj. II. You talk like a Cartesian that must have all that would know, suppose
first that they know nothing, no not that he feels and lives.

Ans. No such matter: Some things, we know necessarily, and cannot choose but
know: For the Intellect is not free of it self, but only as quoad exercitium
actus, it is sub imperio voluntatis: And it is vain to bid men not to know what
they cannot choose but know: And it is as vain to tell them that they must
suppose (falsely) that they know not what they know, as a means to know: For
ignorance is no means to knowledge, but knowledge is: One act of knowledge
being necessary to more, and therefore not to be denied. I have told you before
what certainties are, which must be known and never forsaken.

Obj. III. But your discourse plainly tends to draw men to Skepticism, and to
doubt of all things.

Ans. 1. I tell you I describe to you many certainties not to be doubted of. 2.
And it is indeed your prefidence that tends to Skepticism, as is showed: For
men that believe hastily and falsely, find themselves so often deceived, that at
last they begin to doubt of all things: It is Skepticism which I prevent. 3.
But I confess to you that I am less afraid of Skepticism in the World than ever
I was; as finding corrupt nature so universally disposed the contrary way. As
when I first saw the Books of Jacob Behmen, and some such others, I adventured
to Prognosticate, that the Church would never be much endangered by that Sect,
or any other which a man cannot understand and join in without great study and
acuteness; because few men will be at so much labor; even so I say of
Skepticism; here and there a hard-impatient half-knowing Student may turn
Sceptick; but never any great number: For Pride and Ignorance, and other causes
of self-conceitedness are Born in all men, and every man that apprehends any
thing, is naturally apt to be too confident of his apprehensions; and few will
have the humility to suspect themselves; or the patience and diligence to find
out difficulties. I must say in my Experience, that except the Congregation
which I long instructed, and some few-such, I meet with few Women, Boys, or
unlearned men, when they are past 18 or 20 years old, but they are in conceit
wiser than I, and are still in the right, and I am in the wrong, in things
Natural, Civil, Religious, or almost any thing we talk of, if I say not as they
say; and it is so hard to abate their confidence, or convince them, that I have
half ceased to endeavor it, but let every one believe and say what he will, so
it be not to the dishonor of God, the wrong of others, and the hazard of his
Salvation: For I take it for granted beforehand, that contradiction ofter
causes strife than instruction; and when they take not themselves for
Scholars, they seldom learn much of any but themselves: And their own thoughts
and experience must teach them that in many years which from an Experienced man
they might have cheaplier learnt, in a few days.

Obj. IV. You speak against taking things on trust, and so would keep Children
from Believing and Learning of their Parents and Masters, and from growing wise.

Ans. I often tell you that humane faith is a necessary help to Divine Faith; But
it must not be mistaken for Divine Faith. Men are to be believed as fallible
men: But in some things with diffidence; and in some things with confidence,
and in some things, (where it is not the speakers credit that we rely upon, but
a Concurrence of Testimonies, which make up a natural certainty) Belief and
Knowledge go together, and the thing is sure. But man is not God.

Obj. V. May not a man more safely and Confidently believe by the Churches
Faith, than his own! That is, take that for more certain which all men believe,
than that which I think I see a Divine word for my self?

Ans. This is a Popish Objection thus confusedly and fallaciously often made.
1. Properly, No man can believe by any faith but his own, any more than
understand with any understanding but his own. But the meaning being, that we
may better trust to the Churches Judgment, that this or that is Gods word, than
to our own persuasion that it is Gods word, from the Evidence of the
Revelation. I further answer, 2. That the Churches Judgment is one part of our
subordinate motive; and therefore not to be put in competition with that Divine
Evidence which it is always put in Conjunction with. And the Churches Teaching,
is the means of my coming to know the true Evidences of Divinity in the word.
And the Churches real Holiness caused by that word, is one of the Evidences
themselves, and not the least. Now to put the question, Whether I must know the
Scripture to be Gods word because I discern the Evidences of its Divinity, or
rather because the Church Teaches me that it is Gods word, or because the
Church says it is Gods word, or because the Church is Sanctified by it, are
all vain questions; setting things conjunct and coordinate as opposite. 1. By
the Churches Judgment or Belief, I am moved to a high Reverence of Gods word,
by a very high Humane Faith, supposing it credible that it may be Gods word
indeed. 2. Next by the Churches (or Ministers) Teaching, the Evidences of
Divinity are made known to me. 3. The Effect of it, in the Churches Holiness is
one of these Evidences. 4. And by that and all other Evidences, I know that it
is Gods word. 5. And therefore believe it to be true. This is the true Order
and Resolution of our Faith.

3. But because the Popish Method is, barely to believe the Scripture to be
Gods word, because a Pope and his Council judges so, I add, 1. That we have
even of that humane sort of Testimony far more than such. For theirs is the
Testimony of a self exalting Sect of Christians, about the third part of the
Christian world: But we have also the Testimony of them and of all other
Christians; and in most or much of the matter of Fact, (that the Scriptures
were delivered down from the Apostles) the Testimony of some Heathens and
abundance of Heretics. 2. And with these we have the Evidences of Divinity
themselves. 3. But if we had their Churches (or Pope and Councils) Decrees for
it alone, we should take it but for a humane Fallible Testimony.

For, 1. They cannot plead Gods word here as the proof of their Infallibility:
For it is the supposed question, what is Gods word, which (they say) cannot be
known but by their Infallible Judgment. 2. And they cannot plead number; for,
1. The Mahometans are more than the Christians in the world ( Brierwood
reckons that they are six parts of thirty, and we but five.) And yet not
therefore Infallible nor Credible. 2. And the Heathens are more than the
Mahometans and Christians (being four sixth parts, of the world,) and yet not
infallible. But of this I have the last week wrote a Book of the certainty of
Christianity without Popery; and heretofore my safe Religion and others.

Obj. VI. At least this way of Believing and Knowing things by proper Evidences
of Truth, will loosen the common sort of Christians, (even the godly) from
their Faith and Religion: For whereas now they quietly go on without doubting,
as receiving the Scriptures from the Church or their Teachers as the word of
God, when they fall on searching after proofs, they will be in danger of being
overcome by difficulties, and filled with doubts, if not apostatizing to
Infidelity, or turning Papists.

Ans. Either these persons have already the Knowledge of Certain Evidence of
the Divinity of the Scripture, or Christianity, or they have none. If they have
any the way of studying it more will not take it from them, but increase it:
Else you dishonor Christianity to think that he that knows it to be of God,
will think otherwise if he do but better try it. Upon search he will not know
less, but more.

But if he have no such certainty already, 2. I further answer, that I take
away from him none of that humane belief which he had before: If the belief of
his Parents, Teachers or the Church only, did satisfy him before, which was but
a strong probability, I leave with him the same help, and probability and only
persuade him to add more, and surer arguments. And therefore that should not
weaken, but confirm his Faith.

Obj. But you tell him that the Churches or his Teachers Judgment or word is
uncertain, and that sets him on doubting.

Ans. 1. I tell him of all the Strength and Credibility that is in it, which I
would have him make use of. 2. And it is not alone, but by his Teachers help
that I would have him seek for certainty. 3. But if he did take that Testimony
for certain which was not certain; If he took man for God, or took his
Teachers, or Pope for inspired Prophets, and a humane Testimony for Divine, do
you think that this error should be cherished, or cured? I think that God nor
Man have no true need of a lie in this case; and that lies seldom further men's
Salvation? And that though they do some job of present service the next way, at
the end we shall find that they did more harm than good. And that to say the
contrary, and that men will cease to be Christians unless they be kept to it by
deceit, is the way to downright infidelity.

And yet that you may see how much more than ordinary I favor the weaknesses
of such, I will here answer a great question.

Quest. Whether a Man can have true saving Faith,
who believes the Gospel or Scripture to be Gods word, and Christ to be the
Savior of the World, upon reasons or grounds not sure nor cogent and
concluding; yea possibly not true, for the most part.

Ans. He that reads Mr. Pinks excellent Sermons, and many other such Divines,
will find them thus describing the Faith of Hypocrites, (that they conclude
have no true saving Faith) that they believe in Christ, but on the same or like
reasons as a Turk may believe in Mahomet, that is, because the most, the
greatest, the Learned and the best, and all the Country are of their minds,
and in that way their Parents did educate them in. For my part, I easily
confess, 1. That such a belief which builds on unsound grounds, is wanting
proportionably in its own soundness; 2. And that it should not be rested in; 3.
Much less cherished against all counsels that would cure it. 4. And that though
uncertain reasons are, 1. The first, 2. And the most prevailing with him
afterward, yet every true Believer discerns some intrinsic Signs of
Divinity at least as probable in the Word it self. But yet supposing that wrong
motives be his chief, and that he discerns not that in the word it self which
most prevails with him, I am of opinion that, 1. If the end of such a
Believer be sound, (the reducing of the Soul to God, and attainment of Glory,
and the perfect Love of God.) 2. And if that man unfeignedly believe all that
is Gods Word to be true. 3. And if he believe all the substance of the Gospel
to be Gods word, though by an unsound and non-concluding medium as his chief.
4. And if he by this belief be brought himself to the actual love of God as
God; This unsound Believer is sound in the Essentials of Christianity, and
shall be saved.

The objection is, An uncertain, yea deceived belief upon false suppositions,
is no true belief, and therefore cannot save.

I answer, There is a double Truth in such a belief, 1. That all Gods Word is
true. 2. That this Gospel is Gods Word, and Christ is the Messiah.

You will say that there can be no more, no surer, no better in the Conclusion,
than is in the weaker of the Premises. Of which see Smiglicius Logicks, and
Albertinus in his Philosoph. Disputat. at large.
I answer, I grant it. And all that will follow is, that the Conclusion is not
necessary from these Premises; and that the believer was mistaken in the reason
of his inference, and that he concluded a truth upon an unsound medium; I grant
all this, and consequently that his Faith has some unsoundness or diseasedness
in it. But for all this, I see not but such a believer may be saved. 1. Because
Christ's promise is, that whoever believes in him shall not perish, but have
everlasting life, without excepting such as are drawn to it by non-cogent
arguments. And he that will put in an exception against the Covenant of Grace,
must prove it, or be injurious to Christ, to his Gospel and to men's Souls.

2. Because by experience I find, that it is but a small part of serious Godly
Christians, who believe the Scriptures upon cogent evidence, (or at least many
do not:) But abundance take it upon trust from Godly Preachers or Parents, and
go on without much examining of their grounds; And are not able to bring a
cogent proof of the Divinity of the Scriptures, when they are called to it: And
I am not willing to conclude so great a part of humble upright Christians, to
Damnation, as know not such reasons for their Faith as would hold good in
strict disputation. Not that our Charity must bend the Scripture to it. But
that Scripture commands such Charity; and it no where condemns any man that
believes upon uncogent reasons. For he that does so, may yet firmly Trust on
Jesus Christ, and firmly believe that the Gospel is true, as being the very
Word of God, and may take Heaven for his Portion, and Love God, as God, and
therefore may be saved. Though yet I think it impossible that any man should
truly believe the Scriptures, and not perceive in them some Characters of
Divinity, which as an intrinsical Evidence much encourage and induce him to
believe them; And-though this secret gust and perception be not the medium that
he uses in arguing, or be not the chief, yet it may have an effectual force
with his Soul to hold him close to Christ. But if you suppose the man to have
no Spiritual sight and taste of a difference between Gods Word and a common
Book, then he cannot be supposed to be a sound believer.

As a man that has one ingredient in his medicine which is effectual, may be
cured, though in the composition the main bulk be vanities; or as a debtor that
has many insufficient sureties, may do well if he have one sufficient one,
though he more trust the rest; or as a man's cause may go for him in Judgment
that has one or two good Witnesses, and twenty bad ones which he put more
trust in; and as he truly proves his position, who brings one sound argument
for it, and twenty bad ones; So I think that the common way of the illiterate
in believing is, first to believe Gods Word to be his Word by humane Faith; and
after upon trial to find a Spiritual light and goodness in the Word it self,
and by both together to believe that it is Gods Word. And the worser reasons
may be the more powerful with him, and yet not destroy the sincerity of his
Faith.

Nor does this make his Faith merely humane: For the Question now is not, why
he believes God's Word to be True, and trusts on it: For that is, because it
is God's Word (discerned by him so to be) but he that by an insufficient Medium
(at least with a Better, though less understood) does take it to be God's, may
yet by a Divine Faith believe it, because he judges it his Word.

If a man should counterfeit himself an Angel from Heaven, and come in some
splendid deceitful appearance in the night to an Heathen, and tell him that he
is sent from God to bring him this Bible as his Certain Word, and if the man
receive it, and believe it on his credit to the death, and by that Believing it
be brought to see an excellency and credibility, and taste a spiritual
sweetness in it, and be brought by it (as he may be) to Holiness and the Love
of God, that man shall be saved, though I cannot say that the Intrinsic
Evidence of the Word alone would have prevailed with him without that false
belief of a deceiver: When it is once become a Sanctifying Belief, then there
is no doubt but the Man has better Evidence than the uncertain word of man: He
has the witness in himself. And it is not a Glorifying Faith, till it be a
Sanctifying Faith. But the Question is, What soundness of Reason or proof that
this is God's Word, is necessary to make it a Sanctifying Faith? at least, as
most prevalent and trusted in?

By this you may know what I judge of the Faith of honest illiterate Papists,
and of illiterate Protestants, for a great number of them, who live in Love and
Obedience to God.

And yet to speak both more concisely and distinctly, I. I may believe by
Historical Tradition all that matter of Fact, which those that saw Christ's and
the Apostles Miracles, and heard their words, did know by sense, and those that
saw not believed on the credit of the reporters. II. And yet I may know by
reason, through God's help, that these Miracles, and this Scripture Impress and
Efficacy are God's attestation; and none but God could do it. And of this all
Believers have some perception in various degrees. III. And then we know it to
be true, because it is sealed by those attestations, and is the Word of God.

Obj. VII. But would you have men take the matters of Fact for uncertain (that
this is a true Bible and Copy, and was given the Church by the Apostles, etc.)
and so not pretend to be certain of them.

Ans. I have often said, and elsewhere largely proved, that as, 1. A Humane Faith
of highest probability prepares the way; so 2. These things are known by an
Historical Evidence, which has a proper certainty above mere Humane Faith: For
Humane Faith rests on men's Veracity or Fidelity, which is uncertain: But
there is a History (such as that there is such a City as Rome, Venice, etc.)
which is evident by a surer ground than men's fidelity; even from such a
concurrence of consenters and circumstances, as will prove a forgery impossible.

Obj. VIII. You seem to favor the Popish Doctrine of Ignorance, while you
would have all our Knowledge confined to a few plain and easy things, and
persuade men to doubt of all the rest.

Ans. 1. I persuade no man to doubt of that which he is certain of, but not to
lie, and say he is certain when he is not. 2. I am so far from encouraging
Ignorance, that it is Ignorance of your Ignorance which I reprove: I would have
all men know as much as possibly they can of all that God has revealed. And if
the self-conceited knew more, they would doubt more; and as they grow wiser,
will grow less confident in uncertainties. It is not knowing, but false
pretending to know, that I am against. Do you think that a thousand
self-conceited men and women do really know ever the more, for saying they
know, or crying down that Ignorance, Doubting and Uncertainty which they have
themselves? How many a one (yea Preachers) have cried down the Popish Doctrine
of Uncertainty of Salvation, who had no Certainty of their own; but their
neighbors thought by their lives were certainly in the way to Hell.

Obj. IX. But you would have men resist the Spirit that convinces them, and
make so long a work in doubting, and questioning, and proving every thing, as
that Christians will come but to little knowledge in your way.

Ans. They will have the more knowledge, and not the less for trying.
Peremptory confidence is not knowledge. The next way here is farthest about.
Receive all Evidence from God and Man, from the Word and Spirit with all the
desire, and all the delight, and all the speed that possibly you can: Study
earnestly; Learn willingly; Resist no Light; neglect no Truth. But what is all
this to foolish conceit that you know what you do not? What Is this to the hasty
believing of falsehoods, or uncertainties, and troubling the Church and World
with self-conceit and dreams? I remember two or three of my old acquaintance,
who suddenly received from a Seducer the Opinion of Perfection, that we might
be perfectly sinless in this life: And because I denied it, they carried it as
if I had pleaded for sin against perfection; and they presently took themselves
to be perfect and sinless, because they had got the Opinion that some are such.
I told them that I desired Perfection as well as they, and that I was far from
hindering or dissuading any from Perfection; but wished them to let us see that
they are so indeed, and never to sin more in thought, word or deed: And ere
long they forsook all Religion, and by Drunkenness, Fornication and
Licentiousness, showed us their Perfection. So here, it is not a conceit that
men have Faith and Knowledge, and quickly saying, I believe; or turning to the
Priest or Party that persuades them, which makes them ever the wiser men, or
true Believers.

Obj. X. But that may seem certain to another which seems uncertain or false
to you: Therefore every man must go according to his own Light.

Ans. 1. Nothing is Certain which is not true: If that seem True to you which
is False, this is your Error: And is every man, or any man bound to err, and
believe a falsehood? Being is before Knowing: If it Be not true, you may Think
it to be so (which is that which I would cure;) but you cannot Know it to be
so; much less be Certain of it. 2. If it be Certain to you, it is Evidently
True: And if so, hold it fast and spare not: It is not any man's Certainty, but
Error, which I oppose.

Obj. XI. But if we must write or utter nothing but Certainties, you would have
but a small Library.

Ans. 1. The World might well spare a great many uncertain Writings. 2. But I
say not that you must think, say or write nothing but Certainties: There is a
lawful, and in some cases necessary exercise of our understandings about
Probabilities and Possibilities. The Husbandman when he ploweth and sows is
not certain of an increase. 1. But call not that certain which is not. 2. And
be not as vehement and peremptory in it as if it were a Certainty. 3. And
separate your Certainties and Probabilities asunder, that confusion fill not
your minds with Error.

Obj. XII. While you persuade us to be so diffident of men's reports, and to
suspend our belief of what men say, you speak against the Laws of Converse.

Ans. I persuade you not to deny any man such a Belief as is his due: But give
him no more. If a man profess himself a Christian, and say that he sincerely
believes in Christ, and consents to his Covenant, though you may perceive no
ascertaining Evidence that he says true, yet you must believe him, because he
is the only opener of his own mind, and the Laws of God, and Human Converse
require it. But what is this believing him? Not taking it for a certain truth:
But taking it for a thing probable, which may be true for ought you know, and
which you must hope is true; and this in different degrees according to the
different degrees of the Persons credibility.

If you hear men confidently report any News in these times, when half that we
hear often proves false, you may believe the reporter as a fallible Person, that
is, believe that he does not wilfully Lie, and so not uncivilly contradict him;
and yet suspend your belief of the thing it self, and whether he took it up
rashly on uncertain rumors.

But if you hear a man speak evil of another behind his Back, when the thing is
not notorious and certain otherways, the Law of Justice and Charity obliges
you not to believe him, but to suspend your belief till you hear both sides, or
have surer proof; yea, and to suspend, not with an indifferency, but with a
hope that it is not true which he speaks.

Obj. XIII. But then I shall be as uncharitable in judging the Reporter (who
perhaps is a godly man) to be a Liar and Slanderer, as I should be in believing
that the other is guilty.

Ans. 1. I say not that you are to conclude that certainly he lies, and that
it is false, but to suspend your belief, and to hope that it is false. 2. He that
makes himself the accuser of another man behind his Back, in a way of talk,
does expose himself to that disadvantage, and makes it our duty to begin our
charitable Opinion on the side of him that is accused, and rather to hope that
he is innocent (caeteris paribus) than the accuser. For God forbids
backbiting and slandering, and bids us speak evil of no man. And he that in
our hearing backbiteth and speaks evil (how godly otherwise soever) without a
clear necessary cause, does forfeit our Charity and Belief, more than a man can
do whom we do not see or hear. For if I was bound to judge him innocent before
this backbiting, I am bound so to judge him still. Therefore I do but continue
that good Opinion of my Neighbor which I was bound to: And that I must suspect
the backbiter of a Lie, is the consequent of his own act, and long of himself.
For I cannot believe contraries: And it is not his backbiting which will
disoblige me from my former duty, of judging the other innocent. So that it is
the reporter that casts away the reputation of his own veracity.

Obj. XIV. When you have written all this against pretended knowledge, who is
more guilty than your self? Who so oppresses his Reader with distinctions? Are
all your large Writings evident certainties? Even those Controversies in which
you have so many Adversaries?

Ans. I put in this objection, because I have a Book (called Methodus
Theologiae) which I know will occasion such thoughts in many Readers. But 1. It
is one thing to assert uncertainties; and another thing to anatomize, and
distinctly, and methodically, explain a certain truth. In all my large
writings, if you find that I call any thing certain which is uncertain, that
is, which I give not ascertaining evidence of, acquaint me with the
particulars, and I shall retract them.

2. I never persuaded any man to write or say no more than all men certainly
know already, no not all Learned Divines: For then how should we receive
edification. Subjective certainty is as various as men's Intellects, where no
two are of a size. And objective certainty must be tried by the evidence, and
not by other men's consenting to it. Nor must a Major Vote of Dissenters go for
a proof of objective uncertainty: For Heathens are more than the rest of the
World; and Mahometans more than Christians; and Papists more than Protestants;
and the ungodly more than the godly; and yet this is no proof of our own, or
the things uncertainty.

3. Part of my writings are against uncertainties; and to deliver the Church
from false Opinions that go for certainties; and these are they that have most
contradicters: And may I not write against false and uncertain Opinions which
Religion is corrupted with, and defend the ancient simplicity, without being
guilty of the introduction of uncertainties my self.

4. I deny not but I have many things that are uncertain: But then I
acknowledge them uncertain; and treat of them but as they are.

5. Lastly, If really my writings are guilty of that which I here reprehend,
(false pretended knowledge) the sin is never the better for that, nor my
accusation of it, ever the less true, nor your duty to avoid it ever the less.
Think what you will of me, so you will but think rightly of sin and duty. If I
go contrary to my Doctrine, and you can prove it, take warning by me, and do
not you the like.

Chap. XXI.
Directions for the cure of Pretended Knowledge, or Self-conceit.

Because I must not often repeat the same things, I must refer the Reader to what
I have more fully said of this in 27 Directions for certainty of Knowledge in
my Christian Directory, Part 3. Chap. 7.
THE Cure of this Plague of Prefidence of Pretended Knowledge is it which all
the rest is written for; and must now be the last in Execution as it was the
first in my intention. And could men be persuaded to this following course it
might be done: But natures vicious inclination to the vice, and the Commonness
and Strength of Temptations to it, do make me expect to prevail but with a few.

Direct. I. Labor to understand the true Nature and Principles of Certainty
before opened. False measures will make you judge Certainties to be Falsehoods
or Uncertain, and Falsehoods to be certain truths. And when you know the
conditions of certainty, try all things by them accurately; And if any would by
art, persuade you of the uncertainty of Natures just perceptions (by Sense or
Intellect) remember that be they what they will, you have no better or surer:
They are such as our Creator has given you to trust to for your use, even for
the ends of life.

Direct. II. Discern the helps of Knowledge from Knowledge or Certainty itself.
Believing your Teachers as men, and believing Historians according to their
Credibility and Reverencing the Judgment of Seniors, and of the Church, are all
preparative helps to Certainty; And humane Faith is such as to Divine Faith.
But do not therefore think that it is the same: Nor give men that prerogative
of Infallibility which belongs to God, or to inspired Prophets who prove
their word by Gods attestation. The belief of Logicians is needful to your
understanding Logic, and Logic is a great help to your certain discerning of
Physical and Metaphysical and Moral Verities. And yet many Rules of your Logic
may be uncertain, and you must not take the helps of your Knowledge, for
Evidence it self.

Some think that nothing is known till we have Second notions for it, or can
define it: When things sensible are better known by sensing them, and usually
second notions deceive men and make them doubt of what they better apprehended
without them.

Be very suspicious of all words or terms; 1. As ambiguous, as almost all are:
And therefore he that cannot distinguish them must needs err by confusion: 2.
Lest you take the Names for Things, most disputes using to carry Controversies
de nomine as if they were de re, or slide from this into that.

Dir. III. Therefore also trust not too far to the artificial forms of Argument
without or instead of the Evidence of the truth of the thing it self. For there
are many things supposed to the infallibility of your Art, which may not
themselves be infallibly true: And man's wit is conscious of its own
Fallibility, and therefore is doubtful lest it should be deceived in its
collections and ratiocinations; Especially when the Engine has many tacklings,
and the Chain many links, we are still in doubt lest some one should break: But
the Evidence of the thing in its own reality, which is not wholly laid on the
form of an artificial argument, (which is of great use) does satisfy more.

Direct. IV. Take truths in Order; the Principles first, and the rest in their
true Exurgence and Dependence upon them; And take nothing to be well known
which is not known, not only in a Method, but in a Method clearly suitable to
the things: As Words and Notions, so Rules and Methods must be fetched from the
Things, and fitted to the Things, or they are vain. Sense, and Intellect must
first perceive the things themselves, and be your first Tutors in Somatology
and Pneumatology; And then these must do much in making your Logic. The Foot
must be the measure of the Shoe. And remember that you have but a half,
fallacious Knowledge, till you know the True Place and Order, and Respects, of
the thing, as well as the nature and quality of it in it self; and till you can
draw up a True Scheme of the things which you know; It is dreams that are
incoherent.

Direct. V. Let the great Radical Verities have your greatest confidence, and
not only so, but the most of your thoughts and Estimation and time; and
proportionably let the lesser things have but that share of your Esteem and
Time, and Studies, which they deserve; (which comparatively will be little.)
And make them the test of what is further offered to you: And believe nothing
which is certainly contrary to them. Argue always a notioribus, and reduce not
certainties to uncertainties, but contrarily.

Direct. VI. Keep all your perceptions distinct according to the distinction of
their natures; Let both your Books and your Intellects be like an Apothecaries
Shop, where there are different Boxes with different Titles for different
things. Let sensible perceptions be by themselves: And the Intellective
perception of things sensate be by themselves: And the Intellective perception
of its own and the wills Acts be by themselves: And the collection of the
nature of Spirits and Intellective Agents thence, be by themselves; and the
knowledge of Principles, Physical and Moral, be by themselves: And the
certainty of Conclusions be ranked according to the Variety of their degrees:
The confusion of these different things, causes so confused a kind of
Knowledge, as is next to no Knowledge, and fitter to trouble than to satisfy.

Direct. VII. Look to all things, or as many as is possible: When half is
unknown the other half is not half known. Respicere ad omnia is proper to God:
Respicere ad plurima is necessary to the competent wisdom of a man: To be of a
narrow mind and prospect, is the property of the Ignorant and Erroneous. He
that sees only a hand or foot knows not what a man is by it: And he that
sees only a word knows not by that what a Sentence is; Gods works are all
one: I know not what we shall see in Commenius his Pansophy, which they say is
yet to see the Light; how far he has reduced all Sciences to one. But I little
doubt but they may and should be all reduced to two, which are as the Soul and
Body that yet make up one man, though not one nature, viz. 1. The (...) or Real
part, distinguished into that of Substances and of Modes (where Morality comes
in, etc.) 2. The Organical part, which fitteth words and Notions to Things. And
I am sure that as the Knowledge of one thing or of many much conduces to
further Knowledge; so the Ignorance of one thing conduces to ignorance and
error about others: It is here as in the Knowledge of a Clock or Watch or
Musical Instrument: Know all or you know little, and next to none. No man is a
fit Judge of Church affairs, who has not the State of the World in some good
measure in his Eye; else he will be like most Sectaries who Judge and Talk and
Live, as if the World were no bigger than their Synagogues or Sects. He must
have all the Scripture in his Eye, and all the Body of Divinity and all the
World in his Eye; and God himself who is more than all, who will not by a
narrow mind be cheated into a multitude of Errors. There are abundance of
truths unknown to you, which were they known, would rectify your other Errors.

D. VIII. Conclude not hastily of Negatives. You may easilier know that you do
know what you do know, than know what it is that you do not know. It does not
follow that there is no more, because you know no more. St. John tells you,
that if all that Christ did should be written, the World could not contain the
Books: You cannot therefore conclude from what is recorded, that he said and
did no more than is recorded: Though I am sure against Popery, by my sense and
intellect, that there is real Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, I am not sure by
sense that there is no spiritual Body of Christ: The Negative must be otherwise
proved. I am sure by my five senses (as they are commonly distinguished and
numbered) that there are existent all the sensible qualities which are their
objects: But whether the World may not have more sensible qualities, suited to
many other sort of senses, which we have no conception, notion or name of, is a
thing that no mortal man can know.

You hear many things, and know many things by another man, which make his
cause seem bad: But do you know how many more things may be existent unknown to
you, which if you knew, would change your Judgment?

Allow still room and supposition for abundance of unknown things, which may
come hereafter to your knowledge, and make things seem to you quite other than
they do. How can you possibly know how much more may be unknown to you? If I
have a Servant that stays out much longer than I expected, I may conjecture
that he could have no business to stay him, but his negligence: But there may
be many accidents to cause it, which I cannot judge of till I hear him speak.

D. IX. Be sure that you suspect your first apprehensions of things, and take
few conceptions (conclusive) for certain that are not digested. Fasten not over
tenaciously upon Opinions in the beginning at the first hearing: Take it for
granted that your first conceptions of things must alter, either as to the
Truth, or the Evidence, or the Order, or the Degree. Few men are so happy in
youth, as to receive at first such right impressions, which need not after to
be much altered. When we are Children, we know as Children; but when we become
Men, childish things are done away. Where we change not our Judgment of the
matter, yet we come to have very different apprehensions of it. I would not
have Boys to be mere Scepticks (for they must be Godly and Christians.) But I
would have them leave room for increase of knowledge, and not be too peremptory
with their juvenile conceptions, but suppose that a further light will give
them another prospect of the same things.

D. X. Choose such Teachers, if possible, as have themselves attained the things
you seek; even that most substantial Wisdom which leads to Salvation. For how
else shall they teach others what they have not learnt themselves! O the
difference between Teachers and Teachers! between a rash flashy unexperienced
proud wit, and clear headed, well studied, much experienced, and godly man!
Happy is he that has such a Teacher, that is long exercised in the ways of
Truth, and Holiness, and Peace, and has a heart to value him!

D. XI. Value Truth for Goodness, and Goodness above Truth; and estimate all
Truths and Knowledge by their usefulness to higher Ends. That is Good as a
Means, which does Good. There is nothing besides God that is simply Good, in,
of, and for it self; all else is only Good derivatively from God the Efficient,
and as a Means to God the final Cause. As a pound of Gold more enricheth than
many loads of Dirt: so a little Knowledge of great and necessary matters,
makes one wiser, than a great deal of pedantick toyish Learning. No man has
time and capacity for all things: He is but a proud fool that would seem to
know all, and deny his ignorance in many things. Even he that with Alstedius,
etc. can write an Encyclopaedia, is still unacquainted with abundance that is
intelligible. For my own part, I humbly thank God, that by placing my dwelling
still as in the Churchyard, he has led me to choose still the studies which I
thought were fittest for a man that is posting to another world. He that must
needs be ignorant of many things, should choose to omit those which he can best
spare. Distinguish well between studying and knowing for Use, and for Lust: For
the True Ends of Knowledge, and for the bare delight of Knowing. One thing is
necessary, Luke 10.42. And all others but as they are necessary to that one.
Mortify the Lust of useless Knowledge as well as other lusts of flesh and
fantasy. Dying men commonly call it Vanity. Remember what a deal of precious
Time it wastes; and from how many greater and more necessary things it does
divert the mind; and with what wind it puffs men up; as is aforesaid. How
justly did the rude Tartarians think the great Libraries, and multitudes of
Doctors, and idle Priests, among the Chinenses to be a foolery, and call them
away from their Books to Arms (as Palafox tells us) when all their Learning was
to so little purpose as it was, and led them to no more high and necessary
things?

D. XII. Yet because many smaller parts of Knowledge are necessary to Kingdoms,
Academies and Churches, which are not necessary nor greatly valuable to
individual persons; let some few particular persons be bred up to an eminency
in those studies, and let not the generality of Students waste their time
therein. There is scarce any part of Knowledge so small and useless, but it is
necessary to great Societies that some be Masters of it, which yet the
generality may well spare. And all are to be valued and honored according to
their several excellencies. But yet I cannot have while to study as long as
Politian how Virgil should be spelt; nor to decide the quarrels between Phil.
Pareus and Gruter, nor to digest all his Grammatical Collections, nor to read
all over abundance of Books which I allow house room to. Nor to learn all the
Languages and Arts which I could wish to know, if I could know them without
neglecting greater things. But yet the excellent Professors of them all I
honor.

D. XIII. Above all, Value, Digest, and seriously Live upon the most Great and
Necessary Certain Truths: O that we knew what Work (inward and outward) the
great Truths of Salvation call for from us all! If you do not faithfully value
and improve these, you prepare for delusion: You forget your Premises and
Principles: God may justly leave you in the dark, and give you up to believe a
lie. Did you live according to the importance of your certain Principles, your
lives would be filled with fruit, and business, and delight, and all this
Great: So that you would have little mind or leisure for little and unnecessary
things. It is the neglect of things necessary, which fills the World with the
trouble of things unnecessary.

D. XIV. Study hard, and search diligently and deeply, and that with unwearied
patience and delight. Unpleasant studies tire and seldom prosper. Slight
running thoughts accomplish little. If any man think that the Spirit is given
to save us the labor of hard and long studies, Solomon has spent so many
Chapters in calling them, to dig, search, cry, labor, wait for Wisdom, that if
that will not undeceive them, I cannot: They may as well say, that God's
blessing is to save the Husbandman the labor of plowing and sowing: And that
the Spirit is given to save men the labor of learning to read the Bible, or to
hear it, or think of it, or to pray to God. Whereas the Spirit is given us to
provoke and enable us to study hard, and read, and hear, and pray hard, and to
prosper us herein.

And as vain are our idle Lads that think that their natural Wits, or their
Abode and Degrees in the Universities, will serve the turn instead of hard
studies! And so they come out almost as ignorant, and yet more proud than they
went thither, to be Plagues in all Countries where they come, to teach others
by example the idleness and sensuality which they learnt themselves; and being
ignorant, yet the honor of their Functions must be maintained, and therefore
their ignorance must be hid, which yet themselves do weekly make ostentation of
in the Pulpit, where they should be shining lights; and when their own Tongues
have proclaimed it, those of understanding that observe and loath it, must be
maligned and railed at for knowing how little their Teachers know.

Nothing without long and hard studies furnishes the mind with such a stock of
truth, as may be called real wisdom. That God is the rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, (and not of the lazy neglecters of him) is the second
Principle in Religion, Heb. 11.6. They that cannot be at this labor, must be
content to know but little, and not take on them to know much. For they are not
able to discern truth from falsehood: But while they sleep the Tares are sowed:
Or while they open the Door, all crowd in that can come first; and they cannot
make a just separation. Ignorant Persons will swarm with errors; and he that
erreth will think that he is in the right: And if he think that it is a divine
and necessary truth which he embraces, how zealously may he pursue it?

D. XV. Take heed of a byas of Carnal Interest, and of the disturbing Passions
which selfish partiality will be apt to raise. Men may verily think that they
sincerely love the truth, when the secret power of a carnal interest, their
honor, their profit or pleasure, is it that turns about their judgment, and
furnishes them with Arguments, and whets their Wits, and makes them
passionately confident, and they are not aware of it. Is your worldly interest
on that side that your opinion is for? Though that prove it not false, it
proves that you should be very suspicious of your selves.

D. XVI. Keep up unfeigned fervent love to others, even as to your selves. And
then you will not contemn their Persons and their Arguments, beyond certain
cause. You will not turn to passionate contentions, and reproaches of them when
you differ; and the reverence of your Elders, Teachers, Superiors, will make
you more ready to suspect your selves than them. Most of our self-conceited
pretenders to knowledge have lost their love and reverence of Dissenters, and
are bold despisers of the Persons, reasons and writings of all that contradict
their error. And most that venture to cast the Churches into flames, and their
Brethren into silence and sufferings, that they may plant their own opinions,
are great despisers of those that they afflict, and either hate them, or would
make them hateful, lest they should be thought to be unjust in using them like
hateful Persons. Love that thinks not evil of others, 1 Cor. 13.
is not apt to vaunt it self.

D. XVII. Reverence the Church of God, but give not up your understandings
absolutely to any men; but take heed of taking any Church Sect or Party instead
of the Infallible God. With the Universal Church you must Embody and hold
Concord: It is certain that it erreth not from the Essentials of Christianity:
Otherwise the Church were no Church, no Christians, and could not be saved: If
a Papist say, [and which is this Church?] I answer him, It is the Universality
of Christians, or all that hold these Essentials; and when I say that this
Church cannot fall from these Essentials, I do but say it cannot cease to be a
Church: The Church is constituted of, and known by the Essentials of Faith; and
not the Essentials of Faith constituted by the Church, nor so known by it;
though it be known by it as the Teacher of it.

He that deserteth the Christian Universality, (in deed though not in words)
and cleaves too close to any Sect, (whether Papal or any other) will be
carried down the stream by that Sect, and will fill his understanding with all
their errors and uncertainties, and confound them with the certain truths of
God, to make up a mixed Religion with; and the reverence of his Party, Church or
Sect, will blind his mind, and make him think all this his duty.

D. XVIII. Fear Error and ungrounded Confidence. Consider all the mischiefs of
it, which the World has long felt, and the Churches in East and West are
distracted by unto this day; and which I have opened to you before. He that
fears not a sin and mischief is most unlikely to escape it. A tender
Conscience cannot be bold and rash, where the interest of God, the Church, and
his own and others Souls is so much concerned: When you are invited to turn
Papist, or Quaker, or Anabaptist, or Antinomian, or Separatist, think, What if
it should prove an Error; and as great an Error as many godly learned men
affirm it to be? Alas what a gulf should I plunge my Soul in? What injury
should I do the Truth? What wrong to Souls? And shall I rashly venture on such
a danger, any more than I would do on Fornication, Drunkenness, or other sin?
And does not the sad example of this Age, as well as all former Ages warn you
to be fearful of what you entertain? O what promising, what hopeful, what
confident Persons, have dreadfully miscarried, and when they once began to roll
down the Hill, have not stopped till some of them arrived at Infidelity and
Profaneness, and others involved us all in confusions? And yet shall we not
fear, but rage and be confident?

And to see on the other side what darkness and delusion has fallen upon
thousands of the Papal Clergy, and what their Error has cost the World,
should make those that are that way inclined also fear.

Direct. XIX. Above all pray and labor for a truly humble mind, that is well
acquainted with its own defects; and fear and fly from a proud overvaluing of
your own understanding. Be thankful for any Knowledge that you have, but take
heed of thinking it greater than it is. The Devils Sin, and the imitation of
Adam, are not the way to have the illumination of Gods Spirit. It is not more
usual with God to bring low those that are Proud of Greatness, than to leave to
folly, deceit and error, those that are proud of Wisdom; and to leave to Sin
and Wickedness those that are proud of Goodness. A Proud understanding cannot
be brought to suspect it self, but is confident of its first undigested
apprehensions: It either feels no need of the Spirits light, but despises it
as a fancy; or else it grows conceited that all its conceptions are of the
Spirit, and is proud of that Spirit which he has not. Nothing makes this
peremptory confidence in false conceits so common, as Pride of a knowledge
which men have not. Would the Lord but humble these persons thoroughly, they
would think, Alas! What a dark deceitful mind have I? how unfit to despise the
judgment of them that have labored for knowledge far more than I have done,
and how unfit to be confident against such as know much more than I?

But so deep and common is this Pride, that they that go in rags, and they that
think themselves unworthy to live, and are ready to despair in the sense of
Sin, do yet ordinarily so overvalue their own apprehensions, that even these
will stiffly hold their vain and unpeaceable opinions, and stiffly reject the
judgment and arguments, of the wisest and best that will not be as envious as
they.

Direct. XX. Lastly, Keep in a Child-like, teachable, learning resolution, with
a sober and suspended judgment, where you have not sure evidence to turn the
scales. When Christ says, Mat. 18.3. Except ye be converted and become as
little Children, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; As he
has respect to the humility of Children in general (and their inception of a
new life) so in special he seems to respect them as Disciples: set Children
to School and their business is to hear and learn all day; They set not their
wits against their Masters and do not wrangle and strive against him, and say,
It is not so; we know better than you. But so abominably is humane nature
corrupted by this Intellectual Pride, that when once Lads are big enough to be
from under a Tutor, commonly instead of Learning of others, they are of a
teaching humor, and had rather speak two hours than hear one; And set their
wits to contradict what they should learn, and to conquer those that would
instruct them; and to show themselves wiser than to learn to be more wise; and
we can scarce talk with Man or Woman, but is the wisest in the Company, and
hardliest convinced of an error.

But two things here I earnestly advise you: 1. That you spend more time in
Learning than in Disputing: Not but that disputing in its season is necessary
to defend the Truth: But usually it engages men's wits in an eager opposition
against others, and so against the truth which they should receive: And it
goes more according to the ability of the disputants, than the merits of the
cause. And he that is worsted is so galled at the disgrace, that he hates the
truth the more for his sake that has dishonored him: and therefore Paul
speaks so often against such disputing, and says that the Servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle, and apt to teach, and in meekness instruct
opposers.

I would ordinarily if any Man have a mind to wrangle with me, tell him; [If
you know more of these things than I, if you will be my Teacher, I shall
thankfully hear and learn] and desire him to open his Judgment to me in its
fullest evidence: And I would weigh it as the time and case required; And if I
were fully satisfied against it, I would crave leave to tell him the reasons of
my dissent, and crave his patient audience to the end. And when we well
understood each others mind and reasons, I would crave leave then to end in
peace; unless the safety of others required a dispute to defend the Truth.

2. And my specially repeated counsel is, that you suspend your judgment till
you have cogent evidence to determine it. Be no further of either side than you
know they are in the right, cast not your self into other men's opinions
hastily, upon slight reasons at a blind adventure. If you see not a Certainty
judge it not Certain, If you see but a Probability, judge it but Probable.
Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. The Bereans are commended
for searching the Scripture, 1 These. 5. Act. 16.
and seeing whether the things were so which Paul had spoken. Truth fears not
the light. It is like Gold, that loses nothing by the fire. Darkness is its
greatest Enemy and Dishonor. Therefore look before you leap: you are bid,
Believe not every Spirit, 1 John. 2.
but try the Spirits whether they be of God. Stand still till you know that the
ground is safe which you are to tread on. When Poysoners are as Common as
Physicians, you will take heed what you take. It Is safer when once you have the
essentials of Christianity, to take too little than too much: For you are sure
to be saved if you are mere true Christians; but how far Popery, Antinomianism,
etc. may corrupt your Christianity is a controversy. Wish them that urge you,
to forbear their haste in a matter of everlasting consequence: These are not
matters to be rashly done. And as long as you are uncertain, profess your
selves uncertain; and if they will condemn you for your ignorance when you are
willing to know the truth, so will not God. But when you are certain, resolve
in the strength of God, and hold fast whatever it cost you, even to the death,
and never fear being losers by God, by his Truth, or by Fidelity in your Duty.

PART II.
Of true saving Knowledge: I. Causing our Love to God. II. Thereby Qualifying
us for his Love.

1 Cor. 8.3. But if any man Love God, the same is known of him.


Chap. I.
Knowledge is to be estimated more, by the end it tends to, than by it self.

HAving done with that Epidemical mortal disease, (SELF-CONCEITEDNESS or
PREFIDENCE or overhasty judging, and Pretending to know that which we know not)
which I more desire than hope to cure; I have left but a little room for the
nobler part of my Subject, True saving Knowledge, because the handling of it
was not my principal design.

The meaning of the Text I gave you before: The true Paraphrase of it is as
follows: As if Paul had said; [You overvalue your barren notions, and think
that by them you are wise; whereas Knowledge is a means to a higher end; and is
to be esteemed of as it attaineth that end; And that end is to make us Lovers
of God, that so we may be known with Love by him; For to Love God and be
beloved by him is man's felicity and ultimate end; and therefore that which we
must seek after and live for in the world; and he is to be accounted the wisest
man that loves God most; when unsanctified Notions and Speculations will prove
but folly.]

This being the true meaning of the Text, I shall briefly speak of it by parts,
as it contains these several Doctrines or Propositions.

Doct. 1. Knowledge is a means to a higher end, according to which it is to be
estimated.

Doct. 2. The End of Knowledge is to make us Lovers of God, and so to be known
with Love by him.

Doct. 3. Therefore knowledge is to be valued, sought and used, as it tends
to this holy blessed end.

Doct. 4. And therefore those are to be accounted the wisest or best-knowing
men, that Love God most; and not those that are stored with unholy knowledge.

For the first of these, that [Knowledge is a means to a higher end] I shall
first open it, and then prove it.

I. Aquinas and some other Schoolmen make the Vision or Knowledge of God, to be
the highest part of man's Felicity: And I deny not but that the three faculties
of man's Soul, ( Vital Activity, Intellect and Will) as the Image of the Divine
Trinity, have a kind of inseparability and coequality. And therefore each of
their perfections and perfect Receptions from God, and operations on God, is
the ultimate end of man: But yet they are Distinguishable, though not
divisible; and there is such an Order among them, as that one may in some
respects be called the Inceptor and another the Perfecter of humane operations;
and so the Acts of one be called a means to the Acts of the other. And thus
though the Vision or Knowledge of God be one inadequate conception (if not a
part) of our ultimate end; yet the Love of God, and Living to God, are also
other conceptions or parts of it: yea and the more completive perfect parts,
which we call finis ultimate ultimus.

II. The proof shall be fetched, 1. From the Order and use of the Faculties of
the Soul. 2. From the Objects. 3. From the constitution of the Acts. 4. From
express Scripture.

I. It is evident to our internal perception, 1. That the Understanding is but
the Guide of the Will, and its acts but mediate to determine the Will: As the
Eye is to lead the Appetitive and Executive faculties, by presenting to them
their proper objects. To know is but an initial introductory act.

Yea, 2. It is evident that the Soul is not Satisfied with bare knowing if no
Delight or Complacency follow: For what is that which we call Satisfaction but
the Complacency of the Will? Suppose a man to have no effect upon his Will, no
Pleasure, no Contentation in his Knowledge, and what Felicity or Desirable
Good to him, would there be, in all the Knowledge in the world? Yea when I name
either [Good] or [Desirable] every one knows that I name an object of the
Will. Therefore if you stop at bare Intellection, it is not to be called Good
or Desirable as to the Intellect, these being not proper intellectual objects:
Though remotely I confess they are; that is, that which is called Good, Amiable
and Desirable primarily as the proper object of the Will, must be discerned to
be such by the understanding: When yet the Formal notion of the Intellects
object, is but quid Intelligibile, which materially is Ens, Unum, Verum, Bonum:
But Goodness is the Formal notion of the object of the will, and not only the
material.


If any say that I seem here to take part with Epicurus, (and Cicero's
Torquatus) who erred by placing the chief excellency of Virtue in the Pleasure
of it; and consequently making any thing more Excellent which is more Pleasant,
though it be sin itself; I answer, he that will decide that great controversy,
must distinguish, 1. Between Sensitive Pleasure, and the Complacency of the
Will. 2. Between that which is Good only to me, and that which is Good to
others, and that which is Good in relation to the Supreme and Final Will of
God. 3. Between the Exterior and the Interior acts of Virtue. And then you
shall see Cicero and Torquatus easily reconciled, thus.

1. It is certain that GOODNESS and the WILL are so essentially related to each
other, that they must each e^^^r the others definition. To be Bonum is to be
Volibile; and to Will is ever Velle Bonum.

2. It is certain that God's Will is the Original and End of all Created Good,
which has its Essence in relation to His Will. And therefore if it were
possible for Virtue to be unpleasant or pernicious to the possessor, it would
be Good as it is suited and related to the Will of God.

3. Therefore it cannot be said, that Virtue as Virtue is better than Virtue as
it pleases God: But it is most certain that Virtue as Virtue is pleasing to
God, (as to the objective aptitude,) and that Virtue as pleasing to God, and
consequently as Virtue, is Better than Virtue, as it is pleasant to the
possessor.

4. And it is certain that Virtue, as it is profitable, and justly pleasing to
Mankind, to the Church, to Kingdoms, to Public Societies or multitudes, is
better than as it is pleasing unto one: Because the Good of many is better than
of one.

5. And it is certain that Virtue, as it pleases the rational Will, is better
than as it pleases the mere Sensitive Appetite, which it seldom does: And
therefore Sensuality has no advantage hence.

6. And Virtue as it profits, though at present it occasion sorrow or
displicence in its consequents, is better than that which at the present only
pleases; and quickly vanishes. But that Profit lies in this, that it
prepares for everlasting* or more durable Pleasure. And a long Pleasure
attained by present sorrow, is better than a momentany pleasure; which is
another difference between sensual sinful; and spiritual durable delights.

7. And to end all this Controversy between us and Epicurus, it is notorious,
that the Internal Vital Acts of true Virtue, are nothing else radically but
Pleasure it self: For it is radically and summarily nothing but the Love of God
and Goodness: And Love in its properest notion is nothing but the Complacency
of the Will. To say, I love it, is but to say, It pleases me; unless when you
speak of either sensual appetite and delight, or Love as conjunct with some
other act or passion. And (though Occam here stretch it a little too far) it is
certain that the external act of man has no Virtue in it that is Moral, but
secondary and derived from the Will, even as far as it is Voluntary: So that
the informing root of all Virtue is Will, Love, or Complacency; which Austin
uses to call Delectation, asserting what I now assert. So that the Question
now is, Whether Virtue, which is nothing but Complacency in Good, be better as
Complacency or as Virtue, that is, under one Name or another? or whether it be
better as Virtue, or as Virtue? as Complacency, or as Complacency?

If you think I make Cicero and the older Philosophers fools, by feigning them
to agitate such a Question; I answer, 1. If they do so, it is not my doing, but
their own. 2. But I think Cicero meant not so foolishly, but understood
Epicurus only of sensual pleasure, and not of rational. 3. Or at least of
private pleasure of a single person, as opposite to the utility and pleasure of
multitudes. 4. And whether he had so much Theology as to remember that which is
it that resolves the whole doubt, I know not; viz. that Virtus as Virtue is
objectively pleasing to the Will of God, and as pleasing to God, it is better
than as pleasing to me, and all the world.

So that notwithstanding this Objection (thus fully answered) the Acts of the
Intellect merely as such, without their respect to some Will (either of God or
Man) are not so much as formally Amiable, Desirable or Good.

3. I further add, that the Acts of the Intellect may be forced, involuntary,
displeasing, and both morally and penally evil. A man may by God be forbidden
to search after, and to know some things; and to know them (as voluntarily
done) may be his sin. And all know that a man may be necessitated to know many
things; and that knowledge may torment him: As to know dangers, losses,
enmities, injuries, future evils; especially sins, by an accusing Conscience,
and God's displeasure: And Devils and damned Souls have such knowledge.

Obj. All this is true of some knowledge, but not of the knowledge of God or
Goodness.

Ans. 1. It is granted then that Knowledge as such is not sufficient to be
man's felicity, or final act. 2. And as to the Object, I easily grant that the
true Knowledge of God is the initial part of man's felicity: But that is much,
because it ever infers that Love or Complacency of the Will, which is the
more completive part. 3. But there is a Knowledge even of God, which being
separated from Love, is sin and misery: As the Devils and damned that believe
and tremble, and hate and suffer, are not without all knowledge of God. So much
for the first proof, fetched from the order of the faculties of the Soul.

II. The second proof is fetched from the Objects: It is not mere
Intelligibility that blesses a man, but Goodness, which as such is the formal
Object of the Will, though the material Object of the Understanding. It is a
pleasant thing for the Eyes to behold the Sun: And as pleasant, it is good; and
also as useful to further pleasure of our selves or others. Nothing makes a
man Good or Happy but as it is Good. Therefore the Goodness of God, (his
transcendent perfection by which he is first Essentially Good in himself, and
amiable to himself, and then Good and Amiable to us all) is the ultimately
ultimate object of man's Soul, to which his Intelligibility is supposed.

III. The third proof is from the Constitution of these several (...) a
Knowledge being but an introductive act, supposes not Love, as to its Essence
(though it produce it as an Effect:) But Love included knowledge in it; as the
number of two includes one, when one does not include two. Therefore (...)
together must needs be perfecter than one alone.

IV. The fourth proof is from express Scripture; I will only cite some plain
ones which need no tedious comment. 1. For Love it is said, 1 John 4.16, 17, 18.
We have known and believed the Love that God has to us: God is Love; and he
that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Herein is our Love made
perfect, (or in this the Love with us is perfected) that we have boldness in
the day of Judgment. Because as he is, so are we, in this world: There is no
fear in Love, but perfect Love casts out fear. He that fears is not made
perfect in Love.] So that Love is the perfection of man.

1 Cor. 12.31. and 13.2, etc. Yet show I unto you a more excellent way: Though
I understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and have not Charity, I am
nothing. -- Charity never fails -- 13. The greatest of these is Charity.]

Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the Love of God, etc.

Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

Romans 5.5. The Love of God is poured out on our hearts by the Holy Ghost which
is given to us.]

Gal. 5.6. Faith which works by Love.

Mat. 22.37. The first and great Commandment is, Thou shall Love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, etc.

Luke 10.27. Deuteronomy. 10.12. and 11.1.13.22. and 19.9. and 13.3. and 30.6.16.20.
Josh. 22.5. and 23.11. Psalm. 5.11. and 31.23. and 69.36. and 119.165. and
145.20. Jam. 1.12. He shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that Love him. So 2.5.

Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me.

See Joh. 14.21. and 16.27. 1 John 4.19. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. 1 John 3.22. Heb.
11.6, etc.

And of Knowledge it is said, [ Joh. 13.17. If ye knew these things, happy are
ye if ye do them.

See Jam. 2.14. to the end, Joh. 15.24. But now they have both seen and hated,
both me and my Father.

Luke 12.47. Knowing Gods will, and not doing it prepares men for many
stripes. See Romans 2. And as barren knowledge is often made the aggravation of
sin, so true knowledge is usually made the cause or means of Love and
Obedience., 1 John 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God. 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace
and peace be multiplied to you, through the knowledge of God. -- 2 Pet. 2.20.
and many such like.

I conclude therefore that the knowledge of Creatures is not desirable
ultimately for itself, but as it leads up the Soul to God. And the knowledge
of God, though desirable ultimately for it self, yet not as the perfect, but
the initial part of our ultimate act or end, and as the means or cause of that
love of God, which is the more perfect part of that ultimate Perfection.

Chap. II.
The End of Knowledge is to make us Lovers of God, and so to be known with Love
by Him.

THis is the second Doctrine contained in the meaning of the Text. Where is
included, 1. That all knowledge of Creatures (called Learning) must be valued
and used but as a means to the knowledge and love of God: Which is most evident
in that the whole Creation is the work of God, bearing the Image or Impress of
his Perfections, to reveal him to the Intellectual Creature, and to be the
means of provoking us to his love, and helping us in his service. To deny this
therefore is to subvert the use of the whole Creation, and to set up Gods works
as an useless shadow, or as an Idol in his place.

2. It is included as was afore-proved, that all our knowledge of God himself,
is given us to kindle in us the Love of God. It is the Bellows to blow up this
holy Fire. If it do not this it is unsound and dead. If it do this it has
attained its end; which is much of the meaning of James in that Chap. 2. which
prejudice hinders many from understanding.

3. This love of God has its degrees and effects: Knowledge first kindles but
some weak initial act of love; which through mixtures of fear, and of carnal
affections is hardly known to be sincere by him that has it. But afterward it
produces both stronger acts, and the Holy Ghost still working as the principal
cause, infuseth or operateth a radicated Habit. So that this holy love becomes
like a nature in the Soul, even a divine nature: And it becomes in a sort
natural to us to love God and goodness, though not as the brutish nature, which
is exercised by necessity and without reason. And this new nature of holy love,
is called the new Creature, and the Holy Ghost dwelling in us, and the Spirit
of Adoption; and is our New-name, the White-stone, the Witness in our selves
that Christ is the Savior, and that we are the Regenerate Children of God, the
Pledge, the Earnest, the First Fruits, and the Fore-taste of Life Eternal.

And all the works of a Christian are so far truly holy, as they are the
Effects of holy love: For 1. Holy love is but a holy will; and the will is the
man, in point of Morality. 2. And the love of God is our final act upon the
final object; and all other gracious acts are some way means subservient to
this end: And the end is it that informs all the means, they being such only
as they are adapted to the end.

And in this sense it is true which is said in the Schools (though many
Protestants misunderstanding it, have contradicted it) that love is the form of
all other Graces: That is, It is the heart of the new Creature; or it is that
by which the man is Morally to be reputed and denominated: And it is the final
Grace which animateth or informs the rest as means.

And thus it is true, that when you will prove any Grace to be sincere and
saving, or any evidence certain, you must prove it to participate of the love
of God and goodness, or you have failed and said nothing. (Yea, you must prove
it to be conjunct with predominant love, which sets God above all
Creatures.) And if you will prove any good work to be acceptable to God,
(Prayer, Praise, Alms, Justice, etc.) you must prove that it comes from this
predominant love. For it is so far and no further acceptable to God.

And their ignorance is but to be pitied, who tell you that this is to make our
love of God to be instead of Christ to us, or to set up an acceptable
righteousness or merit in our selves: For we dream not that our love of God was
a Sacrifice for our sins, and the Expiatory Atonement and Satisfaction to
Justice, nor that Merit which procured us Love it self, or purchased us the
Holy Ghost. Our meaning is that goodness is the only proper object of love: And
God loves his Essential goodness first, and Created goodness next: And our
Moral goodness which is his Image is holy love (produced by and joined with
holy wisdom and vitality.) And so though God love us in Christ, or as Related
to him, it is as holy Members of him; and not that he loves complacentially
the haters of God for their Relation to Christ, without respect to any goodness
in themselves. And to say that Christ makes us acceptable and amiable to God,
is all one as to say that he procures us the pardon of Sin, and the gift of
the Holy Ghost, and makes us holy Lovers of God: Or that he is indeed our
Savior. He that commends health as wrought by his Physician, does not set
health instead of the Physician. Christ is the Physician; the Holy Ghost or
Holy Love in us, is our health: To procure and give us the Holy Ghost, is
Christ's Office. He pardons our sin when he pardons the punishment: The
privation of the Holy Ghost and his operations is our principal punishment: And
therefore (not all, but) the principal part of our pardon lies in the giving
us the Holy Ghost.

But some will say, That if God love nothing but goodness, and love us no
further than we are good, how then did he love us first, and while we were his
Enemies? Are not Election, Creation, Redemption and Conversion acts of love?
And is not our love, the fruit of his love?

Ans. Thus Names not opened, by confounding Heads, are made the matter of a
thousand Controversies. As our love is nothing but our will, so the word love
is taken strictly and properly, or largely and less properly. A man's will is
considered as efficient or as final. As it respects a future effect, or a
present existent good. And so Gods will as it final, and respects things
existent, either, 1. In esse cognito. 2. Or in esse reali, is called
complacence, and only complacence is love in the strict and properest sense.
But Gods will as efficient of good, may in a laxer sense be called love. Gods
will is the Fountain or efficient cause of all good, Natural and Moral in the
World. And so you may call Gods causing or making good, by the name of love, if
you please; remembering that it is but the name that is questioned: But his
complacency in good foreseen or existent is strictly called his love. And so
still God loves nothing in either sense but good. For 1. He causes nothing
but good. 2. And he is pleased in nothing but good as good.

Quest. But how then does God love his Enemies?

Ans. 1. He makes us men, which may be called one act of efficient love: And
he Redeemeth them; and he gives them all the good things which they possess:
And he sanctifies some, and makes them lovers of him, that is, holy. And thus
he wills their good, while they are Nothing or Evil; which is called
Benevolence, and Love efficient.

2. And he has true love of complacency in them. 1. As they have the good of
humane nature. 2. And thereby are capable of grace, and all the love and
service which after they may perform. 3. And as they are Related to Christ as
his Redeemed ones. 4. And as by Relation they are those that God fore-knoweth
will love and serve him here, and in the perfections of Eternal Glory. There is
all this good in some Enemies of God, to be the matter of his complacency. And
beyond their goodness he has no complacency in them.

3. And to clear up all this, still remember, that though man's will is changed
by or upon the various objects, yet so is not the will of God. And therefore
all these words signify no variety or change in God; but only how his simple
immutable* Essential will is variously related to and denominated from the
Connotation of Effects and Objects.

4. Also it must be noted, as included in the Text, that God loves all that
truly love him: For to be known of him, here means, to be known with
approbation and love as his peculiar people. As Psalm. 1.6. It is said, The Lord
knows the way of the righteous; and so often: And of the wicked, Mat. 25.12.
Depart from me, I know you not. God owneth with love all those that love him.
What Parts, what Quality, what Degree soever men are of, whatever difference
else there be among them, if they are true lovers of God, they are certainly
approved and beloved by him. This being the very Heart and Essence of the new
Creature, and the Divine Nature in us, must needs prove that man to be Amiable
to God that has it. Other things are true marks of a Child of God, only so far
as they participate of love: But love is the primary proper Character, which
proves us Adopted directly of it self.

And here you may resolve the question that seems so difficult to many:
Whether when the Scripture either by describing the godly, or by promising
Life, does mention some one Grace or Duty, as the Character of a Saint, or the
Condition of Salvation, it be to be understood with a caeteris paribus, if
other Graces and Duties concur, as supposing them separable? Or absolutely, as
supposing that one mark infallible, because it is never separated from the rest?

Ans. The New Man has 1. Its Essential parts; and 2. Its Integrals; and 3. Its
Accidents. The Essentials are ever infallible marks, and are inseparable from
each other: Any one of them will prove us Holy, and will prove the presence of
the rest. These Essentials are an united Trinity of Graces, Holy Life, Light
and Love; where each one has the common Essence of Holiness, which is their
objective termination upon God; and each is linked by participation to another.
Holy Vitality is Vital Activity toward God, in mind, will and practice; Holy
Light is that Knowledge and Belief which kindles Love, and causes a Holy
Life. Holy Love is that complacency of the Will in God and Goodness, which is
kindled by Holy Life and Light, and operateth in Holy practice. Any one of
these thus described, where Love is the Heart of all, is an infallible mark of
Holiness. But all other Graces and Duties which are but the Integrals of
Holiness, are in all Characters and Promises to be understood with a caeteris
paribus, that is, supposing them to be animated with Holy Love, and caused by
Holy Life and Light (Knowledge and Belief.)

And that God does most certainly Love all that Love him, besides the
forementioned proofs from Scripture is further evident.

1. The Love of God and Goodness is the Divine Nature: And God cannot but Love
his own Nature in us: It is his Image, which (as in its several degrees) he
Loves for himself, and next to himself.

2. The Love of God is the Rectitude of Man's Soul; its soundness, health and
beauty: And God Loves the Rectitude of his creatures.

3. The Love of God is the final, perfect operation of the Soul; even that end
which it was created and redeemed for: And God Loves to have his works attain
their end, and to see them in their perfection.

4. The Love of God is the Goodness of the Soul it self: And Goodness is
Amiableness, and must needs be Loved by Him that is Goodness and Perfection
Himself.

5. The Love of God is our uniting adhesion to him: And God that first draws
up the Soul to this Union, will not himself reject us, and avoid it.

6. Love is a pregnant, powerful, pleasing Grace: It delivers up our selves,
and all that we have to God: It delights in duty: It conquereth difficulties:
It contemns competitors, and trampleth on temptations: It accounts nothing
too much, nor too dear for God. Love is the Soul's nature, appetite and pondus,
according to which it will ordinarily act. A man's Love, is his Will, his
Heart, himself: And if God have our Love, he has our selves, and our all: So
that God cannot but Love the Soul that truly Loves him as God.

But here are some Doubts to be resolved.

Q. 1. What if the same Soul have Love and Sin mixed; or sincere Love in a
degree that is sinfully defective, and so is consistent with something of its
contrary: God must hate that Sin: How then can he Love that Soul?

Ans. Remember still that Diversity is only in us, and not in God: Therefore
God's Will is related and denominated toward us, just as its object is. All
that is Good in us God Loves: All that is Evil in us he hates. Where Goodness
is predominant, there God's Love is predominant, or greatest (from this
Relation and Connotation.) Where Sin is predominant, God's aversation,
displicency or hatred is the chief. And we may well expect that the effects be
answerable.

Obj. But we are beloved as Elect before Conversion.

Ans. That was answered before. That is, God from Eternity purposed to make us
Good, and Amiable, and Happy; if you will call that (as you may) his Love.

Obj. But we are beloved in Christ, for his Righteousness and Goodness, and not
for our own.

Ans. The latter is false: The former is thus true: For the Merits of Christ's
Righteousness and Goodness, God will pardon our sins, and make us Good, Holy
and Happy; and will Love us as the Holy Members of his Son; that is, both as
Related to him, and as Holy.

Obj. But if God must needs Love sincere imperfect Lovers of him as such, with
a predominant Love (which will not damn them) then sin might have been pardoned
without Christ's death, and the sinner be loved without his Righteousness, if
he had but sincerely loved God.

Ans. The supposition is false, that a sinner could have Loved God without
Pardon and the Spirit, purchased by the Death and Righteousness of Christ. God
perfectly Loves the perfected Souls in Glory for their own holy perfection:
But they never attained it but by Christ. And God Loves us here according to
the measure of our Love to him: But no man can thus Love him, till his sin be
pardoned, for which he was deprived of the Spirit which must kindle Love. And
imperfect Love is ever joined with imperfect Pardon (whatever some falsely say
to the contrary;) I mean that Love which is sinfully imperfect.

Quest. 2. Does not God's Loving us make us Happy? And if so, it must make us
Holy. And then none that he Loves will fall away from him: Whereas the fallen
Angels and Adam Loved him, and yet fell from him: How then were they beloved by
him?

Ans. I before told you that God's Will (or Love) is first Efficient causing
Good, and then Final, being pleased in the Good that is caused. God's Efficient
Will or Love, does so far make men Holy and Happy as they are such, even
efficiently. But God's Will or Love, as it is our Causa finalis, and the
termiting Object of our Love, and is pleased in us, and approves us, is not
the Efficient Cause of our Holiness and Happiness; but the objective and
perfect constitutive Cause. Now you must further note, that God's Benevolent
Efficient Will or Love, does give men various degrees of Holiness. To Adam in
Innocence he gave but such a degree, and upon such terms as he could lose and
cast away; which he did. But to the blessed in Glory, he gives that which they
shall never lose. These degrees are from God's Efficient Love or Will, which
therefore causes some to persevere, when it left Adam to himself to stand or
fall. But it is not God's Final Love of Complacency as such, that causes our
perseverance: For Adam had this Love as long as he Loved God and stood, and he
after lost it; so that it is not that Final Complacency which is the Terminus
of our Holiness, and Constitutive Cause of our Happiness, which alone will
secure the perpetuity of either of them.

Obj. Thus you make God mutable in his Love, as Loving Adam more before his
fall than after.

Ans. I told you, Loving and not Loving the Creature, are no changes in God,
but in the Creature. It is Man that is mutable, and not God. It is only the
Relation of God's Will to the Creature as varying in it self, and the
extrinsick denomination, by connotation of a changed Object, which is changed
as to God. As the Sun is not changed when you wink, and when you open your
Eyes: Nor a Pillar changed when your motion sets it sometimes on your right
hand, and sometimes on your left.

5. Lastly, It must be noted as included in the Text, That our own Loving God
is not the only or total notion of our end, perfection or felicity; but to be
Known and Loved by God is the other part, which must be taken in, to make up
the total notion of our end.

In our Love, God is considered as the Object: But in God's Complacential Love
to us, he is considered as Active, and his Love as an Act, and Man as the
Object: But yet not as an Object of Efficiency, but of Approbation and a
Pleased Will or Delight. Here then the great difficulty is in resolving which
of these is the highest perfective notion of man's felicity, perfection or
ultimate end; Our Love to God, or God's Love to us.

Ans. It is mutual Love and Union which is the true and complete notion of our
End: And to compare God's Love and ours as the parts, and tell which is the
final principal part or notion, is not easy, nor absolutely necessary. But I
conceive,

1. That our Love to God is Objectively or as to the Object of it, infinitely
more excellent than Gods Love to us as to the Object: Which is but to say, that
God is Infinitely better than man: God loves man who is a worm: But we Love
God who is perfect goodness.

2. Gods Love to us as to the Agent and the Act ex part Agentis, is Infinitely
more excellent than our Love to him: For it is Gods Essential will which loves
us; and it is the will of a worm that loves God.

3. That man's Felicity as such, is not the chief notion of his ultimate end:
But he must Love God as God better than his own Felicity as such, or better
than God as our Felicity.

4. That man's true ultimate end, contains these five inadequate conceptions.
1. The lowest notion or part of it is our own holiness and felicity. 2. The
next notion of it is the perfection of the Church and Universe, to which we
contribute, and which we must value above our own; Including the Glory of
Christ's Humanity. 3. The third notion is the Glory or Luster of Gods
perfections as they shine forth in us and all his perfected glorious works. 4.
The fourth notion is, Gods own Essential goodness as the Object of our
Knowledge, Love and Praise. 5. The fifth and highest notion is, the Active Love
or Complacency of Gods fulfilled Will, in us and in the whole Creation. So that
the Pleasing of Gods will is the highest notion of man's ultimate end. Though
all these five are necessarily contained in it.

Chap. III.
Doct. 3. Therefore Knowledge is to be valued, sought and used, as it tends
to our Love of God.

THis third Doctrine is much of the Scope of the Text: All means are for their
end: So far as Knowledge is a means of love, it must needs hence have the
measure of its worth, and we the motives of our desires of it, and the
direction for our using of it.

1. All knowledge that kindles not the love of God in us, is so narrow, and
small that it deserves not indeed the name of Knowledge: For the necessary
things that such a person is Ignorant of, are a thousand times more or greater,
than that little which he knows: For, 1. What is it that he is Ignorant of?

1. He has no sound and real Knowledge of God. For if he knew God, truly, he
could not but love him: Goodness is so naturally the Object of the will, that
if men well knew the infinite Good, they must needs love him: However there is
a partial knowledge that is separable from sincere Love.

2. He that knows not and loves not God, neither knows nor loves any
creature truly and effectually either as it is of God, or Through him, or To
him; Either as it bears the Impress of the Glorious Efficient, or as it is
ordered to its end by the most wise Director, or as it is a means to lead up
Souls to God, or to Glorify and please him, no nor to make man truly happy. And
can he be said indeed to know any Creature that knows it not in any of these
respects that knows neither its Original, Order or Use? Does a Dog or a Goose
know a Book of Philosophy, because he looks on it, and sees the bulk? Does
he know a Clock or Watch, who knows no more of it, but that it has such
Parts and Shapes, made of Iron and Brass? It is most evident that an unholy
person knows nothing, that is, no one Being, though he may know aliquid de re
aliqua, something of some Being: For he that knows not the Nature, Order or
Use and End of a Being, cannot properly be said to know that Being, but only
secundum quid, or some Accidents of it, or to have a general Knowledge that it
is a Substance, or a something, he knows not what. As an Epicurean can call
all things compacted Atoms, or Matter and Motion. An ungodly man is just like
one that studieth the art of a Scrivener or Printer, to make the Letters, and
place them by art, but never learnt to read or know the signification of the
Letters which he makes or composeth.

Or if any may be said to have a Speculative knowledge of all this in the
Creature (the Nature, Order, and Use,) yet he is without the true Practical
Knowledge, which is it that only is Knowledge indeed, and of use and benefit to
man. For to be able to speak or write a true Proposition about God or the
Creature, is not properly to know God or the Creature, but to know names and
words concerning them: It is but a Logical Knowledge of Notions, and not the
knowledge of the Thing it self, to be able to say and know that this or that
concerning it, is true or false. Nothing more deceives mankind, both in point
of Learning and of Religion, and Salvation, than mistaking the Organical or
Logical Knowledge of second Notions, Words, Propositions, Inferences and
Methods, for the Real Knowledge of the Things themselves; And thinking that
they know a thing, because they know what to say of it.

He knows not a Country, who is only able by the Map or hearsay to describe
it. He knows not Motion, Light, Heat, Cold, Sweet, Bitter, that knows no
more than to give a true definition of it. And as this is true of things
sensible, which must themselves be perceived first by sense, so is it of things
spiritual, which must themselves be perceived first by Intellection, and not
only the notions and definitions of them. He that does not intuitively or by
internal immediate perception, know what it is to Understand, to Remember, to
Will and Nill, to Love and Hate, and consequently to be able to do these acts,
does not know what a man is, or what a Reasonable Soul is, and what an
Intellectual Spirit is, though he could (were it possible) without these, learn
the Definition of a Man, a Soul, a Spirit. A definition or word of art spoken
by a Parrot, or a madman proves not that he knows the thing.

Practical objects are not truly known without a Practical Knowledge of them.
He knows not what meat is, that knows not that it must be eaten, and how to
eat it. He only knows his clothing that knows how to put it on. He only
knows a Pen, a Gun, or other instrument, that knows how to use it. Now the
ungodly, not knowing how any creature signifies the Divine perfections, nor
how by it to ascend to the Knowledge and Love of God, do indeed know nothing
with a proper formal Knowledge.

2. And what is it that such men know or seem to know, which may be compared
with their Ignorance? To give them their due praise, they know how to eat as
well as a Dog, though not so subtly as an Ox or Sheep, that can distinguish
grass before he taste it. He can tell how to drink, though not by so constant a
temperance as a Beast. He can speak better than a Parrot: He can build him a
house as apt for his use, as a Swallow or other Birds can do for theirs. He can
lay up for the time to come, more subtly than a Fox, or Ant, though nothing
so orderly and by wonderful self-conficiency, as the Bees: He can look upwards,
and see the Birds that soar and fly in the Air, though he cannot imitate them:
He can look into the surface of the Waters, and Artificially pass over them in
Ships, though he cannot live in them, or glide through them as the fish: He can
master those that are weaker than himself, as the great Dogs do the little
ones, and carry away the bone from them all: He can glory in his Strength,
though it be less than a Horse's, an Oxe's, an Elephant's, or a Whale's. He can
kill and eat his fellow Animals, as well as a Pike among the Fishes, a Kite
among the Birds, or a Wolf or Dog among the Beasts: He can more craftily than
the Fox entrap and ensnare them (the Fishes, Birds and Beasts;) yea as
artificially as a Spider does the Flies, to make up what he wants, of the Hawk,
or Dog for swift pursuit, or of the Lion for rapacious Strength. He can sing;
and so can the Linnet, the Owsel the Lark and Nightingale: He can make his Bed
as soft as the Birds their Nests, or as other creatures that love their ease:
He can generate and breed up his Offspring, though not with that constancy of
affection, and accurateness of Skill and Industry, as a Hen her Chickens, or
most other animals do their young. Yea he can live in Society, Families,
Commonwealths* though much more disorderly, contentiously and to the
disturbance if not destruction of each other, than Pigeons in their Dove-house
or the flight of Stares, or Larks, or Lapwings, or the flocks of Sheep, and
less accurately than the Bees do in their Hive.

All this and more we can speak of the praises of the Knowledge or Wisdom of an
ungodly man, that never learnt to Know and Love his God, nor any thing truly
worthy of a man: And is all this worthy the name of Knowledge? Their Character
could not be fitlier given, than here it is by the Apostle: They know nothing
as they ought to know. But of this more next.

Chap. IV.
And therefore those are to be accounted the wisest and best knowing men, that
love God most; and not those that are stored with unholy knowledge.

THis fourth Doctrine, is also a discernable part of the meaning of the Apostle
in the Text. His purpose is to humble those that judge themselves wise for that
which is no wisdom, but useless, ludicrous notions and self-conceitedness: And
to show men wherein true wisdom does consist. Many thousands there are that
heartily love God, and are devoted to him, and live to his service in the
World, who never read Logic, Physics, Metaphysics or Mathematics; nor laid
in that stock of artificial notions, which are the Glory and Utensils of the
Learned World. And yet that these are truly and happily wise and knowing, the
Apostle judges, and I thus further prove.

1. Because they know the things themselves, and not only the names and
definitions of them: As he that knows food by eating it, the Military Art, or
Navigation by Experience, or a Country by traveling or dwelling in it. Others
lick the outside of the Glass, but taste not the sweet that is within.

2. Because they know the greatest and most excellent things: God is infinitely
greater and better than the Creatures: And Heaven incomparably better than the
riches and pleasures of this Earth. To know how to Build a City, or a Navy, and
how to Govern an Army or a Kingdom, is more than to know how to pick Sticks or
Straws, or to dress and undress us. Understanding is valuable by the dignity of
its objects; therefore how much does the wisdom of a holy Soul excel all the
Craft and Learning of the ungodly? Let not the rich man glory in his riches --
But let him that glories glory in this, that he knows God; if he so know him
as to love him.

3. Because they know the most Necessary things, and the most Profitable. They
know how to be Good, and how to do their duty, and how to attain their End, and
how to please God, and how to escape damnation, and how to be happy in
everlasting joy and glory. And I think he is wise, that is wise enough to be
Happy, and to attain all that the Soul of man can well desire.

But who will desire the Wisdom that makes a man never the better? and that
will not save his Soul from Hell? What Soul in Hell does think that Wisdom
brought him thither? It were a thousand times better, not to know how to speak
or go, to dress or undress us, than not to know how to be holy and happy, and
to escape sin and everlasting misery.

4. A holy Soul understands that which his understanding was made for; and
for which he has his life, and time, and teaching; which is but to be good,
and Love God and Goodness, and to do good. And Wisdom, as is before proved, as
as all other means, is to be estimated by its end.

But an ungodly man knows not that which he was made for. He is like a Knife
that cannot cut; a Ship that will not endure the Water; a House that is not fit
to dwell in. What is a man's wit worth, but for its proper end? If man was made
but to eat, and drink, and play, and sleep, and build, and plant, and stir a
while about the Earth, and have his will over others, and his fleshly pleasure,
and then die, then the ungodly may be called wise: But if he be made to prepare
for another world, and to Know, and Love, and Live to God, they are then worse
than Bedlams, and more dangerously beside themselves.

5. A holy Soul knowing God the beginning and end, knows all things; Because
he knows them, 1. In the chiefest excellency of their natures, as they bear
the Impress of God; 2. And in their Order as governed by him; 3. And in their
Usefulness as tending to him: Though neither they, nor any others, be well
acquainted with their material part, which the Philosopher thinks that he
knows best. Who think you best knows what Money is? He that knows the
King's Impress, and the Value, and what it is good for, and how to get and use
it? or he that can only tell you whether it be Copper or Silver, or Gold (not
knowing well what any of these are,) and knows nothing of the Impress, or
Value, or Use? I tell you, the humble holy person, that sees God in all, and
knows all things to be Of Him, and By Him, and To Him, and Loves Him in and
for all, and serves Him by all, is the best Philosopher, and has the
greatest, most excellent and profitable Knowledge. In comparison of which, the
unholy Learning of the world is well called Foolishness with God. (For I
believe not that Paraphraser who would persuade us, that it is but the
Phanatick conceits and pretensions of the Gnostics, that the Apostle here and
elsewhere speaks of. But I rest satisfied that it is primarily the unholy
Arts and Sciences of the Philosophical Heathens; and secondarily the Platonic
Heretics pretensions to extraordinary Wisdom, because of their speculations
about Angels, Spirits, and other invisible and mysterious things, which they
thought were peculiarly opened unto them.) Doting about questions that engender
strife, and not edification, and do increase to more ungodliness, is the true
description of unholy Learning.

6. The Lovers of God are wise for perpetuity: They see before them: They know
what is to come; even as far as to Eternity: They know what will be best at
last, and what will be valued, and serve our turn in the hour of our extremity:
They judge of things as all will judge of them, and as they shall constantly
judge of them for ever. But others are wise but for a few hours, or a present
job: They see not before them: They are preparing for repentance: They are
shamefully mutable in their Judgments; magnifying those pleasures, wealth and
honors to day, which they vilify and cry out against at death and to
eternity! A pang of sickness, the sight of a grave, the sentence of death, the
awakening of Conscience, can change their Judgments, and make them speak in
other Language, and confess a thousand times over that they were fools: And if
they come to any thing like Wisdom, it is too late, when time is past, and hope
is gone. But the godly know the day of their visitation, and are wise in time;
as knowing the season of all duties, and the duties of every season. And as
some Schoolmen say, that All things are known to the Glorified, in speculo
Trinitatis; so I may say, that All things are morally and savingly known, to
him that knows and Loves God, as the Efficient, Governor and End of all.

Yet, to avoid mistakes and cavils, remember, that I take no true Knowledge as
contemptible. And when I truly say, that he knows nothing as he ought to
know, that does not know and Love his God, and is not wise to his duty and
salvation; yet if this Fundamental Knowledge be presupposed, we should build
all other useful Knowledge on it, to the utmost of our capacity: And from this
one stock, may spring and spread a thousand branches, which may all bear fruit.
I would put no limits to a Christian's desires and endeavors to know, but that
he desire only to know useful and revealed things. Every degree of knowledge
tends to more: And every known Truth befriendeth others; and like Fire,
tends to the spreading of our knowledge, to all neighbor Truths that are
intelligible. And the want of acquaintance with some one Truth among an
hundred, may hinder us from knowing rightly most of the rest; or may breed an
hundred Errors in us. As the absence of one wheel or particle in a Watch, or
the ignorance of it, may put all the rest into an useless disorder. What if I
say that Wisdom lies more, in knowing the things that belong to salvation, to
public good, to life, health, and solid comfort, than in knowing how to sing,
or play on the Lute, or to speak or carry our selves with commendable decency,
etc. It does not follow that all these are of no worth at all; and that in
their places these little matters may not be allowed and desired: For even Hair
and Nails are appurtenances of a man, which a wise man would not be without;
though they are small matters in comparison of the animal, vital and nobler
parts. And indeed he that can see God in all things, and has all this
sanctified by the Love of God, should above all men value each particle of
Knowledge, of which so holy an use may be made: As we value every grain of Gold.

Chap. V.
The first Inference: By what measures to estimate men's Knowledge.

FRom hence then we may learn how to value the understandings of our selves,
and others: That is Good which does good. Would God but give me one beam more
of the heavenly light, and a little clearer knowledge of himself, how joyfully
could I exchange a thousand lower notions for it! I feel not my self at all
miserable, for want of knowing the number and order of the Stars, the nature of
the Meteors, the causes of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, with many hundred
other questions in Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics: Nor do I feel it any
great addition to my happiness, when I think I know somewhat of such things
which others know not. But I feel it is my misery to be ignorant of God, and
ignorant of my state and duty, and ignorant of the world where I must live for
ever. This is the Dungeon where my wretched Soul does lie in captivity night
and day, groaning and crying out, O when shall I know more of God! and more of
the Celestial Habitations! and more of that which I was made to know! O when
shall I be delivered from this darkness and captivity! Had I not one beam that
pierces through this Lanthorn of flesh, this Dungeon were a Hell, even the
outer darkness. I find Books that help me to names, and notions: But O for that
Spirit that must give me Light to know the Things, the spiritual, great and
excellent things, which these names import! O how ignorant am I of those same
things, which I can truly and methodically speak and write of! O that God would
have mercy on my dark understanding that I be not as a Clock, to tell others
that which it self understands not! O how gladly would I consent to be a fool
in all common Arts and Sciences, if I might but be ever the wiser in the
Knowledge of God! Did I know better Him by whom I live, who upholdeth all
things, before whom my Soul must shortly appear; whose favor is my life, whom
I hope to love and praise for ever; what were all other things to me? O for one
beam more of his Light! For one taste of his Love! for one clear conception of
the heavenly glory! I should then scarce have leisure, to think of a thousand
inferior speculations, which are now magnified and agitated in the world.

But much more miserable do I find my self, for want of more Love to the
blessed God, who is Love it self. O happy exchange! did I part with all the
pleasures of the world, for one flame, one spark more of the Love of God? I
hate not my self for my ignorance in the common Arts and Sciences: But my God
knows, that I even abhor and loath my self, because I love and delight in him
no more! O what a Hell is this dead and disaffected heart! O what a foretast of
Heaven would it be, could I but feel the fervours of Divine Love! Well may that
be called the First Fruits of Heaven, and the Divine Nature and Life, which so
uniteth Souls to God, and causes them to live in the pleasures of his
Goodness. I dare not beg hard for more common knowledge: But my Soul melts
with grief for want of Love; and forces out tears, and sighs, and cries; O
when will Heaven take acquaintance with my heart, and shine into it, and warm
and revive it, that I may truly experience the delightful life of holy Love! I
cannot think them loathsome and unlovely, that are unlearned, and want the
ornaments of Art. But I abhor and curse those hateful sins, which have raised
the clouds, and shut the windows, and hindered me from the more lively
Knowledge, and Love of God. Would God but number me with his zealous Lovers, I
would presume to say, that he had made me wise, and initially happy. But, alas!
such high and excellent things will not be gotten with a lazy wish, nor will
holy Love dwell with iniquity in unholy and defiled Souls.

But if Wisdom were justified of none but her Children, how confidently durst I
call my self a Son of Wisdom? For all my Reason is fully satisfied, that the
learned ungodly Doctors are mere fools, and the Lovers of God are only wise:
And O that my Lot may be with such, however I be esteemed by the dreaming world!

Chap. VI.
The second Inference: To abate our Censures and Contempt of the less Learned
Christians and Churches upon Earth.

I Must confess that Ignorance is the great Enemy of Holiness in the world; and
the Prince of Darkness, in his Kingdom of Darkness, oppugneth the Light, and
promoteth the works of Darkness by it: And it is found that where Vision
cease, the People perish, even for lack of knowledge: And the ignorantest
Countries are the most ungodly. But I must recant some former apprehensions: I
have thought the Armenians, the Syrians, the Georgians, the Copties, the
Abassines, the Greeks, more miserable for want of Polite Literature, than now I
judge them. Though I contemn it not as the Turks do, and the Moscovites; yet I
perceive that had men but the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, yea of the
summaries of true Religion, they might be good and happy men, without much
more. If there be but some few among them, skilled in all the Learning of the
world, and expert in using the Adversaries weapons against themselves, as
Champions of the Truth, the rest might do well with the bare Knowledge of God,
and a Crucified Christ. It is the malice of assaulting Enemies, that makes all
other Learning needful in some for our defense. But the New Creature lives not
on such food, but on the bread of life, and living waters, and the sincere Milk
of the sacred Word.

The old Albigenses and Waldenses in Piedmont, and other Countries, did many
Ages keep up the life and comfort of true Religion, even through murders and
unparalled cruelties of the worldly Learned Church; when they had little of
the Arts and common Sciences. But necessary Knowledge was propagated by the
industry of Parents and Pastors: Their Children could say over their
Catechisms, and could give account of the Principles of Religion, and recite
many practical parts of Scripture: And they had much Love and Righteousness,
and little Division or Contention among them; which made the moderate Emperor
Maximilian profess to Crato, that he thought the Picards of all men on Earth
were likest the Apostolic Primitive Churches.

And Brocardus, who dwelt among them in Judea, tells us that the Christians
there that by the Papists are accounted Heretics, (as Nestorians or
Eutychians) were indeed good harmless simple men, and lived in Piety, and
mortifying Austerities, even beyond the very Religious sort (the Monks and
Friars) of the Church of Rome, and shamed the wickedness of our Learned part of
the World.

And though there be sad mixtures of such Superstitions and Traditions, as
ignorance uses to breed and cherish, yet the great devotion and strictness of
many of the Abassines, Armenians, and other of those ruder sort of Christians,
is predicated by many Historians and Travelers. And who knows but there may
be among their vulgar, more love to God and Heaven, and Holiness, than among
the contentious Learned Nations, where the Pastors strive who shall be the
greatest, and Preach up that Doctrine and Practice which is conformable to
their own Wills and worldly Interests; and where the people by the oppositions
of their Leaders, are drawn into several Sides and Factions, which as Armies,
Militate against each other. Is not the love of God like to be least, where
Contentions and Controversies divert the peoples minds from God and necessary
saving Truths? And where men least love one another? And where mutual Hatred,
Cruelty and Persecution, proclaim them much void of that love which is the
Christian Badge?

I will not cease praying for the further Illumination and Reformation of those
Churches: But I will repent of my hard thoughts of the Providence of God, as if
he had cast them almost off, and had few holy Souls among them. For ought I
know they may be better than most of Europe.

And the like I say of many unlearned Christians among our selves! we know not
what love to God and goodness does dwell in many that we have a very mean
esteem of. The Breathings of poor Souls toward God by Christ, and their
desires after greater holiness is known to God that kindles it in them, but
not to us.

Chap. VII.
The third Inference: By what measures to judge of the Knowledge necessary to
Church Communion.

I Know that there are some that would make Christ two Churches; one Political
and Congregate (as they phrase it) and the other Regenerate: Or one Visible and
the other Invisible: And accordingly they say that professed Faith is the
qualification of a Member of the Church-Congregate (and Obedience to the Pope,
say the Papists,) and real love is the qualification of the Church-Regenerate.

But as there is but one Catholic Church of Christ, so is there but one Faith,
and one Baptism, by which men are stated as Members in that Church. But as
Heart-consent and Tongue-consent are two things, but the latter required only
as the Expression and Profession of the former; so Heart-consenters and
Tongue-consenters should be the same men; as Body and Soul make not two men,
but one. But if the Tongue speak that consent which is not in the Heart, that
Person is an Hypocrite; and is but analogically or equivocally called a
Christian or Member of Christ: And such among the sincere are not a distinct
Church or Society, (if they were, they should be called the Hypocritical
Church, and not the Political or Congregate Church.) But they are as Traitors
in an Army, or as stricken Ears in a Corn Field. But the true Church being One
is considered, as consenting with Heart and with the Tongue: As a Corn Field
has Straw, Chaff and Grain; and as a Man has Soul and Body. So that it is the
same Church that is visible by Baptism and Profession, and Invisible by
Heart-consent or Sincerity.

But it is the same thing (and not diverse) that is in the Hearts of the
sincere, and that is to be professed by the Tongue: Even that voluntary
practical Faith which is described in Baptism, and no other. The same Faith
which is accepted to Salvation in the sincere and invisible Members of the
Church (as they are called) must be professed by all that will (at Age) be
visible Members.

And the Knowledge and Belief required in Baptism is so much as prevails with
the Person to give up himself to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as his
Reconciled Creator, his Savior and Sanctifier. And he that has so much
knowledge as will do this, has as much as is necessary to his reception into
the Church.

Doubtless he that is capable of Baptism, is capable of Church Membership; and
he that is capable of Church Membership, is capable de jure as to right, of so
much Church Communion as he is capable of by real aptitude: An Infant is not
naturally capable of the actions of the Adult; nor half-witted Persons, of the
receptions and performances of the judicious; some cannot understand a Sermon,
or Prayer, or Praise, the twentieth part so well as others can do, and so
cannot receive and do beyond their understanding: Some may not so well
understand the nature of the Lords Supper, as to be really fit at present to
receive it: And some may be unfit through some extraordinary doubts, opinions,
or lapses: But still de jure a Church Member has right to so much Church
Communion as their real qualifications make them capable of. For that right is
part of the definition of a Church member; And to be made a Church member is
the work of Baptism.

And here we must consider of the reason, why God would have Baptism to be the
Profession of that Faith which makes us Christians: Sometime we are called
Believers, and said to be Justified by Faith, as if it were Faith alone that
were our Christianity: And yet when it comes to Church entrance, and to the
solemn profession of our faith, and reception of a Sealed and Delivered pardon,
we must do more than profess that we believe with the understanding; We must
give up our selves absolutely by a Vow and Covenant, to God the Father Son and
Holy Ghost, renouncing the flesh, the World and the Devil; which is the act of
a resolved Will. And to Will, is rationally to Love and Choose. By which Christ
tells us, that (as words of Knowledge in Scripture usually imply affection,
so) the Faith that he means and requires to our justification, is not a mere
assent or act of intellection; but it is also the wills consent, and a
practical Affiance: As a man Believing the Skill and Fidelity of a Physician,
does Desire, Will or Choose him for his Physician, and Practically Trust him,
or cast himself upon his Fidelity and care for cure. Therefore Christ joyneth
both together, Mark 16.16. He that Believes and is baptized shall be saved,
not principally intending the washing of the flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience, as Peter expounds it; that is, [He that so believes as by hearty
consent to devote and give up himself openly and absolutely, and presently to
God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, shall be saved.]

And so the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. There is one Baptism, as part of the
uniting bond of Christians: That is there is one solemn Covenant between God
and Man, in which we profess our Faith, and give up our selves to God the
Father Son, and Holy Ghost, and are stated in a gracious Relation to him and
one another.]

And thus it is that Baptism is reckoned, Heb. 6. among the principles; And
that the ancient Doctors unanimously conclude, that Baptism washes away all
sin, and certainly puts us into a present state of life; That is, The
delivering up our selves sincerely to God in the Baptismal Covenant, is the
condition of our right to the benefits of that Covenant from God.

From all which it is plain, that the Head is but the guide of the Heart, and
that God looks more to the Heart than to the Head, and to the Head for the
Heart: And that we are not Christians indeed, till Christ have our Hearts
indeed; Nor Christians by profession, till by Baptismal Covenant and profession
we deliver up the Heart to Christ; Now so far as Consent and Will may be called
Love, fo far even Love is Essential to our Christianity, and to this faith,
which is required to our baptism and justification. And no other faith is
Christianity, nor will justify us.

But to them that are here stalled with the great difficulty, How Love is that
grace of the Holy Ghost which is promised to believers, in the Covenant, as
consequent, if it go before it in the Covenanters, I answer at present, that
they must distinguish between, 1. Love to Christ as a Savior of our selves,
proceeding principally from the just Love of our selves, and our Salvation; and
Love to God above our selves, for his own Infinite Goodness, as our ultimate
end: 2. Between the Act of Love, and a Habit; 3. Between that spark of Love
which consists in the said consent, and is contained in true Faith; and that
Flame of Love which it self carries the name, as being the most eminent
operation of the Soul. And if hereupon they cannot answer this question
themselves, I must refer them to the Appendix of the third Chapter of my
Christian Directory, in which I have largely opened this case, with as much
exactness as I could reach unto.

All that remains very difficult then as to our judging of the Knowledge of
men to be admitted to Christian Church Communion, is but, what knowledge is
necessary in the adult unto their lawful Baptism? And to that I say, so much as
is necessary to an understanding consent to the Baptismal Covenant, or to an
hearty giving up themselves to God the Father Son and Holy Ghost: And here we
must know that the same Covenanting words being comprehensive, are understood
in different degrees, according to man's different Capacities, even of true
believers: Insomuch that I do not think that any two men in the world, have in
all notions and degrees just the same understanding of them. And therefore it
is not the same distinctness and clearness of understanding which we must
expect in all, which is found in some, or which is desirable. When one man
names GOD, he has an orderly conception of his several Attributes (in which
yet all men are defective, and most Divines themselves are culpably ignorant:)
When another man conceives but of fewer of them, and that disorderly: And yet
these must not be accounted Atheists, or denied to believe in the same God, or
refused Baptism, nor is it several Gods that men so differently believe in.

I. He that knows God to be a most perfect Spirit, most powerful, Wise and
Good, the Father Son and Holy Ghost, the Creator of the world, our Owner,
Governor and most Amiable Lover, (Benefactor and End) I think knows as much
of God as is of necessity to Baptism and Church Communion.

II. He that knows [that Jesus Christ is God and man, the Redeemer of the
sinful world, and the Mediator between God and Man, who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost in the Virgin Mary, fulfilled all righteousness, was crucified as a
Sacrifice for man's sin; and being dead and buried rose again, and ascended into
Heaven, and is the Teacher, King and Intercessor of his Church, and has made
the new Covenant, and gives the Holy Ghost to sanctify believers, and
pardons their sins, and will raise our Bodies at last, and Judge the World in
righteousness according to his Gospel, and will give everlasting happiness to
the Sanctified] I think knows as much of Christ as is necessary to Baptism
and Church Communion.

III. He that knows that [the Holy Ghost is God, proceeding from the Father
and the Son, the sanctifier of Souls, by Holy Life and Light, and Love, by the
Holy Gospel of which he is the Inditer and the Seal] I think knows all that
is necessary unto Baptism, concerning the Holy Ghost.

IV. And as to the Act of Knowing this Trinity of Objects, there is great
difference between, 1. Knowing the Notions or Words, and the matter. 2. Between
an orderly clear, and a dark and more confused Knowledge. 3. And between apt
significant words, and such as any way notify a necessary true conception of
the mind. 4. Between such a Knowledge as makes a man Willing, and Consent to
give up himself to this Trinity in Covenant, and that which prevails not for
such consent. And so,

1. It Is true that we know not the Heart immediately; and therefore must judge
by Words and Deeds: But yet it is the Knowledge of the Things (as is aforesaid)
that is necessary to Salvation, because it is the Love of the Things, is
chiefly necessary. But by what words to express that Love or Knowledge, is not
of equal necessity in itself.

2. There being no man whose conceptions of God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, the
Covenant, etc. are not guilty of darkness and disorder, a great degree of
darkness and disorder of conceptions, may consist with true grace in those of
the lowest rank of Christians.

3. The second Notions and Conceptions of things (and so of God our Redeemer,
and Sanctifier) as they are verba mentis in the mind itself, are but Logical,
Artificial Organs; and are not of that necessity to Salvation as the conception
of the matter or incomplex objects.

4. Many a man in his studies finds that he has often a general and true
Knowledge of Things in themselves, before he can put names and notions on them,
and set those in due Order, and long before he can find fit words to express
his mental notions by; which must cost him much study afterward. And as
Children are long learning to speak, and by degrees come to speak orderly and
composedly and aptly (mostly not till many years use has taught them;) So the
expressive ability is as much matter of art, and got by use, in men at age: And
they must be taught yet as Children to speak of any thing, new and Strange, and
which they learned not before. As we see in learning Arithmetic, Geometry, and
all the Arts and Sciences. Even so men, how holy internally soever, must by
study and use (by the help of Gods Spirit) learn how to speak of holy things,
in Prayer, in Conference, in answering such as ask an account of their Faith
and Knowledge: And hypocrites that are bred up in the use of such things, can
speak excellently in Prayer, Conference or Preaching: When true Christians at
first that never used them, nor were bred up where they heard them used, cannot
tell you intelligibly what is in their minds, but are like men that are yet to
learn the very Language in which they are to talk in, I know this by true
experience of my self, and many others, that I have examined.

5. Therefore, I say again, if men cannot aptly answer me of the very
Essentials of Religion, but speak that which in its proper sense is Heresy, or
unsound and false: Yet if when I open the questions to them my self, and put
the Article of Faith into the question, and ask them (e. g.) Do you believe
that there is but One God? or, are there many? Does God know all things, or
not? Is he our Owner, or not? Does he rule us by a Law, or not, etc? If they by
Yea or Nay, do speak the truth, and profess to believe it, I will not reject
them for lack of knowledge, if the rest concur. I meet with few censorious
Professors (to say nothing of Teachers) that will not answer me with some
nonsense or falseness, or ineptitude, or gross confusion, or defectiveness, if
I examine them of the foregoing Notions of the very baptismal Covenant: As,
what is a Spirit? what does the word [God] signify? what is Power in God? what
Knowledge? what Will? what Goodness? what Holiness? what is a Person in the
Trinity? what is the difference between the three Persons? How is God our End?
Had Christ his humane Soul from the Virgin, or only his flesh? Had he his
Manhood from Man, if not his Soul, which is the chief essential part? what is
the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature? wherein different from the Union of
God and Saints, or every Creature? with an hundred such. In which I must bear
with ignorant false answers from eminent Professors, that separate from others
as too ignorant for their Communion: And why then must I not bear with more in
those that are new beginners, and have not had their time and helps?

6. But if a man can speak never so well, and profess never so confident a
belief, if he Consent not to the Covenant and Vow of Baptism, to give up
himself presently and absolutely to Christ, I must reject that man from the
Communion of the Church. But if these two things do but concur in any, 1. The
foresaid signification of a tolerable Knowledge and Belief, by yea or nay,
(Do thou Believe in God, etc. as the Ancient Churches used to ask the
Baptized;) 2. And a ready professed consent to be engaged by that holy Vow and
Covenant to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; I will not deny Baptism to
such, if Adult, nor after Church Communion to them, if they are already in the
Covenant.

And all this is because that the Will is the Man; and if any Man truly love
Jesus Christ, he is a true Believer in Christ; and if any Man love God, the
same Man is known and loved of him, and has so much knowledge as will save his
Soul. I confess in private Catechizing and Conference I have met with some
ancient Women that have long lived as godly Persons, in constant affectionate
use of means, and an honest godly Life, and been of good repute in the Church
where they lived, who yet have spoken downright Heresy to me, through
ignorance, in answering some questions about Jesus Christ: But I durst not
therefore suspend their Communion, nor condemn their former Communion: For as
soon as I told them better, they have yielded, and I could not perceive whether
it was from gross ignorance, or from unreadiness of notions, or from the want
of memory, or what, that they spoke amiss before. So that I shall be very loath
to reject one from Communion, that shows a love of God, and Jesus Christ, and
Holiness, by diligent use of means, and an upright Life.

7. And he that will impartially be ruled by the Holy Scriptures, will be of
the same mind. For no one was ever taken to be a Church Member at Age, without
so full a consent, as was willingly expressed by devotedness to God in the Solemn
Covenant: The Jews by the Sign of Circumcision, and the Christians by Baptism;
and both by Covenanting with God were initiated: And consent is love. But the
Articles and objective Degrees of Knowledge and Belief have greatly varied. The
Jews were to know and profess more than the Gentiles; and the Jews since the
Egyptian Deliverance, more than before; And John Baptized upon a shorter
Profession than the Apostles did; And the Apostles till Christ's Resurrection,
believed not many great Articles of our Faith, not knowing that Christ must
die, and be an Expiatory Sacrifice for Sin, and Sin to be pardoned by his
Blood; nor that he was to rise again, and send the Holy Ghost for the work
which he was sent for, etc. And Acts 19. there were Disciples that had not
heard that there was a Holy Ghost (I confidently think, twice Baptized.)

And if we mark how the Apostles Baptized, with what Orders for it they
received from Christ, it will confirm my conclusion. For Christ could have
given a particular Creed, and Profession of Faith, if he had pleased; but he
takes up with the General three Articles, of Believing in the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19, 20. lest any should cast out his weak ones for want of
distinctness of Knowledge and Belief. And he makes the Covenant-consent in
Baptism the necessary Thing, as the End and Measure of their Knowledge. He that
has Knowledge enough to cause him to thirst, may come and drink of the waters
of Life, Rev. 22.17. And he that hungreth and thirsts after righteousness
shall be satisfied; and he that comes to Christ he will in no wise cast out.

And the Apostles Baptized so many thousands in a short time, that they could
not examine each Person about a more particular Knowledge and Belief, Acts 2.
etc. Nor do we read in Scripture of such particular large Professions, as go
much beyond the words of Baptism. And though, no doubt, they did endeavor to
make the ignorant understand what they professed and did, and so had some larger
Creed, yet was it not all so large, as the short Creed called the Apostles now
is; several of its Articles having been long since added.

I have spoken all this, not only to Ministers, who have the Keys of Admission,
but especially for the Religious Persons sakes, who are too much inclined to
place godliness in words and ability to speak well, in Prayer or Conference, or
answering Questions, and that make a more distinct Knowledge and Profession
necessary than God has made: Yea, if all the Articles of the Creed are
professed, when the understanding of them is not clear and distinct, they
deride it, and say, A Parrot may be taught as much; and they separate from
those Pastors and Churches that receive such to their Communion. Many do this
of a godly Zeal, lest ignorance and formality be encouraged, and the godly and
ungodly not sufficiently distinguished: But their Zeal is not according to
Knowledge, nor to the holy Rule; and they little know how much Pride often
lurketh unobserved, in such desires to be publicly differenced from others, as
below us, and unmeet for our Communion: And less know they how much they injure
and displease our gracious Lord, who took little Children in his Arms, and
despises not the weak, and carries the Lambs, and refuses no one any further
than they refuse him.

I tell you, if you see but true love and willingness in a diligent, reformed,
pious and righteous Life, there is, certainly there is, saving Knowledge and
Faith within; and if words do not satisfactorily express it, you are to think
that it is not for want of the thing it self, but for want of use and exercise,
and for want of well studied Notions, or for want of natural Parts, Education
or Art to enable them to act that part aright. But if God know the meaning of
Abba, Father, and of the groans of the Spirit, in his Beloved Infants, I will
not be one that shall condemn and reject a lover of God and Christ, and
Holiness, for want of distinct particular Knowledge, or of words to utter it
aright.

Chap. VIII.
The fourth Inference: The aptness of the Teaching of Christ, to ingenerate the
Love of God and Holiness.

IF Love be the End and Perfection of our Knowledge, then hence we may
perceive, that no Teacher that ever appeared in the World, was so fit for the
ingenerating of true saving knowledge as Jesus Christ. For none ever so
promoted the love of God.

1. It was he only that rendered God apparently lovely to sinful man, by
reconciling us to God, and rendering him apparently propitious to his Enemies,
pardoning sin, and tendering Salvation freely to them that were the Sons of
Death. Self-love will not give men leave to love aright a God that will damn
them, though deservedly for sin. But it is Christ that has made Atonement, and
is the Propitiation for our sins, and proclaims Gods love, even to the
Rebellious: Which is more effectually to kindle holy love in us, than all the
Precepts of Naturalists without this could ever have been. His Cross, and his
Wounds and Blood were the powerful Sermons, to Preach Gods winning love to
sinners.

2. And the benefits are so many and so great which he has purchased and
revealed to man, that they are abundant fuel for the Flames of Love. We are
set by Christ in the way of Mercy, in the Household of God, under the Eye and
special Influence of his love; all our sins pardoned, our Everlasting
punishment remitted, our Souls renewed, our wounded Consciences healed, our
Enemies conquered, our fears removed, our wants supplied, our Bodies, and all
that is ours under the protection of Almighty love; and we are secured by
Promise, that all our Sufferings shall work together for our good. And what
will cause love if all this will not? When we perceive with what love the
Father has loved us, that of Enemies we should be made the Sons of God, and of
condemned Sinners we should be made the Heirs of endless Glory, and this so
freely, and by so strange a means, we may conclude that this is the Doctrine of
Love, which is taught us from Heaven by love it self.

3. And especially this work of love is promoted, by opening the Kingdom of
Heaven to the foresight of our Faith; and showing us what we shall enjoy for
ever; and assuring us of the Fruition of our Creators Everlasting Love; yea, by
making us foreknow that Heaven consists in perfect mutual endless love. This
will both of it self, draw up our Hearts, and engage all our Reason and
Endeavors, in beginning that work which we must do for ever, and to learn on
Earth to love in Heaven.

4. And besides all these objective helps, Christ gives to Believers the
Spirit of Love, and makes it become as a nature in us; which no other Teacher
in the World could do. Others can speak reason to our Ears, but it is Christ
that sends the warming Beams of holy Love into our Hearts.

If the love of God and holiness were no better than common Philosophical
Speculations, then Aristotle, or Plato, or such other Masters of names and
notions, might compare with Christ and his Apostles, and Athens with the
Primitive Church; and the Schoolmen might be thought the best Improvers of
Theology. But if thousands of dreaming Disputers wrangle the World into misery,
and themselves into Hell, and are ingenious Artificers of their own damnation;
and if the love of God and Goodness, be the healthful constitution of the Soul,
its natural content and pleasure, the business and end of life, and all its
helps and blessings, the Soder of just Societies, the Union of Man with God in
Christ, and with all the Blessed; and the Fore-taste and First Fruits of
endless Glory; then Christ the Messenger of Love, the Teacher of Love, the
Giver of Love, the Lord and Commander of Love, is the best Promoter of
Knowledge in the World. And as Nicodemus knew that he was a Teacher come from
God, because no man could do such works unless God were with him; so may we
conclude the same, because no man could so reveal, so cause, and communicate
Love, the holy Love of God and Goodness, unless the God of Love had sent him.
Love is the very end and work of Christ, and of his Word and Spirit.

Chap. IX.
The fifth Inference: What great cause men have to be thankful to God for the
Constitution of the Christian Religion: And how unexcusable they are that will
not learn so short and sweet, and safe a Lesson.

SO excellent and every way suitable to our case is the Religion taught and
instituted by Christ, as should render it very acceptable to Mankind. And that
on several accounts.

1. The brevity and plainness of Christian Precepts, greatly accommodateth the
necessity of Mankind. I say his necessity, lest you think it is but his sloth.
Ars longa, Vita brevis, is the true and sad complaint of Students. Had our
Salvation been laid upon our Learning a Body of true Philosophy, how desperate
would our case have been? For, 1. Man's great Intellectual weakness; 2. His want
of leisure would not have allowed him a knowledge that requires a subtle wit
and tedious studies.

1. Most men have wits of the duller sort: Such quickness, subtilty and
solidity, as is necessary to great and difficult studies, are very rare. So
rare, as that few such are found even amongst the Preachers of the Gospel: Of a
multitude who by hard Studies and honest Hearts, are fit to Preach the Doctrine
of Salvation, scarce one or two are found of so fine and exact a wit as to be
fit judiciously to manage the curious Controversies of the Schools. What a case
then had Mankind been in, if none could have been wise and happy indeed, but
these few of extraordinary capacity? The most public and common good is the
best. God is more merciful than to confine Salvation to subtilty of wit: Nor
indeed is it a thing it self so pleasing to him as a Holy, Heavenly Heart and
Life.

2. And we have Bodies that must have Provision and Employment: We have
Families and Kindred that must be maintained: We live in Neighbourhoods and
public Societies, which call for much Duty, and take up much time. And our
sufferings and crosses will take up some thoughts. Were it but Poverty alone,
how much of our time will it alienate from contemplation? whilst great
necessities call for great care and continual labor? Can our common poor
Laborers, (especially Husbandmen) have leisure to inform their minds with
Philosophy or curious Speculations?

Nay, we see by experience, that the more subtle and most vacant wits, that
wholly addict themselves to Philosophy can bring it to no considerable
certainty, and consistency to this day, except in the few Rudiments or common
Principles that all are agreed in. Insomuch that those do now take themselves
to be the chief or only wits, who are pulling down that which through so many
Ages, from the beginning of the World, has with so great wit and study been
concluded on before them; and are now themselves no higher than new
Experimenters, who are beginning all anew again, to try whether they can
retrieve the errors of Mankind, and make any thing of that which they think
the World has been so long unacquainted with: And they are yet but beginning
at the Skin or Superficies of the World, and are got no further with all their
wit, than Matter and Motion, with Figure, Site, Contexture, etc. But if they
could live as long as Methusalem, it is hoped they might come to know that
besides Matter and Motion; there are Essential Virtues called substantial
Forms, or active Natures, and that there is a Vis Motiva, which is the cause of
Motion, and a Virtus Intellectiva, and Wisdom which is the cause of the Order
of Motion, and a Vital Will and Love which is the perfection and end of all: In
a word, they may live to know that there is such a thing in the World as Life,
and such a thing as Active Nature, and such a thing as Sense and Soul, besides
Corporeal Matter and Motion, and consequently that man is indeed man. But,
alas, they must die sooner, perhaps before they attain so far, and their
Successors must begin all anew again, as if none of all these great attempts
had been made by their Predecessors, and so (by their method) we shall never
reach deeper than the Skin, nor learn more than our, A B C And would we have
such a task made necessary to the Common Salvation, even for all the Poor and
Vulgar, wits, which is so much too hard for our most subtle Students?

2. And Christianity is as suitable to us, in the Benefit and Sweetness of it.
What a happy Religion is it that employeth men in nothing but receiving good to
themselves, and in doing good to themselves and others. Whose work is only the
Receiving and Improving of Gods Mercies, and Loving and Delighting in all that
is good, rejoicing in the tastes of Gods Love on Earth, and in the Hopes of
perfect Felicity, Love and Joy for ever. Is not this a sweeter life, than
tiresom, unprofitable Speculations.

O then how unexcuseable are our contemners of Religion, that live in wilful
Ignorance and ungodliness, and think this easy and sweet Religion, to be a
tedious and intolerable thing! What impudent Calumniators and Blasphemers are
they of Christ and Holiness, who deride and revile this sweet and easy way to
life, as if it were a slavery and an irksom toil, unnecessary to our Salvation,
and unfit for a freeman, or at least a Gentleman, (or a Servant of the flesh
and world) to practice. If Christ had set you but such a task as Aristotle, or
Plato did to their disciples; so many notions, and so many Curiosities to
learn; If he had written for you as many Books as Chrysippus did; If he had
made necessary to your Salvation, all the arbitrary notions of Lullius, and all
the Fanatic conceits of Campanella, and all the dreaming Hypotheses of
Cartesius, and all the Astronomical and Cosmographical difficulties of Ptolomy,
Tycho-Brache, Copernicus and Galilaeus, and all the Chronological difficulties
handled by Eusebius, Scaliger, Functius, Capellus, Petavius, etc. And all the
curiosities in Philosophy and Theology of Cajetane, Scotus, Ockam, Gabriel,
etc. Then you might have had some excuse for your aversation: But to accuse and
refuse, and reproach so Compendious, so Easy, so Sweet, so Necessary a
Doctrine and Religion, as that which is brought and taught by Christ, this is
an ingratitude that has no excuse, unless Sensuality and Malignant enmity may
pass for an excuse.

Does Christ deliver you from the maze of Imaginary Curiosities, and from the
burdens of worldly wisdom called Philosophy, and of Pharisaical Traditions, and
Jewish Ceremonies, and make you a light burden, an easy Yoke, and Commandments
that are not grievous, and after all this, must he be requited with Rejection
and Reproach, and your Burdens and Snares be taken for more tolerable than your
deliverance? You make a double forfeiture of Salvation, who are so unwilling to
be saved.

Be thankful, O Christians, to your heavenly Master, for tracing you out so
plain and sweet a way. Be thankful that he has cut short those tiresom
studies, by which your taskmasters would confound you, under pretense of
making you like Gods, in some more subtle and sublime Speculations than Vulgar
wits can reach. Now all that are willing may be Religious, and be saved: It is
not confined to men of learning. The way is so sweet, as shows it suitable to
the end. It is but [ Believe Gods Love and Promises of Salvation by Christ,
till you are filled with Love and its delights, and live in the pleasures of
Gratitude and Holiness, and in the Joyful hopes of endless Glory:] And is not
this an easy Yoke! Says our Heavenly Poet Mr. G. Herbert, in his Poem called
Divinity p. 127.

As men for fear the Stars should Sleep and Nod,
And trip at night, have Spheres supplied;
As if a Star were duller than a clod,
Which knows his way without a guide,
Just so the other Heaven they also serve,
Divinities transcendent Sky,
Which with the Edge of wit they Cut and Carve,
Reason Triumphs, and Faith lies by.
-- But all his Doctrine which he taught and gave,
Was clear as heaven from whence it came;
At least those Beams of truth which only save,
Surpass in Brightness any Flame:
Love God, and Love your Neighbors, watch and pray,
Do as you would be done unto.
O dark instructions! even as dark as day!
Who can these Gordian Knots undo?
Chap. 10.
The sixth Inference: How little reason ungodly men have to be proud of their
Learning, or of any sort of Knowledge or Wisdom whatsoever.

AS the ancient Gnostics, being puffed up with their corrupt Platonic
Speculations, looked down with contempt upon ordinary Christians, as silly
ignorants in comparison of them, and yet had not wisdom enough to preserve them
from the Lusts and Pollutions of the world; Even so is it with abundance of the
worldly Clergy and ungodly Scholars in this age. They think their Learning
sets them many degrees above the Vulgar, and gives them right to be
Reverenced as the Oracles or Rabbis of the World; When yet (poor Souls!) They
have not learned (by all their Reading, Studies and Disputings) to Love God and
Holiness, better than the Riches and Preferments of the World. And some of them
not better than a Cup of strong drink, or than the brutish pleasures of Sense
and Flesh. It is a pitiful thing to see the Pulpit made a Stage for the
ostentation of this self-shaming, self-condemning Pride and Folly: For a man
under pretense of serving God, and helping other men to Heaven, to make it his
errand to tell the hearers, that he is a very Wise and Learned man; who has
not wit enough to choose a holy, humble life, nor to make sure of Heaven or to
save his Soul; nor perhaps to keep out of the Tavern, or Alehouse the next
week, nor the same day to forbear the venting of his worldly, carnal mind. What
is such Learning, but a Game of Imagination, in which the Fantasy sports it
self with names and notions; or worse, the materials which are used in the
service of sin, the fuel of pride, the blinder and deceiver of such as were too
ignorant before, being a mere shadow and name of Knowledge? What good will it
do a man tormented with the Gout, or Stone, or by miserable poverty, to know
the names of various herbs, or to read the titles of the Apothecaries boxes, or
to read on a sign-post, Here is a good ordinary? And what good will it do a
carnal, unsanctified Soul, that must be in Hell for ever, to know the Hebrew
roots or points, or to discourse of Cartesius his materia subtilis and globuli
aetherei, etc. Or of Epicurus and Gassendus Atoms, or to look on the Planets
in Galileus Glasses, while he casts away all his hopes of Heaven, by his
unbelief, and his preferring the pleasures of the flesh? Will it comfort a man
that is cast out of Gods presence, and condemned to utter darkness, to
remember, that he was once a good Mathematician, or Logician, or Musician, or
that he had wit to get riches and preferments in the world, and to climb up to
the height of honor and dominion? It is a pitiful thing to hear, a man boast
of his wit, while he is madly rejecting the only felicity, forsaking God,
esteeming vanity, and damning his Soul! The Lord deliver us from such wit and
learning. Is it not enough to refuse Heaven and choose Hell (in the certain
causes) to lose the only day of their hopes, and in the midst of light, to be
incomparably worse than mad, but they must needs be accounted wise and learned,
in all this self-destroying folly? As if (like the Physician who boasted that
he killed men according to the Rules of art) it were the height of their
ambition to go learnedly to Hell, and with Reverend gravity and wit, to live
here like brutes, and hereafter with Devils for evermore.

Chap. 11.
The seventh Inference: Why the ungodly world hates Holiness, and not Learning.

FRom my very Childhood, when I was first sensible of the concernments of men's
Souls, I was possessed with some admiration, to find that every where the
Religious, godly sort of people, who did but exercise a serious care of their
own and other men's Salvation, were made the wonder and obloquy of the world;
Especially of the most vicious and flagitious men, so that they that professed
the same Articles of faith, the same Commandments of God to be their Law, and
the same Petitions of the Lords Prayer to be their desire, and so professed the
same Religion, did every where revile those that did endeavor to live
according to that same profession, and to seem to be in good sadness in what
they said. I thought that this was impudent Hypocrisy in the ungodly, worldly
sort of men! To take them for the most intolerable persons in the Land, who are
but serious in their own Religion, and do but endeavor to perform, what all
their Enemies also vowed and promised. If religion be bad, and our faith be not
true, why do these men profess it? If it be true and good, why do they hate and
revile them that would live in the serious practice of it, if they will not
practice it themselves? But we must not expect Reason, when sin and sensuality
have made men unreasonable.

But I must profess that since I observed the course of the world, and the
concord of the Word and Providence of God, I took it for a notable proof of
man's fall, and of the verity of the Scripture, and the supernatural Original of
true Sanctification, to find such an universal enmity between the holy and the
serpentine seed, and to find Cain and Abels case so ordinarily exemplified, and
him that is born after the Flesh to persecute him that is born after the
Spirit. And methinks to this day it is a great and visible help for the
confirmation of our Christian Faith.

But that which is much Remarkable in it is, that nothing else in the world
(except the Crossing of men's carnal interest) does meet with any such universal
enmity. A man may be as learned as he can, and no man hate him for it. If he
excel all others, all men will praise him and proclaim his excellency: He may
be an excellent Linguist, an excellent Philosopher, an excellent Physician, an
excellent Logician, an excellent Orator, and all commend him. Among Musicians,
Architects, Soldiers, Seamen, and all Arts and Sciences, men value, prefer and
praise the best; Yea even Speculative Theology, such wits as the Schoolmen and
those that are called great Divines, are honored by all, and meet, (as such)
with little Enmity, Persecution or Obloquy in the world. Though I know that
even a Galilaeus, a Campanella, and many such have suffered by the Roman
Inquisitors, that was not so much in enmity to their Speculations or Opinions,
as through a fear lest new Philosophical notions should unsettle men's minds,
and open the way to new opinions in Theology, and so prove injurious to the
Kingdom and Interest of Rome. I know also that Demosthenes, Cicero, Seneca,
Lucan, and many other learned men, have died by the hands or power of Tyrants.
But that was not for their Learning, but for their opposition to those Tyrants
Wills and Interests. And I know that some Religious men have suffered for their
Sins and Follies, and some for their meddling too much with secular affairs, as
the Councillors of Princes, as Functius, Justus Jonas, and many others. But
yet no Parts, no Excellency, no Skill or Learning is hated commonly, but
honored in the World, no not Theological Learning, save only this practical
Godliness and Religion, and the Principles of it, which only rendereth men
amiable to God (through Christ) and saves men's Souls. To know and love God,
and live as those that know and love him, to seek first his Kingdom and the
Righteousness thereof, to walk circumspectly, in a holy and heavenly
Conversation, and studiously to obey the Laws of God, this which must save us,
this which God loves and the Devil hates, is hated also by all his Children;
for the same malignity has the same effect.

But methinks this should teach all considering men to perceive what Knowledge
it is that is best, and most desirable to all that love their happiness. Sure
this sort of Learning, Wit and Art, which the Devil and the malignant World do
no more dispraise, oppose and persecute, (though as it is sanctified to higher
ends it be good, yet) of it self is comparatively no very excellent and amiable
thing. I know Satan labors to keep out Learning it self (that is truly such)
from the world, because he is the Prince and Promoter of darkness, and the
Enemy of all useful light: And lower Knowledge is some help to higher, and
speculative Theology may prepare for practical; and the most gross and brutish
ignorance best serves the Devils designs and turn. And even in Heathen Rome
the Arts prepared men for the Gospel; and Learning in the Church Reformers has
ever been a great help and furtherance of Reformation. But yet if you stop in
Learning and Speculation, and take it as for it self alone, and not as a means
to holiness of Heart and Life, it is as nothing. It is Paul's express
resolution of the case, that if we have all Knowledge without this holy Love,
we are nothing, but as sounding Brass or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.

But surely there is some special excellency in this holy knowledge, and Love,
and Obedience, which the Devil and the malignant World so hate, in high and
low, in rich and poor, in Kindred, Neighbors, Strangers, or any, where they
meet with it. It is not for nothing. This is the Image of God; this is it that
is contrary to their carnal Minds, and to their fleshly Lusts, and sinful
Pleasures. This tells them what they must be and do (or be undone for ever)
which they cannot abide to be or do.

Let us therefore be somewhat the wiser for this discovery of the mind of the
Devil and all his Instruments: I will love and honor all Natural, Artificial,
acquired Excellencies, in Philology, Philosophy, and the rest: As these expose
not men to the Worlds Obloquy, so neither unto mine or any sober man's. In their
low places they are good, and may be used to a greater good. But let that holy
knowledge and love be mine, which God most loves, and the World most hates,
and costeth us dearest upon Earth, but has the blessed end of a Heavenly
Reward.

Chap. XII.
The eighth Inference: What is the work of a faithful Preacher, and how it is
to be done.

IF that Knowledge which kindles in us the Love of God, be the only saving
Knowledge, then this is it that Ministers must principally preach up and
promote. Could we make all our hearers never so learned, that will not save
their Souls: But if we could make them holy, and kindle in them the love of God
and goodness, they should certainly be saved. The holy practical Preacher
therefore is the best Preacher, because the holy practical Christian is the
best and only true Christian. We work under Christ, and therefore must carry on
the same work on Souls which Christ came into the World to carry on. All our
Sermons must be fitted to change men's Hearts, from Carnal into Spiritual, and
to kindle in them the love of God. When this is well done, they have learnt
what we were sent to teach them; and when this is perfect, they are in Heaven.

Those Preachers that are Enemies to the godliest of the people, and would make
their Hearers take them all for Hypocrites, that go any further than obedience
to their Pastors, in Church-forms and Orders, Observances and Ceremonies, and a
civil Life, are the great Enemies of Christ, his Spirit, his Gospel and the
Peoples Souls; and the Eminent Servants of the Devil, in his malignant War
against them all. All that Knowledge, and all those Formalities, which are set
up instead of divine Love and holy Living, are but so many cheats, to deceive
poor Souls till time be past, and their convictions come to late.

I confess that ignorance is the calamity of our times, and people perish for
lack of Knowledge: And that the Heart be without Knowledge it is not good: And
lamentable ignorance is too visible in a great degree, among the religious sort
themselves; as their manifold differences and errors too openly proclaim: And
therefore to Build up men in Knowledge, is much of the Ministerial work. But
what Knowledge must it be? Not dead Opinions, or uneffectual Notions, or such
Knowledge as tends but to teach men to talk, and make them pass for men of
parts: But it is the Knowledge of God and our Redeemer, the Knowledge of Christ
Crucified, by which we Crucify the Flesh with all its Affections and Lusts:
And by which the World is Crucified to us, and we to it. If the Gospel be hid
it is hid to them that are lost in whom the God of this World has blinded
their Eyes; when there is no truth and mercy, and knowledge of God in the Land,
no wonder if such a Land be clad in mourning. When men have not so much
Knowledge of the evil of sin, and their own sin and misery, and of the need and
worth of Christ, of the truth of Gods Word, of the vanity of the World, of the
greatness, wisdom and goodness of God, and of certain, most desirable Glory of
Heaven, as shall humble their Souls, and turn them from the World to God, and
absolutely deliver them up to Christ, and mortify fleshly Lusts, and overcome
temptations, and renew them unto the Love of God and goodness, and set their
Hearts and Hopes on Heaven. This is the ignorance that is men's damnation: And
the contrary effectual Knowledge is it which saves Souls.

Chap. XIII.
The ninth Inference: Those that Know God so far as to Love him above all, may
have comfort notwithstanding their remaining ignorance.

A Great number of upright hearted Christians, who Love God sincerely, and obey
him faithfully, are yet under so great want of further knowledge, as is indeed
a great dishonor to them, and a hinderance of them in their duty and comfort,
and to many a great discouragement: And O that we knew how to cure this
imperfection, that Ignorance might not feed so many Errors, and cause so many
fractions and disturbances in the Church, and so many sinful miscarriages in
its members!

But yet we must conclude that the person that has knowledge enough to renew
his Soul to the Love of God, shall be loved by him, and shall never perish, and
therefore may have just comfort under all the imperfections of his knowledge.
More wisdom might make him a better and more useful Christian: But while he is
a Christian indeed, he may rejoice in God. I blame not such for complaining of
the dullness of their Understandings, the badness of their Memories, their
little profiting by the means of Grace: I should blame them if they did not
complain of these: And I think their case far more dangerous to the Church and
to themselves, who have as much ignorance and know it not, but proudly glory in
the wisdom which they have not. But many a thousand Christians, that have
little of the Notional and Organical part of Knowledge, have powerful
apprehensions of the Power, Wisdom and Love of God, and of the great Mercy of
Redemption, and of the Evil of Sin, the Worth of Holiness, and the Certainty
and Weight of the Heavenly Glory: And by how much these men love God and
Holiness more than the more Learned that have less Grace; by so much they are
more beloved of God, and accounted wiser by the God of wisdom; and therefore
may rejoice in the greatness of their felicity. I would have none so weak as to
under-value any real useful Learning: But if Pharisees will cry out against
unlearned, godly Christians, [These people know not the Law and are accursed;]
Remember the Thanksgiving of your Lord, I thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them to Babes. And as the (reputed) foolishness of God (that is, of
Gods Evangelical Mysteries) will shortly prove wiser, than all the reputed
wisdom of men; so he that has wisdom enough to love God and be saved, shall
quickly be in that World of light, where he shall know more than all the
Doctors and subtle disputers upon Earth, and more (in a moment) than all the
Books of men can teach him, or all their Authors did ever (here) know. Jer.
9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in
his riches. But let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness and
righteousness in the Earth: For in these things do I delight, says the Lord.

Chap. XIV.
Questions and Objections answered.

Quest. 1. IF so much knowledge will save a man as helps him to love God as
God, may not Heathens or Infidels at least be saved? For they know that there
is one God who is Infinitely Good and Perfect, and more amiable than all the
World, and the great Benefactor of man, and of the whole Creation: So that
there is no goodness but what is in him, or from him, and through him, and
finally to him: And man's will is made to love apprehended good, and follows
the last practical act of the Intellect, at least where there is no Competitor,
but omnimoda ratio boni. And all men know that God is not only Best in himself,
but Good, yea Best to them, because that all they have is from him: And they
have daily Experience of pardoning Grace contrary to their Commerit. It seems
therefore that they may love God as God.

Ans. 1. To cause a man to Love God as God, there is necessary both Objective
Revelation of God's Amiableness, and such Subjective Grace which consists in
a right Disposition of the Soul. 2. Objective Revelation is considered as
sufficient either to well disposed, or to an ill disposed Soul. 3. This Right
disposition consists both in the abatement of men's Inclinations to contrary
(sensual) objects, and in the inclining them to that which is Divine and
Spiritual. And now I answer,

1. It cannot be denied but that so much of God's Amiableness or Goodness is
revealed to Infidels that have not the Gospel, by the means mentioned in the
Objection, as is sufficient to bring men under an obligation to love God as
God, and to leave them unexcusable that do not.

2. Therefore to such the Impossibility is not Physical, but Moral.

3. And there is in that objective Revelation, so much sufficiency, as that if
the Soul it self were sanctified and well disposed, it might love God upon such
revelation. (Which Amyraldus has largely proved.)

4. But to an unholy and undisposed Soul no objective Revelation is sufficient
without the Spirits help and operations.

Of all this I have discoursed more largely in my Cath. Theology, and the
applied Epitome.
5. Only the Spirit of Christ the Mediator, as given by and from him, does thus
operate on Souls, as savingly to renew them.

6. Whether ever the Spirit of Christ does thus operate on any that hear not of
Christ's Incarnation, must be known either by the Scripture or by experience. By
the Scripture I am not able to prove the Universal Negative, though it is easy
to prove sanctification incomparably more common in the Church, than on those
without, if any there have it. The case of Infants, and of the Churches, and
the World before Christ's Incarnation, must here come into consideration. 2. And
by experience no man can prove the Negative; because no man has experience
what is in the Hearts of all the persons in the World.

Q. 2. May a Papist or an Heretic by his knowledge be a lover of God as God?

Ans. What is said to the former question is here to be reviewed. And further,
1. A Papist and such Heretic as positively holds all the essentials of
Christianity, and sees not the opposition of his false opinions hereto, and
holds Christianity more practically than those false opinions, may be saved
in that state, for he is a Lover of God: But no other Papists or Heretics can
be saved but by a true conversion. 2. There is a sufficiency in the Doctrine of
Christianity which they hold, to save them, as to Objective Sufficiency. And
that God gives not subjective Grace (of Sanctification) to any such,
notwithstanding their errors, is a thing that no man can prove, nor any sober
charitable Christian easily believe: And experience of the piety of many makes
it utterly improbable, though we know not certainly the Heart of another.

There are many murmurings against me in this City (behind my back: for never
one man of them to my remembrance to this day, did ever use any charitable
endeavor to my face to convince me of my supposed error) as one that holds
that a Papist may be saved, yea, that we are not certain that none in the World
are saved besides Christians; and the Sectaries whisper me to one another to be
like Origin, a person in these dangerous opinions, forsaken of God, in
comparison of them: What really I assert about these Questions, I have here
briefly hinted; but more largely opened in my Catholic Theology: But I will
confess that I find no inclination in my Soul, to desire that their doctrine
may prove true, who hide the Glorified love of God, and would contract his
Mercy and Man's Salvation into so narrow a Room, as to make it hardly
discernable by man, and the Church to be next to no Church, and a Savior to
save so very few, as seem scarce considerable among the rest that are left
remediless. And who would make us believe that the way appointed to bring men
to the Love of God, is, to believe that he has elected that particular person,
and left almost all the World (many score or hundreds to one) unredeemed, and
without any promise or possibility of Salvation: I am sure that the covenant of
Innocence is ceased; And I am sure that all the World was brought under a Law
of Grace made after the fall to Adam and Noe: And that this Law is still in
force to those that have not the more perfect edition in the Gospel. And that
Christ came not to bring the World that never hear of him nor can do, into a
worse condition than Jews and Gentiles were in before: nor has he repealed
that Law of Grace which he before made them; nor has God changed that Gracious
Name which he proclaimed even to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7. And I am sure that
Abraham the Father of the Faithful conjectured once, even when God told him
that Sodom was ripe for destruction, that yet there might be fifty Righteous
persons in it; By which we may conjecture what he thought of all the World
Read, Man. 1.14. with all the old Translations in the Polyglot Bible, and
consider it.
. And I know that in every Nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him; And that he that comes to God must believe
that God is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and
therefore without Faith none can please God: And that men shall be judged by
that same Law which they were under and obliged by, whatever it be. And they
that have sinned under the Law (of Moses) shall be judged by it; And they that
sinned without that Law shall be judged without it. And I know that God is LOVE
it self and Infinitely Good; and will show us his goodness in such Glorious
Effects to all eternity as shall satisfy us and fill us with Joyful praise: And
as for the Papists, I know that they are seduced by a worldly Clergy, and that
by consequence many of the Errors in that Church do subvert the Fundamentals;
And so do many Errors of the Antinomians and others among us that are taken for
religious persons; yea and as notoriously as any Doctrines of the Popish
Councils do: But I know that as a Logical Faith or Orthodoxness, which
consists in holding right Notions and Words, deceives thousands that have no
sound belief of the things themselves expressed by these words; So also Logical
errors about Words, Notions and Sentences, may in unskilful men consist with a
Sound Belief of the Things which must necessarily be believed. And that Christ
and Grace may be thankfully received by many that have false Names and Notions,
and Sayings about Christ and Grace. And I know the great Power of Education and
Converse, and what advantage an opinion has even with the upright, which is
commonly extolled by Learned, Godly, Religious men, especially if by almost
all. Therefore I make no doubt but God has many among the Papists, and the
Antinomians, (to name no others) who are truly Godly, though they Logically or
Notionally hold such errors as if Practically held would be their damnation,
and if the consequents were known and held: Much more when thousands of the
Common People, hold not the errors of the Church which they abide in. And it
shall not be my way of persuading my own Soul or others to Love God, by first
persuading them that he Loves but few besides them. And when such have
narrowed Gods Love and mercy to all save their own party, and made themselves
easily believe that he will damn the rest of the world, even such as are
desirous to please God as they are, they have but prepared a Snare for their
own Consciences, which may perhaps when it is awakened as easily believe that
he will damn themselves. Let us give all diligence to make our own calling and
election sure, and leave others to the righteous God, to whose Judgment they
and we must stand or fall. Who art thou that judge another Servant?

As the Covenant of Peculiarity was made only with the Israelites, though the
Common Law of grace (made to Adam and Noe) was in force to other Nations of the
World; So the more excellent Covenant of Peculiarity is since Christ's
Incarnation made only with the Christian Church, though the foresaid Common Law
of Grace be not repealed to all others: Nor can it be said that they sin not
against a Law of Grace; or mercy leading to repentance.

And as the Covenant of Peculiarity was not repealed to the ten tribes (though
the benefit^s were much forfeited by their violation;) but God had still
Thousands among them in Elias time that bowed not the knee to Baal, and such as
Obadiah to hide the Prophets; though yet the Jews were the more Orthodox: Even
so though the Reformed Churches, as the two Tribes, stick closer to the truth,
the Kingdoms where Popery prevails, have yet many thousands that God will
save; and notwithstanding their errors and corrupt additions, they have the
same Articles of Faith and Baptismal Covenant as we. And if any man think
himself the wiser or the happier man than I, for holding the contrary, and
thinking so many are hated of God more than I do (and consequently rendering
him less lovely to them,) I envy not such the honor nor comfort of their
wisdom.

Obj. III. You will thus confirm our Ignorant people in their presumption, that
tell Professors of Godliness, I Love God above all, and my Neighbor as my
self, though I do not know and talk, and pray so much as you do.

Ans. Either they do so Love God and Man, or they do not: If they do, they are
good and happy men, though you call them ignorant: Yea he is far from being an
Ignorant man that knows God and Christ, and Heaven and Holiness so well as to
be unfeignedly in Love with them. But if he do not, what say I to his
encouragement in presumption! But you must take another course to cure him,
than by calling him to a barren sort of Knowledge. You must show him that the
Love of God is an operative principle, and where it is will have dominion and
be highest in the Soul, and that telling God that we Love him, while we love
not his Law, his Service, or his Children, yea while we love our Appetite, our
Wealth, our Credit, and every beastly lust above him, and while we cannot abide
much to think or hear talk of him, this is but odious Hypocrisy, which
deceives the sinner, and makes him more abominable to God.

But if really you see a poor Neighbor whom you count ignorant, live as one
that loves God and Goodness, take heed that you proudly despise not Christ's
little ones; but Love and Cherish those sparks that are kindled and Loved by
Christ: The least are called by Christ, his Brethren, and their interest made
as his own, Mat. 25. And the least have their Angels which see the face of God
in Heaven.

Qu. IV. How then are Infants saved that neither have knowledge nor Love.

Ans. 1. While they have no Wills of their own, which are capable of holy
duties, they are as members of their Parents whose Wills are theirs; and who
know God and Love him, for themselves and their Infants: As the Hand and Foot
does not know or Love God in itself, and yet is holy, in that it is the Hand or
Foot of one that does know and Love him.

2. Sanctified Infants have that Grace which is the seed of holy Love, though
they have not yet the Act nor proper habit of Love. I call it as seed, because
it is a holy disposition of the Soul, by which it is (not only Physically as
all are, but) Morally able to Love God, when they come to the use of reason, or
at least mediately to do that which shall conduce to holy Love.

3. And in this state being Loved of God and known of him as the Children of
his Grace and Promise, they are happy in his Love to them: For he will give
their natures their due capacity in his way which we are not yet fit to be
fully acquainted with, and he will fill up that Capacity with his Love and
Glory.

Obj. V. If this hold, away with universities, and all our Volumes and Studies
of Physics, Mathematics and other Sciences; for they must needs divert our
thoughts from the Love of God! And then Turks, Muscovites and other contemners
of Learning are in the right.

Ans. There is a right and a wrong use of all these: As there is of Arts and
business of the world: One man so follows his trade and worldly business as
to divert, distract or corrupt his mind, and drown all holy thoughts and Love;
and leave no due place for holy diligence. And another man so follows his
calling, as that Heaven has still his heart and hope, and his labor is made
but part of his obedience to God, and his way to life eternal, and all is
Sanctified by holy Principles, End and Manner: And so it is about common
Learning, Sciences or Arts: And I have proved to you, that among too many
called great Scholars in the world, many books and much reading and
acquaintance with all the arts of speaking, with Grammar, Logic, Oratory,
Metaphysics, Physics, History, Laws, etc. is but one of Satan's Last and
Subtlest means of wasting precious time, deceiving Souls, and keeping such
persons from pursuing the ends of their excellent wit, and of life itself, that
would not have been cheated, diverted and undone, by the grosser way of brutish
pleasures: But holy Souls have a Sanctified use of all their common knowledge,
making it serve their high and holy ends. But O that some Learned men would in
time, as well understand the difference between common Learning (which serves
fancy, pride or worldly hopes) and the Love of God and a heavenly life, as they
must know it when they come to die.

Chap. XV.
Use, Exhort. Not to deceive our selves by overvaluing a dead or an unholy
Knowledge.

IT grieveth my Soul to observe how powerfully, and how commonly Satan still
plays his first deceiving game, of calling off man from Love, Trust and
Obedience, to an ensnaring and troublesome, or unprofitable sort of Knowledge:
And how the Lust of knowing carries away many unsuspected to misery, who
escape the more dishonorable sort of lust! And especially what abundance in
several ways, take Notional Knowledge, which is but an Art of thinking and
talking, for real Knowledge, which is our acquaintance with God and Grace, and
which changed the Soul into the Image of him that we seek and know, and fills
us with Love, and Trust, and Joy.

Two sorts are especially here guilty. I. The Learned Students before
described. II. The superficial sort of people accounted Religious.


I. I have already showed how pitiful a thing it is, that so many Academical
Wits, and so many Preachers, (to say nothing of the grossly proud, tyrannical
and worldly Clergy) do spend so many years in studies, that are used but in the
service of the flesh, to their own condemnation, and never bend their minds to
kindle in themselves the Love of God, nor a heavenly Desire or Hope, nor to
live in the comfortable prospect of Glory: How many preach up that Love and
Holiness, (as the Trade that they must live by) which they never fervently
preached to themselves, nor practiced sincerely one hour in their lives! How
many use to preach Funeral Sermons, and bury the dead, that are unprepared for
death themselves, and hardened in their security and unholy state, by those
sights, those studies, those words which should awaken and convince them, and
which they plead themselves for the conviction of their hearers! O miserable
Scholars! Miserable Preachers! Miserable Doctors and Prelates, who study and
preach to their own condemnation, and have not knowledge enough to teach them
to Love God, nor to set more by the heavenly Glory, than this World; but by
spiritual words do both hide and cherish a fleshly and a worldly mind! You will
find at Death that all your Learning was but a Dream, and one of the Vanities
that entangle fools, and you will die as sadly as the unlearned, and be beaten
with more stripes than they that knew not their Masters will.

1. Unholy Knowledge is but a carcass, a shadow, the activity of a vain mind,
or a means without the end, and unfit to attain it. A Map is not a Kingdom, nor
does it much enrich the owner. The names of meats and drinks will not nourish
you: And to know names and notions gives you no title to the things so named.
You may as well think to be saved for being good Musicians, Physicians, or
Astronomers, as for being Learned Divines, if your Knowledge cause not holy
Love: It may help others to Heaven, but it will be but vanity to you, and you
will be a sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1. You glory in a
lifeless picture of Wisdom, and Hell may shortly tell you that you had better
have chosen any thing to play the fools with, than with the notions and words
of Wisdom mortified.

2. Nay, such profanation of holy things is a heinous sin. Who is liker the
Devil than he that knows most, and loves God least? To know that you should
love, and seek God most, and not to do it, is wilfully to despise him in the
open light. As the privation of God's Love is the chief part of Hell; so the
privation of our Love to God is the chief part of ungodliness or sin; yea and
much of Hell it self. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. Unholy
Knowledge is a powerful Instrument of Satan's service; in the service of Pride,
and Ambition, and Heresy; one Learned and witty ungodly man, will merit more
of the Devil by mischieving Mankind, than many of the common unlearned sort:
And none are so like impenitently to glory in this sin: They will be proud of
such adorned Fetters; that they can sin Philosophically, and Metaphysically, in
Greek and Hebrew, and with Logical subtilty, or Oratorical fluency, prove
against unlearned men, that they do well in damning their own Souls, and that
God and Heaven are not worthy of their chiefest love and diligence; such men
will offend God more judiciously than the ignorant, and will more discreetly
and honorably fool away their hopes of Heaven, and more successfully deceive
the simple: Their Wisdom, like Achitophel's, will serve turn to bring them to
destroy themselves: And is it any wonder if this be foolishness with God? 1
Cor. 3.19.

The understanding of a man is a faculty unfit to be abused and prostituted to
the slavery of the Flesh. The abuse of the senses is bad, but of the
understanding worse; because it is a nobler faculty. When they that knew God,
glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imagination, their foolish
heart was darkened, and professing themselves wise ( Philosophers or Gnostics)
they became fools, Romans 1.21, 28. And as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, God gave them up to vile affections. And yet many are proud of
this mortal Tympanite, as if it were a sound and healthful Constitution! And
think they have the surest right to Heaven for neglecting it knowingly, and
going learnedly in the way to Hell.

3. You lose the chiefest delight of knowledge: O that you knew what holy
quietness and peace, what solid pleasure that knowledge brings, which
kindles and cherishes holy love, and leads the Soul to Communion with God;
and how much sweeter it is to have a powerful and experimental knowledge, than
your trifling dreams? The Learned of you all have but the Husks or Shells of
knowledge; and what great sweetness is in Shells, when the poorest holy
experienced Christian has the Kernel, which is far more pleasant? O try a more
serious practical Religion, and I dare assure you, it will afford you a more
solid kind of nourishment and delight. The pleasure of the speculative Divine
in knowing, is but like the pleasure of a Mathematician or other Speculator of
Nature; yea below that of the Moral Philosopher: It is but like my pleasure in
reading a Book of Travels or Geography; in comparison of the true practical
Christians, which is like their pleasure that live in those Countries, and
possess the Lands and Houses which I read of.

4. Nay, (yet worse) this unholy knowledge does often make men the Devils most
powerful and mischievous Instruments: For though Christ often also so overruled
the Hearts of Men, and the Course of the World, as to make the knowledge and
gifts of bad Men serviceable to his Church (as wicked Soldiers often fight in a
good Cause, and save the lives of better men) yet a worldly mind is likest to
follow the way of worldly interest; and it is but seldom that worldly interest
does suite with, and serve the interest of truth and holiness, but more
commonly is its greatest adversary: Therefore most usually it must be expected
that such worldly men should be adversaries to the same truth and holiness
which their worldly interest is adverse to. And hence has arisen that Proud
and Worldly, and Tyrannical Clergy, which has set up and maintained the Roman
Kingdom, under the Name of the Holy Catholic Church; and which has by their
Pope and pretended General Councils usurped a Legislative and Executive Power
over the whole Christian World, and made great numbers of Laws without
Authority, and contrary to the Laws of Christ; multiplying Schisms on pretense
of suppressing them, and making so many things necessary to the Concord of
Christians, as has made such Concord become impossible; presumptuously voting
other men to be Heretics, while their own Errors are of as odious a kind,
yea, when holy Truth is sometime branded by them as Heresy. And when they
cannot carry the Judgments, Consciences and Wills of all men along in obedience
to their Tyrannical Pride and Lust, and Interest, they stir up Princes and
States to serve them by the Sword, and Murder, and Persecute their own
Subjects, and raise bloody Wars against their Neighbors, to force them to obey
these proud Seducers: Yea, and if Kings and States be wiser than thus to be
made their Hangmen or bloody Executioners (to the ruin of their best Subjects,
and their own Everlasting Infamy and Damnation) they stir up the foolish part
of the Subjects against such Rulers, and in a word, they will give the World no
peace: So that I am past all doubt that the Ten Heathen Persecutions so much
cried out of, was but a small matter as against the Christians Blood, in
comparison of what has been done by this Tyrannical Clergy: And the cruelest
Magistrates still seem to come short of them in cruelty, and seldom are very
bloody or persecuting, but when a worldly or proud Clergy stirs them up to it.
And all the Heresies that ever sprang up in the Church, do seem to have done
less harm on one side, than by pretenses of Unity, Order and Government, they
have done on the other. O how unspeakably have been and still are the Churches
Sufferings, by a proud and worldly Clergy, and by men's abuse of pretended
Learning and Authority!

5. I will add yet one more considerable mischief; that is, that your
unholiness and carnal minds for all your Learning, corrupts your judgments,
and greatly hinders you from receiving many excellent truths, and inclines
you to many mortal errors. To instance in some particulars.

1. About the Attributes and Government of God, a bad man is inclined to doubt
of Gods particular Providence, his holy Truth and Justice, and to think God is
such a one as he would have him to be. Whereas they that have the love of God
and goodness, have his Attributes as it were written on their Hearts; that he
is Good, and Wise, and Holy, and Just, and True, they know by an Experimental
certain knowledge, which is to them like Nature and Life it self. Joh. 17.3.
Hos. 2.20. Psalm. 34.8. etc.

2. The very truth of the Gospel and Mystery of Redemption is far hardlier
believed by a man that never felt his need of Christ, nor ever had the
operations of that Spirit on his Soul, which are its Seal, than by them that
have the witness in themselves, and have found Christ actually save them from
their sins: Who are regenerated by this holy Seed, and nourished by this Milk.
1 John 5.10, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. and 1 Pet. 2.2.

3. Yea the very truth of our Souls Immortality, and the Life and Glory to
come, is far hardlier believed by them who feel no inclination to suc^ a future
Glory, Romans 5.2, 3. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. and 5.1, 2, 3, etc.
but only a propensity to this present Life, and the interest and pleasures of
it, than by them that have a Treasure, a Home, a Heart, and a Conversation in
Heaven, and that long for nearer Communion with God, and that have the Earnest
and First Fruits of Heaven within them. Math. 6.20, 21. Phil. 3.20, 21. Col.
4.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 8.17, 18, 19, 20.

4. The evil of sin in general, and consequently what is sin in particular, is
hardlier known by a man that loves it, and would not have it to be sin, than
by one that hates it, 1 Cor. 2.14. Joh. 9.40.
and loves God and holiness above all. They that love the Lord hate evil.

5. Most Controversies about the Nature of Grace, are hardlier understood by
them that have it not, than by them that have it as a new Nature in them. And
consequently what kind of Persons are to be well thought of as the Children of
God? The Pharisees were strict, and yet haters of Christ and Christians: Many
Preach and Write for godliness, that yet when it comes to a particular
judgment, deride the godly as Hypocrites or Superstitious.

6. In cases about the worship of God, a carnal Mind, how Learned soever, is
apt to relish most an outside, carnal, ceremonious way, and to be all for a
dead formality, or else for a proud ostentation of their own Wits, Opinions and
Parts, or some odd singularity that sets them up to be admired as some
extraordinary Persons, or teaches their own Consciences so to flatter them:
When a Spiritual Man is for worshipping God (though with all decent Externals,
yet) in Spirit and in Truth; and in the most understanding, sincere and humble
manner, and yet with the greatest joy and praise. Romans 8.16, 26, etc.

7. Specially in the work of self-judging, how hard a work have the most
Learned that are ungodly truly to know themselves? When Learning does but help
their Pride to blind them? And yet none so apt to say as the Pharisees, John
9.10. Are we blind also? And to hate those that honor them not as erroneously
as they do themselves: And therefore Augustine so lamenteth the misery of the
Clergy, and says that the unlearned take Heaven by violence, when the Learned
are thrust down to Hell with all their learning! who are prouder and more
self-ignorant Hypocrites in the World (expecting that all should bow to them
and reverence them, and cry them up as wise and excellent men) than the Unholy,
Worldly Fleshly Clergy.

8. And in every case that themselves are much concerned in, their Learning
will not keep them from the most blind in Justice: Let the case be but such as
their honor, or profit, or relations and friends are much concerned in, and
they presently take all Right to be on their side; and all these to be honest
men that are for them, and all those to be wicked Hypocrites, Heretics,
Schismatics, Factious, or Liars, that are against them; and dare print to the
world that most notorious truths in matters of fact are lies, and lies are
truths, and corrupt all History where they are but concerned: So that
experience has taught me to give little credit to any History written by men,
in whom I can perceive this double Character, 1. That they are worldly and
unconscionable; 2. And concerned by a personal Interest; especially when they
revile their Adversaries. And money, friends or honor will make any Cause true
and just with them, and can confute all evidences of truth and innocence.
Learned Judges are too often corrupt.

9. And in cases of great Temptation, how insufficient is Learning to repel the
Tempter, when it is easily done by the holy Love of God and Goodness? How easily
is a man's Judgment tempted to think well of that which he loves, and ill of
that which his heart is against?

Many such Instances I might give you, but these fully show the misery and
folly of ungodly Scholars, that are but blinded by dead notions, and words of
Art, to think they know something, when they know nothing as they ought to
know; and to hate truth and goodness, and speak evil of the things they know
not, while for want of holy Love, these tinkling Cymbals do but deceive
themselves, and ascertain their own damnation.

II. I should next have said as much of the vanity and snare of the Knowledge
of such Gnostics, as in an over-valuing of their own Religious skill and
gifts, cry out as the Pharisees, This people that know not the Law are cursed.
But what is said is applicable to them.

Chap. XVI.
Love best the Christians that have most Love to God and Man.

IF God Love those most that have most Love, and not those that have most
barren Knowledge; then so must we, even all that take God's Wisdom as
infallible: Of whom can we know better whom to Love and Value, than of him that
is Wisdom and Love it self? There is more savoury worth in the experience,
affections, and heavenly tendency of holy Souls, than in all the subtilties of
Learned Wits. When a man comes to die, who savoureth not more Wisdom in the
Sacred Scripture, and in holy Treatises, than in all Aristotle's Learned works?
And who had not then rather hear the talk and prayers of a holy person, than
the most accurate Logic or Mathematics? Alas! what are these but trifles to a
dying man? And what they will be to a dying man, they should be much to us all
our life; unless we would never be wise till it is too late.

And among men seeming Religious, it is not the Religious wrangler or disputer,
nor the Zealous reviler of his Brethren, that can hotly cry down on one side,
These men are Heretical; or on the other, These are Antichristian, that are the
Lovely persons: Not they that on one side cry out, Away with these from the
Ministry and Church as disobedient to us? Or on the other, Away with these from
our Communion as not holy enough to join with us? It is not they that
proudliest persecute to prove their Zeal, nor they that proudliest separate
from others to prove it; but it is they that live in the love of God and Man,
that are beloved of God and Man. Nature teaches all men to love those that
love them. And the Divine Nature teaches us to love those much more that love
God and goodness. Though love be an act of obedience as commanded, yet has it
a Nature also above mere obedience; and bare commanding will not cause it. No
man loves God or man only because he is commanded so to do; but because he
perceives them to be good and amiable. And the most loving are the most lovely
so be it their love be rightly guided. Does it not kindle love in you to
others, more, to hear their Breathings after God, and Grace, and Glory, and to
see them loving and kind to all, and delighting to do all the good they can,
and covering tenderly the infirmities of others, and practicing, 1 Cor. 13. and
living at peace among themselves, and as much as is possible with all men, and
loving their Enemies, and blessing those that curse them, and patiently bearing
and forgiving wrongs, than to come into one Congregation and hear a Priest
teach the people to hate their Brethren as Schismatics or Heretics; or in
another, and hear a man teach his Followers to hate others as Antichristian or
Ceremonious? Or to hear silly Men and Women talk against things that are quite
beyond their reach; and shaking the Head to talk against Dissenters, and say,
Such a one is an erroneous or dangerous man, take heed of hearing him? Such a
one is for or against Reprobation, Free Will, Universal Redemption, Man's Power,
and such like, which they little understand. In a word, the proudly Tyrannical,
and the proudly Schismatical, with all their pretense of Learning on one side,
or of the Spirit and Holiness, and Gifts on the other, are no whit so amiable
as the single-hearted, honest, peaceable Christian, who preaches love, and
prays love, and lives, and breaths, and practices love. Paul says, that
all the Law is fulfilled in love; and fulfilling is more than knowing it. And
Christ himself did not in vain sum up all the Commandments in the love of God
and Man, Nor in vain ask Peter thrice: Love thou me? nor in vain so often
charge it on them, as his new (that is his last) Commandment, that they love
one another? Nor does his beloved Apostle John in vain so earnestly write for
love.

Chap. XVII.
Exhort. Plead not against Love or works of Love, upon pretense of a cross
Interest of Learning, Knowledge, Gifts, Church Order, Discipline, etc. or any
other thing.

IF LOVE be that which is most amiable in us to the God of Love, then as
nothing in the World can excuse him that is without it, nor render him lovely
indeed to God and Man, so nothing must be made a pretense against it. And no
pretense will excuse that man, or that Society that is against it. Even
corrections and severities when they must be used, must come from love, and be
wholly ordered to the ends and interest of love. And when necessity calls for
destructive Executions, which tend not to the good of him that is Executed, yet
must they tend to the good of the Community or of many, and come from a greater
love than is due to one, or else that which otherwise would be laudable
Justice, is but Cruelty: For the punishment of Offenders is good and just,
because tending to the common good, Debentur Reipublicae, the Community have
Jus, a Right to them as a means to their good: So that it is Love that is the
Amiableness of Justice it self.

If any think that Gods Justice is a cross instance, let him consider, 1. That
though the most public or common good be our end next the ultimate, yet the
true ultimate end of all things, is God himself: And the love of God is the
highest love: And Gods Justice is not without that love of himself, and tends
to that good which he is capable of receiving, which is but the fulfilling or
complacency of his own will, which is but improperly called his Receiving. 2.
And we little know how many in another World, or in the renewed Earth, are to
be profited by his Justice on the damned, as Angels and Men are by his Justice
on the Devils.

1. LOVE is the Life of Religion, and of the Soul, and of the Church: And what
can be a just pretense for any, to destroy or oppose the very Life of Religion,
the Life of Souls, and the Life of the Church of Christ! Physic, Blood-letting
and Dismembring may be used for Life: But to take away Life, except necessarily
for a Good that is better than that life, is Murder: And what is it that is
better than the Life of Religion in all matters of Religion? Or than the life
of the Church in all Church affairs? Or than the life of men's Souls in all
matters of Soul concernment?

2. LOVE is the great command and summary of all the Law: And what can be a
just pretense for breaking the greatest command, yea, and the whole Law?

3. LOVE is Gods Image, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, who is
LOVE, and God in him: And what can be a pretense sufficient for destroying the
Image of God, which is called by his name?

4. There is nothing in man that God himself loves better than our love* And
therefore nothing that as better can be set against it.

And yet alas, what enmity is used in the World against the Love of God and
Man? and many things alleged as pretenses to justify it? Let us consider of
some few of them.

1. The great Tyrants of the World, such as in several ages have been the
Plagues of their own and neighbor Nations, care not what havoc they make of
Religion, and of men's lives, by Bloody Wars and Cruel Persecutions* destroying
many thousands, and undoing far more thousands of the Country Families where
their armies come, and sacrificing the lives of the best of their subjects by
butcheries or flames? And what is the pretense for all this? Perhaps they would
be Lords of more of the World, and would have larger Kingdoms: Or more honor:
Perhaps some Prince has spoken a hard word of them, or done them some wrong:
Perhaps some subjects believe not as they bid them believe; or forbear not to
worship God in a manner which they forbid them: Perhaps Daniel will not give
over praying for a time, or the Apostles will not give over preaching, or the
three Confessors will not fall down to the Golden Image; and so Nebuchadnezzar,
or the other Rulers seem despised: And their wills and honor are an Interest
that with them seems to warrant all this. But how long will it seem so? I had
rather any friend of mine had the Sins of a Thief or Drunkard or the most
infamous Sinner among us to answer for, than the Sins of a Bloody Alexander,
Caesar or Tamerlane.

2. The Roman Clergy set up Inquisitions, force men by cruelties to submit to
their Church Keys, whose very nature is to be used without force, and they
silence, yea torment the faithful Ministers of Christ, and have murdered
thousands of his faithful people raised rebellions against Princes and Wars in
Kingdoms; and taught men to hate Gods Servants as Heretics, Schismatics,
Rebels, Factious, and what not? And what pretense must justify all this? Why
the Interest of the Pope and Clergy, called in ignorance or craft by the name
of the Holy Church, Religion, Unity, and such other honorable name. But must
their Church live on Blood? and holy Blood? And be built or preserved by the
destruction of Christ's Church? Must their doctrine be kept up by silencing
faithful Ministers? and their worship by destroying or undoing the true
worshippers of Christ? Are all these precious things which die with Love, no
better than to be sacrificed to the Clergies Pride and Worldly lusts?

3. Among many Schismatics and Sectaries (that are not miscalled so, but are
such indeed) their Discipline consists in separating from most other
Christians, as too bad (and that is, too unlovely) to be of their Communion;
and their Preaching is much to make those seem bad (that is, unlovely) that are
not of their way; and their worship is much such as relisheth of the same envy
and strife, to add affliction or reproaches to their Brethren; or to draw the
people from the Love of others unto them; And their ordinary talk is
backbiting others for things that they understand not, and reporting any lie
that is brought them, and telling the hearers something of this Minister, or
that person or the other, that is unlovely, as if Satan had hired them to
Preach down Love, and prate and pray down Love, and all this in the name of
Christ: And the third chapter of James is harder than Hebrew to them; they do
not understand it, but though they tear it not out of the Bible, they leave it
out of the Law in their Hearts, as much as the Papists leave the Second
Commandment out of their Books. And it is one of the marks of a good man among
them to talk against other parties, and make others odious, to set up them. And
what are the Pretenses for all this? Why Truth and Holiness. 1. Others have not
the Truth which they have. And 2. Others are not against the same Doctrines and
Ceremonies, and Bishops and Church Orders and ways of worship which they are
against; and therefore are ungodly, antichristian or men of no Religion.

But Truth seldom dwells with the Enemies of Love and Peace: They that are
Strangers and Enemies to it indeed do often cry it up, and cry down those as
Enemies to it that possess it: The wisdom that has bitter envying and
heart-strife is from beneath; and is earthly, sensual and devilish. I admonish
all that care for their Salvation that they set up nothing upon love killing
terms: If you are Christ's disciples you are taught of God to love each other,
you are taught it as Christ's last and great Commandment: You are taught it by
the wonderful example of his life, and specially, Joh. 13.14. By his washing
hi^ disciples feet: You are taught it by the Holy Ghosts uniting the hearts of
the disciples, and making them by Charity to live as in Community, Acts 3. and
4. You are taught it by the Effective operation of the Spirit on your own
hearts: The new nature that is in you inclines you to it. And will you now
pretend the necessity of your own Interest, Reputation, your Canons, and things
indifferent, your little Church orders of your own making, yea or the positive
institutions of Christ himself, as to the present exercise, against this Love?
Has Christ commanded you any thing before it, except the Love of God? You say,
if such and such men be suffered, this and that disorder and inconvenience will
follow: But is it a greater thing than Love that you would maintain? Is it a
greater evil than the destruction of Love that you would avoid? Did not Christ
prefer mercy before Sabbath rest, and before the avoiding familiarity with
sinners? Pretend nothing against Love that is not better than Love.

Obj. But what is this to the Love of God which the Text speaks of?

Ans. As God is here seen as in a Glass, so is he loved: He that Loves not his
Brother whom he sees daily, how shall he Love God, whom he never saw? He that
says he loves God, and hates his Brother, is a Liar? What you do to his
Brethren you do as to Christ: If you can find as full a promise of Salvation to
those that observe your Canons, Ceremonies, Orders, or are of your Opinion and
Sect, as I can show you for them that Love Christ and his Servants, then prefer
the former before Love.

I know that the Love and Good of Church and State and of many must be
preferred before the love and good of few. But take heed of their hypocrisy
that make these also inconsistent when they are not; and make public good and
peace a mere pretense for their Persecutions on one side, or their Schisms on
the other. Love is so amiable to nature itself, that few of its Enemies oppose
it but under pretense of its own interest and name: It is as in love to the
Church and to men's Souls that the Inquisition has murdered so many, and the
Laws de Hereticis comburendis have been made and Executed. But this Burning,
Hanging, Tormenting, and undoing kind of Love, needs very clear proof to make
good its name and pretenses, before impartial men will take it for love indeed.
Whatever good you seem to do, by the detriment of Love to God and Man, you will
find it will not bear your charges.

Chap. 18.
Exh. Bend all your Studies and Labors to the exercise and increase of Love,
both of God and Man, and all good works.

THE greatest, best and sweetest work should have the greatest diligence. This
great Commandment must be obeyed with the greatest care. The work of love must
be the work of our whole life: If you cannot learn to pray and preach, no nor
to follow a worldly trade, without study and much Exercise, how think you to be
proficients in the love of God without them? Do this well, and all is done. O
happy Souls that are habituated and daily exercised in this work! Whose new
nature, and life and study, and business, is holy Love.

1. How Divine, how High and Noble is this life; To live in a humble friendship
with God and all his holy ones? All animals naturally Love their like, and
converse according to their Love: And men as men have as much sociable Love to
men as the love of sin and inordinate self-love will allow them: And they that
truly love God and Holiness, and Saints, do show that they have some connatural
suitableness to these excellent Objects of their love. Nothing more aptly
denominateth any man Divine and Holy, than Divine and Holy Love. How else
should Souls have Communion with God? His common Influx all creatures receive?
In him all live and move and have their being: But when his Love kindles in us
a reflecting Love, this is felicity itself. Yea it is much nobler than our
felicity: For though our felicity consist in Loving God, and being Beloved of
him, yet it is a far more excellent thing by reason that God is the Object of
our love, than by reason that it is our felicity: Gods interest advances it
more than ours: And though they are not separable, yet being distinguishable,
we should love God far more as God, and perfect goodness in himself, than as he
or this love is our own felicity.

2. This life of love is the true improvement of all Gods Doctrines,
Ordinances, Mercies, Afflictions, and other Providence whatsoever! For the use
of them all is to lead us up to Holy Love, and to help us in the daily exercise
of it. What is the Bible else written for, but to teach us to Love and to
exercise the fruits of Love? What came Christ from Heaven for, but to
demonstrate and reveal Gods love and loveliness to man, and by reconciling us
to God, and freely pardoning all our sins, and promising us both Grace and
Glory, to show us those motives which should kindle Love, and to show us that
God is most suitable and worthy of our Love, and to fill us with the Spirit of
love, which may give us that which he commands us. What is it that we read
books for, and hear Sermons for, but to kindle and exercise holy Love? What
join we for in the Sacred worship of the assemblies, but that in an united
flame of holy love, we might all mount up in praise to Jehovah? What is the
Lords day separated to, but the tidings of love, the Sufferings Victories, and
Triumphs of our Saviors love, the Tastes and Prospects of Gods love to us, and
the lively and joyful exercise of ours to him, and to each other? What use are
the Sacraments of, but that being entertained at the most wonderful Feast of
Love, we should taste its sweetness and pour out the grateful sense of it in
holy Thanksgiving and Praise, and the exercise of uniting love to one another?
What are Church Societies or Combinations for but the loving Communion of
Saints? Which the primitive Christians expressed by selling all, and living in
a Community of love, and steadfastly continuing in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship, and breaking of bread and Prayer? What are all Gods mercies for but
that as by Love tokens we should taste that he is Love and Good, and should by
that taste be inclined to returns of Love? Nay what are Civil Societies, but
loving Communions, if used according to their natures. Did they not love each
other, so many Bees would never hive and work together, nor so many Pigeons
dwell peaceably in one Dove-house, nor fly together in so great flocks. What is
the whole Christian Faith for, but the doctrine of holy love believed, for the
kindling and exercise of our love? what is faith itself but the bellows of
love? What is the excellency of all good works, and gifts and endowments, but
to be the exercises of love to God and man, and the incentives of our brethrens
Love? Without love all these are dead Carcasses, and as nothing, and without it
we our selves are as nothing; yea though we give all that we have to the poor,
or give our bodies like martyrs to be burnt, or could speak with the tongue)
the Orthodoxness and Elegancy) of Angels, we were but as sounding brass and as
a tinkling Cymbal. James knew what he said, when he said that Faith without
works is dead, because without love it is dead, which those works are but the
body or the fruit of.

3. This life of Love is the perfection of man's faculties as to their intended
end and use. As all the operations of the lower faculties, (Vegetative and
Sensitive) are subordinate to the use and operations of the Intellectual part,
which is the higher, so all the Acts of the Intellect itself, are but
subservient and Dirigent to the Will (or Love) and Practice. The understanding
is but the Eye by which the Soul sees what to love, and choose or refuse, and
what to do or to avoid. Love is the highest act of our highest faculty; And
complacency in the highest infinite good, is the highest of all the acts of
Love. This is the State of the Soul in its Ripeness and Mellow Sweetness, when
it is delightful, embracing its most desired object, and is blessed in the
fruition of its ultimate end. All other Graces and Duties are Servants unto
this. They are the parts indeed of the same new creature, but the Hands and
Feet are not the Heart.

4. For Love is the very foretast of Heaven; the beginning of that felicity
which shall there be perfect. In Heaven all Saints shall be as One; and all
united to their glorious Head, as he is united to the Father (disparities
allowed,) Joh. 17.24. And what more uniteth Souls than Love? Heaven is a state
of Joyful Complacence; and what is that but Perfect Love? The Heavenly work is
perfect Obedience and Praise: And what are these but the actions and the breath
of Love?

5. Therefore they that live this life of Love, are fitter to die, and readier
for Heaven, than any others. Belief is a foresight of it; but Love is a
foretast; the first fruits, and our earnest and pledge. He that Loves God, and
Christ, and Angels, and Saints, and perfect Holiness, and Divine Praise, is
ready for Heaven, as the Infant in the womb is ready for birth, at the fullness
of his time: But other Christians, whose Love is true, but little to their
fears, and damped by darkness, and too much love of the body and this world, do
go as it were by untimely birth to Heaven; and those in whom the love of the
body is predominant, come not thither (in that state) at all. The God of Grace
and Glory will meet that Soul with his felicitating embracements, who pants
and breaths after him by Love: And as Love is a kind of Union with the
Heavenly Society, the Angels, who love us better than we love them, will be
ready to convey such Souls to God. As the living dwell not in the graves among
the dead, and the dead are buried from among the living; so holy Souls, who
have this life of Love, cannot be among the miserable in Hell, nor the dead in
sin among the blessed.

6. Therefore this life of holy Love, does strengthen our Belief it self.
Strong Reasons that are brought for the Immortality of Souls, and the future
Glory, are usually lost upon unsanctified hearers; yea with the Doctors
themselves that use them: When they have persuaded others that there is a
Heaven for Believers, and that by Arguments in themselves unanswerable, they
have not persuaded their own hearts; but the predominant Love of Flesh and
Earth, does bias their understandings, and makes them think that they can
confute themselves. Their gust and inclination prevails against Belief: And
therefore the greatest Scholars are not always the strongest Believers. But
holy Love, when it is the Habit of the Soul, as it naturally ascends; so it
easily believes that God, that Glory to which it does ascend. The gust and
experience of such a Soul assures it that it was made for Communion with God,
and that even in this life such Communion is obtained in some degree; and
therefore it easily believes that it is Redeemed for it, and that it shall
perfectly enjoy it in Heaven for ever. Though Glory be here but seminally in
Grace, and this world be but as the womb of that better world for which we
hope, yet the life that is in the Embrio and seed, is a confirming Argument for
the perfection which they tend to. O that men knew what holy Love does signify
and foretell! As the seed or Embrio of a man becomes not a Beast or Serpent; so
he that has the habitual Love of God, and Heaven, and Holiness, is not capable
of Hell, no more than the Lovers of worldliness and sensuality are capable of
present Communion with God, and of his Glory. God does not draw men's Hearts to
Himself, nor kindle Heavenly desires in them in vain. He that has the Spirit
of Christ, has the Witness in himself, that Christ and his Promises of Life
are true, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. And what is this Spirit, but the Habit of Divine
and Heavenly Love, and its concomitants? May I but feel my Soul inflamed with
the fervent Love of the Heavenly Perfection, surely it will do more to put me
quite out of doubt of the certainty of that blessed state, than all Arguments
without that Love can do.

7. And holy Love will be the surest Evidence of our Sincerity; which many old
Writers meant, that called it, The Form of Faith and other graces: As means, as
means, are informed by their aptitudinal respect unto the End; so Love, as it
is the Final Act upon God the Final Object, thus informs all subordinate
Graces and Duties as they are means. And as all Morality is subjected in the
Will as the proper primary seat, and is in the Intellect, executive power, and
senses only by participation, so far as their acts are imperate by the Will; so
Love and Volition being really the same thing, it may accordingly be said, that
nothing is any further acceptable to God, than it is Good; and nothing is
morally Good any further than it is voluntary or willed; and to be willed (as
Good, as End, or as Means) and to be Loved, are words that signify the same.
No preaching, praying, fasting, etc. no fear of punishment, no belief of the
Truth, etc. will prove us sincere and justified, any further than we can prove,
that all this either comes from, or is accompanied with Love, that is, with a
Consenting Will. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10. And,
If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may be baptized, says Philip to
the Eunuch, Acts 8. My Son, give me thy heart, is Wisdom's invitation. All Is
nothing without the heart, that is, without willingness or Love. They that love
most are sureliest forgiven, and have most holiness or grace, how unskifull
soever they may be in their expressions. The sealing Spirit of Adoption, is the
Spirit of Love, and the Abba Father, and the unexpressed groans of filial Love,
are understood and acceptable to God. A Loving Desire after God and Holiness,
is a better Evidence, than the most taking Tongue, or largest Knowledge.

8. This life of Holy Love will make all our Religion and Obedience easy to us;
It will give us an alacrity to the performance, and a pleasure in the practice
of it; and so our obedience will be hearty, willing and universal. Who is
averse to that which he Loves (unless for something in it which he hates?)
All men go willingly and readily to that which they truly Love. Therefore it is
said that the Law is not made for a Righteous man: that is, a man that Loves
Piety, Temperance and Justice, and their several works, so far has no need of
Threatening Laws and Penalties to constrain him to it: And he that hates sin,
so far has no need of Legal Penalties to restrain him from it. Thus is the Law
said to be written in our Hearts; not as it is merely in our knowledge and
memory, but as the matter commanded is truly Loved by us, and the sin forbidden
truly hated. Even our Horses will carry us cheerfully that way which they Love
to go, and go heavily where they go against their Wills. Win men's Love, and the
life and lips and all (according to power) will follow it.

9. And such persons therefore are likest to persevere: men go unweariedly (if
they be but able) where they go with Love. Especially such a Love, which
grows stronger as it draws nearer the state of perfection which it loves;
and grows by daily renewed experiences and mercies, as Rivers grow bigger as
they draw nearer to the Sea. We easily hold on in that we Love; But that which
men loath, and their hearts are against; they are quickly weary of: And the
weary person will easily be persuaded to lie down: The root of a Apostasy is
already in those persons, who Love not the end which they pretend to seek, nor
the work which they pretend to do.

10. Lastly, holy Love is a pregnant, spreading, fruitful grace: It kindles a
desire to do good to others, and to draw men to Love the same God and Heaven,
and Holiness which we love. It made Gods word to be to Jeremy as a burning Fire
shut up in his Bones, he was weary of forbearing, Jer. 20.9. As fire kindles
fire, and is the active principle of vegetation (as I suppose) so Love kindles
Love, and is a kind of generative principle of Grace. Gods Love is the first
cause; but Man's Love makes them meet Instruments of Gods Love: For Love will
be often praising the God and Holiness which is loved; and earnestly desires
that all others may Love and praise the same. The Soul is not indeed converted,
till its Love is won to God and Goodness: A man may be terrified into some
austerities, superstitions or reformations, but he is not further holy than his
Heart is won. And as every thing that generateth is apt to produce its like, so
is Love, and the words and works of Love. And as Love is the Heart of Holiness,
so must it be of all fruitful Preaching and conversation, whatever the Words or
Actions are, they are like no farther to win Souls, than they demonstrate the
Love of God, and of Holiness, and of the hearers or spectators. As among
amorous and vain persons strong Love appearing though by a look or word, does
kindle the like more than all complements that are known to be but feigned and
affected words; so usually Souls are won to God, as by the Preachers words and
works of Love, the love and loveliness of God in Christ, are fulliest made
known.

Quest. But how should we reach this excellent Life of holy Love, which does so
far excel all knowledge.

Ans. I have said so much of this in the first part of my Christian Directory,
and other writings, that I must here say but little of it, lest I be overmuch
guilty of repetitions. Briefly,

Direct. I. Believe Gods Goodness to be equal to his Greatness. Gods three
great primary Attributes are coequal, viz. His Power, his Wisdom, and his
Goodness! And then look up to the Heavens and think how Great and Powerful is
that God that made and continues such a frame, as that Sun, and those Stars,
and those Glorious unmeasureable Regions where they are: Think what a World of
Creatures God maintains in life, on this little lower Orb of Earth, both in
the Seas and on the Land. And then think, O what is the Goodness which is equal
to all this Power!

Direct. 2. Consider how communicative this Infinite Goodness is: Why else is
he called LOVE it self? Why else made he all the World? And why did he make the
Sun so Glorious? Why else did he animate and beautify the Universe, with the
Life and Ornaments of Created Goodness? All his works shine by the splendour of
that excellency which he has put upon them; all are not equal, but all are
Good, and their inequality belongs to the Goodness of the Universe. The
Communicative Nature with which God has endowed all active Beings, (and the
most Noble most) is an Impress of the Infinite communicative LOVE. Fire would
communicate its Light, Heat and Motion to all passive objects which are capable
of receiving it: How pregnant and fertile is the very Earth, with plants,
flowers and fruits of wonderful variety, usefulness and beauty! What plant is
not natured to the propagation of its kind, yea to a plenteous multiplication?
How many Seeds which are Virtual Plants, does each of them bring forth at once;
and yet the same plant, with all its offspring, perhaps lives many years for
further multiplication: so that did not the far greatest part of Seeds yearly
perish, there must be very many such Earths to receive and propagate them: This
Earth has not room for the hundredth part: To show us that the Active natures
even of Vegetatives, do quite exceed in their pregnant communicative activity,
the receptive capacity of all passive matter: which teaches us to observe that
all created Patients are unconceiveably too narrow to receive such
Communicative Influences, as Infinite pregnant LOVE can communicate, were there
subjects to receive them.

It is wonderful to observe in all sorts of Animals, the same multiplying
communicative inclination! and what use the God of nature makes even of
sensual LOVE to all Generation? Uniting and Communicative LOVE is in all
Creatures the incentive Principle of Procreation. And what a multitude of young
ones will some one Creature Procreate, especially Fishes to admiration? So that
if other Fishes, with Men and other Creatures did not devour them, all the
Waters on Earth could not contain them.

Yea our Moral Communicativeness also has the same indication: He that knows
much would fain have others know the same; secret knowledge kept to our selves
only has its excellent use; but it satisfies not the mind, nisi te scire hoc
sciat alter, unless others know that you have such knowledge, and unless you
can make them know what you know: Holy Souls therefore have a fervent, but a
regular desire, and endeavor by communicative Teaching to make others wise:
But proud Heretical Persons, that overvalue their conceits, have an irregular
Fornicating Lust of Teaching; and adulterously invade the charge of others,
presuming that none can do it so wisely and so well as they. Men will compass
Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; and Tares and Weeds are as much inclined to
propagation as the Wheat. There is a mavelous desire in the Nature of man to
make others of their own Opinion; and when it is governed by Gods Laws, it is
greatly beneficial to the World.

And even in Affections, as well as Knowledge, it is so: We would have others
love those that we love, and hate what we hate. Though where, by the
insufficiency of the narrow Creature, Men must lose and want that themselves,
which they Communicate to others, selfishness forbids such Communication.

And doubtless all the Creatures in their several Ranks, have some such
Impresses from the Creator, by which his transcendent perfections may be
somewhat observed. That God is now so Communicative as to give to all Creatures
in the World, whatever Being, Motion, Life, Order, Beauty, Harmony, Reason,
Grace, Glory, any of them possess is past all question to considering sober
reason. Which tempted Aristotle to think that the World was Eternal, and some
Christians to think that though this present Heaven and Earth were Created, as
in Genesis 1. is said, yet that from Eternity some Intellectual World at least, if
not also Corporeal, did flow from the Creator as an Eternal Effect of an
Eternal Cause; or an Eternal Accident of the Deity: Because they could not
receive it, that a God so unspeakably Communicative now (who has made the Sun
to be an Emblem of his Communicativeness,) should from all Eternity be solitary
and not communicative, when yet to all Eternity he will be so. But these are
questions which incapable Mortals, were far better let alone than meddle with,
unless we desire rather to be lost than to be blessed in the Abyss of Eternity,
and the thoughts of infinite pregnant LOVE.

But it is so natural for man and every Animal to love that love and goodness
which is beneficent, (not only to us, but to all) rather than a mere
self-lover, that does no good to others, that it must needs conduce much to our
love of God, to consider that he is good to all, and his mercy is over all his
works; and that as there is no light in the Air but from the Sun, so there is
no goodness but from God in all the World, who is more to the Creation than the
Sun is to this lower World. And a Sun that lights all the Earth, is much more
precious than my Candle: A Nilus which waters the Land of Egypt, is more
precious than a private Well: It is the Excellency of Kings and public
Persons, that if they are good, they are good to many: And O what innumerable
Animals in Sea and Land, besides the far greater Worlds of nobler Wights do
continually live by one God of Love! Study this Universal, Infinite Love.

Direct. 3. Especially study Divine LOVE and Goodness in the Face of our
Redeemer Jesus Christ, and all the Grace which he has purchased and
conferreth. As we may see that magnitude of the Stars in a Telescope, which
without it no Eye can discern; so may we see that glory of the love of God, by
the Gospel of Jesus, which all common natural helps are insufficient to
discover to such minds as ours. LOVE is the great Attribute which Christ came
principally to manifest, (as was aforesaid) Joh. 3.16. 1 John 3.1, etc. And
love is the great Lesson which he came to teach us; and love is the new nature
which by his Spirit he gives us. And love is the great duty, which by Law and
Gospel he requires of us. Love has wrought its Miracles in Christ to the
posing of the understandings of Men and Angels. There we may see God in the
nearest condescending Unity with Man: In Christ we may see the divine wisdom
and word incorporate in such Flesh as ours, conceived in a Virgin by the power
of the Spirit of Love; by which Spirit this Incorporate Word did Live, Preach,
Converse familiarly with Man; work Miracles, heal Diseases, suffer reproachful
Calumnies and Death; Rising, Triumphing, Ascending, Interceeding, sending the
Embassies of Love to the World, calling Home the greatest sinners unto God,
reconciling Enemies, and making them the Adopted Sons of God, forgiving all sin
to penitent Believers, quickening dead Souls, illuminating the Blind, and
sanctifying the Wicked by the Spirit of Life, and Light, and Love; and making
it his Office, his Work, his Delight and Glory, to rescue the miserable
Captives of the Devil, and to make Heirs of Heaven of those that were condemned
to Hell, and had forsaken Life in forsaking God. As this is shining, burning
love, so it is approaching and self-applying love; which comes so near us, in
ways and benefits so necessary to us, and so exceeding congruous to our case,
as that it is easier for us to perceive and feel it, than we can do things of
greater distance. The clearer the Eye of Faith is, by which we look into this
mysterious Glass, the more the wonders of Love will be perceived in it. He
never knew Christ, nor understood the Gospel, that wondered not at Redeeming
saving love; nor did he ever learn of Christ indeed, that has not learned the
Lesson, Work and Life of love.

Direct. 4. Keep as full Records as you can of the particular Mercies of God to
your selves; and frequently peruse them, and plead them with your frozen Hearts.

These are not the chiefest reasons of Christian love; because we are such poor
inconsiderable Worms, that to do good to one of us, is a far smaller matter,
than many things else that we have to think of for that end. But yet when love
does choose a particular Person for its object, and there bestow its obliging
Gifts, it helps that Person far more than others to returns of thankfulness
and love: It Is that place, that Glass which the Sun does shine upon, does
reflect its Beams, rather than those that are shut up in darkness. Self-love
may and must be regulated and sanctified, to the furthering of higher love. It
is not unmeet to say with David, Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord, because he has
heard the voice of my supplication. We should say as heartily, I love the Lord
because he has prospered, recovered, comforted my Neighbor: But this is not
all so easy as the other: And where God by personal application, makes our
greatest duty easy, we should use his helps.

Obj. But if it be selfishness as some tell us, to love one that loves us,
better than another of equal worth, who does not love us, is it not selfishness
to love God on so low an account as loving us? God may say well, I love those
that love me, Prove. 8.17. because to love him is the highest virtue, but to
love us is as inconsiderable as we are.

Ans. 1. You may love another the more for loving you on several accounts. 1.
As it is a duty which God requires him to perform (but so you must love him
equally for loving others also.) 2. As he rendereth himself more congruous and
obliging to you, by choosing you for the special object of his love, by which he
takes the advantage of your natural self-love, to make your love to him both
due and easy, (as is said of the reflection of the Sunbeams before.)

2. But two things you must take heed of, 1. That you under-value not your
Neighbors good, but love another for loving your Neighbors also, and doing
them good; and he that arriveth at that impartial Unity as to make the smallest
difference between his Neighbor and himself, does seem to me to be arrived at
the state that is likest to theirs that are One in Heaven. 2. And you must not
over-love any man by a fond partiality for his love to you; as if that made a
bad man good, or fitter for your love: They that can love the worst that love
them, and cannot love the best that set light by them ( deservedly, or upon
mistake) do show that self-love overcomes the love of God. But God cannot be
loved too much, though he may be loved too selfishly and carnally. His greatest
Amiableness is his Essential Goodness and Infinite Perfection: The next is his
Glory shining in the Universe, and so in the Heavenly Society, especially
(Christ and all his Holy Ones;) and so in the public blessings of the World,
and all Societies. And next his goodness to your selves, not only as parts of
the said Societies, but as Persons whose Natures are formed by God himself, to
a capacity, of Receiving and Reflecting Love.

Who finds not by Experience that God is most loved, when we are most
sensible of his former love to us, in the thankful review of all his Mercies,
and most assured or persuaded of his future love in our Salvation. Therefore
make the renewed Commemoration of Gods Mercies, the incentives of your love.

Direct. 5. But yet could you get a greater Union and Communion not only with
Saints as Saints, but with Mankind as Men, it would greatly help you in your
Love to God: For when you love your neighbors as your selves, you would love
God for your neighbors mercies, as well as for your own. And if you feel that
God's Love and special mercies to one person, even your selves, can do so much
in causing your Love, what would your Love amount to, if thousand thousands of
persons to whom God shows mercy, were every one to you as your selves, and
all their mercies as your own? Thus graces mutually help each other. We love
Man, because we love God; and we love God the more for our love to Man.

Direct. 6. Especially dwell by Faith in Heaven where Love is perfect, and
there you will learn more of the work of Love. To think believingly that Mutual
Love is Heaven it self, and that this is our Union with God, and Christ, and
all the holy ones, and that Love will be an everlasting employment, pleasure
and felicity, this will breed in us a desire to begin that happy life on Earth.
And as he that hears excellent Music will long to draw near, and join in the
consort or the pleasure; so he that by Faith does dwell much in Heaven, and
hear how Angels and blessed Souls do there praise God in the highest fervours
of rejoicing Love, will be inclined to imitate them, and long to partake of
their felicity.

Direct. 7. Exercise that measure of Love which you have in the constant
Praises of the God of Love. For exercise exciteth, and naturally tends to
increase, and Praise is the duty in which pure Love to God above our selves and
all, even as good and perfect in himself, is exercised. As Love is the Highest
Grace, or Inward Duty; so praise is the Highest Outward Duty, (when God is
praised both by Tongue and Life.) And as Soul and Body make one Man, of whose
existence Generation is the cause; so Love and Praise (of Mouth and Works) do
make one Saint, who is Regenerated such by Believing in the Redeemer, who has
power to give the Spirit of Holiness to whom he pleases. But of this more
afterward.

Direct. 8. Exercise your Love to Man, especially to Saints, in doing them all
the good you can; and that for what of God is in them. For as this is the fruit
of the Love of God, and the evidence of it; so does it tend to the increase of
its cause: Partly as it is an exercise of it, and partly as it is a duty which
God has promised to the reward. As it is the Spirit of Christ, even of
Adoption, which works both the lov^ of our Father, and our Brethren in us; so
God will bless those that exercise Love, (especially at the dearest rates, and
with the fullest devotedness of all to God, with the larger measures of the
same Spirit.)

Chap. XIX.
Exh. V. Place your Comforts in health and sickness in Mutual Divine Love. 2.
See that you sincerely love God. How known? Doubts answered.

IT is of greatest importance to all Mankind, to know what is best for them,
and in what they should place and seek their comforts: To place them most with
the Proud, in the applauding thoughts or words of others, that magnify them
for their wit, their beauty, their wealth, or their pomp and power in the
world, is to choose somewhat less than a shadow for felicity, and to live on the
Air; even an unconstant Air: And will such a life be long, or happy? Should not
a man in misery rather take it for a stinging deriding mockery or abuse, to be
honored and praised for that which he has not, or for that which is his
snare, or consists with his calamity? Would not a Malefactor at the Gallows
take it for his reproach to hear an Oration of his happiness? Will it comfort
them in Hell to be praised on Earth? This common reason may easily call, An
empty Vanity.

To place our Comforts in the delights of Sensuality, had somewhat a fairer
show of Reason, if Reason were made for nothing better; and if these were the
noble sort of pleasures that advanced man above the brutes; and if they would
continue for ever, and the end of such mirth were not heaviness and repentance,
and they did not deprave and deceive men's Souls, and leave behind them
disappointment and a sting. But he is unworthy the honor and pleasures of
Humanity, who prefers the pleasures of a beast, when he may have better.

To place our Comforts in those Riches, which do but serve this Sensuality with
provisions, and leave posterity in as vain and dangerous a state as their
progenitors were, is but the foresaid folly aggravated.

To place them in Domination, and having our Wills on others, and being able to
do hurt, and exercise revenge, is but to account the Devils happier than men,
and to desire to be as the Wolf among the Sheep, or as the Kite among the
Chickens, or as the great Dogs among the little ones.

To place them in much Knowledge of Arts and Sciences, as they concern only the
Interests of the body in this life; or as Knowledge is but the delight of the
natural fantasy or mind, does seem a little finer, and sublime, and manly,
but it is of the same nature and vanity as the rest. For all Knowledge is for
the guidance of the Will and Practice; and therefore mere knowing matters that
tend to Pride, Sensuality, Wealth or Domination, is less than the enjoyment of
sensual pleasures in the things themselves. And the contemplation of superior
Creatures, which has no other end than the delight of knowing, is but a more
refined sort of vanity, and like the minds activity in a dream.

But whether it be the Knowledge or the love of God, that man should place his
highest felicity in, is become among the Schoolmen and some other Divines, a
controversy that seems somewhat hard. But indeed to a considering man, the
seeming difficulty may be easily overcome: The Understanding and Will and
Executive activity, are not several Souls, but several faculties of one Soul;
And their Objects and Order of operation easily tell us, which is the first,
and which the last which tends to the other as its end, and which object is
the most delightful and most felicitating to the man, viz. That Truth is for
Goodness, and that Good as Good is the amiable, delectable and felicitating
object; And therefore that the Intellect is the guide of the Will, and Faith
and Knowledge are for Love and its Delight. And yet that man's felicity is in
both and not in one alone, as one faculty alone is not the whole Soul, (though
it be the whole Soul that acts by that faculty.) Therefore the later
Schoolmen have many of them well confuted Aquinas in this point.

And it is of great importance in our Christian practice. As the desire of more
Knowledge first corrupted our nature, so corrupted nature, is much more easily
drawn to seek after knowledge, than after love. Many men are bookish that
cannot endure to be Saints: Many can spend their lives in the studies of Nature
and Theology, and Delight, to find increase of Knowledge, who are Strangers to
the Sanctifying, Uniting, delightful exercise of holy love. Appetite is the
pondus or first Spring of our moral actions, yea and of our natural, though the
sense and intellect intromit or illuminate the Object. And the first act of
natural Appetite (Sensitive and Intellectual) is necessitated. And accordingly
the Appetite as pleased is as much the end of our Acts and Objects, as the
Appetite as Desiring is the beginning: Even as ( si parvis magna, etc.) Gods
Will as Efficient is the absolutely first cause, and his will as done and
pleased is the ultimate end of all things. It is Love by which man cleaves
unto God, as Good, and as our ultimate end. Love ever supposes knowledge; and
is its end and perfection. Neither alone, but both together are man's highest
State; Knowledge as discerning what is to be Loved, and Love as our uniting and
Delighting adherence to it.

I. Labor therefore with all your industry, to know God that you may love him;
It is that love that must be your comforting grace, both by signification, and
by its proper Effective Exercise. 1. True love will prove that your Knowledge
and Faith are true and saving, which you will never be sure of, without the
Evidence of this and the consequent Effects. If your expressive art or gifts be
never so low, so that you scarce know what to say to God or man, yet if you so
far know God as sincerely to love him, it is certainly true saving knowledge,
and that which is the beginning of eternal life. Knowledge, Belief, Repentance,
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Zeal, Diligence, etc. are so far, and no further
sure marks of Salvation, as they cause or prove true love to God and Man,
Predominant. It is a hard thing any otherwise to know whether our Knowledge,
Repentance, Patience, Zeal or any of the rest be any better than what an
unjustifyed person may attain: But if you can find that they cause or come
from, or accompany a sincere Love of God, you may be sure that they all partake
of sincerity, and are certain signs of a Justified Soul. It is hard to know
what sins for number, or nature, or magnitude, are such as may or may not
consist with a State of saving grace. He that considers of the sins of Lot,
David, Solomon and Peter will find the case exceeding difficult: But this much
is sure, that so much sin may consist with a Justified State, as may consist
with sincere love to God and Goodness. While a man truly loves God above all,
his sin may cause Correction, but not DAMNATION; unless it could extinguish or
overcome this Love. Some question whether that the sin of Lot or David, for the
present stood with justification: If it excussed not predominant habitual love,
it intercepteth not justification: If we could tell whether any or many
heathens that hear not of Christ, have the true love of God and Holiness, we
might know whether they are saved.

The reason is, because that the will is the man in Gods account; And as
Voluntariness is essential to sin, so a Holy Will does prove a Holy person. God
has the heart of him that loves him. He that loves him would fain please
him, glorify him, and enjoy him: And he that loves holiness would fain live a
holy life.

Therefore it is that Divines say here that desire of grace is a certain sign
of grace, because it is an act of Will and Love. And it is true, if that desire
be greater or more powerful than our Averseness, and than our desire after
contrary things, that so it may put us on necessary duty, and overcome the
lusts and temptations which oppose them: Though cold wishes which are conquered
by greater unwillingness and prevailing lusts, will never save men.

2. And as love is our more comforting Evidence, so it is our most comforting
Exercise. Those acts of religion which come short of this, come short of the
proper life and sweetness of true religion. They are but either lightnings in
the brain that have no heat; or a feverish zeal which destroys or troubles,
but does not perform the acts of life; or else (even where love is true, but
little; and oppressed by fears and grief, and trouble,) it is like Fire in green
Wood, or like young green Fruits, which is not come to mellow ripeness. Love of
Vanity is disappointing, unsatisfactory and tormenting: Most of the Calamities
of this life proceed from creature-love: The greatest tormentor in this world
is the inordinate love of life; and the next is the love of the pleasures and
accommodations of life; which cause so much care to get and keep, and so much
fear of losing, and grief for our losses, especially fear of dying, that were
it not for this, our lives would be much easier to us (as they are to the
fearless sort of brutes.) And the next tormenting affection is the love of
Children, which prepares men for all the Calamity that follows their
miscarriages in Soul and Body: Their unnatural ingratitude, their Lewdness, and
Debauchery, and Prodigality, their Folly and Impiety would nothing so much
torment us, were they no more loved than other men. And our dearest Friends do
usually cost us much dearer than our sharpest enemies. But the love of God and
Satisfying everlasting good is our very life, our pleasure, our Heaven on
Earth. As it is Purest and Highest, above all other because of the Object, so
is it yet more pleasant and contenting, because it includes the hopes of more,
even of those greater delights of heavenly everlasting love, which as a pledge
and earnest it does presignify. As in nature, conception and the stirring the
Child in the womb do signify that same life is begun, which must shortly appear
and be exercised in the open world. So the stirrings of holy love and desires
toward God, do signify the beginning of the heavenly life.

Humility and Patience, and diligent obedience do comfort us by way of
Evidence, and as removing many hindrances of our comfort, and somewhat further
they go. But Faith, Hope and Love, do comfort us by way of direct efficiency:
Faith sees the matter of our Joy; love first tastes it so far as to stir up
desires after it. Then Hope gives some pleasure to us in expecting it. And
lastly, complacential love delightfully embraces it, and is our very Joy
itself, and is that blessed union with God and holy Souls, the amiable Objects
of true love, which is our felicity it self. To work out our comforts by the
view of Evidences and Signs, is a necessary thing indeed, but it requires a
considerate search, by an understanding and composed mind; and it is often much
hindered and interrupted, by men's ignorance of themselves, and weakness of
grace, and darkness or smalness of Evidence, and diverse passions, especially
fear (which in some is so Tyrannical that it will not suffer to believe or feel
any thing that is comfortable.) But love takes in the sweetness of that good
which is its object, by a nearer and effectual way, even by immediate taste; As
we feel in the exercise of our Love to a dear Friend, or any thing that is
amiable and enjoyed.

The readiest and surest way therefore to a contented and comfortable life is,
(to keep clear indeed our evidence, especially, sincere Obedience, but)
especially to bend all our Studies and Religious endeavors, to the kindling
and exercise of holy love, and to avoid all (though it may come on religious
pretense of humiliation or fear) which tends to quench or hinder it.

I. In Health and Prosperity as you live upon Gods love, be sure that you do
not atheistically overlook it, but take all as from it, and savouring of it.
The hand of divine love perfumeth each mercy with the pleasant odor of itself,
which it reaches to us. Every bit that we eat is a love token, and every hour
or minute that we live; All our health, wealth, Friends and Peace are the
Streams which still flow from the Spring of unexhausted love. Love shines upon
us by the Sun; love makes our Land fruitful, or Cattle useful, our Habitations
convenient for us, our Garments warm, our Food pleasant and nourishing; Love
keeps us from a thousand unknown dangers night and day: It gives us the
comforts of our Callings, our Company, our Books, our lawful Recreations; It
blesses means of Knowledge to our understandings, and means of Holiness to our
Wills, and means of Health and Strength to our bodies: Mercies are Sanctified
to us when we taste Gods love in them, and love him for them, and are led up by
them to himself, and so love him ultimately for himself, even for his Infinite
Essential Goodness. As God is the efficient life of our mercies, and all the
world without his Love could never give us what we have, so is Gods love the
Objective life of all our mercies, and we have but the Corpse or Carcass of
them, and love them but as such, if we love not in them the Love that gives
them.

II. And even in adversity and pain, and sickness, whilst Gods love is
unchanged, and is but changing the way of doing good, our thoughts of it should
be unchanged also. We must not think that the Sun is lost when it is set, or
clouded: we live by its influence in the night, though we see not its light,
unless as reflected from the Moon: Our Mothers brought us into the World in
sorrow; and yet they justly accounted it a mercy that we were born: Our lives
are spent in the midst of sorrows; and yet it is a mercy that we live: and
though we die by dolor, all is still mercy to believers, which faith
perceives contrary to sense: And here is the greatest and final victory which
Faith obtains against the flesh, to believe even the ruin of it to be for
our good. Even Antonine the Emperor could say that it was the same good God who
is the cause of our birth and of our death: one as well as the other is his
work, and therefore good: It was not a Tyrant that made us, and it is not a
Tyrant that dissolveth us. And that is the best man, and the best will, which
is most pleased with the Will of God, because it is his Will. Yet just
self-love is here a true coadjutor of our joy: for it is the will of God that
the Justified be Glorified. And Infinite love is saving us when it seems to
destroy us.

To live upon the comforts of Divine love in sickness, and when death
approaches, is a sign that it is not the welfare of the body that we most
esteem, and that we rejoice not in God only as the preserver and prosperer of
our flesh, but for himself and the blessings of immortality.

It is a mercy indeed which a dying man must with thankfulness acknowledge, if
God have given him a clear understanding of the excellent mysteries of
Salvation: knowledge as it kindles and promoteth love, is a precious gift of
grace, and is with pleasure exercised, and may with pleasure be acknowledged.
But all other knowledge is like the Vanities of this World, which approaching
death does take down our esteem of, and causes us to number it with other
forsaking and forsaken things: All the unsanctified learning and knowledge in
the World, will afford no solid peace at death* but rather aggravate natures
sorrows, to think that this also must be left. But love and its comforts (if
not hindered by ignorance or some strong temptation) do then show their
immortal nature: And even here we feel the words of the Apostle verified, of
the vanishing nature of Knowledge, and the perpetuity of holy love, whilst all
our learning and knowledge will not give so much comfort to a dying man, as one
act of true love to God and Holiness kindled in us by the communication of his
love. Make it therefore the work of your Religion, and the work of your whole
lives, to possess your minds with the liveliest sense of the infinite goodness
and amiableness of God, and hereby to live in the constant exercise of Love.

II. And though some men hinder love by an over fearful questioning whether
they have it, or not; and spend that time in doubting, and complaining that
they have it not, which they should spend in exciting and exercising it, yet
reason requires us to take heed lest a carnal mind deceive us with any
counterfeits of holy love: Of which having written more in my Christian
Directory, I shall here give you but these brief instructions following.

It is here of grand importance, I. To have a true conception of God as he must
be loved; II. And then to know practically how it is that love must be
exercised toward him.

I. GOD must be conceived of at once, both 1. As in his essence, 2. And as in
his relations to the world and to our selves, 3. And as in his works. And those
that will separate these, and while they fix only on one of them leave out the
other, do not indeed love God as God, and as he must be loved.

1. To think in general that there is an infinite eternal Spirit of Life, Light
and Love, and not to think of him as related to the world, as its Creator,
Preserver and Governor, nor as related to us and to mankind as our Owner, Ruler
and Benefactor, is not to think of him as a God to us or to any but himself:
And a love thus exercised cannot be true saving love.

2. And because his relations to us result from his works, either which he has
done already, or which he will do hereafter, therefore without the knowledge of
his works, and their goodness, we cannot truly know and love God in his
relations to us.

3. And yet when we know his works, we know but the medium, or that in which he
himself is made known to us; And if by them we come not to know him and love
him in his perfect Essence, it is not God that we know and love. And if we knew
him only as Related to us and the World, (as that he is our Creator, Owner,
Mover, Ruler and Benefactor,) and yet know not what he is in his essence that
is thus related viz, that he is (the Perfect, First, Being, Life, Wisdom and
Love,) this were not truly to know and love him as he is God. These conceptions
therefore must be conjunct.

God is not here known to us but by the revelation of his works and word, nor
can we conceive of him but by the similitude of some of his works: not that we
must think that he is just such as they, or picture him like a creature; for he
is infinitely above them all: but yet it is certain that he has made some
impressions of his perfections upon his works; and on some of them so clear as
that they are called his Image.

Nothing is known to us but either, 1. By sense immediately perceiving things
external and representing them to the fantasy and intellect, or 2. By the
Intellects own conceiving of other things by the similitude of things sensed;
3. Or by immediate internal Intuition or Sensation of the acts of the Soul in
it self: 4. Or by reasons collection of the nature of other things, from the
similitude and effect of such perceived operations.

I. By the external Senses, we perceive all external sensed things, and we
imagine and know them as so perceived.

II. By the Intellection of these, we conceive of other things as like them,
forming Universal conceptions, and applying them to such individuals as are
beyond the reach of our Senses. (As we think of Men, Trees, Beasts, Fishes,
etc. in the Indies as like those which we have seen; and of sounds there as
like those which we have heard, and of the taste of Fruits by the similitude of
such as we have tasted, etc.

III. How Sense it self, Intellection it self, Volition it self, and internal
Affections are perceived, is no small controversy among Philosophers. That we
do perceive them, (by the great wisdom and goodness of our Creator) we are
sure; but how we do it we can scarce describe, as knowing it better by the
experience of that perception it self than by a knowledge of the Causes and
Nature of the acts. It is most commonly said that the Intellect knows its own
acts by Reflection, or as Ockam, by Intuition, and that it knows what Sense
is, and what Volition by some Species or Image of them in the fantasy which
it beholds. But such words give no man a true knowledge of the thing enquired
of, unless withal he read the solution experimentally in his own Soul. I know
not what the meaning of a Reflect act is: Is it the same act which is called
Direct and Reflect? And does the Intellect know that it knows by the very
same act by which it knows other things? If so, why is it called Reflect, and
what is that reflection? But the contrary is commonly said, that diverse objects
make diverse acts, and therefore to know e.g. that this is Paper, and to know
that I know this, are two acts, and the latter is a reflecting of the former.
But the former act is gone, and nothing in the instant that it is done, and
therefore is in it self no intelligible object of a reflecting act: But as
remembered it may be known, or rather that remembering is knowing what is past,
by a mavelous retention of some impress of it which no man can well
comprehend, so as to give an account of it: And why may not the same memory
which retains the unexpressible Record of an Act past an hour or many years
ago, be also the Book where the Intellect reads its own Act as past
immediately in the foregoing instant? But sure this is not the first knowing
that we know? Before the act of memory, the Intellect immediately perceives
its own particular acts: And so does the sense: By one and the same act we see
and perceive that we see; and by one and the same act (I think) we know and
know that we know, and this by a consciousness or internal sense which is the
immediate act of the Essence of the faculty: And choose whether you will say
that such two objects may constitute one act? Or whether you will say that the
latter (the act it self) is not properly to be called an object: For the
various senses of the word object must be considered in the decision of that:
Man's Soul is Gods Image: When God knows himself and his own knowledge, and
when he wills or loves himself, and his own will or love, here we must
either say that himself, his knowledge and will is not properly to be called an
Object, or else that the Object and the Act are purely the same, without the
least real difference; but we name them differently as inadequate conceptions
of one Being: And why may it not be so in a lower sort in the Soul that is Gods
Image? That is, that the understandings most internal act, viz. the knowing or
perceiving when it knows any thing that it knows. It is not really
compounded of an act and an object (as the knowledge of distinct objects is;)
but that either its act is not properly to be called its object, or that act
and object are not two things, but two inadequate conceptions of one thing.

And how does the Soul perceive its own Volitions? To say that Volitions which
are acts of the Intellectual Soul must be sensate, and so make a Species on the
fantasy, as sensate things do, and be known only in that Species, is to bring
down the higher faculty, and subordinate it to the lower, that it may be
intelligible; while it is certain that we shall never here perfectly understand
the solution of these difficulties, is it not pardonable, among other men's
conjectures, to say, That the noble faculty of Sense (because Brutes have it)
is usually too basely described by Philosophers? And that Intellection and
Volition in the rational Soul are a superior eminent sort of sensation
transcending that of Brutes; and that Intelligere and Velle are eminenter
sentire; and that the Intellect does by understanding other things, eminently
see or sense, and so understand that it understands: And that the will does
by willing feel that it wills: When I consult my Experience, I must either
say thus, or else that Intellection and Volition so immediately ever move the
Internal sense, that they are known by us only as acts compounded with that
sense.

But I am gone too far before I was aware.

IV. The Soul thus knowing or feeling its own acts, does in the next place
rationally gather, 1. That it has power to perform them, and is a substance so
empowered. 2. That there are other such substances with the like acts. 3. And
there is one prime transcendant substance, which is the cause of all the rest
which has infinitely nobler acts than ours.

And thus Sense and Reason concur to our knowledge of God, by showing us, and
perceiving that Image in which by similitude we must know him. The Fiery,
Ethereal or Solar Nature is (at least) the similitude of Spirits: And by
condescending similitude God in Scripture is called LIGHT, and the FATHER of
LIGHTS, in whom is no darkness, allowing and inviting us to think of his Glory
by the similitude of the Sun or Light. But Intellectual Spirits are the highest
Nature known to us, and these we know intimately by most near perception: By
the similitude of these therefore we must conceive of God.

A Soul is a self-moving Life or vital Substance; actuating the Body to which
it is united. God is super-eminently Essential-Life, perfect in himself, as
living Infinitely and Eternally, and giving Being to all that is, and Motion to
all that moves, and Life to all that lives.

A reasonable Soul is Essentially an understanding power: And God is
super-eminently an Infinite understanding knowing himself and all things
perfectly.

A reasonable Soul is Essentially a rational Appetite or Will, necessarily
loving himself, and all that is apprehended every way, and congruously good.
God is super-eminently an Infinite Will or Love, necessarily loving himself;
and his own Image, which yet he freely made by communicative Love.

All things that were made by this Infinite Goodness, were made good and very
good. All his works of Creation and Providence (however misconceived of by
sinners) are still very good. All the good of the whole Creation is as the heat
of this Infinite, Eternal Fire of Love. And having made the World good, in the
good of Nature, and the good of Order, and the good of mutual Love, he does by
his continual influx maintain and perfect it. His Power moves, his Wisdom
governs, and his Love felicitateth. And man he moves as man, he Rules him
by Moral Laws as man; and he is his perfect Lo^er, and perfect amiable Object
and End. As our Creator making us in this natural capacity and Relation; as our
Redeemer restoring and advancing us to blessed Union with himself; and as our
Sanctifier and Glorifier preparing us for, and bringing us to Celestial
perfection. And thus must God be conceived of that we may love him: And false
and defective conceptions of him, as the great impediments of our love: And we
love him so little, (much) because we so little know him: And therefore it is
not the true knowledge of God, which Paul here makes a competitor with love.

II. And as we know God by ascending from his Works and Image, in the same
order must our love ascend. The first acts of it will be toward God in his
works, and the next will be toward God in his Relation to us, and the highest
toward God as Essentially perfect and amiable in himself.

I will therefore now apply this to the Soul that fears lest he love not God,
because he perceives not himself either to know or love him immediately in the
perfection of his Essence.

1. Do you truly love the Image of God on the Soul of Man? That is, a Heavenly
Life, and Light, and Love? Do you not only from bare conviction commend, but
truly love a Soul devoted to God, full of his love, and living in obedience to
his Laws, and doing good to others according to his power? This is to love God
in his Image! God is Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, or Love* To love true
wisdom and goodness as such is to love God in his Works.

Especially with these two qualifications; 1. Do you love to have Wisdom and
Goodness, and Love as Universal as is possible? Do you long to have Families,
Cities, Kingdoms and all the World, made truly Holy, Wise and united in Love to
one another? The most Universal Wisdom and Goodness is most like to God: and to
love this is to love God in his Image.

2. Do you love Wisdom and Goodness in your selves, and not in others only? Do
you long to be liker to God in your capacity, and more near him and united to
him? That is, Do you long to know him, and his will more clearly and to enjoy a
holy communion with him and his holy ones in the fullest mutual love, (loving
and being beloved) and to delight your Souls in his joyful praises, in the
communion of Saints? This is certainly the love of God. Our union is by love;
he that would be united to God and his Saints in Jesus Christ, that would fain
know him more, and love him better, and praise and obey him joyfully in
perfection, does undoubtedly love him.

And here I would earnestly caution you against two common deceits of men by
counterfeit love. I. Some think that they love God savingly because they love
him as the God of Nature, and cause of all the Natural Being, Order and
Goodness which is in the whole frame of Heaven and Earth; This is to love
somewhat of God, or to love him secundum quid, in one respect: But if they love
him not also as he is the Wise and Holy, and Righteous Ruler of Mankind, and as
he requires, us to be holy, and would make us holy, and love not to please his
Governing will, they love him not as God with a saving love. I have elsewhere
mentioned the saying of Adrian (after Pope) in his Quodlib. that an unholy
person may not only love God as he is the glorious cause of the World and
natural good, but may rather choose to be himself annihilated, and be no man,
than that there should be no God, were it a thing that could be made the matter
of his choice: And indeed I dare not say that every man is holy who had rather
be annihilated than one Kingdom should be annihilated, when many Heathens would
die to save their Country or their Prince; much less dare I say that all shall
be saved that had rather be annihilated than there should be no world, or be no
God: But (says the foresaid Schoolman) it is the love of God as our holy
Governor, and a love of his holy will, and of our conformity thereto, that is
saving love.

II. And I fear that no small number do deceive themselves in thinking that
they love Holiness as the Image of God in themselves and others, when they
understand not truly what Holiness is, but take something for it that is not
it. Holiness is this Uniting love to God and Man, and a desire of more perfect
Union! To love Holiness, is to love this love it self; to love all of God that
is in the World, and to desire that all men may be united in holy love to God
and one another, and live in his praise and the obedience of his will. But I
fear too many take up some opinions that are stricter than other men's, and call
some things Sin which others do not, and get a high esteem of some particular
Church order, and form of manner of worshipping God, which is not of the essence
or holiness, and then they take themselves for a holy people, and other men for
profane and loose, and so they love their own Societies, for this which they
mistake for holiness; and instead of that uniteing love which is holiness
indeed, they grow into a factious enmity to others, reproaching them as
rejoicing in their hurt as taking them for the enemies of God.

2. And as God must be loved in his Image on his servants, so must he in his
Image on his word. Do you love the holy Laws of God, as they express that holy
Wisdom and Love, which is his perfection? Do you love them as they would rule
the World in Holiness, and bring mankind to true wisdom and mutual love? Do you
love this word as it would make you Wise and Holy; and therefore love it most
when you use it most, in reading, hearing, meditation and practice* surely to
love the Wisdom and Holiness of Gods Laws and Promises, is to love God in his
Image there imprinted, even in that Glass where he has purposely showed us
that of himself which we must love.

3. But no where is Gods Image so refulgent to us, as in his Son our Savior
Jesus Christ: In him therefore must God be loved: Though we never saw him, yet
what he was, even the holy Son of God, separate from sinners, the Gospel does
make known to us: as also what wondrous love he has manifested to lost
mankind! In him are all the treasures of Wisdom and Goodness: both an example,
and a doctrine and law of wisdom, holiness and peace he has given to the
World: In this Gospel, Faith sees him, yea sees him as now Glorified in
Heaven, and made Head over all things to the Church; the King of love, the
great high Priest of love, the Teacher of love, and the express Image of the
Fathers person: Are the thoughts of this glorious Image of God now pleasing to
you, and is the wisdom, holiness and love of Christ now amiable to you in
believing? If so, you Love God in his blessed Son. And as he that has seen the
Son has seen the Father, so he that loves the Son loves the Father also.

4. Yet further, the glory of God will shine most clearly in the Celestial
glorified Church, containing Christ and all the blessed Angels and Saints who
shall for ever see the glory of God and Love, obey and praise him, in perfect
Unity, Harmony and Fervency! You see not this heavenly Society and Glory, but
the Gospel reveals it, and Faith believes it: Does not this blessed Society
and their holy work, seem to you the most lovely in all the world? Is it not
pleasing to you to think in what perfect joy and concord they love and magnify
God, without all sinful ignorance, disaffection, dullness, discord or any other
culpable imperfection? I ask not only whether your opinion will make you say
that this Society and State is best? but whether you do not so really esteem it
as that it has the pleasing desires of your Souls? Would you not fain be one
of them and be united to them, and join in their perfect Love and Praise? If
so, this is to Love God in that most glorious appearance where he will show
forth himself to man to be beloved.

But here true believers may be stopped with doubting because they are unwilling
to die, and till we die this glory is not seen. But it is one thing to love
Heaven and God there manifested, and another thing to love death which stands
in the way. Nature teaches us to loath death as death, and to desire, if it
might be, that this Cup might pass by us? Though faith make it less dreadful,
because of the blessed State that follows: But he that loves not
blood-letting or Physic, may love health. It is not death, but God and the
heavenly perfection in glory which we are called to Love. What if you could
come to this glory, without dying as Henoch and Elias did, would you not be
willing to go thither?

5. And he that loves God in all these his appearances to man, in his works
and Image on his Saints, in the wisdom, holiness and goodness of his word, in
the wisdom, love and holiness of his Son, and in the perfection of his glory in
the heavenly Society, does certainly also love him in the highest respect, even
as he is himself that blessed essence, that perfect greatness, Wisdom and
Goodness, or Life, Light and Love, which is the beginning and end of all
things, and the most amiable object of all illuminated minds, and of every
Sanctified will, and of all our harmonious praise for ever. For whatever become
of that dispute, whether we shall see Gods essence in itself, as distinct from
all created glory, (the word seeing being here ambiguous) it is sure that we
can even now have abstracting thoughts of the Essence of God as distinct from
all creatures, and our knowledge of him then will be far more perfect.

It should be most pleasant to every believer to think that GOD IS; Even that
such a perfect glorious being is existent: As if we heard of one man in another
land whom we were never like to see, who in wisdom, love, and all perfections
excelled all men that ever were in the world, the thoughts of that man would be
pleasing to us, and we should love him because he is amiable in his excellency.
And so does the holy Soul when it thinks of the infinite amiableness of God.

6. But the highest Love of the Soul to God, is in taking in all his
amiableness together, and when we think of him as related to our selves, as our
Creater, Redeemer, Sanctifier and Glorifier, and as related to all his Church
and to all the world, as the cause and end of all that is amiable, and when we
think of all those amiable works which these Relations do respect, his Creation
and Conservation of the whole world, his Redemption of mankind, his Sanctifying
and Glorifying of all his chosen ones, his wonderful mercies to our selves for
Soul and Body, his mercies to his Church on earth, his unconceivable mercies to
the glorified Church in Heaven, the Glory of Christ, Angels and Men, and their
perfect Knowledge Love, and joyful praises, and then think what that God is in
himself that does all this? This Complexion of considerations causes the
fullest Love to God. And though unlearned persons cannot speak or think of all
these distinctly and clearly as the Scripture does express them, yet all this
is truly the Object of their Love, though with confusion of their apprehensions
of it.

But I have not yet done, nor indeed come up to the point of trial. It is not
every kind or degree of Love to God in these respects that will prove to be
saving. He is mad that thinks there is no God: And he that believes that there
is a God does believe that he is most powerful, wise and good, and therefore
must needs have some kind of Love to him. And I find that there are a sort of
Deists or Infidels now springing up among us, who are confident, That all, or
almost all men shall be saved, because say they, all men do love God. It is not
possible say they that a man can believe God to be God, that is, to be the
Best, and to be love itself, and the cause of all that is good and amiable in
Heaven and Earth, and yet not love him: The will is not so contrary to the
understanding, nor can be. And say the same men, he that loves his neighbor,
loves God; for it is for his goodness that he loves his Neighbor, and that
goodness is Gods goodness appearing in man: He that loves Sun and Moon, and
Stars, Meat and Drink, and pleasure loves God, for all this is Gods goodness
in his works; and out of his works he is unknown to us; and therefore they say,
that all men Love God, and all men shall be saved, or at least all that love
their Neighbors; for God by is us no otherwise to be loved.

For answer to these men, 1. It is false that God is no otherwise to be loved
than as in our Neighbor: I have told you before undeniably of several other
respects or appearances of God, in which he is to be loved: And he that is not
known to us as separate from all Creatures, is yet known to us as distinct from
all Creatures, and is, and must be so loved by us: Else we are Idolaters if we
suppose the Creatures to be God themselves, and love, and honor them as God:
Even those Philosophers that took God for the inseparable Soul of the World,
yet distinguished him from the World which they thought he animated, (and
indeed does more than animate.)

2. And it is false that every one loves God who loves his Neighbor, or his
Meat, Drink and fleshly Pleasure, or any of the accommodations of his sense.
For Nature causes all men to love life, and self, and pleasure for themselves:
And these are beloved even by Atheists that believe not that there is a God!
And consequently such men love their Neighbors not for God, but for
themselves, either because they are like them, or because they please them, or
serve their interest, or delight them by society and converse, as Birds and
Beasts do love each other that think not of a God. And if all should be saved
that so love one another, or that love their own pleasure, and that which
serves it, not only all wicked men, but most Brute Creatures should be saved.
If you say, they shall not be damned, it is true, because they are not Moral
Agents, capable of Salvation or Damnation, nor capable of Moral Government and
Obedience; and therefore even the Creatures that kill one another are not
damned for it: But certainly as man is capable of Salvation or Damnation, so is
he of somewhat more as the means or way, than Brutes are capable of, and he is
saved or damned for somewhat which Brutes never do. Many a thousand love the
pleasure of their sense, and all things and persons which promote it, that
never think of God or love him. And it is not enough to say that even this
natural good is of God, and therefore it is God in it which they love; for it
will only follow that it is something made and given by God which they love,
while they leave out God himself. That God is Essentially in all things good
and pleasant which they love, does not prove that it is God which they love,
while their thoughts and affections, do not include him.

3. But suppose it were so that to love the Creature were to love God, is not
then the hating of the Creature the hating of God? If those same men that love
Meat and Drink, and sensual Delight, and love their Neighbors for the sake of
these, or for themselves, as a Dog does love his Master, do also hate the
holiness of Gods Servants, and the holiness and justice of his Word and
Government, and that holiness and order of Heart and Life which he commands
them, do not these men hate God in hating these? And that they hate them, their
obstinate aversation shows, when no reason, no mercy, no means, can reconcile
their Hearts and Lives thereto.

4. I therefore ask the Infidel Objector, whether he shall be saved that loves
God in one respect, and hates him in another? That loves him as he causes
the Sun to shine, the Rain to fall, the Grass to grow, and gives Life and
Prosperity to the World, but hates him as he is the Author of those Laws, and
Duties, and that holy Government, by which he would bring them to a voluntary
right order, and make them holy, and fit for Glory, and would use them in his
holy Service, and restrain them from their inordinate Lusts and Wills? How can
love prepare or fit any man for that which he hates or does not love: If the
love of fleshly interest and pleasure prepare or fit them to seek that, and to
enjoy it, (the little time that it will endure) how should this love make them
fit for Heaven, for a Life of holiness with God and Saints? It is this that
they love not, and will not love, (for if they truly loved it they should have
it;) yea, it is this that they hate, and will not accept or be persuaded to.
And what a fond conceit then is it to think that they shall have Heaven that
never loved it, no nor the small beginnings here of the Heavenly Nature and
Life, and all because they loved the pleasures of the Flesh on Earth, and loved
God and their Neighbors for promoting it?

5. Yea, I would ask the Infidel, whether God will save men for rebelling
against him? Their love to their Flesh and to the Creature, as it is
inordinate, and takes Gods place, and shuts out the love of Holiness and
Heaven, is their great Sin and Idolatry? And shall this be called a saving love
of God? What gross self-deceit has sensuality taught these men?

6. I grant them therefore that all men that believe that there is a God, do
love somewhat of God, or secundum quid, or in some partial respect have some
kind of love to God. But it is not a love to that of God, which must save,
felicitate and glorify Souls: Meat and Drink, and fleshly Sports do not this;
but Heavenly Glory, Wisdom, Holiness and Love to God, and Man for God, and this
they love not, and therefore never shall enjoy: Nay, that of God which should
save and felicitate them they hate, and hated holiness is none of theirs, nor
ever can be, till they are changed. And so much to the Infidels Objection.

7. I add therefore in the last place to help men in the trial of their love to
God, that their love must have these two qualifications.

1. They must love that of God which makes man happy, and is indeed the end of
his Nature, and Sanctification; And that is, not only the comforts of this
transitory natural Life and Flesh, but the fore described Union and Communion
with God, in perfect knowledge, love and praise. 2. This love to God must be
predominant, and prevail against the power of alluring objects, which Satan
would use to turn our Hearts from him, and to keep out holy Heavenly love.
Damning sin consists in loving somewhat that is good and lovely, and that is
of God; but it is not simply in loving it, but in loving it inordinately,
instead of God or greater things, and out of its due time and rank, and
measure, and so as to hinder that love which is our holiness and happiness.
Moral Good consists not in mere Entity, but in Order; and disorderly Love
even of real good is sinful Love.

Therefore when all is said, the old mark which I have many and many times
repeated, is it that must try the sincerity of your love; viz. If 1. in the
esteem of a believing mind, 2. And in the choice and adherence of a resolved
will, 3. And in the careful, serious endeavors of your lives, you prefer the
knowing, loving, obeying and joyful praising of God, begun here and perfected
in Glory, as the benefit of our Redemption by Christ, before all the interests
of this fleshly life, the pleasures, profits and honors of this World, that
is, before the pleasures of sin and sensuality for this transitory Season. Or
in Christ's words, Mat. 6.33. If you SEEK FIRST THE KINGDOM OF GOD, AND HIS
RIGHTEOUSNESS, and trust him to superadd all other things. This is that love of
God and goodness which must save us: And he that loves God even in these high
respects, a little, and loves his fleshly pleasure so much more, as that he
will not consent to the regulating of his Lusts, but will rather venture or let
go his Salvation than his sins, has no true saving love to God.

Obj. There is scarce any Fornicator, Drunkard, Glutton, Swearer, or other rash
and sensual sinner, but believes that God is better than the creature, and
that it were better for him to live to God in love and holiness, than to live
in sinful pleasures: and therefore though he live in sin against this
knowledge, it seems that with the rational will he loves God and Goodness
best, because he judges them best.

Ans. 1. It is one thing, what the judgment says; and another thing, how it
says it. A speculative judgment may drowsily say, that God and Holiness are
best* when yet it says it but as a dreaming opinion, which prevails not with
the will to choose them, having at the same time so strong an apprehension of
the pleasures of sin as carries away the will and practice.

2. It is one thing therefore to love God under the notion of being best, and
another thing to love him best. For the will can cross such a notion of the
understanding; at least by an omission, as appears by the sin of Adam, which
began in the will (or else had been necessitated.) The same understanding which
sluggishly says, God or Holiness is better, yet may more clearly and
vehemently say [Lust is pleasant, or Pleasure of the flesh is good] and being
herein seconded with the strong apprehensions of sense and fantasy, the will
may follow this simple judgment, and neglect the comparate.

3. It is one thing for the understanding to say, that God is more amiable to
one that has a heart to love him, and a suitable disposition; and another
thing to say, he is now more amiable to me: those can say the first, that
cannot truly say the latter, and therefore love not God as best, and above all.

4. It is one thing for the understanding sometimes under conviction to say,
God and Holiness are best for me, and I ought to love them best, and then to
lay by the exercise of this judgment in the ordinary course of life, (though it
be not contradicted) and to live in the continual apprehension of the goodness
of sensual pleasure; and another thing to keep the judgment that God and
Holiness are best, in ordinary exercise. For the will does not always follow
the judgment that we had before, but that which we have at present: and that
which we exercise not, we have not at that time in act: and it is not a mere
power or habit of knowledge which rules the will, but the present act. Many a
man is said to know that which he does not think of, when indeed he does not
know it at that time, but only would know it if he thought of it: As a man in
his sleep is said to know what he knew awake, when indeed he knows it not
actually till he be awake.

Obj. But true grace is rather to be judged of by the habit, than by the
present acts.

Ans. By the habit of the Will it is, that is, by habitual love, for that will
command the most frequent acts: but I propose it to the consideration of the
judicious, whether an ordinary habit of drowsy knowledge, or belief that God
and Holiness are best, may not be ordinarily kept out of act, and consist with
a prevailing habit of sensuality or love of forbidden pleasure in the will, and
with a privation of prevalent habitual love to God and Holiness. I suppose with
most such sinners this is the true case: the understanding said lately, It is
best for thee to love God, and live to him, and deny thy lust: And it often
forgets this, while it still says with sense, that fleshly pleasure is
desirable: and at other times it says, Though God be best, thou may venture
at the present on this pleasure; and so lets loose the corrupted will,
reserving a purpose to repent hereafter, as apprehending most strongly at the
present, that just now sensual delight may be chosen, though holiness will be
best hereafter.

Obj. But if a habit will not prove that we sincerely love and prefer God, how
shall any man know that he loves and prefers him, when the best often sin;
and in the act of sin God is not actually preferred.

Ans. 1. I told you that a habit of true love will prove sincerity, though not
a habit of true opinion or belief, which is not brought into lively and
ordinary act: uneffectual faith may be habitual. Yea such an uneffectual
counterfeit half love, which I before described to you, may be habitual, and
yet neither act nor habit saving.

2. The Sins of godly men are not prevalent absolutely against the being,
operation or effects of the love of God and Holiness; For even when they sin,
these live, and are predominant in all other things, and in the main bent and
course of life; but only they prevail against some Degree of holy love, perhaps
both in the act and habit for such sins are not ungodliness, but imperfection
of godliness and the effects of that imperfection.

3. When godly men fall into a great extraordinary sin, it is not to be
expected that they should comfortably discern the sincerity of their love to
God either by that sin, or in that sin; but they may discern it, 1. By the
course of a godly life, where the prevalency of the habit appears in the
power and stream of acts; and 2. By their Repentance for, and abhorring and
forsaking of that sin, which stopped and darkened their love to God. And these
two together viz, A resolved course of living unto God, and Repentance and
Hatred of every sin which is against it, and especially of greater sins, will
show the sincerity and power of holy love.

Obj. But then one that sins daily, e. g. by passion, or too much love to
the World, or creatures, and by omissions, etc. shall never be sure that he
sincerely loves God, because this is a course of sin, and he cannot have such
assurance till he forsake it.

Ans. One that ordinarily commits gross and wilful sin, that is, such sin as
he had rather keep than leave, and as he would leave if he were but sincerely
willing, has no predominant love of God; at least in act, and therefore can
have no assurance of it: But one that is ordinarily guilty of mere infirmities
may at the same time, know that the love of God does rule both in his heart and
life. The Passion of fear or of anger, or of sorrow may be inordinate, and yet
God loved best, because the will has so weak a power over them, that a man
that is guilty of them may truly say, I would fain be delivered from them. And
some inordinate love of life, health, wealth, friends, honor, may stand with a
more prevailing love of God, and the prevalency be well perceived. But what
greater actual sin (as Noah's or Lots Drunkenness, David's Adultery and Murder,
Peter's denial of Christ) are or are not consistent with true love to God, is a
case that I have elsewhere largely handled, and is unmeet for a short decision
here.

Obj. But when I feel my heart, desires and delights all cold to God and
Holiness, and too hot after fleshly, worldly things, may I not conclude that I
love these better?

Ans. Sensible near things may have much more of the passionate part of our
love, our desires and delights, and yet not be best loved by us. For God and
Things Spiritual being out of the reach of sense, are not so apt or like to
move our sense and passion immediately to and by themselves. As I said before,
that is best loved, which has, 1. The highest esteem of the understanding. 2.
The most resolved prevalent choice of the will, 3. And the most faithful
endeavors of our life.

And many a Christian mistaketh his affection to the thing it self, because of
his strangeness to the place and to the change that death will make. If the
weakest Christian could have without dying, the clear knowledge of God, the
communion of Faith and Love by his Spirit; could he love God but as much as he
would love him, and answerably taste his love, in every prayer, in every
promise, in every Sacrament, in every mercy; could his Soul keep a continual
sabbath of delight in God, and in his Saints and Holy worship, this seems to
him more desirable and pleasing than all the treasures of the World. And he
that desires this communion with God desires Heaven in reality, though he
fear the change that death will make, because of the weakness of faith, and our
strangeness to the state of separated Souls.

Chap. XX.
The second part of the Exhortation; Rest in this that you are known with Love
to God.

2. TO be KNOWN OF GOD here signifies to be approved and Loved of him, and
consequently that all our concerns are perfectly known to him and regarded by
him.

This is the full and final comfort of a believer. Our Knowledge and Love of
God in which we are agents are, 1. The evidence that we are known with Love to
God, and so our comfort (as is said) by way of Evidence; 2. And they are our
comfort in their very exercise. But the chief part of our comfort is from God,
not only as the Object of our Love, but as the Lover of us and all his Saints,
even in our passive receiving of the blessed effects of his Love for ever: When
a Christian therefore has any discerning of his interest in this Love of God,
by finding that he Loves God and Goodness, here he must finally Anchor his
Soul, and quietly rest in all Temptations, Difficulties, and Tribulations.

1. Our enemies know us not, but judge of us by blinding interest, and the
biass of their false opinions, and by an easy belief of false reports, or by
their own ungrounded suspicions: And therefore we are odious to them, and
abused, slandered and persecuted by them. But God knows us, and will justify
our righteousness, and bring all our innocence into light, and stop the mouth
of all iniquity.

2. Strangers know us not, but receive such Characters of us as are brought to
them with the greatest advantage: And even good men may think and speak evil of
us (as Bernard and others of the Waldenses, and many Fathers of many Godly Men
that were called Heretics, and many called Heretics of such Fathers.) But to
us it is a small thing to be judged of man, that is not our final judge, and
knows not our cause, and is ready to be judged with us; We have one that
judges us and them, even the omniscient God, who knows every Circumstance of
our cause.

3. Our very Friends, know us not: No not they that dwell with us: In some
things they judge us better than we are, and in some things worse: For they
know not our hearts; And interests and cross dispositions may deceive them; and
even our bosom Friends may slander us and think they speak the truth.

And when they entirely Love us, their Love may hurt us, while they know not
what is for our good: But God knows us perfectly and knows how to Counsel
us, Conduct us, and Dispose of us: He sees the inwards and the outward, the
onwards and the upwards of our case, which our dearest Friends are utter
strangers to.

4. We know not our selves thoroughly, nor our own concerns: We often take our
selves to be better or worse than indeed we are: We are often mistaken in our own
hearts and our own actions, and in our interest. We often take that to be good
for us that is bad, and that to be bad which is good and necessary: We long for
that which would undo us, and fear and fly from that which would save us: We
often rejoice when we are going to the slaughter, or are at least in greatest
danger; and we lament and cry when God is saving us, because we know not what
he is doing. Paul says, [I know nothing by my self, yet I judge not my own
self,] that is, though I have a good Conscience, yet that is not my final
judge: It must go with me as God judges of me, and not as others or my self.

Is it not then an unspeakable comfort in all these cases that we are known of
God?

Desiring to know inordinately for our selves was our first sin; And this sin
is our danger and our constant trouble. But to be to God as a Child to his
Father, who takes care to Love him and obey him, and in all things trusts
his Fathers Love, as knowing that he cares for him, this is our duty, our
interest and our only peace.

Remember then with comfort, O my Soul; 1. Thy Father knows what it is
fittest for thee to do. His precepts are wise and just, and good; Thou know
not but by his word! Love therefore and submit to all his Laws: The strictest
of them are for thy good: Thy Guide, and not thou, must lead the way; Go not
before him nor without him; nor stay behind him: In this night and wilderness
if thou have not his Light and Presence, how forlorn, Erroneous and Comfortless
will thou be? He knows thy heart, and knows thy Enemies, Temptations and
Dangers, and therefore best knows how to guide thee, and what to put into his
Laws and into thy duty.

2. He knows what place, what state of Life, of Health, of Wealth, of
Friends, is best for thee. None of these are known to thee: He knows whether
ease or pain be best: The flesh is no fit judge, nor an ignorant mind: That is
best which will prove best at last; Which he that foreknoweth all events
knows. That therefore is best which infinite Wisdom and Love does choose.
Ease and Pain will have their end: It is the end that must teach us how to
estimate them: And who but God can foretell thee the end?

He knows whether Liberty or Imprisonment be best: Liberty is a Prison if sin
prevail, and God be not there. A Prison is a Palace if God by his Love will
dwell there with us. There is no thraldom but sin and Gods displeasure, and no
true liberty but his Love.

3. He knows whether Honor or Dishonor be best for thee: If the esteem of
men may facilitate their reception of the saving truth of God which is preached
to them, God will procure it if he have work to do by it: If not, how little is
it to be regarded? What does it add to me to be highly esteemed or applauded by
men, who are hasting to the dust, where their thoughts of me and all the world
are at an end? When I see the Skulls of the dead who perhaps once knew me, how
little does it now concern me what thoughts of me were once within that Skull?
And as for the immortal Soul, if it be in the world of light, it judges as God
judges by his Light: If in hell, I have no more cause to be troubled at their
malice than at the devils? And I have little cause to rejoice that those damned
Souls did once applaud me.

Oh miserable men that have no better than the Hypocrites reward, to be seen
and honored of men! Gods approbation is the felicitating honor! He will own
all in me that is his own, and all that he owneth is everlastingly honored.
The Lord knows the way of the Righteous, Psalm. 1.6. For it is his way: The
way which he prescribed them, and in which he did Conduct them. Good and evil
are now so mixed in me, that it is hard for me fully to discern them: But the
all-seeing God does discern them) and will separate them.

4. Thy Heavenly Father knows whether it be best for thee to abound or want:
And with what measure of worldly things it is fittest for thee to be entrusted!
Abundance has abundant snares and cares, and troubling employments which
divert our thoughts from things of real and perpetual worth: Provision is
desirable according to its usefulness to our work and end: It is far better to
need little and have little, than to have much and need it all: For it cannot
be got, or kept, or used, without some troublesome and hurtful effects of its
vanity and vexation. Let the foolish desire to be tired and burdened with
Provision, and lose the prize by turning their helps into a snare, and miss of
the end by over-loving the way: My Father knows what I want, and he is always
able to supply me with a word: It does not impoverish him to maintain all the
World. His store is not diminished by Communication. The Lord is my Shepherd,
what then can I need? Psalm. 23.1. How often have I found that he cares for me,
and that it is better to be at his finding and provision, than to have been my
own Carver, and to have cared for my self? Blessed be my bounteous Father who
has brought me so near to the end of my Race, with very little care for
provision in my way, and with lesser want! Necessaries I never wanted, and
superfluities are not wanted. Blessed be that wise and gracious Lord, that has
not given me up to greedy desires; nor ensnared and burdened me with needless
plenty. How safe, how easy and comfortable a life is it, to live in the Family
of such a Father, and with a thankful carelessness to trust his will, and take
that portion as best which he provideth for us? And into what misery do foolish
Prodigals run, who had rather have their portion in their own hand, than in
their Fathers?

5. Thy heavenly Father knows with what kind and measure of Trials and
Temptations it is fit that thou should be exercised! It is his work to permit
and bound, and order them: It is thy work to beg his grace to overcome them,
and watchfully and constantly to make resistance, and in Trial to approve thy
faithfulness to God: Blessed are they that endure Temptations; for when they
are tried they shall receive the Crown of life, James 1. If he will try thee by
bodily pain and sickness, he can make it turn to the health of thy Soul:
Perhaps thy diseases have prevented some mortal Soul-diseases which thou did
not fear. If he will try thee by men's malice, Injury or Persecution, he knows
how to turn it to thy good; and in season to bring thee out of trouble: He will
teach thee by other men's wickedness to know what grace has cured or prevented
in thy self; and to know the need of trusting in God alone, and appealing to
his desirable Judgment: He that bids thee when thou art Reviled, and
Persecuted, and loaded with false reports for righteousness sake, to rejoice
and be exceeding glad, because of the great reward in heaven, can easily give
thee what he does Command, and make thy sufferings a help to this exceeding joy.

If he will try thee by Satan's molesting Temptations, and suffer him to buffet
thee, or break thy peace by Melancholy disquietments and vexatious thoughts
(from which he has hitherto kept thee free) he does but tell thee from how
much greater evil he has delivered thee, and make thy fears of Hell a means to
prevent it, and call thee to thy Savior to seek for safety and peace in him.

If it please him to permit the malicious tempter to urge thy thoughts to
blasphemy or other dreadful sin (as it ordinarily falls out with the
Melancholy,) it tells thee from what malice grace preserves thee, and what
Satan would do were he let loose: It calls thee to remember that thy Savior
himself was tempted by Satan to as great sin as ever thou wast, even to worship
the Devil himself; And that he suffered him to carry about his body from place
to place, which he never did by thee: It tells thee therefore that it is not
sin to be tempted to sin, but to consent; And that Satan's sin is not laid to
our charge: And though our corruption is such, as that we seldom are tempted
but some culpable blot is left behind in us, (for we cannot say as Christ, that
Satan has nothing in us:) Yet no sin is less dangerous to man's damnation, than
the Melancholy thoughts which such horrid vexatious Temptations cause; both
because the person being distempered by a disease, is not a volunteer in what
he does; and also because he is so far from loving and desiring such kind of
sin, that it is the very burden of his life; They make him weary of himself,
and he daily groaneth to be delivered from them. And it is certain that Love is
the damning malignity of sin; and that there is no more sin than there is will;
And that no sin shall damn men which they had rather leave than keep; and
therefore forgiveness is joined to Repentance: Drunkards, Fornicators,
Worldlings, Ambitious men, love their sin: But a poor Melancholy Soul that is
tempted to ill thoughts, or to despair, or terror, or to excessive griefs, is
far from loving such a state. The case of such is sad at present: But O how
much sadder is the case of them that are Lovers of pleasure more than of God,
and prosper and delight in sin.

6. God knows how long it is best for me to live. Leave then the
determination of the time to him; All men come into the word, on the condition
of going out again: Die we must; and is it not fitter that God choose the time
than we? Were it left to our wills how long we should live on Earth, alas how
long should many of us be kept out of heaven, by our own desires? And too many
would stay here till misery made them impatient of living. But our lives are
his gift, and in his hand, who knows the use of them, and knows how to
proportion them to that use; which is the justest measure of them. He chose the
time and place of my birth, and he chooses best: Why should I not willingly
leave to his choice also, the time and place, and manner of my departure. I am
known of him; and my concerns are not despised by him. He knows me as his
own, and as his own he has used me, and as his own he will receive me, Psalm.
37.18. The Lord knows the days of the upright, and their inheritance shall be
for ever. And if he bring me to death through long and painful sickness, he
knows why, and all shall end in my Salvation. He knows the way that is with
me, and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold, Job 23.10. He
forsakes us not in sickness or in death. [Like as a Father pityeth his
Children, the Lord pityeth them that fear him; For he knows our frame, he
remembers that we are dust: As for man his days are as grass; as a flower of
the Field, so he flourishes: For the wind passes over it, and it is not, and
the place thereof shall know it no more: But the mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting to them that fear him.] If the Ox should not know
his owner, nor the Ass his Masters Crib, the owner will know his own and seek
them. That we understand and know the Lord, is matter of greater joy and
glorying, than all other wisdom or riches in the world, Jer. 9.24. But that he
knows us in Life and Death, on Earth and in Heaven, is the top of our
rejoicing. The Lord is good, and strength in the day of trouble; and he knows
them that trust in him, Nah. 1.7. Sickness may so change my flesh that even my
Neighbors shall not KNOW ME; and Death will make the change so great, that
even my friends will be unwilling to see such an unpleasing, loathsome
spectacle: But while I am carried by them to the place of darkness, that I may
not be an annoyance to the living, I shall be there in the sight of God, and my
Bones and Dust shall be owned by him, and none of them forgotten or lost.

7. It may be that under the temptations of Satan, or in the languishing
weakness or distempers of my flesh, I may doubt of the love of God, and think
that he has withdrawn his mercy from me; or at least may be unmeet to taste the
sweetness of his love, or to meditate on his truth and mercies: But God will
not lose his knowledge of me, nor turn away his mercy from me. The foundation
of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, and
let him that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. He
can call me his Child, when I doubt whether I may call him Father: He doubts
not of his right to me, nor of his graces in me, when I doubt of my sincerity
and part in him. Known unto God are all his works, Act. 15.18. What means
Paul thus to describe a state of grace, Gal. 4.9. Now after ye have known God,
or rather are known of of God? but to notify to us, that though our knowledge
of God be his grace in us, and our evidence of his love, and the beginning of
life eternal, ( Joh. 17.3.) yet that we are loved and known of him is the first
and last, the foundation and the perfection of our security and felicity. He
knows his Sheep, and none shall take them out of his hand. When I cannot
through pain or distemper remember him, or not with renewed Joy or Pleasure, he
will remember me, and delight to do me good, and to be my Salvation.

8. And though the belief of the unseen World be the principle by which I
conquer this, yet are my conceptions of it lamentably dark: A Soul in flesh,
which acts as the form of a body, is not furnished with such images, helps,
or light, by which it can have clear conceptions of the state and operations of
separated Souls: But I am known of God, when my knowledge of him is dark and
small: And he knows whither it is that he will take me, and what my state and
work shall be! He that is preparing a place for me with himself, is well
acquainted with it and me: All Souls are his; and therefore all are known to
him: He that is now the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as being living with
him while they are dead to us, will receive my departing Soul to them, and to
himself, to be with Christ, which he has instructed me to commend into his
hands, and to desire him to receive. He that is now making us living Stones for
the new Jerusalem, and his heavenly temple, does know where every one of us
shall be placed. And his knowledge must now be my satisfaction and my peace.
Let unbelievers say, How does God know? Psalm. 73.11. But shall I doubt whether
he that made the Sun, be Father of lights, and whether he know his dwelling,
and his continued works? Be still O my Soul, and know that he is God, Psalm.
40.10. and when he has guided thee by his counsel he will take thee to Glory;
and in his Light thou shall have Light: And though now it appear not (to sight,
but to Faith only) what we shall be yet we known that we shall see him as he
is, and we shall appear with him in glory.

And to be KNOWN of God undoubtedly includes his PRACTICAL LOVE, which
secureth our Salvation and all that tends thereunto. It is not meant of such
a knowledge only as he has of all things, or of such as he has of the
ungodly. And why should it be hard to thee, O my Soul, to be persuaded of the
love of God?

Is it strange that he should love thee who is Essential Infinite love: Any
more than that the Sun should shine upon thee, which shines upon all capable
recipient objects, though not upon the incapable, which through interposing
things cannot receive it? To believe that Satan or wicked men, or deadly
Enemies should love me, is hard: But to believe that the God of love does love
me, should in reason be much easier than to believe that my Father or Mother,
or dearest friend in the World does love me: If I do not make and continue my
self incapable of his complacence by my wilful continued refusing of his grace,
it is not possible that I should be deprived of it, Prove. 8.17. I love them
that love me. Psalm. 146.8. The Lord loves the righteous. John 16.27.

2. Why should it be hard to thee to believe that he loves thee, who does good
so universally to the World, and by his love does preserve the whole Creation,
and give all Creatures all the good which they possess? When his mercy is over
all his works, and his Goodness is equal to his wisdom and his power, and all
the World is beautified by it, shall I not easily believe that it will extend
to me? The Lord is good to all, Psalm. 145.9. Luke 18.19. None is good (
essentially, absolutely and transcendently) but he alone, Psalm. 33.5. The Earth
is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 52.1. The goodness of God endures
continually: He is good and does good, Psalm. 119.68. And shall I not expect
good from so good a God, the cause of all the good that is in the World?

3. Why should I not believe that he will love me, who so far loved the World,
yea his Enemies, as to give his only begotten Son, that whoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life? Joh. 3.16. Having given me so
precious a gift as his Son, will he think any thing too good to give me? Romans
8.32. yea still he follows his Enemies with his mercies, not leaving himself
without witness to them, but filling their hearts with food and gladness, and
causing his Sun to shine on them, and his Rain to fall on them, and by his
goodness leading them to repentance.

4. Why should I not easily believe his love, which he has sealed by that
certain gift of love, the Spirit of Christ which he has given? The giving of
the Holy Ghost is the shedding abroad of his love upon the heart, Romans 5. I had
never known, desired, loved, or served him sincerely but by that Spirit: And
will he deny his name, his mark, his seal, his Pledge, and Earnest of Eternal
life? Could I ever have truly loved Him, his Word, his Ways and Servants, but
by the reflection of his love? shall I question whether he love those whom he
has caused to love him? When our love is the surest gift and token of his
love, shall I think that I can love him more than he loves me, or be more
willing to serve him than he is willing and ready to reward his Servants? Heb.
11.6. 1 John 3.24. and 4.13.

5. Shall I not easily hope for good from him, who has made such a covenant of
Grace with me in Christ? Who gives me what his Son has purchased, who
accepts me in his most beloved, as a member of his Son? Who has bid me, ask
and I shall have? And has made to Godliness, the promise of this life and that
to come, and will withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly? Will
not such a Gospel, such a Covenant, such promises of love secure me that he
loves me, while I consent unto his covenant terms?

6. Shall I not easily believe that he will love me, who has loved me while I
was his Enemy, and called me home when I went astray, and mercifully received
me when I returned? Who has given me a life full of precious mercies, and so
many experiences of his love as I have had? Who has so often signified his
love to my Conscience? So often heard my prayers in distress, and has made all
my life, notwithstanding my sins, a continual wonder of his mercies? O
unthankful Soul, if all this will not persuade thee of the love of him that
gave it! I that can do little good to any one, yet have abundance of friends
and hearers, who very easily believe that I would do them good, were it in my
power, and never fear that I should do them harm! And shall it be harder to me
to think well of Infinite Love and Goodness, than for my neighbors to trust me
and think well of such a wretch as I? What abundance of love tokens have I yet
to show, which were sent me from Heaven to persuade me of my Fathers love and
care.

7. Shall I not easily believe and trust his love who has promised me eternal
glory with his Son, and with all his holy ones in Heaven? Who has given me
there a great Intercessor to prepare Heaven for me, and me for it and there
appears for me before God? Who has already brought many millions of blessed
Souls to that glory, who were once as bad and low as I am? And who has given
me already the Seal, the Pledge, the Earnest and the First Fruits of that
Felicity.

Therefore, O my Soul, if men will not know thee, if thou were hated of all men
for the cause of Christ and Righteousness; If thine uprightness be imputed to
thee as an odious crime; If thou be judged by the blind, malignant World,
according to its gall and interest; If friends misunderstand thee; If Faction
and every evil cause which thou disownest, do revile thee, and rise up against
thee: It is enough, it is absolutely enough, that thou art known of God: God is
All; and All is nothing that is against him, or without him: If God be for thee
who shall be against thee? How long has he kept thee safe in the midst of
dangers? and given thee peace in the midst of furious Rage and Wars? He has
known how to bring thee out of trouble, and to give thee tolerable ease, while
thou have carried about thee night and day the usual causes of continual
torment! His loving kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63.3. but thou have had
a long unexpected life, through his loving kindness. In his favor is life,
Psalm. 30. And life thou have had by and with his favor. Notwithstanding thy
sin, while thou can truly say, thou love him, he has promised that all
shall work together for thy good, Romans 8.28. And he has long made good that
promise: Only ask thy self again and again as Christ did Peter, whether indeed
thou love him? And then take his love as thy full, and sure, and everlasting
portion; which will never fail thee, though flesh and Heart do fail; For thou
shall dwell in God and God in thee for evermore 1 John 4.12, 15, 16. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
A Christian Directory, or Body of practical Divinity. 1. Christian Ethics. 2.
Oeconomicks. 3. Ecclesiastics. 4. Politics, Resolving multitudes of Cases on
each Subject. By Rich. Baxter. Folio.

Mr. Baxters Catholic Theology. Folio.

Mr. Baxters Methodus Theologiae Christianae. Folio.

A Third Volume of Sermons Preached by the late Reverend and Learned Tho.
Manton D.D. In two parts. Folio.

A Hundred Select Sermons on several Texts, of Fifty on the Old Testament, and
Fifty on the New. Folio.

Choice and Practical Expositions on four Select Psalms. Folio. Both by the
Reverend and Learned Tho. Horion D.D. late Minister of St. Hellens, London.

The true Prophecies and Prognostications of Michael Nostrodamus, Physician to
Henry the Second, Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, Kings of France,
and one of the Best Astronomers that ever were. Folio.

Sixty one Sermons, Preached mostly on public occasions, whereof five formerly
Printed by Adam Littleton D.D. Rector of Chelsea in Middlesex. Folio.

The Novels and Tales of the Renowned John Boccasio, the first Refiner of
Italian Prose, containing a hundred curious Novels. Folio.

A Key to open Scripture Metaphors, in two Volumes. By Benjamin Keach and Tho.
Delawn. Folio.

The Saints Everlasting Rest, or a Treatise of the Blessed State of the Saints
in their Enjoyment of God in Glory. 4 to.

The English Nonconformity, as under King Charles II. and King James II. Truly
Stated and Argued, By Richard Baxter. 4to.

A discourse concerning Liturgies. By the Late Learned and Judicious Divine,
Mr. David Clarkson. 8vo.

A discourse of the saving Grace of God. By the late Reverend and Learned David
Clarkson Minister of the Gospel. 8vo.

The Vision of the Wheels seen by the Prophet Ezekiel; Opened and Applied:
Partly at the Merchants Lecture in Broad-street, and partly at Stepney, on
January 31. 1689. being the Day of Solemn Thanksgiving to God for the great
Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Slavery, By his then Highness the
most Illustrious Prince of Orange. Whom God raised up to be the glorious
Instrument thereof. By Matthew Mead Pastor of a Church of Christ at Stepney*
4to.

A Call to the Unconverted to Turn and Live. 12mo.

The right Method for settled Peace of Conscience, and Spiritual Comfort. 8vo.

The Life of Faith in every State. 4to.

Alderman Ashursts Funeral Sermon. 4to.

A Key for Catholics to open the juglings of the Jesuits: The first part of
answering all their common Sophisms: The second against the Sovereignty and
necessity of General Councils. 4to.

The certainty of Christianity without Popery. 8vo.

Full and easy satisfaction, which is the true Religion: Transubstantiation
shamed. 8vo.

Naked Popery: Answering Mr. Hutchinson. 4to.

Which is the true Church: A full Answer to his Reply: proving that the General
Councils and the Popes Primacy were but in one Empire. 4to.

The History of Bishops and their Councils abridged, and of the Popes. 4to.

The Cure of Church Divisions. 8to.

A full Treatise of Episcopacy, showing what Episcopacy we own, and what is in
the English Diocesan frame, for which we dare not swear never to endeavor any
alteration of it, in our places. 4to.

A search for the English Schismatic; comparing the Canoneers and
Nonconformists. 4to.

An Answer to Mr. Dodwell and Dr. Sherlock, confuting an Universal-humane
Church Sovereignty, Aristocratical and Monarchical, as Church Tyranny and
Popery; and defending Dr. Iz. Barrows excellent Treatise. 4to.

FINIS.

