portrait

Farewell vain World! As thou have been to me
Dust and a Shadow; those I leave with thee:
The unseen Vital Substance I committ
To him that is Substance, Light and Life to it.
The Leaves and Fruit here dropped are holy seed,
Heaven's heirs to generate; to heal and feed:
Them also thou will flatter and molest
But shall not keep from Everlasting Rest.
THE REASONS OF THE Christian Religion.

The FIRST PART, OF GODLINESS: Proving by NATURAL EVIDENCE the Being of GOD,
the Necessity of HOLINESS* and a future Life of Retribution; the Sinfulness of
the World; the Desert of Hell; and what hope of Recovery Mercies intimate.

The SECOND PART, OF CHRISTIANITY: Proving by Evidence Supernatural and
Natural, the certain Truth of the CHRISTIAN Belief: and answering the
Objections of Unbelievers.

First meditated for the well-setling of his own Belief; and now published for
the benefit of others, By RICHARD BAXTER.

It opens also the true Resolution of the Christian Faith.

Also an APPENDIX, defending the Soul's Immortality against the Somatists or
Epicureans, and other Pseudo-philosophers.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Fran. Titon, at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street. 1667.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BEcause there are some, who judging of others by themselves* will say what
need this labor among Christians, to prove a God, a Life to come, and the
Truth of the Gospel? Or at least what need is there of it, after so much
already written? I take my self obliged to give you an account of this attempt:
For my own Reason is much against over-doing, and wasting our little time in
things superfluous; which is but enough for necessary things: But it has
recorded this among the indubitata; Boni raro nimis; optimi nunquam;
indifferentes saepissime mali semper.

The true Reasons of this work, are no fewer than these following. 1. Quod
cogitamus, loquimur: That which is most and deepest in my thoughts, is aptest
to break forth to others. Man is a communicative Creature. Though it be to my
shame, I must confess, that necessity, through perplexed thoughts, has made
this Subject much of my Meditations: It is the Subject which I have found most
necessary and most useful to my self. And I have reason enough to think, that
many others may be as weak as I. And I would fain have those partake of my
satisfaction, who have partaked of my difficulties.

2. I perceive, that because it is taken for a shame, to doubt of our
Christianity and the Life to come, this hinders many from uttering their
doubts, who never get them well resolved, but remain half Infidels within,
whilst the Ensigns of Christ are hanged without; and need much help, though
they are ashamed to tell their needs: And prudent Charity will relieve those
who are ashamed to beg.

3. As the true knowledge of God, is the beginning and maintainer of all
holiness and honesty of Heart and Life; so latent Atheism and Infidelity in
the minds of Hypocrites in the Church, is the root of their profaneness,
dishonesty and wickedness. Did they seriously Believe as Christians, they
would not live as the Enemies of Christianity! I take it therefore to be the
surest and most expeditious Cure of the security, presumption, pride,
perfidiousnesse, sensuality, and wickedness of these Hypocrites, to convince
them that there is a God, and a Life to come, and that the Gospel is true.

4. And this profaneness and sensuality tends to greater Infidelity. They
that will not live as they profess to Believe, may most easily be drawn to
Believe and profess, as they are willing to live. And therefore this
Prognostic commands me to endeavor, to prevent men's open profession of
Infidelity, lest the present torrent of ungodliness, selfishnesse, malice,
uncharitableness, perjury, treachery, faction, whoredom, and other
sensualities, should fall into this gulf, or one that is not much unlike it.

5. The best complain of the imperfection of their Faith: And too many good
Christians, especially if Melancholy surprise them, are haunted with such
temptations, to Atheism, blasphemy and unbelief, as make their lives a burden
to them! And one that has heard so many of their complaints as I have done, is
excusable for desiring to relieve them. It has many a time been matter of
wonder to me to observe, that there is scarce one deep melancholy person among
ten (religious or not religious before) but is followed with violent
suggestions to doubt of the Godhead, and of the truth of the Gospel, or to
utter some word of Blasphemy against God. And he that must pray, [Lord increase
my Faith, and help my Unbelief,] must use other means as well as pray.

6. The imperfection of our Faith (even about the Gospel, and the Life to come)
is the secret root of all our faults; of the weakness of every other grace, of
our yielding to temptations; and of the carelessness, badnesse, and barrenness
of our Lives. So Transcendent are the Concernments of the Life to come, that a
certain, clear, and firm belief of them, would even deride temptations, and
bear down all the trifles of this World, by what names or titles soever
dignified, as things not worthy of a look or thought! What manner of person
will that man be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness, who believing that
all these things must be dissolved, does look for the coming of Christ, and for
the Blessed Consequents! 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 14. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. O what a life
would that man live! what Prayers, what Praises! what holy discourse would
employ his tongue! with what abhorrence would he reject the baits of sin! who
did but see, but once see, those unseen and future things, which every
Christian professes to believe? How contemptibly would he think and speak both
of the pleasures and the sufferings of this dreaming life, in comparison of the
everlasting things? What serious desires, and labors, and joys, and patience,
would such a sight procure? How much more holy and Heavenly would it make even
those that by the purblind World are thought to exceed herein already? And if
we took our Belief to be as certain as our sight, Believing would do greater
matters than it does. I often think what one told me, that an Infidel answered
him, when he asked him, How he could quiet his Conscience in such a desperate
state? says he, [I rather wonder how you can quiet your Conscience in such a
common careless course of life, believing as you do? If I believed such things
as you do, I should think no care, and diligence, and holiness could be enough.]

7. The Soul in flesh is so much desirous of a sensitive way of apprehension,
and sensible things being still before us, do so increase this Malady, and
divert the mind from spiritual things, that we have all great need of the
clearest evidence, and the most suitable, and frequent, and taking explication
of them, that possibly can be given us, not only to make us Believe things
unseen, but to make us serious, and practical, and affectionate about the
things which in a sort we do believe; to keep drowsy hearts awaken.

8. The way of taking Religion upon trust, without rising up to make it our
own, has filled the Church so full of Hypocrites who have no better than an
humane Faith, that thereby the complexion of it is much changed, from its
primitive beauty: And thousands do perish by felf-deceit: And though some of
their Gifts be serviceable to the Gospel, others of them do more effectually
serve the Devil, against the Cause and Servants of Christ, than they could have
done if they were professed Infidels.

9. It makes me blush, and stirrs my Indignation, to read and hear abundance of
hot and vehement Disputes, and tedious or Critical discourses about many small
less needful things, by those men that never studied the Foundation, nor can
with Sense and Reason defend their Christianity against an Infidel. Such
preposterous methods are perverse and nauseous.

10. I am much afraid lest many of those ignorant zealous Christians, who now
turn to that Sectary whom they cannot answer, would turn to the Infidel at
last, when they find themselves unable to confute them, through their own
insufficiency and ungroundednesse in the Truth.

11. But if they do not Apostatize, what a shame will it be to the Church of
God, to have our Religion thus betrayed, by such as are not able to defend it?
And how many others may it tempt to Infidelity, to hear an Ignorant Christian
baffled.

12. I am too sure, that too many Teachers, that should be Champions for the
Truth, are lamentably unfurnished for such a Conflict, by neglecting the study
of the Foundation, and bestowing all their thoughts on the Superstructure.

13. I know that it is Gods method, to cause the growth of Faith at the root,
in proportion to its growth in tallnesse and in fruit: It is his merciful
Providence, to keep those whose Faith has weaker roots, from the strong
temptations which others undergo. As the Plant that is little, does bear but
little of the stroke of the winds; which else would quickly overturn it: but
the root growing downward, as the top grows upward, the radication and the
assaults are still proportioned: So Faith must grow equally in its Roots and
Branches while we live. Had I felt as strong assaults against my Faith while I
was young, as I have done since, I am not sure it would have escaped an
overthrow.

14. I have in the anatomizing of the Controversies which most hazard the
Church of Christ, found so much latent Atheism and Infidelity, that I think
among many (that do not observe it) the true root of all the difference is,
Whether there be a God, and a Life to come? And whether the Scriptures be true.
And I think that A sound agreement in these, would do more to the ending of
such Controversies, and to the healing of our Wounds, than any disputing of the
Controverted points.

15. We have had hot and scandalous Disputes among Christians, de Resolutione
Fidei; each Party invalidating the others Foundations, as if it had been our
work to persuade the Infidel World, that they are in the right. And I thought
it the only way to end that Controversy, to open all the Causes of our Faith.
The Roman Party may here perceive our Grounds, and better know into what we
resolve our Faith, than if we named only one sort of Cause, and said, I resolve
it into this: As if all the Frame had but one Wheel? Faith has variety of
Causes and Objects, into which respectively it may be said to be resolved: (by
those that will not use an insignificant Word, to make People believe there is
a difference, where there is none; and to keep men from understanding the
matter it self.) Augustine says of his Friend Nebudius (Ep. 23. Bonif.) That
he exceedingly hated a short Answer to a great Question, and took it ill where
he might be free, of any that did expect it from him: [Answer me in a word] is
the Command of an ignorant or a slothful person, or of a Deceiver, when a Word
is not capable of the necessary Answer.

16. There is no more desirable work in the World, than the converting of
Idolaters and Infidels to God and to the Christian Faith. And it is a work
which requires the greatest judgment and zeal in them that must perform it.
It is a doleful thought, that five parts of the World are still Heathens and
Mahometans; And that Christian Princes and Preachers do no more to their
Recovery; but are taken up with sad Contentions among themselves: And that the
few that have attempted it, have hitherto had so small success. The opening of
the true method for such a Work, is the highest part of my design: In which
though many others have excellently labored, [especially Savonarola,
Campanella, Ficinus, Vives, Micraelius, Duplessis, Grotius, and our
Stillingfleet,] my Zeal for the saving of Men's Souls has provoked me to try,
whether I might add any thing to their more worthy Labors, in point of Method
and perspicuity of Proof.

17. Lastly, I have long ago written much on this Subject, which is dispersed
and buried in the midst of other Subjects, (except my Book of the
Unreasonableness of Infidelity): And I thought it more Edifying to set it in
order together by it self. If these Reasons justify not my undertaking, I have
no better. The Lord have mercy on this dark, distracted, sensual World.
Christians, watch, pray, love, live, hope, rejoice, and patiently suffer,
according to this Holy Faith which you profess, and you shall be blessed in
despite of Earth and Hell.

October. 31. 1666. Your Brother in this Life of Faith, Richard Baxter.

Virtus Fidei in Periculis secura est; securitate periclitatur. Chrysostom. in
Mat. 20.
To the Doubting and the Unbelieving READERS.
THE natural love to knowledge and to my self, which belong to me as I am a
Man, have commanded me to look beyond this life, and diligently to enquire,
whether there be any certainty of a better? and which is the way to it, and to
whom it does of right belong. And what I have certainly discovered in this
search, the love of Mankind, and of Truth, and of God, oblige me to
communicate. But it was not a cursory glance at Truth, nor a look toward it
afar off, in my state of ignorance and diversion, which brought the satisfying
light into my mind: nor can you reasonably expect it should do so by you. I saw
that in one Savonarola, Campanella, Ficinus, Vives, Mornay, Grotius, Cameron,
Micraelius, which I now see might satisfy all the world, if it were duly
received. But it was not a bare reading of one or all of these and others,
which was a due reception: I found that truth must be so long retained, and
faithfully elaborated by a diligent and willing mind, till it be concocted into
a clear methodical understanding, and the Scheme or Analysis of it have left
upon the soul its proper image, by an orderly and deep impression; yea, till
the Goodness of the matter become as nutriment, blood and spirits to the Will,
before it is truly made our own. It expects (I say not greater courtship,
but) more cordial friendship, than a transient salute, before it will unveil
its glory, and illustrate, beautify and bless the soul. It is food and
Physic: it will nourish and heal: but not by a bare look or hearsay, nor by
the reading of the prescript. Could I procure the Reader to do his part, I
doubt not but this Treatise will suffice on its part, to bring in that light,
which the Sagae, the Lemures and Daemones of Atheism, Infidelity and
Ungodliness will not be able to endure.

But I am far from expecting universal success; no not if I brought a Book from
Heaven. The far greatest part have unprepared minds, and will not come up to
the price of truth. And nothing is more sure than that recipitur ad modum
recipientis; and Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli. These drones
imagine, that they are fit to judge of a Scripture-difficulty, or of an
argument concerning the mysteries of Religion, before they know what it is to
be a Man, or understand the Alphabet of Nature, even those points which
supernatural Revelations presuppose: such uncapableness in the Reader is as a
great hinderance, as the want of solid proof and evidence in the Writer. Most
men are drowned in filthy sensuality, or worldly cares; and their relish is
vitiated by luscious vanities; their reason is debased by subjection to the
flesh, and darkened and debilitated by long alienation from its proper work: and
yet they are so constituted of ignorance and pride, that they can neither
understand plain truth, nor perceive that it is long of themselves that they
understand it not. And ^othfulness and sensuality have so far conquered
humanity it self, even the natural love of truth and of themselves, that they
will take up with what their play-fellows have taught them, and venture their
souls and their everlasting concernments, ^nless they can secure them by an
idle, gamesome, ^leshly life, or grow wise by the short superficial studies of
an alienated, unwilling, tired mind. Unless the great things of God and
Immortality, will ^e savingly known by a few distracted thoughts of a
discomposed mind, or the rambling talk of their companions, whose heads are as
unfurnished and giddy as their own; or by the cursory perusal of a few Books,
which cross not their carnal interest and humor in the midst of their more
beloved employments and delights, they will neither be solid Christians, nor
wise and honest men. If God will be conversed with in the midst of their
feasting, cups and oaths, in their pride, and revelling, and with their whores;
if he will be found of them that hate his holiness, and all that love it, and
seriously obey him, then God shall be their God, and Christ shall be their
Savior, and if this be the way, they may become good Christians: But if
retired serious thoughts be necessary, and an honest faithfulness to what they
know, they must be excused: They that know that it is not an hours perusal of a
book of Astronomy, Geometry, Music, Physic, etc. which will serve to make
them skilful in these Arts, do expect to attain far higher wisdom, by
inconsiderable industry and search; and will not be wise unless they can be
taught by vision in their dreams, or in the crowd and noise of worldly
business, and of fleshly lusts.

I find that it is a difficult task which I have undertaken, to be the
instructor of such men: if I be large and copious, their laziness will not
suffer them to read it: if I be concise, I cannot satisfy their expectations;
for they think nothing well proved, if every objection be not answered, which
idle cavilling brains can bring: Neither have they sufficient attentiveness for
brevity, nor will their ignorance allow them to understand it. The
contradicting vices of their minds, do call for impossibilities for the cure.
Their Incapacity says, It must be a full explication, or I cannot apprehend
the sense or truth. Their averseness and slothfulness says, It must be short,
or I shall be tired with it, or cannot have while to read it. I cannot answer
both these expectations to the full: but though the greatness of the matter
have made the Book bigger than I intended, the nauseating stomach of most
Readers has persuaded me to avoid unnecessary words: and as big as the Book
is, I must tell the Reader, that the style is so far from redundancies (though
some things be often repeated) that if he will not chew the particular words, but
swallow them whole, and bestow his labor only on the Sentences, I shall
suppose that he has not read the Book.

Ficinus very truly notes, that while children and youth are sufficiently
conscious of their ignorance, to keep in a learning course, they may do well;
but when they first grow to a confidence of their own understandings, and at
ripeness of age imagine, that their wits are ripe, and think that their
unfurnished minds (because they have a natural quickness) are competent judges
of all that they read; then they are most in danger of infidelity, and of being
undone for ever; (from 18 to 28 being the most perilous age.) But if God keep
them as humble diligent learners, till they have orderly gone through their
course of studies, and sanctify their greener youthful knowledge; they then
grow up to be confirmed Christians. Ficin. de Verit. Rel. cap. 3. It is
therefore the diligence and patience of the Reader which I still entreat, and
not his belief: for I will beg nothing of his understanding, but justice to the
truth; but (supposing God's help) do trust to the cogencie of evidence.

Yet I must tell you, that I expect the Reader, by the truths which he
learneth, should be able himself to answer an hundred trivial objections, which
are here passed by: and that in particular textual difficulties, he have
recourse to Commentaries and Tractates on those subjects: for this Book is long
enough already. He that will diligently consider the connection of the
consequent Propositions to the Antecedent, and will understand what he reads
as he goes along, will see that I give him sufficient proof of all which I
desire him to assent to. But I make no doubt but a hasty and half-witted Reader
can find objections and words enough against the plainest truth here written;
and such as he thinks do need a particular answer. When an understanding Reader
would be offended with me, if I should recite them. I had more compassion on
the sober Reader, than for the humouring of every brainsick Sceptick, to stand
proving that two and two are four. I write for such as are willing to be wise
and happy, and that at dearer rates than jesting: For others, I must leave
them, whether I will or no, to be wise too late.

And for those capricious brains who deride our ordinary preaching, as begging
and supposing that which we do not prove, when they have here, and in other
such writings, found our fundamentals proved, let them hereafter excuse our
superstructure, and not think that every Sermon must be spent in proving our
Christianity and Creed.

In the first part of this Book, I give you no testimonies from the Christian
writings or authorities, because I suppose the Reader to be one that does not
believe them; and my business is only to prove Natural Verities by their proper
evidence: But lest any should think that there is not so much legible in
Nature, because the wisest Heathens saw it not, I have cited in the margin
their attestations to most particulars, to show that indeed they did confess
the same, though less distinctly and clearly than they might have done, (as I
have plainly proved.) But, being many years separated from my Books, I was
forced to do this part less exactly than I would have done, had I been near my
own or any other Library. Again, I seriously profess, that I am so confident of
the just proofs and evidences of truth here given, that I fear nothing as to
frustrate the success, but the Reader's Incapacity, (through half-wittedness or
wickedness) or his Laziness in a cursory and negligent perusal of what is
concisely but evidently proposed. It Is true that Seneca says, [Magna debet
esse eloquentia, quae in vitis placet.] I may add, Et Veritatis evidentia quae
caecis, malignis vel ignavis prodest. And who feels not the truth of Hierom's
words, (ad Paul.) Nunquam benefit, quod fit praeoccupato animo. Be true and
faithful to your selves, and to the Truth, and you shall see its Glory, and
feel its Power, and be directed by it to everlasting Blessedness. This is his
End, who is

October. 31. 1666. An earnest desirer of Mankind's Felicity, RICHARD BAXTER.

TO THE HYPOCRITE READERS; Who have the Name of Christians, and the Hearts and
Lives of Atheists and Unbelievers.
IT is the great Mercy of God to you, that you were born of Christian Parents,
and in a Land where Christianity is the professed Religion, and under
Governors and Laws which countenance it: But this which should have helped you
to the intelligent and serious entertainment of Religion, has been abused by
you to detain you from ^t: You have contented your selves to have Religion in
your Princes, and your Parents Precepts, in Libraries and Laws, and to say over
some of these by ^ote; whilst you banished it from your Hearts and Lives, if
not also from your sober thoughts and understanding! And having indeed no
Religion of your own (because the labor of understanding and obeying it,
seemed too dear a price to purchase it) you ^ve thought it most serviceable to
your quietness and your reputation to seem to be of the Religion of your
Parents or your King, be it what it will. This is indeed the common course of
the rude and irreligious Rabble, in all Nations of the World. O that I might be
your effectual Monitor, to awaken you to consider what you have been doing? and
yet if you are Men, to suffer your Reason to look behind you, within you, and
before you, and seriously think what it is to be in Heaven or Hell for ever,
and prudently to manage your own Concernments! Can you think that that man has
any Religion who has no God? Or has he indeed a God, who prefers his lust,
or wealth, or honor, or any thing in the World before him? Or that is not
devoted to his Obedience and his Love? Is he a God that is not better than the
Pleasures of the Flesh and World? Or that is not greater than a mortal man? or
is not fully sufficient for you? Did you know what you did when you owned your
Baptismal Vow and Covenant? which is when you usurp the name of Christians, and
join in visible communion in the Church? Do you know what it is to believe that
there is a God, and a Life to come, and to renounce the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil, and give up your selves to a Savior and a Sanctifyer? Or can you
think while you are awake and sober, that Perfidiousness will save you, and be
taken by God instead of Christianity? will God accept you for a perjured
Profession? to be that and do that which never came into your hearts? Is
Hypocrisy a Virtue? And will Lying bring a man to Heaven? Christianity is such
a Believing in Christ, to bring us unto God and everlasting Glory, as makes
the Love of God the very Nature of the Soul, and thankful obedience its
Employment, and a Heavenly Mind and Life to be its Constitution and its Trade;
and the Mercies of this Life to be but our Travelling-helps and Provisions for
a better; and the Interest of fleshly lust to be esteemed but as dross and
dung. Is this the Life which you live, or which you hate? I beseech you Sirs,
as you regard the reputation of your Reason, tell us why you will profess a
Religion, which you abhor? or why will you abhor a Religion which you
profess? why will you Glory in the part of a Parrot, or an Ape, to say over a
few words, or move your Bodies, while you detest the humane part, to know and
love and live to God? Do you live only to treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to
every one according to his deeds? Romans 2.5, 6. Do you profess your selves
Christians only for self-condemnation; to be Witnesses against your selves in
Judgment, that you wilfully lived unchristian lives? What is there in the
World that you are so averse to, as to be seriously that which you profess
your selves to be? Who hate you more than those that are that in heart and
life, which you call your selves in customary words? or that are serious in the
Religion which you say your selves you hope to be saved by? Read Matthew. 23.29,
30, 31. why do you honor the dead Saints, and abhor the living? and would
make more Martyrs, while you keep Festivals of Commemoration of those that
others made? Quae est illa Justitia sanctos colere, and sanctitatem contemnere?
Primus gradus Pietatis est Sanctitatem diligere. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 24. Christ
has not more bitter Enemies in the World, than some of you who wear his
Livery: Turks and Heathens are more gentle to true Christians, and have shed
less of their blood than Hypocrite Christians have done. The Zeal of the
Pharisees consumed many, whom the Clemency of the Romans would else have
spared. Be it known to all the Infidel World, who detest Christianity because
of your wickedness, that you are none of us; Christ renounceth you, Matthew.
7.22, 23. and we renounce you. They may as well hate Philosophy because some
vagrant Sots have called themselves Philosophers, or have sailed with Aristotle
or Plato in the same Ship: They may as well hate Physic, because many ignorant
Women and Mountebanks have professed it? They may as well reproach us for
Loyalty to our King, because there are secret Traitors, that call themselves
his Subjects? What are you to Christians, that we should be reproached for your
Villainies? O you Turks and Heathens, rather reproach us because there are
wicked persons of your selves; for you are not so cruel Enemies to Christians,
as many of these Hypocrites are. Nullus enim Christianus malus est, nisi hanc
professionem simulaverit. Athenagor. Leg. pro Christ. page 3. Nemo illic (in
Carcere) Christianus, nisi plane tantum Christianus: aut si aliud, jam non
Christianus. Tertull. Apol. c. 43. sed dicet aliquis etiam de nostris excedere
quosdam a regula disciplinae. Desunt tum Christiani haberi apud nos: Id. ib. c.
46. Leg. Twiss. Vind. Great. l. 3 E. 8.. 6. p. 75. and my 5th Disp. of
Sacraments. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his,
Romans 8.9. Luke 14.26, 33. They are Spies in his Army: They are Absaloms, Chams
and Judas's in his Family. Try them by the Character that Christ has given of
his true Disciples: and if they be such, then tell us of their Lives and spare
not. They are not of us, while they are among us. 1 John 2.19. They are more of
your party than of ours, If the Mind, Heart, and Life, be more of the Man,
than the tongue and knee. What if a Celsus, or Porphiry, or Epicurus had called
himself a Christian? Must Christ be answerable for him? Is it not enough that
they abuse him by their hypocrisy, and living contrary to his Laws, but he
must be accused for their Crimes, which he so strictly forbids, and for
which he will cast them into Hell for ever? would you have him do more than
this is to disclaim them? Were they indeed Christian Princes, Barons, Priests
and People, of whom Abbas Urspergensis speaks, Chron. page 32. Ut omnis homo
jam sit perjurus and praedictis facinoribus implicatus; ut vix excusari possit,
quin sit in his sicut populus, sic and Sacerdos -- Et p. 321. Principes
terrarum and Barons, art Diabolica edocti, nec curabant Juramenta infringere,
nec Fidem violare, and jus omne confundere? were they Christian Knights that
Erasmus speaks of, Colloqui Pap. 485. Ni sis bonus aleator, probus
Chartarius, Scortator improbus, potator strenuus, profusor audax, decoctor and
conflator aeris alieni, deinde scabie ornatus Gallica, vix quisquam te credet
equitem. It was Cotta's proof, that there are Atheists, in Cicer. de nature.
Deor. li. 1. [What shall we say of the Sacrilegious, Perjured, and Ungodly? If
Carbo, etc. had thought, that there are Gods, he had not been so PERJVRED and
UNGODLY.] What more necessary to ungodly men (whatever they call themselves)
than to convince them that there is a God, and Life to come? Christ will not
care for their Image of Religion, or deceitful Promises and Professions: All
wise men are of Solon's mind [Probitatem jurejurando certiorem habe] Laert. in
Sol.

Believe it, Hypocrites, your fornications, gluttony, drunkenness, idleness,
covetousness, selfishnesse, or pride, will find no Cloak in the day of
Judgment, from the Christian name. You might better cheap have been sensual
and wicked at a further distance, than in the Family or Church of God. Nihil
prodest aestimari, quod non sis: Et duplicis peccati reus es; non habere quod
crederis; and quod non habueris simulare: Hieron. Ep. ad fill. Maur. Or suppose
your Lives are more civilly and smoothly carnal? To do no harm, is too little
to prove you Christians: Much more to do evil with some bounds. Nullum est
aliud latronum beneficium, nisi ut commemorare possint, iis se vitam dedisse
quibus non ademerint. Cicer. Phil. 2. Non est bonitas pessimis esse meliorem.
Senec. My reasonable demand is, that you will be what you call your selves, or
call your selves as you are. I am not inviting you to a new Religion, nor to a
Sect; but to be really and seriously what you are nominally, and what you have
vowed and profess to be: Jest not with God, and Heaven and Hell. You may mock
your selves, but God will not be mocked. At last turn back, and study what that
Religion is which you profess: Review your Baptismal Covenant; and be true to
that, and I have done. And cast out of your way the common block of hating
those whom you should imitate. Ita comparatum est, ut virtutem non suspiciamus,
neque ejus imitandae studio corripimur, nisi eum in quo ea conspicitur, summo
honor and amore prosequamur. Plutar* in Cat. Vtic. It was one of the Roman
Laws of the 12 Tables, [Impius ne audeto placare donis iram Deorum.] Repent
and pray, was Peter's Counsel to one of your Predecessors, Act. 8.22. Judas has
a Kiss for Christ; but it is hearty love, and a sober, righteous, godly life,
which must be your evidence. I have faithfully warned you; The Lord have mercy
on you, and convert you.

R.B.
October. 31. 1666.
Cujus aures clausae Veritati sunt, ut ab amico verum audire nequeat, hujus
salus desperanda est. Cic. Rhet. 1. Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear
from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be abominaton. Antisthenes
civitates tunc interire aiebat, cum bonos discernere nequeunt a malis. Laert.
in Antisth. 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil: For the Devil
sins from the beginning: For this purpose the Son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil.
THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Of Natural Religion or GODLINESS.
CHAP I. OF the nearest Truths, and 1. Of Humane Nature, or the Knowledge of
our selves: (Where note, that the Question about the Souls Immaterial
Substance, is reserved to the Appendix or Conclusion), Page 1 CHAP. II. Of Man
as Related to the things below him, 4 CHAP. III. Of Men as mutually Related to
each other, 6 CHAP. IV. Of MAN and other things as produced by the FIRST CAUSE,
9 CHAP. V. What this CAUSE is in it self: That it is GOD, 16 CHAP VI. Of GOD as
RELATED to his Creatures, especially to Man: and I. as his OWNER, 32 CHAP. VII.
Of Man's Relation to God his OWNER, 36 CHAP. VIII. II. Of GOD's Relation to Man
as his RVLER, where it is proved, that God rules Man morally by Laws and
Judgment, 38 CHAP. IX. Of Man's SVBJECTION to God, or Relation to him as our
RVLER, 65 CHAP. X. Of GOD's particular LAWS as known in NATVRE: What the Law of
Nature is, 69 CHAP. XI. III. Of GOD's Relation to Man as his BENEFACTOR and his
END: Or as his CHIEF GOOD: Proved that God is Man's END, 80 CHAP. XII. Of MAN's
Relation to God as he is our FATHER, BENEFACTOR, and END or CHIEF GOOD: and the
Duties of that Relation, 101 CHAP. XIII. Experiments of the Difficulty of all
this Duty-before-proved from Nature: And what it must cost him who will live
such a Holy Life, 114 CHAP. XIV. That there is a Life of Retribution after
this, proved, 119 CHAP. XV. Of the Intrinsecal Evils of SIN: and of the
PERPETVAL PUNISHMENT due to the Sinner by the undoubted Law of Nature, 156
CHAP. XVI. Of the present sinful and miserable state of the World, 176 CHAP.
XVII. What Natural Light declares of the Mercy of God to Sinners, and of the
Hopes and Means of Man's Recovery, 182
PART II. Of CHRISTIANITY, and Supernatural Revelation.
CHAP. I. OF the need of a clearer Light, or fuller Revelation of the Will of
God, than all that has been opened before, p. 191 CHAP. II. Of the several
RELIGIONS which are in the World, 198 CHAP. III. Of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION: and
1. What it is, 204 CHAP. IV. Of the Nature and PROPERTIES of the Christian
Religion, 229 CHAP. V. Of the CONGRVITIES in the Christian Religion, which make
it the more easily credible, and are great Preparatives to Faith, 241 CHAP. VI.
Of the WITNESS of JESUS CHRIST, or the great demonstrative Evidence of his
Verity and Authority, viz. The SPIRIT: In 4. parts: 1. Antecedently, by
PROPHECY. 2. Constitutively and Inherently, the Image of God, on his Person,
Life and Doctrine. 3. Concomitantly; by the Miraculous Power and Works of
Christ and his Disciples. 4. Subsequently; in the actual Salvation of men by
Renovation: Opened: Notes added, 258 CHAP. VII. Of the subservient Proofs and
Means by which the forementioned Evidences are brought to our certain
knowledge, 302 How we know the antecedent Prophetical Testimony; and the
Constitutive, Inherent Evidence: How we know the Concomitant Testimony of
Miracles: 1. By Humane Testimony. 2. By Evidence of Natural Certainty. 3. By
Divine attestation in the Testifyers Miracles. The Proofs of that Divine
attestation with the Witnesses: 1. In the holy Constitution of their Souls and
Doctrine: 2. In their Miracles and Gifts: 3. In the success of their Doctrine
to men's sanctification. How the Churches testimony of the Disciples Miracles
and Doctrine is proved. 1. By most credible Humane Testimony: 2. By such as
has Natural Evidence of Certainty: 3. By some further Divine attestation. The
way or Means of the Churches attestation and Tradition. The Scriptures proved
the same which the Apostles delivered, and the Churches received. How we may
know the 4th part of the Spirits Testimony, viz. The Successes of Christian
Doctrine to men's sanctification: What Sanctification is, and the acts or parts
of it. Consectaries, from p. 302. to 350 CHAP. VIII. Of some other subservient
and Collateral Arguments for the Christian Verity, 350 CHAP. IX. Yet Faith has
many Difficulties to overcome: What they are, and what their Causes, 365 CHAP.
X. The Intrinsecal Difficulties in the Christian Faith resolved: or 24
Objections against Christianity answered, 371, to 424 CHAP. XI. The Extrinsecal
Difficulties, or 16 more Objections resolved, 424 CHAP. XII. The reasonable
Conditions required of them, who will overcome the Difficulties of Believing,
and will not undo themselves by wilful Infidelity, 444 The sum of all in an
Address to God, 453, 457 CHAP. XIII. Consectaries. I. What Party of Christians
should we join with, or be of, seeing they are divided into so many Sects? 464
CHAP. XIV. II. Of the true Interest of Christ and his Church, and the Souls of
Men, of the means to promote it, and its Enemies and Impediments in the World:
(Which being only named in brief Propositions, should be the more heedfully
perused, by those that dare pretend the Interest of Religion and the Church,
for the proudest, or the most dividing practices; and those which most directly
hinder the successful preaching of the Gospel, the pure Worshipping of God,
and the saving of Men's Souls.) 466.
The Conclusion, (or an Appendix) defending the Souls Immortality, against the
Somatists, or Epicureans, and other Pseudo-philosophers.
OBJECTION I. MAtter and Motion only may do all that which you ascribe to
Souls, p. 495 OBJECT. II. By Sense, Imagination, Cogitation, Reason, you cannot
prove the Soul to be incorporeal, and immortal, because the Bruits partake of
all these, 523 OBJECT. III. Humane Souls are but Forms: and Forms are but the
qualities or modes of Substances; and therefore perish when separated from
Bodies, 535 OBJECT. IV. The Soul is material, and consequently mortal, because
it depends upon matter in its Operations, and therefore in its Essence, 539
OBJECT V. No immaterial Substance moves that which is material, as a principle
of its Operations: but the Soul so moves the Body: Ergo -- 540 OBJECT. VI. The
Soul in our sleep acts irrationally, according to the fortuitous motion of
the spirits, -- Ergo -- 543 OBJECT. VII. Reason is no proof of the Souls
Immateriality, because Sense (which the Bruits have) is the more perfect
apprehension, 543 OBJECT. VIII. Sensation and Intellection are both but
Reception: The Passivity therefore of the Soul does show its Materiality, 544
OBJECT. IX. There is nothing in the Intellect which was not first in the Sense,
etc. Ergo, the Soul that can reach but things corporeal, is such it self, 547
OBJECT. X. That which things Corporeal work on, is Corporeal: but, etc. 551
OBJECT. XI. That is not incorporeal which knows not it self to be so, nor
has any notion but Negative and Metaphorical of Incorporeal Beings, 551
OBJECT. XII. The Soul is generated: Ergo, corruptible, 555 OBJECT. XIII. Omne
quod oritur interit: That which is not eternal as to past duration, is not
eternal as to future duration: But, etc. 567 OBJECT. XIV. You have none but
Moral Arguments for the Souls Immortality, 568 OBJECT. XV. You seem to confess,
that it is not the endless duration of the Soul, but only a future state of
Retribution, which you can prove from Nature alone, 568 OBJECT. XVI. Both Soul
and Body are like a Candle in fluxu continuo: Ergo, being not long the same,
are incapable of a Life of Retribution, 569 OBJECT. XVII. The Soul returns to
the Anima Mundi or Element of Souls, and so loses its Individuation, and is
incapable of Retribution, 571 OBJECT. XVIII. The Fictions of the Platonists
about their several Vehicles, and such like, do make their Doctrine the more to
be suspected, 574 OBJECT. XIX. The Souls actings will not be such as they are
now by Corporeal Spirits, and Idea's: Ergo, it will be incapable of
Retribution, 578 OBJECT. XX. The belief of the Souls Immortality does fill men
with fears, and draw them to superstition, and trouble the Peace of Kingdoms,
etc. 579 In Objection about the Worlds Eternity: What Christianity says about
it, 582 The Testimony of Socrates and Zenocrates of the Souls Immortality, 589
^icero's Doctrine, and his redargution of the Somatists at large, 590 The
Stoics neerness to the Doctrine of Christianity, with their particular Moral
Tenets, and their Praises, by the Learned and Pious Mr. T. Gataker, 595 The
Stoics, Platonists, and other Philosophers opinion of the sufficiency of
Virtue to be Man's Felicity, against the Epicurean Doctrine of Pleasure,
Vindicated. It imports a great Theological Verity, that God is Man's ultimate
End; and to be loved above our own Pleasure; opened, 598, etc. Why I answer no
more particular Objections, as about Scripture-Texts, etc. 601 An Instance in
some Strictures on a late Writing, called, Inquisitio in Fidem Christianorum
hujus Seculi, 604
Readers, I entreat you, whatever you do by all the rest following, to correct
with your pen these few greater Errata, because they quite pervert the sense,
and some of them turn it directly contrary to some of the greatest Truths which
I am defending.
PAge 85 l. 30. for no other end r. another end, p. 208. l. 23. for Fire r.
Air, p. 173 l. 22. for thousands r. themselves, p. 232. l. 4. for against i^ r.
of it, p. 373. l. 15. for intelligible r. unintelligible, p. 529. l. 33. blot
out quoad formam, p. 460. l. 34. for words r. works, p. 567. l. 12, 13. for
mortal r. immortal, p. 598. l. 27. for it is first good r. it is not first
good, p. 53. l. 5. for impudencies r. imprudences, p. 111. l. 32. for or r.
our, p. 170. l. 11. for see^ r. serve, p. 220. l. 24. for or r. our, p. 350. l.
16. for Accidentally r. Antecedently, p. 558. for expurgency r. exurgency, p.
545. l. 28. for and r. is, p. 600. l. 8. for continues r. contrives, p. 252. l.
19. for superficial r. supernatural, p. 509. l. 16. for anatomized r. atomized,
p. 554. l 3. for debased r. disposed, p. 593. l. 21. for missu r. injussu. In
the first Epistle p. 1. l. 14. r. indifferentis.

PAge 12. l. 36. for or r. are, p. 49. marg. l. 32. for at r. ut, p. 80. l. 10.
r. so full, p. 157. marg. l. antep. r. animi morbi, p. 178. l. 32. for
sometimes r. (...) minds, p. 199. marg. l. 1. r. Eunapius, p. 201. l. 22. r.
Texeira, p. 236. marg. l. 1. r. simulata, and l. 26. r. his Disciples, p. 240.
l. 23. dele Telesius, l. 30. r. Behmenists, p. 246. l. 19. for Aristippus r.
Aristotle, p. 281. l. 22. for has r. have, p. 297. marg. l. 40. for speculum
r. specimen, p. 346. l. 11. r. in the, p. 349. l. 5. r. the godly, p. 350. l.
36. r. Asellius, p. 367. l. 32. r. These are the, p. 417. l. 30. for since r.
sure, p. 418. l. 2. for wean r. turn, p. 437. l. 4. for most r. more, p. 498.
marg. l. 11. r. nolint, and l. penult. for Carts. r. Cortes. p. 503. l. 19.
for one r. a^, p. 509. l. 9. for as r. an, p. 514. l. 27. r. contemperatio, p.
527. l. 24. r. Gradually, p. 551. marg. l. 1. r Cortes. p. 553. l. 14. for Lud
r. Lod, p. 554. l. 1. for the r. that; p. 557. l. 32. dele who, p. 560. l. 34.
r. Adiant^m, p. 571. l. 17. r. nor no substance, p. 576. l. 22. for Arphad. r.
Aphrod. p. 578. l. 21. dele may, p. 582. marg. r. Cortes. p. 587. l 7. for one
reason, r. our Reason, p. 588. l. 8. for what r. which.

Take notice also, that many of the marginal Citations, are not put just over
against the words which they referr to.

PART I. Of Natural Religion, or GODLINESS.
Non tam authoritatis in disputando, quam Rationis momenta quaerenda sunt.
Cicer. de Not. Deor. 1. p. 6.

Animo ipso animus videtur, and nimirum, hanc habet vim praeceptum Apollinis,
quo monet UT SE quisque NOSCAT: Non enim credo id praecipit ut membra nostra,
aut staturam figuramve noscamus: Neque nos corpora sumus (...) neque ego tibi
dicens hoc CORPORI tuo dico. Cum igitur NOSCE TE, dicit, hoc dicit, NOSCE
ANIMUM TUUM. Nam corpus quidem quasi vas est, aut aliquod animi receptaculum:
ab ANIMO tuo quicquid agitur id agitur a te. Hunc igitur nosce nisi Divinum
esset, non esset hoc acrioris cujusdam animi praeceptum, sic ut tributum Deo
sit, hoc est, SEIPSUM posse cognoscere, sed fi qualis sit animus, ipse animus
nesciat, dic quaeso, ne esse quidem se sciet? Cicero Tuscul. Quast. l. 1. page
(mihi) 226, 227.

Patet aeternum id esse quod seipsum movet: and quis est qui hanc naturam
animis tributam neget. Inanimum est enim omne quod pulsu agitatur externo. --
Sentit igitur animus se moveri: Quod cum sentit, illud una sentit, se vi sua,
non aliena moveri; nec accidere posse ut ipse unquam a se deseratur, ex quo
efficitur aeternitas. Id. ibid.


CHAP. I. Of the Nearest Truths, viz. of Humane Nature.
RESOLVING on a faithful search into the Nature and certainty of Religion, as
being the business which my own and all men's happiness is most concerned in,
being conscious of my weakness, and knowing that truths have their certain
order, in which they give much light to one another; I found it meet to begin
at the most evident, from whence I ascended in the order following.

Obj. Age ostende mihi Deum tuum. Resp. Age ostende mihi hominem tuum: fac te
hominem esse cognoscam, and quis meus sit Deus demonstrare non morabor.
Theophil. Antioch. ad Autolycum. lib. 1. initio.
. 1. I am past all doubt that I have sense, cogitation, understanding and will,
with executive operation.

Though I could not exactly define what these are, yet I am satisfied that I
have them: and I discern, that a simple term does better express one of these
to me, than a definition does: because they are known so immediately in and of
themselves, partly by internal sensation, and partly by intuition. And words
are but to make known my mind about them to another, and another to me; but
the things themselves are otherwise to be known. What it is to see, to hear, to
smell, to taste, Cum despicere coeperimus and sentire, quid simus, and quid ab
animantibus caeteris differamus, tum ea insequi incipiemus, ad quae nati sumus.
Cicer. 5. de fin.
I know better by seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, than by any definitions
of them: and the bare denomination, when I understand the term, is my best
expression. And if I could not answer a Sceptick, who denied the certainty of
my judgment by sensation and reflexive intuition, yet nature would not suffer
me to doubt. Or if any such should really make me doubt, whether I may not
possibly live in a continual delusory dream, Qui seipsum cognoverit cognoscet
in se omnia: Deum, ad cujus imaginem factus est: Mundum, cujus simulachrum
gerit. Creaturas omnes cum quibus symbolum habet. Paulus Dom. de Scala These.
page 722.
and all my senses and understanding be deceived; yet would it satisfy me in
the main, that I must judge by such powers as I have, and can do no better, and
therefore should be no further sollicitous. If any would persuade me that I
feel not when I am sick or wounded, or see not when I see, or taste not when or
what I taste; yet must I be persuaded, that fallible or infallible, this sense
must be used, and serve for the ends to which it is given me. And that I have
no better faculties to use.

Ut Deum noris, and si ignores and locum and faciem; sic animum tibi tuum notum
esse oportet, etiamsi ignores and locum and formam. Cicer. 1. Tuscul.
. 2. By my actions I know that I am; and that I am a sentient, intelligent,
thinking, willing, and operative being; or a wight that has these powers.

For ab operari ad posse and esse, the consequence is undoubted. Nothing is no
agent; and none does that which he cannot do.

. 3. This mind, or foresaid power, is found in, or conjunct with an organized
body.

He that doubts not of his sense and intellection, need not doubt of his
body, which is the object of both.

. 4. This body is a quantitative or extensive, nutrite, changeable, corruptible
matter.

Of which my senses and experience will not suffer me to doubt.

. 5. This mind is fitted to the use of KNOWING, and is desirous of it,
delighted in it, and the more it knows, Non ii sumus quibus nihil verum esse
videatur, sed ii qui omnibus veris falsa quaedam adjuncta esse dicamus, tanta
similitudine, ut, etc. Cicer. de Not. Deor. 1. p. 7.

Lege Pisonis dicta de mente and corpore, in Cicer. de finib. l. 5. p. 189.


the more it is able and disposed to know.

All this our actions and experience testify. Knowing is to the mind as seeing
is to the eye. One act of knowledge promoteth and facilitateth another.

. 6. Being and verity are its direct objects.

As light and colors are the objects of our sight. To these it has power and
inclination.

. 7. When I know the effects, I have an inclination to know the cause; not
only the lower, but the very first.

Though it be possible that some sensual sluggish person, may be so taken up
with present earthly things, as to drown these desires, and scarce to think of
any first cause, or take any pleasure in the exercise of his higher faculties;
yet, as I feel it otherwise in my self, so I find it otherwise in multitudes of
others, and in all that have free minds, and in the worst at certain times; so
that I perceive it is natural to man, to desire to know even the first Cause,
and highest excellency. Omnes ad id quod Bonum videtur, omnes suas actiones
referunt. Aristot. de Republ. 1. c. 1.


. 8. Yet do I find that my mind is not satisfied in knowing, nor is Entity and
Verity the ultimate object which my mind looks after; but Goodness.

Entity and Verity may be unwelcome loathed things, if against my good. The
thief could wish, that neither Law, In homine optimum quidem Ratio, Haec
antecedit animalia, Deos sequitur. Sen. ep. 77.
nor Judge, nor Gallows had a being, and that his sentence were not true.
Knowledge is but a mediate motion of the Soul, directive to the following
volitions and prosecution.

. 9. I find I have a Will, inclined to apprehended Good; that is, both to that
which has a simple excellency in it self, Malitia praemiis exercetur: ubi ea
dempseris, nemo omnium gratuito malus est. Salust.
and which makes for the happiness of the world, or for my own.

This makes it self as well known to me, as my natural appetite. For my
apprehensions do but subserve it, and my life is moved or ruled by it.

. 10. It is also averse to apprehended evil as such, as contrary to the
foresaid good.

Though real evil may possibly be chosen, when it is a seeming good, and also
that which appears proximately evil, for a higher good to which it seems a
means, yet ultimately and for it self, no rational will desires or chooses
Evil.

. 11. While sensitive pleasure is apprehended as good by the senses, Reason may
discern a further good, which may cross at least the present sense.

To take bitter Physic, to corrode or cut off ulcerated parts, to use hard
diet and Exercise, etc. may be ungrateful in themselves to sense, and yet
commended by Reason, and commanded by the will (I yet forbear all higher
instances.)

Animi imperio, corporis servitio magis utimur: Alterum nobis cum Diis, alterum
cum belluis commune est. Salust. Cat.
. 12. My sense and bodily faculties, are naturally to be subjected to the
guidance of my Reason, and the command of my Will, as the superior faculties.

For one is common to Bruits, and the other proper to Rational creatures: And
rational Agents are more excellent than Bruits: and the most excellent should
rule. Reason can see further than Sense: Est homini cum Deo Rationis societas,
Cic. 1. de leg.
And the wisest is most fit to govern. They that deny this, should claim no
government or power over their beasts, their dogs, or sheep. If Reason ruled
not Sensuality, most persons would presently destroy their lives: Even as swine
would kill themselves with eating, if the reason of man did not restrain them.

Deus animal unum spectabile hominem, in quo omnia animalia continerentur
effecit. Cic. de univers.
. 13. The sum is, that Man is A living Wight, having an active and executive
POWER, with an UNDERSTANDING to guide it, and a WILL to command it: And that
there is a certain difference between Truth and Falsehood, Natural Good, and
Evil.

All this is quite beyond dispute.

CHAP. II. Of Man as Related to the things below him.
Aliorum causa omnia generata sunt, ut effruges atque fructus quos terra gignit
animantium causa; animantes autem hominum; ut equum vehendi causa, etc. Ipse
autem homo ortus est ad mundum contemplandum, etc. Cicer. 2. de Not. Deor.
. 1. THere are other things, called Inanimates and Bruits, in being, besides
Man.

My understanding by the help of all my senses, tells me, that there are
Beasts and Birds, Trees and Herbs, and that I live among a multitude of Beings,
inferior to Man. Though I may be ignorant of their Principles, and many things
in their Natures, yet can I no more doubt of their being than of mine own, nor
of the inferiority of their natures, when I see their inferior operations.

. 2. Man has a certain sub-propriety in them for his use.

They that deny this, will not say their Lands, their Fruits, Bestiis homines
uti ad utilitatem suam possint sine injuria.
their Money, their Goods, and Cattle are their own: nor question any one for
stealing them, or depriving them of the Propriety: Nor may they possess and use
them as their own.

. 3. Man has the Right of governing the Bruits, so far as they are capable of
government.

Which is not by proper moral Government, by Laws and Judgment; but such an
Image of it, as is suitable to their several kinds. This is in order to their
own preservation; but especially for our use and ends: He that denies this,
must not Rule his Dog, his Horse, or Ox, or Sheep; but leave them every one to
themselves.

. 4. Man is also (subordinately) their Benefactor, and their End: and they are
more for Him than for themselves.

He is their End as he is better than they, and has the foresaid Propriety in
them; The cause will further appear anon. The beauty and sweetness of my
Flowers, is more for me than for themselves: and I do more enjoy them. My trees
and herbs, and fruits, and metals; my Horse and Ox that labor for me; and
all the creatures on whom I feed, I find are for my use; even their life and
labor: Mankind accuses not himself as wronging them, when for his own
advantage he makes use of both. And his care is necessary to their
preservation; planting, dressing, watering, feeding, defending, providing for
them: without which the usefullest would perish.

. 5. The sum is, that MAN is the OWNER, the GOVERNOR, and the END and
BENEFACTOR of the Inferior beings; and so is LORD among them in the World.

CHAP. III. Of Men as mutually Related to each other.
Nullum est unum uni tam simile, tam par, quam omnes inter nosipsos sumus. Quod
si depravatio consuetudinum, si opinionum varietas, non imbecilliratem animorum
torqueret, and flecteret. quocunque coepisset, sui nemo ipse tam similis esset,
quam omnes essent omnium. Cic. 1. de leg
. 1. I See that there are more men besides me upon earth.

. 2. The natural dignity of man, and their likeness to each other, makes them
all confess that it is their duty to love one another.

He that denies this, will not expect to be loved himself by others; nor will
he pretend to any virtue, nor to merit the benefit of humane converse.

. 3. Individual persons are commonly conscious of self-insufficiency, and of
their need of others, and inclined to a sociable life.

If Birds and Beasts will go together in flights and herds, with those of
their own kind, no wonder if man also have a natural inclination to society,
besides the knowledge of the necessity and benefits of it.

Homines hominum causa sunt generati, ut ipsi inter se, alii aliis prodesse
possint. Cic 1. Offic.
. 4. Each Individual in these societies must contribute his endeavors to the
common good.

For this is the end of the Association: He that will be for none but himself,
cannot justly expect that any should be for him: And he that would have all the
society be helpful to him, must to his power be helpful to all.

Sic nos nati videmur, ut inter omnes esset societas quaedam. Cic. de Amicit.

Homo naturaliter est animal politicum and civil. Aristot. 1. Polit.


. 5. The distinction of persons, and their interests and actions, foundeth a
distinction of Propriety and Rights.

For natural Individuation makes it necessary that every man have his own
food, and his own clothing, at least for the time: and therefore it is usually
needful to the good of the whole and the parts, that each one have also their
provisional Proprieties: And the difference of men in wit and folly, industry
and sloth, virtue and vice, good or ill deserts, will also cause a difference
of Propriety and Rights: Though these may be in part subjected to the common
good.

. 6. Parents also may upon the merits of Children (if not arbitrarily) make an
inequality in propriety: And so may other Donors and Benefactors.

As all Children need not the same proportion, so all deserve not the same: And
those Parents that have great Estates, may leave more to their own children
than to others: so that many ways both Propriety and disproportion may
certainly come to pass, and be allowed in the World. Inter nos natura ad
civilem communitatem conjuncti and consociati sumus. Quod ni ita se haberet,
nec justitiae ullus esset, nec bonitati locus; and quomodo hominum inter
homines juris esse vincula putant, sic homini nihil juris esse cum bestiis:
Chrysippus ait caetera nata esse hominum causa and Deorum; eos autem societatis
suae, etc. Cato in Cicer. de finib. l. 3. p. 149.


. 7. Therefore there is such a thing as Justice due from man to man, for the
preservation of these Rights and Order: and it is injustice to violate them.

This is confessed by all the World, that look for Justice from others: And if
it be not maintained, the world will be as in a continual War or Robbery: But
better grounds and proofs of it, will be mentioned anon.

. 8. Therefore there is a difference between good and evil, as respecting the
benefit or hurt of others, beside that which respects men as to themselves.

Those that think they are bound to avoid hurting no man but themselves or for
themselves, nor to do good to any but themselves or for themselves, have so far
obliterated the Laws of Humanity, and so openly renounce the benefits of
Society, and bid defiance to Mankind, that I suppose them so few that I need
not dispute against them: Nor have I ever met with any defender of so inhumane
a Cause, whatever may be in their hearts and practice.

. 9. Nature teaches Parents to educate their children in sobriety, obedience,
justice and charity; and to restrain their contraries.

Did Parents make no difference between their Childrens temperance and
gluttony, drunkenness and unchastity, between their obedience and disobedience,
and contempt of their own authority; between actions of Justice and Charity,
and actions of falsehood, robbery, cruelty, and inhumanity, what a degenerate
thing would Mankind prove? even Cannibals exercise some government over their
Children.

. 10. The means which Nature teaches all the World, to suppress iniquity, and
promote well-doing, is by Punishments and Benefits, that it may turn to the
hurt of the evil-doer himself, and to the benefit of the Well-doer.

Thus Parents do by Children, yea Men by Beasts, on the account of Prudence,
though not of Justice. Without Punishments and Rewards or Benefits, Laws are
ridiculous or deceits, and Government is nothing.

. 11. For the just and effectual performance of this, Salus Civitatis in
legibus est. Arist. 1. Rhet. c. 4.
nature teaches the World to set up Governments, that by settled Laws and
righteous Judgment, it may be rightly done.

Quoniam ea natura esset hominis, ut ei cum genere humano quasi civil jus
intercederet, qui id conservaret, cum justum, qui migraret injustum fore.
Chrysip. in Cato. in Cicer. ubi supra.
Though better principles should acquaint men with the nature and necessity of
Government, yet these are so obvious to all the world, that for their own
preservation, together with some natural sense of justice, the most barbarous
Nations, that are nearest unto bruits, are for some Civil Government, (besides
Oeconomical Government, which none but madmen ever questioned).

. 12. By this Government, the Liberty, Estates and Lives of offenders are
destroyed, for the ends of the Government, viz. for Justice and the common good.

That this is so, de facto, is so undeniable, that even those Heathens (the
supposed relicts of the Pythagoreans) who will not kill a harmless beast, will
yet kill those men who deserve to die. And if Government had not the power over
the Liberties, Estates and Lives of offenders, it could not preserve the
Liberties, Estates and Lives of the innocent.

Est unum jus quo devincta est hominum societas, and quod lex constituit una:
Quae lex recta ratio est imperandi atque prohibendi. Cicer. de leg. 1. p. 225.
. 13. The combination of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of the Individuals, and
the Eminency of these in the Governors, is the cause of the order, strength
and safety of these humane societies.

All the parts are in the combination to contribute to the good of the whole,
and that according to the nature of the parts: it is not a heap of stones, nor
a forest of trees, nor a heard of cattle, which we are speaking of, but an
association of men; which must be promoted and blessed by the worth and duty of
the individuals: and this consists in the perfections and right exercise of
their Power, Intellects and Wills. But as the place of the Governor requires
more of the exercise of these, than is requisite in any individual else, so
does it therefore require, that these be in him in greater eminency and
excellency than in others; viz. that in himself he excel in wisdom and
goodness; and by his interest in the people that he excel in power or strength.
Take away power, and Societies are indefensible, exposed to the will of
enemies, and unable to execute their Laws upon their own offenders, and so to
attain the ends of their association and government. Take away wisdom, and they
are a rout of Idiots or madmen, and government can be none at all. Take away
goodness, and they are as a company of Devils, or confederacy of Robbers or
pernicious enemies, who can neither trust one another, nor promote the common
good, but are fit to destroy and be destroyed.

. 14. By all this it is manifest, Si veritatem de anima cognoverimus, valde
magnum nobis erit introductorium ad omnem veritatem, and ad omnes parts
Philosophiae insignes dat occasiones. Themist. sup. 1. de Anim.
that MAN is not only a living Wight, having Power, Intellect, and Will, and
Dominion over inferior things, as their Owner, Ruler and End, but also is a
sociable Wight, or fitted for society where Government is exercised, by Power,
Wisdom and Goodness, which are his perfections.

I have looked thus long at the things that are seen, as nearest me, and most
discernable, before I proceed to the Cause, which is unseen.

CHAP. IV. Of Man, and other things, as produced by their first Cause.
. 1. I Was not always what I am.

It is not yet sixty years since I was no man: Read Galen's admirations of the
Creator, l. de usu part. praecipue l. 3. cap. 10.
I had a late beginning, and though I now enquire not of what duration my soul
is, my present composition is not from eternity: the same I see of others, that
are born men, who were lately none: and so of all things that are here
generated.

. 2. I did not make my self, Animorum nulla in terris origo est. Nil enim est
in animis nostris mistum and concretum, aut quod ex terra natum, humidum,
igneum, etc. His enim naturis nihil inest quod vim memoriae, mentis,
cogitationis habeat, etc. Nec invenietur unquam unde ad hominem venire possint,
nisi a Deo. Cicero.
at least as an independent uncaused being.

I could not as I am, make my self what I am: for so my self as the cause
should be before my self as the effect, which is a contradiction, unless the
word [self] be used equivocally. When I was not I acted not. If it be said by
any, that the Soul did fabricate a Body to it self, and so one part of me made
the other, I answer, 1. My soul did not make the matter of that Body: for if it
did, it made it of something or of nothing; if of something, either it made
that something or not; if not, then it made not the first matter of the Body.
If it made it of nothing, it must be Omnipotent; but it is conscious of
impotency. 2. My soul did not make it self, for then it must be before it self,
which is impossible. And if I made neither form nor matter, I did not make my
self. If it be said, that my Soul is an eternal uncaused being, and so did
fabricate this Body as a dwelling for it self: I answer, 1. As to the supposed
fabrication, Quis est tam vecors, qui cum suspexerit in coelum, Deo, esse non
sentiat? and ea quae tanta mente fiunt, ut vix quisquam art ulla, ordinem
rerum, atque vicissitudinem persequi possit, casu fieri putet. Cicer. de Resp.
Arusp.
it is conscious it self of no such thing. And if my Soul made my body, either
it was as a causa subministra vel instrumentalis, by the direction and power of
a superior cause, or else of and by it self as the prime cause. If the first,
then it is a caused and dependent being it self, and so leads us to a higher
cause. If the second be affirmed, and so my Soul an eternal, uncaused,
independent being; then, 1. That which is without beginning, cause and
dependency, must needs be self-sufficient, and be the highest excellency; it
must have an infiniteness, and need no help from any other: But my Soul is
conscious of imperfection in knowledge, its ignorance is its burden and
dishonor, Placet Stoicis corruptibilem esse Mundum, quippe genitum eorum
ratione quae per sensus intelliguntur. Cujus and parts sunt corruptibiles and
totum, parts autem mundi corruptibiles sunt, in se invicem mutantur. Est
igitur corruptibilis Mundis. Ae quicquid mutari in deterius potest,
corruptibile est. Mundus autem huic mutationi and corruptioni obnoxious est.
Laert. in Zenone.
it knows not so much as is here asserted of it self, it knows no such
perfections or operations, it knows little comparatively of the Universe, or
of any particular thing in it. If it were an eternal, uncaused, independent
Being, it need not all the helps of evidence and argument in this dispute.
Moreover it is conscious of imperfection in Goodness, and defilement of Evil:
it is defective in governing this flesh, which could never be able to make me a
sinner or culpable, if it were animated with an uncaused independent being.
Moreover I am conscious of impotency in every thing that I go about: a thousand
difficulties pose and stall me! a thousand things I would do and cannot, and as
many I would have and cannot: whereas an uncaused independent mind, should
necessarily have an uncaused independent power, and wisdom, and goodness, and
so should at least partake of infiniteness in all.

Mundum autem fieti (dicunt Stoici) cum ex igne substantia per aerem versa in
humorem fuerit; deinde erassior ipsius pars effecta fuerit terra: porro
subtilior in aerem cesserit, eademque magis ac magis extenuata in ignem
evaserit. Id. ibid.
And if my Soul did thus fabricate my Body, then what needed it pre-existent
Matter to make it of? And why did it not make it sooner, seeing it has such an
inclination to it? Can an independent Mind be ignorant what it was, and what it
did it self from all eternity, before it entered into this flesh? And why does
it not amend the infirmities of this Body? or why did it not make it self a
Body more excellent, more comely, more sound, more clean, and more durable?
Could it choose no better? can it not heal and perfect this? can it not prevent
the dissolution of it? Seeing I find it so much in love with it, and so
unwilling to be separated from it, if it were an independent mind, and caused
it at the first, it would not be unwillingly taken from it, and leave it to
rottenness and dust?

And if my Soul did thus independently make my Body, did all other Souls do so
by their Bodies, or not? If they did not, then they had a superior Cause; if
they did, then it seems that every Worm, and Fly, and Toad has a Soul, that is
an eternal, uncaused, independent being. But why then have they no knowledge,
no reason, no speech? why did they not choose a more honorable dwelling? why
do they all stoop to the service of man, if they are equally excellent? And
then it would follow that there are as many eternal independent beings, as
there are Souls or living Wights in all the world. And so instead of one true
perfect God, there would be innumerable demigods, which all had the perfection
of independencies, and none of them had a perfection of being and sufficiency:
which would put us upon the further enquiries, whether they do all their
business independently, or by a general council and consent, and how they all
do to agree, and not fall into perpetual wars; how the soul of an idiot, or a
wicked man, or of a Toad or Serpent, came to be so self-denying as to be
contented with that part, when the Soul of Aristotle, and Seneca, and Paul were
so much better provided for.

And if all this were so, who made the things inanimate, that have no souls of
their own to make them? For my part I made them not. And my Soul is conscious
that it is a dependent being, that cannot illuminate it self, nor know what it
would know, nor be what it would be, nor do what it would do, nor can support
its body or it self an hour. It looks dependently to something higher for
help, and protection, and supply, and mercy, and is past all doubt that it is
no God.

If it be said that all Souls are but one, even parts of the universal Soul of
the World, Chrysippus and Possidonius aiunt Mundum regi and administrari
secundum mentem and providentiam, Mente per omnes illius parts pertingente;
sicut and in nostra anima contingit, sed per lias magis, per illas minus.
Laert. in Zen.
and that individuation is by Matter only, and that so though my Soul be not
the whole first cause and being, it is a part of it: I answer, 1. I note by the
way, that this hypothesis acknowledges that which I am searching after, viz.
that there is a God: and it asserteth higher things of man than I am proving,
viz. That he has not only an immortal Soul, but a Soul that is part of God
himself. 2. And according to this, the Soul of every Heliogabalus,
Sardanapalus, Idiot or Toad, should be part of God. 3. And then all souls
should be alike, if all be God; the Soul of a murderer, Anaxogoras docuit
Mentem, confufis primo rebus accessisse, omniaque compegisse simul and
ordinasse. Laert. in ^nax. ex Timone.

Ovid's description of the Creation of the world, is almos as if he had taken
it out of Moses, Metaph. l. 1.


and of him that is murdered, of a Nero and a Saint, yea, of Caesar and of his
Dog. And how then comes there so much enmity between them, and so great
disparity? why is one wise, and another foolish or brutish, and one the Ruler
of the other? The Soul of a Bird or Horse seems to be lodged in as good a
kind of matter as Man's; or at least, the Soul of a Nero in as good a matter as
the Soul of Paul; or at least, the Soul of one that turns to villainy from
virtue, has the same matter which it had before. And certainly it is not
matter that principally individuateth, but forms. Nor is the difference between
good men and bad, and between Men, and Serpents or Beasts, so much in Matter as
in the Soul.

Moreover Nature teaches all men to seek felicity, and fear infelicity and
calamity: which they need not do, nor could not do, if they were all parts of
God: God cannot be miserable, but Man can, as to his Soul as well as his Body,
and the misery of his Body is little to that of the Soul even in this life. God
cannot be evil, but the Soul may be vitiated and evil, as experience teaches.
God may not be punished or afflicted, but a wicked man may be punished and
afflicted, even in his mind or Soul; and a Magistrate will not think, when he
hangs a thief, that he either punished bare flesh, or that he punished God.

Moreover God can wrong no man, but one man may wrong another. God need not
fear doing any thing amiss, but the Soul of man must fear it. No part of God
can be so unhappy as to choose to be a Toad, or a wicked or miserable man. God
has no Body, but so have these Souls; else when men eat a plant, or bird, or
any flesh, they eat part of the Body of God.

Moreover I find, that it is Bodies only that are Quantitative or Extensive,
and so divisible into parts: many parts of one Body may be animated by one
Soul, but not by many parts of that one Soul, (except the Soul be material it
self.)

But why (may some object) may I not hold, that all the Orbs being one world,
or one Body of one informing Soul, which is God; and so that really those which
you call individuals, are but parts of this one animated world. Answ. This is
confuted by what is said. Whether the world be animated by one The Pythagoreans
and Plato.

So Balbus in Cicer. de Not. Deor. l. 2. and many more.

But Cicero in other places speaks of God, not as the Soul of the world
formally and constitutively, but only efficiently, calling him, The Parent of
the Universe, the Maker of all things, etc. So that it seems that he took not
God, pro forma mundi, but as we do, for More than the Soul of it, even the
first Efficient. And lib. de Univers. he supposes the Eternal God to have
created that God who is the Soul of the world.


universal Soul, we are not now enquiring. But that God is not this informing
Soul is before disproved. In point of efficiency we grant that he is as the
Soul of Souls, effecting more than Souls do for their Bodies, but not in point
of Constitution. He is much more than the Soul of the world, but is not
formally its Soul. But, 2. Those men that will think so, must acknowledge, that
as they take the Horse and the Rider to be both parts of God, and the Child and
the Father, and the Subject and the Prince, and the Malefactor and the Judge,
and the flagitious wretch and the best of men; so it is no other membership
than what consists with the difference of moral good and evil, of wise and
foolish, of Governors and Subjects, of Rewards and Punishments, of Happiness
and Misery, which are the things that I am seeking after. But so few lay this
claim to Deity, that I need no further mind them.

. 3. My Parents were not the first cause of my being what I am.

As each Individual cannot be the first Cause of it self, so neither can their
Parents; for they do not so much as know my frame and nature, nor the order and
temperature of my parts; nor how or when they were set together; nor their use,
or the reason of their location. And certainly he that made me, knew what he
did, and why he did it in each particular. My Parents could not choose my sex,
nor shape, nor strength, nor qualifications.

. 4. The world which I see, and live in, did not make it self.

As Men, and Beasts, and Trees, and Stones did not make themselves, so neither
did they join as concauses or assistants in the making of the whole; nor did
any one of them make the rest: nor did any of the more simple substances,
called Elements, make themselves; neither the passive Elements, or the active;
the Earth, the Water, the Air or the Fire: For we know, past doubt, that
nothing has no power or action; God never wrought Miracle to convince Atheism,
because his ordinary works convince it. Lord Bacon Essay 16. p. 87.
and before they were, they were not, and therefore could not make themselves.
Nor can they be the first cause of mixed bodies, because there is that exceeding
wisdom most apparent in the generation, production, nature and operations of
these Bodies, which these Elements have not.

. 5. The visible world is not an uncaused independent Being.

For all the generated parts we see, do oriri and interire; they have a
beginning, progress, decay and end. And the inanimate parts having less of
natural excellency than the living, cannot infinitely exceed them, in the
excellency of Deity as uncaused and independent. And we see that they are all
dependent in their operations. They show in the order of their beings and
action, that incomprehensible wisdom, which is not in themselves: the Earth,
the Sea, the Air and Winds, are all ordered exactly by a Wisdom and a Will,
which they themselves are void of. Besides, they are many and various; but
their order and agreement shows, that it is some One universal Wisdom and
Will which rules them all: and if they are dependent in operation, they are
certainly dependent in being. And had they that excellency to be uncaused and
independent, they would have had therewith all other perfections, which we see
they want; and they would not have been many but one in that perfection.

. 6. The first universal Matter is not an uncaused independent being.

If such there be, its inactivity and passiveness shows it to want the
excellency of independency: and the ordination of it into its several beings,
and the disposals of it there, is done by a principle of infinite power,
activity and wisdom: on which having this dependence in its ordination and use,
The Platonists simile is, As the substance and shadow may be at one time,
though one be the cause of the other; so here.
it must be dependent also in its being.

. 7. If it were doubtful whether the world were eternal, and whether it were
the Body of God as the informing Soul, yet it would be past doubt that it is
not uncaused or independent, but caused by God.

That the world is not eternal we want not natural evidence: for, (Vid.)
Raymond. Lullium Art magna de tabul. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5. ad sin. 23.

And Alex. Gill on the Creed, page 88, 89, etc. and page 96, etc. Lege etiam
Disputationem Zachariae Scholast. Epise. Mitilen. cum Ammonio contra mundi
aeternitatem, in Bib. Pa. Graecolat. To. 1. page 330, etc.


says Lullius, then there would be two Eternals, the Cause and its Effects;
and then all things would be caused by natural necessity, and not by free will,
and consequently always alike: and then there has been Evil eternally, and
both the caused Good and the Evil would in all other aggravations be answerable
to Eternity, and the Evil would be as soon, as great, as durable as the good.
The same world which is finite in good and evil, and other respects, would be
infinite in Eternity; and the evil would have an infiniteness in point of
Eternity, and this necessitated by the eternity of the world: And seeing no
individuals are eternal, the supposed eternity of the world must be but of some
common matter, or only intentional and not real. The corporeal part having
quantity, is finite as to extension, and therefore cannot be infinite in
duration. In Eternity then there is no time, no prius and posterius; but in the
world there is. Much more is said by many; but this is not my present task, I
shall say more of it afterward.

But if it were doubtful whether the world were not eternally the Body of God,
yet would it be undoubted still that he caused it. And that there were the
difference of a cause and an effect, in order of nature, though not in
duration. As if a Tree or a man's body were supposed eternal, yet the root and
spirits of the Tree, and the principal parts and spirits in man's body would be
the causal parts on which the rest depend.

. 8. It remains therefore most certain, that something is a first Cause to
all things else, and that he is the Creator of all things.

For if the world be not uncaused and independent, it has a Cause; and if it
have a Cause it has a Creator: For when there was nothing but himself, he must
make all things of Himself, or of Nothing: not of Himself, for He is not
Material, and they are not parts of God (who is indivisible:) He that thinks
otherwise, should not kill a Flea or a Toad, nor blame any man that beats, or
robs, or wrongeth him, nor eat any creature; because he does kill, and
blame, and eat a part of God, who is unblameable, and can injure none, and is
to be more reverenced.

. 9. If there were any doubt whether the Sun, or Fire, Quid enim potest esse
tam apertum, tamque perspicuum, cum coelum suspeximus, coelestiaque contemplati
sumus, quam esse aliquod numen, praestantissimae mentis, quo haec regantur.
Cicer. l. 2. de Not Deor.
or passive matter had a first Cause, there can be no doubt at all concerning
MAN, which is the thing which I am enquiring into at the present.

For every one sees that Man has his beginning, and confesses that it is but
as yesterday since he was not; and therefore has a Cause which must be
uncaused, or have a Cause it self: if the latter, then that Cause again is
uncaused, or has a Cause it self. And so we must needs come at last to some
uncaused cause.

. 10. If any second Cause had made Man or the World, yet if it did it but as a
caused Cause, it self would lead us up to an uncaused Cause, which is the first
Cause of all, which we are seeking after.

Esse igitur Deos perspicuum est: ut id qui neget, vix cum sanae mentis
existinem. Cicer, de Not. Deor. 2.
For what any Cause does by a power received from a higher Cause, and
consequently ordered by it, that is done principally by that first or highest
Cause. And if God had made the world by an Angel or Intelligence, it would have
been nevertheless his Creature, nor any thing the less to his honor than if he
had made it by himself alone.

. 11. The sum of all is, that There is certainly a first uncaused independent
Cause of Man, and all things else, besides that Cause.

CHAP. V. What this Cause is, in it self. That it is God.
. 1. THe first Cause is known to us imperfectly, and by the effects. Agnoscimus
Deum ex operibus ejus. Cic. 1 Tusc.


Man is so conscious of his ignorance herein, and of the perplexities and
diversities of opinions which follow thereupon, and of the necessity of
beginning downward at the effects, and rising upward in his enquiry, that I
need not prove this Proposition to any man.

Commoda quibus utimur, lucem qua fruimur, Spiritum quem ducimus, a Deo no^is
dari and impertiri videmus. Cic. pro Rosc.
. 2. Though God (or the first Cause) is to be searched after in all his works,
yet chiefly in the chiefest of them within our reach; which is Man himself.

If any shall say, that the Sun and other creatures are more excellent than
Man, and therefore God (or the first Cause) is to be searched after rather in
them, and his Attributes denominated from them: I answer, There is no doubt but
secundum quid, Jovem dominatorem rerum and omnia nutu regentem, and praesentem
and praepotentem, qui dubitat, haud sane intelligo cur non idem, Sol sit, an
nullus sit dubitare possit, Cicer. de Not. Deor. l. 2. page (mihi) 48.
the Sun is a nobler Creature than Man. But what it is simpliciter we cannot
tell, unless we knew it better. The highest exellencies known to man in the
Sun, is the Potentia Motiva, Illuminativa and Calefactiva; Motion, Light and
Heat, with their effects, do tell us, what we know of it. That which we are
conscious of in Man is, Posse, Scire, Velle; Power, Intellection and Will, with
their Perfections; which are an higher excellency than Motion, Light and Heat.

. 3. He that gives Being to all else that is, must needs be the first Being
formally or eminently Himself.

Entity must needs be in the noblest sense or sort, Tria sunt invisibilia Dei:
h. e. Potentia, Sapientia, Benignitas; a quibus omnia procedunt, in quibus
omnia subsistunt, per quae omnia reguntur: Pater est Potentia, Filius
sapientia, Spiritus sanctus Benignitas: Potentia creat, Sapientia Gubernat,
Benignitas conservat (and perficit.) Potentia per benignitatem sapienter creat:
Sapientia per potentiam benign Gubernat: Benignitas per sapientiam potenter
conservat: sicut imago in speculo cernitur, sic in natura animae, etc. Huic
similitudini Dei approximat homo: Cui Potentia Dei dat bonum posse; sapientia
tribuit scire, benignitas praestat velle: haec triplex animae rationalis vis
est; scil. Posse, Scire, Velle: quae supra dictis tribus fidei, spei and
charitati cooperantur, etc. Poth^ Prumensis de statu Domus Dei, lib. 1. in
Boblioth. Pat. V. 9.
in the Primum Ens, the original of Being, rather than in any derived Being
whatsoever. For it cannot give better than it has: so that Ens, or [I am] is
his first Name.

. 4. He that has made Substances more noble than Accidents, is Himself a
Substance either formally or eminently; and a Living Substance, yea Life it
self.

Once for all, by [Eminently] I mean somewhat more excellent, or transcendent,
which yet Man has no better Name for, or fitter Notion of. God is thus a
Substance, Life transcendently, if not formally.

. 5. He that has made Intelligences, or Spirits, or Minds, more noble and
excellent than Bodies, is himself a Mind, Intelligence or Spirit, either
formally, or transcendently and eminently.

We find that corporeal, gross and dense Beings are most dull and passive, and
have least of excellency: The Body of it self in comparison of the Mind, is a
dull and dirty clod. Though we have no adequate conception of a Spirit, we know
not only Negatively, that it contains a freedom from the baseness and
inconveniences of corporeity, but also we know by its essential acts, that
positively it is a pure active Life, Intelligence and Will, and therefore a
more excellent sort of Being, than things merely corporeal which have no such
action. So that we have found, as to his Being, that the first Cause is Ens,
Substantia, Vita, Spiritus.

. 6. There must needs be in the first Cause an Esse, Posse, and Operari.

If there were no Operation, there were no Causation: If there were no Power,
there could be no Operation: and if there were no Being, there could be no
Power. Not that these are things so various as to make a composition in the
first Cause; but they are transcendently in it without division and
imperfection, by a formal or virtual distinction.

. 7. Seeing the noblest Creatures known to us are Minds that have a Posse,
Scire, Velle, active, executive Power, with an Understanding to guide it, and a
Will to command it, God has either formally, or eminently and transcendently
such a Power, Intellect and Will, which is his Essence.

For nothing is more certain, than that no Cause can give more than it had to
give: If the first Cause had not Power, Understanding and Will, Deo nihil
praestantius, ab coigitur necesse est m^um regi. Nihi igitur est na^ ^e^ens aut
su^ (...) D^s: Om^g ^git ipse natural a^ tenim si concedlimus intelligentes
esse Deos. concedimus et am providentes, and rerum quidem maximarum. Cicer. de
Not. Deur.
either formally or eminently in a higher and nobler kind, he could not have
endowed all mankind with what he had not.

1. That the first Cause is most powerful is evident by his works: he that gave
Man his measure of power, and much more to many other creatures, has himself
much more than any of them: He that made this mavelous frame of all the Orbs,
and causes and continues their being, and their constant rapid motion, is
incomprehensibly potent. Whatsoever Power there is in all the Creatures visible
and invisible set together, there must be more or as much in their first Cause
alone, because nothing can give more Power than it has. Dicitis nihil esse
quod Deus efficere non possit, and quidem sine ullo labor: ut enim hominum
membra sine ulla contentione mente ipsa ut moveantur, sic numine Deorum omnia
fingi, moveri mutarique posse. Neque id dicitis superstitiose atque aniliter,
sed Physica constantique ratione: inquit Cotta de Stoicis in Cicer. de Not.
Doer. 3. p 110.


2. His works also prove that the first Cause is an Understanding: for the
admirable composure, order, nature, motions, variety and usefulness of all his
Creatures, do declare it. He that has given Understanding to Man, has
formally or eminently more himself, than all men and all his creatures have. If
Intellection were not an excellency above mere natural or brutish motion, Man
were not better than the inanimates or bruites; but if it be, the Giver of it
cannot want it. Not that his Intellection is univocally the same thing with
ours. But it is something incomparably more noble, which expresses it self in
humane Intellection as its Image, and is seen by us in this Glass, and can be
expressed by us no better than by this name.

3. And as it is a nobler nature which acts by Volition, or Free Will, than
that which has no Will at all, and so no voluntary choice and complacency; so
the first Cause which has given this noble faculty to Man, has certainly
himself, though not a Will univocally the same with ours, yet a Will of a
transcendent excellency, which expresses it self in ours as its Image, and
must be something better and greater, but cannot be lower or less. And though
such Indetermination as proceeds from imperfection, and consequently such
Liberty belongs not to the first Cause, which has no defects, yet all that
Liberty which belongs to perfection must undoubtedly belong to Him. He that
did what we see, has done it willingly and freely.

. 8. What ever the first Cause is, it must needs be in absolute Perfection.

It must needs have in it more than the whole world besides, because it gives
all that to the whole Creation, which it has received, and is. An imperfect
cause could never have made such a world as we behold, and partly know. And
were the first Cause imperfect, there would be no perfection in being.

. 9. The perfection of the first Cause in Being requires that it be Eternal,
without Beginning or End of duration.

Nothing in the world can be more evident to reason, than that something must
be Eternal, without beginning; nothing being more evident, than that Nothing
has no power, no action, no effects, and so can make nothing. And therefore if
ever there had been a time, when Nothing was, Nothing could ever have been:
imagine that there were Nothing now, and it is certain there never would be any
thing.

Obj. Something may oriri de novo without any Cause, as well as God be
eternally without any Cause.

Answ. Its impossible: For he that is eternally, has all perfection eternally
in himself, and needs no Cause, being still in being, and being the Cause of
Causes. But Nothing has no perfection or being, and therefore needs an
Omnipotent Cause to give it a being.

Obj. If the world may be created of nothing materially, it may be what it is
without any thing efficiently.

Answ. Impossible: Pre-existent matter is not necessary to the first created
matter: for Matter may be caused of Nothing by an Omnipotent Efficient, as well
as the wonderful frame of all things be made out of Matter. But without an
Efficient, no Being can arise de novo.

So that it is most evident, seeing any thing now is, there has been something
eternally. And if something, it must needs be the first Cause, which is chief
in excellency, and first in order of production, and therefore of existence.

. 10. The first Cause must needs be independent, in being, perfections, and
operations; and so be absolutely self-sufficient.

For it were not the first, if there were any before it: Deus est Men's, soluta,
libera and segregata ab omni concretione mortali, omnia sentiens, movens, etc.
Cicer. 1. Tuscul.
and being caused by nothing else, it was eternally sufficient in and for it
self: otherwise that which it were beholden to, would have the place of a Cause
to it. And if it caused not all, or needed the help of any other, Velleius in
Cicer de Not. Deor. 1. Recites the Opinions of many of the Philosophers, of
God, p. 10. Sed Deo (si Deus est) longum nihil omnino est, cui punctum terra
est, and sub nutu omnia constituta. Arnob. l. 7. p. 63.
it is not absolutely the first Cause to all others, nor perfect in it self.
That which could be eternally without a cause, and it self cause all things, is
selfsufficient and independent.

. 11. The first Cause must needs be free from all imperfection of Corporeity
(or Materiality) Composition, Passibility, corruptibility, Mutability and
Mortality, and all other imperfections of defendent beings.

There is such a thing as a Living Principle, and a pure spiritual Nature in
the created world: and the Maker of it must be life and Spirit in a higher
purer sense than it, and therefore must be free from all its imperfections: and
having no cause, has no defect; and having no beginning, can have no end. All
this Reason does certainly apprehend.

. 12. This perfect first Cause must be Immense or Infinite in Being.

Not by corporeal extension; as if God, as a Body, were in a place, and being
more extensive than all place, were called Immense: But in the perfect Essence
of an eternal Life, and Spirit, and Mind, he is every where without Locality,
and all things live, and move, and be in him. The thought of space is but a
Metaphorical help to our conception of his Immensity.

. 13. Therefore he must needs be Omnipresent.

Plato in lib. leg. Quid sit omnino Deus, inquiri oportere non censet. Cicer.
1. de Not. Deor.
Not by extension quantitative, but in a sort transcendent and more excellent,
according to the transcendent way of his Existence: For if we must have
conceived of him as no better than a Body, and of Magnitude as an Excellency,
we might well have concluded, that he has made nothing greater than himself.
Nemo dat quod non habet; and therefore he must be more extensive than all the
world, and consequently absent from no part of it. Much more when his Being,
which surpasses corporeity, directs us to acknowledge a more noble kind of
Omnipresence than Extensive.

. 14. Therefore is he Incomprehensible as to humane understanding, or any other
created intellect.

Of our own incomprehension experience sufficiently convinces us here, and
Reason evinceth the same of all created Intellects: for the less cannot
comprehend the greater; and between finite and infinite there is no proportion.
We know nothing purely-intelligible so easily and certainly as that God is: But
there is nothing that we are so far from comprehending: As we see nothing more
easily and certainly than the Sun, which yet we see not with a comprehensive,
but a partial and defective sight.

. 15. This Infinite Being can be but One. The wiser sort of the Heathens
believed one only Parent of the Universe, but durst not speak out what they
knew, of his unity or perfections. Cicero says, Illum quasi Parentem hujus
Universitatis invenire difficile; and cum inveneris, indicare in vulgus, nefas.
de Vniversit. page 2. And the same he says, lib. 2. de not. Deor.


For if there were many, they could not be Infinite, and so indeed there would
be none: nor would there be any one first Cause of all things: For if one
caused one part of the World, and another another part, no one were the first
Cause of all: And if they joined in causing all together, they would all
conjunctly make but one first cause, and each one several be but part of the
Cause. If there be no one that is sufficient to make and govern all the World,
there is no perfect Being, nor no God: but the effect shows the sufficiency
and the unity of the World (the Orbs being one frame) the unity of the first
cause. Perfection consists more in the unity of one all sufficient Being,
Stoici dicunt unum Deum esse: Ipsumque and mentem, and fatum, and Jovem dicunt:
Principio illum cum esset apud se, substantiam omnem per aerem in aquam
convertisse. Et quemadmodum in faetu semen continetur, ita and hanc serendi
rationem in humore talem residisse, materia ad operandum aptissime parata, ex
qua caetera post haec gignerentur. Tum genuisse primum elementa quatuor, ignem,
aquam, aerem, terram. Videntur autem illis duo esse rerum omnia principia,
saciens videl. and patiens: Quod patitur fine qualitate esse substantiam
materiam: Quod autem faciat VERBUM DEUM esse quod in ipsa sit. Hunc enim quippe
sempiternum per ipsum omnem singula creare. Laert. in Zenone, p. (mihi) 359,
360.
than in a voluntary concurrence of many Beings. The most learned Heathens, who
thought there were many to be named Gods, did mean but subordinate particular
Gods, that were under the one universal God, whom the Stoics and Academicks
took to be the universal Soul, and the subordinate Gods the Souls of the
particular Orbs and Planets.

. 16. The Power of this God must needs be Omnipotency.

He that has given so great Power to the creatures, as is exercised by them,
especially the Sun and fixed Stars in their several Vortices or Orbs; and he
that could make such a World of nothing, and uphold the being, and maintain the
order, and cause, and continue the rapid motions of all the Vortices or Orbs,
(which are to us innumerable, and each of incomprehensible excellency and
magnitude) is certainly to be accounted no less than Omnipotent. By his
Omnipotency I mean that, by which in it self considered in primo instanti he
can do all things possible, that is, which belong not to Impotency, but to
Power: And by which in secundo instanti he can do all things, which his
Infinite Wisdom judges congruous and meet to be done: And in tertio instanti,
can do all that he will do, and are pleasing to him.

. 17. The understanding of the first Cause must needs be Omniscient, and
infinite Wisdom.

1. He that has given so much wisdom to such a Worm as Man, must have more
than all the men in the World! Whatever knowledge is in the whole Creation,
being given by Him, does prove that formally or eminently he has more. Were it
all contracted into one Intelligence, it must be less than His that caused it.
He has not given more wisdom than he had to give: nor so much as he had (or
is) himself. For if he should make any thing equal to Himself, there would be
two Infinites, and there would be a perfect self-sufficient being, which yet
had lately no sufficiency or being, and there would be a being independent in
facto esse, which was dependent in fieri: which are Contradictions.

2. The effects in the admirable frame and nature, and motions of the Creation,
declare that the Creator is infinitely wise. The smallest insect is so
curiously made, and so admirably fitted and instructed to its proper end and
uses; The smallest Plants in wonderful variety of shapes and colors, and
smells and qualities, uses and operations, and beautiful flowers, so
marvellously constituted and animated, by an unseen form, and propagated by
unsearchable seminal virtue; The smallest Birds and Beasts and creeping things
so adorned in their kinds, and so admirably furnished for their proper ends,
especially the propagation of their species, in love, and sagacity, and
diligence to their young, by instinct equaling in those particulars the
reasonable creature; The admirable composure of all the parts of the body of
Man, and of the vilest Beast and Vermin; The quality and operation of all the
Organs, humors and spirits: The operations of the Mind of man; and the
constitution of Societies, and overruling all the matters of the World; with
innumerable instances in the creature; do all concur to proclaim that man as
mad as madness can possibly make him (in that particular) who thinks that any
lower cause than incomprehensible wisdom did principally produce all this; And
that by any brutish or natural motion, or confluence of Atoms, or any other
matter, it could be thus ordered, continued and maintained, without the
infinite wisdom and power of a first Cause, superior to mere natural matter
and motion. What then should we say, if we had a sight into the inwards of all
the Earth, of the nature and cause of Minerals, and of the forms of all things;
If we saw the reason of the motions of the Seas, and all other appearances of
Nature which are now beyond our reach: Yea, Nee enim ignorare potest Deus qua
mente quisque sit. Cicer. de Div.

At ignoratio rerum aliena est naturae Deorum; and sustinendi muneris propter
imbecillitatem difficultas, minime cadit in majestatem Deorum: ex quo efficitur
id quod volumus, Deorum providentia mundum administrari. Cicero ibid.


if we had a sight of all the Orbs, both fixed Stars and Planets, and of their
matter, and form, and order, and relation to each other, and their
communications and influences on each other, and the cause of all their
wondrous motions: If we saw not only the nature of the Elements, especially
the active Element, Fire; but also the constitution, magnitude, and use, of all
those thousand Suns, and lesser Worlds, which constitute the universal World:
And, if they be inhabited, if we knew the Inhabitants of each: Did we know all
the Intelligences, blessed Angels, and holy Spirits, which possess the nobler
parts of Nature; and the unhappy degenerate Spirits, that have departed from
light and joy, into darkness and horror, by departing from God; yea, if we
could see all these comprehensively, at one view; what thoughts should we have
of the wisdom of the Creator? And what should we think of the Atheist that
denies it? We should think Bedlam too honorable a place for that man, that
could believe, or durst say, that any accidental motion of subtle matter, or
fortuitous concourse of Atoms, or any thing below a Wisdom and Power
infinitely transcending all that with Man is called by that name, was the first
Cause, Quod si inest in hominum genere, men's, fides, virtus, concordia, unde
haec in terras nisi a superis diffluere potuerunt? Cumque sit in nobis
consilium, ratio, prudentia, necesse est Deos haec ipsa habere majora: Nec
habere solum, sed etiam his uti, in optimis and maximis rebus. Cicero de nature.
Dorum. lib. 2. page 76.
and is the chief continuer of such an incomprehensible frame.

. 18. The first Cause must needs be infinitely Good.

By Goodness I mean all essential Excellency, which is known to us by its
fruits and appearances in the Creature: which as it has a Goodness natural and
moral, so is it the Index of that transcendent Goodness, which is the first
cause of both: This goodness is incomparably beyond that which consists in a
usefulness to the creatures good; or Goodness of Benignity as relative to Man.
And it is known better by the mere name, as expressing that which Nature has
an intrinsic sense and notion of, than by definitions. As sensible qualities,
light, color, sound, odor, sweet, bitter, etc. are known by the name, best,
which lead to the sensitive memory, which informs the Intellect what they
are: As the mention of things sensible enters the definition of sense, and
the mention of sense does enter the definition of things sensible; and yet the
object is in order of nature before the act. And as Truth must enter the
definition of Intellection, and Intellection the definition of Truth; and yet
Truth is in order before Intellection, and contemporary with the Intellect: so
is it between Goodness and the Will. But if we speak of uncreated Good, and of
a created Will, then Good is infinitely antecedent to that Will. But the Will
which is created has a nature suited to it; and so the notion of Excellency
and Goodness is naturally in our estimative faculty, and the relish of it, or
complacency in it, is naturally in the Will, so far as it is not corrupted and
depraved. As if I knew a man that had the wisdom and virtue of an Angel, my
estimation calls him Excellent and Good, and my Will does complacentially
cleave to him, though I should never look to be the better for him my self: or
if I only heard of him, and never saw him, or were personally beholden to him.

Deus est summum Bonum, supra omnem substantiam, omnemque naturam; quod cuncta
expetunt, cum ipse sit plenae perfectionis, nullius societatis indigus* Plato
in Tim. Amor Divinus fuit causa factionis mundi, and originis omnium rerum. Id.
ib Bonus quidem Deus, and quidem Deus causa bonorum: Malorum autem omnium non
causa. Idem de Leg.

Deus si Vim spectes, valentissimus, si decorem formosissimus, si vitam
immortalis, denique si virtutem piaestantissimus est. Aristot de Mun. c. 6.


That God is thus infinitely Excellent and Good, the Goodness of his Creatures
proves: for all the goodness that is in Men and Angels, Earth and Heaven,
proceeds from him. If there be any Natural Goodness in the whole Creation,
there must be more in the Creator: If there be any Moral Goodness in Men and
Angels, there must be more in eminency in him: For he can make nothing better
than himself, nor give to creatures what he has not.

. 19. The Goodness of the first Being consisting in this infinite Perfection or
Excellency, contains his Happiness, his Holiness, and his Love or Benignity.

. 20. The HAPPINESS of the first Being consists, 1. In his BEING HIMSELF. 2.
In his KNOWING HIMSELF. 3. In his LOVING and ENJOYING HIMSELF.

The most perfect Being must needs be the most Happy, and that in Being what he
is; his own Perfection being his Happiness. And as Knowledge in the Creature is
both his Perfection and Delight, so the transcendent Omniscience of the Creator
must needs be both part of his Perfection, (as distinguished by our narrow
minds) and such felicity as may be called Eminently his Delight, Deus est Actus
illis porro actus qui per se est; and optimus and aeternus. Atque Deum animal
esse and aeternum and praestantissinium dicimus. Vita igitur and aevum
continuum and perpetuum Deo suppetit: est enim hoc Deus. Arist. Metaphys.
though what God's Delight is we know not formally. And as Love or Complacency
is the perfective operation of the Will, and so of the Humane Nature in Man,
and is his highest, final, and enjoying acts, of which all Goodness is the
object; so there must be something in the Perfection of the first Cause, though
not formally the same with Love in Man, yet eminently so called, as knowable to
us by no other name. And this complacency must needs be principally in Himself,
because He himself is the Infinite and only Primitive Good; and as there was
primitively no Good but Himself to Love, so now there is no Good but derived
from Him, and dependent on Him. And as his Creature (of which anon) is obliged
to love Him most, so he must needs be most amiable to Himself. Self-love and
self-esteem in the Creature may be inordinate, and therefore called Pride: but
it is impossible that infinite Goodness it self can be over-valued or
over-loved by Himself or by any creature.

. 21. The HOLINESS of the first Being consists, 1. In his separation from all
creatures; by that Transcendency, which makes him their end. 2. In the special
Perfection of his WILL, which wills and has complacency in that alone ad
extra, which is agreeable to his perfect Nature, and infinite Wisdom. 3. And so
being the Fountain and Rule of Moral Goodness to the Rational Creature.

The Holiness of Man consists, 1. In his separation from common uses unto
God. 2. In the Rectitude of his Will, as habitually thus inclined and bent to
Moral Good, and hating evil. 3. Whereby it is conform to the governing Will of
God. And hence we may learn what Holiness is in God, though not formally the
same with that in Man.

. 22. The Benignity and Love of the first Being is his Essence or Nature, as
inclined to complacency in all created Good; and to benevolence or doing good
to creatures, freely and agreeably to his infinite Wisdom.

The Love of complacency to all created Good, is necessary in God, supposing
the continued existence of that created Good, which is the object. But it is
not necessary that such created Good do continually exist. The Love of
Benevolence is also natural to God in this sense, that it is his natural
perfection as respecting the Creature to be used agreeably to his perfect
wisdom; but the exercise of it is not necessary, because the being or felicity
of the Creature is not necessary; but it is acted freely, according as the
infinite wisdom sees it fit, as to those Ends to which all Creatures are but
the Means.

. 23. The first Being must needs be the only ultimate end to himself, so far
as he may be said to intend an End.

Creatas autem Potentia^, creatrix utique Potentia jare supereminet eo ipso vel
maxim quo creavit. Nam and animam anima praestantiorem saepe and experimur and
dicimus. Claudian. Mammort. de Anime Statu. l. 1. cap. 15.
God does not intendere finem in defectiveness and imperfection as the Creature
does: He wants nothing, nor is he in via as to his felicity. But eminently he
may be said to intend an End, as he makes one thing a means to produce or
attain another, and does nothing disorderly nor in vain, but orders all
things in infinite wisdom. He is not wanting, but enjoying his end at all
times, even in the midst of his use of means. To his essential Goodness and
Blessedness, there is no means, nothing is capable of the honor of
contributing to it. When I consider, that taking any one sound, if you join
thereto another, a Third above it, and then place another a third above that
also; these three thus conjoined and sounding together, do constitute one
entire Harmony, which governs and compriseth all the sounds, which by art or
imagination can at once be joined together in Musical con^ordante: This I
cannot but think a significant Emblem of that supreme and incomprehensible
Three in One, governing, comprising and disposing the whole Machine of the
World, with all its included parts in a perfect Harmony. Christoph. Simpson's
The Division Vioist. page 17.
But his Will is the Beginning of all derived Beings, and his Will is the
ultimate End of all. He is pleased to make and order all by his power and
wisdom, and he is pleased in all things as so made and ordered. The complacency
of his Will then is the ultimate end of all his works, as the Glory of his own
Power, Wisdom and Goodness shines in them. And though Complacency, or
Pleasedness, or Will, be not formally the same in God, as in us, yet something
eminently there is in him, which under this Notion we must conceive of, and
express.

. 24. The Posse, Scire, Velle, the operative Power, Understanding and Will of
God, according to their Perfection, called, his Omnipotency, Omnisciency and
Goodness, by which he is Maximus, Sapientissimus, Optimus, is a wonderful, yet
an intelligible and certain Trinity in Unity, viz. In the Unity of Essence
there is this Trinity of Principles or Faculties, as they may be called from
the manner of imperfect man, but deserve a higher name in God.

. 25. The Essence of God is not the Genus, and these three the Species; nor is
it the Totum, and these three the Parts; nor is it a Substance, of which these
three are Accidents: but they are like the Essential faculties in Man, which
are one with the Soul in Essence, but are not one and the same Faculties, but
truly distinct (whether it be Really, Formally, or Relatively and
Denominatively only): Gods Power or Omnipotency is not formally the same
(quoad conceptum objectivum) with his Understanding and Wisdom, nor this the
same with his Will and Goodness; they are as three essential Principles, and
yet but one Essence, and so one God. Nor is it part of God that is Omnipotent,
and part that is Omniscient, and part that is Good; or quae potest intelligit
and vult: lut the whole Godhead is Omnipotent, the whole Omniscient, and the
whole is Good, or Power, Wisdom and Goodness it self: Yet each of these Notions
by it self alone is not a total or full expression of the whole perfection of
the Deity.

Therefore we must neither confound the essential Principles in God, nor divide
the Essence. The Omnipotency is as one faculty, the Understanding another, and
the Will another; but the Godhead and Essence of them all is one, the Glory
equal, the Majesty coeternal. Such as the Power is, such is the Understanding,
and such is the Will. The Power uncreated, the Understanding uncreated, and the
Will uncreated. The Power incomprehensible, the Understanding incomprehensible,
and the Will incomprehensible. The Power eternal, the Understanding eternal,
and the Will eternal. And yet there are not three eternal Gods or Essences, but
one Eternal; nor three Incomprehensibles, nor three Uncreated, but One. The
Power is God, the Understanding is God, The Reason why the Heathens made Gods
of several Virtues, was, because those Virtues were most eminent in God, and by
adoring them, men would learn to love and imitate them. Been Men's, Pietas,
Virtus, Fides consecratur manu: quarum omnium R^mae dedicata public templ.
sunt, ut illa qui habeant (habent autem omnes boni) Deos ipsos in animis suis
collocatos putent. Cicer. de Leg. 2. p. 240.
and the Will is God: and yet there are not three Gods, but one God. So then,
there is One Power, not Three Powers; One Understanding, not Three
Understandings; One Will, not Three Wills. And in this Trinity, none is in
duration before or after other, none is greater or less than other; but the
whole three Principles be coeternal together, and coequal. So that in all
things as aforesaid this Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is to be
acknowledged as undeniable in the light of Nature, and to be adored and
worshipped by all.

And because of the Unity of the Essence, these Three may be predicated in the
Concrete of each other, but not in the Abstract, because of their formal
diversity. And so it may be said, that the Power is an Understanding or wise
Power, and the Understanding is an Omnipotent Understanding, and the Will a
most Wise and Omnipotent Will, and the Power a Good and Willing Power: but not
that the Power is the Understanding, and the Understanding the Will, or the
Will is the Power or Understanding.

So as to their Order, the Power, as in it self considered, as an Active Vital
Power, is first in our conception, and does as it were act by the
Understanding, and the Understanding by the Will, and in execution so go forth
with the Will, that the effect is immediately to be ascribed to it.

. 26. Though all the Divine Faculties or Principles are adumbrate (or made
manifest) in the Creation or Frame of the world, yet the Omnipotency is therein
to us most eminently apparent.

It is infinite Wisdom and infinite Goodness which shines to us in this
wonderful Frame. But we first and with greatest admiration take notice of the
Omnipotency. To consider the innumerable number of the Orbs, the multitude of
the Fixed Stars, which may be called so many Suns, and to think of their
distances, magnitude, powers, orders, influences, communications, effects, etc.
and how many millions of these, for ought we know, there may be, besides those
which are within our sight, even though helped by the most perfect Telescopes;
it strikes the Soul with unspeakable admiration at the Power that created and
maintains all this. When we think of the unconceivable rapid, orderly,
perfect, constant motions of all these Orbs, or at least of the Planets and
circumjacent bodies in every Vortex: All these thoughts do make the Deity, or
first Being, to be just to the mind as the Sun is to the eye, the most
Intelligible of Beings, but so Incomprehensible, that we cannot endure to gaze
too much or near upon his glory.

. 27. Whether the whole world be animated, or inanimate: Whether the whole have
one constitutive Soul or not: Whether each Orb have its particular Soul or not,
are things unrevealed, and beyond the Certain knowledge of the natural mind.
But it is certain that the first Being is not the proper constitutive Form or
Soul of the world* but yet that he is much more to it than such a Form or Soul,
even the total, perfect first Cause of all that it is, and has, and does.

He is not the constitutive Form or Soul of the Universe, (as it seems Cicero
with the Academicks and Stoics thought) because then the Creator and the
Creature should be the same: or else the Creature should be nothing but dead,
passive matter: and then Man himself, who knows that he has a Soul, would
either be God, (which his experience and the conscience of his frailty
forbids him to imagine) or else he should be a Creature more noble than the
Universe, of which he is so small a part, (which his reason forbids him also
to believe.)

But yet that God is much more to the world than a constitutive Soul, is
undeniable; because he is the creating Cause, Fas autem nec est, nec unquam
fuit, quicquam nisi pulcherrimum facere eum qui essot optimus. Cicer. de
Universe. p. 269.
which is more than a constitutive Cause: and his continued causation in its
preservation, is as a continued creation: As in Man, the Soul is a dependent
cause, which can give nothing to the Body but what it has received, nor act
but as it is acted or empowered by the first efficient. And therefore though we
call not God the Soul of Man, because we would not so dishonor him, nor
confound the Creator and the creature; yet we all know that he is to us much
more than the Soul of Souls, for in him we live, and move, and have our being.
So also it is as to God's causation of the Being, Motion and Order of all the
world. God is incomparably more to it than its Form, as being the total first
Cause of Form and Matter. To be the Creator is more than to be the Soul.

. 28. The glory of all being, action and order in the creatures, is no less due
to God when he works by means, than when he works by none at all.

For when no Means is a Means, nor has being, aptitude, See Theophil. Antioch.
ad Autol. l. 1. p* in B. p. 128. showing that by Gods Voice speaking to Adam is
meant his Son.
force or efficacy, but from himself, he only communicates praise to his
creatures, when he thus uses them, but gives not away the least degree of his
own interest and honor: for the creature is nothing, has nothing, and can do
nothing but by him: It uses no strength, or skill, or bounty, but what it
first received from him; therefore to use such means can be no dishonor to
him, unless it be a dishonor to be a communicative Good. As it is no dishonor
to a Watch-maker to make that Engine, which shows his skill, instead of
performing all the motions without that little frame of means: But yet no
similitude will reach the case, because all creatures themselves are but the
continued productions of the Creator's will; and the virtue which they put
forth, is nothing but what God puts into them. And he is as near to the
effect, when he works by means, as when without.

Sic Plato, cum de Deo loqui esset animatus, dicere Quid sis, non est ausus:
hoc solum de Deo sciens, quod sciri Qualis sit, ab homine non possit; solemn
vero ei simillimum de visibilibus solum reperit and per ejus similitudinem viam
sermoni suo attollendo se ad comprehensibilia patefecit. Nam Deus qui prima
Causa est, unus omnium princeps and origo est. Hic super abundanti foecunditate
majestatis de se Mentem creavit. Haec men's quae (...) vo catur, qua patrem
inspicit, plenam simil tud^nem servat authoris. Macrob.
. 29. Those that call these three faculties, or Principles in the Divine
Essence, by the name of three Hypostases, or Persons, do seem to me to speak
less unaptly than the Schools, who call [Deum seipsum intelligentem] the
Father, and [Deum ut a se intellectum] the Son, and [Deum a se amatum] the Holy
Ghost. For that in God which is to be conceived of us, by Analogy to our
essential faculties, is with less impropriety called [an Hypostasis or Person]
than that which is to be conceived by us, in Analogy to our actus secundi, or
receptions.

. 30. And those that say the first faculty, Omnipotency, as eminently appearing
in the frame of Nature, may therefore be said to be specially therein
personated, or denominated, the Creating Person, speak nothing which derogateth
from the honor of the Deity.

. 31. Though we cannot trace the vestigia, the adumbration, or appearances of
this Trinity in Unity, through the whole Body of Nature and Morality; because
of the great debility and narrowness of our Minds; Yet is it so apparent on the
first and most notable parts of both, as may make it exceeding probable that it
runs in perfect method through them all; if our understandings were but able
to follow and comprehend that wonderful method in the numerous, minute and
less discernable particulars.

Nulla gens est tam inmansueta neque tam ferrea, quae non criamsi ignoret
qualem Deum habere deceat, tamen habendum sciat. Cicero 1 de leg.
I shall now give no other instance, than in two of the most noble Creatures.
The Soul of Man, which is made after Gods Image; from whence we fetch our first
knowledge of him, has in the unity of a living Spirit, the three foresaid
faculties, of vital and executive Power, Understanding and Will, which are
neither three species, nor three parts, nor three accidents of the Soul: But
three faculties certainly so far distinct, as that the Acts from whence they
are denominated really differ, and therefore the faculties differ at least in
their Virtual Relation to those acts, and so in a well-grounded denomination.
Omnibus innatum and quasi insculptum est, esse Deos. Idem de Not. Deor.
To understand is not to will: for I understand that which I have no will to,
even against my will (for the Intellect may be forced: Therefore the same Soul
has in it the virtue or power both of understanding and willing, and so of
executing: Nulla gens tam fera cujus mentem non imbuerit Deorum ^pinio, Idem 1.
Tusc.

Dicunt Stoici DEUM esse animal immortale, rationale, perfectum and beatum; a
malo omni remotissimum, providentia sua mundum and quae sunt in mundo
administrans omnia: Non tamen inesse illi humanae formae lineamenta: Caeterum
esse opificem immensi hujus operis, sicut and patrem omnium. Laert. in Zenone,
page (mihi) 364.

I had rather believe all the fables in the Legend, Talmud, Alcoran, than that
this universal Frame is without a mind. Lord Verulam, Essay 16.


which are denominated from the different acts which they relate to. There is
some Reason in the powers, virtues, or faculties of the real difference in the
acts.

So in the Sun, and all the superior Luminaries, there is in the unity of their
Essence, a Trinity of Faculties or Powers, 1. Motiva, 2 Illuminativa, 3.
Calefactiva; causing motion, light and heat. The doctrine of Motion is much
improved by our late Philosophers: when the doctrine of Light and Heat are so
also, and vindicated from the rank of common accidents and qualities, the
nature of the Luminaries and of Fire will be also better cleared. The Sun is
not to these Powers or Acts, either a Genus, a Totum, or a Subjectum. It is not
one part of the Sun that moves, and another which illuminateth, and another
which heateth: But the whole Sun (if it be wholly Fire or ethereal matter)
does move, the whole illuminateth, and the whole does heat: And Motion, Light
and Heat, are not Qualities inherent in it; But Motion, Illumination, and
Calefaction, are Acts flowing immediately from its Essence as containing the
faculties or powers of such acts.

He that could write a perfect method of Physics and Morality, would show us
Trinity in Unity through all its parts from first to last. But as the Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, Multi de Diis prava sentiunt: id enim vitioso more effici
solet: Omnes tamen esse vim and naturam divinam arbitrantur. Nec vero id
collocutio hominum aut consensus efficit; non institutis opinio est confirmata;
non legibus: Omni autem in re consensio omnium gentium Lex naturae putanda est.
Cicer. Tusculan. Qu: l. 1. p. 220.

Cesarius and some other of the Ancients, make the Image of God on Man to be
his Natural perfections, and his similitude, to be his moral perfections.


the Vessels of the Natural, Vital, and Animal, humors and spirits, are easily
discernable in their trunks and greater branches, but not so, when they are
minute and multiplied into thousands, so is it in this Method.

But I must desire the Reader to observe, that though I here explain this
Trinity of Active Principles in the Divine Essence, which is so evident to
Natural Reason it self, as to be past all controversy; Yet whether indeed the
Trinity of Hypostases or Persons, which is part of the Christian Faith, be not
somewhat distinct from this, is a question which here I am not to meddle with,
till I come to the second part of the Treatise: Nor is it my purpose to deny
it, but only to prepare for the better understanding of it. Of which more shall
there afterward be said.

. 32. And thus all Creatures, and especially our selves, declare that there is
a first Being and Cause of them all, who is a Substance, Life, a Spirit, or
Mind, an Active Power, Understanding and Will, perfect, eternal, independent
and self-sufficient, not compounded, not passible, not mutable, corruptible or
mortal, Immense, Omnipresent, Incomprehensible, only One, Omnipotent,
Omniscient, and most Good, most Happy in Being Himself, in Knowing himself, and
enjoying him; most Holy, transcending all the Creatures, of a Perfect Will, the
Fountain of all Moral Good, Love or Benign: having a Trinity of essential
Transcendent Principles, in unity of Essence, which have made their adumbration
or appearance on the World, whereof though he be not the constitutive form or
Soul, He is to it much more; the first Efficient, Dirigent, and ultimate final
Cause of all: That is, THERE IS A GOD.

CHAP. VI. Of GOD as RELATED to his Creatures: especially to Man. And I. as his
OWNER.
PAssing by all that is doubtful, and controverted among men truly Rational,
and taking before me only that which is certain, undeniable, and clear, and
wherein my own Soul is past all doubt, I shall proceed in the same method
secundum ordinem cognoscendi, non essendi. The word [GOD] does not only
signify all that I have been proving, viz. Read the proofs of the Deity, and
of Providence at large in Cicer. de not. Deor. lib. 2. by Balbus.
The perfect nature of the first Cause, but also his Relations to us his
Creatures: And therefore till I have opened and proved those Relations, I have
done but part of my work, to prove that THERE IS A GOD.

. 1. GOD having produced Man (and all the World) by his Power, Understanding
and Will, is by immediate resultancy Related to him as his CREATOR.

Though he made his Body of pre-existent Matter, yet was that Matter made of
nothing; and therefore God is properly Man's CREATOR, and not his Fabricator
only. And a CREATURE is a Relation, which infers the Correlate, a CREATOR,
as a Son does a Father. This therefore is Gods first grand Relation unto Man,
which has no cause to produce it, but his actual Creation, which is its
fundamentum.

. 2. This Grand prime Relation, infers a Trinity of Grand Relations, viz.
That God is our OWNER, our RVLER, and our BENEFACTOR, of which we are now to
speak in order.

That these Three are justly distinguished from each other, is past doubt to
all that understand what is meant by the terms. An Owner as such is not a Ruler
or Benefactor, a Ruler as such is not an Owner or a Benefactor. A Benefactor as
such is neither an Owner nor a Ruler. And the enumeration is sufficient: All
humane affairs, or actions of converse and society, belong to Man in one of
these three Relations, or such as are subordinate to them, and mere dependents
on them, or compounded of them. They are in some respect the Genera, and in
some as it were the Elements of all other Relations. And from the manner of
men, they are applied to God, with as much propriety of speech, as any terms
that man can use concerning him. And he that could draw a true scheme or method
of the Body of Morality (or Theology, for all is one with me) would reduce all
the dealings of God with Man, which are subsequent to the fundamental Act of
Creation, to these three Relations; and accordingly distinguish of them all:
Yet in the Mixed acts, (as most are such) distinguishing only of the compounding
Elements (I mean, the interest of these three Relations, as making up the
several acts.)

. 3. A full Owner or Proprietor, is called Dominus in the strictest sense, and
is one that has a Jus possidendi, disponendi, and utendi; a right of having or
possessing, disposing and using, without any copartner, or superior Proprietor,
to restrain him.

The meaning is better known by the bare terms of denomination, through common
use, than by definition. We know what it means, when a man says of any
thing, It is mine own: There are defective half-proprieties, of Copartners,
and subordinate Proprietors, which belong not to our present case. The word
Dominus, and Dominuim, is sometime taken laxely, as comprehending both
Propriety and Rule; and sometime improperly, for Government or Command it self:
But among Lawyers it is most commonly taken properly and strictly for an OWNER
as such: But lest any be contentious about the use of the word, I here put
instead of it, the word Owner and Proprietor, as being more free from ambiguity.

Those writers who confound Propriety and Government under the word Dominion,
and then bestow long and sharp disputes on the question, what is the
fundamentum of Gods dominion, do but delude the ignorant, and exercise the
patience or contempt of the intelligent,
. 4. GOD is jure Creationis and Conservationis, the most absolute Owner or
Proprietor of Man, and the whole Creation.

It is not possible that there should be a more full and certain title to
propriety, than Creation, and total conservation is. He that gives the World
all its Being, and that of nothing, and continues that being, and was beholden
to no pre-existent matter, nor to any coordinate concause, nor dependent on
any superior cause in his causation, but is himself the first independent,
efficient, total cause of being and well-being, and all the means thereto, must
needs be the absolute Owner of all, without the least limitation or exception.

It is not the supereminency of Gods nature, excelling all created beings, that
is the foundation of this his Propriety in the creature. For Excellency is no
title to Propriety. And yet he that is unicus in capacitate possidendi, that is
so transcendently excellent as to have no Copartner in a claim, might by
Occupation be sole Proprietor, in that kind of Propriety secundum quid, which
Man is capable of: Because there is no other whom he can be said to wrong. But
GOD has a more plenary title by Creation, to Absolute Propriety.

. 5. Therefore it belongs to GOD to be the Absolute Disposer of all things:
To do with them what he please: and to use them to the pleasure of his will.

Every one may do with his own what he list, except the propriety be but
limited, and dependent on another, or but secundum quid. Who should interpose
and any way hinder God, from the free disposal of his own? Not any Copartner,
for there is none. Nor the Creature it self, because it is absolutely His.

. 6. Therefore also (in hoc instanti, antecedently to any further Relation or
Covenant) it is not possible for God to do wrong to his Creature, howsoever he
shall use it: Because it is absolutely his own, and he owes it nothing: And
where there is no Debitum, there is no Jus, and can be no Injuria.

It is to be remembered that I speak not here of God as now related to the
Rational creature as a Rector and a Benefactor, and as having declared his own
will in his Laws or Promises, to the contrary. But I speak of God only in the
Relation of a Proprietor simply in it self considered, and so of his Absolute
right, and not his Ordinate will (as it is commonly called). No man need to
fear lest God should deal unequally with him, or contrary to that which true
Reason calls Justice. For God having made himself Rector of the World, has,
as it were, obliged himself, that is, declared his will, to deal equally with
all men, and judge them according to their works: And so has created a
Debitum, and Jus to man, which infers a certain Justice on Gods part. But
considering him only in this first Relation, merely, ut Dominus absolutus, or
Proprietor, it is not possible for any thing that he can do, to be an injury: A
mere corporal pain (including no contradiction or error, as consciences
accusation of the innocent, does) could be no wrong: There being less
appearance of reason to call it wrong, than for my burning my Wood, or plucking
a Rose to be a wrong: For it is not the Pain of one that can make it an injury,
any more than the destruction of the other: where there is no Jus, there can be
no Injuria: And where there is no Debitum there is no Jus. My Rose has
possession of its life, but no Right to it: Therefore it is no wrong to destroy
it. And yet in this, and in the killing of Birds, and Beasts and Fishes, and
laboring my Horse and Ox in continual weariness and pain, my borrowed
half-propriety secundum quid, excuses me from doing them any wrong: Which Gods
Absolute Propriety will do much more unquestionably by him.

. 7. Though all Gods Three Essential Principles or Faculties, Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, appear in each of his Three grand Relations, Owner, Ruler, and
Benefactor; yet each one of these has most eminently some one of Gods
Essential principles or faculties appearing in it: viz. His Power most
appears in his Propriety, his Wisdom in his Rule, and his Goodness or Love in
his benefits given us.

Therefore Propriety resulteth immediately from Creation, as producing the
Creature as a Creature; but so does not Government, as we shall see anon. And
as Omnipotency is the most eminent Attribute in the Creation, so is it in that
Absolute Propriety of the Creator, acquired by it.

CHAP. VII. I. Of Man's Relation to God his OWNER.
Prima pietat's magistra natura est. Cic.
. 1. GOD being our undoubted, absolute OWNER, it follows undeniably that we
are His own.

The Relations are mutual, and the thing needs no proof.

Omnis est Deorum vita beata, hominem autem quatenus in ea lucet quoddam ejus
actionis exemplat. Aristot. Eth. 10. c. 8.
. 2. Therefore Man being an intelligent Creature, that can know this his
Relation to his Maker, is bound by Nature to consent to it, and absolutely
resign himself to the will, dispose and use of his Creator.

For there is nothing more reasonable, than that every one should have his own:
And the Understanding of man should conceive of things as they are, and the
Will of man should consent to his Makers Interest and right, or else it were
most crooked, irregular and unjust. Therefore it must needs be the duty of
every reasonable Creature to bethink him, that GOD is his absolute Owner, and
thereupon to make a deliberate resolved RESIGNATION of himself to GOD, without
any exceptions or reserves. Agri ne consecrentur Platoni assentior: qui his
fere verbis utitur: Terra igitur, ut focus, domicilium sacrum omnium Deorum
est: Quocirca nequis iterum idem consecrato. Aurum autem and argentum in
urbibus and privatim and in fanis, invidiosa res est: Cicer. de leg. l. 2. p.
245.


. 3. Therefore man should labor to know wherein he may be most useful to his
Maker's Interest, (which is his Pleasure in our perfection) and therein he
should willingly and joyfully lay out himself.

For it is undeniable that God should be served with his Own, and that entirely
without dividing: for we are not in part, but wholly his.

. 4. Therefore no man can have any propriety in himself, but what is derived
from his Absolute Lord, and stands in full subordination to his propriety.

For there can be but one full and absolute Proprietor. I can have no other
propriety in my self, but by derivation and trust from my Creator.

. 5. Therefore also no creature can have any Propriety in another creature, but
only derivatively, subordinate, and secundum quid.

No Parent has any propriety in his Children, nor the most absolute and potent
Prince in his People, but as God's Stewards under him; no not in themselves,
and therefore not in others. And a Steward has no propriety in his Master's
goods, but derivative, dependent, subordinate and improper, and only the usum,
fructuum, and such possession as is necessary thereto, and such an imperfect
propriety as will justify that possession.

. 6. And as I am not my Own, so nothing is properly my own which I possess, but
all that I have is God's as well as I.

For no man can have more title to any thing else than to himself. He that is
not Owner of himself, is Owner of Nothing. And we have not any thing, nor can
have, which is not as much from God as we, and therefore is not as much his.

. 7. Therefore no man should repine at God's disposal of him, but all men
should acquiesce in the disposing-will of God.

For it is unreasonable and unjust to murmur at God, for doing as he list with
his own, and using any thing to his ends.

. 8. And therefore all men should avoid all selfish affections, and partiality,
and be more affected with God's interest than their own.

For we are not so much our Own as his, and our interest is not considerable in
comparison of his.

. 9. Therefore no man should do any thing for selfish ends, which is injurious
to the will and interest of God, our absolute Owner.

. 10. And therefore no man should dispose of his Estate, or any thing he has,
in any way, but for the interest of his absolute Lord.

. 11. And therefore all men should make it the very care and labor of their
lives, to serve the will and interest of this their absolute Owner.

. 12. And therefore no man should prefer the will or interest of the greatest
mortal man, or the dearest friend, before the will and interest of God.

. 13. Nor should the public interest of States or Kingdoms be pleaded against
his will and interest.

But yet we must take heed how we oppose or neglect this last especially,
because the will of God does take most pleasure in the public or common
benefit of his creatures; and therefore these two are very seldom separated:
nor ever at all as to their real good, though as to carnal, lower good, it may
so fall out.

All these are so plain, that to stand to prove or illustrate them, were but to
be unnecessarily and unprofitably tedious.

. 14. It being a God of infinite Wisdom and Goodness, as well as power, who is
our Owner, his Title to us is a great consolation to the upright.

For as he has taught men (and bruits too) to love their Own, it intimates
that he will not despise his Own: and therefore his interest in us is our
comfort.

. 15. No man is capable of giving any thing properly to God, but only by
obediential reddition of his own: no nor to man, but as God's Steward, and
according to our propriety, secundum quid, in respect to other Claimers.

CHAP. VIII. II. Of GOD's Relation to Man as his Governor.
Stoici dicunt Mundum regi and administrari secundum mentem and providentiam.
Laert. in Zenone.

Note, that all Cicero's unanswerable reasons for the Law of Nature, lib. de
Leg. prove, that God governs us by Laws: For the Law of Nature is God's Law,
who is the Maker of Nature.


sect;. 1. GOD having made Man a rational free Agent, and sociable, among
sensible Objects, and out of sight of his invisible Creator, and so infirm and
defectible, it follows necessarily, that he is a creature which must be
governed by moral means, and not only moved by natural necessitation as
inanimates and bruits.

The thing that I am first to prove, is, That Man's Creator has made him such
a creature, whose nature requires a Government; that he has a necessity of
Government, and an aptitude to it.

By Government I mean, the exercise of the moral means of Laws and Execution,
by a Ruler, Omnium quae in hominum doctorum disputatione versantur, nihil est
profecto praestabilius, quam plane intelligi nos ad justitiam esse natos; neque
opinione sed natura, constitutum esse jus. Id jam patebit, si hominum inter
ipsos societatem conjunctionemque prospexeris, etc. Cicer. de Leg. 1. page 221.
for the right ordering of the Subjects actions, to the good of the Society,
and the honor of the Governor.

I distinguish Laws from all mere natural motions and necessitation: for though
analogically the Shepherd is said to rule his Sheep, and the Rider his Horse,
yea, and the Pilot his Ship, and the Plowman his Plow, and the Archer his
Arrow: yet this is but equivocally called Government, and is not that which we
here mean, which is the proposal of duty, seconded with rewards or punishment
for the neglects, by those in authority, for the right governing of those that
are committed to their care and trust. So that it is not all moral means
neither which is called Government, for the instruction or persuasion of an
Equal is not such. Laws, and Judgment, and Execution are the constitutive parts
of Government. But by Laws I mean the whole kind, and not only written Laws,
nor those only which are made by Sovereign Rulers of Commonwealths, which by
excellency are called Laws: but I mean, The signification of the will of a
Governor, making the subjects duty, and determining of Rewards to the
obedient, and punishments to the disobedient. Or, [An authoritative
constitution de debito officii, praemii and poenae, for the ends of
Government.] So that as Parents, and Tutors, and Masters, do truly govern as
well as Kings; so they have truly Laws, though not in such eminency as the Laws
of Republics. The will of a Parent, a Tutor, or Master, manifested concerning
duty, is truly a Law to a Child, a Scholar, or a Servant. If any dislike the
use of the word [Law] in so large a sense, it suffices now for me to tell them
in what sense I use it, and so it will serve to the understanding of my mind. I
take it for such an Instrument of Government. The parts of it are, 1. The
constituting of the debitum officii, or what shall be due from the Subject. 2.
The constituting the debitum praemii vel poenae, or what shall be due to the
Subject, which is in order to the promoting of obedience, though as to the
performances obedience may be in order to the reward. Now that man is a
creature made to be governed, by such a proper moral Government, I prove.

1. The several parts of Government are necessary, therefore Government is
necessary. From all the parts of Government to the whole, Si leges abregantur
and curvis licentia faciendi quicquid voluerit data sit, non solum Respub.
pessum ibit, sed nec quicquam intererit inter nostram and ferarum vitam.
Demest. Or. 2. cont. Aristog.
is an unquestionable consequence. It is necessary that man have Duty
prescribed and imposed; else man shall have nothing which he ought to do: Take
away Duty, and we are good for nothing, nor have any employment fit for reason:
And take away all Reward and Punishment, and you take away Duty in effect;
experience teaches us that it will not be done, for a rational agent will have
ends and motives for what he does.

2. From the imbecility of our younger state: so weak is our infant
understanding, Bonis legibus, honestorum studiorum aemalatione pia, ^emperans,
justa, and re bellica praestans civitas redditur. Dio^. H^l. c. l. 4.
and so strong our sensitive inclination, that if Parents should leave all
their Children ungoverned, abused Reason would make man worse than beasts.

3. From the common infirmity and badness of all the world. The wise are so
few, and the ignorant so many, that if all the ignorant were left ungoverned to
do what they list, they would be like an Army of blind men in a fight,
Modesliam quandam cognitio re: n^ coelest* u^n assert is, qui videant quanta
sit etiam apud Deos moderatio, quantas ordo; and magnitudinem animi, Deorum
opera and facta cementibu^. Justitiam etiam, cum cognitum habeas, quid sit
fummi RECTORIS and DOMINI numen, ^uod consilium, quae voluntas, cujus ad
naturam apta ratio vera illa and summa Lex a Philosophis dicitur. Cicer. de
Finib. l. 4 p. 156.
or like a world of men bewildred in the dark. What a confused loathsome
spectacle would the world be? and the rather because men are bad as well as
foolish. Would all the sensual vicious persons in the world be ordered like
men, without any Government, by such as are wiser than themselves?

4. From the power of sensitive objects: The baits of sense are so numerous, so
near and so powerful, that they would bear down reason in the most, without the
help of Laws: nay, Laws themselves, even of God and Man, do so little with the
most, as tell us what they would be without them.

5. The variety of men's minds and interests and dispositions is such, as that
the world ungoverned would be utterly in confusion: as many minds and ways as
men. No two men are in all things of the same apprehensions.

6. From the nature of man's powers: He is a noble creature, and therefore has
answerable ends to be attained, and therefore must have the conduct of
answerable means. He is a rational free Agent, and therefore must have his End
and Means proposed to his Reason, and is not to be moved by Sense alone; his
chiefest End as well as his chief Governor, being out of his sight.

7. The experience of all mankind constrains them to consent to this, that
Man is a creature made for Government. Therefore even among Cannibals, Parents
govern their Children, and Husbands govern their Wives; and in all the rational
world, there are Rulers and Subjects, Masters and Servants, Tutors and
Scholars, which all are Governors or Governed. Few men are to be found alive
on earth, who would have all men, or any men save themselves ungoverned.
Otherwise Men would be worse to Men, I say not, than Serpents, and Toads, and
Tigers are to one another, but than any of them are to men. Every man that had
strength and opportunity, would make a prey of the life or welfare of his
brother. Men's own necessity forces them every where to set up Governments,
that they may not live as in a continual war, in danger and fear of one
another; nay, a war that is managed by Armies, is also ordered by Government,
because many must agree for mutual defense: but else, every man would be
against another, and they would be as so many fighting Cocks or Dogs, every one
would fight or fly for himself; for fighting or flying, injuring and being
injured would be all their lives.

He that denies Man to be a Creature made for Government, and consequently
denies God's Government of the world, by Moral proper Government, does own all
these absurdities, (which elsewhere I have heretofore enumerated.)

1. He denies that there is a God: for to be GOD includeeth to be Governor of
the Rational world.

2. He denies that Man Owes any Duty to God or Man: for where there is no
Government, there is no proper Duty.

3. He denies the Justice of God: for Justice is the attribute of a Governor,
that is, distributive Justice, which we speak of: for commutative Justice God
cannot exercise toward Man, because of our great inferiority to him.

4. He denies all the Laws of Nature: for where there is no Government, there
are no Laws.

5. He denies the Virtue of Obedience, and all other Virtues concatenated with
it: for where there is no Government, Fundamentum libertatis, fons aequitatis,
men's and animus and consilium, sententia civitatis posita in legibus. Cic.
there is no Obedience.

6. He denies that there is any such a thing as sin, or any fault against God
or Man: for where there is no Government, there is no transgression. Both the
vicious Habits and the Acts, Atqui si natura confirmatum jus non erit, virtutes
omnes tollantur: ubi enim liberalitas? ubi patriae caritas? ubi pietas? ubi aut
been merendi de altero, aut referendae gratiae voluntas, poterit existere? Nam
haec nascuntur ex co qued natura propensi sumus ad diligendos homines, quod
fundamentum juris est. Neque solum in homines obsequia, sed etiam in Deos
Ceremoniae Religionesque tolluntur, quas non metu, sed ea conjunctione, quae
est homini cum Deo, conservandas puto. Cic. de leg. 1. p. 225.
will have no more crime than the poison of a Toad.

7. And then no man should forbear any act as sinful or criminal.

8. Nor should any persons reprove sin in others, nor exhort them from it.

9. Nor should any one confess any sin, or repent of it, (because it is not.)

10. Nor should any man ask forgiveness of any crime of God or Man.

11. Nor should any man thank God for the pardon of his sin.

12. It will follow that there is no moral difference between men or actions,
as Good and bad, but all are alike, what ever they be or do.

13. He denies all God's Judgments, and all his Rewards and Punishments; for
these are all of them acts of Government.

14. It will follow, that every man should do what his list.

15. And that all Parents may forbear the government of their Children, and all
Masters of their Servants, and Governors of their Families.

16. It treasonably subverteth all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and denies that
there should be any Kings or Subjects.

17. It denies all humane Justice, because it denies humane Government.

18. It makes Man a Beast, who is incapable of Moral Government.

19. It makes him far worse than a Beast, as corruption optimi est pessima: for
a Beast has an analogical improper government by Man, but Man must have such
as moves him rationally, according to his nature, or he must have none at all.
And it would banish all Order, Duty and Virtue out of the world, and make Earth
somewhat worse than Hell, which is not wholly destitute of Government.

20. But the best of it is, while it nullifieth Right and Wrong, it infers,
that whosoever shall beat or hang the owners of this Doctrine do them no wrong,
nor offend any Laws of God or Man: For if there be no Government, there is no
Transgression; and if they are Bruits, they may be used as Bruits, who are
incapable of Titles, Rights, Inheritances, or of any plea as against an injury.

. 2. Man being made a Creature to be governed, it thence follows, that his
Creator must needs be his Sovereign Governor, as being only fit, and having in
his Propriety, the only Right. Mundus Numine regitur, estque quasi communis
urb* and civitas hominum. Cicero 2 de finib.


1. A Governor he must have; for there is no Government nor governed, without
a Governor. 2. If there be never so many Inferior Governors, there must be
some Supreme: Or else each one would be absolutely Supreme, and none Inferior.
But I will first prove that God is Man's Sovereign, Nec solum jus a natura
dijudicatur, sed omnino omnia honesta and turpia: Nam and communis
intelligentia nobis nota res edicit; easque in animis nostris inchoavit, ut
^onesta in virtute ponantur, in vitiis turpia. Haec autem in opinione
existimare, non in natura ponere, dementis est. Nam and nec arboris, nec equi
virtus, quae dicitur in quo abutimur nomine, in opinione sita est sed in
natura. Cicero de leg. 1. p. 225.
and then show the foundation of his right, and of this Relation.

The only objection made against it, consists of these two parts: 1. That God
moves man effectually per modum naturae as an Engineer; and that this is more
excellent than Moral Government. 2. And that Moral Government being a less
effectual way, is committed to Angels and to Men, viz. Kings, and States, and
Magistrates, who are sufficient to perform it.

This Objection confesses the Government of one man over others, but denies
the Government of God over Man, and instead of it substituteth his mere
Physical motion, or natural Government, such as a Pilot uses to his Ship. I
shall therefore against it prove, that not only Man but God, does exercise this
proper Moral Government, by Laws, and Executions, and not a Physical motion
only.

. 3. I GOD has de facto made Laws for Mankind: Therefore he is their
Governor by Laws.

The consequence is undeniable: The antecedent I further prove.

. 4. He that does by authoritative constitution of Duty, oblige Man to
obedience, does make Laws for him, and Govern him by Laws: But God does by
authoritative Constitution of duty, oblige man to obedience: Rerum natura male
administrari non vult: and multorum dominatus and principatus non est utilis:
unus ergo sit Princeps. Aristot. lib. ^ 11. Metaph. c. 10.
Therefore he makes Laws for him, and rules him thereby.

The Major is not to be denied; for it only asserteth the Name from the
Definition: The authoritative appointment of the Debitum Officii, obliging to
obedience, is the definition of Legislation, as to its first and principal act;
which the appointment of the debitum praemii vel poenae follows. And I think
that the interest of Mankind will not suffer him to be so erroneous as to deny
the Minor: I think few will believe that there is no such thing as a Law of
Nature made by the God of Nature; Quod in navi Gubernator, quod in curru
agitator, quod in Choro praecentor, quod denique lex in Civitate, and dux in
exercitu, hoc Deus est in M^ndo. Aristot. de Mund. c. 6.
or that there is no such thing as Duty incumbent on Man from God; and so no
such thing as an accusing or excusing Conscience: Few persons will believe,
that it is no duty of Parents to nourish their Children, or no crime to murder
them: Or that it is no duty for Children to be thankful to their Parents, and
to love them, or no sin to hate, or scorn, or kill them: Few Kings will
believe, that it is no duty toward God, for their Subjects to obey them, and
no crime to rebel or murder them; and that Conscience has nothing to say
against him for such things, that can but escape the judgment and revenge of
man: And few Subjects will believe, that it is no crime for a Prince to oppress
them, in their liberties, estates and lives: And few neighbors will think that
he is innocent before God, who beats them, or sets fire on their Houses,
or murdereth their children or other Relations. If man be under no duty to God,
and if nothing that he can do is a sin against God, what a thing will Man be,
and what a Hell will Earth be? Deny the Law of Nature, and you turn men loose
to every villainy; and engage the World to destroy it self, and set all as on
fire about their ears.

For if God only move us Physically, there is neither virtue nor vice, good nor
evil, in a moral sense: But what God moves a man to, that he will do, and what
he does not move him to, he will not do; and so there being only motion and no
motion, action and no action, there will be no Duty and no obligation, and so
no Moral good or evil.

. 5. II. If God should Rule us only by Physical motion, and not by Laws, he
should not rule man as man, according to his Nature: But God does rule man
according to his Nature: Therefore not only by Physical motion.

Otherwise Man should not differ from Inanimates and Bruits. Est enim virtus
perfecta ratio, quod certe in natura est. Cicero de leg. 1. p. 226.
A stone is to be moved Physically, and a Bruit by the necessitating objects of
sense: But Man has Reason, which they have not, and he is a free Agent: And
therefore though God concur to his Physical motion as such, yet he must move
him as Rational, by such objects, and such proposals, and arguments, and means,
as are suited to Reason. By presenting things absent to his understanding, to
prevail against the sense of things present; and by teaching him to prefer
greater things before lesser; and by showing him the commodity and
discommodity, which should move him; God would not have made him Rational, if
he would not have Governed him accordingly.

. 6. III. If the way of physical motion alone, is not so excellent and suitable
as the way of Moral Government by Laws also, then God does not only move man
physically, and leave it to Magistrates to Rule as Morally: But the antecedent
is true: Therefore so is the Consequent.

God does not omit the more excellent, and choose a lower way of Government,
and leave the more excellent way to man. And that the Minor is true appears
thus. The way which is most suitable to the object or subject of Government is
the most excellent way: But such is the Moral way by Laws: The other Beasts are
as capable subjects of as men, and Trees as either. Wisdom and Justice are
eminently glorified in the Moral way: And Omnipotency it self also appears in
Gods making of so noble a Creature, as is governable by Reason without Force.

. 7. IV. If God were not the Sovereign Ruler of the World, there could be no
Government of men's hearts: But there is a government of hearts: Therefore God
is the Ruler of the World.

Man knows not the Hearts of those whom he governs: And therefore he can
take no cognizance of heart-sins or duties, unless as they appear in words or
deeds: And therefore he makes no Law for the government of hearts. But the
Heart is the Man: and a bad heart is the fountain of bad words or acts, and is
it self polluted, before it endeavors the injury of others. He that thinks
all indifferent that is within him, is himself so bad, that it is the less
wonder if being so indifferent, yea so vitiated within, he think nothing evil
which he has a mind to do. He that thinks that the heart is as good and
innocent which hates his God, his King, his Friend, his Parents, as that which
loves them, and that it is no duty to have any good thought or affection, but
only for the outward actions sake; nor any sin to be malicious, covetous,
proud, deceitful, lustful, impious, and unjust, in his cogitations,
contrivances, and desires, unless as they appear in the acts, does show that he
has himself a heart, which is too suitable to such a Doctrine. But Nature has
taught all the World, to judge of men by their Hearts, as far as they can know
them, and not to take the Will, which is the first seat of Moral Good or Evil,
to be capable of neither Good nor Evil. Therefore seeing Hearts must be under
Government, it must not be man, but the heart-searching God, that must be their
Governor.

. 8. V. If God were not the Governor of the World, all earthly Sovereigns
would be themselves ungoverned: But they are not ungoverned: Therefore God is
their Governor, and so the Governor of the World.

What Cicero de leg. 3. says, that He must first learn to Obey who will learn
to Govern, is true in respect of obedience to God.
The Kings and States that have Sovereign power through all the World, are under
no humane Government at all. Though some of them are limited by Contracts with
their people. But none have so much need to have the benefit of
Heart-government; none have so strong Temptations as they; And no men's actions
are of so great importance, to the welfare or misery of the World. If the
Monarchs of the Earth do take themselves to be left free by God to do what they
list; what work will be made among the people? If they think it no duty to be
just, or merciful, or chaste, or temperate, what wonder if they be unjust and
cruel, and filthy, and luxurious, and use the People for their own ends and
lusts, and esteem them as men do their Dogs or Horses, that are to be used for
their own pleasure or commodity. What is the present calamity of the World, but
that the Heathen and Infidel Rulers of the World are so ignorant, and sensual,
and have cast off the fear of God, and the sense of his Government, in a great
degree; when yet most of them have some conviction that there is a God, who
Rules all, and to whom they must be accountable: What then would they be, if
they once believed that they are under no Government of God at all. If they
should oppress their Subjects, and murder the innocent, it would be no fault:
For where there is no Government and Law there is no transgression: No one
forbids it to them, and none commands them the contrary if God do not: For
the people are not the Rulers of their Rulers, nor give them Laws: Quae Lex est
recta ratio imperandi atque prohibendi: Quam qui ignorant, is est injustus, sive
est illa scripta uspiam, sive nuspiam. Quod si justitia est obtemperatio
scriptis legibus, institutisque populorum, etsi, ut iidem dicunt, utilitate
omnia metienda sunt, negliget leges, easque perrumpet, si poterit, is qui sibi
eam rem fructuosam putabit fore. Cicero de leg. 1. p. 225.
And Neighbor Princes and States are but Neighbors: Therefore if they should
sacrifice peace and honesty, liberties, lives and Kingdoms to their lusts, no
man could say, They do amiss, or violate any sort of Law.

Obj. But the fear of Rebellions, and the peoples vindicating their liberties
would restrain them.

Answ. Only so far as they feel themselves unable to do hurt: As a man is
restrained from killing Adders lest they sting him: And the advantage of their
place does usually empower them, to make desolations, if they have a mind to
it. And great minds will not easily bear a popular restraint: And indeed the
honester and better any people are, the more undisposed are they to rebel: And
therefore Tyrants may with smallest danger and fear destroy them.

Obj. But their own interest lies in the peoples welfare; and therefore there
is no danger of such miseries.

Ans. Did Nero think so, that wished Rome had but one neck; that set the City
on fire, that he might sing over it Homers Poem of the flames of Troy? that
ripped up his own Mother, that he might see the place where once he lay? Did
Caligula think so? Did Commodus, Caracalla, Heliogabalus, think so? Did the
Spaniards think so by the Indians, who are said by their own Writers, to have
murdered in forty two years space, no less than fifty millions of them? Did
King Philip think so, who put his own Son and Heir to death, by the
Inquisition? besides so many thousands more in Spain and the Low Countries, by
that and other ways? How full of such bloody instances is the World. If it
were a Tyrants interest that kept him under some moderation to the people of
his own Dominions, it might yet possibly leave him a bloody destroyer of other
Nations, in his Conquests. The World has not wanted men that think the lives
of many thousands, a little sacrifice to a proud design, or furious passion;
and are no more troubled at it, than a Pythagorean would be to kill a Bird. It
has had such as Sylla, Messala, Catiline, and the Conquerours of Jerusalem,
who as Josephus says, crucified so many thousands, till they wanted Crosses
for men, and place for Crosses, besides the greater numbers famished.

Obj. But if Chief Governors be under no Law, they are under Covenants, by
which they are obliged.

Answ. What shall make their Covenants obligatory to their consciences, if they
be under no government of God? The reason why men's Covenants bind them, is,
because they are under the government of God, who requires all men to keep
their Covenants, and condemns Covenant-breakers. But if God had never
commanded Covenant-keeping, nor forbad Covenant Breaking, they could never be
matter of duty or sin. So that this Doctrine, that God has made no Laws for
man, and is not his Governor, does leave all Sovereigns from under the least
conscientious restraint from any acts of cruelty or injustice, and tends to
deliver up the world to be a sacrifice to their lusts: when it is the
government of the universal Sovereign that is their restraint.

There is scarce any thing that the world needs so much as good Governors,
nor that is a greater blessing to them: Which Diogenes intimated when he was to
be sold, and bid the Crier cry, Who will buy him a Master: and when they asked
him what he could do, he said, He could tell how to command or rule men. Laert.
in Diog.

Dicebatque cum intueretur in vita gubernatores, medicos, and philosophos,
animalium omnium sapientissimum, hominem esse: cum autem inspiceret somniotum
interpretes, conjectores, vates, vel qui gloriae aut divit^is addicti essent,
tunc demum nihil se stultius existimare homine. Id. ibid.


. 9. VI. If God have not the Sovereignty over all the world, then no man on
earth can have any Governing Power: But Princes and Rulers have a Governing
Power: Therefore the Sovereignty is in God.

The reason of the major is, because Kings can have no power but what they
receive from some or other: there is no effect without a cause. And if they
receive it, it is either from God or Man as the Original. Not from Man, for the
people themselves have no governing power to use or give, as to the government
of Commonwealths: for their personal power over themselves is of another
species, and comes short of this in many respects, (as elsewhere I have
proved): And if it were otherwise, yet they have nothing themselves but
derivatively from God, as is proved before: and therefore they themselves must
have their power from him, from whom they are, and have all that they possess:
But God cannot give that which he has not himself, either formally or
eminently: Therefore he has governing power formally or eminently, or else no
Prince, or Man, or Angel can have any, no more than they can have being or
reason without him. And though his power be transcendent, his exercise of it
must be according to the capacity of the subject: and therefore morally by Laws
and Executions. So that as all things else in the creature are derived, so is
power. And as in beings, aut Deus aut nihil is an undeniable truth, so as to
governing power, or Sovereignty, either it is, Primitively, Supremely and
Transcendently in God, or there is none in any Prince or Parents: for if they
have it not from Him, they can have none at all.

Obj. Governing by Laws is caused by humane impotency, Cicero, de Leg. r.
proves, That Right is founded in the Law of Nature, more than in Man's Laws;
because, else (says he) men may make evil good, and good evil; and make
Adultery, Perjury, etc. just, by making a Law for them.] A cursed consequence,
which the Atheist cannot deny upon his Principles.

Quod si populorum jussis, si Principum decretis, si sententiis judicum jura
constituerentur, jus esset latrocinari, jus adulterare, jus testamenta falsa
supponere, si haec suffragiis, aut scitis multitudinis probarentur. Quae si
tanta potentia stultorum sententiis atque jussis, ut eorum suffragiis rerum
natura vertatur, cur non sanciunt, at quae mala perniciosaque sunt habeantur
pro bonis and salutaribus. Aut cur cum jus ex injuria facere Lex possit, bonum
eadem facere non potest ex malo. Atqui nos Legem bonam a mala, nulla alia nisi
naturali norma dividere possumus. Cicer. de Leg. 1. p. 225.


because man is not every where present, nor of power to effect himself in and
by others, all the things which he commands: But were man Omnipresent and
Omnipotent as God is, he would make all men do well, and not command them to do
it: Therefore it is so in the Government of God.

Answ. It is granted that man is impotent, and God Omnipotent, and Omnipresent,
and therefore that God could indeed do as is here intimated, even make all men
do well, and not command it: But, 1. it is apparent, that de facto he does not
so. 2. And his wisdom being more eminently to be manifested in the work of
Government than his Omnipotency, does show us partly, why he does not so, even
because the sapiential way is more suitable to his ends and to the subject.
Creation did most eminently glorify (or manifest) Omnipotency; Government does
most eminently glorify God's Omniscience or Wisdom, as our Perfection or
Glorification will most eminently manifest, and glorify his Love and Goodness.
Each Attribute shines most eminently in its proper work: and man's conceits
must not confound this perfect order.

Yet let it be here noted, that all this while I meddle not with the
controversy of the Liberty of man's will; and so, whether God's sapiential
government by Laws, do operate also by necessitation, and Physical causation,
as the natural motions of the Orbs, or the artificial motions of an Engine. I
only argue, that whether God thus operate by his Government by secret
necessitation or not, yet it is most certain, that he governs Morally, and
uses the Means of Doctrine, Laws and Judgments: which might consist with
Physical necessitating efficacy in all that do obey indeed, if God's wisdom,
and man's freedom of will did infer nothing to the contrary. But if it had
been granted, that all God's government is by Physical efficacy, it would stand
good nevertheless, that Laws and Judgment are part of the means which he makes
so effectual. But yet I shall go further in the next Argument.

. 10. VII. Experience satisfies all the rational world, that there is, de
facto, a course of Duty appointed by God for men, which they do not eventually
fulfill. Therefore there is not only a Moral Government, which is effectual, but
also which is separated from necessitating efficacy.

They that deny this, and plead for Physical Government only, must affirm, that
nothing is any man's Duty, but what he actually performs: and that nothing is
any man's sin which he does, or omitteth to do; that is, that there is no sin
or moral evil in the world: For all that God Physically effects is good; and
they suppose him to have no Law which commands any thing but what he
Physically effects, and he will not Physically effect that which he
forbids. And if there be no such thing as moral evil or sin in the world,
then no man should fear any, or avoid any! Let but a man leave any thing
undone* (if it be nourishing his children, defending his King, loving God or
man) and he may thence conclude that it never was his duty: Let him but do any
thing that he has a mind to, (if it be killing Father or Mother, or his Prince
or Friend) and he may be sure that it is no sin, because he has done it; for
if God forbid it not, it is no sin: nay, he may make it an effect of God's
government. But this consequence is so false and horrid, that no Nation on
earth receives it, and Cannibals themselves abhor it, who eat not their
friends, but strangers and enemies.

Stoici dicunt, sinceros esse sapientes, observareque and cavere solicit, ne
quid de se melius quam sit commendare putemur, fuco seu art aliqua mala
occultante, and bona quae insunt apparere faciente, ac circumcidere vocis omnem
fictionem. Laert. in Zenone.
. 11. VIII. If God be not the Governor of the world by Laws, then no man need
to fear or avoid any thing forbidden by the Laws of Man, who can either keep it
secret by Wit, or keep himself from humane revenge by Power. But the consequent
is false: therefore so is the Antecedent.

The reason of the consequence is evident; because, where no humane revenge is
to be feared, there no punishment at all is to be feared, if God be no
Governor of the world: but those that can hide their actions by craft, or make
them good by power, need not fear any humane revenge; therefore they need to
fear none at all, upon the Atheists grounds. And if that be so, 1. How easy is
it for cunning malice to burn a As London now is.
Town, to kill a King, to poison wife or children, and to defraud a neighbor,
and never be discovered? If this be so, then Thieves, Adulterers, Traitors,
when they are detected, have failed only in point of wit, Tutum aliqua res in
mala conscientia praestat, nulla securum. Putat enim etiamsi non deprehenditur
posse se deprehendi: and inter somnos movetur, and quoties alicujus scelus
loquitur, de suo cogitat Sen. ep. 106.

Prima and maxima peccantium poena est peccasse: Haec and secundae poenae
premunt and sequuntur, timere semper and expavescere and securitati diffidere.
Id. ep. 47.

Mihi laudabiliora videntur omnia, quae sine venditatione and sine populo test
fiunt. Nullum theatrum virtuti conscientia majus est. Cicer. in Tuscul. 2. p.
268.


(that they concealed it not) and not in point of honesty and duty. 2. And then
any Rebel that can get enough to follow him, has as good a cause as the King
that he rebelleth against; and if he conquer, he need not accuse himself of
doing any wrong: And then there will be nothing for conscience to blame any man
for, nor for one man to accuse another of, but witlesness or impotency. And
then the Thief must suffer only for want of strength or cunning, and not
because he did any wrong.

. 12. IX. If there be no Government by God, there can be no true Propriety but
Strength: and he that is strongest has right to all that he can lay hold on.
But the Consequent is false: therefore so is the Antecedent.

The consequence is undeniable: for if there be no Divine Government, there is
no Law but Humane: and no man can have any Right besides Strength to make Laws
for any other whomsoever. For if God have no Government and Law, he
constituteth no Debitum vel Jus, no Dueness or Right. And man can have no Right
to govern others, if he have no Governor to give any. If God do give Right to
Govern, he thereby makes obedience to that Governor a duty: and he that
constituteth or instituteth Right and Duty, governs. And if God give men No
Right to Govern, they can have none. And then, if Strength be all their Title,
any man that can get as much Strength, does get as good a Title; and may seize
upon the Lives, the Lands and Estates of Prince or People, and give Laws to the
weaker, as others before gave Laws to him. And so there will utter confusion
and misery be let in upon the world. As in the Poet's description of the
degenerate Age, Vivitur ex raptu, non hospes ab hospite tutus, etc. Reason
would have nothing to say against strength: the great Dog would have the best
title to the bone. Melior mihi dextera lingua est.

Dummodo pugnando superem, tu vince loquendo, Ovid. Met. The honest, poor and
peaceable would have such a peace with thieves and strong ones, Cum pecore
infirmo quae solet esse lupis. Ovid.

. 13. If God govern not the world, then mere Communities are incapable of Right
or Wrong, Par and aequum Legibus acceptum far debetis. Demosth.
and no man is bound in duty to spare his brother's life or state. But the
Consequent is false: therefore so is the Antecedent.

Animal hoc providum, sagax, multiplex, acutum, memor, plenum Rationis and
consilii quem vocamus hominem, praeclara quadam condition generatum esse a
supremo Deo: solemn est enim ex tot animantium generibus and naturis particeps
Rationis and cogitationis, cum caetera sint omnia expertia. Quid est autem non
dicam in homine, sed in omni coelo, atque terra ratione divinius, quae cum
adolevit atque perfecta est, nominatur rite sapientia. Est igitur quoniam nihil
est ratione melius, eaque and in homine and in Deo, prima homini cum Deo
Rationis societas. Inter quos autem Ratio, inter cosdem recta ratio est
communis: Quae cum sit Lex, lege quoque consociati homines cum Diis putandi
sumus; Quibus autem haec sunt inter cos communia and civitatis ejusdem habendi
sunt unde universus hic Mundus una civitas communis Deorum atque hominum
existimanda. Cic. de Leg. 1. p. 219.
By a Community I mean a company of men that have yet set up no Government
among them: If God be not their Governor, such have none at all, and so are
under no moral obligation: for Covenants themselves cannot bind, if there be no
superior obligation, requiring man to stand to his Covenants.

Obj. Then God's Covenants to man do not bind him.

Answ. Not at all, by proper obligation, as if it were his Duty to keep them,
and his Sin to break them; for God is not capable of duty or sin. But yet
improperly they may be called Obligations, because they are the demonstrations
of his Will, which the perfection of his Nature will not let him violate. It
would be an imperfection, if God should break promise, though not a sin or
crime: And therefore it is impossible for God to lie.

Obj. But suppose we say, that Man is under no other obligations than a Beast;
and that among men there is no proper right or wrong, duty or fault: yet men by
confederacies, without any other Government, would settle Rules for the safety
of cohabitation and converse, and for love of themselves would forbear wronging
others. And this is all the Law of Nature that Man has above Bruits.

Answ. Those Confederacies would no further oblige them, than their Interest
required them to observe them. Still by this rule a man is left free to kill
wife and children; if he be weary of them, which no neighbor, being wronged by
none, will seem obliged to revenge: still he that is the stronger is left to do
his worst, without fault, to seize upon other men's estates, and to depose Kings
and destroy them, and all the world would be in a state of war. Or if
self-interest keep some quiet for a time, it would be but till they had
strength and opportunity to do otherwise. He is not fit for humane society, who
would tell all about him [I take my self free to defraud and murder any of you,
as soon as my own safety and interest will allow it me.] And no man that thus
takes a man for a beast, can expect any better usage than a beast himself, any
further than self-love shall restrain others from abusing him: nor can he plead
any better title to his estate, nor exemption from the violence of the
stronger. And it will also follow, that honesty is nothing but self-preserving
policy; and that blasphemy and impiety against God need not be feared or
avoided; nor any thing as a fault, but only as a folly, exposing the person
himself to danger. Incest, Perjury, Lying, might be impudencies, but not any
crimes.

Obj. If you supposed them in God, they would be but imperfections, and not
crimes, and why should you judge othewise of them in Man.

Answ. Because the absolute perfection of his Nature is instead of a Law to
God, who has no Superior. But man has a Superior, and has an imperfect
nature, which is therefore to be regulated by the wisdom and will of that
perfect Superior.

And moreover, if Man have reason and wisdom above a Beast, which makes him
capable of knowing Right and Wrong, and of being moved by the things that are
evident to reason, though not to sense; and if he be made to be governed by
Laws, (as was proved before) then he is certainly governed accordingly; or else
his nature and reason were given him in vain, which could not be by the most
wise Creator.

Obj. God governs the world as the Soul governs the Body, which is
rationally ex part animae; but not by giving reason or laws to the Body: but
despotically by the natural power of the Will.

Answ. The flesh is not capable of Laws, as having no Reason, and therefore no
proper Laws can be given to it in it self by the Soul: But the Soul is capable
of Reason, and made to be moved by proposed Reasons in a Law, and not only by
natural force as the flesh. The Government must be agreeable to the capacity of
the Subject. Though the Rider rule the Horse by a bridle and spur, and not by a
Law, it follows not that the King must not rule the Rider so. The Soul and
Body constitute one Suppositum or Man; and therefore the Body is governed by a
Law, because the Soul is so, which despotically moves it: Laws are for
distinct individuals, and not for one part of an individual to give to another
part.

Obj. If God be the constitutive Soul of the world, then he need not give it
Laws.

Answ. Because it is most certain de facto, that he does give us Laws,
therefore it is certain that he is not the constitutive Soul of the world, as
is also further proved before: though he be much more to it than a Soul.

. 14. XI. If man act, per media propter finem, and loath discerned by reason,
then he must be ruled by a Law. But the Antecedent is sure: Ergo, etc.

For the End is ever something apprehended sub ratione boni, (and the ultimate
end, sub ratione optimi possibilis:) and the Means are chosen and used, sub
ratione conducibilis, as apt to attain the End. This Means and End are not to
be discerned only by sense and imagination, as in bruits every object is
apprehended, but by reason; this Reason is defectible and liable to error, and
therefore the rational evidences must be proposed to it, and that conveniently:
For he that knows not Reason, why he should choose, refuse, or act, cannot do
it Rationally. And the Will being as apt to be seduced by the sense, Non potest
consistere Respablica, ubi non est honos virtuti, nec poena scelerosis. Demosth.
has need of due motives to determine it. Therefore there is need of the
Regulation of a Law, containing the direction of a superior wisdom, with
authority and motives of consequential Good or Evil, proposed by one that can
accomplish it.

But the whole world does so universally consent, that there is a difference
between Right and Wrong, Duty and Crimes, Good and Evil, and so a necessity of
some Government (humane at least) and that man is not like the beasts, where
strength is the only title, and good and evil is but natural, called jucundum
and utile, with their contraries, that I need not plead that part of the cause
any further, universal consent not only making it unnecessary, but also being a
valid argument against it, as proving that it is against the common reason of
Mankind, and light of Nature.

. 15. XII. If God be not the universal Governor of the world, then error,
malice, and tyranny, and selfishness will make injustice finally prosperous,
and oppressed innocence remediless. But that cannot be, as shall hereafter be
fullier made appear.

There must be some infallible Judge to pass the final sentence, and hear all
Causes, as it were, over again; and some perfect righteous Judge to set
straight, all that men's unrighteousness made crooked; or else unrighteousness
will finally prevail. And this must be God, who being the fountain of all
Government, is also the end of all.

. 16. XIII. If God be not the Supreme Universal Governor, there can be no
unity and harmony in the moral Order and Government of the World.

As all the Corporations in the Kingdom would be in continual discord with one
another, if they were not all united in one King; so would all the Kingdoms of
the World (much worse than they are) if they were not under the Government of
one God.

. 17. XIV. The last argument shall be a Jure and aptitudine: If Man be made a
Creature to be morally Governed, and the undoubted Right and Aptitude, for
supreme Government be in God alone, then God is actually the supreme Governor
of the the World: But the antecedent is true, therefore the consequent.

1. That God only is Able, is undeniable: Men can govern but their particular
Provinces or Empires: and none of them is capable of Governing all the World,
for want of Omnipresence, Omnipotency, and Omniscience: And therefore the Pope
that claims the Government of all the World, if all turn Christians, does
thereby pretend to a kind of Deity. And if Angels were proved able to govern
the Earth, it can be but as Officers, and not in absolute supremacy: Atticus in
Cicer. de leg. 1. p. 213. says, That he cannot but believe that Jus est ortum
ex natura, because of these Principles.

1. Quasi muneribus Deorum nos esse instructos and ornatos. 2. Unam esse
hominum inter ipsos vivendi parem communemque rationem. 3. Omnes inter se
naturali quadam indulgentia and benevolentia, tum etiam societate juris
contineri.


For who then shall be the Governor of them: Their being is merely derivative
and dependent; and therefore so must be their power. God only is all
sufficient, omnipresent, omnipotent, omniscient, and most good: Sufficient to
give perfect Laws to all; to execute righteous Judgment upon all; and to
protect the World as his Dominion: when Princes cannot protect one Kingdom, nor
themselves.

And Gods title and right is as undoubted as his Power: For he is Absolute
Owner of the World. And who should claim Sovereignty over him or without him,
where he is sole Proprietor. He has undoubted right to rule his own.

Obj. Propriety among men is no title to Government.

Answ. Absolute Propriety in a Governable creature, is a plenary title. But no
man has absolute Propriety in another. Yet Parents, and the Masters of Slaves,
who come nearest it, have an answerable Power of Governing them. But man's
fullest Propriety is in Bruits and Inanimates, which are not Creatures capable
of Government.

. 18. The Relation then of Sovereign King or Rector in God to man, is founded
in the forenamed Relation of a Proprietor; supposing the Aptitude of the
Subject and the Owner.

Having proved that God is the Universal King, I come to show his title to his
Kingdom ^itulus est fundamentum juris. Sovereignty or summa potestas, is Jus
supremi Regiminis. Where this Right is founded, great ignorance has made a
great controversy, the thing to men that are of competent understandings in
such subjects, being most easy and past controversy. God having made man, is
immediately his Owner, because his maker. Having made him a Rational free
Agent, and so to be Governed, he has the Jus Regendi by Immediate Resultancy
from his Absolute Propriety; supposing the Nature of the Creature, and the
Perfection of the Creator alone, which so qualify one to be a Subject, and the
other to be the Governor, that they are as it were the remoter fundamentum
Relationis. From the being of Man Hoc aliquid a Deo creatum, resulteth the
propriety of God: From the specific nature of Man, as a Rational, free,
sociaile Creature, he is by immediate Resultancy Gubernandus: and being such,
his Creator, remotely for his Infinite Perfections and sole aptitude, and
proximately, because he is Man's absolute Owner, is by Resultancy his rightful
Governor: And that he neglects not this his Right, but actually Governs
him, appears in the very making man such, and continuing him such as is made
to be Governed, See this fullyer proved in my Political Aphoris. p. 52, etc.

Videtis Magistratus hanc esse Vim, ut praesit, praescribatque recta and
utilia, and conjuncta cum legibus: ut enim magistratibus leges, ita populo
praesunt magistratus: Vereque dici potest, Magistratum esse legem loquentem,
legem autem ^n utum Magistratum. Cicer. de leg. 3. i^.


as also in his actual Laws and Judgments. This is the true and plain
resolution of the Question of the Title of God to his Kingdom, or fundamentum
of the Relation of Universal King.

. 19. Humane Government is an Ordinance of God, and Humane Governors are his
Officers as he is supreme: And he has not left it free to the World, whether
they will live in governed Societies, or not.

That Humane Government is appointed by God, appears thus: 1. In that the
light of Nature teaches it all the World. 2. In that God has put into man's
Nature a necessity of it, and therefore signified his will concerning it: It
is, needful to the very lives of men, and to their highest perfections, order,
and seize. If Parents did not govern Children, and Teachers their
Scholars, and Masters their Servants, and Princes their Subjects, the World
would be as a Wilderness of wild beasts, and men would not live like men,
according to their natural capacities: I deny not, but some one or few by
necessity or some extraordinary circumstances, may be exempted from this
obligation, by being incapable of the benefit: being cast into a Wilderness, or
such like place, where the benefit of Government is not to be had. But that is
nothing to the commoner case of Mankind: As Marriage is indifferent to those
individuals that need not the benefits of it; but it is not lawful for the
World of Mankind, to forbear procreation, to the extinction of it self.

. 20. Therefore as all Rulers receive their Power from him, and hold it in
dependence on him, so must they finally use it for him, even for his will and
interest, which they must principally intend.

He that is the Original of Power must needs be the End: He that gives it to
man, does give it for the accomplishment of his own Will. It is held in pure
subordination to him, and so it must be used, or it is abused.

. 21. Therefore no man can have any Power against God, or his Laws or Interest:
For he gives not Power against Himself.

That is, he gives no man Right, authority or commission to displease him, by
the breaking of his Laws; for that is a contradiction, or charge his Laws
with contradiction. Yet must not any Subjects make this a pretense to deny any
just obedience to their Rulers, or to rebel against them, on supposition that
their Government is against God. For as private men are not made Public Judges
of the interest of God, but only private discerners, in order to their own
obedience to him; so may that Government be for God in the main, which is
against him in some few particulars.

. 22. The Highest Duty of Man, is to Him who is the Highest: And the greatest
Crime is that which is committed against the greatest Authority.

This is sua luce so evident, that it needs no proof: formally the chief
obedience is due to the chief Governor: (To a King rather than to a Justice of
Peace or Constable:) And consequently the greatest sin is against him. If God
be above man, so is duty to God, and sin against God, the greatest in both
kinds.

Read what is after cited out of Zeno. Laert. in Zen. says, that the Stoics
say, Virtutes sibi invicem esse connexas, ut qui unam habuerit, omnes habeat:
esse enim illarum communes speculationes, etc. Qui enim probus est, ea
despicere and agere quae sint agenda: quae vero facienda sint, ea and eligenda
esse, and sustinenda, and distribuenda, and perseveranter tenenda: sequuntur
autem prudentiam consiliorum maturitas and intelligentia; temperantiam vero
ordinis dexteritas and ornatus; Justitiam autem aequitas and gratitudo:
fortitudinemque constantia, atque valentia. Placet autem eis, nullum inter
Virtutem and Vitium esse medium-Quemadmodum enim lignum aut distortum aut
rectum oportere esse aiunt, ita justum vel injustum -- At virtutem Chrysippus
quidem amitti posse, Cleanthes vero non posse ait.
. 23. Therefore there is Good and Evil, which respects God, and are called
Holiness and Sin, which are incomparably greater, than Good and Evil so called
from respect to any Creatures, whether Individuals or Societies.

Therefore they that know no Good but that which is so called from its respect
to man's commodity or benefit, nor no Evil but that which is so called from its
respect to the hurt of Creatures, do not know God, nor his Relation to his
works; but make Gods of themselves, and accordingly judge of Good and Evil.

. 24. The Consciences of men do secretly accuse them, or excuse them, according
to this sort of Good or Evil.

When men have wrangled against Religion never so long, there are very few so
blind and bad, in whom God has not a resident witness, called Conscience,
which secretly tells a man that he does well or ill, as he keeps or
breaks the Laws of Nature, and that with respect to the Sovereign Lawgiver,
and not only to the good or hurt of man. As Conscience does not accuse a man
for being poor or sick, or wronged by another (though about these we may have
also inward trouble) so it does not justify him for his Prosperity in the
World (though it may be laid asleep and quieted by such means). But it is for
Moral Good or Evil that Conscience does accuse or justify: If I make my self
poor wilfully, my Conscience will trouble me for the wilful fault, and breed in
me repentance and remorse: And so it will if I hurt or impoverish my neighbor:
But if I hurt my self or neighbor unavoidably without any fault of mine, I am
sorry for it, but my Conscience will not accuse or condemn me for it.

. 25. This power of Conscience causes all the World, to praise or dispraise
men according to this Moral Good or Evil.

Mark but the Infidels themselves, or any whom Vice has turned into Monsters,
and they will commend men upon the account of that inward sincerity, and
honesty, which God only can make Laws for: and dispraise men for the contrary.
If you say, Quae autem natio non comitatem, non benignitatem, non gratum
animum, and beneficii memorem diligit? Quae superbos, quae maleficos, quae
crudeles, quae ingratos non aspernatur, non odit? Cic. de leg. 1. p. 222.
that they do this only because such virtues make men fit for humane converse,
and profitable or not hurtful to one another; I answer, we are not enquiring
of the final cause, but the formal: Though they praise sincere and honest men,
and those that are loving, compassionate, kind, and dispraise dissemblers,
malicious, and men of hurtful dispositions, yet you may observe that they
speak not of these only as useful or hurtful qualities, but as moral good or
evil; as things that men ought or ought not to do; which they are bound to do,
or not do by some obligation: And what Obligation can make it any man's duty, if
there be no Law of God in Nature for it, when it is out of the reach of the
Laws of men. Mark Heathens, and Infidels, and Atheists in their talk, and you
shall hear them praise or dispraise men, for some things which intimate a
Divine Obligation; which shows that the Conscience of the World bears
witness to the supreme universal Government of God.

No man who believes that there is a God, can believe that the actions of his
rational creatures have no relation to him; or that the good or evil of them,
which is the result of their relation to God, can be of less or lower
consideration, than their relation to themselves or one another: Therefore if
it be laudable to perform duty to Kings, and Parents, and Neighbors,
Conscience will tell the World, that it is incomparably more necessary to
perform our duty to God: And it cannot be, that the World should stand related
to God, as their Creator, Proprietor, Governor and end, and yet owe him no
duty.

. 26. Gods Government (as Man's) consists of three parts, Legibus and earum
observantia exornantur omnia. Demosth. Nihil omnino neque pulchrum neque
decorum reperiri potest; quod non cum lege aliqua communicet: Id. Orat. 1.
cont. Arist.
Legislation, Judgment, and Execution.

Without Laws, the Subject can neither know his Duty, nor his Rewards and
Punishments. Without Judgment, laws will be uneffectual; and without
execution, judgment is a deceitful ludicrous thing.

. 27. By a Law I mean, An Authoritative Institution what shall be due from and
to the Subject for the ends of Government] Or [A sign of the Rulers Will
instituting what shall be Due to and from the Subject, for the ends of
Government.]

The fuller reasons of this Definition of a Law, I have given in another
Writing. Signum is the Genus of it; The will of a Ruler being no otherwise to
be known to Subjects, but by signs: The Relations of [ Ruler and Subjects] is
presupposed: Lex nihil aliud est, quam recta and a numine Deorum ratio,
imperans honesta, prohibensque contraria. Cicero Phil. 1.

Vitiorum emendatricem legem esse oportet, commendatricemque virtutum: Ab ea
enim vivendi doctrina ducitur. Cicer. 1. de leg.


It is therefore only an Authoritative sign, or the sign of [a Rulers] will,
because a Ruler only has the Power of Government: I say of his [Will] as that
which is the nearest perfective Efficient, or Imperant faculty, including the
understandings conduct. I call it [an institution] or [instituting sign] to
signify its efficiency de debito, and to distinguish it from [the judicial
decisive determination of the Ruler.] It is only [to Subjects] that this
signification is made, he being not a Ruler to any others. The product of the
Institution or Statutum, is only Debitum, which is the immediate full effect of
Laws: This Debitum is twofold, 1. Officii, what shall be Due from the Subject
(or what shall be the Subjects duty.) Ad salurem Civium, civitatumque
incolumitatem, vitamque hominum and quietam and beatam, conditae sunt Leges.
Cicer. 1. de leg.
2. What shall be due to him, 1. If he keep the Law, which is the Debitum
praemii: 2. If he break it, which is the Debitum poenae: I say [to the ends of
Government.] For it is a Relation which must have the end in the definition;
and seeing I only define a Law in genere, I mention but [ the ends of
Government] in genere: A majoribus nostris nulla alia de causa leges sunt
inventae, nisi ut suos cives incolumes conservatent. Cicer. in Vatin. Nil est
tam aptum ad jus conditionemque naturae sine quo nec domus ulla, nec civitas,
nec gens, nec hominum universum genus, stare, nec rerum natura omnis, nec ipse
mundus potest. Nam and hic Deo paret, and huic obediunt maria terraeque and
hominum vita jussis supremae legis obtemperat. Cicer. de leg. 3. p. 253, 254.
For several Governments have several ends: The Government of single persons
only, as of a scholar, a son, a servant, by a Tutor, Parent, Master, intends
proximately but the good of the individual subject: The mandates of such
Rulers, have the true nature of a Law, though it be of the lower sort, as is
the Government; And Custom has appropriated the word [Law] to a nobler species
only. The Government of Societies is always immediately for [the Order of the
Society:] But not always for their good; much less chiefly: The Government of a
society of Slaves (as the Spaniards over the Peruvians and Mexicans in digging
their Mines) is for the Order of those Slaves, but for the benefit of the
Lords. The Government of some Armies, is for the Order of the Armies, but for
the good of those they fight for. The Government of a true Commonwealth is for
the Bonum publicum, the common good, which includes the happiness of the
Rulers with the Subjects. The universal Government of the World, is proximately
for the Order of the World, and for its good, but ultimately and principally
for the fulfilling and pleasing the Will of God, in the said Order and good,
and in the glory or operations of his own Power, Wisdom, and Goodness therein.
(As shall be further proved afterward.)

. 28. Any signification of the will of God, that man shall be benefited on
condition of his obedience, is the praemiant part of his Law: And any
signification of his will, that man shall be punished if he sin (or that
punishment shall be his due) is the penal part of his Law.

If it only foretold that in a way of Physical efficiency, obedience will
produce good, and disobedience hurt to himself, this were not properly,
praemiant or penal; But when the Good is promised upon the condition of
obedience, and the hurt threatened upon condition of sin, as means to move a
rational free Agent to obey, this is truly a praemiant and penal act of Law:
And this is fulfilled also in a physical way of production; the Lawgiver being
also the Creator and Disposer of all the World, does wisely order it, that
Moral good shall be attended with Physical good, and Moral evil with Physical
evil; first or last.

. 29. The Immensity (or Omnipresence) the Omnipotency, Of this read Cicero's 2.
lib. de not. Deor.
Omniscience, and infinite goodness of God, with his total Causation in the
support of all his Creatures, do most undoubtedly prove his particular
Providence, in observing and regarding all the actions of his Subjects in the
World; and so declare his actual government.

It is the gross ignorance of the Divine perfections, which ever made any one
question the particular Providence of God as extending to the smallest things
and actions. 1. It is proved by his Immensity (conceived of as without
corporeal extension of parts as before said): He that made and upholdeth all
the World, did never make that which is greater than himself, and excludes his
presence. Though being a Spirit he has not Corporeal quantity, yet
analogically and in a way of eminency and transcendency, we must say that he is
Greater and Immense: And it is his perfection which denies extension and
dimensions; and therefore in a nobler kind he is every where present. And if
he be here as certainly as I am, and in a more excellent manner, he cannot but
observe all things and actions which are here.

2. He is Omnipotent and All sufficient, and therefore as Able to observe and
govern every the smallest Thing and action, as if he had but that one to look
after in the world. And I think, if God had but one man at all to mind and
govern in all the world, the Adversary himself, that now denies his particular
providence, would confess, that God does observe and regard that one
individual. It is men's Atheistical or Blasphemous diminutive thoughts of God,
who conceive of him as finite, though they call him infinite, which is the
cause of all such kind of errors.

3. His Omniscience infallibly proves also his particular observance of all
things and actions in the world: for His Knowledge being his natural perfection
is necessary: He cannot be ignorant of any thing that is. If I had but one
thing just before my eyes to see, in the open light, I must needs see it, if it
have the necessaries of a visible object, unless I wink. If the Sun's
illumination were an act of vision, (as its like it is nothing more ignoble)
how easily would it at once discern all that is upon one half of the earth at
once? All things are naked and open before the eye of the Omniscient being: He
cannot but behold or know them, and therefore observe them and regard them.

4. His Creation, Causation and Manutetency also prove, that he both knows
and regards all things: For can he be either ignorant, forgetful or mindless
of that which he made, and still does so conserve, as to continue a kind of
Creation of it? His Omnipotent Will which gave it a being, does still continue
it; should he withdraw his active sustentation, it would turn all, not only to
confusion but to nothing. And does he not know and regard what is continually
as in his hand, or by continual volition produced or maintained by him? He is
the universal Cause of all the agency and motion in the world; in him we Live,
Move and Be: and can he be ignorant or regardless of what he does? Why will he
make, maintain, and move that which he does not regard?

5. His Relation of Owner proves his regard: all things are his Own.

6. And his Relation of a Governor proves his regard and his actual
government of Man and all his actions. For he takes not on him a vain
Relation; and he that makes Laws for every person and action, does regard and
govern every person and action: But so does God. Ergo.

. 30. Those who think God does nothing to all the rest of the world, but by
those noblest creatures which are next him, and that he has committed the
government of all the rest of the world to the Intelligences of the first
Order; cannot without blindness and contradiction deny, that he is still
Himself no less the actual Mover and Governor of all, than if he used no
Officer or Instrument at all.

For 1. God ceased not himself to be Omnipresent, Omniscient, Omnipotent, or
most Benign, when he gave that supposed Power to those Instruments. 2. He made
them and ordered them under Him, through plenitude of Goodness, delighting to
communicate Power and Dignity as well as Being to his Creatures, and not
through impotency or insufficiency, to supply any defect in his own Government,
and to help him: He uses them to honor them, and not to dishonor himself. He
gave away from himself no degree of Perfection, nor deprived himself of the
smallest part of Honor, which he communicates to them; but honors himself
in the appearance of his Perfections by the said Communications. As God can do
that by himself without the Creature, which he causes the Creature to do; (as
to move, illuminate and beat the lower parts without the Sun as well as with
it, or any thing which imports not impotency or contradiction) for he ceased
not to be omnipotent; so that which he does by any Creature is as truly and
fully done by Himself, as if there were no created instrument or cause in it.
For that Creature which is nothing of it self, and has not any Being but in
full dependence on its Maker, can have no action of it self, but in full
dependence upon him; what ever it does, it does by him: though as to the
specifying comparison, why this rather than that, God has given men a power
with liberty, yet the Action as an Action, being from the Power which was
totally from him, is so it self: There can be no less of God's agency in any
action, because he does it by a Creature, than if he did it without; though
there be more of the Creatures, there is no less of his: His communication of
Power is not by discerption, or division and diminution of his own. He that
knows what a Creator and total first Cause is, needs no other proof of this.
Men indeed communicate power to their Officers, through their own
insufficiency, to be their helpers, and supply the want of their presence or
action; but so does not God. Therefore if Angels or Intelligences govern and
move all inferior things, they are all governed and moved no less certainly,
proximately, honorably by God himself, than if he had never used such a
subordinate Agent; and that immediatione essentiae and virtutis; immediately,
though not so immediately, as to use no honourary second cause.

Dii, qui quo velint, possint laedere, nec a quodam laedi vicissim, non nocent
nisi improbis. Plut. in Lacon.
. 31. Justice is an Attribute of God as GOVERNOR, by which he makes equal
Laws, and gives all their due according to them; (or judges them righteously
according to his Laws) for the ends of Government.

As Justice is conceived of in God according to the image in Man, Hanc video
sapientissimorum fuisse sententiam, Legem neque hominum ingeniis excogitatam,
neque scitum aliquod esse populorum, sed aeternum quiddam quod universum mundum
regeret imperandi prohibendique sapientia. Ita principem Legem iilam and
ultimam Mentem esse dicebant omnia ratione aut cogentis aut vetantis Dei. Cic.
de Leg. 2. p. 234.
which we call the Virtue or Habit of Justice, so it is his eternal Nature,
being nothing else but the perfection of his infinite Wisdom, and his Will or
Goodness, as respecting a Kingdom of Subjects as possible and future. For he
may so be called JUST, that has no Kingdom, because he has that Virtue which
would do Justice if he had a Kingdom. But as JUSTICE is taken either for the
exercise of righteous Government, or for the honorable Relation and Title of
one that does so exercise it; that is, of an actually Just Governor, so
formally and denominatively it is an Attribute of God, which is not Eternal,
but subsequent to his Relation of a King or Governor. He that is not a
Governor, is not a just Governor. A negatione est secundi adjecti ad
negationem est tertii valet argumentum.

The Law is Norma Officii and Judicii. He that makes a Law, thereby tells
his Subjects, that according to this they must live, and according to this they
must be judged. Indeed the immediate sense of the words of a Law, as such, is
not to be taken as de Eventu, but de Debito: He that says, Thou shall not
murder, says not, [Eventually it shall not come to pass that thou shall not
murder] but [It shall be thy Duty not to do it.] And he that says, [If thou
murder thou shall be put to death] does primarily, in the sense of the words
themselves, mean no more but [Death shall be thy due.] But in that he declares
that he will justly govern according to this Law, therefore he means
secondarily and consequently, that ordinarily he will give to all their due. In
what cases the Letter and nearest sense of a Law may be dispensed with, or the
Lawgiver reserveth a liberty of dispensation to himself, belongs not to this
place to be disputed.

CHAP. IX. II. Of Man's Subjection to God, or Relation to him as our Governor.
. 1. MAn being made thus a Rational free Agent, Seneca Epist. ad Luc. 83. p.
(mihi) 711. says, Sic certe vivendum est, tanquam in conspectu vivamus. Sic
cogitandum, tanquam aliquis in pectus inspicere posset and potest: Quid enim
prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum. Nihil Deo clausum interest animis
nostris, and cogitationibus mediis intervenit.

Diogenes ( in Laert.) said to an immodest woman, Non vereris mulier, ne forte
stante post tergum Deo (cuncta enim plena ipso sunt) inhoneste te habeas?
Primus est Deorum cultus, Deos credere; deinde reddere illis Majestatem suam:
reddere Bonitatem sine qua nulla Majestas est: scire illo esse qui praesider
Mundo, qui universe ut sua, temperanin qui humani genet. tutelam gerunt. Idem.
epist. 92.


and sociable to be governed, and God being his Rightful Governor, is
immediately related to God as his Subject, as to Right and Obligation.

There is no Sovereign without a Subject: Subjection is our Relation to our
Governor, or else our consent to that Relation. In the former sense we take it
here. A Subject is one that is bound to obey another as his Ruler. He that is a
Subject by Right and Obligation, and yet does not consent and actually subject
himself to his rightful Governor, is a Rebel. There cannot be greater
obligations to subjection imagined by a created understanding, than the
Rational Creature has to God.

. 2. All men are obliged to consent to this subjection, and to give up
themselves absolutely to the government of God.

God's absolute propriety in us as his creatures, gives him so full a Title to
govern us, that our consent is not at all necessary to our obligation and
subjection-relative; but only to our actual obedience, which cannot be
performed by one that consents not. Therefore God's right and our natural
condition are the foundation of our subjection to him, as to Obligation and
Duty; and he that consents not, sins by high Treason against his
Sovereign. As God did not ask our consent whether he should make us men, so
neither whether he should be our Governor and we his Subjects as to
obligation: nor yet whether he shall punish the rebellious and disobedient. But
he asks our consent to obey him, and to be rewarded by him: for we shall
neither be holy nor happy but by our own consent. Those therefore (whom I have
confuted in my Treatise of Policy) who say, God is not our King till we make
him King, nor his Laws obligatory to us till we consent to them, speaking de
Debito, do not reason but rave, and are unworthy of a confutation.

. 3. All men therefore are obliged to subject their Understandings to the
revealed Wisdom of God, and their Wills to his revealed Will; and to employ all
the powers of Soul and Body, and all their possessions, in his most exact
obedience.

Subjection is an obligation to obedience. Where the Authority and Subjection
are absolute and unlimited, there the obedience must be absolute and most
exact. The understanding of our absolute Ruler is the absolute rule of our
understandings. No man must set up his conceits against him, nor quarrel with
his Government or Laws. If any thing of His revelation or prescription seem
questionable, unjust or unnecessary to us, it is through our want of due
subjection, through the arrogance and enmity of our carnal minds. His Will, de
Debito, Nihil mihi videtur frigidius, nihil ineptius, quam Lex cum prolegomeno:
Dic quid me velis fecisse; non disco, sed pareo. Senec. ep. 95.

If Men's Laws must have so great authority, much more Gods. Ex quo intelliges
par est, eos qui perniciosa and injusta populis jussa descripferint, cum contra
fecerint quod polliciti professique sint, quidvis potius tulisse quam leges.
Cic. de leg. l. 2. p. 235.

Multa perniciosa, multa pestifica sciscuntur in populis, quae non magis Legis
^omen attingunt, quam fi latrones, etc. id. ibid.


must be the absolute Rule of all our Wills: so much secret exceptions and
reserves as we have in our resignation and subjection, so much hypocrisy and
secret rebellion we have. Our subjective obligation is so full and absolute,
and our Ruler so infallible, just and perfect, that it is not possible for any
man's obedience to God to be too absolute, exact or full. Nothing can be more
certain than that a Creature, subject to the government of his Creator, of
infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, does owe him the most perfect and exact
obedience, according to the utmost of his Powers, without any dissent,
exception, resistance, unwillingness or neglect.

. 4. All obedience which Rulers require of their Subjects, or Subjects give to
any Governors, must be in full subordination to the government and will of God.

For all Powers under the absolute Sovereign of the world, are derivative and
dependent, and are no more than he has given: they are from him, under him,
and for him; and can no more have any authority against him, than a Worm
against a King, or than they could have Being and Authority without him. He
that contradicts this Proposition, must take down God, and Deifie Man, and so
defy and conquer Heaven, or else he will never make it good. Plutarch de
Tranquil. Anim. says, that it is one of Aristotle's sayings, That he that
believed as he ought of the gods, should think as well of himself as Alexander,
who commanded so many m. n. p. 155.
As for the difficulties that seem to rise by allowing Subjects to prefer God's
Authority before their Parents or Princes; it belongs no more to the clearing
of the present subject that I resolve them, than that I resolve such as arise
from our allowing Subjects to disobey a Justice or Constable when he is against
the King.

. 5. They that are obliged to such absolute and exact obedience, are obliged to
use their utmost diligence to understand God's Laws, which they must obey.

For no man can obey a Law which he does not know of, and understand.
Subjection includes an obligation to study our Maker's Laws, so far as we must
do them: Indeed those that concern others, we are not so much bound to know (as
a Subject to know God's Laws for Kings and Pastors of the Church); but for our
own duty we cannot do it before we know it. Those that are ignorant of their
Maker's Will through unwillingness, contempt or negligence, are so far
disobedient to his Government.

. 6. Dicebat Thales, Homines existimare oportere Deos omnia cernere, deorumque
omnia esse plena, and tunc fore omnes Castiores. Cic. 2. de Leg.

Anthenodorus dicere prudenter solebat, ita cum hominibus homines vivere
debere, acsi Deus Retributor bonorum malorumque ultor, omni loco ac tempore
actiones nostras intueretur conspicereturque humanis nostris oculis. Fulgos. l.
7. c. 2.

Sic vive cum hominibus tanquam Deus videat: Sic loquere cum Deo tanquam
homines audiant Sen. ep 10.


There are many and great temptations to draw us to disobey our Maker, which
every one is bound with greatest vigilance and constancy to resist.

He that is bound to obey, is certainly bound to resist all temptations to
disobedience. For that is far from absolute or true obedience which will fail,
if a man be but tempted to disobey. Kings and Parents will not accept of such
obedience as this; they will not say, [Be true to me, and honor me, and obey
me, till you are tempted to betray me, and to reproach me, and rebel.] He that
will be false to God when he is tempted to it, was never true to him. No
temptation can bring so much for sin, as God gives us against it, nor can
offer us so much gain, or honor, or pleasure by it, as he offers us on
condition we obey him. And that the world is full of such temptations,
experience puts past dispute, (of which, more anon.)

. 7. No price can be offered by any Creature, which to a Subject of God should
seem sufficient to hire him to the smallest sin.

Sin has such aggravations (which shall be opened anon) that no gain or
pleasure that comes by it can counter-ballance. There being no proportion
between the Creature and the Infinite Creator, Chilon (in Laert. p. 43) inquit,
Damnum potius quam turpe lucrum eligendum, nam id semel tantum dolori esse: hoc
semper.
there can nothing by, or of the Creature be proportionable, or considerable to
be put into the balance against the Creator's Authority and Will. The command
of Kings, the winning of Kingdoms, the pleasure of the flesh, the applause of
all the world, if they are offered as a price or bait to hire or tempt a man to
sin, should weigh no more against the command of God, than a feather in the
balance against a Mountain. All this common reason will attest, however sense
and appetite reclaim.

Plus apud bonos pietatis jura quam omnes opes valent. Justin. Hist. l. 3.

Because God has penalties to promote obedience, all Religion is called, The
fear of God. Laertius says of Cleanthes, Cum aliquando probro illi daretur,
quod esset timidus: At ideo, inquit, parum pecco. Fear is a preserving
cautelous passion, though it make not a good man of it self, but as joined with
Love.


. 8. No man can reasonably fear lest his true obedience to such a Governor
should prove his final detriment or hurt: but if it did, it were nevertheless
our duty to obey.

1. No man can reasonably think, that God is less able to reward, protect and
encourage his subjects in their duty, than any Tempter whatsoever in their
disobedience. And no man can think that he is less wise to know how to perform
it: nor can any think that Infinite Goodness is less disposed to do good to the
good, than any Tempter whosoever can be to do good to the evil. These things
being all as clear as light it self to the considerate, it must needs follow,
that no reason can allow a man to hope to be finally a gainer or saver by his
disobedience to his Maker, or to fear to be a loser by him.

2. But if it were so, obedience would be our duty still: for the authority of
God, as his propriety, is absolute; and he that gives us power to require the
analogical obedience of our Horse or Ox, though it be to our benefit only, and
his hurt, yea though it be in going to the slaughter, if he did so by us could
do us no wrong, nor give us any just excuse for our disobedience. For as sweet
as life is to us, it is not so much Ours in right as His, and therefore should
be at his disposal.

. 9. The breaking of Gods Laws must needs deserve a greater penalty, than the
breaking of any Man's Laws, as such.

The difference of the Rulers and their Authority puts this past all
controversy; of which yet I shall say more anon.

. 10. What is said of the subjection of Individuals to God, is true of all just
Societies as such; the Kingdoms of the world being all under God the universal
King, as small parcels of his Kingdom, as particular Corporations are under a
humane King.

Therefore Kings and Kingdoms owe their absolute obedience to God, and may not
intend any ultimate end, but the pleasing of their universal Sovereign; nor set
up any interest against him, or above him, or in coordination with him; nor
manage any way of Government, but in dependence on him, as the Principle and
the End of it; nor make any Laws, but such as stand in due subordination to his
Laws; nor command any duty but what has in its order, a true subserviency and
conducibility to his pleasure.

CHAP. X. Of GOD's particular Laws as known in Nature.
THe true nature of a Law I have opened before. Though Cicero's books de
legibus, be usually read by us when we are boys, they are worthy the perusal
of the wisest men, and fit for the edification and pleasure of the learned.
It is not necessary that it be written nor spoken; but that it be in general
any apt [signification of the Will of the Rector to his subjects, instituting
what shall be due from them and to them, for the ends of Government.] Therefore
whatsoever is a signification of Gods will to man, appointing us our duty, and
telling us what benefit shall be ours upon the performance, and what loss or
hurt shall befall us, if we sin, is a Law of God.

. 1. A Law being the Rectors Instrument of Governing, there can be no Law where
there is no Government: And therefore, that which some call, The eternal Law,
is indeed no Law at all; But it is the Principle of all just Laws.

The Eternal Wisdom and Goodness of God (that is, the Perfection of his Nature
and Will) as related to a Possible, or future Kingdom, is denominated Justice:
And this Justice some call the Eternal Law: But it is truly no Law, because it
is the will of God in himself, and not as Rector; nor is it any signification
of that Will, nor does it suppose any governed subjects in being from Eternity;
nor does it make any duty to any from Eternity: But all the Laws which God
makes in time, (and consequently which men make, which are just and good) are
but the Products of this Eternal Will and Justice.

And whereas some say, that there is an eternal truth in such Axioms as these
[Thou shall love God above all, and do as thou would be done by, and the
good should be encouraged, and the bad punished, etc.] I answer, God forms
not Propositions; And therefore there were no such Propositions from Eternity:
Nor was there any Creature to love God, Quod (de magistratu loquitur) cum dico
legem, a me dici nihil aliud intelligi volo quam imperium, sine quo nec domus
ulla, nec civitas, etc. Id. de leg. 3. init.
or to do Good or Evil, and be the subject of such Propositions: That
Proposition therefore which was not from Eternity, was neither true nor false
from Eternity; for non entis non sunt accidentia vel modi. But this is true,
that from Eternity there were the grounds of the verity of such Propositions
when they should after be: And that if there had been subjects from Eternity
for such Propositions, and Intellects to frame them, they would have been of
Eternal truth.

. 2. At the same time of his Creation that God made Man his subject, he also
made him some Laws, to govern him.

For, subjection being a general obligation to obedience, would signify
nothing, if there were no particular duties to be the matter of that obedience.
Else Man should owe God no obedience, from the beginning, but be Lawless; for
where there is no Law, there is no Obedience: (Taking a Law in the true
comprehensive sense, as I here do.)

. 3. All the objective significations in natura rerum, within us or without us,
of the Will of God, concerning our Duty, reward or punishment, are the True Law
of Nature, in the primary proper sense.

. 4. Therefore it is falsely defined by all Writers, who make it consist in
certain axioms (as some say) born in us, or written on our hearts from our
birth; (as others say) dispositively there.

It is true, that there is in the nature of Man's Soul a certain aptitude to
understand certain Truths, as soon as they are revealed, that is, as soon as
the very Natura rerum is observed: And it is true, that this disposition is
brought to actual knowledge, as soon as the mind comes to actual consideration
of the things. But it is not true that there is any actual knowledge of any
Principles born in Man: Nor is it true, that the said Disposition to know is
truly a Law; nor yet that the actual knowledge following it, is a Law: But the
disposition may be called a Law Metonymically, as being the aptitude of the
faculties to receive and obey a Law; as the Light of the Eye, which is the
potentia and dispositio videndi, may be called [the Light of the Sun] but
unhansomly: And the subsequent actual knowledge of Principles, may be called
the Law of Nature metonymically, as being the perception of it, and an effect
of it: as actual sight may be called, the Light of the Sun, and as actual
knowledge of the Kings Laws, may be called His Laws within us, that is, the
effect of them, or the Reception of them: But this is far from propriety of
speech.

That the inward axioms as known are not Laws, is evident, 1. Because a Law is
in genere objectivo, and this is in genere actionum: A Law is in genere
signorum; but this is the discerning of the sign: A Law is the will of the
Rector signified: this is his will known: A Law is Obligatory: this is the
perception of an Obligation. A Law makes duty: but this is the knowledge of a
duty made. 2. The Law is not in our power to change or abrogate: But a man's
inward dispositions and perceptions are much in his power, to increase or
diminish, or obliterate: Every man that is wilfully sensual and wicked, may do
much to blot out the Law of Nature, which is said to be written on his heart;
But wickedness cannot alter or obliterare the Law of God: If this were Gods Law
which is upon the heart, when a sinner has blotted it out, he is disobliged
from duty and punishment: For where there is no Law, there is no duty or
transgression. But no sinner can so disoblige himself by altering his Makers
Laws: 3. Else there would be as many Laws of Nature, not only as there are men,
but as there are diversity of perceptions: But Gods Law is not so uncertain and
multiform a thing. 4. And if Man's disposition or actual knowledge be Gods Law,
it may be also called Man's Law: And so the Kings Law, should be the Subjects
perception of it.

It is therefore most evident, that the true Law of Nature is another thing:
(And is it not then a matter of admiration, that so many sagacious, accurate
Schoolmen, Philosophers, Omnis lex inventum sane and donum est Deorum. Decretum
vero hominum prudentum -- Demost. cont. Aris. or. 1.
Lawyers, and Divines, should for so long time go on in such false definitions
of it!) The whole World belongs to the Law of Nature, so far as it signifies
to us the will of God, about our duty, and reward, and punishment: The World is
as Gods Statute Book: The foresaid natural aptitude, makes us fit to read and
practice it. The Law of Nature is as the external Light of the Sun; and the
said natural disposition, is as the visive faculty to make use of it. Yet much
of the Law of Nature is within us too: But it is there only in genere
objectivo, and signi: Man's own Nature, his Reason, Free will, and Executive
power, are the most notable signs of his duty to God; To which all Mercies,
Judgments, and other signifying means belong.

. 5. The way that God does by Nature oblige us, is by laying such fundamenta
from which our duty shall naturally result, as from the signification of his
Will.

Communis lex nunquam immutatur, cum secundum naturam sit: jus vero scriptum
saepius. Aristot. 1. Rhet. ad Theod. c 4.
. 6. These fundamenta are some of them unalterable (while we have a being,) and
some of them alterable: And therefore some Laws of Nature are alterable, and
some unalterable accordingly.

As for instance, Man is made a Rational free Agent; and God is unchangeably
his Rightful Governor, of infinite Power, Diogenes (in Laert.) congregatis ad
se plurimis exprobravit, quod ad inepta studiose concurrerent; ad ea vero quae
gravia and utilia, negligenter convenirent: Dicebatque de fodiendo and
calcitrando certare homines, ut autem boni and probi fierent curare neminem.
Musicos in jus vocabat, quod cum lyrae chordas congrue aptarent, animi mores
inconcinnos haberent. Mathematicos carpebat, quod Solemn and Lunam and sydera
intuentes, quae ante pedes erant negligerent. Oratores item, quod studerent
justa dicere, non autem and facere. Avaros quoque quod pecuniam vituperarent,
ac sum diligerent: and eos qui justos, quod pecunias contemnerent laudabant,
pecuniosos vero imitari satagebant. Stomachabatur eis qui pro bona valetudine
sacra facerent, inter sacrificia contra sanitatem coenarent. Servos mirabatur,
qui cum edaces dominos cernerent, nihil diriperent ciborum. -- Dicebat manus ad
amicos non complicatis digitis extendi oportere.
Wisdom and Goodness: Therefore the nature of God and Man (in via) thus
compared are the fundamentum from whence constantly resulteth our indispensable
duty to love him, trust him, fear him, and obey him: But if our being, or
reason, or free will, which are our essential Capacities cease, our obligations
cease cessante fundamento. God has made Man a sociable Creature; and while he
is in society, the Law of Nature obliges him to many things, which he has no
obligation to, when the society is dissolved: As when a Parent, Child, Wife,
or Neighbor dies, all our duties to them cease. Nature by the position of
many circumstances, has made Incest ordinarily a thing producing manifold
evils, and a sin against God: And yet Nature so placed the children of Adam, in
other circumstances, that the said Nature made that their duty (to marry one
another) which in others would have been an unnatural thing: Nature forbids
Parents to murder their children: But when God the absolute Lord of life, would
that way try Abraham's obedience, when he was sure that he had a supernatural
command, even Nature obliged him to obey it. Nature forbids men to rob each
other of their proper goods. But when the Owner of all things, had given the
Israelites the Egyptians goods, and changed the propriety, the fundamentum of
their former natural obligation ceased. Changes in natura rerum, which are the
foundation of our obligation, may make changes in the obligations, which before
were natural. But so far as Nature, that Nature which foundeth duty is the
same, the duty remains still the same: The contrary would be a plain
contradiction.

. 7. The Authoritas Imperantis is the formal object of all obedience: and so
all our duty is formally duty to God as our Supreme, or to Men as his Officers:
But as to the Material object, our Natural duties are either, I. Toward God:
II. To our selves: III. To others.

. 8. I. The prime duties of the Law of Nature are toward God, and are our full
consent to the three Relations, (of which two are mentioned before): To be Gods
Rational Creatures, and not obliged to take him heartily for our Absolute Owner
and Ruler, is a Contradiction in Nature.

. 9. Man's Nature being what it is, Laertius says of the Magi, that they do
Deorum cultui vacare; signa statuasque reprehendere; and eorum imprimis qui
Mares esse Deos and foeminas, dicunt, errores improbare. Signa and statuas ex
disciplinae instituto e medio tulisse. Qui and revicturos homines,
immortalesque futuros, dicunt, and universa illorum precationibus consistere.
Plerique and Judaeos ab his duxisse originem tradunt. Laert. page 4, 5, 6.
and Related thus to God, and Gods Nature and Relations being as before
described, Man is naturally obliged to take God to be what he is in all his
Attributes forementioned (cap. 5.) and to suit his will, and affections to God
accordingly: that is, to take him to be omnipotent, omniscient, and most good,
most faithful, and most just, etc. and to believe him, seek him, trust him,
love him, fear him, obey him, meditate on him, to honor him, and prefer him
before all the World; and this with all our Heart and might, and to take our
chiefest pleasure in it.

All this so evidently resulteth from the Nature of God and Man compared, that
I cannot perceive that it needs proof or illustration.

. 10. It is a contradiction to Nature, that any of this duty proper to God, may
be given to any other, and that any Creature or Idol of our Imagination should
be esteemed, loved, trusted, obeyed, or honored as God.

For that were falsehood in us, injury to God, and abuse of the Creature.

. 11. Nature requires, that Man having the gift of speech from God, should
employ his Tongue in the Praise and service of his Maker.

This plainly resulteth, from our own Nature, and the use of the Tongue,
compared with, or related to Gods Nature and perfections, with his propriety in
us, and all that is ours, and his Government of us.

. 12. Seeing Man lives in total dependence upon God, and in continual
receivings from him, Nature obliges him to use his heart and tongue in holy
desires expressed and exercised in Prayer, and in returning thanks to his great
Benefactor, (of which more anon.)

For though God know all our sins and wants already, yet the Tongue is fitted
to confess our sins, and to express our desires: And by confessing and
expressing, a twofold capacity for mercy accreweth to us: That is, 1. Our own
Humiliation is excited and increased by the said Confessions; and our Desires,
and Love, and Hope, excited and increased by our own Petitions, (the tongue
having a power to reflect back on the heart, and the exercise of all good
affections being the means of their increase.) 2. And a person that is found in
the actual exercise of Repentance and holy Desire, and Love, is morally, and in
point of Justice, a much fitter recipient for pardon, and acceptance, and other
blessings, than another is: And it being proved by Nature, that Prayer,
Confession and Thanksgiving, has so much usefulness to our good, and to our
further duty, Nature will tell us, that the tongue and heart should be thus
employed. And therefore Nature teaches all men in the World, that believe
there is a God, to confess their sins to him, and call upon him in their
distress, and to give him thanks for their receivings.

. 13. Seeing Societies as such are totally dependent upon God, and men's gifts
are communicative, and Solemnities are operative: Nature teaches us, that God
ought to be solemnly acknowledged, Pietas est scientia colendi numinis: inquit
Aemilius in Plutarch.
worshipped, and honored, both in Families, and in more solemn appointed
assemblies.

It greatly affects our own hearts to praise God in great and solemn
Assemblies: Many Hearts are like many pieces of Wood or Coals, which flame up
greatly when set together, Nulla Pietas est erga Deos, nifi honesta de numine
Deorum ac Mente opinio sit. Cicer. pro Planc.
which none of them alone would do. And it is a fuller signification of Honor
to God, when his Creatures do purposely assemble for his solemn and most
reverent Praise and Worship. And therefore Nature showing us the reasons of it,
does make it to be our duty.

. 14. Nature tells us, De Diis ita ut sunt loquere. Bias in Laert.
that it is evil to cherish false opinions of God, or to propagate such to
others; to slander or blaspheme him, to forget him, despise him, or neglect
him, Equidem is qui de Diis talia commentus est, an Philosophus appellandus sit
nescio, (inquit Laert. de Orpheo, p. 3.) Videant certe qui ita volunt quo sit
censendus nomine, qui Diis cuncta hominum vitia, and quae raro a turpibus
quibusque and flagitiosis geruntur, adscribit -- Fulmine interisse cognoscitur.
Laert. Proem.
to contemn his Judgments, or abuse his Mercies; to resist his instructions,
precepts, or sanctifying motions: And that we should always live as in his
sight, and to bend all our powers entirely to please him, and to think and
speak no otherwise of him, nor otherwise behave our selves before him, than as
beseems us to the infinite, most blessed, and holy God.

. 15. Nature tells us, that in Controversies between Man and Man, it is a
rational means for ending strife, to appeal to God the Judge of all, by solemn
Oaths, where proof is wanting: And that it is a heinous crime to do this
falsely, making him the Patron of a lie, or to use his name rashly,
unreverently, profanely, or in vain.

All this being both against the Nature of God, and of our speech, and of
humane society, is past all doubt unnatural evil.

. 16. Nature tells us, Lege Laert. de Magis.
that God should be worshipped heartily, sincerely, spiritually, and also
decently and reverently, Cicero de not. Deor. lib. 1. p. 46. says, That
Possidonius believed that Epicurus thought that there was no God; and
therefore, not according to his judgment, but in scorn, describes God like a
man careless, idle, etc. which he would not have done, if he had thought that
there was a God indeed.
both with soul and body, as being the Lord of both.

. 17. It tells us also, that he must not be worshipped with sin or cruelty,
or by toyish, childish, ludicrous manner of Worship, which signify a mind
that is not serious, or which tend to breed a low esteem of him; or which are
any way contrary to his Nature, or his will.

. 18. Nature tells us, that such as are endued with an eminent degree of holy
wisdom, should be Teachers of others, for obedience to God, and their salvation.

As the Soul is more worth than the Body, and its welfare more regardable, so
charity to the Soul is as Natural a duty as to the body: which cannot better be
exercised, than in communicating holy wisdom, and instructing men in the
matters of highest everlasting consequence.

Impellimur natura ut prodesse velimus quamplurimis, imprimisque docendo,
rationibusque prudentiae tradendis. Itaque non facile est invenire, qui quod
sciat, ipse non tradat alteri. Ita non solum ad discendum propensi sumus, verum
etiam ad docendum. Cic. 2. de fin.
. 19. Yea, Nature teaches, that so great a work should not be done slightly
and occasionally only, as on the by, but that it should be a work of stated
office, which tried men should be regularly called to, for the more sure and
universal edification of Mankind.

Nature tells us, that the greatest works, of greatest consequence, should be
done with the greatest skill and care; and that it is likest to be so done when
it is made a set Office, entrusted in the hands of tried men: for it is not
many that have such extraordinary endowments: and if unfit persons manage so
great a work, they will mar it, and miss the end: and that which a man takes
for his Office, he is liker to take care of, Descriptionem sacerdotum nullum
justae Religionis genus praetermittit: Nam sunt ad placandos Deos alii
constituti, qui sacris praesint solennibus: ad interpretanda alii praedicta
vatum; neque multorum ne esset infinitum, neque ut ca ipsa quae suscepta
public essent, quisquam extra collegium nosset. Cic. de leg. l. 2. p. 241.
than that which he thinks belongs no more to him than others: and how
necessary Order is in all matters of weight, the experience of all Governments,
Societies and Persons may soon convince us.

. 20. Nature tells us also, that it is the duty of such Teachers to be very
diligent, serious, and plain, and of Learners to be thankful, willing,
studious, respectful, and rationally-obedient, as remembering the great
importance of the work.

For in vain is the labor of the Teachers, if the Learners will not do their
part: the Receiver has the chief benefit, and therefore the greatest part of
the duty, which must do most to the success.

. 21. Nature tells men, that they should not live loosely and ungoverned, but
in the order of governed Societies, for the better attainment of the ends of
their Creation, (as is proved before.)

. 22. Nature tells us, that Governors should be the most wise, and pious,
and just, and merciful, and diligent, and exemplary, laying out themselves for
the public good, and the pleasing of the universal Sovereign.

. 23. It teaches us also, that Subjects must be faithful to their Governors,
Autoritate nutuque legum docemur domitas habere libidines, coercere omnes
cupiditates, nostra tueri, ab alienis mentes, oculos, manus abstinere. Cic. 1.
de Or.
and must honor and obey them, in subordination to God.

. 24. Nature tells us, that it is the Parents duty, with special love and
diligence, to educate their children in the knowledge, fear, and obedience of
God; providing for their bodies, but preferring their souls.

. 25. And that children must love, honor and obey their Parents; willingly and
thankfully receiving their instructions and commands.

. 26. Nature also tells us, Nihil interest utrum vir bonus scelestum
spoliaverit, an bonum improbus: nec utrum bonus an malus adulteratus sit: sed
lex damni solum spectat dissimilitudinem, utiturque pro paribus, si alter
violavit, alter violatus est. Aristot. Ethic. 5. c. 4.
that thus the Relations of Husband and Wife should be sanctified to the
highest ends of life; and also the Relation of Master and Servant: and that our
callings and labors in the world should be managed in pure obedience to God,
and to our ultimate end.

. 27. Nature teaches all men to love one another, as servants of the same God,
and members of the same universal Kingdom, and creatures of the same specific
nature.

There is somewhat amiable in every man, for there is something of God in every
man, and therefore something that it is our duty to love: And that according to
the excellency of man's nature, which shows more of God than other inferior
creatures do; Vide Plutarchi Roman. quaest. 65.
and also according to their additional virtues. Loveliness commands love,
and love makes lovely. This, with all the rest aforementioned, Temperantia
libidinum inimica est. Cic.
are so plain, that to prove them is but to be tedious.

. 28. Nature tells us, that we should deal justly with all, When an Adulterer
asked Thales whether he should make a vow? he answered him, Adultery is as bad
as perjury: intimating, that he that made no conscience of adultery, would make
none of perjury. Laert. Cyrus is praised by Plutarch, de curiosit. that would
not see Panthaea: and they are by him reproved that cast a wanton eye at women
in coaches as they pass by, and look out at windows to have a full view of
them, and yet think that they commit no fault: suffering a curious eye and a
wandering mind to slide and run every way.
giving to every one his due, and doing to them as we would be done by.

. 29. Particularly it tells us, that we must do nothing injuriously against
the life, or health, or liberty of our neighbor, but do our best for their
preservation and comfort.

. 30. Man being so noble a creature, and his education so necessary to his
welfare, and promiscuous unregulated generation tending so manifestly to
confusion, ill education, divisions and corruption of mankind; and unbridled
exercise of lust tending to the abasement of reason, and corruption of body and
mind, Nature tells us, that carnal copulation should be very strictly
regulated, and kept within the bounds of lawful marriage; and that the contract
of marriage must be faithfully kept, and no one defile his neighbors bed, nor
wrong another's chastity, or their own, in thought, word, or deed.

This proposition, though Boars understand it not, is proved in the annexed
reasons: Nothing would tend more to household divisions and ill education, and
the utter degenerating and undoing of mankind than ungoverned copulation. No
one would know his own children, if lust were not bounded by strict and certain
Laws; and then none would love them, nor provide for them; nor would they have
any certain ingenuous education. Women would become most contemptible and
miserable, as soon as beauty faded, and lust was satisfied; and so one half of
mankind made calamitous, and unfitted to educate their own children: and ruin
and depravation of nature could not be avoided. They that think their choicest
Plants and Flowers fit for the enclosure of a Garden, and carefullest culture,
weeding and defense, should not think their children should be educated or
planted in the Wilderness. It is not unobservable, that all flying Fowls do
know their Mates, and live by couples, and use copulation with no other: and
that the Beasts and more terrestrial Fowl do copulate but only so often as is
necessary to generation. And shall Man be worse than Beasts?

. 31. Nature binds us, not to violate the propriety of our neighbor, in any
thing that is his, by fraud, theft, or robbery, or any other means, but to
preserve and promote his just commodity as our own.

. 32. Government and Justice being so necessary to the order and welfare of the
world, Nature teaches us that bribery, fraud, Aristotle, Ethic. 4. says,
Every lie is evil, and to be avoided.

The Roman Laws against perjury and false witness and bribery, tell us what
nature says thereabout. Read in Lamprid. how vehement Alexander Severus was
against bribery.

Fundamentum justitiae est fides, id est, dictorum conventorumque constantia
and veritas. Cicer.


false-witness, and all means that pervert Justice must be avoided, and equity
promoted among all.

. 33. The Tongue of Man being made to be the Index of his mind, and humane
converse being maintained by humane credibility and confidence; Nature tells
us, that Lying is a crime, which is contrary to the nature and societies of
Mankind.

. 34. And Nature tells us, that it is unjust and criminal to slander or
injuriously defame our neighbor, by railing, reviling, or malicious reports;
and that we ought to be regardful of his honor as of our own.

. 35. Nature tells us, that, both in obedience to God, the just disposer of
all, and for our own quietness and our neighbors peace, we should all be
contented with our proper place and due condition and estate, and not to envy
the prosperity of our neighbor, nor covetously draw from him to enrich
ourselves.

Because God's will and interest is above our own, and the public welfare to
be preferred before any private persons; and therefore all are to live quietly
and contentedly in their proper places, contributing to the common good.

. 36. Nature teaches us, De altero temere affirmare periculosum est, propter
occultas hominum voluntates multiplicesque naturas. Cic.
that it is our duty to love humane Nature in our enemies, and pity others in
their infirmities and miseries, and to forgive all pardonable failings, and not
to seek revenge and right our selves by our brothers ruin: but to be
charitable to the poor and miserable, and do our best to succor them, and help
them out of their distress.

All these are our undeniable duties to GOD and our Neighbors.

. 37. Nature also tells us, that every man, as a rational lover of himself,
should have a special care of his own felicity, A man that loved his belly,
desiring to be admitted into Cato 's family, Cato answered, Non possum cum tali
vivere, cujus palatum plus sapit, quam cerebrum. Erasm.

Nullus mihi per otium dies exit. Partem noctium studiis vendico, non vaco
somno sed succumbo. Senec. What mean you to make your prison so strong, said
Plato to one that pampered his body. Ficin. in vit. Plat.

Vires corporis sunt vires carceris, inquit Petrarch. l. 1. dial. 5. Cato homo
virtuti simillimus-qui nunquam recte fecit ut facere videretur, sed quia aliter
facere non poterat: cuique id solum visum est rationem habere; quod haberet
justitiam. Velleius Pater. l. 2.

Magna pars libertatis est, been moratus venture. Senec.

Plato says, God is the temperate man's Law, and Pleasure the intemperate
man's.

Temperantia voluptatibus imperat: alias odit atque abigit: alias dispensat and
ad sanum modum dirigit: nec unquam ad illas propter ipsas venit. Sen.

Scit optimum esse modum cupidorum, non quantum velis, sed quantum debeas
sumere. Senec.

Animis tenduntur infidiae -- ab ea quae penitus in omni sensu implicata
infidit imitatrix boni, voluptas, malorum autem matter omnium: cujus blanditiis
corrupti, quae natura bona sunt, quia dulcedine hac and scabia carent, non
cernimus satis. Cic. de leg. 1. p. 226.


and know wherein it does consist, and use all prudent diligence to attain it,
and make it sure.

. 38. Nature tells us, that it is the duty of all men to keep Reason clear,
and their Wills conformable to its right apprehensions, and to keep up a
constant Government over their Thoughts, Affections, Passions, Senses,
Appetite, Words and Actions, conforming them to our Makers Laws.

. 39. Nature tells us, that all our Time should be spent to the Ends of our
Creation, and all our Mercies improved to those Ends, and all things in the
world be estimated by them, and used as Means conducing to them.

. 40. Nature commands us to keep our Bodies in sobriety, temperance and
chastity, and not be inordinate or irregular in eating, drinking, lust, sleep,
idleness, apparel, recreation, or any lower things.

. 41. It commands us also watchfully and resolutely to avoid or resist all
temptations which would draw us to any of these sins.

. 42. And it teaches us patiently to bear our crosses, and improve our trials
to our benefit, and see that they breed not any sinful distempers in our Minds
or Lives.

Ampliat aetatis spatium sibi vir bonus; hoc est, vivere bis, vita posse priore
frui. Martial.
. 43. And Nature tells us, that this obedient pleasing of our Maker, and
holy, righteous, charitable and sober living, should be our greatest pleasure
and delight: and that we should thus spend our lives even to the last; waiting
patiently in peaceful joyful hopes for the blessed end, which our righteous
Governor has allotted for our reward.

As a summary of what the light of Nature may teach man, see the Stoics
Ethics collected by Barlaam; (much of which may be found in Seneca, and is
confessed and praised by Cicero, though he chide them for their new words and
schism) where you will see, that the Stoics were wiser and better men, than
the Epicureans would have men believe.

Oculos vigilia fatigatos cadentesque in opere detinco -- Male mihi esse malo,
quam molliter: si mollis es, paulatim effeminatur animus, atque in
similitudinem otii sui and pigritiae, in qua jacet, solvitur. Dormio minimum,
and brevissimo somno utor: satis est mihi vigilare defiisse, Aliquando dormisse
scio, aliquando suspicor. Senec.


All this is evidently legible in nature, to any man that has not lost his
reason, or refuses not considerately to use it. And he that will read but
Antonine, Epictetus and Plutarch, (who are full of such precepts, that I refer
you to the whole Books instead of particular citations) may see, that he who
will deny a life of Piety, Justice and Temperance, to be the duty and rectitude
of Man, must renounce his reason and natural light, as well as supernatural
revelation.

. 44. Reason also teaches us, that when the corruptions, sluggishness, or
appetite of the flesh, resists or draws back from any of this duty, or
tempts us to any sin, Reason must rebuke it, and hold the reins, and keep its
government, and not suffer the flesh to bear it down, and to prevail.

CHAP. XI. III. Of GOD's Relation to Man as his BENEFACTOR and his END. Or as
his CHIEF GOOD.
THE Three Essential Principles in God, do eminently give out themselves to Man
in his Three Divine Relations to us. His Power, Intellect and Will; His
Omnipotency, Omniscience and Goodness; in his being our Owner, our Ruler, and
our Chief Good. The two first I have considered already; our Omnipotent Lord or
Owner, and our most wise Governor, and our Counter-relations with the duties
thereof. I now come to the third.

For the right understanding whereof, let us a little consider of the Image of
God in Man, Porro coeli generationis authorem sum Bonum atque
excellentissimum (asseruit Plato): ejus quippe quod sit in rebas conditis
pulcherrimum, eum esse conditorem quem intelligibilium omnium constet esse
praestantissimum. Itaque quoniam hujusmodi Deus est, coelam vero
praestantissimo illi simile est, quoniam pulcherrimum cernitur, nulli creaturae
erit similius, quam Deo soli. Laert. in Plat.
in which we must here see him. It is Man's WILL, which is his ultimate,
perfective, imperant faculty; it is the proper subject of Moral habits, and
principal agent of Moral acts: And therefore in all Laws and Converse, the WILL
is taken for the Man; and nothing is further morally Good or Evil, Virtuous or
culpably Vicious, than it is Voluntary. The INTELLECT is but the Director of
the WILL: Its actions are not the perfect actions of the Man: If it apprehend
bare Truth without respect to Goodness, its Object is not the highest or
felicitating or attractive Object, and therefore the act can be no higher: if
it apprehend any Being or Truth as good, it apprehends it but as a servant or
guide to the WILL, to bring it thither to be received by LOVE. The perfect
excellency of the object of humane acts is Goodness, and not mere Entity or
Verity. Therefore the excellentest faculty is the Will: It is Good that is the
final-Cause in the object of all humane acts: Therefore it is the fruition of
Good which is the perfective final Act; and that fruition of Good as Good, is,
though introductorily by Vision, yet finally and proximately by Complacencies,
which is nothing else but Love in its most essential act, delighting in its
attained object. And for the executive Power, though in the order of its
natural being, it be before the Will, yet in its operation ad extra, it is
after it, and commanded by it.

Accordingly, while we see God but in this Glass, we must conceive that his
Principle of Understanding and Power, stand in the foresaid order as to his
WILL: and his Omnipotence and Omniscience, to that eminently-moral Goodness,
which is the perfection of his will. (The natural goodness of his Essence
filling all.)

Therefore here note, that this Attribute of God (his GOODNESS) does make Him
our Chief Good, in a twofold respect, both EFFICIENTLY and FINALLY. In some
sort it is so with the other Attributes: His Power is Efficiently the spring of
our being and actions; and finally and objectively it terminateth our
submission and our trust. His Wisdom is the principle of his Laws, and also the
object and end of our enquiries and understandings. But his Goodness is the
EFFICIENT of all our good in its perfection of causality, and that END of our
Souls, Nihil est Deo similius and gratiis, quam vir, animo perfecto bonus, qui
hominibus caeteris antecellit, quod ipse a Diis immortalibus distat. Luc Apul.
de Deo Socr.
which is commonly called ULTIMATE ULTIMUS. So that to submit to his Power, and
to be ruled by his Wisdom, is, as I may say, initially our end. But to be
pleasing to his good will, and to be pleased in his good will; that is to Love
Him, and to be beloved by Him, is the absolute perfection and end of man.

Therefore under this his Attribute of Goodness, God is to be spoken of both as
our BENEFACTOR and our END; which is to be indeed our summum bonum.

. 1. Man has his Being, and all the good which he possesses, from God, as the
sole first Efficient by Creation.

. 2. Therefore God alone is the Universal Grand BENEFACTOR of the world,
besides whom they have no other, but merely subordinate to him.

No creature can give us any thing which is originally its own, having nothing
but what it has received from God: Therefore it is no more to us, but either a
gift of God, or a Messenger to bring us his gift; they have nothing themselves
but what they have received: nor have we any sort of Good, either Natural,
Moral, of Mind, or Body, or Fortune, or Friends, but what is totally from the
Bounty of our Creator, and as totally from him, as if no creature had ever been
his instrument. Quis dubitare potest mi Lucili, quin Deorum immortalium munas
sit quod vivimus. Senec.

Prope Deus est, tecum est, intus est: Ita dico Lucili, sacer intra nos
spiritus sedet, bonorum malorumque nostrorum observator and custos. Hic prout a
nobis tractatur, ita and nos tractat ipse: Bonus vero vir sine Deo nemo est. An
potest aliquis supra formam, nisi ab illo, adjatus exurgere. Ille dat consilia,
magnifica and erecta in unoquoque bono viro. Senec.




. 3. As God's Goodness is that by which he communicates Being and all Good to
all his Creatures, and is his most completive Attribute, in point of
Efficiency, so is it that Attribute which is in genere causae finalis, the
finis ultimate ultimus of all his works. God can himself have no ultimate end
but Himself: and his rational creatures can have no other lawful ultimate End:
And in Himself, it is his Goodness, which is completely and ultimately that End.

Here I am to show, I. That God himself can have no ultimate end but Himself.
II. That Man should have no other. III. That God, as in his Goodness, is
ultimate ultimus, the End of Man.

I. 1. That which is most Beloved of God is his ultimate End: but God Himself
is most beloved of Himself: Therefore he is his own ultimate End.

The reason of the major Proposition is, Because to be the ultimate end, and to
be maxim amatum, is all one* Finis quaerentis has respect to the Means of
attainment, and is that cujus amore media eliguntur and applicantur. This God
is not capable of, (speaking in propriety) because he never wants his End.
Finis fruitionis is that which amando fruimur; which we love complacentially in
full attainment: And so God does still enjoy his end: and to have it in Love is
to enjoy it.

The Minor is past controversy.

Obj. But if God have not finem quaerentis, then in every instant he enjoys
his end: and if so, then he uses no means at all: for what need any means be
used for that end, which is not sought but still enjoyed. And consequently,
where there is no means there is no end.

Answ. As finis signifies nothing but effectum, viz. perfectionem operis,
which is but finis terminativus; so it is not always at present attained; and
God may be said to use means, that is, subordinate efficients or instruments to
accomplish it. But as it signifies causam finalem, scil. cujus amore res fit,
so far as it may (without all imperfection) be ascribed to him, he must be said
continually to enjoy it: And yet to use means for it, but not as wanting it,
but in the same instant using and enjoying: that is, He constantly
communicates himself to his creatures, and constantly loves himself so
communicated. He is the first efficient and ultimate end, without any
interposing instant of Time, (were Eternity divisible) but in order of Nature,
he is the Efficient before he is the End enjoyed, but not before the End
intended. He still sends forth the beams of his own Glory, and still takes
pleasure in them so sent forth: His works may be increased and attain
perfection, (called finem operis by some) but his Complacency is not increased
or perfected in his works, but is always perfect: As if the Sun took constant
pleasure in its own emitted light and heat, though the effects of both on
things below were most various. God is still pleased in that which still is, in
all his own works, though his works may grow up to more perfection.

Or if any think fit to say, that God does quaerere finem, and that he may
enjoy more of it at one time than another, yet must he confess, that nothing
below the complacency of his own will, in his own emitted beams of Glory,
shining in his works, is this his ultimate end.

2. That which is the Beginning must be the End: But God is the Beginning of all
his works: therefore he is the End of all. He himself has no Beginning or
Efficient, and consequently no final cause of himself: but his works have
himself for the Efficient, and for their End: that is, He that made them,
intended in the making of them, that they should be illustrious with his
communicated beams of Glory, and thereby amiable to his will, and should all
serve to his complacency.

If the End were lower than the Beginning, there would be no proportion; and
the Agent would sink down below himself.

3. If any thing besides God were his ultimate End, it must thereby be in part
Deifi'd, or his actions debased by the lowness of the End: but these are
impossibilities. The Actions are no nobler than their End: and the End is more
noble than the Means as such.

4. The ultimate End is the most amiable and delectable: The Creature is not to
God the most amiable and delectable: Therefore the Creature is not his ultimate
end. The first Argument was from the Act, this from the Object.

5. The ultimate end is that in which the Agent does finally acquiesce: God
does not finally acquiesce in any creature. Therefore no creature is his
ultimate end. That the finis cui is properly the ultimate end, and the finis
cujus is subordinate to it, Cicero shows in Piso 's speech, l. 5. de finib.
p. 188. In nobis ipsis ne intelligi quidem, ut propter aliam quampiam rem,
verbi gratia, propter voluptatem, nos amemus. Propter nos enim illam, non
propter eam nosmetipsos diligimus. Quid est quod magis perspicuum est, non modo
carum sibi quemque, verum etitiam vehementer carum.


6. That which is God's ultimate End is loved simply for it self, and not as a
means to any higher end: The Creature is not loved by him simply for it self,
but as a means to a higher end, ( viz. his complacency in his glory shining in
it): Ergo, it is not his ultimate end. The ultimate end has no end; but the
creatures have an end, viz. the complacency of God in his glory shining in the
creature.

Obj. But you confound the final Object and the final Act: God's complacency of
love is his final Act, but our enquiry is of the final Object.

Answ. The finis cui, or personal end is most properly the ultimate, he for
whose sake, or for whom the thing is done: But this is God only, and therein he
is both the act and object. He that did velle creaturas, did velle eas ad
complacentiam propriae voluntatis. The question is not of the actus
complacentiae, but of the actus creandi vel volendi creaturarum existentiam:
which he does propter voluntatis impletionem, and inde complacentiam; which is
the final act, and the final object of the creating act; But for the actus
complacentiae it is not actus intentionis but fruitionis; and therefore has no
end, above it self: And the final object of that Complacency, is not the
Creature it self, but the Impletion of the Divine will in the Creature; yea,
the Image of his Omnipotency, Wisdom and Goodness shining in the Creation, is
not loved propter se, ultimately; but for the sake of that Divine Essence and
Perfection of which it is the Image: (as we love the Image of our friend for
his sake;) so that when all is done, God himself is his own end in all his
works, so far as (very improperly) he may be said to intend an end.

Or if you could prove the Creature to be the Objectum finale, that proves him
not to be properly the finis ultimus: For that is a difference between Man's
agency and Gods: Man is an Agent made and acting for his final Object, and more
ignoble than his Object (as the eye of a Fly that beholds the Sun): But God
is an Agent more noble than the Object, who gave the Object it self its being,
and made it of nothing, for himself; and so the Object is for his final Act.

Obj. But God being Perfect needs nothing, nor can receive any addition of
perfection or blessedness; and therefore it is not any addition of Good to
himself which he intends in the Creation, and consequently it is his ultimate
end to do the Creature good.

Answ. All the antecedent part is granted, and is anon to be further asserted:
But the last consequence is denied; because there is no other end beside the
addition of Good to himself, which God may intend, so far as he may be said to
intend an end. He does all the Good to the Creature which it receives, but not
ultimately for the Creatures sake.

II. That man should have no ultimate End but God, (that is, ultimate ultimus
as its called) is proved in what is said: and the fuller opening of it,
belongs to the next Chapter.

III. It is God in all his Perfections, Omnipotency, Wisdom and Goodness, that
is man's ultimate end; but it is the last which supposes both the other, and to
which man's will, which must perform the most perfect final act, is most fully
suited: And therefore is in a special sort, our ultimate end. The Omnipotency
of God, is truly the efficient, dirigent and final Cause of all things, but it
is most eminent in Efficiency: The Wisdom of God is truly the efficient,
dirigent and final cause of all things: but it is most eminent in Direction and
Government: The Goodness of God is truly the efficient, dirigent and final
cause: But it is most eminent in being the perfective efficient, and final
Cause.

. 4. Gods ultimate end in Creation and Providence, is not any supply or
addition of Perfection or Blessedness in himself; as being absolutely perfect
in himself, and capable of no addition.

But those who think that God does produce all things ex necessitate naturae
from Eternity, say, that as the Tree is not perfect without its fruits, so
neither is God without his works: They say with Balbus in Cicero, and other
Stoics, that the World is the most excellent Being; and that God is but the
soul of the World: and though the Soul be a complete soul if it had no body,
yet it is not a complete Man: and as the Tree is complete in genere causae
without the fruit, yet not as a Totum containing those effects ab essentia
which are its Part and End: So say they, God may be perfect without the World,
as he is only the Soul and part of the World; but he is not a complete world,
nor in toto.

Answ. 1. That God is not the soul or constitutive cause of the World, but
somewhat much greater, is proved before Chap. 4.
: And also that it was not from Eternity; and consequently that he created it
not by natural necessity: The foundation therefore being overthrown, the
building falls. Those that hold the foresaid opinion must hold, that God is
in point of duration, an eternal efficient, matter, form and end; and that in
order of Nature, he is first an Efficient principle causing matter, and
secondly, he is an efficient with matter, and in the third instant he is the
form of the effected matter, and in the fourth instant he is the end of his
operations herein. And if you call the efficient Principle only by the name of
God, then you grant what I prove and you seemed to deny: But if he be not God
as the mere efficient and end, but also as the matter; then you make every
stone, and Serpent, and every thief and murderer, and devil, to be part of God,
and make him the subject of all the sin and evil, all the weakness, folly and
mutations which be in the World: (with the other absurdities before mentioned).
And if you say, that he is God, as efficient, form, and end, and not as matter,
then you contradict your self, because the form and matter are parts of the
same being: And whether you call him God as the form only (and so make him but
part of Being, and consequently imperfect, and consequently not God) or as
matter and form also, and so make him a compounded being, still you make him
imperfect, in denying his simplicity or unity, and as guilty of all the
imperfections of matter, and of composition: And you make one part of God more
imperfect than the rest, as being but an effect of it. All which are
inconsistent with the nature of God, and with the nature of Man and every
Creature, who is hereby made a part of God.

2. Quid enim est aliud natura quam Deus? and divina ratio? toti mundo
partibusque ejus inserta? Ergo nihil agis ingratissime mortalium, qui te negas
Deo debere, sed naturae; quia nihil natura fine Deo est, nec Deus sine natura,
sed idem est uterque nec distat officio. Senec. de Benefic.
If this had been true of the World as consisting of its constitutive causes,
that it is God in perfection, and eternal, etc. yet it could not be true of the
daily-generated and perishing beings. There are millions of men and other
animals, that lately were not, what they are: Therefore as such they were no
eternal parts of God, because as such they were not eternal: Therefore if God
brought them forth for his own Perfection, it would follow that he was before
imperfect, and consequently not God; and that his Perfections are mutable and
perishing. Therefore at least some other cause of these must be found out.

And as for the similitudes in the objection, I answer; 1. That the fructifying
of a Tree is an act of Generation; Leg. Aenean. Gazeum de Anima 3. P.T. 2 Gr.
lat. p. 385, 386, etc.
and the ends of it are partly the use (for food) to superior sensitive
Creatures, especially man; and partly the propagation of its species, because
it is mortal. Fructification is indeed its perfection, but that is because it
is not made for it self, but for another. Sic vos non vobis, may be written
upon all. But God is neither mortal needing a propagation of the species, nor
is he subservient to any other, and finally for its use.

And as for the Soul, it made not the matter of its own body, but found it
made, though in the formation of it, it might be so efficient as domicilium
sibi fabricare. But God made all matter of nothing, and gave the World
whatsoever it is or has; And therefore was Perfect himself before: For an
imperfect being could never have been the cause of such a frame: Therefore he
needed no domicilium for himself, nor as an imperfect Part (a form) to concur
to the constitution of a whole. But he is the efficient, dirigent and final
cause of the World and all things, but not the constituent or essential; for
then the Creature and Creator were all one, and God debased, and the Creature
deified: But he is to them a supra-essential cause; even more than a form and
soul, while he is a total efficient of all.

3. If all that is in the Objection had been proved, it would not at all shake
the main design of my present discourse, which is to prove that God is our
Grand Benefactor and Chief Good! and that he is man's ultimate end. For if the
World were his Body, and he both its Efficient and its Soul, he would be the
cause of all its Good; and the Cause would be more excellent than the Effect:
And if our Souls that never made the matter of our Bodies, are yet the noblest
part of us, and far more excellent than the Body; much more would God that made
or caused all the Matter and Order in the World, be more excellent than that
World which he effected: And as the Soul is not for the Body as its ultimate
end, (though it be the Life of the Body, and its great Benefactor,) but the
Body is finally more for the Soul, though the Soul need not the Body, so much
as the Body needs the Soul; and as the Horse is finally for the Rider, and
not the Rider for the Horse; though the Horse needs his Master more than the
Master does the Horse; (for the Horses life is preserved by the Master, when
the Master is but accommodated in his Journey by his Horse;) Even so, though
the World need God, and he needs not the World, and God gives being and life
to the World, which can give nothing at all to him, yet the World is finally
for God, and not God for the World. The noblest and first Being is still the
End.

And the generated part of the World, which is not formally eternal, but does
oriri and interire, is it that our dispute does most concern which the
Objection does no whit invalidate.

. 5. The same Will of God which was the free efficient, Goodness signifies
more than utility or Pleasure to our selves: As when we call a Man, a good Man,
a good Scholar, a good Judge, etc. And so does evil signify on the contrary.

Bonum est quod sui ipsius gratia expetendum est. Aristot. Rhet. 1.

Bonum omnis originis and ortus finis est. Id. Metaph. l. ae. c. 3.


is the End of all his Works ad extra.

Gods Essence has no Efficient or final Cause, but is the efficient and final
cause of all things else: They proceeded from his Power, his Wisdom and his
good will; and they bear the Image of his Power, Wisdom, and Good Will; and he
loves his own Image in them, and loves them as they bear his Image; and
loves his Image for Himself. So that the act of his Love to Himself is
necessary, though voluntary; and so is the act of his Love to his Image, and to
all the Goodness of the Creature, while it is such: But he freely and not
necessarily made and continues the Creature in his Image; and needs not the
Glass or Image, (being self-sufficient) so that his Creature is the mediate
Object, Maximum Bonum maxim semper expetendum. Aristot. 1* Eth. c. 7. Duplex
bonum est: alterum quod absolute and per se bonum sit; alterum quod alicui bono
sit and usui. Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. 12.

Veteres probe summum bonum definierunt, id ad quod omnia referuntur. Arist.
Eth. 1. c. 1.


his Image on the Creature is the ultimate created Object; his own perfections
to which that Image relates, is the objectum simpliciter ultimatum; his
complacency or love is the Actus ultimus; and that very act is the object of
his precedent act of Creation, or volition of the Creatures: But all this is
spoken according to the narrow imperfect capacity of man, who conceives of God
as having a prius and posterius in his acts, which is but respectively and
denominatively from the order of the objects. In short, Gods free will is the
Beginning of his works ad extra; and the complacency of that will in his works
as Good in relation to his own perfections, is the END: And therefore he is
said to Rest when he saw that all his works were Good.

. 6. Whatsoever is the fullest expression, It is a saying of Pliny's, that as
Pearls though they lie in the bottom of the Sea, are yet much nearer kin to
Heaven, as their splendor and excellency shows; so a godly and generous
soul, has more dependence on Heaven, whence it comes, than on earth where it
abides.
and Glorifying demonstration of God in the Creature, must needs be the chief
created excellency.

Because he loves Himself first, and the Creature for Himself: And seeing the
Creature has all from him which is good and amiable in it, it must needs
follow, that those parts are most amiable and best, which have most of the
impression of the Creators excellencies on them. Not that he has greater
Perfections to imprint on one Creature than another, but the impression of
those Perfections, is much greater on one, than on another.

. 7. The Happier therefore God will make any Creature, the more will be
communicate to it of the Image and demonstration of his own goodness, and so
will both love it the more, for his own Image, and cause it to love him the
more, which is the chief part of his Image.

. 8. The Goodness of God is conceived of by our narrow minds, in three
notions, as it were in three degrees of altitude: The Highest is, The infinite
perfections of his Essence as such: The second is, The infinite perfection of
his Will as such, which is called His Holiness, and the Fountain of Morality;
The third is that one part of his Wills perfection, which is his Benignity to
his Creatures, which we call his Goodness in a lower notion, as relative to our
selves, because he is inclined by it to Do us good: This is his Goodness in
condescension.

. 9. Though all this is but one in God, yet because our minds are fain to
receive it as in several parts or notions, we may therefore not only
distinguish them, but compare them, as the Objects of our Love.

. 10. Man usually begins at the lowest, and loves God first, for his
Benignity and Love to us, before he rises to the higher acts.

And this is not an irregular motion of a lapsed Soul, in its return to God, so
be it we make haste in our ascent, and make no stay in these lower acts;
otherwise it will be privatively sinful.

. 11. Therefore God multiplyeth Mercies upon Man, that he might facilitate this
first act of Love by gratitude.

Not that these Mercies being good to our selves, should lead us to love God
ultimately for our selves; But they should help us first to love him for our
selves, as the immediate passage to a higher act of Love, with which we must
love Him in and for Himself, and our selves for Him.

. 12. Therefore God has planted into our Natures the Principle of self-love,
that it might suit our Natures to the Mercies of God, and make them sweet to
us: Not that we should arise to no higher an esteem of them, but that this
sweetness in them which respects our selves, and is relished by self-love,
should lead us to the Fountain of perfect Goodness from which they flow.

Our very senses and appetites are given us to this end, not that we should
judge by no higher faculties, but that the delights of the patible or sensible
qualities in the Creatures, by affecting the sense, might presently represent
to the higher faculties, the sweetnesses of Infinite Goodness to the Soul; and
so we might by all ascend to God.

. 13. Those mercies therefore are the greatest, Bonum summum est animi operatio
secundum virtutom optimam and perfectissimam in vita perfecta. Aristot. Rhet. 1.

Tria sunt genera bonorum; maxima animi, secunda corporis; externa tertia:
Cicero 3. Tuscul.

Nihil bonum nisi quod honestum; nihil malum nisi quod turpe. Cicero. At. l.
10.


which reveal most of God, with the least impediments of our ascent unto him:

. 14. Therefore his Love most revealed and communicated, and his perfect
Goodness most manifested to the Soul, is the Greatest Mercy; and all corporal
Mercies are to be estimated and desired but as they subserve and conduce to
these, and not as they are pleasing to our flesh or senses.

. 15. The Perfect Goodness of the Will of God, though it contain Benignity, and
Mercy, yet is not to be measured by the good which he does to us our selves* or
to any Creature; But its highest excellency consists in its Essential
Perfection, and the Perfect Love that God has to himself, and in the
conformity of his Will to his most perfect Wisdom, which knows what is to be
willed ad extra; and in his complacency in all that is good as such. If a man
must love his Country better than himself, then God much more: And then self
is not to be the highest in our Love.

Respublica nomen universae civitatis est, pro qua mori, and cui nos totos
dare, and in qua omnia nostra ponere, and quasi consecrare debemus. Cicer. 2.
de leg.




When self-love so far blinds us, as to make our Interest the Standard to
judge of the goodness of God, we do but show that we are fallen from God unto
our selves, and that we are setting up our selves above him, and debasing him
below our selves: As if we and our Happiness were that ultimate end, and he and
his Goodness were the Means, and had no other Goodness but that of a means to
us and our felicity! If he made us, he must needs have absolute Propriety in
us, and made us for himself: To measure his Goodness by our own Interest, is
more unwise than to measure the Sea in our hand, or the Sun and all the Orbs by
our span. And to measure it by the Interest of the Universe, Laudandus est is
qui mortem oppetit pro Republica, qui doceat patriam esse chariorem nobis, quam
nosmetipsos: Estque illa vox inhumana and scelerata little, qui negant se
recusare, quo minus ipsis mortuis terrarum omnium deflagratio consequatur.
Cicer. 3* de finib.
is to judge of that which is infinite, by that which is finite; betwixt which
there is no proportion. As God is infinitely Better than the World, so he is
infinitely more Amiable, and therefore must Infinitely more Love himself than
all the World; and therefore so to do, is Infinite excellency and Perfection in
his Will. But the out-going of his Will to the Creature, by way of causative
volition, is free; and conducted by that Wisdom, which-knoweth what is fit, and
what degrees of Communication are most eligible to God. God is Perfect without
his Works: He had wanted nothing if he had never made them. He will not herein
do all that he is simply Able to do, but all that his Wisdom sees fittest to
be done. He was as Good before he made the World as since; And those that think
he caused it eternally, must confess him in order of Nature to be first perfect
in Himself, and to have more Goodness than all which he communicates to the
World. He was as Good before this present generation of men on Earth had any
being! He is as good before he brings us to the Heavenly Glory, as he will be
after; It was the erroneous reasoning of the Philosophers, to prove the World
eternal, that Optimum and Pulchrum, God and the World must be inseparable; and
so to conclude the Being of that, which their fancies think best to be; (as
Ammonius argues with Zachar. Mytilen.): whereby they might as well prove (as
Zach. tells Ammon*) that Plato and Aristotle were from eternity, and must
never die. It is foolish to reason against sense and experience, or to deny
that which is, because we think that it should be otherwise.
though before he did not so much good to us. It is no diminution of his
Goodness, to say, that he made millions of Toads, and Flies, and Spiders, whom
he could have made men if he had pleased; or to say, that he made millions of
Men, whom he could have made Angels; nor that he made not every Clod or Stone a
Starr or Sun: nor that he suffers men to be tormented by each others cruelty,
or by such diseases as the Stone and Strangury, Convulsions, Epilepsies, etc.
nor that men at last must die, and their bodies rot and turn to dust. That
these things are done, is past dispute: And that God is good is past dispute:
And therefore that all this is consistent with this Goodness, is past dispute:
and consequently that his goodness is not to be measured by so low a thing as
humane or any Creature Interest.

If you say, that all this is hurtful to the Individuals, but not to the
Universe; to which it is better that there be a mixture of evil with good, than
that every part had a perfection in it self: I answer:

1. It seems then that the good which you measure Gods goodness by, is not
the Interest of any individual Creature, at least that is in this lower World.
For you confess, that the good which would make it Happy, is given to it
limitedly, and with mixtures of permitted or inflicted evil; and that God could
have given them more of that goodness, if he would: God could have freed them
from pain and misery; yea, and have given the ignorant more knowledge, and
honesty, and grace. So that it is not our interest that is the measure of his
goodness: And if so, what is it that you call the Universal interest. Surely,
the universality of Rational creatures, has no being but in the Individuals;
and if it be not the welfare of the Individuals, which is the Measure, then is
it not any interest or welfare o the Universe, which is of the same kind: and
for the insensible creatures, they feel neither good nor hurt; and therefore by
your Measure should be none of the Universe, whose interest is the Measure.
Therefore it must be somewhat above the sensible interest of any or all the
Individuals, which you call the Bonum Vniversitatis: and that can be nothing
else but that state and order of the Universe, in which it is conform to the
Idea of the Divine Intellect, and to the Volition of the Divine Will, and so is
fittest for him to take complacency in, as being the measure and reasons of his
own volitions and operations, which he fetches not aliunde; or at least which
are unknown to such as we. No doubt but it is more for the happiness of the
Individuals, that every Dust, and Stone, and Fly, and Beast, and Man were an
Angel: but it is not so.

2. And surely they that believe the evil of sin, and that God could have kept
it out of the world, and saved the Individuals from it, will confess, that
man's interest is not the Measure of God's goodness: especially considering
what consequents also follow sin, both here and hereafter.

3. And as to this lower part of the Universe, how many Nations of the Earth
are drowned in woeful ignorance and ungodliness: how few are the wise, and good,
and peaceable? When God could have sent them Learning, and Teachers, and Means
of Reformation, and have blessed all this Means to their deliverance. So that
the far greater part of this lower world has not so much good as God could
give them; and the infirmities of the best do cause their dolorous complaints.

It is certain that God is infinitely good, and that all his works also are
good in their degree: but withal it is certain, that God in himself is the
Simple Primitive Good, and that created goodness principally consists in a
conformity to his Will, which is the standard and measure of it.

. 16. God as considered in the Infinite Perfections of his Nature and his Will,
is most Amiable, and the object of our highest love.

. 17. But he is not known by us in those Perfections, as seen in themselves
immediately, Cotta tells Vell^iu^, That h^, ^y making ^od (...) of ^eas^s o^
Man, S^ ^u^it Relig^o^ (...): Quidem enim cur De^ as humibus ^ ^do dica^, cum
D^i non modo hominibus non cons^iant, sed o^ni^o nihil c^ent. nihil agant* At
est little c^mia quaedam praestanfere natura, ut ea debeat ipsa per se ad^e
colendam elicere sapientem. (This reason is ^o^ d^ed, but the goodness of God's
Nature p^o^d by his doing good.) -- Quae porro pietas e^debetur, a quo nihil
accepe^is? aut quid o^n no, cujus nullum merit m^t, e^ debere potest? Est enim
Pietas Justitia adversus Deos: cum quibus quid potest nobis esse juris, cum
homini nulla cum Deo sit communitas, sanctitas est scientia colendorum Deorum:
qui q^a ^obrem colendi s^nt non intellige, nullo nec accepto ab us, nec spe^a o
bon^. sic. de Not. Deo. c. 1. p. 32.
but as demonstrated and glorified expressively in his works, in which he
shines to us in his goodness.

. 18. His works therefore are made for the apt revealing of himself as amiable
to the intelligent part of his Creation.

They are the Book in which he has appointed us to read, and the Glass in
which he has appointed us with admiration to behold the Infinite power, Wisdom
and Goodness of the Creator, and in which we may see, that he is not only our
Chief Benefactor, but the Vltimate Object of our Love, and so the End of all
our Motions.

. 19. This third Relation of God to us as our Chief Good, efficiently and
finally, is the highest and most perfective to us, but is not separated from
the former two, but they are all marvelously conjunct, and concur in the
production of most of the subsequent effects of Gods providence.

As the Elements are conjuct, but not confounded in mixed bodies, and in
themselves, are easily to be distinguished, where they are not divided, and
their effects sometimes also distinct, but usually mixed as are the causes; so
is it in the case of these three Great Relations: though God's Propriety extend
further than his Government; because Inanimates and Bruites are capable of one,
and not of the other; yet as to the Rational Creatures, they are in reality of
the same extent. God is as to Right the Owner and the Ruler of all the world,
and also their real Benefactor, and quoad debitum their ultimate end. But as to
consent, on their parts, none but the godly give up themselves to him in any
one of these Relations. In order of Nature, God is first our Owner, and then
our Ruler, and our chief Good or End. His work in the first Relation, is
Arbitrary Disposal of us; his work in the second is to Govern us; and in the
third, Attraction and Felicitating. But he so Disposes of us, as never to
cross his rules of Government; and so governs us, as never to cross his
absolute Propriety; and attracteth and felicitateth us in concent with his
Premiant act of Government; and all sweetly and wonderfully conspire the
perfection of his works.

. 20. All these Relations are often summed up in one name, which principally
imports the last, which is the persective Relation, but truly includes both
the former: and that is, Epicurus vero ex animis hominum extraxit radicitus
Religionem, cum Diis immortalibus and Opem and Gratiam sustulerit. Cum enim and
praestantissimam naturam Dei dicat esse, negat idem esse in Deo gratiam: toliit
id quod maxim proprium est optimae praestantissimaeq, naturae. Id. ibid. p.
33, 34.

Quae enim potest esse sanctitas, si Dii humanae non curant. Id ibid.

Utinam istam caliditatem homimbus Dii ne dedislent: qua perpauci been utuntur;
qui tamen ipsi a male utentibus opprimuntur; innua etabiles autem improbe
utuntur: ut donum hoc divinum Rationis and consilii, ad fraudem hominibus non
ad bonitatem, impertitum esse videatur: sed urgetis, hominum esse istam culpam,
non Deorum -- Resp. At, si medicus sciat eum aegrotum, qui jussus est vinum
sumere, meracius sumpturum statimque periturum, magna sit in culpa: sic vestra
ista providentia reprehendenda, quae rationem dederit iis, quos sciverit ea
perverse and improbe usuros. Non intelligo quid intersit, utrum nemo sit
sapiens, an nemo esse possit. Debebant Dii quidem omnes bonos efficere,
siquidem hominum generi consulebant; sin id minus, bonis quidem consulere
debebant. Cotta in Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 3. p. 105, 106.


That GOD is Our FATHER.

As the Rational Soul does ever include the Sensitive and Vegetative Faculties,
so does God's Fatherly Relation to us include his Dominion and Government. A
Father is thus a kind of Image of God in this Relation: For, 1. he has a
certain Propriety in his children. 2. He is by nature their rightful Governor.
3. He is their Benefactor, (for they are beholden to him for their being and
well-being) Nature causes him to love them, and binds them again to love
him. And the Title [OVR FATHER which art in Heaven] includes all these Divine
Relations to us, but specially expresses the Love and Graciousness of God to
us.

Obj. But I must go against the sense of most of the world, if I take God to be
infinitely or perfectly good: for operari sequitur esse: He that is perfectly
good, will perfectly do good. But do we not see and feel what you said before.
The world is but as a wilderness, and the life of man a misery! We come into
the world in weakness, and in a case in which we cannot help our selves, but
are a pity and trouble to others: we are their trouble that breed us and bring
us up: we are vexed with unsatisfied desires, with troubling passions, with
tormenting pains, and languishing weakness, and enemies malice; with poverty
and care; with losses and crosses, and shame and grief; with hard labor and
studies, with the injuries and spectacles of a Bedlam world, and with fears of
death, and death at last! Our enemies are our trouble, our friends are our
trouble: our Rulers are our trouble, and our inferiors, children and servants
are our trouble: our possessions are our trouble, and so are our wants. And is
all this the effect of perfect Goodness? And the poor Bruits seem more
miserable than we! they labor, and hunger, and die at last to serve our will!
we beat them, use them and abuse them at our pleasure! And all the Inanimates
have no sense of any good! and which is worst of all, the world is like a
Dungeon of ignorance, like an Hospital of madmen for folly and distractedness;
like a band of Robbers for injury and violence, like Tigers for cruelty, like
snarling Dogs for contention, and, in a word, like Hell for wickedness. What
else sets the world together by the ears in wars and bloodshed in all
generations! what makes peacemakers the most neglected men? what makes
virtue and piety the mark of persecution and of common scorn? how small a part
of the world has knowledge or piety? And you tell us of a Hell for most at
last. Is all this the fruit of perfect Goodness. These thoughts have seriously
troubled some.

Answ. He that will ever come to knowledge, must begin at the first Fundamental
Truths, and in his enquiry proceed to lesser Superstructures, and reduce
uncertainties and difficulties to those points which are sure and plain, and
not cast away the plainest certain truths, because they over-take some
difficulties beyond them. The true method of enquiry is, that we first try
whether there be a God that is perfectly Good or not: If this be once proved
beyond all controversy, then all that follows is certainly reconcilable to
it: for Truth and Truth is not contradictory. Now that God is perfectly Good
has been fully proved before: He that gives to all the world, both Heaven,
and Earth, and all the Orbs, all that Good, whether Natural, Gracious or
Glorious, which they possess, is certainly Himself better than all the world:
for he cannot give more Goodness than he has: this is not to be denied by any
man of reason: therefore it is proved that God is perfectly Good. Is God's
making man a free Agent be not against his Goodness, then the sin which a free
Agent commits is no impeachment of Gods Goodness: At verum prius: Ergo --
The reasons why God made man with freewill, the ancient VVriters commonly
render to the Infidels: itenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexand. Arnobius,
Lactantius, Eusebius, Tatianus, Origin, etc. vid. Zachar. Mitylen. Disput. p.
364. B.P. Graeco-lat ^o. 1.
Besides, his Perfections must needs be proportionable: we know that he is
Eternal, as is unquestionably demonstrated: we see by the wonderful frame of
Nature, that he is Omnipotent and Omniscient: and then it must needs be, that
his Goodness must be commensurate with the rest.

Therefore to come back again upon every consequent which you understand not,
and to deny a fundamental principle, which has been undeniably demonstrated;
this is but to resolve that you will not know. By this course you may deny any
demonstrated truth in Mathematics, when you meet with difficulties among the
superstructed consequents.

Let us therefore methodically proceed: We have proved that God is the cause of
all the Goodness in the world, in Heaven and Earth, and therefore must needs be
Best himself. And it is certain, that all the sins and calamities which you
mention are in the world, and that the creature has all those imperfections:
Siquidem anima regalem Majestatem ostendit, null us dominio subjecta, and
propriae potestatis, tanquam imago Dei communia cum archetypo quaedam habens.
Greg. Nyssen. citat. etiam in Caesarii Dial. 3. The Ancients commonly make the
Freedom of the will as well as Rationality, to be God's natural Image on the
Soul.

See especially the full discourse of Nemesius, de Nature. hom. cap. 39, 40, 41.
Lege Pennotti propugnacul. libert.


therefore it is certain that these two Verities are consistent, what ever
difficulty appears to you in the reconciling them. Thus far there is no
matter of doubt. And next we are therefore certain, that the Measure of God's
Goodness is not to be taken from the Creatures interest. And yet we know that
his Goodness inclines him to communicate goodness and felicity to his
creatures: for all the Good in the world is from him. It remains therefore,
that he is good, necessarily and perfectly: and that he does all well
whatsoever he does: and that there is in the Creature a higher Goodness than
its own felicity, even the Image of God's Power, Wisdom and Goodness, in which
his Holiness and Justice have their place. And that this Goodness of the
Universe (which consists in the Glorious appearances of God in it, and the
suitableness of all to his Will and Wisdom) includes all things except sin,
which are contained in your objection; and that punishment of sinners, though
it be malum physicum to them, is a moral good, and glorifieth God's Justice and
Holiness: and even the permission of sin it self is good, though the sin be
bad. And yet that God will also glorify that part of his Goodness which
consists in Benignity; for he has an amor beneficentiae, of which the
creature only is the object; but of his amor complacentiae he himself is the
chief object, and the creature but the secondary, so far as it participateth of
Goodness. (And Complacency is the essential act of Love.) Think but what a
wonderful Fabric he has made of all the Orbs, composed into One World! and
can you possibly have narrow thoughts of his Goodness? He has placed more
Physical Goodness in the nature of one silly Bird, or Fly, or Worm, than humane
wit is able to find out; much more in Plants, in Beasts, in Men, in Sea and
Land, in the Sun, and fixed Stars, and Planets: Our understandings are not
acquainted with the thousandth thousandth thousandth part of the Physical
goodness which he has put into his creatures: there may be more of the
wonderful skill, and power, and goodness of God, laid out on one of those
Stars, that seems smallest to our sight, than millions of humane intellects, if
united, were able to comprehend. And who knows the number any more than the
magnitude and excellency of those Stars. What man can once look up toward the
Firmament in a Star light night, Si quis omnia alia habeat, valetudinem,
divitias, etc. sed malus ex confesso sit, improbabis illum. tem siquis nihil
habet eorum quae retulit, careat pecunia, clientum turba, avorum and proavorum
serie, si ex confesso bonus fit, probas illum. Ergo hoc unum bonum hominis,
quod qui habet, etiamsi aliis destituitur, laudandus est; quod qui non habet,
in omnium aliorum copia damnatur ac rejicitur. Senec.

Inter fines is qui perfectus est, semper praecellit imperfectum. Perfectus
porro est quo admoto, nullo amplius opus est. Arist. Mig. Mor. 1 c. 3. and 1
Rhet. c. 7. Finis est cujus gratia omnia comparantur, -- Majus bonum est finis,
quam quod finis non est. and Met. 2. c. 2. Quod per se bonum est, suaque vi and
natura, id omne finis est.

Nothing commoner in Philosophy, than that Publicae saluti privaca incolumitas
est postponenda. Therefore self-love must not persuade us, that there is
nothing higher than our own good to be intended.


or once read a Treatise of Astronomy, and then compare it with his Geography,
and compare those far more excellent Orbs with this narrower and darker world
we live in, and not be wrapped up into the astonishing admiration of the Power,
Wisdom and Goodness of the Creator? When the anatomizing of the body of one man
or beast might wrap up any considerate man into Galen's admiration and praises
of the Maker! and how many myriades of such bodies has God created? and how
much more excellent are the forms or souls than any of those bodies? And how
little know we how incomparably more excellent the nature of Angels may be than
ours? and what glorious Beings may inhabit the more glorious Orbs? and yet can
you think meanly of the Creator's Goodness?

O but you say, that all these lower Creatures have still the forementioned
sorrows and imperfections.

I answer you, 1. They were not made Gods, but Creatures, and therefore were
not to be perfect. 2. It is the corrupt and blinded sensual mind which cries
out for want of sensible pleasure, and can see no goodness in any thing but
this: but true reason tells any man that has it, that our sensible pleasure
is a thing too low to be the highest excellency of the creature, and to be the
ultimate end of God: and that the glory of the whole world, even the inanimate
parts as well as the animate, showing the glory of the Infinite Creator is the
excellency of the world. What if the Sun, and Stars, and Earth, and Sea, the
Fire and Air have no feeling; have they therefore no goodness but what is a
Means to the sensible delights of lower things? Has a Worm more goodness than
the Sun, if it have more feeling? These are the madnesses of sensual men. May
not an excellent Limner, Watch-maker, or other Artificer, make a Picture, a
Watch, or Musical Instrument, merely for his own delight? and may he not
delight in the excellency of it, though you imagine him to have no need of it,
or of the delight? And what is the excellency of such a Picture, but to be the
full demonstration of the Author's skill, in the most full representation of
the thing resembled? Will you say that he has done no good, because he made
not his Picture sensible, and made not its pleasure his ultimate end? Those
things which in particulars we call Bad, are Good as they are parts of the
Universal frame; as many darknings and shadowings in a Picture may conduce to
make it beautiful. The eye is a more excellent part of the body than a finger
or a tooth; and yet it makes to the perfection of the whole that there be
fingers and teeth, as well as eyes: So it does to the perfection of the world,
that there be Men, and Beasts, and Plants, as well as Angels; and poor men as
well as rich, and sick man as well as sound, and pain as well as pleasure. Our
narrow sight that looks but on a spot or parcel of God's work at once, does
judge according to the particular interest of that parcel, (and so we would
have no variety in the world, but every thing of that species which we think
best); But God sees all his works at once, uno intuitu, and therefore sees
what is best in reference to the glory of the Universe; and sees what variety
is beautiful, and what each part should be according to the office and order of
its place.

And 3. does not your own experience reprehend your own complaint as guilty of
contradiction? You would have all things fitted to your particular interest, or
else you think God is not good enough to you: and may not every other creature
say the same as justly as you. And then how would you have a Horse to carry
you, an Ox to plow for you, a Dog to hunt for you, a Hare or Partridge to be
hunted; yea, a bit of flesh to nourish you, yea, or the fruit of trees and
plants, yea, or the earth to bear you, or the air to breath in, or the water to
refresh you. Non quoniam mutabiles vires habemus, improbitatis nostrae culpa in
Deum conferenda est: Non enim in facultat bus sunt vitia, sed in habitibus:
Habitus autem ex electione and voluntate sunt. Itaque nostra ipsorum electione
and voluntate improbi evadimus, non natura sumu^. Nemesius de Not. hom. cap. 41.
For every one of these might expect to be advanced to be as high in sensual
pleasure as you.

He that compares (as aforesaid) the Elements and Orbs which have no sense,
with a Worm that has it, will think that sense has blinded reason, when it is
so overvalued, as to be thought the most excellent thing, or a meet measure of
the goodness of the Creator.

4. Most of the calamities of the Rational creature which you mention, are sin,
and the fruits of sin: and when Man brings in sin, it is good that God should
bring in punishment. It is an act of Justice, and declares his Holiness, and
warns others. Therefore all your complaints against these penal evils, should
be turned only against the sinner, and all should be turned to the praise of
the righteous Governor of the world.

5. And as for the sin it self, which has depraved the world as foully as you
describe it, it is none of the work of God at all; If you say, Homo est
principium suarum operationum. Aristot. 3. Eth.

Nemo nolens bonus and Beatus est. Sen.

Si divitias velis, rem bonam esse scias, nec omnino in te sitam. Si vero
beari, id and bonum est and penes te. Opes enim fortuna ad tempus commodato
dat. Beatitudo autem a nostra voluntate procedit. Epictet.

Read Gassendi Phys. sect. 2. l. 1. c. 6. sintne coelum and sydera habitabilia?
And Card. Nic. Cusanus, l. 2. de Doct. ignot. 11. in Coroll. cited also, ibid.
by Gassendus.


that he might have prevented it if he had pleased; I answer, He has declared
his detestation of it: as our Ruler he has forbidden it: he deterreth men from
it by his sorest threatenings: he allureth them from it by his richest promises
of reward: he appoints Kings and Magistrates to suppress it by corporal
penalties. This and much more he does against it, and more he could do, which
should prove effectual; but his wisdom saw it not meet, nor conducible to the
glory of the Universe, to make all Moral Agents of one size, any more than all
Natural Agents: and therefore he made not man indefectible. Do you think that
[a Rational creature with free will, being the Lord of its own acts, and a
self-determining Principle, to act without force] is not a thing which God may
make and take delight in? as well as a Watch-maker takes delight to make a
Clock that shall go of it self, without his continued motion, (and the longer
he can make it go without him, and so the liker to himself, the more excellent
he thinks his work.) If God may make such a free-agent, then is it no
impeachment to his goodness, if it abuse its freedom unto sin; especially when
he will overruled even that sin, so far as to bring good out of it by accident.

And lastly, as for all the objections from sin and misery against God's
goodness; I answer you with those Questions. Do you know what number the holy
and glorious Angels are, in comparison both of wicked men and Devils? Whether
they may not be ten thousand to one? Do you know how many thousand fixed Stars
there are, besides Planets? Do you know whether they are all Suns? and how much
bigger they are than the Earth? and how much more glorious? Do you know whether
they are all inhabited or not? (when you see almost no place on Earth
uninhabited, not so much as Water and Air) Do you know whether those thousands
of more glorious Orbs have not inhabitants answerable to their greatness and
glory, beyond the inhabitants of this darker Orb? Do you know whether sin and
sorrow be not kept out there, and confined to this, and some few such obscurer
receptacles? Do you know the degrees of holiness and Glory which those
superior Inhabitants possess? And do you know that all these things set
together, the demonstration of Gods goodness by the way of Beneficence, is not
ten thousand times beyond the demonstrations of it in the way of Justice, and
all the other sorrows that you complain of? Till you know all these, do not
think your selves meet, from your sensible troubles, to argue against that
Infinite goodness, which demonstrateth it self so unquestionably to all, by all
the Goodness of the whole Creation.

I may boldly then conclude, that GOD is OUR FATHER, our CHIEF GOOD, our CHIEF
BENEFACTOR, and ULTIMATE END.

And so that in sensu plenissimo, THERE IS A GOD; that word comprehending both
the foresaid Trinity of Principles in the Unity of his Essence, and the Trinity
of Relations, in the Unity of the Relation of our CREATOR.

CHAP. XII. III. Of Man's Relation to GOD, as he is our FATHER, or our Chief
Good; and of our Duty in that Relation.
. 1. GOD being to Man Efficiently and finally, his Chief, yea, his Total Good,
as is declared; it must needs follow that Man is by immediate resultancy
related to Him as his Total Beneficiary, and Recipient of his benefits; and
owes him all that which Goodness conjunct with Sovereignty and Dominion can
oblige him to.

Whether all Obligation, which is truly Moral, to a Duty, do arise from
Sovereignty and Rule, and belong to us as Subjects only, in the nearest formal
sense? Or whether Benefits simply without any respect to Government and
Subjection, may be said to oblige to Moral Duty as such, is a Question that I
am not concerned to determine; as long as God is both Governor and Benefactor,
and his Government may give the formal moral obligation, as his Benefits
provide the greatest Materials of the Duty. Though this much I may say to it,
that I cannot see but the Duty of a Beneficiary as such, may be called moral,
as well as the Duty of a Subject as such: And if it were supposed that two men
were absolutely equals as to any subjection, and that one of them should by
kindness exceedingly oblige the other, all will acknowledge ingratitude to be
an unnatural thing: and why that vice may not be called properly moral in a
rational free agent, I am not yet convinced. You will say, It Is true; but that
is because that both those men are Subjects to God, whose Law obliges them
both to Gratitude, and therefore Ingratitude is a sin only as against the Law
of God in Nature. To which I reply, that I grant Gods Law of Nature makes
Ingratitude a sin: and I grant that a Law is properly the instrument of a
Governor as such: and so as Ingratitude is the violation of a Law, it is only
a sin against Government as such. But I question whether as Love is somewhat
different from Wisdom and Power, and as a Benefactor and an attractive good
has the highest and a peculiar kind of obligation, so there be not something
put by God into our Nature, which though it be not formally a Law, yet is as
obligatory, and as much if not more than a Law, which makes it more than the
Duty of a Subject, to answer love and goodness with gratitude and love: so that
if per impossible you suppose that we had no other obligation to God but this
of love and goodness (or abstract this from the rest) I question whether it be
not most eminently moral, and whether the performance of it do not morally fit
us for the highest benefits, and felicity, and the violation of it merit not,
(morally) the rejections of our great Benefactor, and the withdrawing of all
his favors to our undoing. But this Controversy my Cause is not much
concerned in, as I have said, because the same God is our Sovereign also.

. 2. The duty which we specially owe to God in this highest Relation is LOVE:
which as such is above obedience as such.

The difference of Understandings and Wills requires Government and obedience,
that the understanding and will of the superior may be a Rule to the subjects:
But LOVE is a Concord of Wills; and so far as LOVE has caused a concord,
there is no use for Government by Laws and Penalties: Seneca, Epist. 31. says.
Quaerendum est quod non fiat indies deterius; cui non possit obstari; quo nil
melius possit optari. Quid hoc est? Animus sed hic rectus, bonus, magnus. Quid
aliud voces hune, quam Deum in humano corpore hospitantem? Hic animus tam in
Equitem Romanum, quam in servum potest cadere; Quid est eques Romanus? aut
libertinus? aut servus? Nomina ex ambitione, aut ex injuria nata, subsilire in
Coelum ex angulo licet: exurge modo, and te dignum finge Deo; finges autem, non
auro, non argento: Non potest ex hac materia Imago Dei exprimi similis.

Plato says, that Man's End is to be made like God. Laert in Plat.

Socrates said, that God was the Best and most Blessed: and the nearer any one
came in likeness to him, so much was he the better and more blessed.

Non potest temperantiam laudare, qui summum bonum ponit in voluptate: Cic.


And therefore the Law is not made for a Righteous man as such, that is, so far
as Love has united his Soul to Virtue, and separated it from sin, he need not
to be constrained or restrained by any Penal Laws: no more than men need a Law
to command them to eat and drink, and preserve their lives, and forbear
self-destruction. But so far as any man is unrighteous or ungodly, that is,
has a will to sin, or cross or averse to Goodness, so far he needs a penal
Law: which therefore all need while they remain imperfect.

Nature has made Love and Goodness like the Iron and the Lodestone. The
Understanding does not so ponderously incline to Truth, as the Will does
naturally to Good. For this being the perfect act of the Soul, the whole
inclination of Nature goes after it. Therefore Love is the highest duty or
noblest act of the Soul of Man; the end and perfection of all the rest.

. 3. The essential act of this LOVE is COMPLACENCIE; or the Pleasedness of the
mind in a suitable Good: But it has diverse effects, concomitants and
accidents, from whence it borrows diverse Names.

. 4. The LOVE of Benevolence, as it works toward the felicity of another, is
the Love of God to man, who needs him; but not of Man to God, who is above
our benefits, and needs nothing.

. 5. Our LOVE to God, respects him either, 1. as our Efficient, 2. Dirigent,
3. or final Good: which has accordingly concomitant duties.

. 6. I. Our LOVE to God as our Chief good efficiently, contains in it, 1. A
willing Receiving Love: 2. A Thankful Love: 3. A Returning devoted serving
Love: (which among men amounts to retribution.)

. 7. 1. An absolute dependent Beneficiary ought with full dependence on his
Total Benefactor, to Receive all his Benefits with Love and willingness.
Gratus sum; non ut alius mihi libentius praester, priori irritatus exemplo; fed
ut rem jucundissimam faciam. Senec. Ep. 28.


An undervaluing of Benefits, and demurring, or rejecting them, is a great
abuse and injury to a Benefactor. Thus does the ungodly World, against all the
Grace and greatest mercies of God. They know not the worth of them, and
therefore despise them, and will not be entreated to accept them: but take them
for intolerable injuries or troubles, as a sick Stomach does its Physic and
Food, Credamus itaque nihil esse grato animo honestius. Omnes hoc urbes, omnes
etiam ex barbaris regionibus gentes conclamabunt; In tanta judiciorum
diversitate, referendam been merentibus gratiam, omnes uno ore affirmabunt; in
hoc discors turba consentiens. Senec. ib.
because they are against their fleshly Appetites. An open heart to receive
Gods mercies with high esteem, beseems such Beneficiaries as we.

. 8. 2. Thankfulness is that Operation of Love, which the light of Nature has
convinced all the World, to be a duty: and scarce a man is to be found so
brutish as to deny it: And our Love to God should be more thankful than to
all the World, because our Receivings from Him are much greater, than from all.

. 9. 3. Though we cannot requite God; true gratitude will devote the whole man
to his Service, Will, and Honor, and bring back his Mercies to him for his
use, so far as we are able.

. 10. II. Our LOVE to our DIRIGENT Benefactor, is, 1. A fiducial Love, 2. A
love well-pleased in his conduct; 3. A following Love.

Though it belongs to God chiefly as our sapiential Governor to be the
Dirigent Cause of our Lives: Yet he does it also as our Benefactor, by a
commixture of the effects of his Relations.

. 11. 1. So infinite and sure a Friend, is absolutely to be Tristed, with a
General Confidence in the Goodness of his Nature, and a particular Confidence
in the Promises or significations of his good will.

Infinite Good cannot be willing to deceive or disappoint us. And if we
absolutely Trust him, it will abundantly conduce to our holiness, and peace.

. 12. 2. We must also love his Conduct, his Precepts and his holy Examples, and
the very way it self in which he leads us.

All that is from him is good, and must be loved both for it self, and for him
that it comes from, and for that which it leads to. All his Instructions,
helps, reproofs, and all his conducting Means should be amiable to us.

. 13. 3. Love must make us cheerfully follow him, in all the ways which by
Precept or Example he is pleased to lead us.

And so to follow him, as to love the tokens of his presence, and footsteps of
his will, and all the signs of his approbation: And with an Heroic fortitude
of Love, to rejoice in sufferings, and venture upon dangers, and conquer
difficulties for his sake.

. 14. III. Our LOVE to GOD as our final Good is, 1. Been meritos quin colas,
nec exorari fas est, neque est excusatio difficultatis: neq, aequum est tempore
and die memoriam beneficii definire. Cicer.
A Desiring LOVE: 2. A seeking LOVE; and 3. A full complacential delighting
Love; which is the perfection of us and all the rest: And accidentally it is
sometimes a Mourning Love.

. 15. 1. Man being but in Via under the efficiency and conduct of Love, to
final Love and Goodness has his End to intend, and his means to use, and
therefore Love must needs work by Desire. Vos, vos appello, qui Mercurium, qui
Platonem, Pythagoramque sectamini: vosque caeteros qui estis unius mentis, and
per easdem vias placitorum inceditis unitate. Audetis ridere nos -- Quid Plato
vester nonne animo surgere suadet e terris, and circa Deum semper (quantum
fieri potest) cogitatione ac mente versari? Audetis ridere nos quod animarum
nostrarum provideamus saluti? id est ipsi nobis? Quid enim sumus homines, nisi
animae corporibus clausae? Vos enim nonne omnes pro illarum geritis
incolumitatibus curas* Metus ille vos habet ne velut trabalibus clavis affixi,
corporibus haereatis? Quid illi sibi velint secretarum artium ritus, quibus
affamini nescio quas potestates, ut sint vobis placidae, neque ad fedes
remeantibus patrias obstacula impeditionis opponant. Arnob. adv. Gentes, lib.
2. p. 14.


. 16. So far as a man is short of the thing desired, Love will have some sense
of want; and so far as we are crossed in our seekings, and frustrate in any of
our hopes, it will be sorrowful.

. 17. 2. Man being appointed to a course and life of Means to his last end,
must needs be employed in those Means for the Love of that End: And so the main
work of this life is that of a Desiring, seeking Love.

. 18. 3. The complacential delighting LOVE, has three degrees: The first in
Belief and Hope, The second in foretaste; and The third in full enflamed
exercise.

. 19. 1. The well-grounded Hope of the foreseen Vision and fruition of the
Infinite Good which is our End, must needs possess the considerate mind, with
a delight which is somewhat answerable to that Hope.

. 20. 2. When the Soul does not only Hope for its future end, but also at
present close with God subratione finis, in the exercise of pure complacencial
Love, in Prayer, Praise or Contemplation, he has some measure of fruition even
in via, and a sensible foretaste of his future perfection, according to the
degree of this his Love.

There is a delight that comes into the mind by the mere foresight and hope
of what we shall be, and have, and do hereafter: And this comes by the Means
of Promise and Evidence: And there is also a Delight which comes in upon the
present exercise of Love it self on God as present; when the soul in the
contemplation of his infinite Goodness, is wrapped up in the pleasures of his
Love: And this is a degree of fruition of our end, before the perfect fruition
of it. And therefore take notice that there are these two ways of our comfort
in this life: 1. Exploratio juris, the trial of our title: 2. Exercitium
amoris; the feasting of the Soul in the exercises of Love.

. 21. 3. The final perfect act of Love will not be in via, but when we have
fully reached our end.

. 22. This final act is not well expressed by the common word [fruition]
because it intimates that we are the finis cui our selves, and that our own
enjoyment of God as our felicity, is the finis ultimate ultimus, which is not
true.

. 23. Yet is [fruition] one ingredient into our End, because our final act of
Love is for our selves, though not principally.

Magistris, Diis and Parentibus, non potest reddi aequivalens. Aristot. 9 Ethic.
. 24. All the difficulties de fine hominis are best resolved by understanding
that it is finis amantis, and what that is: The Nature of Love is an
inclination or desire of Union or Adhaesion: And therefore it includes the
felicity of the Lover, together with the attractive excellency of the Object;
Laus and gratiarumactio debetur danti, non accipienti, Arist. 4. Eth.
and is both gratia amantis and amati simul. But when the Lover is infinitely
above the Object, the Lover is the chief end (for his own complacency) though
the Object have the benefit: And when the Object is infinitely better than the
Lover, the Object must be incomparably the chief end, cujus gratia potissimum:
though the Lover withal intend his felicity in fruition.

. 25. But if any soul be so far above self-love, as to be drawn up in the
fervours of Holy love, in the mere contemplation of the infinite Object, not
thinking of its own felicity herein, its felicity will be never the less, for
not intending or remembering it.

Qui sancti? qui Religionem colentes, nisi qui meritam Diis immortalibus
gratiam, justis honoribus, memori mente persolvunt? Cicer. pro. Planc.
. 26. Therefore the final act of Love, has no fitter name than Love it self,
or delightful adhaesion to God, the infinite Good, with full complacency in
him.

. 27. Though God must be loved as our Benefactor, yet the perfect goodness of
his Will and Nature, as standing above all our Interest or Benefits, must be
the principal reason and Object of our Love.

That we must love God more for Himself, If we must love good men for
themselves, much more God. Ubi beneficus, si nemo alterius causa benign facit.
Ubi gratus, fi non eum ipsum cui referunt gratiam, ipsi cernunt grati? Ubi illa
sancta amicitia, si non ipse amicus per se amatur, toto pectore: qui etiam
deserendus and abjiciendus est, desperatis emolumentis and fructibus: quo quid
potest dici immanius? Cicero de leg. 1 p. 227.
than for our selves, is thus proved: 1. That which is most Amiable must be
most Loved: But God is most amiable, and not we our selves: Therefore he must
be Loved above our selves, (and consequently not for our selves, but our selves
for him:) The minor is soon proved: That which is most Good is most Amiable:
But God is most good: Ergo. And Goodness is the proper object of Love.

2. That which the Soul most Loves it does most devote it self to, and adhere
to, and rest in: But we must more devote our selves to God, and adhere to him,
and rest in him, than our selves: Ergo, we must Love him more.

3. That which is an Absolute Good, and is dependent on nothing, must be
absolutely loved for it self: But such is God: Ergo. And that which is only a
derivative, limited, dependent Good, and not made ultimately for it self; is
not to be loved ultimately for it self: But such is man: Ergo.

4. That which is the Fountain of all Goodness and Love, must be the end of
all: But that is God and not Man: Ergo.

5. To love God ultimately for our selves, is to deifie our selves, and take
down God into the order of a Means, that is, of a Creature.

. 28. Having proved, that God must be loved above our selves, we need no other
proof, that not we, Justitia nihil expetit praemii, nihil pretii: per se igitur
expetitur: eademque omnium virtutum causa atque sententia est: Atque etiam si
emolumentis, non suapte natura virtus expetitur, una erit virtus, quae malitia
rectissime dicetur. Ut enim quisque ad suum commodum refert maxim quaecunque
agit, ita minime est vir bonus: ut qui virtutem praemio metiuntur, nullam
virtutem nisi malitiam putant. Cicero de Leg. 1. p. 227.
but God must be our ultimate end.

. 29. Because we here see not God intuitively, but in his Works, we are bound
with fervent desire to study and contemplate them, and therein to feast our
love in beholding and tasting of his Love and Goodness.

As a Man will look on the Picture, the Letters, the works of his absent
Friend, and retain the Image of him in his heart; so God, though not absent,
yet unseen, expresses himself to us in all his works, that we may studiously
there behold, admire and love him.

. 30. Therefore Gods Works must be more valued and studied, as they are the
Glass representing the Image of his perfections, and showing us his chief
essential amiableness, than as they are beneficial and useful to us, and so
show us only his benignity to us.

. 31. Yet must self-love, and sense it self, and the sensible sweetness and
experience of Mercies be improved to our easier taste of God's essential
Goodness, and we must rise up from the lower to the higher object: and this is
our chief use of sensible benefits. Nihil homini metuendum, nisi ne
faelicitatem excludat. Solon in Laert. p. 31. Summo Bono constituto in
Philosophia, constituta sunt omnia: nam caeteris in rebus sive praetermissum,
sive ignoratum est quippiam, non plus incommodi, quam quanti quaeque earum
rerum est, in quibus neglectum est aliquid. Summum autem bonum si ignoretur,
vivendi rationem ignorari necesse est: ex quo rantus error consequitur, ut quem
in portum se recipiant, scire non possunt. Cognitis autem rerum firiibus
(bonorum and malorum) inventa vitae via est conformatioque omnium officiorum.
Piso in Cic. de finib. lib. 5. page 182.

Decrescere summum bonum non potest. Mortalia eminent, cadunt, deteruntur,
crescunt, exhauriuntur, implentur. Divinorum una natura est. Senec. Epist. 66.
p. 644, 645.




Doubtless as the Soul, while it dwells with flesh does receive its objects
by the mediation of sense, so God has purposely put such variety of sensible
delicacies into the creatures, that by every sight, and smell, and hearing, and
touch, and taste, our souls might receive a report of the sweetness of God,
whose goodness all proceed from. And therefore this is the life which we should
labor in continually, to see God's goodness in every lovely sight, and to
taste God's goodness in every pleasant taste, and to smell it in every pleasant
Odor, and to hear it in every lovely word or sound; that the motion may pass
on clearly without stop, from the senses to the mind and will, and we may never
be so blockish as to gaze on the glass, and not see the Image in it; or to gaze
on the Image, and never consider whose it is: or to read the Book of the
Creation, and mark nothing but the words and letters, and never mind the sense
and meaning. A Philosopher, and yet an Atheist or ungodly, is a monster; one
that most reads the Book of Nature, and least understands or feels the
meaning of it.

. 32. Therefore God daily renews his mercies to us, that the variety and
freshness of them producing renewed delight, may renew our lively feelings of
his love and goodness, and so may carry us on in love, without cessations and
declinings.

Our natures are so apt to lose the sense of a Good that is grown ordinary and
common, that God by our renewed necessities, and the renewed supplies, and
variety of mercies, does cure this defect.

. 33. Those therefore that turn God's mercies to the gratifying of their
sensitive appetites and lusts, and forget him, and offend him the more, and
love him the less, do forfeit his mercies by their inhumane and irrational
ingratitude and abuse.

Which is the sin of all proud, covetous, voluptuous persons; the ambitious,
fornicators, gluttons, drunkards, and lovers of sports, recreations, idleness,
or any pleasure, as it turns them from God.

. 34. Above all other sin, Coelestia semper spectato: illa humana contemnito.
Cic. Somn. Scipi.
we should most take heed of the inordinate love of any creature (for it self,
or for our carnal self alone) because it is most contrary to our love to God,
which is our highest work and duty.

. 35. Those mercies of God are most to be valued, desired and sought, which
show us most of God himself, or most help up our love to him.

. 36. We must love both our natural selves and neighbors, the bad as well as
the good, with a love of benevolence, desiring our own good and theirs: But at
the same time we must hate our selves and them, so far as wicked, with the
hatred of Displicency: and with the love of Complacency, must only so far love
our selves or others, as the Image of Divine Goodness is in us or them.

I speak not of the mere natural passion of the parent to the child, which is
common to man and beast: nor of the exercises of love in outward acts, for
those may be directed by God's commands to go more to one (as a wicked child)
that has less true amiableness in him. But all holy love must be suited to the
measures of the truest object. Templum mentis amo, non marmoris, aurea in illo

Fundamenta: manet fides structura nivali. Consurgit pietate nitens, tegit
ardua culmen:

Justitia interius spargit sola picta rubenti Flore, pudicitiae pudor almus,
and atria servat.

Haec domus apta mihi est, haec me pulcherrima seeds

Accipit, aeterno coelestique hospite digna, Prudent.

Quicquid boni egeris in Deos refer: Bias in Laert.




. 37. The love of God should be with all our soul, and with all our might; not
limited, suppressed or neglected, but be the most serious, predominant action
of our souls.

How easy a matter is it to prove Holiness to be naturally man's greatest duty,
when love to God, which is the sum of it, is so easily proved to be so. All
the reason in the world, that is not corrupted, but is reason indeed, must
confess without any tergiversation, that it is the most great and
unquestionable duty of man to love God above all; yea, with all our heart and
soul and might. And he that does so, shall never be numbered by him with the
ungodly, for those are inconsistent.

. 38. The exercises of love to God in complacency, desire, seeking, etc. should
be the chief employment of our thoughts.

For the thoughts are the exercise of a commanded faculty, which must be under
the power of our will: and the ultimate end, and the exercises of love to it,
should daily govern them. When the Oracle of Delphos adjudged the Tripos to the
wisest, it was sent to Th^les, and from him to another, till it came to Solon,
who sent it to the Oracle, saying, None is wiser than God. Laert. in Thalet. So
should we all send back to God the glory and praise of all good which is
ascribed to us.
And what a man loves most, usually he will think of, with his most practical
powerful thoughts, if not with the most frequent.

. 39. The love of God should employ our tongues in the proclaiming of his
praise and benefits, and expressing our own admiration and affection, to kindle
the like in the souls of others.

For the same God who is so amiable, has given us our speech with the rest of
his benefits, and given it us purposely to declare his praise. Reason tells
us that we have no higher, worthier, or better employment for our tongues; and
that we should use them to the best. The tongues of men are adorned with
language, for charitable and pious communication, that they may be fit to
affect the hearts of others, and to kindle in them that sacred fire, which is
kindled in themselves. Therefore that tongue which is silent to its Makers
praise, and declares not the Goodness, and Wisdom, and power of the Lord, and
does not divulge the notice of his benefits, Numen divinum omni modo, omni
tempore i^e cole, juxta leges patrias, and ut ali^ colant effi^e. Dio^. l. 52.
condemns it self, and the heart that should employ it, as neglecting the
greatest duty it was made for.

. 40. The lives of Gods Beneficiaries should be employed to his praise and
pleasure, and should be the streaming effects of inward love. And all his
mercies should be improved to his service, from a thankful heart.

All this has the fullest testimony of reason, according to the rules of
proportion and common right. To whom should we live, but to him from whom and
by whom we live? What but our ultimate end should be principally intended, and
sought through our whole lives? A creature that has all from God, should in
love and gratitude bring back all to him; and thus we make it more our own.

. 41. This Life of Love should be the chiefest Delight and Pleasure of our
Souls, Arist^ppus rogatus alicuando, quid haberent e^imium Philosopi? Si omnes
inquit, leges intereant, equabiliter vivimus. Laert.

Oderunt peccare boni vit^tis amore. Hor.


which all other pleasure should subserve, and all be abhorred which
contradicts it.

Nothing is easilier confessed by all, than the desirableness of Delight and
Pleasure: and the most excellent object, which most be most beloved, must be
our chief delight: for Love it self is a delighting act, unless some stop do
turn it aside into fears and sorrows. Nothing can it self be so delectable as
God, the chiefest Good; and no employment so delectable as loving him. This
therefore should be our work and our recreation, our labor and our pleasure,
our food and feast. Other delights are lawful and good, so far as they further
these delights of holy love, by carrying up our hearts to the original and end
of all our mercies and delights. But nothing is so injurious to God and us as
that which corrupts our minds with sensuality, and becomes our Pleasure
instead of God.

. 42. The sense of the present imperfection of our Love should make us long to
know God more, and to love him and delight in him, and praise him in perfection
to the utmost extent of our capacities.

If it be so good to love God, then must the highest degree of it be best: and
reason teaches us, Read Seneca, de vita beata, fully proving against the
Ep^cureans, that wealth, honor and pleasure are not man's felicity, because
they make him not better or best.
when we feel how weak our Knowledge and Love is, to long for more; yea, for
perfection.

. 43. Thus has Reason showed us the end and highest felicity of man, in his
highest duty; To Know God, to Love him and Delight in him in the fullest
Perfection, and to be Loved by him, and be fully pleasing to him, as herein
bearing his Image, is the felicity, and the ultimate end of man. LOVE is man's
final act, excited by the fullest Knowledge, and God so beheld and enjoyed in
his Love to us, is the final Object. And here the Soul must seek its Rest.

Obj. But quae supra nos nihil ad nos: God indeed is near to Angels, but he
has made them our Benefactors, and they have committed it to inferior Causes:
there must be suitableness as well as excellency to win love: Sursum animum
vocant initia sua: Erit autem illic, etiam antequam hac custodia exolvatur, si
vitia sua deseruit, purusque ac^enis in cogitationes divinas emicuit. Senec.
ep. 80.

Tutum iter^est, jucundum est, ad quod natura te instruxit. Dedit tibi illa
quae si non deserueris, par Deo consurges. Parem autem Deo to pecunia non
facit* etc. Senec. ep. 13.


we find no suitableness between our hearts and God. And therefore we believe
not that we were made for any such employment. And we see that the far greatest
part of mankind are as averse to this life of Holiness as our selves; and
therefore we cannot think but that it is quite above the nature of man, and not
the work and end which he was made for.

Answ. 1. Whether God have made Angels, or Rulers, or Benefactors, or what love
or honor we owe them as his Instruments, is nothing to our present business.
For if it be granted that he thus uses them, it is most certain that he is
nevertheless himself our Benefactor, nor nevertheless near us. What nearness to
us they have, we are much uncertain; but that he himself is our total
Benefactor, and always with us, as near to us as we are to our selves, is past
all question, and proved before.

2. There neither is nor can be any object so suitable for our LOVE as God; he
has all Goodness in him, and all in the creature is derived from him, and
depends on him; and he has given us all that ever we our selves received,
and must give us all that ever we shall receive hereafter. He is all-sufficient
for the supply of all our wants, and granting all our just desires, and making
us perfect: all that he does for us, he does in Love, as an intellectual free
Agent; and he is still present with us, upholding us, and giving us the very
Love which he demands: and he created us for Himself to be his Own, and gave
us these faculties to know and love him. And can any then be a more suitable
object of our love?

3. Do you not find that your understandings have a suitableness or inclination
to Truth and Knowledge, and would you not know the best and greatest things?
and know the cause of all the wonderful effects which you see: and what is this
but to know, God? And do you not find that your Wills have a suitableness to
good as such in the general? and to your own felicity? And do you not know that
it should not be unnatural to any man to love the best, which is best, and
especially which is best for him; and to love him best who is his greatest
Benefactor, and most worthy of his love in all respects? And can you doubt
whether God be most worthy of your love? All this is plain and sure. And will
men's averseness to the love of God then disprove it? It is natural for man to
desire knowledge, as that which perfecteth his understanding; and yet Boys are
averse to learn their Books, because they are slothful, and are diverted by the
love of play. What if your servants be averse and slothful to your service?
does it follow that it is not their duty, Quod si poena, si metus supplicii,
non ipsa turpitudo, deterret ab injuriosa, facinorosaque vita, nemo est
injustus: at incauti potius habendi sunt improbi: Callidi, non boni sunt, qui
utilitate tantum, non ipso honesto, ut boni viri sint moventur. Cic. de leg. l.
1. p. 289.
or that you hired them not for it? What if your wife and children be averse to
love you? is it therefore none of their duty so to do? Rebels are averse to
obey their Governors, and yet it is their duty to obey them. If your child or
any one that is most beholden to you, should be averse to love and gratitude to
you, (as thousands are to their Parents and Benefactors) will it follow that
Nature obliged them not to it?

4. What can you think is suitable to your love, if God be not? is it lust, or
play, or meat and drink and ease? A Swine has a nature as suitable to these as
you? Is it only to deal ingenuously and honorably in providing for the flesh,
Complent bona corporis beatissimam vitam; sed ita ut sine illis possit beata
vita exis^ere. Ita enim parvae and exiguae sunt istae accessiones bonorum, ut
sicut s^ellae in radio solis, sic istae in virtutum splendere, ne cernantur
quidem. Atque haec ut vere dicitur parva esse ad beat vivendum momenta ista
corporis commodorum, sic nimis violentum est, nulla esse dicere. Qui enim sic
disputant, obliti mihi videntur quae ipsi egerint principia naturae. Tribuendum
est his aliquid, dummodo quantum tribuendum sit intelligas. Piso in Cic. de
finib. l. 5. p. 202.
and maintaining the fuel of these sensualities, by Buildings, Trading,
Manufactures, Ornaments and Arts? All this is but to have a reason to serve
your sense, and so the swinish part still shall be the chief: for that which is
the chief and ruling object with you, does show which is the chief and regnant
faculty. If sensual objects be the chief, than Sense is the chief faculty with
you. And if you had the greatest wit in the world, and used it only to serve
your guts, and throats, and lusts, in a more effectual and ingenious way than
any other men could do, this were but to be an ingenuous beast, or to have an
Intellect bound in service to your bellies. And can you think that things so
little satisfying, and so quickly perishing, are more suitable objects for your
love than God?

5. What say you to all them that are otherwise minded, and that take the Love
of God for their work and happiness? They find a suitableness in God to their
highest esteem and love; and are they not as fit Judges for the affirmative, as
you for the negative?

Obj. They do but force themselves to some acts of fancy.

Answ. You see that they are such acts as are the more serious and prevalent in
their lives, and can make them lay by other pleasures, and spend their days in
seeking God, and lay down their lives in the exercise and hopes of Love. And
that it is you that follow fancy, and they that follow solid reason, is evident
in the reason of your several ways. That world which you set above God is at
last called Vanity by all that try it: Reason will not finally justify your
choice: but I have here showed you undeniable reason for their choice and love;
and therefore it is they that know what they do, and obey the Law of Nature,
which you obliterate and contradict.

Obj. But we see the Creature, but God we see not, and we find it not natural
to us to love that which we do not see.

Answ. Is not Reason a nobler faculty than sight? if it be, Unum vero finem
Aristotelis declaravit, esse usum virtutis in vita sancta and integra. Hesych.
Illust. in Aristot.
why should it not more rule you, and dispose of you? Shall no Subjects honor
and obey their King but those that see him? You can love your money, and land,
and friends when they are out of sight.

Obj. But these are things visible in their nature.

Piso ubi sup. in Cic. says, That all the difference in this between the
Stoics and the Peripateticks and Academicks is but this, Whether corporal
things shall be called no Good at all, or only such little Goods as to be next
to none, page 102, 203. To the shame of those nominal Christians, who know no
greater good than they.
Answ. They are so much the more vile, and less amiable. Your own Souls are
invisible, will you not therefore love them? You never saw the life or form of
any Plant or living Wight; you see the beauty of your Roses, and many other
flowers, but you see not the life and form within, which causes all that
beauty and variety; which yet must be more excellent than the effect. Can you
doubt whether all things which appear here to your sight, have an invisible
Cause and Maker? or can you think him less amiable, because he is invisible,
that is, more excellent?

6. In a word, it is most evident, that all this averseness of men's hearts to
the Love of God, is their sin and pravity; and the unsuitableness of their
nature is, because they are vitiated with sensuality, and deceived by sensible
things: a disease to be cured and not defended. Their sin will not prove the
contrary no duty.

7. And yet while we are in flesh, though God be not visible to us, his works
are, and it is in them (the frame of the world) that he has revealed and
exposed Himself to our love: It is in this visible Glass that we must see his
Image, and in that Image must love him: and if we will love any Goodness, we
must love his; for all is his, and as his should be loved by us. Siquis est hoc
robore animi atque hac indole virtutis, ac continentiae, ut respuat omnes
voluptates, omnemque vitae suae cursum labor corporis, atque in animi
contentione conficiat, quem non quies, non remissio, non aequalium studia, non
ludi, non convivia delectant, nihil in vita expetendum putet, nisi quod est cum
laud and honor conjunctum; hunc, mea sententia, Divinis quibusdam bonis
instructum atque ornatum puto. Cic. pro Call.


CHAP. XIII. Experiments of the difficulty of all this Duty, and what it will
cost a man that will live this holy life.
HItherto I have proved that there is a GOD, of Infinite Power, Wisdom and
Goodness; the Creator, and consequently the Owner, the Ruler, and the Father or
Chief Good of Man; and that Man as his creature is absolutely his own, and
therefore should resign himself as his own to his disposal; and that he is
absolutely his subject, and therefore should most exactly and diligently obey
him; and I have showed particularly wherein; also that Man is his Total
Beneficiary, and made to love him as his chief Good and End; and therefore
should totally devote himself to him in gratitude and love, Male de me
l^quuntur, sed mali: Moverer, si de me Marc. Cato, si Laelius sapiens, si duo
Scipiones ista loque^entur. Nunc malis displicere, laudare est. Sen. Videturne
summa improbitate usus non sine summa esse ratione. Nec scena solum referta est
his sceleribus, sed multo vita communis poene majoribus. Sentit domus
uniuscujusque, sentit forum, sentit curia, campus, socii, provincia, ut
quemadmodum ratione recte fiat, sic ratione peccetur: alterum and a paucis and
raro alterum and saepe and a pluribus: ut satius fuerit nullam omnino nobis a
Diis datam esse rationem, quam tanta cum pernicie datam. Ita Colta contra Deos
in Cic. de Nature. Deor. 3. p. 111.
and desire him, seek him and delight in him above all the world, and live in
his praises and continual service. All this is fully proved to be Man's duty.
And now let us see on what terms he stands in the world for the performance
of it.

. 1. There is in the present disposition of Man a great averseness to such a
life of Resignation, Obedience and Love to God, as is before described, even
when he cannot deny it to be his duty, and to be the best, most honorable, and
most felicitating life.

Too sad experience confirms this. The bad are so averse, that they will not
be persuaded to it: the godly have such a mixture of averseness, as finds
them matter of continual conflict. It is this aversness which serves instead
of arguments against it, or which is a pondus to the very judgment, and makes
it so hard to believe any arguments which go against so strong a contrary
inclination.

. 2. We find that the senses of men are grown masterly and inordinate, and are
too eagerly set upon their objects, and hold down the mind from rising higher,
and cause it to adhere to things terrene.

So that man's life now is like that of the bruits: it is things of the same
nature that he valueth and adhereth to, and most men live to no higher ends but
to enjoy their sensual pleasure while they may.

. 3. We find that Reason in most men is so debilitated, that it cannot potently
reduce it self into action, nor see that practically which speculatively it
confesses, nor clearly and powerfully observe those Perfections of God in his
works, nor those Duties of man, which we are convinced to be true: but by
inconsiderateness and dull apprehensions is almost as no reason to them, and
falls down before their sensuality.

. 4. Hereupon men grow strangers unto God, and have no thoughts of him but
dark, and dull, and ineffectual.

. 5. The world is full of allurements to the flesh, and those Mercies which
should raise the mind to God, are made the food of this sensuality, and the
greatest means to keep it from him.

Sense is irrational, and fastneth on its object: and when Reason fails in
its office, there we are left like Dogs gnawing upon a Carrion, and in
greediness fighting for it with each other; when we have separated the creature
from God in our minds, Vir bonus nec cito fieri, nec intelligi potest: Nam ille
alter fortasse Phoenix anno quingentesimo nascitur. Nec est mirum, ex
intervallo magna generat; mediocria and in turbam nascentia saepe fortuna
producit: sed qui sciret quid esset vir bonus, nondum se esse credere, fortasse
etiam fieri posse desperaret. Sen. ep. 42. Diogenes said, He found good
children at Lacedaemon, but good men no where in all Graece.
and so deprived it of its life and beauty, which fitted it for another use.
And when every place and state of life has such baits as these, which hourly
are allureing a mind so weakly fortified against them, no wonder if they do
prevail.

. 6. Education, custom and ill example confirm these vicious habits with the
most, and much increase them.

. 7. The best have some of this inordinate sensuality and weakness of Reason,
and are imperfect in virtue, and are tempted by the world as well as others.

. 8. Therefore no man can live to God according to his certain duty, who will
not deny the desires of his flesh, and bring it into subjection, and live in
vigilance and daily conflict against its lusts.

Obj. But the appetite of meat, and drink, and sleep, and ease, and venery, and
sport, and pleasure, and gain, and honor, is natural to us: and that which is
natural is no vice, nor to be denied or destroyed.

Answ. It is natural to have the appetite, but it is the disease of nature that
this appetite is inordinate, and no otherwise natural than the Leprosy is to
those to whom it is propagated by their Parents. But is it natural to you to
have lust and appetite, and is it not natural to you to have Reason to moderate
and rule them? If not, it is natural to you to be Bruits, and not natural to
you to be men: What is more natural to Man than to be Rational? is it not his
essential form? And whether is Reason or Appetite, think you, naturally made to
be the predominant faculty? Should the Horse rule the Rider, or the Rider the
Horse? The Soul and Body are much like the Rider and the Horse; bethink you
which should naturally rule.

Rari quippe boni: numero vix sunt totidem quot

Thebarum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili. Juven.

Quae ego scio, populus non probat: Quae probat populus ego nescio. Sen. ep. 29.


. 9. The inordinacy of the fleshly appetite and fantasy, makes it a
continual pain to the flesh to be restrained and denied.

As it is to a headstrong wilful Horse to be governed, the more inordinate the
appetite is, the more it is pained by denial and restraint.

. 10. The far greatest part of the world do live an ungodly sensual life, and
the interest of the flesh is predominant in them.

Sad Experience puts this quite out of controversy.

. 11. Usually, Imperitia in omnibus majori ex part dominatur, and multitudo
verborum. Cleobulus in Laert.

Offendet te superbus contemptu, dives contumelia, petulans injuria, lividus
malignitate, pugnax contentione, ventosus and mendax vanitate? Non feres a
suspicioso timeri, a pertinace vinci, a delicato fastidiri. Senec. de Ira. l.
3. c. 8.

Praestat cum paucis bonis adversus malos omnes, quam cum multis malis adversus
paucos pugnare. Antisthenes in Laert. l. 6. c. 1.


the more Riches and Fullness of all Provisions for the flesh men possess, the
more sensual and vicious they are.

It is not always so; but that its usually so, we need no proof but the
knowledge of the World: nor need we take it from Christ only as a point of
Faith, That its hard for a Rich man to enter into Heaven: And Reason tells
us, that when the love of the World above God is the mortal sin, those are most
in danger of it, to whom the World appears most lovely: And they that have
most temptations are in the greatest danger to miscarry.

. 12. The Rich are commonly the Rulers of the World, who have the liberties,
estates, and lives of others, much in their power.

I never yet knew or heard of that place, where the poor long ruled.

. 13. Commonly, the more averse men are to Godliness, and the more prone to
sensuality; the less can they endure those that would persuade them to
Godliness from their sensual Lives; or that give them the Example of a holy
self-denying life.

For as it seems intolerable to them to leave their sensuality, and to betake
themselves to a contrary life, which they are so averse to; so they take him as
an enemy to them, that would draw them to it, and are furious against him, as a
hungry Dog against him that would take away his Carrion. Experience puts this
past all doubt (of which more anon.)

. 14. Hence it comes to pass, that in all parts of the World, the
fore-described life of Godlyness, is the matter of the common hatred, scorn and
cruel persecution of the sensual and ungodly.

The more exactly any man shall set himself to obey God, Seneca Epist. 87.
scribit, Tam necessarium fuisse Romano populo nasci Catonem quam Scipionem:
Alter enim cum hostibus nostris, alter cum moribus, bellum gessit. And if a
Cato was at war with the manners of the World, much more will a true Saint,
that is more fully acquainted with Sacred Verity.
the more he crosses the lusts and carnal Interest of the wicked; and the more
he commonly suffers in the World. So full of malice and prejudice is the
World, against such faithful Subjects of God, that they slander them and make
them seem the most odious sort of men: And so unreasonable are they and unjust,
that the fullest evidence for their Justification, does but seem to aggravate
their faults; and nothing is so great a Crime as their highest Virtues! Or if
their Justification be undeniable they rage the more, because they are hindered
from making them suffer as deeply in their Names as in their Bodies. These
things are no more questionable than the Wars of Alexander or Caesar, the
World having longer proof and fuller evidence of them.

. 15. And ordinarily God himself so orders it, that his faithfullest Subjects
shall be the deepest sufferers in this life.

. 16. Therefore self-denial, mortification, contempt of the World, and patience
under manifold sufferings from God and Man, are necessary to all who will be
faithful to God, in the unquestionable duties before described.

It is tried Friendship and Obedience which is most valuable. And unwholsom
pleasures though preferred by the foolish Patient, are forbidden by our wise
Physician, that they hinder not our health, and greater Pleasures.

. 17. Therefore if Worldly fleshly pleasures were our end and chief Good, the
best men would have the smallest measure of them.

Obj. But you restrain man further than God restrains him, and bind him to
more than God binds him to, and make superstition to seem his duty, and then
raise these consequences from such Premises.

Answ. What I mean by sin and duty I have so fully opened before, and proved to
be such by the light of Reason, that this Objection has no place. Even the
sober Heathens, the Greek Philosophers, and Roman Worthies found and confessed
all this to be true. If there be any thing in the Life before described, which
all sound Reason does not justify and command, let him that is able manifest
so much: If not, it is no superstition, Qui toto dies precabantur and
immolab^nt* ut sui liberi sibi superstites essent, superstitiosi sunt
appellati: Quod nomen patuit postea latius: Qui autem omnia quae ad cultum
Deorum pertine^ent, diligenter pertractarent, and tanquam relegerent, sunt
dicti Religiosi, ex relegendo, ut elegantes ex eligendo, a diligendo
diligentes, ex intelligendo intelligentes: superstitiosi and Religiosi, alterum
vit^i nomen, alterum l^udis Cicero de not. Deor. lib. 2. p. 73, 74.

^rdua^re haec est opib^s non tradere mores. Martial.

Pittaci dictum est, Perdifficile est esse bonum. Bruson. All Cicero's Books de
Finib. show the worthlesness of Pleasure in comparison of Virtue.


, to live as a man that is governed by God, and led by Reason; and to do that
which all our faculties were made for. And for austerities, I have pleaded for
none, which are not become needful to our own preservation and felicity: As a
Patient will endure a strict diet, and exercise, and blood-letting, and bitter
Physic for his health: It is not any affected unprofitable austerities, that I
plead for; but those which are for our good, and fit us for our duty, and keep
the flesh from rebelling against Reason, and keep Man from living like a Beast:
Even less than many of the Philosophers plead for; and he that uses but thus
much which is needful, will find it both opposed as unsufferable by the
World, and murmured against by his suffering and displeased Flesh; and that the
Soul cannot do its duty, but at a considerable cost and trouble to the Body.
Though there may be an evil masked and cunningly moderated, which men call
Goodness, which may be had at a cheaper rate. But says Seneca truly, Non est
Bonitas, pessimis esse meliorem.

CHAP. XIV. That there is a Life of Retribution after this.
TO know whether there be a Life after this, Senec. Consol. ad Marciam: Cum
tempus advenerit quo se mundus renovaturus, -- omni flagrante materia uno igne,
quicquid nunc ex disposito lucet, ardebit -- Nos quoque faelices animae, and
aeterna sortitae, cum Deo visum erit, iterum ista moliri -- Foelicem filium
tuum Marcia, qui ista (mortuus) jam novit. --
for men to receive Rewards or Punishments in, is a matter of greatest
importance to Mankind, to be fully resolved in: upon which depend our
Comforts, and our Religion, and without which we know not what to expect, to
hope for, or to fear; nor what to intend and seek after through our lives, nor
how to order our hearts or actions.

This therefore I shall inquire into by the help of Reason and Natural
evidence, as one that would not be deceived nor deceive, in so great a matter.
And I shall pass by those arguments which are commonly fetched from the Souls
immateriality, and independence upon matter, and other such like, which are
commonly to be found in Physics and Metaphysics, as being not such as my
present method leads me to; and shall make use of such as are the necessary
consectaries of the certain Truths already proved.

D^ s^ ^ae, duplicesque cursus animotum e corpore exeuntium: Nam qui se vitiis
humanis contaminarunt; and libidinibus se tradiderunt, i^s devium quoddam iter
est, seclusum a consil o Deorum. Qui autem se integros castos^, servarunt,
quibusque suit m^n^a^a cum corporibus contagio suntque in corporibus humanis
vitam imitati Deorum, iis ad illo^ a quibus sunt profecti, facile patet
reditus. Socrates, in Cicerone Tuscul. 1.
Object. But whatever Rationalities may be drawn from the Divine Attributes, to
prove a future state, yet it depending wholly on the Divine Will, and the
Divine Will being absolutely free, we can have no rational inducements to bring
us to any sufficient knowledge of it, but by a clear Revelation of the Divine
Will.

Answ. Is the Law of Nature no clear Revelation of Gods will? or is it a Law
without any Rewards or Penalties? It depended on Gods will, whether man should
be his Subject or no, obliged to obey him! But does it follow therefore that it
cannot be proved? By making him a Rational free Agent, and sociable, placed
among occasions of good and evil, God did reveal that it was his will that Man
should be his Subject, and obey him! One action of God does often reveal his will
concerning another. Those Attributes of God which signify his Relation to us,
do reveal much of his will, concerning what he will do with us in those
Relations. And though his will be free, his perfections consist not with
falsehood and mutability. If in freedom you include [indetermination] then when
we prove the determination of it ad unum, you will plead no longer that it is
free; no more than it is yet free whether he will make the World.

Qui recte and honest curriculum vivendi a natura datum confecerit, ad astra
facile revertetur. Non qui aut immoderate, aut intemperanter vixerit. Cicero de
Universe.
. 1. I. He that is the most Righteous Governor of the World, making a just
difference by Rewards and Punishments, between the obedient and the wicked,
which yet he makes not in this life, will certainly make it after this life:
But God is the most Righteous Governor of the World, making a just difference
by Rewards and Punishments, between the obedient and the wicked, which yet he
makes not in this life: Therefore he will make it after this life.

That God is the Governor of the World (in a proper sense, by Laws and Moral
Government) is proved: And that he is Righteous, is contained in the
Perfections of his Nature. To deny either of these is to deny him to be God.
That his Laws of Nature have not only Precepts of Duty, but sanctions of Reward
and Punishment, is also proved: And further may be thus. 1. If there be no
Rewards or Punishments, there is no Judgment or Execution: But there is
Judgment and Execution: for they are parts of Government. Ergo -- 2. Without
Rewards and Punishments, Improbo been esse non potest. Cicero Par. Impii apud
inferos poenas luunt. Cicero Philict. 1. de Legib. Impiis apud inferos sunt
poenae praeparatae. Cicer. 1. de invent.
Precepts would be vain to such as us, and uneffectual as to their ends. But
God has not made his Laws in vain, -- Ergo.

Obj. Governors use not to give men Rewards for their Obedience: subjects must
obey without Reward.

Answ. It is not the Name but the Thing that we enquire of: Call it a Benefit
if you had rather: All Government is upheld by Rewards and Punishment. Reward
is either that which is common to all obedient Subjects, or such as is
specially proper to some: All subjects that are faithful, have title to
protection, and approbation, and justification against all false accusations;
and to their share in that peace and felicity of the Commonwealth, Sic habeto;
te non esse mortalem, sed corpus hoc. Cicer. some. scip.

Cicero says, that their worshipping of Hercules, and other Heroes, does
imply, that Animi omnium sunt immortales, sed Bonorum Divini. Cicer. 2. de
Legib.


which is the end of the Government: And some Commonwealths having far greater
felicities than others, accordingly the Subjects of them have their right and
part: And this is the common reward or benefit of obedience and fidelity.
Besides which, some great exploits are usually rewarded with some special
praemium. In humane Kingdoms as such, the End is no higher than the Beginning:
Temporal Governors give but temporal Rewards: The felicities of the Kingdom,
which are the ends of Government, as they are from Man are but temporal; and
our share in them is all our Reward from men: But the original and end of the
Kingdom of God are higher, and of further prospect: The benefits of fidelity
are greater, as shall be further proved.

But let it be noted, Bonorum mentes mihi Divinae atque aeternae videntur, and
ex hominum vita ad Deorum religionem sanctimoniamque migrare. Idem.

Deorum providentia Mundus administratur, iidemque consulunt rebus humanis,
neque solum universis, verum etiam fingulis. Cicer. 1. de Divinat.


that this Objection says nothing against a life of Punishment. Governors
never leave their Precepts without this sanction. And he that believes future
Punishment, will easily believe a future Reward.

Let it also be noted, that Paternal Government has evermore Rewards in the
strictest sense; that is, a special favor and kindness showed to the Child
that is specially obedient; and so the rest according to their measures. But
the Kingdom of God is A PATERNALL KINGDOM as is proved. That God will make in
his Retributions a just difference between the good and bad, is proved from his
Justice in Government: If his Laws make no difference, then men are left at
liberty to keep or break them, nor can it rationally be expected that they
should be kept: Nor could he be said so much as to love or approve, or justify
the obedient more than the rebellious: Persuasum hoc sit a principio hominibus,
Dominos esse omnium rerum ac moderatores Deos: eaque quae gerantur, eorum geri
ditione atque numine -- Et qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in se admittat,
qua mente, qua pietate colat Religionem, intueri, Piorumque and impiorum habere
rationem. Cicero de leg. 2.
But so unholy a Nature, and so indifferent between sin and duty, and so unwise
and unjust in governing, is not to be called God. Either he justly
differenceth, or he does not Govern.

That God makes not a sufficient differencing Retribution in this life, is the
complaint of some, and the confession of almost all the World: The bad are
commonly the greatest, and the Lords and Oppressors of the Just: The Turks, the
Tartarians, the Moscovites, the Persians, the Mogull, and more such brutish
Monarchs, who use the people as the slaves of their pride and lust, do take up
the far greatest part of the Earth. Few places are so good, where Goodness
exposes not men to sufferings, from the rabble of the vulgar, if not from the
Governors; slanders and abuses are the common lot of those that will differ
from the carnal, wild, rebellious Rout. And poverty, pain, sickness, and
death, do come alike to all. The sensual, that have wit enough, so far to
bridle their lusts, as to preserve their health, do usually live longer than
more obedient men: And they deny themselves none of those fleshly pleasures,
which the obedient do continually abstain from.

Obj. But do you not ordinarily say, that Vice brings its punishment with it
in its natural effects? and Obedience its Reward? Is not the life of a Glutton
and Drunkard punished by poverty, and shame, and sickness? And is not Godliness
a pleasure in it self? If it be our highest end and Happiness to love God and
please him, then sure the beginnings of it here, must have more good, than all
the pleasures of sin? and so God makes a sufficient difference here.

Answ. Some Vices that are sottishly managed, do bring poverty, shame and
sickness: but that may easily be avoided by a vicious wit: Gluttony and
drunkenness may fall short of sicknesses. Fornication and adultery and incest
may be managed with greater craft. Pride and ambition may attain dominion and
wealth: Theft may be hid, and cheating and fraud may make men rich, and free
them from the pinching wants, and cares, and the temptations to discontent and
contention, of the poor. Malice may delight it self in secret revenges, in
poysonings, murderings, and such like, without any worldly hurt to the
transgressour. A Tiberius, a Nero, a Caligula, a Domitian, a Commodus, a
Heliogabalus, a Sardanapalus, may be on the Throne, when a Socrates, a Seneca,
a Cicero, a Cato, a Demosthenes is put to death; yea, when a Paul or Peter, an
Ignatius, a Cyprian, are sacrificed to their bloody rage.

Yet it is true, that all this while they want the dignity and comfort of the
Just: But while they value it not, and feel not the want of it, they take it
not for a punishment, but choose it as a felicity.

And as for the present Rewards of Virtue, to speak impartially, I verily think
that if there were no life to come, Virtue and Holiness were rationally more
eligible: But that is much because God is an End above our selves! And for our
own content, in many, Holiness would give the mind more pleasure, than all
fleshly pleasure, and worldly greatness could counterpoise. But with many
others, whose afflictions are very heavy, and pains and poverty very great, and
who are grievously tormented by cruel persecutors; and perhaps a Melancholy
constitution may forbid them much delight, it is hard to say, that if they
durst let loose themselves to all sin, which makes for their fleshly interest,
their Pleasure would not be much greater. While the Soul is in flesh, it
unavoidably partaketh of the pain or pleasure of the flesh: Therefore the
torment of the Stone, or Strangury, or of a Rack or Strappado will reach the
Soul: And the operations of the Soul being in and by the body, a tormented body
will hinder those Contemplations which should feed our Joy, and also hinder the
Joy of those Contemplations. Most Christians enjoy little comfort in Holiness,
through the very cares of this life, and the weakness of Grace, and power of
Corruptions, and doubts and fears which do attend them: Much less would they
have much comfort, if they were here tormented, and miserable in body, and had
no hope of another life. In some sense we may say, that Heaven is begun on
Earth, because Holiness is begun: But the Heaven on Earth is the hope and
reflection of the Heaven indeed, and is soon gone if that be gone, as the light
here cease when the Sun is set. God seen and loved in a glass does more
differ as to us from God as seen and loved in the intuition of his Glory, than
the heart of man is now able to conceive. The difference may be well called
specifical as to our actions, yea transcendently such. Let any man in torment
without any hope of Heaven be Judge.

And though Honesty without the Pleasure and Comforts of it, be still better
and more eligible, yet while man's Reason and Virtue is so weak, and his sense
and appetite so strong, and his body has so much power upon his mind, it is
very few that the mere Love of Virtue would prevail with, if that Virtue were
never to come to a higher degree than this.

It is undoubtedly true, that the Delights of Holiness, are incomparably more
desirable, as we have them in this life, than Kingdoms and all the pleasures
of the flesh: But that is principally because that this life is the passage to
a better, and has relation to so glorious a reward: The least forethought of
future Blessedness, may weigh down all the riches and pleasures of the World.
But take away the respect to the life to come, and weak man would meet with no
such comforts.

It is true also, that Virtue and Piety is most desirable even for it self: But
that is especially as it will be it self indeed, in a life of fuller perfection
than this: For here it is so weak, and clogged with so many corruptions, and
infirmities, that the comfort of it is little perceived: But as a Child in
infancy has less pleasure than a Brute, for all his Reason; and as young
Scholars for a time, do meet with more trouble than pleasure in their Learning,
and half-witted Artists are often more incommodious than none; and no one would
much seek after Arts or Learning for all its excellency, if they had not hopes
to ascend above that troublesome smattering degree: Even so in the present
Case, though the least Virtue be in it self more valuable than all sensual
pleasure, yet considered as Good to us, we should never be able to prefer it,
if we had not hopes of a higher measure, than most of the truly virtuous and
obedient, do here attain.

Either it is fleshly, worldly pleasure, or it is the pleasing and enjoying of
God in Holiness and Love, which is Man's ultimate end. If it be the former, then
certainly the sensual and wicked are in a better condition than the obedient:
For they have much more of that kind of delight; while the best are often
tormented and persecuted by their cruelty. Animus est ingeneratus a Deo, ex quo
vere vel agnatio nobis cum coelestibus vel genus vel stirps appellari potest.
Cicero 1. de Legib.
But if it be the latter, then it is sure to be enjoyed hereafter, seeing we
have here so small a measure, and also find that all the Virtue and Holiness
of this life, consists much more in desire, and seeking, than in delightful
enjoying: And our Delights are for the most part, the effects of Hope, of what
we shall possess hereafter, more than of the sense of our present happiness.

There is no righteous Governor on Earth, Quum Pompeio res infeliciter
cederent, and ad Caesarem inclinaret victoria, Cato dicebat, in rebus Divinis
multum esse caliginis; quod Pompeio praeter jus agenti fuissent omnia prospera;
causam reipublicae tuenti nihil succederet. Plutarch. in Catone.
that will suffer (if he can help it) his disobedient Subjects to persecute
those that most carefully obey him, and to make them a common scorn, and to
imprison them, torment them, burn them at Stakes, or banish them, and then say,
That their obedience is in its own nature so much better than disobedience,
that it is Reward enough of it self. It is not the work of a Ruler only to see
that no man be a loser by him or his service in point of commutative Justice;
but to see that by distributive Justice such a difference be made between the
obedient and disobedient, as the difference of their actions do require, in
order to the ends of Government. Justice gives every one his due. Mercy it
self when it remitteth a penalty, does it for the same ends, and upon such
reasonable considerations of repentance, confession, satisfaction, reparation,
(according to power) that it may be called a Just Mercy: God is such a Lover of
Holiness, that he will in his Government manifest that Love; and such a hater
of sin that he will signify his hatred of it to the sinner.

Moreover, the Body it self is part of the Man, Plato dicebat, Deum nullo
uspiam modo injustum esse sed plane justissimum: Nec ei similius inveniri posse
quiequam, quam qui inter nos justissimus est. In. Thaeet.
and that part which has no small interest in the sin: It seems therefore
unjust that the Bodies and sensitive powers of the disobedient should have all
kind of pleasures, and the Bodies and sense of the obedient have the pain of
Fasting, self-denial, persecutions, cruelties, and no further Judgment to make
a more equal Retribution.

In a word, I think there are few that compare the life of an Emperor of
Turkey, or Tartary, or any wicked sensual Worldling, with the life of many a
thousand persecuted and tormented Saints, but will confess, that no
Distributive Justice does make in this life, so sufficient a difference, as may
make men know the Justice of the Governor, the desirableness of a holy state,
How like a Christian was that of Anaxagoras, in Laert. p. 8^. Hic non modo
generis gloria and opibus, verum animi quoque magnitudine clarissimus fuit:
Quippe qui universum patrimonium suis sponte concessit. Quo cum ab eis
insimularetur negligentiae, Quid ergo, inquit, noune vos ista curatis? Deinde
ab eis profectus, ad speculandum rerum naturam se contulit, rei and publicae
and privatae omnino negligens; adeo ut cuidam se ita compellanti, Nullane tibi
Patriae cura est? dixerit, Mihi vero patriae cura est, and quidem summa;
digitum in coelum intendens. Been merenti, been profuerit; male merenti par
erit. Plaut. (...), dictum Cleobuli. Phocilidis. (...). Qui indignam honor
afficiunt, stultitiae opinionem habent. Cic.
or the danger of the contrary: it was the observation of this that made most
of the Atheists of the world think, that there was no God, or that he exercised
no moral Government over men: and that made even the innocent often to stagger,
and tempted them to think their labors and sufferings were all in vain, till
they looked before them to the end.

And if God's Justice make not a sufficient difference here, it is certain that
there is another life where he will do it; because else he should not be just,
his Laws would be delusory, and his Government would be defective, and
successful only by deceit.

Obj. God is not obliged to do Justice to men any more than to any other
creatures: he suffers the Dog to kill the Hare, the Deer, and innocent Sheep;
the Kite to kill the harmless Doves and Chickens; the ravenous Birds, and
Beasts, and Fishes, to devour and live upon the rest; and Man upon all: and he
is not bound to do them Justice.

Answ. The Bruits are no subjects capable of moral Government, and consequently
of Propriety, of Right or of Wrong. God that made them incapable of Government,
thereby declared that he intended them not for it. Let no man here play with
ambiguities, and say, that God governs all the creatures. The word
[Government] is taken equivocally, when it is applied to a dead or brutish
subject, a Ship, a Coach, a Horse, a Dog; and means not the same thing which
we discourse of. It is Moral Government by Laws and Judgment which we treat of.
When God had made Man a Governable Creature, he thereby declared his will to be
himself his Governor, which is all the obligation that God is capable of, as
to actions ad extra. He therefore that made the rational world his Kingdom, did
thereby engage himself to govern them in Justice: there is therefore no
comparison between the case of men and bruits, who never were subjects, but
utensils in his Kingdom.

. 2. II. If there were no retribution in the life to come, the secret sins and
duties of the heart and life would be under no sufficient Government. But the
secret sins and duties of the heart and life are under a sufficient Government:
Therefore there is a Retribution in the life to come.

This Argument is a particular instance, Qui largiuntur indignis ea quae dignis
conferri debebant, tria committunt absurda, nam and ipsi jacturam faciunt, and
in bonos contumeliosi sunt, and malos roborant materia vitiorum suppeditata.
Antonin.

Stultissimum est existimare on nia justa esse quae scita sint in populorum
institutis, aut legibus. Etiamne si quae sint Tyrannorum leges, si 30 illi
Athenis leges imponere voluissent? aut si omnes Athenienses delectarentur
tyrannicis legibus, number idcirco hae leges justae haberentur? Nihilo credo magis
illa quam interrex noster tulit, ut Dictator quem vellet civium, indicta causa,
impune posset occidere. Est enim unum jus quo devincta est hominum societas,
etc. Cic. de leg. 1. p. 225. Idem undique in infernum descensus est; said
Anaxagoras to one that lamented that he must die in a strange Country. Laert.
in Anaxag.


to clear the former general Argument. The Major is proved by experience; the
Heart is the Fountain of Good and Evil, man cannot see it, and therefore
pretends not to govern it, or make Laws for it; if they did, it would be all
in vain. The heart may be guilty of Atheism, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Malice,
Contrivements, and desires of Treason, Murder, Incest, Adultery, Fraud,
Oppression, and all the Villainy in the world, and no man can know or punish it:
and God does not do it ordinarily in this life, with any sufficient act of
Justice. So also all those sins which men are but able to hide, as secret
Murders, Treasons, Revenge, Slanders, Fraud, etc. do escape all punishment from
man. And God has no observable ordinary course of outward Justice in this
world, but what he exercises by men, (though extraordinarily he sometime
otherwise interpose.) And how easy and ordinary it is for subtle men to do
much wickedness, and never be discovered, needs no proof. The like we may say
in some measure of those secret duties of heart and life, which have neither
reward nor notice in this life; and if observed, are usually turned into matter
of reproach.

The Minor needs no more proof, when we have proved already that God is our
Governor: It is certain, that the secret acts of heart and life are as much
under his government as the open, and therefore shall have equal retribution.

. 3. III. If there were no life of retribution after this, the sins of the
Great ones and Rulers of the world, and all others, that by strength could make
their part good, would be under no sufficient Justice. But the sins even of the
greatest and strongest are under sufficient justice: Therefore there is a life
of retribution after this.

The Major is clear by experience: The sins of all the Sovereigns of the earth
are rarely under sufficient justice in this life. If there were no punishment
hereafter, what justice would be done upon a Tamerlane, a Bajazet, a Mahumed, a
Dionysius, an Alexander, a Caesar, a Marius, a Sylla, a Sertorius, and many
hundred such, for all the innocent blood which they have shed, for their pride
and self-exalting. What justice would be done on Kings, and Emperors, and
States, that have none above them, for all their lusts and filthiness, their
intemperance and sensuality, Nae illi falsi sunt qui diversissimas res pariter
expectant, voluptatem and praemia virtutis. Sa^ust.

Ut ex barba capillos detonsos negligimus, ita ille divinus animus egressurus,
quo receptaculum suum conferatur, ignis illud exurat, an ferae distrahant, an
terra contegat, non magis putat ad se pertinere, quam secundinas ad editum
infantem. Sen. ep. 93.

Maximum est argumentum naturam ipsam de immortalitate animorum tacit
judicare, quod omnibus curae sint, and maxim quidem, quae post mortem futura
sunt. Cic.

Cum natura caeteros animantes abjecisset, ad pastum, solum hominem erexit, and
ad coeli quasi cognationis domiciliique pristini conspectum excitavit. Tum
speciem ita formavit oris, ut in ea penitus reconditos mores effingeret. Cic.
1. de legib.


their oppression and cruelty? I know that God does sometimes punish them by
Rebels, or by other Princes, or by sickness in this life: but that is no
ordinary course of justice, and therefore not sufficient to its ends:
Ordinarily all things here come alike to all. And what justice would be done
upon any Rebels or Robbers that are but strong enough to bear it out? Or upon
any that raise unrighteous Wars, and burn, and murder, and destroy Countries
and Cities, and are worse than plagues to all places where they come, and worse
than mad dogs and bears to others? If they do but conquer, instead of
punishment for all this villainy, they go away here with wealth and glory.

The Minor is past question: Therefore certainly there is another life, where
conquering, rewarded, prospering, domineering sin shall have its proper
punishment.

. 4. IV. If God rule not man by the hopes and fears of certain Good and Evil
hereafter, he rules him not according to his Nature: But God does rule man
according to his Nature: Ergo.

The Minor needs no proof: The Major is proved by experience: The nature of
man is to be most moved with the hopes and fears of Good and Evil after death:
Otherwise death it self would comparatively seem nothing to us. No other
creature has such hopes and fears: If you ask, how I can tell that? I answer,
as I can tell that a Tree does not hear, and a Stone does not feel or see,
because there is no appearance of such a sense, whose nature is to make it self
manifest by its evidences where it is: Bruits show a fear of death, and love of
life, but of nothing further; of which there is evidence enough to quiet a mind
that seeks after truth, though not to silence a prating caviller. This will
be further improved under that which follows.

. 5. V. If the world cannot be governed according to its nature, and God's
Laws, without the hopes and fears of Good and Evil after death, then the
objects of such hopes and fears is certain truth. But the Antecedent is true:
Therefore so is the Consequent.

That the nature of man requires a Moral Government, and not only a Physical
motion, is already proved. Physical motion only determines the agent to act,
and produces the act it self quoad eventum. Piso in Cic. de fin. l. 5. p. 199.
Speaking of corporal and sensitive good, says, Quibus tantum praestat Mentis
excellens perfectio, ut vix cogitari poffit quid intersit. So that the
perfection of the Mind is the perfection of the Man.
Moral Government does institute for the subject a debitum agendi, and habendi,
and judges him accordingly. If there were no Government but Physical motion,
there were no debitum in the world, neither officii, praemii vel poenae, vel
jus possidendi, vel injuria: no right or wrong. For Physical motion does
equally produce the act in perjury, murder, treason, adultery, as in good
deeds: and it never produces an act which eventually never is: Therefore there
should be nothing a Duty but what comes to pass, if Physical motion were all
the Government. Government then there must be; and what God requires of all by
nature I have showed before. Now that there is a moral impossibility of the
performance of this in any sincerity, so as to intimate any laudible Government
of the world, I shall further prove.

1. If according to the present temper of man, there be no motives, which would
ever prove sufficient to resist all the temptations of this life, to keep us in
true obedience and love to God, unto the end, without the hopes and fears of
Good and Evil after death; then cannot the world be governed according to God's
Laws, without such hopes and fears of futurity. But the Antecedent is true:
Ergo, so is the consequent.

If God had prescribed man a course of duty in his Laws, Ex ipsa vita
discedimus tanquam ex hospitio, non tanquam ex domo: Commorandi enim nobis
natura diversorium, non habitandi domum dedit. Cic. in Cat. Maj.
(as to obey and love him upon terms of fleshly suffering) and had not given
man such motives as might rationally prevail for the performance; his Laws had
been all in vain. He that has made Holiness our indispensible duty, has
certainly left us motives and rational helps to perform it. But so many and
great are the temptations of this life, and so strong is our sense, and so
great are the sufferings of the obedient, that in this our imperfection we
could never go through them, without the motives which are fetched from another
life. 1. It would weaken the hands of the best, as to their duty, it would
embolden them to sin, it would give victory to all strong temptations. Let
every Reader but consult with his own soul, and (though it be granted that
virtue should be chosen for its own sake, how dear soever it may cost, yet) let
him without lying say, what he thinks he should be and do in case of
temptations, if he knew that he had no life to live but this. I am not sure,
Atque haud scio an pietate adversus Deos sublata, fides etiam and societas
humani generis and una excellentissima virtus justitia tolletur. Cic. de Not.
Deor. p. 4.
but I will freely confess what I think most that now are honest would be and
do. First, They would observe how little difference God makes between the
obedient and disobedient in his providence, and how ordinarily his present
judgments are not much to be feared. And hence they would think, that he
makes no great matter of it, what they either are or do: and so their very
love of Virtue would be much debilitated: Nay, the sufferings of the virtuous
would tempt them to think, that it is no very desirable way: Pietas est
fundamentum omnium virtutum. Cic. pro Plan.
and though still they would have something within them, which would tell them,
that honesty, and temperance, and piety are good; yet the natural love of
themselves is so deeply planted in them, Zenophon reports Cyrus as saying, If
all my san^liars were endued with piety to God, they would do less evil to one
another, and to me. l. 8. Pietate adversus, Deos sublata, fides etiam and
societas humani generis, and una excellentissima virtus justitia, tollatur
necesse est. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
and so powerful, that in most great temptations it would prevail. They would
venture upon lying and perjury, rather than lose their liberty, or livelihood,
or reputation. They would do any thing which the Rulers bid them, or any one
that is stronger than they, rather than suffer much for their innocence. I
think they would not scramble much for riches, or high places, because a quiet
life best pleases them; but if they had a fancy to any delightful seat, or
pleasant accommodation, they would stretch their consciences hard to get it:
And to escape poverty, and suffering, and death, they would do I know not what.
And if their interest required them to do another mischief, in order to the
public good, (for revenge I suppose them not much inclined to) they would be
as Brutus's and would be confident of the success of subtle and concealed
enterprises: Lento gradu ad vindictam sui, Divina procedit ita: tarditatemque
supplicii gravitate compensat. Valor. Max. de Dionys. l. 1. c. 2.
they would no further resist any great temptation to please their appetites in
meats and drinks; or their flesh, in lust, or ease, and sports, and gaming, and
such vain pastimes, than some other carnal interest contradicting did forbid
them. And though naturally some men prefer Knowledge before all worldly
pleasures, yet considering how short a time they should be the better for it,
and how many toilsome hours they must lay out for it, they would rather let it
go, and take up with the ease and pleasure of the flesh. This, I fear, would be
their life; for when all the comforts of this life of flesh are laid in the one
end of the balance, what should weigh them down but something greater? So that
if some little restraint of villainy might be made by lower motives, I appeal to
the conscience of the Reader, whether he thinks, Nam quid faciet is homo in
teneoris, qui nihil timet nisi testem vel judicem? Quid in deserto loco nactus
quem multo auro spoliare possit imbecillum atque solum? etc. Cic. de leg. 1.
page 224.
that the fore-proved duties of Resignation, Obedience, and Love to God above
all, would ever be performed (by any considerable number at least) if they knew
that they had no life to live but this.

2. Yea, no tolerable Government at all could be kept up, (I speak not of God's
Physical motion by Omnipotency.) For, 1. The Rulers of the world, that have
none above them would have little or no restraint; and their examples would
form the people to all abomination. If they feared insurrections, they would
oppress them the more to disable them. And what a world must it be, when Lust
is the Law to all the Governors? And the people would have nothing but the
hopes and fears of temporal good or evil, to restrain them from any Treason or
Rebellion or villainy. And all those that Princes cannot please, would plot, A
fortnight after the writing of this London was burnt.
revenge or play their game another way: and subtle men would think it easy to
poison or murder secretly Princes and Nobles, and any enemy that stood in the
way of their own designs, Qui nihil alterius causa sacit, and metitur suis
commodis omnia, videtis credo quid sit acturus -- si negabit illi vitam
erepturum, and aurum ablaturum, non quod turpe judicet, sed quod metuat ne
emanet, id est, ne malum habeat. Cic. ibid.
if once they were out of fear of a life to come.

3. And all secret villainy would be committed without fear: (secret adulteries,
theft, lying, perjury) and common honesty could not be maintained; for every
man's self-interest would be his Law, and prevail against all the principles of
honesty. And all that men would strive for, would be either to strengthen
themselves in their wickedness, that they might be out of fear of humane
Justice; or else to hide it from the cognizance of man: Thus would the world be
turned into a resemblance of Hell, and men be as much worse than wild beast, as
their natures were better which are corrupted, and all would be in wickedness
and confusion, Thaletis dicta in Laert. sunt, Animas esse immortales.
Antiquissimum omnium entium Deus: ingenitus enim est: Pulcherrimum mundus: a
Deo enim factus: Maximum locus; capit enim omnia: Veloeissimum Mem; nam per
universa discurrit, etc.


without the hopes and fears of another life.

Obj. But in all this you argue against experience: Has there not been
Government and order kept up among Heathens? and is there not a Government at
this day in all the Kingdoms and Commonwealths throughout the world?

Answ. In all this I speak according to experience: For, 1. Almost all the
world believe a life to come: all the Christians, all the Mahometans, and all
the Jews, and almost all or most of the known Idolaters and Heathens: their
very Idolatry intimates this, Stoici dicunt esse Daemones quibus insit hominum
miseratio, inspectores rerum humanarum: Heroas quoque solutas corporibus
sapientum animas. Laert. in Zenone.
when they number their deceased Heroes with their gods. And though the power
of this belief is debilitated with the most, (and therefore piety and virtue
proportionably perishes) yet that common dull belief of it which they have,
being in a business of unspeakable consequence, does restrain them so far as
they are restrained.

2. Those that believe it not, are yet in an uncertainty; and the possibility
of rewards and punishments hereafter, keeps up much of the order that is left.

3. Those few Countries which believe that there is no life to come, (or rather
those persons in some Countries) do proportionably increase or excel in
wickedness: they give up themselves to sensuality and lusts, to pride, and
covetousness, and revenge, and cruelty; and are usually worse than others, as
their belief is worse; what makes Cannibals more savage than other people?
What made a Nero, a Heliogabalus, etc. such swine? what made Rome it self at
that pass, that Seneca says, more died by poison of servants hands, (and
secret murders) than by Kings: (even in days of such great and common cruelty.)
All was, because men's consciences were from under the hopes and fears of
another life: and if all were so, then all would live accordingly.

But it is another kind of life which the Law of God in Nature does enjoin us;
it is another kind of life, which I before proved to be all men's duty: and
whether the world have sufficient means and motives to such a life, and could
be governed but like men, without the hopes and fears of futurity, let sober
and considerate reason judge? Qui ea committit quae leges prohibent, and de
quibus supplicia sunt, is ea multo magis committet, de quibus nullum supplicium
est. Aristot. 1. Rhet.

Obj. At non apud omnes proficiunt leges.

Resp. Nec philosophia quidem; nec ideo inutilis and formandis animis inefficax
est. Sen. ep. 95.




Obj. Can it be any worse then it is already? what vice or villainy does not
every where abound, for all the belief of a life to come?

Answ. If it be so bad for all that belief, what would it be without? if the
enervating of it by the lusts of the flesh do loose the reins, and leave the
world in so much wickedness, what would it be if their hopes and fears of
another life were gone? Now men have a secret witness in their breasts, which
checketh and restrains them: Now they have Kings and Rulers, who having some
belief of a life to come, do form their Laws accordingly, and govern the common
people with some respect to that belief. Now there are many (through the mercy
of God) who are serious in that belief, and live accordingly; who are
instructors, restraints and examples to the rest. And from these is that order
which is kept up in the world: But if all were as those few, that have overcome
this belief, the world would be a Wilderness of savage Beasts, and would be so
full of impiety, villainy, persidiousness, bloodiness, and all confusion, that
we should think it a greater sign of goodness in God to destroy it, than to
continue it; and should think of his Government according to the effects, or
should hardly believe he governed it at all.

I come now to prove the consequence of the Major Proposition, that the object
of those hopes and fears are certain truths, which are so necessary to the
government of the world: and this needs no other proof but this.

If God can govern the world without a course of deceit and lying, then the
objects of these necessary hopes and fears are true: But God can govern the
world without a course of deceit and lying: Ergo.

The Major is evident, because to govern by the hopes and fears of falsehoods,
or things that are not, (when those hopes and fears are not only of God, but
made necessary to Government) is to govern by deceit and lying: or if it had
not been by falsehood uttered, but falsehood permitted, Utiles esse has opiniones
quis neget, cum intelligat quam musta firmentur jurejurando: quantae salutis
fint faedera religionis; quam multos divini supplicii metus, a scelere
revocaret? quamque sancta fit societas civium, inter ipsos Diis immortalibus
interpositis, tum judicibus, tum testibus.

Cic. de leg. l. 2. p. 236, 237.

Nisi Deus istis te corporis custodiis liberaverit, ad coelum aditus patere non
potest. Cic. Somn. Scip.


the Minor is certain.

For if God cannot govern without such a course of deceit, it is either for
want of Power, or of Wisdom, or of Goodness; that is, Holiness, and Benignity
of Will. But the Omnipotent wants not Power, and the Omniscient wants not
Wisdom, to find out true and suitable means; and he that is Optimus, wants
neither Holiness to love truth and hate falsehood, nor Benignity to love his
Creature: and therefore needs no such means.

And he that believes that God himself does govern the world by a cheat, even
by the hopes and fears of fictions, will sure think it best to imitate his God,
and to govern, and trade, and live accordingly.

This argument was a necessitate ad ordinem, the next shall be only from God's
actual government.

. 6. VI. If God do de facto govern the world by the hopes and fears of Good and
Evil in another Life, then the object of those hopes and fears is certain:
Laertius says of Bion Borist. That he had learned of impious Theodorus to deny
God, in his health; but falling into unhealthfulness he repented of his sin
against God. Ac siquidem id dogma tueri perstitisset, merito dicendus esset
sensuse ut visum fuislet, etsi male visum esset. At nunc tamen longo morbo
tabescens, ac mori pertimescens, qui Deos non esse dixe^at, phanum non viderat,
mortalibus qui illudebat veris dum diis immolarent -- Peccavi dixit, delictis
parcite -- Stultus qui mercede voluerit Deos esse. Quasi tunc Dii essent quum
illos Bion demum esse arbitraretur.
But God does de facto so govern: Ergo.

The Major is proved as before: for that which proved that God can govern
without falsehood, proved also that he does govern without it. It belongs only
to the Impotent, the Ignorant, or the Bad to use such means.

Obj. May not a Parent or Physician honestly deceive a Child or Patient for his
recovery to health? why then may not God do so?

Answ. 1. They do it through insufficiency to attain their end by a better
means: but the Omnipotent and Omniscient has no such insufficiency. 2. They
may not lie or utter any untruth to do it, though they may hide some truth by
words which he is apt to mistake. But if the world be governed by such hopes
and fears of futurity, it is hard to think whence they should fetch the object,
but from some divine revelation in nature. 3. A whole course of Government of
all the rational world, by so sorry an instrument as deceit and falsehood, is
more inconsistent with the nature and perfections of God, than a particular act
of deceit in a work of necessity and charity is with the nature of imperfect
man.

The Minor is proved in the answer to the last objections, and by the common
experience of the world.

Obj. How little does the hopes and fears of another world do with the most? Do
you not see that fleshly interest rules them, and therefore they are what the
Great ones would have them be, who can help or hurt them?

Answ. 1. I have proved how much worse it would be, ^ that restraint which
these hopes and fears make were taken off. 2. That this restraint is general in
all Nations almost of the earth, though the prevalency of sin do much enfeeble
it. 3. That Rulers themselves are under some of these restraints, in their
Law-making and Judgment. Though fleshly interest much prevail against it,
there are some remnants of secret hopes or fears in the consciences of sinners,
which keep up so much good as is yet left, and keep men from those villainies,
in which they might hope to escape all sufferings from men.

. 7. VII. If God himself kindle in the best of men desires to know him, love
him, and enjoy him perfectly hereafter, then such desires shall attain their
end: But God himself does kindle such desires in the best of men: Ergo -- And
consequently there is such a Life to come.

Here 1. I must prove that the best men have such desires: 2. That God kindles
them: 3. That therefore he will satisfy them.

1. And for the first, the Consciences of all Good men are my witnesses; whose
desires to know God better, For as the Sun is not seen without the Sun, nor the
Air heard without the Air, but the Eye that is full of the light sees the
light, and the Ear full of air hears the resounding air; so God is not known
without God; but a mind full of God only, is lifted up to God, so far as
illustrated with the light of God he knows God, and inflamed with the heat of
God he thirsts after him. Ficin. c. 2. p. 15.
to love him and please him more, and to enjoy his Love, is as the very pulse
and breath of their souls. For this they groan, and pray, and seek; for this
they labor, wait and suffer: If you could help them to more of the Knowledge
and Love of God, you would satisfy them more than to give them all the wealth
and honors of the World. Their Religious lives, their labors, prayers,
contemplations, and sufferings, prove all this, and show for what they long and
live.

Obj. But this is caused by the power of a deluded fantasy, which seeks
after that which is not to be had: What if you fall in Love with the Sun? Will
it prove, that you must be loved by it, see it and enjoy it, in the life to
come?

Answ. 1. To the similitude: Either the Sun is a rational free Agent, or not.
If it be, it is either the chief Agent, or a dependent Instrument: If it were
the first (as it is not) I should owe my self totally to it, It is a most
improbable thing, that God would give up all the best men in the World to
deceit, in so great a matter, and them that are most faithful to the Truth,
and would save all the Epicures, Drunkards, Fornicators, proud and perjured
Athiests, from this error, if it were an error, to believe a life to come.
in the exercise of all the powers given me, as is aforesaid: And if it gave me
such Desires, I might suppose it was not in vain. But if it give me nothing but
as an Instrument or dependent Cause, I owe it nothing but in subserviency to
the first Cause: But in such subserviency, if God had commanded me to love and
honor it, as a Lover of Mankind, and a Rational Benefactor, and had placed
any of my duty or felicity, in seeking perfection in that love and honor; I
should obey him; and expect an answerable benefit: But if it be no intelligent
Agent, or I cannot know that it is so, then I can owe it no other respect but
what is due to a natural Instrument of God.

2. To the matter: That these desires are not from a deluded fantasy, but the
work of God I prove: 1. In that I have fully proved them already to be our
Duty, by the Law of Nature: (...). Gr. Com.

Supplicii facilius pius a Diis supplicans

Quam qui scelestus est, invenit veniam sibi. Plaut. Rud.

(...).

(...). Menand.


To love God with all the heart and might, and consequently to desire to love
him, and please him, and enjoy him in perfection, that is in the utmost of our
capacity, is a proved duty. 2. In that the Best men are the possessors of it;
And the more all other Virtues and Obedience do abound, the more this
abounds. And the more any are vicious, impious, sensual, worldly, the less
they have of these desires after God. 3. They increase in the use of holy means
appointed by God: and they decay by evil means. All sin is against it, and all
obedience does promote it. 4. It is found most suitable to the tendency of our
faculties, as their only perfection: The only true advancement of Reason, and
rectitude and felicity of the Will. If it be not by God, Nec unquam Bono
quicquam mali evenire potest, nec vivo nec mortuo, nec res ejus a Diis
negliguntur. Cicero Tuscul. 1.
that the Love and Desires of God are kindled in us, then no good is to be
ascribed unto God: For we have here no greater good.

Now that God will satisfy these desires is proved; In that he makes nothing
in vain, nor kindles any such desires as shall deceive them, and make all
their lives a mere delusion. Yea, and do this by the very best of men. None of
this is consistent with the perfections of God.

. 8. VIII. If there were no life of Retribution after this, Obedience to God
would be finally men's loss and ruin: But Obedience to God shall not be finally
men's loss and ruin: Ergo, there is another Life --

The Major is proved before: However it would be best in point of Honesty, it
would be worst to thousands in point of personal Vtility. Even to all those
that forsaking all the sinful pleasures of this World, do conflict with their
flesh, and keep it under, and suffer the loss of all outward comforts by the
cruelty of Persecutors, and it may be through melancholy or weak fears, have
little comfort from God instead of them; and at last perhaps be tormented and
put to death by cruelty. Few will think this desirable for it self.

And that our Obedience to God shall not be men's final loss and ruin, needs
no proof but this; that he has made our self-love a Principle inseparable from
our nature, and makes use of it in the Government of the World; and commands
nothing but what is finally for our good; Sicut non potest quiequam ignis
propinquatione fieri frigidissimum, ita non potest homo quia solus haeret Deo
sapientissimo, beatissimoque stultissimus ex hoc, miserrimusque evadere: Neque
potest Deus qui summa veritas and bonitas est, humanum genus, prolem suam
decipere. Marsil. Ficin. de Rel. Christ. c. 1. p. 13.
and so conjoyneth the pleasing of him and our own felicity inseparably in our
end: His Regiment is paternal, His Glory which he seeks by us, is the Glory
of his Goodness communicated and accumulated on us. This taken in with the
Wisdom and Goodness of his Nature, will tell any man, that to be a loser
finally by our Obedience to God, is a thing that no man need to fear: He does
not serve himself upon us to our hurt; nor command us that which will undo us.
He neither wants Power, Wisdom, nor Goodness, to make us gainers by our duty.
It is the desire of natural Justice in all, ut bonis been sit, and malis male:
If I find but any duty commanded me by God, my Conscience and my sense of the
Divine perfections, will not give me leave to think that I shall ever prove
finally a loser by performing it, Aristo hoc unum tenuit, praeter vitia atque
virtutes negavit rem esse ullam aut fugiendam aut expetendam. Pis^ in Cicer. de
fin. l. 5. p. 203.
though he had never made me any promise of reward: so far the Law of Nature
has a kind of Promise in it, that if he do but say, Do this, I will not doubt
but the doing of it is for my good! And if he bid me but use any means to my
own happiness, I should blaspheme if I suspected it would tend to my loss and
misery, and was made my snare.

. 9. IX. The highest Love and Obedience to God, is never a work of imprudence
or folly, nor ever to be Repented of: But such they would be to many, if there
were no life to come: Ergo --

By imprudence and folly, I mean that course which tends to our own undoing
as aforesaid: No man shall ever have cause to repent of his fidelity to God,
and say, I did foolishly in ruining my self by it. This argument being but a
mere consectary of the former, I pass over.

. 10. X. If no man living be certain that there is no future life of
Retribution, Ea paranda viatico, quae cum naufragio simul enatarent: ait
Antisthenes in Laert. l. 6. c. 1.

Id ib. dixit, Eos qui cuperent immortales esse, oportere pie vivere and just.


then it is certain that there is such a life: But no man living is certain
that there is no such life: Ergo, its certain that there is.

The Major is proved thus: If all men be in Reason obliged to seek the
happiness and escape the punishments of another life, before all the treasures
and pleasures of this World, then it is certain that such a Life of happiness
and punishments there is: But if no man be certain, that there is no such life,
the bare probability or possibility that there is such, does in reason oblige
all men to seek it, above all the World: Ergo, it is certain that such a life
there is.

Dii boni! quid est in hominis vita diu? Mihi ne diuturnum quidem quicquam
videtur, in quo est aliquid extremum. Cum enim id advenit, tum illud
praeteriit, effluxit: Tantum remanet quod virtute and recte factis sit
consecutus. Horae quidem cedunt, and dies, and menses, and anni, nec
praeteritum tempus unquam revertitur: nec quid sequatur sciri potest. Cicer.
Cat. Maj.
My argument is from our Obligation to seek it before all, to the certain being
of it. 1. That no man is certain that there is no life to come, I need not
prove, as long as no man ever proved such an opinion, and the boldest Atheists
or Infidels say no more, than that they think there is no other life, but all
confess that they have no assurance of it.

2. If so, then that the possibility or probability obliges us to regard it in
our hopes, fears, and endeavors before all this World, is evident from the
incomparableness of them, or great disparity of the things. When most of the
World think there is another life, and there is so much for it as we here lay
down, and a few Atheists say only [we do not believe it, or it is not likely,
though it be not a thing that we are certain of] now Reason commands every
man that loves himself, to prefer it before all earthly things. Because we
are fully certain beyond all doubt, that all earthly things are of short
duration, and will quickly leave us: and when they are gone, they are to us as
if they had never been: They are a shadow, a dream, a something which is next
to nothing: To say, It will shortly have an end, does blot out the praise, and
embitter the pleasures of all below. What the better are all generations past,
for all the wealth and fleshly pleasures which they ever received in the World?
There is no wise man, Nemini explicatum potest esse, quomodo sese habitu^um sit
corpus, non dico ad annum, sed ad vesperum, Cicer. 2. de fin.
but would prefer the least probability of attaining full felicity, and
escaping death and torments, before the certainty of possessing a pin or a
penny for an hour. The disparity is much greater between things temporal and
everlasting, than any such similitude can reach. All the Christians, Says
Plutarch, de Tranquil. Anim. Alexander wept because he was not Lord of the
World, when Crates having but a Wallet and a thredbare Cloak, spent his whole
life in mirth and joy, as if it had been a continual Festival Day.
and all the Mahometans, and most of the Heathens of the World do hold the
Immortality of the Soul; and the perpetuity of the Happiness or misery
hereafter: The Atheist is not sure of the contrary: and he is sure that a few
years or hours will put an end to all his temporal pleasures, and equal those
that lived here in pleasure and in pain: And therefore that at the worst his
loss or hazard of the pleasures of sin for the hopes of eternal pleasure, is
not a thing considerable: If those that dissent from him prove in the right,
the sensualist is utterly undone for ever: He must live in endless pain and
misery, and must lose an endless unspeakable joy and glory which he might have
possessed as well as others: But if he himself prove in the right, he gets
nothing by it but the pleasing of inordinate concupiscence for a few years; and
will die with as much emptiness of content as if he had lived in continual
pain. Now this being the true case, no sober reason can deny, but that wisdom
obliges every man to labor for an uncertain, endless Glory with Angels more
than for the certain pleasures of the World, which are of so short continuance;
and to do more to escape uncertain everlasting misery, than a certain trouble to
the flesh for so short a time: And thus a life of Godliness spent in seeking
future Happiness, and in escaping future Punishment, is naturally made the duty
of all men in the World.

Obj. But you seem here to forget that you had before made Godliness to be a
Man's loss and undoing, if so be there were no life to come? when now you make
the loss and hurt to be as nothing.

Answ. 1. I spoke before especially of those that suffer persecution for their
fidelity: Plato dixit finem esse, Deo similem fieri. Vittutem sufficere quidem
ad been beateque vivendum; caeterum instrumentis indigere, corporis bonis,
robore, fanitate, integritate sensuum and caeteris id genus: Exterioribus item,
puta opibus, etc. Laert. in Platone. Arbitratur and Deos humana cernere atque
curare -- and daemones esse -- Porro in Dialogis Justitiam, Divinam legem
arbitratus est, ut ad just agendum potentius suaderet, ne post mortem paenas
improbi luerent. Id. ibid.
I speak here especially of all the multitude of the World, who get nothing but
the pleasures of sin by their sensuality. 2. When I speak of all the pleasures,
profits and honors of this World, and life it self as next to nothing, I do
not say that they are simply nothing. They are nothing compared to everlasting
Joy or Misery: But they are something to him that shall have no more: The ease
and life of a poor Bird or Beast is naturally desirable to it: One of the best
of Christians said, that If in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of
all men most miserable: and yet, that The sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared to the Glory which shall be revealed in us. There is
no contradiction between these two; that these short-lived pleasures are not
worth one thought in comparison of the life to come: and yet that they would be
considerable, if there were no other to be had and hoped for.

3. And now the consequence is proved in what is said before: If it should by
common Reason and Nature be made all men's duty in the World, to seek to attain
a happiness which is not to be attained, and to escape a misery which never was
or will be unto any, and this with the chiefest care and labor of their lives,
then the whole life of Man should be vanity and a lie: Nature should have
formed him for mere delusion, to tire him out in following that which is not:
The World should not only be totally governed by deceit, but formed principally
for such a life: And whereas indeed it is the Worldling that pursues vanity,
and spends his life in a dream or show; this opinion would make men's wisdom,
and honesty, and piety, to be the vanity, dream and show. But none of this can
be imputed to the most wise and gracious God: He need not set up a false
deceitful hope or fear before his Creatures to keep them in obedience; nor
has he appointed their lives for so vain a work.

Abeunt omnia unde orta sunt. Cicer. Cato Maj.

Boni viri sunt Deorum simulachra. Diogen. in Laert.

Surely if the World was made for Man, then Man was made for more than the
world. Du-Plessis Verit. Christ. Relig. Praefar.


. 11. XI. If the perfection of man's faculties to which Nature formed him, be
not attained in this life, then is there another life where it is to be
attained. But the Antecedent is true: Ergo, so is the Consequent.

The reason of the consequence is, because God who makes nothing in vain, made
not man in vain, nor his natural inclination to his own perfection. His will is
signified by his works: As a man that makes a knife, or sword, or gun, or ship,
does tell you what he makes it for, by the usefulness and form of it; so when
God made man with faculties fitted to know him, and love him, he showed you
that he made him for that use, and that therein he would employ him.

Obj. It would perfect the wit of a Bruit if it were raised as high as a Man's;
and yet it follows not, that so it shall be.

Answ. I deny the antecedent: It would not perfect him in his kind, but make
him another thing of another kind. Man is more than a perfect Bruit, and a
Bruit is not an imperfect man: But I speak of perfecting man in his own kind,
according to his Nature.

Obj. A Chicken has a desire to live to full maturity, and yet you kill it
before: And Grass and Plants may be cut down before they come to perfection.

Answ. I speak in my argument of the species of man, and the objection speaks
only of some individuals: If there be no higher stature for any Chicken or
Plant to grow up to, then that is the state of its perfection. Its natural
inclination to a perfecter state does show that nature formed it for a
perfecter state, and that such a state there is to be attained, Seneca E^ist.
^3. page (mihi) 673. says, Miraris hominem ad Deos ire? Deus ad homines venit:
immo (quod propius est) in homines venit: nulla sine Deo men's bona est: Semina
in corporibus humanis divina dispersa sunt: quae si bonus cultor excipit,
similia origini prodeunt; and paria his ex quibus orta sunt, surgunt: si malus,
non aliter quam humus sterilis ac palustris, necat; ac deinde creat purgamenta
pro frugibus. Beata vita est conveniens naturae suae: Quae non aliter
contingere potest, quam si primum sana men's est, and in perpetua possessione
sanitatis suae. Senec. de vita beat. c. 3.
however by accident it may be killed or cut down before it do attain it, which
never befalls all the kind, but some individuals. So I confess that by ill
accidents (by sin) men may fall short of their natural perfection. But natures
inclination shows that there is such a state.

And the Antecedent is manifest, 1. In our nature. 2. In all men's experience.

1. We feel in our natures a capacity of knowing all that of God which I have
before laid down, and that it is improvable by further light to know much more:
We feel that our hearts are capable of loving him, and of delighting in the
contemplation of the glory of his perfections: And we find all other things so
far below the tendancy of our faculties, and the contentment of our minds, that
we know that this is it that we were made for, and this is the proper use that
our Understandings and Wills were given us for. 2. And we find that we attain
not any such perfection in this life as we are capable of and do desire; but
that our increase of virtue and holiness is an increase of our desires after
more; and the better any man is, the more he still desires to be better; and
the more he knows, and loves, and delights in God, the more he desires it
in a far higher degree. And even of our knowledge of nature we find, that the
more we know, the more we would know; and that he that knows the effect,
would naturally fain know the cause; and that when he knows the nearer cause,
he would know the cause of that, Nullum est animal praeter hominem quod habet
ullam notitiam Dei. Cic. 1. de Leg.

Dii immortales sparserunt animos in corpora humana, ut essent qui terras
tuerentur, quique coelestem ordinem contemplantes, imitarentur eum, vitaemodo
and constantia. Cic. Cat. Maj.


and so know the first cause, God himself. And the little that we here attain
to of Knowledge, Love and Delight, is far short of the perfection in the same
kind which our faculties incline unto.

. 12. XII. Another illustration or confirming argument may be gathered from the
great disparity which God has made between Men and Beasts: If God had intended
us for no more knowledge and fruition of himself hereafter than the Beasts
have, then he would have given us no more Capacity, Desire or Obligation to
seek it than the Beasts have: But he has given us more Capacity, Desire and
Obligation to seek it: Ergo. --

A Beast has no knowledge that there is a God, no thoughts of a Life to come,
Ex terra sunt homine^, non ut incolae and habitatores, sed quasi spectatores
superarum rerum atque coelestum: quarum spectaculum ad nullum aliud animantium
genus pertinet. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 2. Non temere, nec fortuito, sati and
creati sumus: sed profecto fait quaedam vis, quae generi consuleret humano: nec
id gigneret aut aleret, quod cum omnes labores exantlavisset, tum incideret in
mortis malum sempiternum. Cic. 1. Tusc.
no desire to know God, or love him, or enjoy him; no obligation to take care
for another life, nor to provide for it, nor once to consider whether there be
any such or not: Because he is not made for any life but this. And if God had
made Man for no more, he would have disposed and obliged him no further: We
have an understanding to know it, and thoughts, and hopes, and fears, and cares
about it, which are not all in vain; and we are plainly in reason obliged to
this, and more than we do; and that Obligation is not vain.

. 13. XIII. If there were no Life of Retribution hereafter, Man were more vain
and miserable than the Bruits by far, and his Reason would but more delude him,
and torment him: But the Consequent is absurd: Ergo, so is the Antecedent.

The Major is easily proved by our great experience: for the world consists
partly of men that believe another life, and partly of them that do not: and
Reason makes them both the more miserable. For the former sort, which is the
most of the world, their Reason tells them, that it is their duty to labor
for a happiness hereafter, and to fear and prevent a future misery: Mors iis
^erribilis est, quorum cum vita omnia extinguuntur. Cic. Parad 1.
and so their expectation would be their mere delusion, and their lives would
be all spent and ordered in delusion: Like a company of men that should run up
and down to prepare for a transplantation into the Moon, and should cut down
timber to build there, and provide a stock of cattle to store the grounds
there, and buy and sell Lands there; Read Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. where Cotta
would prove, that God did man a mischief by making him rational.
such would be the life of man in preparing for another world: and he would be
under a double calamity: One, by all this fruitless labor, and another by his
fear of future misery, if his labor by temptations should be frustrate, and he
should miscarry. To have Reason to lead a man in such a delusory life, and to
torment him with the fears of what may befall him after death, is sure to be by
reason more unhappy than the beasts, that have none of this.

And for the Atheists, they are more unhappy too, so far as they are rational
and considerate. For they have no more happiness than the beasts to comfort
them, while they look for none hereafter: and they have in all the way the
foresight of their end: they foreknow their great probability of sickness, and
painful tormenting diseases: they foreknow the certainty of their death: Thus
Man who is the perfectest of Animals should be the most imperfect, and he that
is the wisest should be the most deluded.
they know how all their sport and pleasure will end, and leave them in dolor,
and how their corpse must be rotting and turn to dust: they foresee abundance
of crosses in their way: they are troubled with cares for the time to come. A
beast has none of this foreknowledge, and none of the fore-thoughts of pain
or dying, but only fearfully flies from a present danger. Moreover the poor
Atheist, having no certainty of the truth of his own opinion, (that there is no
other life) is often haunted with fears of it, and especially when approaching
death does awake both his reason and his fears: he then thinks, O what if there
should be another world, where I must live in misery for my sin! In despite of
him, some such fears will haunt him. Judge then whether the use of reason be
not to make man a more deluded and tormented creature than the bruits, if so be
there were no life after this?

But this cannot stand with the methods of our Creator: To give us so great an
excellency of nature, to make us more vain and unhappy than the beasts. When he
makes a creature capable and fit for higher things, he declares that he
intends him for higher things.

Obj. But even here we have a higher kind of work and pleasure than the Bruits:
we rule them, and they serve us: we dwell in Cities, and Societies, and make
provision for the time to come.

Answ. Those Bruits that dwell in Woods and Deserts serve us not: and our
ruling them is a small addition to our felicity: Pride it self can take little
pleasure in being the Master of Dogs and Cats. Rule does but add to care and
trouble: caeteris paribus, it is an easier life to be ruled than to rule. And
if we take away their lives, it is no more than we must undergo our selves: and
the violent death which we put them too has usually less pain, than our
languishing age, and sickness, and natural death. And it is as pleasant to a
Bird to dwell in her nest, as to us to dwell in Cities and Palaces; and they
sing as merrily in their way of converse, as we in our troublesome Kingdoms and
Societies: If present pleasure be the highest of our hopes, they seem to have
as much as we; or if there be any difference, it is counter-ballanced by the
twenty-fold more cares, and fears, and labors, and mental troubles which we
are more liable to. Dicunt Stoici Malum, impium esse and sine Deo: quod duplici
ratione accipitur; sive quod Deo contrarius dicatur, sive quod aspernetur Deum:
id tamen malis omnibus non convenire: Pios autem and Religiosos esse sapientes:
petitos enim esse Divini juris omnes Porro p^etatem scientiam esse Divini
cultus: Diis item eos sacrificia facturos, castosque futuros: Quippe ea quae in
Deos admittuntur peccata detestari, Diisque charos ac gratos fore, quod sancti
justique in rebus Divinis sint: solos vero Sacerdotes esse sapientes, etc.
Laert. in Zenone. (How christian-like is all this spoken) Nec enim tantum mali
est peccare principes (quanquam est hoc magnum per seipsum malum) quantum
illud, quod permulti imitatores principum existunt. Nam licet videre, si velis
replicare memoriam temporum, qualescunque summi civitatis viri fuerunt talem
civitatem fuisse: Quaecunque mutatio morum in principibus extiterit, candem in
populo secuturam. Cic. de leg. 3. p. 262.
And our knowledge does but increase our sorrow, (of which next.)

. 14. XIV. If there were no life of Retribution, the wiser any man were, the
more miserable would he be, and knowledge would be their plague, and ignorance
the way to their greatest pleasure: But the consequence is absurd: Ergo, so is
the antecedent.

The reason of the consequence is manifest in what is said: the Ignorant have
nothing to disturb them in their sensual delights. The liker to beasts they can
be to eat, and drink, and play, and satisfy every lust, and never think of a
reckoning, or of death it self, the more uninterrupted would be their delights;
the fore-thoughts of death or any change would not disturb them: their folly,
which makes them overvalue all the matters of the flesh, would increase their
pleasure and felicity: for things delight men as they are esteemed, rather than
as indeed they are. But the more wise and knowing men would always see vanity
and vexation written upon all the treasures and pleasures of the world; and in
the midst of their delights would foresee death coming to cut them off, and
bring them to a dolorous end. So that undoubtedly the most knowing would be the
most miserable; and though Nature delight in knowing much, it would but let in
an inundation of vexatious passions on the mind.

But Knowledge is so great a gift of God, and Ignorance so great a blemish unto
Nature, that it is not by sober reason to be believed, that so noble a gift
should be given us as a plague, and so great a plague and shame of nature as
ignorance is, should be a blessing or felicity.

. 15. XV. If the Kings and temporal Governors of the world do extend their
Rewards and Punishments as far as to temporal prosperity and adversity, life
and death, in respect to the present ends of Government, and this justly; then
is it meet and just that the Universal King extend his benefits and punishments
much further, for good or evil, as they have respect unto his own Laws and
Honor: But the antecedent is true: Ergo, so is the consequent.

Kings justly take away men's lives for Treason: They that look but to the
present temporal good or hurt of the Commonwealth, do think that no temporal
punishment or reward can be too great for some crimes, and for some
atchievments. Read but the Statute-books, and this will be soon found.

And that the offenses which are against the Infinite Majesty deserve
incomparably sorer punishments, than any against men as such, is past all
question. As also that love, and fidelity, and duty to God, is incomparably
more laudable.

. 16. XVI. If there were no life of retribution after this, it would follow,
that man is more to be feared and obeyed than God, and so has the far greater
and higher hand in the Moral Government of the world: But the consequent is
absurd and blasphemous: Ergo, so is the Antecedent.

The argument is clear and past all contradiction. The reason of the Major or
consequence, is, Because (though God can destroy any wicked man at his
pleasure, yet) all the world's experience shows us, that ordinarily in this
life he does no such things: If a strange judgment overtake some wicked man, it
is an unusual thing, and next to a miracle: And usually all things come alike
to all; the good and the bad die of the same disease: Laert. in Timon. says,
That Philatchus the Historian reports of Praylus the Philosopher, that he was
of so constant a mind, that he suffered himself to be unjustly executed as a
Traitor, and would not use one word of supplication for his life: But that is
not the common temper of Mankind.

Alta spectare si voles, atque hanc sedem and aeternam domum contueri; neque
sermonibus vulgi te dederis, nec in praemiis humanis spem posueris rerum
tuarum: sois re illecebris oportet ipsa virtus tr^hat ad verum decus. Cic. in
Somn. Scip.


the deceitful and the wicked prosper in the world as much as others; if either
suffer more, usually it is the best. Videtis quam prospera navigatio a Diis
datur sacrilegis, says Dionysius. Thunderbolts strike so few, that it is
scarce rational much to fear them. If one fall under some extraordinary
judgment, many hundred escape.

But on the other side, Kings and States do ordinarily do execution on those
that displease them, and break their Laws: The case of a Daniel is so rare,
that it would be no rule to direct a rational course by: If the King should
forbid me praying as he did Daniel, or command me to worship his Image, as he
did the other three witnesses; reason and self-preservation would require me to
obey him: for its ten to one but he would execute his wrath on me, and its an
hundred to one God would not deliver me here. God suffered thirty or forty
thousand to be murdered at once by the French Massacre under Charles 9. He
suffered two hundred thousand to be murdered by the Irish Papists: He suffered
many to be burned in Queen Mary's days: He suffered yet greater Havoc to be
made of the poor Waldenses and Alligenses: He suffered most cruel inhumane
torments, and death, upon thousands of innocent persons, to change the
new-planted Religion in Japan. He therefore that cares for his life and peace,
will think it far safer to venture on the present executions of God, than of
his King, or Enemy, or any one that is strong enough to ruin him: If I lived
under the Turkish Empire, and were commanded to deny Christ, and to renounce my
Baptism, and to subscribe that my Baptismal Vow does not oblige me, or any way
to lie, or be perjured, or sin against God; self-preservation would bid me,
[Venture on the sin, for it is an hundred to one but God will spare thee; The
very doubting of the life to come makes multitudes take this course in our
age: preferring that which they have in hand, before that which they suppose
uncertain.

Rursus vero si animoe lethi adeunt januas ( Epicuri ut sententia definitur)
nec sic causa est competens cur expeti philosophia debeat, etiamsi verum est,
purgari has animas, atque ab omni puras vitiositate praestari: Nam si
communiter obeunt, non tantum est erroris maximi, verum stolidae caecitatis,
fraenare ingenitos appetitus, cohibere in angustiis vitam, nihil indulgere
naturae, non quod cupidines jusserint and instigaverint facere, cum nulla te
praemia tanti laboris expectent, cum dies mortis advenerit, and corporalibus
fueris vinculis exolutus. Arnob. adv. Gentes, l. 2.


and it is an hundred to one but that the Prince will punish and destroy thee
if thou obey him not] How few that knew there were no life to come, would not
rather venture to please a Tyrant, or a Robber than God, and more fear to
displease them? and would not by perjury, or any commanded villainy, save
himself from their fury and cruelty? and would not study more to flatter and
humor them, than to obey their God? And so Man should have the chief
government of the world, while Man's rewards and punishments were so much more
notable than God's, Man would be feared and obeyed before God: that is, Man
would be taken for our God. These things are clear undeniable truths. If there
were no life to come, self-love and reason would make man more obedient to Man
than God, and so make Gods of flesh and blood. But whether this be the tendency
of the Government of God, let Reason judge.

. 17. XVII. A very probable argument may be fetched from the number and quality
of intellectual spirits: He that looks to the vast, and numerous, and
glorious Orbs which are above him, and thinks of the glorious receptacles of a
more glorious sort of creatures, and then considers that we are intellectual
agents, made to love and honor God as well as they; and considers further both
the Benignity of God, and the communion which those other Orbs have with us,
will think it probable, that we are in progress toward perfection: and that we
that are so like them, may be capable of their happiness.

. 18. XVIII. If in this life God have little of the praise and glory of his
works, from those whom he created for it, but contrarily be much dishonored by
them; then there is another life in which he will be more honored by them: But
the antecedent is true: Ergo, so is the consequent.

What a glorious fabric has God set man to contemplate? and how little of it
is here known? so that Philosophy is found to be but a searching and wrangling
about things which no man reaches; and yet an inquisitive desire we have. And
therefore sure there is a state in which these works of God shall be better
known of us, and God shall have the honor of them more than now. His Laws also
prescribe us excellent duties, and his Servants are very excellent persons,
according to his own description: But our infirmities, our errors, or
divisions, our miscarriages and scandals do so dishonor him and his ways, that
the glory of them is much obscured, and blasphemers reproach him to his face,
and Godliness (which the Law of Nature teaches) is derided as a foolish thing,
and as the mere effect of superstitious fear. Now though all this does no hurt
to God, yet he is capable of wrong who is incapable of hurt. And it is not to
be believed, that he will finally put up all this at his creatures hands, and
never vindicate his honor, not never more show the glory of his Grace, his
Image, his Justice and Judgments, than he now does.

. 19. XIX. The constant testimony of conscience in all men, Plato often says,
that the wicked are punished after death.

Antisthenes 7. Tome had a Book, de his quae sunt apud inferos. Laert. l. 6. c.
1.


that have not mastered Reason by Sensuality, and the common consent of all
that are worthy to be called Men, in all Ages and Countries upon earth, does
show that the life to come is a truth which is naturally revealed, and most
sure.

. 20. XX. The enemy of Souls does (against his will) give man a fourfold
reason to judge, that there is a life of Reward and Punishment hereafter: viz.
1. By Compacts with Witches. 2. By Apparitions. 3. By Satanical Possessions. 4.
By all kind of subtle importunate temptations, (which evidence themselves.)

1. Though some are very incredulous about Witches, yet to a full enquiry the
evidence is past question, that multitudes of such there be. Though many are
wronged, and some may be thought so foolish or melancholy, as not to know what
they say against themselves; yet against such numerous and various instances,
these exceptions do but confirm the general truth, that such there are. I have
said so much of them in Saints Rest; Part 2. and unreasonableness of Infidelity.
two other Writings, that I shall now say no more but this: That those Judges
ordinarily condemn them to die, who themselves have been most incredulous of
such things: that so great numbers were condemned in Suffolk, By the Doctrine
of Idols, false Gods that were sometimes men, and their Sacrifices, the Devil
confesses a Life to come.
Norfolk, and Essex, about twenty years ago, that left the business past all
doubt to the Judges, Auditors, and Reverend Ministers, (yet living) who were
purposely sent with them for the fuller inquisition. That the testimonies are
so numerous and beyond exception, recorded in the many Volumes written on this
subject, by the Malleus Maleficorum, Bodin, Remigius, and other Judges who
condemned them, that I owe no man any further proof, than to desire him to read
the foresaid Writings: wherein he shall find Men and Women, Gentlemen,
Scholars, Doctors of Divinity, of several qualities and tempers, all
confessedly guilty, and put to death for this odious sin. And he shall find
what compacts they made with the Devil, promising him their Souls or their
service, and renouncing their Covenant with God. All which does more than
intimate, that men have Souls to save or lose, and that there is an Enemy of
Souls who is most sollicitous to destroy them; or else to what end would all
this be? When people are in wrath and malice, desirous of revenge or in great
discontents, or too eagerly desirous after overhasty knowledge in any needless
speculation, the Devil has the advantage to appear to them, and offer them his
help, and draw them into some contract with him (implicit at least, if not
explicit) I have my self been too incredulous of these things, till cogent
evidence constrained my belief. Though it belong not to us to give account, why
Satan does it, or why upon no more, or why God permits it, yet that so it is
in point of fact, it cannot be rationally denied. And therefore we have so much
sensible evidence, that there is a happiness and misery after this life, which
the Devil believes, though Atheists do not.

2. And though some are as incredulous of Apparitions, yet evidence has
confuted all incredulity. I could make mention of many: but for the notoriety I
will name but two; which it is easy to be satisfied about:

The one is the Apparition in the shape of Colonel Bowen in Glamorganshire, to
his Wife and Family, speaking, walking before them, laying hold on them,
hurting them in time of Prayer (the man himself then living from his Wife in
Ireland, In Ireland, it was testified by the Oaths of many witnesses, that
after the Protestants had been murdered at Portdown-Bridge, a long time
together, a Spectrum appeared in the River like a person naked, standing in the
water up to the middle, and crying, Revenge, Revenge. See Dr. Jones, and Sir
John Temples books.
being one that from Sect to Sect had proceeded to Infidelity if not to
Atheism, and upon the hearing of it came over; but durst not go to the place).
The thing I have by me described largely and attested by learned godly
Ministers, that were at the place; and is famous, past contradiction.

2. But (to name no more) he that will read a small Book called The Devil of
Mascon, written by Mr. Perreand, and published by Dr. Peter Moulin, will see an
instance past all question: The Devil did there for many months together at
certain hours of the day, hold discourse with the inhabitants, and publicly
disputed with a Papist that challenged him, and when he had done, turned him
and cast him down so violently, that he went home distracted: He would sing and
jest and talk familiarly with them as they do with one another: He would answer
them questions about things done at a distance; and would carry things up and
down before them, and yet never seen in any shape: All this was done in the
house of the said Mr. Perreand a Reverend faithful Minister of the Protestant
Church, in the hearing of persons of both Professions, Papists and Protestants
that ordinarily came in, for above three months at Mascon a City of France (And
at last upon earnest Prayer it ceased.) Mr. Perreands piety and honesty was
well known; and attested to me by the Right Honorable the Earl of Orrery, now
Lord President of Munster in Ireland, and attested to the World by his most
learned, worthy, honorable Brother Mr. Robert Boil, in an Epistle before the
Book; neither of them persons apt to be over-credulous of such unusual things,
yet both fully satisfied of the truth of this story by Mr. Perreands own
Narratives, with whom they were very familiar.

See the other Testimonies cited in my Saints Rest, Part 2.

Q. But how does this signify that there is any future state for man.

Answ. 1. Commonly, these Apparitions do expressly referr to some sin or duty
which are regardable in order to a further Life. Sometimes they come to
terrify Murderers or other great Offenders: and sometimes the Devil has
killed men outright: (which yet were no more painful than another death, if it
fetched not their souls into a greater misery) sometimes they are used to tempt
people to sin, to witchcraft, to revenge, to idolatry and superstition (to
which use they are common among many of the Indians): And all this intimates
some further hurt which sin does men after this present life; which they take
not here for their pain, but their pleasure. 2. Many of these Apparitions say,
that they are the souls of such and such persons that have lived here: If it be
so, then the question is granted. And whether it be so, I suppose is to us
uncertain: For why a condemned Soul may not appear as well as Satan,
notwithstanding that both of them are in that state of misery which is called
Hell, I yet could never hear any sure proof. But (because this is uncertain) 3.
At least it shows us, that these evil Spirits are near us, and able to molest
us, and therefore are ordinarily restrained, and that their natures are not as
to any elevation so distant from ours, but that a converse there may be; and
therefore that it is very probable, that when the souls of the Wicked are
separated from their bodies, they shall be such as they, or have more converse
with them; and that the good Spirits shall be the companions of the souls of
men that here were not far unlike themselves. When we perceive that we live
among such invisible Spirits, it is the easier to believe that we shall live
with such of them hereafter, as we are most like.

See what I have cited, Saints Rest, Part 2. cap. 7.
3. I may add to these the instance of satanical Possessions: For though many
diseases may have of themselves very terrible and strange effects, yet that the
Devil, I mean some evil Spirit, does operate in many is past all contradiction:
some will speak Languages which they never learnt: some will tell things done
far off: some will have force and actions which are beyond their proper natural
ability: Most great Physicians, how incredulous soever, have been forced to
confess these things: and abundance of them have written particular instances.

And the manner of their transportations, their horrid blasphemies against God,
with other carriages, do commonly intimate a life to come, and a desire that
Satan has to dishonor God, and destroy the souls of men as well as their
bodies.

4. And lastly, the Temptations and suggestions of Satan, yea, and often his
external contrived snares, are such as frequently give men a palpable discovery
of his agency, that there is indeed some evil Spirit that does all this to the
hurt of Souls. Were there no such Tempter it were scarce credible that such
horrid inhumane Villainies should ever be perpetrated by a rational Nature, as
Histories credibly report, and as in this Age our eyes have seen. That men
should ever, even against their own apparent interest, be carried on
obstinately to the last, in a wilful course of such sins as seem to have
little or nothing to invite men to them, Polybius often notes, that many
excellent men have attempted great and excellent works; but very few have ever
been so happy as to perform them; and of those that have gone a little way, but
few have finished them.
but a delight in doing hurt and mischief in the World. Whence is it that some
men feel such violent importunate suggestions to evil in their minds, that
they have no rest from them, but which way soever they go, they are haunted
with them till they have committed it, and then haunted as much to hang
themselves in desperation. Whence is it that all opportunities are so strangely
fitted to a sinners turn, to accommodate him in his desires and designs? And
that such wonderful successive trains of impediments are set in the way of
almost any man that intends any great good work in the World? I have among
men of my own acquaintance observed such admirable frustrations of many
designed excellent works, by such strange unexpected means, He that did but
well study the plain strife between Christ and Satan, about knowledge and
ignorance in the World, and how marvellously Satan keeps the Gospel from the
Infidel World, and locketh up the Scripture in an unknown tongue among the
Papists, and hinders Preachers in all the World, will see that there is
certainly a Kingdom of Darkness and a Kingdom of Light, which strive for Souls.
and such variety of them, and so powerfully carried on, as has of it self
convinced me, that there is a most vehement invisible malice permitted by God
to resist Mankind, and to militate against all Good in the World. Let a man
have any evil design, and he may carry it on usually with less resistance. Let
him have any work of greatest Natural importance which tends to no great
benefit to Mankind, and he may go on with it without any extraordinary
impedition: But let him have any great design for Common good, in things that
tend to destroying sin, to heal divisions, to revive Charity, to increase
Virtue, to save men's Souls, yea or to the public common felicity, and his
impediments shall be so multifarious, so far fetched, so subtle, incessant, and
in despite of all his care and resolution, usually so successful, that he
shall seem to himself to be like a man that is held fast hand and foot, while
he sees no one touch him! or that sees an hundred blocks brought and cast
before him in his way, while he sees no one do it. Yea, and usually the
greatest attempts to do good shall turn to the clean contrary, even to destroy
the good which was intended, and drive it much further off. How many Countries,
Cities, Churches, Families, who have set themselves upon some great
Reformation, have at first seen no difficulties almost in their way? And when
they have attempted it, they have been like a man that is wrestling with a
Spirit? Though he see not what it is that holds him, when he has long swear,
and chafed, and tired himself, he is fain to give over; yea, leave behind him
some odious scandal, or terrible example, to frighten all others from ever
meddling with the like again. I have known that done which men call a Miracle, a
sudden deliverance in an hour, from the most strange and terrible Disease,
while by Fasting and Prayer men were present begging the deliverance: And
presently the Devil has drawn the persons in such a scandalous sin, that God
had none of the honor of the deliverance, nor could any for shame make mention
of it, but it turned to the greater dishonor of piety and prayer, though the
wonder was past doubt. I have known men wonderfully enlightened and delivered
from courses of Error and Schism, and being men of extraordinary worth and
parts, have been very like to have proved the recovery of abundance more: And
they have been so unresistibly carried into some particular Errors on the
contrary extreme, that all the hopes of their doing good has turned to the
hardening of others in their Schism, while they saw those Errors, and judged
accordingly of all the reasons of their change. But especially to hinder the
successes of godly Magistrates, and Ministers, in their reformings, and their
Writings for the winning of Souls, it were endless to show, the strange
unexpected difficulties which occur, and lamentably frustrate the most
laudable attempts. Nay, I have known diverse men that have had resolute designs,
but to build an Almshouse, or a School-house, or to settle some public
charitable work, that when all things seemed ready, and no difficulty appeared,
have been hindered in despite of the best of their endeavors, all their
days, or many years: Yea men that purposed but to put it in their Wills, to do
some considerable work of Charity, have been so delayed, hindered and
disappointed, that they were never able to effect their ends. By all which it
is very perceivable to an observing mind, that there is a working invisible
Enemy still seeking to destroy all Godliness, and to hinder Men's salvation.

Perhaps you will say, that if this be so, you make the Devil to be stronger
than God, and to be the Governor of the World, or to be more in hatred to
goodness, than God is in love with it.

I answer, No: but it appears that his Enmity to it is implacable, and that
he militateth against God and man's felicity, and that sin has so far brought
this lower World under Gods displeasure, that he has in a great measure
forsaken it, and left it to the will of Satan: Yet has he his holy seed and
Kingdom here, and the purposes of his Grace shall never be frustrated, nor the
Gates of Hell prevail against his Church: And if he may forsake Hell totally as
to his felicitating presence, he may also penally forsake Earth as to the
greater number, whilst for ought we know, he may have thousands of Orbs of
better Inhabitants which have not so forfeited his love, nor are not so
forsaken by him.

I have been the larger in proving a Life to come, Virtutis merces ac finis
optimum quiddam est, divinum and beatum. Aristot. 1. Eth. c. 9.
of Retribution to the good and bad, because all Religion does depend upon it,
and I have my self been more assaulted with Temptations to doubt of this, than
of Christianity it self, though this have more of Natural Evidence. And I have
set down nothing that I am able rationally to confute my self (though every
Truth is liable to some snarling exceptions of half-witted and contentious men.
Virtutum omnium jucundae non sunt actiones, nisi quatenus finis copulatus
conjunctusque asciscitur. Id. 3. Eth. c. 9.
) No man that confesses a Life to come, can question the necessity of a Holy
Life: But I have thought meet first to prove, that a Holy Life is our
unquestionable duty (as the prius cognitum) and thence to prove the certainty
of the future state: For indeed, Virtus extollit hominem and super astr^
mortales collocat: nec ea quae bona aut mala vocantur, aut cupit nimis, aut
expavescit. Senec. Ep. 88.
though God has not hid from us the matter of our Reward and Punishment, Hopes
and Fears, yet has he made our Duty plainer in the main, and proposed it first
to our knowledge and consideration. The Eternity of the future state, I have
not here gone about to prove; because I reserve it for a fitter place, and need
the help of more than natural light, for such a task. But that it shall be of
so much weight and duration, as shall suffice to the full execution of Justice,
and to set all straight, that seemed crooked in Gods present Government, this
Nature it self does fully testify.

Three sorts of men will read what I have written: 1. Some few (and but very
few) of those whose Consciences are so bloody in the guilt of their debauchery,
that they take it for their interest to hope that there is no life but this. 2.
Those whose Faith and Holiness, has made the World to come, to be their
interest, happiness, hope, desire, and only joy. 3. Those that only understand
in general, that it is the highest interest of humane Nature, that there be a
full felicity hereafter; and see it a most desirable thing, though they know
not whether it be to be expected or not. The first sort, I may fear are under
such a Curse of God, as that he may leave their Wills to master their Belief,
Tria sunt quae ex animae providentia accipit corpus animalis: ut vivat, ut
decore vivat, and ut immortalitas illi successione quaeratur. Macrob. 7. Satur.
as their Lusts have mastered their Wills, and lest they be forsaken of God, to
think that true which their wicked hearts desire were true; and that the Haters
of God and a holy Life, should be left to dream that there is no God, nor
future Happy Life.

The second sort have both Light, Experience and Desire, and therefore will
easily believe.

The third sort are they whose Necessities are great, and yet conjunct with
hope of some success. Though bare interest should command no man's
understanding, because a thing may be desirable, Animarum originem manare de
coelo, inter recte philosophantes indubitatae constat esse sententiae. Et
Animae dum corpore utitur haec est perfecta sapientia, ut unde orta sit, de quo
font venerit, recognoscat. Macrob, sup. somn. scip. l. 1. c. 9.
which is neither certain nor possible; yet I must needs say, that Reason and
self-love should make any man, (that is not resolved in wickedness) exceeding
glad to hear of any hopes, much more of certainty, of a life of Angelical
Happiness and Joy, to be possessed when this is ended. And therefore the
enquiry should be exceeding willingly and studiously endeavored. I shall
conclude this point with a few serious Questions, to those that deny a future
Life of Retribution.

Qu. 1. Whether he that takes a man to be but an ingenuous kind of Beast, can
take it ill to be esteemed as a Beast? May I not expect that he should live
like a Beast, who thinks that he shall die like a Beast? Is such a man fit to
be trusted any further in humane converse, than his present fleshly interest
obliges him? May I not justly suppose that he lives in the practice of
fornication, adultery, lying, perjury, hypocrisy, murder, treachery, theft,
deceit, or any other villainy, as often as his interest tells him he should do it.
What is a sufficient or likely motive to restrain that man, or make him just,
who believes not any life after this? It seems to me a wrong to him in his
own Profession, to call him an Honest man.

2. If you think your selves but ingenuous Beasts, Maximum argumentum est,
naturam ipsam de immortalitate animorum tacitum judicare, quod omni^s curae
sunt, and maxim quidem, quae post-mortem futura sunt. Cicero Tuscul. Qu. l. 1.
p. 220.
why should you not be content to be used as Beasts. A Beast is not capable of
true Propriety, Right or Wrong: He that can master him, does him no wrong, if
he work him, or fleece him, or take away his life. Why may not they that can
master you, use you like Pack-horses, or Slaves, and beat you, and take away
your lives.

3. Would you be only your selves of this mind, or would you have all others of
it? If your selves only, why envy you the Truth (as you suppose) to others? If
all others, what security shall Kings have of their lives? or Subjects of their
lives of liberties? What trust can you put in Wife, or Child, or Servant, or
any man that you converse with? Will you not quickly feel the effect of their
opinions? Had you not rather, that the enemy who would murder you, the thief
who would rob you, the liar that would deceive you, did believe a Judgment and
life of Retribution, than not?

4. If there be no Life after this, Platonici dicunt, Beatum esse hominem
fruentem Deo; non sicut corpore, vel scipso fruitur animus, aut sicut amicus
amico; sed sicut Luce Oculus. August. de Civ. Dei.
what business have you for your Reason? and all your noble faculties and time,
that is worthy of a man; or that is not like Childrens games or Poppet-playes?
What have you to do in the World, that has any weight in the trial, any
content or comfort in the review, or will give solid comfort to a dying man?
Were it not better lie down and sleep out our days, than waste them all in
dreaming waking? O what a silly Worm were Man! what should he find to do with
his understanding? Take off the poise of his ultimate End, and all his Rational
Motions must stand still, and only the brutish motion must go on, and Reason
must drudge in the Captivity of its service.

But these Questions, and more such, I put more home in my Book, called A
Saint, or a Bruit. If conscience tell you, that you can put no trust in your
friend, your wife, your servant, or your neighbor, if they believe that there
is no life but this: surely the same conscience may tell you, that then the
thing is true, and that the God of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness has
better means enough than deceits and lies to rule the world by.

Hear what the conscience of the Epicure says in Cicero, Academ. Quaest. l. 4.
p. (mihi) 44. Quis enim potest, cum existimet a Deo se curari, non and dies and
noctes divinum numen horrere, etc. its true of the guilty: But what greater joy
to the upright, godly, faithful Soul.

CHAP. XV. Of the intrinsic Evil of Sin, and of the perpetual Punishment due
to the Sinner by the undoubted Law of Nature. Ad hoc anima conjuncta corpori
est, ut fruatur scientiis and virtutibus: si autem cum fervore magno se
invenerit, benign recipietur a suo creatore; fin autem secus, relegabitur ad
inferna. Plat. in Tim. Animus recte solus liber, nec dominationi cujusquam
parent, neque obediens cupiditati. Recte invictus, cujus etiamsi corpus
constringatur, animo tamen vincula injici nulla possunt. Cic. 3. de finib. Deus
animum ut Dominum and imperantem obedienti praefecit corpori. Cic. de univers.

. 1. IT seemed good to the most wise Creator to give Man with Reason a Liberty
of Will, by which he is a kind of first cause of its own determination in
comparative moral acts; though he hold the power in full dependence upon God,
and perform each act as an act in genere by the influx of his Maker, and do all
under his perfect government. And these great Principles in his Nature, his
Power, his Reason, and his free self-determining Will, are the Image of God, in
which as Man he was created, which advanced by the perfections of Fortitude,
Wisdom and Moral Goodness, are also in Holiness the Image of God's Perfections.

When a man deliberateth whether he shall do this sin or not, (as lie or
murder) he cannot act in general without God, but that he chooses this act
rather than another, may be without any more of God, than his giving and
maintaining his free-choosing power, and his universal influx before mentioned,
and his setting him among such objects as he acts upon. Neither do those
objects, nor any Physical efficient motion of God, or any creature besides
himself, determine his will effectually to choose the evil and refuse the good.
It is not true, that nothing undetermined can determine it self to act; this is
but to deny God's natural Image on the Will of Man. The Will cannot determine
it self without the conduct of an Intellect, and without an Object in esse
cognito, nor without Divine sustentation and universal influx: But it can
determine it self to the moral species, which is but the mode of action, to
this rather than that in the comparative proposal, without any pre-determining
efficient: (for such none of the former are.)

And God having made such a self-determining creature, Casta placent superis;
pura cum mente venite

Et manibus puris sumite fontis aquam. Tibul.

Pone Deos, and quae tangendo sacra profanas;

Non been coelestes impia dextra colit. Ovid.


took delight to govern him according to his nature, by the sapiential moral
means of Laws; of what he does more to cause Good than Evil, and other such
incident questions, I must now put them off to a fitter place.

. 2. God planted in man's mind a natural inclination to Truth and Goodness, and
to his own felicity, and an averseness to falsehood, and to evil, and to his own
misery and hurt; that these lying deeper than his liberty of choice, might be a
pondus to his motions, and help him the more easily and steadfastly to obey, and
to adhere to and prosecute his proposed happiness and end.

. 3. Accordingly God formed his holy Law, with a perfect fitness to these
faculties and inclinations, furnishing it wholly with truth and goodness, and
fitting all things in it to the benefit of man: (as is proved before.)

. 4. This Law had a sufficient promulgation, being legible on the face of the
whole Creation, (within our view) and specially on the nature of man himself,
from whence his duty did result.

. 5. And God was pleased to make as legible the most rational powerful motives
to love and obedience, that can be imagined by man, that no tempter might
possibly bid the ten thousandth part so much for our love and obedience as he
had bid, and assured us of himself.

. 6. From all this it is most evident, that God made us not sinners, though he
made us men; but that man, Morbi perniciosiores, pluresque quam corporis. Cic.
3. Tusc.
being defectible, abused his liberty, and turned from God, and brought
corruption and misery upon himself.

. 7. He that will understand God's Justice aright, must consider of these forty
intrinsic evils that are in sin, which nature it self declares.

1. In its formal nature, it is the violation of a perfect righteous Law.

2. It is a contempt or denial of God's governing authority over us.

3. It is the usurping of the government of our selves, which we denied to God.

The Athenians punished not only the total violation of a Law, but even of a
clause or part of a Law.
4. It is a denial or contempt of the wisdom of God, as if he had erred in the
making of his Laws, and knew not so well what is just, and meet, and good for
us, as we our selves, and were not wise enough to govern a lump of animated
clay.

5. It is an exalting of our folly into the Throne of the Divine Wisdom; as if
we had more wisdom than he that made us, and knew better what is just and meet,
and what is fit or good for our selves, and could correct God's Laws, and make
our selves a better Rule.

6. It is a denial or contempt of the Goodness of God, as if he had ensnared us
by his Law, and envied our happiness, and forbad us that which would do us
good, and put us upon that which, will do us hurt, and so would seduce us into
calamity, and were an enemy to our welfare.

Piso in Cic. de fin. l. 5. p. 203. says of the Epicureans, Quin etiam ipsi
voluptuarii diverticula quaerant, and virtutes habeant in ore totos dies, etc.
which shows, that virtue was commended even by the voluptuous.
7. It is a preferring our naughtiness before His Goodness; as if we could do
better in regulating our selves than God, and could make a better choice for
our selves than his Laws have made. And as if our wills were fitter than God's
to be the Rule of good and evil.

8. It is a denial or contempt of his Holiness and Purity, which is contrary to
sin as health to sickness: as if by our deeds we would persuade the world, that
God is as Satan, a lover of sin, and an enemy to Himself and Holiness.

9. It is a denial or contempt of God's propriety, as if we were not his own,
and he had not power to dispose of us as be list: or it is a robbing him of the
use and service of that which is absolutely his own.

10. It is a claiming of propriety in our selves, as if we were at our own
disposal, and might do with our selves and our faculties as we list.

11. It is a belying or contempt of the great and gracious Promises of God, and
of the wonderful mercy which he manifests in them; by which he does bind
and allure us to Obedience: As if he did not mean as he speaks, or would not
make good his Word to the Obedient.

12. It is a falsifying or contempt of his dreadful Threatenings, as if he did
not intend any execution of them, but made them only as a deceitful terror to
frighten men from sin, for want of better means.

13. It is a denial or contempt of the dreadful future Judgment of God, as if
he would never call men to any account, nor judge them according to his Laws.

14. It is a denying the Veracity of God, as if he were a Liar and Deceiver,
and did not intend the things which he speaks; As if his Precepts were but a
false pretension, and he were indeed indifferent what we did, and were not to
be believed in his predictions, promises, or threats.

15. It is a contempt of all the Mercies even of this life, which flesh it self
does overvalue; As if protection, provision, deliverances, comforts, were not
so much to be regarded, as our Concupiscence; nor were not of weight enough to
bind us to obey so merciful a God; and as if Ingratitude were no Crime.

16. It is a contempt of those Castigatory Afflictions, by which God drives
men from sin, by giving them a taste of the bitterness of its fruits.

17. It is a contempt of all the examples of his Mercy and his Judgments upon
others: by which he has showed us how good he is, and how just a punisher of
sin.

18. It is a contempt of all the inward motions and strivings of God, which
sinners often feel persuading them to forbear their sin, and to seek after God.

19. It is a contempt of Conscience, which bears witness for God against
their sins.

20. It is a contempt of all the Instructions and advise of wise and good men,
who are required by God and Nature to warn men, and persuade them from their
sins.

21. It is a contempt of the Example of all Obedient Virtuous Persons, whose
Lives instruct them and reprove them.

22. It is a contempt of Virtue it self, which is contrary to sin, and whose
proper worth commands Love.

23. It is a contempt of Gods Omnipresence, when we will sin in his very
presence; and of his Omniscience, when we will sin when we know that he sees
it.

24. It is a contempt of the Greatness and Almightiness of God, when a silly
Worm dare sin against him, who upholdeth the World, and can do Justice on him
in a moment; as if we could make good our part against him.

25. It is a contempt of the attractive Goodness of God, by which he is Man's
End and Happiness: As if all the Goodness and Love of God, were not enough to
counterpoise the base and brutish pleasures of sin: and to drive the rational
Soul to God? (It was his Efficient Goodness which I spoke of before.)

26. And thus it declares, that we are so far void of Love to God: For Love
is desirous to please.

27. It is a setting up the sordid Creature for our End, as if it were more
attractive and amiable than God, and fitter to content and delight the Soul.

28. It is a contempt of all that glorious Happiness of the Life to come, which
God has warranted the righteous to expect: As if it were not all so good as
the defiling transitory pleasures of sin, and would not recompense us for all
that we can do or suffer for God.

29. It is the silencing and laying by our Reason by inconsiderateness, or the
perverting and abusing of it by Error, in the greatest matters, for which it
was given us; and so it is a voluntary drunkenness or madness, in the things of
God and our felicity.

30. It is a setting up our senses and appetite above our Reason, and making
our selves in use, as Beasts, by setting up the lower beastial faculties to
rule.

Minus malum est seritas and immanitas quam vitium, etsi terribilior. Aristot.
7. Eth. c. 6.
31. It is the deformity, monstrosity, disorder, sickness and abuse of a Noble
Creature, whom God made, in our measure, like himself, and so a contemptuous
defacing of his Image.

32. It is a robbing God of that Glory of his Holiness, which should shine
forth in our hearts and lives, and of that complacency which he would take in
our Love, Obedience, Perfection and Felicity.

33. It is the perverting and Moral destruction, not only of our own faculties,
(which were made for God); but of all the World which is within our reach:
Turning all that against God and our happiness, which was given us for them.
Yea, it is worse than casting them all away, while we use them contrary to
their natures, against their Owner and their end.

34. Nil peccant oculi, si non animus oculis imperet. Sen.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se

Crimen habet, quantum major qui peccat habetur. Juv.

Omnino ex alio genere impotentia est, ex alio vitium: Vitium enim omne sum
culpae ignarum est, non ignara impotentia. Aristot. 7 Eth. c. 8.

Vitia nostra voluntate necesse est suscipi. Aristot. 3 Eth. c. 5.

Quae crimini dantur vitia in nostra potestate sunt. Aristot. 3 Eth. c. 5.


It is thus a preach in the Moral order and harmony of the world, and as much
as in us lies, the destroying of the world: As the dislocation or rejection of
some parts of a Clock or Watch, is a disordering of the whole; and as a wound
to the hand or foot is a wrong to the body. And it is a wound to every Society
where it is committed; and an injury to every individual, who is tempted or
afflicted by it.

35. It is a contradicting of our own professions, confessions, understandings
and promises to God.

36. It is a preferring of an inch of hasty time before the durable life to
come, and things that we know are of short continuance, before those of which
we can see no end.

37. It is the preferring of a corruptible flesh and its pleasure, before the
Soul, which is more noble and durable.

38. It is an unmercifulness and inhumane cruelty to our selves, not only
defiling soul and body, but casting them on the displeasure and
punishing-justice of their great and terrible Creator.

39. It is the gratifying of the malicious Tempter, the enemy of God and of our
souls; the doing his will, and receiving his image instead of God's.

40. And all this is done voluntarily, without constraint, by a rational
free-agent, in the open light, and for a thing of naught. Besides what
Christians only can discern, all this the light of Nature does reveal to be in
the malignity of sin.

. 8. Sin being certainly no better a thing than is here described, it is most
certain that it deserves punishment.

. 9. And reason tells us, Sceleris etiam poena tristis, and praeter eos
eventus qui sequuntur, per se maxima est. Cic. 2. de leg.
that God being the Governor of the world, and perfect Government being his
perfect work and glory in that relation, it is not meet that in such a Divine
and perfect Government so odious an evil be put up, and such contempt of God
and all that is good be past by without such execution of his Laws as is
sufficient to demonstrate the justice of the Governor, and to vindicate his
Laws and authority from contempt: nor that it be pardoned on any terms, but
such as shall sufficiently attain the ends of perfect Government.

The ends of Punishment are, 1. to do Justice and fulfill the Law, and truth of
the Lawgiver. 2. To vindicate the honor of the Governor from contempt and
treason. 3. To prevent further evil from the same offender. 4. To be a terror
to others, and to prevent the hurt that impunity would encourage them to. 5.
And if it be but merely castigatory, it may be for the good of the sinner
himself: but in purely vindictive punishment it is the Governor and Society
that are the end.

(...). M^nd.
1. It is true, that as the immediate sense of the Precept (e.g. Thou shall do
no murder) is not de eventu, [it shall not come to pass] but de debito, [Thy
duty is to forbear it]; So also the immediate sense of the Penal part is not de
eventu, (e. g I thou murder thou shall be put to death) but de debito, death
shall be thy due, thou shall be Reus mortis: So that if it do non evenire, it
is not presently a falsehood. But its as true, Nemo ma^us felix. J^ve^.
that when the Sovereign makes a Law, he thereby declares that this Law is a
Rule of Righteousness, that it is Norma officii and judicii: that the Subject
must do according to it, Malo benefacere tantundem est periculum, quantum bono
malefacere. Plaut. Pen.
and expect to be done by according to it: that it is the Instrument of
Government. Therefore these two things are declared by it. 1. That ordinarily
Judgment and execution shall pass according to it. 2. That it shall never be
extraordinarily dispensed with, by Sovereignty, but upon terms which as well
declare the Justice of the Governor, and discourage offenders from contempt,
and are as fit to preserve the common good, and the honor of the Sovereign. So
that thus far a Law does assert also the event; which I put to prevent
objections, and to show that truth and justice require the ordinary execution
of just and necessary Laws.

Noxiae par poena esto, ut in suo vitio quisque plectatur. Cic. 3. de leg.

Injusti judicis est been agentem non remunerare, and negligentem non
corripere. Sen. de benef.

Turpe quid ansurus, te, sine test, time. Anson.

Veterem ferendo injuriam, invitas novam. Gell. Noc. Attic. l. 28.


2. And should they be ordinarily dispensed with, it would intimate, that the
Ruler did he knew not what in making them; that he repented of them a unjust;
or over-saw himself in them; or foresaw not inconveniences; or was not able to
see them executed: it would also make him seem a deceiver, that affrighted
Subjects with that which he never intended to do; which Omnipotency,
Omniscience and perfect Goodness cannot do, what ever impotent ignorant bad men
may do.

3. And the offender must be disabled (when penitency shows not the change of
his heart) that he do so no more: and therefore death is ordinarily inflicted.

4. And especially offenses must be prevented, and the honor of the Sovereign
and safety of the people be preserved: If Laws be not executed, they and the
Lawgiver will be despised; others will be let loose, and invited to do evil,
and no man's right will have any security by the Law. Therefore it is a
Principle in Politics, that Poena debetur reipublicae; it is the Commonwealth
to which the punishment of offenders is due, that is, it is a means which the
Ruler owes them for their security. And Cato was wont to say, Se malle pro
collato beneficio nullam reportare gratiam, quam pro maleficio perpetrato non
dare poenam. Plutar. Apoth. Romans He had rather miss of thanks for his
kindnesses and gifts, than of punishment for his faults. And was wont to say,
that Magistratus qui maleficos prohibere possent, and tamen impunitate
donarent, lapidibus ol ruendos esse, ut Reipub. perniciosissimos. A hundred
such sayings are in Cicero, Offic. 3. Quotusquisque reperietur qui impunitate
proposita abstinere possit injuria. Impunitas peccandi maxima est illecebra: De
Nature. Deor. 3. Nec domus, nec Respubl. stare potest, si in ea nec recte factis
praemia extent vlla, nec supplicia peccatis. In Verrem 5. est utilius unius
improbi supplicio multorum improbitatem coercere, quam propter multos improbos
uni parcere. Offic. 1. Non satis est eum qui lacesserit, injuriae suae
penitere; ut ipse nequid tale posthac committat, and caeteri sint ad injuriam
tardiores. This is the common sense of all that know what it is to govern.

Obj. But God is so good, that all his Punishments tend at last to the sinners
good, and are merely castigatory.

Answ. God is so wise, that he knows better than we what is good and fittest
to be done. And God is so good, that for the honor of his Government, and
Holiness, and Goodness, he expresses his hatred of sin, to the final ruin of
the sinners. And he is so wise and good, that he will not spare the offender,
when the penalty is necessary to the good of the innocent, to prevent their
falls. The Objection is a surmise not only groundless, but notoriously false.

. 10. He that would know how far punishment is necessary to the ends of
Government, must first know how far the Penal Law it self is necessary; for the
first and chiefest benefit to the Commonwealth is from the Law, and the next
from the Execution.

All Laws were made for these two causes, Both that no man might be suffered to
do that which is unjust; and that transgressors being punished, the rest might
be made better. Demosth. Or. 2 cont. Aristog. It is your part who are Judges to
preserve the Laws, and to make them strong and valid: for it is by the benefit
of these that good men are better than the bad. Id. ib. Or. 1.

The Government is useless which has not nerves and force against the wicked
and injurious, and in which pardon and the request of friends can do more than
the Laws. Id. Or. de falls. leg.

Let no man be thought of so great authority as to escape unpunished, if he
breaks the Laws. Id 3. Olynth. Puniendis peccatis tres esse causas existimatum
est 1. Cur adhibetur poena castigandi and emendandi gratia; ut is qui deliquit
attentior fiat correctiorque 2. Quum dignitas ejus authoritasque in quem
peccatur tucada est, ne praetermissa animadversione contemptum ei pariat 3.
Propter exemplum ut caeteri metu poenae terreantur. Gell. l. 6.


The first benefit is to constrain men to duty, and to restrain them from doing
ill. This is done immediately by the fear of punishment, (with the expectation
of the benefit): This fear of punishment is to be caused by the rational
expectation of it, if they do offend. This expectation is to be caused by the
commination of the Law. When the Law says, [He that sins shall suffer] the
Subject avoideth sin for fear of suffering. Therefore the Subject must believe
that the Lawgiver means as he speaks, even to govern and judge in Justice
according to that Law: and he that can but make the Subject believe, that the
Governor does but affright men with a lie, and means not to execute his
penalties, shall easily make his Laws of none effect, and turn loose offenders
to presumptuous disobedience. Therefore the fore-belief of execution is
necessary to the efficacy of the Law, which else is but as a Mawkin to affright
away birds, and fit to work on none but fools. And if it be so necessary a duty
to the Subject to believe that the Law shall be the Norma judicii, and shall be
executed; then in our present case it is certainly true: For God cannot lie,
nor make it the duty of the world to believe a lie, nor need so vile a means to
keep the world in order. So that it is most evident, that if the Law be
necessary, the execution of it is ordinarily necessary; and either the
execution, or some means as effectual to the ends of Government, is ever
necessary.

. 11. Therefore he that would know what degree of punishment it is meet and
just for God to execute, must first know what degree it is meet for him to
threaten, or make Due by Law: or rather how much he has made due: Because what
God should do, is best known by what he actually does.

If a temporal, short, or small measure of Penalty be sufficient to be
threatened in the Law, for the present attaining of the ends of Government, then
such a punishment is sufficient in the execution. But if the threatening of an
endless punishment in another world be little enough; in suo genere, to prevail
now with Subjects for order and obedience, then the execution will be therefore
necessary by consequence.

. 12. It follows not therefore that Punishment or Rewards must cease, if the
ends be past in natural existence; because Moral means may in time be after
their end, to which they were appointed to operate in esse cognito; In
judicando vel corrigendo haec est lexut aut eum quempunit emendet, aut poena
ejus caeteros meliores reddat; aut sublatis malis securiores caeteri vivant.
Sen. de Clem.
and that penalty which is perpetuated may be a means to the ends already
attained: that is, the threatenings, and the expectation of them; and then the
honor of the Ruler's veracity and justice binds him to the execution.

. 13. What ever reward or punishment is annexed to sin by the Law, is offered
with the duty and sin to the subjects choosing or refusing; and no man is in
danger of any punishment but he that chooses it, in its self or in its annexed
cause. And he that will have it, or will have that which he is told by God is
annexed to it, (especially if it be deliberately and obstinately to the last)
has none to blame of cruelty toward him but himself, nor nothing to complain
of but his wilful choice.

Obj. But it were easy with God to confirm man's will so, that the threatening
of a temporal punishment might have ruled him.

Answ. It is easy with God to make every man an Angel, and every beast or worm
a man: but if his wisdom think meet, below men to make such inferior things as
Beasts; and below Angels or confirmed Souls to make so low a rank of creatures
as Men, that have Reason, and undetermined and unconfirmed Free-wills; what are
we that we should expostulate with him for making them no better, nor ruling
them in our way?

. 14. Sin does unquestionably deserve a natural death and annihilation.

This all men grant that believe that God is our Governor, and that there is
any such thing as His Laws, and Man's sins. If treason against a King deserve
death, Animas vero ex hac vita cum delictorum sordibus recedentes, aequandas
his qui in abruptum ex alto praecipitique delapsi sunt, unde nunquam sit
facultas resurgendi. Ideo utendum est concessis vitae spatiis, ut sit perfectae
purgationis major facultas: Macrob. de Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 13.
much more rebellion and sin against God. Life and being is God's free gift: if
he take it away from the innocent, he takes but his own: therefore there can
be no doubt but he may take it away from the guilty who abuse it.

. 15. If such a penalty were inflicted, God is not bound to restore that sinner
to being again whom he has annihilated, (if it be not a contradiction): And
then this penal Privation would be everlasting: Therefore an endless Privation
of Being and all mercies is the sinners due.

All this I know of no man that does deny.

. 16. God is not bound thus to annihilate the sinner, but may continue all his
natural Being, Sua quemque fraus, and seus error maxim vexat, suum quemque
scelus ngitat, amentiaque afficit, suae maloe cogitationes conscientiaeque
animi terrent. Hae sunt impiis assiduae domesticaeque furiae, quae dies
noctesque poenas a sceleratissimis repetunt. Cic. pro Rosc. improbitas nunquam
sinit eum respirare, nunquam quiescere. Cic. de fin.

Impii poenas luunt, non tam judiciis, quam angore conscientiae, fraudisque
cruciatu. Id. 2 de Leg.

Animi conscientia improbi semper cruciantur, tum etiam poenae timore. Id 2. de
fin.

Impiis apud inferos sunt poenae praeparatae. Id. 1. de leg.

Hic geminae aeternem portae, quarum altera dura

Semper lege patens, populos Regesque receptat. Val. Flac. 1. Claud. 2. Ruf de
inferis ita loquitur. Huc post emeritam mortalia secula vitam

Deveniunt, ubi nulla manent discrimina fati

Nullus honor, vanoque exutum nomine Regem

Perturbat plebeius egens* --


and leave him under the deserved privation of well-being, depriving him of all
other Mercies.

This is undeniable; that it is in God's choice whether he will take away his
Being it self, or only all the Mercies which are necessary to his well-being:
for he that had nothing before but by free gift, may be deprived of any thing
which was none of his own, if he forfeit it by abuse. Nay, we live upon such a
continued emanation from God, as the beams from the Sun, that it is but God's
stopping of his streams of bounty, and we perish, without any other taking away
of mercies from us.

. 17. Nature teaches men to choose a great deal of (tolerable) pain and
misery, rather than not be at all: even so much as will not utterly weigh down
the love of life, and of vital operations.

I say not (as some) that the greatest torment or misery is more eligible (or
less odious) than annihilation. But it is certain, that a great deal is. We see
abundance (how ever the Roman and Greek Philosophers scorned it as baseness)
who are blind, or lame, or in grievous pains of the Gout and Stone, and many
that are in miserable poverty, begging their bread, or toiling from morning to
night like horses, and yet seldom taste a pleasant bit, but join distracting
cares with labors; and yet they are all unwilling to die: Custom has made
their misery tolerable, and they had rather continue so for ever than be
annihilated. If then God may annihilate even the innocent, (supposing he had
not promised the contrary) then may he lay all that pain, and care, and labor
on them, which they would themselves prefer before annihilation. For its no
wrong to one that has his reason and liberty to give him his own choice.

. 18. It is just with God to lay more misery on a sinner, than on one that
never deserved ill: and to lay more on him for his sin, than he would choose
himself before annihilation.

Whether God may without injustice inflict more misery on the innocent, than he
would himself prefer before annihilation, some make a question, and deny it.
For my part, I see no great difficulty in the question.

But it is nothing to that which I am proving; it is not God's usage of the
innocent but of the guilty which we are speaking of: Facinorum mala
flagellantur a conscientia cui pluramum torn entorum est, eo quod perpetua
illam sollicitudo urget ac verberat. Sen. ep. 97. Conscientia aliud agere non
patitur, ac subinde respicere ad se cogit. Dat poenas qui metuit. Sen. ^p. 105.
and that he may make them more miserable who deserve it, than his bounty made
them before any guilt, or than a just man would choose to be rather than be
annihilated, I see no reason at all to doubt. Penalty is involuntary: and no
man ever said that it was unjust to lay more upon a malefactor than he himself
was willing of, and would choose before a condition, which without his fault he
might have been put into.

So then we have already proved, 1. That God may punish a man everlastingly. 2.
And with a greater penalty than annihilation.

. 19. God may leave a sinner his being, and (in particular) deprive him of his
favor, and all the joys and blessedness which he refused by his sinning.

. 20. And he may justly withal deny him those corporal mercies, (meat, drink,
honor, pleasure, health, ease, etc.) which he over-valued and abused, and
preferred before God and greater blessings.

All this I think no man does deny that acknowledges a God.

. 21. He that is continued in his natural being, and is deprived of God's
favor, and of his future happiness for ever, and understands what it is that
he has lost, and is also deprived of all those natural benefits which he
desired, must needs be under continual pain of sense as well as of loss: for
all this want must needs be felt.

. 22. He that in all this misery of loss and sense, does remember how it was
that he came to it, and how base a thing he preferred before his God, and his
felicity, and for how vile a price he sold his hopes of the life to come, and
how odiously he abused God by sin, (as it is before described) cannot choose
but have a continual torment of conscience, and heart-gnawing repentance in
himself. Facinorosa conscientia instar ulceris in corpore, poenitentiam
relinquit in anima lancinantem jugiter ac pervellentem. Plut. de Tranquil.

Maxima est factae injuriae poena fecisse: nec quisquam gravius afficitur, quam
qui ad supplicium poenitentiae trahitur. Sen. de Ira, l. 3. c. 29. It is one of
Pythagoras 's sayings, That a bad man suffers more by the scourge of his own
conscience, than one that is beaten with rods, and chastised in his body. Stob.
sermon. 24.

Quod quisque fecit, patitur: authorem scelus

Repetit, suoque praemitur exemplo nocens Sen. Her fur. Sed nemo ad id sero
venit, unde nunquam

Cum semel venit potuit reverti. Id. ibid.




. 23. He that is under utter despair of ever coming out of this condition, will
thereby have his torment yet more increased.

All these are natural undeniable consequents.

. 24. A Body united to so miserable a self-tormenting forsaken Soul, cannot
have any peace and quietness: seeing it is the Soul by which the body lives,
and has its chiefest peace or pains.

. 25. Thus sin does both as a Natural and as a Moral Meritorious cause bring on
dissatisfaction, grief, vexation, desertion by God, and privation of felicity
and peace.

. 26. For as long as a sinner is impenitent and unsanctified, (that is, loves
not God as God) nor is recovered from his carnal mind and sin, it is both
morally and naturally impossible that he should be blessed or enjoy God.

For, as it is only God that efficiently can make happy, because nothing
works but by him; Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius, etc. Plaut.

Jam aderit tempus, cum se etiam ipse oderit. Plaut. Bac.


and so sin meritoriously undoeth the sinner, by making him unfit for favor,
and making him an object of displicence and justice; so it is only God that
finally can make happy, all things being but Means to him, and unfit of
themselves to give Rest to the inquisitive seeking mind. And God is enjoyed
only by Love, and the sense of His Love and Goodness: therefore the soul that
loves not God, and is not suited to the delightful fruition of him, can no
more enjoy him, than a blind man can enjoy the light, or an ox can feast with a
man.

. 27. He that is under this punishment and despair, will be yet further removed
from the love of God, and so from all capacity of happiness: for he cannot love
a God who he knows will for ever by penal justice make him miserable.

He that would not love a God who abounds in mercy to him in the day of
mercy, will never love him when he sees that he is his enemy, and has shut
him for ever out of Mercy, and out of Hope.

. 28. God is not bound to sanctify the mind and will of such a self-destroying
sinner, who has turned away himself from God and Happiness.

-- Nam quis Peccandi finem posuit sibi, quando recepit

Erectum semel attrita de fionte ruborem?

Quisnam hominum est quem tu contentum videris uno Ilagitio^ Juvea. 3.


And without a renewed Mind it is morally and unnaturally impossible that he
should be happy. He that would not use the Mercy that would have saved him, in
the day of mercy, cannot require another life of mercy and trial, when this is
lost and cast away, nor can require the further helps of grace.

. 29. If sin as sin have all the malignity and demerit before proved, much more
the aggravated sins of many; and most of all a life of wickedness, which is
spent in enmity against God and Godliness, and in a course of sensuality and
rebellion, In omni in juria permultum interest, utrum perturbatione aliqua
animi quae plerumque brevis est, an consulte fiat: Leviora enim sunt ea, quae
repentino aliquo motu accidunt, quam ea quae praemeditata and praeparata
inferuntur. Cic. 3. Offic.
with the obstinate, impenitent, rejecting of all the counsel, calls and
mercies which would reclaim the sinner, and this to the last breath.

It has before been manifested, that all wilful sin has this malignity in it,
that in effect it denies that there is a God, or pulls him down as much as
in the sinner lies, and it sets up the Devil in his stead, and calls him
God, or makes God to be such a one as the Devil is; and also makes an Idol of
the sinner himself. For it denies God's Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Propriety,
Sovereignty and Love; his Truth, and Holiness, and Justice: and makes him on
the contrary impotent, unwise, bad, envious, unholy, false, unjust, and one
that has no authority to rule us; with much more the like.

But a life of enmity, rebellion and final impenitency (which is the case of
all that perish) much more deserves what ever humane nature can undergo.

. 30. He that consents not to God's Government is a Rebel, and deserves
accordingly: and he that consents to it, consents to his Laws, and
consequently to the Penalty threatened: and therefore if he break them, he
suffers by his own consent, and therefore cannot complain of wrong.

All that understand God's Government and Laws, and consent to them, are not
only under the obligation of governing-power, but also of their own consent:
and it is justly supposed that they consented on good and rational grounds, not
knowing where they could be better: on hopes of the benefits of the Government,
and the Reward, Volenti non fit injuria.

Neque enim civitas in seditione beata esse potest, nec in discordia dominorum
domus: Quo minus animus a seipso dissidens, secumque discordans, gustare partem
ullam liquidae voluptatis and liberae potest. Torquatus Epicur. in Cic. de fin.
l. 1. p. 86.


they necessarily consented to the Penalties.

. 31. He that never consents to the Law, and yet is under the obligation of
it, has Life and Death, the Blessing and the Curse, Felicity and Misery set
before him in the Law: Felicity is annexed to obedience, and misery to
disobedience; and the Lawgiver tells us, that accordingly he will judge and
execute, and he offers every man his choice. He therefore that after this
does choose the sin which misery is annexed to, does choose the misery and
refuse the happiness: and therefore it is no wrong to cast him into misery,
though everlasting, as long as he has nothing but what he chose, and loses
nothing but what he rejected, and that with wilful obstinacy to the very last.

A sinner in this case has nothing but blasphemy to say against the Justice of
his Maker: for what can he say? He cannot say that his Maker had not Authority
to make this Law, for his authority was absolute. He cannot say that it was too
cruel, hard and unjust a Law; for it was made but to deter him and such as he,
from such sin, to which he had no greater temptations than the toyish vanities
of a fleshly life. And he himself has declared by the event, that the Law was
not terrible enough to deter him: if it would not seem against so small and
poor a bait, he himself does justify the terribleness of it by his contempt.
God says, I threaten Hell to thee, It is an odd fiction of Cicero, that men
for sin shall be turned into women: Atque ille qui recte and honest curriculum
vivendi a natura datum confecerit, ad illud astrum, quotum aptus fuerit
revertetur: Qui autem immoderate and intemperanter vixerit, cum secundus ortus
in figuram muliebrem transferet, and si ne tum quidem finem vitiorum faciet (as
he is less likely) gravius etiam jactabitur, and in suis moribus simillimas
figuras pecudum and ferarum transferetur. Neque malorum terminum prius
aspiciet, quam illam sequi caeperit conversionem, quam habebat in se, etc. --
cum ad primam and optimam conversionem pervenerit. Cic. de Universit. p (mihi)
358.
to keep thee from sin: The sinner says by his life and practice, The
threatening of Hell is not enough to keep me from sin. And shall the same man
say, when execution comes, it is too great? No sinner shall suffer any thing
but what he chose himself, in the causes of it. If he say, I did not believe
that God was in good earnest, and would do ath^ said; this is but to blaspheme,
and say, I took God for a liar, and deceiver, and a bad, and unwise, and
impotent Governor. If he say, I did not know that sin (even final impenitency
in an ungodly life) deserved so ill, common reason, and all the world will rise
up against him, and the light of nature will show him to his face, that all the
forty points of malignity were in sin, which I mentioned before; and therefore
that the Law of nature had a sufficient promulgation.

Having thus showed what punishment God may inflict without the least
imputation of injustice, let us next enquire of Reason, what he will inflict.

32. When it is at God's choice whether he will annihilate a sinner, or let him
live in misery, Reason tells us, that the latter is more suitable to the ends
of Government: because the living offender will not only be still a spectacle
in the eyes of others, as a man hanged up in chains, but will also confess his
folly and sin, and his conscience will justify his Judge, and so God's Justice
will be more glorious and useful to its ends.

That which is not, is not seen nor heard: the annihilated are out of sight.
And the mind of man is apt to think of a state of annihilation as that which is
as a state of rest, or ease, and feels no harm, and so is not terrible
enough, (as shall be farther said anon.) The living sufferer therefore is
rationally the fittest monument of God's Justice.

33. It must reasonably be expected, that a Soul which is made apt to perpetual
duration, should perpetually endure: and that the Soul enduring, the misery
also should endure, seeing it was due by the Law of Nature, (as is proved.)

Perpetual duration is necessary to no creature, their Beings being but
contingent and dependent on the will of God, But perpetual duration of a
dependent being is certain, when the first Being does declare his will that it
shall be so: and the natural way by which God declares his will concerning the
use of any thing, is by the nature and usefulness of it: because he makes all
things wisely, and nothing in vain. Therefore when he makes the nature of an
Angel or spiritual being, apt to perpetual duration, as being not mixed of
separable Principles, nor corruptible, he thereby declares his will for its
duration, because he gave it not that durable nature in vain.

Two Arguments therefore I now offer to prove, that man's Soul is of perpetual
duration: 1. Because it is such in its operations, (and therefore in its
essence) as the superior Spirits are which are so durable: for they are but
Intelligences and Free-agents, fitted to love God, and delight in him, and
praise him; and so is man. 2. Because (as is fully proved before) it is made to
be happy in another life: and that proves that it dies not with the Body: and
that proves that its nature is incorruptible, and that proves that it shall
be perpetual, unless any sin should forfeit its being by way of penal
deprivation: and that is improbable, both because God has fitter ways of
punishment, and intimates in its corruptible nature that this is not his
intent, and because the state of future reward is like to be a confirmed state.

34. Experience tells the world, that so great is the folly and obdurateness
of man, and the force of present sensual allurements, that nothing less than a
perpetual misery, worse than annihilation, is rationally sufficient to be the
Penalty of that Law, which is the instrument of governing the world: and
therefore it is certain that so much is in the Law, and so much shall be
executed.

Magna est peccandi illecebra spes impanitatis. Cic. pro Mil. The Light of
Nature taught men, that God would not accept the sacrifices of the wicked, much
less admit them to his glory. Donis impii ne placare Deos audeant Plato^^m
audiant, qui vetat dubitare qua sit mente futurus Deus, cum vir nemo bonus ab
improbo se donati velit. Cic. de Leg. l. 2. p. 244.

The Epicurean confesses, Quod si qui satis opibus hominem sibi contra
conscientiam septi esse and muniti videntur, Deorum tamen numen horrent, easque
ipsas solicitudines, quibus animi noctes diesque exeduntur, a Diis supplicii
causa importare putant. Cic. de ^in. l. 1. p. 84.

Nullum conscium peccatorum tuorum, magis timueris quam temet ipsum: alium enim
potes effugere, ^e autem nunquam: Nequitia ipsa est sui poena. Sen.


Those thieves and murderers that have confirmed their infidelity, and overcome
all the expectations of another world, will as boldly venture their lives to
rob and kill, as if they were of little worth: yea, when they know that they
must die, how desperately go they to the gallows, and how little make they of
their lives: Its true, (as was aforesaid) that nature abhors death; but we
see among Soldiers, that he that at first is timorous, when he has been used
a while to kill men, or to see them killed by thousands, grows senseless,
almost regardless of his life, and will make as it were a jest of death. And
when it is so ordinary a thing with men to kill birds, and fishes, and beasts,
for their daily food and pleasure, why should they not easily bear their own,
if they look for nothing after death? A beast loves his life as well as we,
and our death is no more painful than theirs, and we should have as much
courage as a beast. Especially men that live a poor and miserable life on
earth, would little fear that death which ends it; and so humane Government
it self would be in vain. He that would have an instrument to revenge him on
his enemy, to kill his Governor, or do any villainy in the world, if it were
not for fear of another world, might find enough among Poor villains, that by
misery or melancholy are a-weary of their lives. At least as long as they run
but a hazard, like a Soldier in fight, and may possibly escape by craft, or
flight, or friends, or strength, what wickedness will they not commit? What
Prince so just that has not some rebellious Subject, or some Enemy that seeks
his life? What man so good that is not maliced by some? Who has money or an
estate, which one or other does not desire? and if there were nothing but death
and annihilation to restrain men, what Prince, what person, had any security of
his life or estate? If a Rogue once grow but sensual and idle, he will
deliberately resolve, [I will venture my life to live in pleasure, rather than
live in certain toil and misery; a short life, and a sweet, is better than a
longer which is miserable, and must end at last.] We see, if once men be
persuaded that they shall die like beasts, that they are not much troubled at
it, because they think that when they have no being, they shall have no fear,
nor care, nor grief, nor trouble, nor pain, nor want. And though right improved
Reason, which has higher expectations, makes a greater matter of the loss of
them; yet sensual men so brutine themselves, that they grow contented with the
felicity of a Bruit, and are not much troubled that they have no more.
Annihilation therefore certainly is a penalty utterly insufficient, even to
keep any common Order in the World (as I proved before): And therefore it is
certain, that the penalty inflicted hereafter will be greater than
Annihilation: And if so, it must contain, with the Being of the Creature, a
suffering worse than the loss of Being.

. 35. The Belief of a Hell or endless punishment, being that which is de facto
the restraint of the Obedient part of the World, and that which proves too
weak with the Disobedient part, it thence follows, that a Hell or endless
punishment will be inflicted.

The Reasons I have given before, 1. Peccati dolor and maximus and aeternus
est. Cic. At. 11. Itaque non ob ea solum incommoda quae eveniunt improbis,
fugiendam improbitatem putamus, sed multo etiam magis, quod cujus in animo
versatur, nunquam sinit eum respirare, nunquam quiescere; inq. Torquatus
Epicureus in Cicer. ne fin. l. 1. p. 85.
Because that Experience shows that the Threatening of Hell is necessary in
the Law: therefore it self is necessary in the execution. 2. Because God does
not govern the World by deceit.

. 36. God will inflict more punishment for the final rejection of his
Government, than Kings do for treason and rebellion against thousands.

There is no proportion between God and Man, and between a fault against God,
and against Man: Therefore if racks, torments, and death, be justly inflicted
for Treason against a King, much more may be expected for rebellion against God.

Obj. But men's sins do God no hurt, as they do the King.

Answ. They do wrong, where they do no hurt. It is not for want of Malignity in
sin, but through the perfections of God, that they do not hurt him: But they
displease him, and injure him, and they hurt the World and the sinner himself,
who is not his own. A Child is to be corrected for many faults, which do his
Father no harm. It is not hurting God that is the Cause that sin is punished.

Obj. But God is merciful as well as just.

Answ. True, and therefore he showed mercy to sinners in the day of Mercy: And
it is for the contempt and abuse of mercy that he condemns them: If the Mercy
abused had been less, the sin and punishment had been less. A merciful King
and Judge will hang a Murderer or Traitor. Mercy to the good requires
punishment of the bad. Gods Attributes are not contrary. He is merciful to the
due Objects of mercy, and has penal Justice for the Objects of that Justice.

Obj. But after this life, the ends of punishment cease: therefore so will the
punishment: Ut fulmina paucorum pe^leulo cadunt, omnium n^etu; sic
animadversiones magnarum potestatum, terient latius quam nocent. Senec.

Solon. counsel for the felicity of the Commonwealth was, ut boni praemiis
invitentur, and mali poenis coerceantur. Cicer. ad Brut.

Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. Hor.


For there will be none in the next World to be warned by it, nor any further
sin to be restrained; unless it be a Castigatory Purgatory for the sinner
himself.

Answ. 1. I have proved that the Law was necessary to the Government of this
World: And if it was necessary that God say, [everlasting death shall be the
wages of sin] then his Truth and Justice make the execution necessary
afterward.

2. When this life is ended, we look for a New Heaven and a New Earth wherein
dwells righteousness: And the penalties of the sinners of this World, may be
a means of that righteousness of the next; as the punishment of the Devils is a
warning to us, and proposed to us for our terror and restraint.

3. How little know we, whether thousands of the Orbs which we see are not
inhabited; and whether the penalties of Earthly sinners, may not be a warning
to any of those superior Worlds. God has not acquainted us with all the uses
that he can make of sinners punishments: And therefore when Nature tells us
what is due, it is folly to say it will not be, because God has no use for it.

Obj. But Hell is a cruelty which expresses tyranny rather than wise justice.

Answ. That Is but the voice of Folly, partiality and guilt: Every thief that is
hanged is like enough to think the same of his own Punishment and Judge. If you
think it such a cruelty, why was not the threatening of it enough to govern you,
and to counterpoise a Feather, the trifles of sordid fleshly pleasure: Why did
you choose it, in the choice of sin? were you not told of it? and was not Life
and Death offered to your choice? Would you choose that which you think it is
cruelty to inflict? who is it that is cruel to you but your selves? Why will
you now be so cruel to your own souls, and then call God cruel for giving you
your choice? O sinners, as you are wise, as you are men, as ever you care what
becomes of you for ever, have mercy upon your selves, and do not refuse, and
obstinately refuse the mercy of God, and then call him unmercifull? Have pity
on your own Souls! Be not so cruel against your selves as to run into endless
misery for nothing, and then think to lay the blame on God! God calls now to
you in your sin and wilfulness, and entreats you to have mercy on your
selves, and then he will have mercy on you in the day of your distress: But if
you will not hear him, but will have none of his mercy now, wonder not if in
vain you cry to him for it then.

Obj. But I would not so use an Enemy of my own. Dat ille veniam facile cui
venia est opus. Sen. Agam.

Audetis ridere nos cum Gehennas dicimus and inextinguibiles ignes, in quos
animas dejici ab eorum hostibus cognovimus? Quid Plato vester in volumine de
animae immortalitate? Nonne Acherontem, nonne Stygem, etc. nominat? in quibus
animas asseverat volvi, mergi, exuri? Nec ejus authoritas plurimum a veritate
declinat? Quamvis enim vir lenis and benevolae voluntatis inhumanum esse
crediderit capitali animas sententia condemnare; non est tamen absone
suspicatus jaci eas in flumina torrentia flammatum globis, and caenosis
voraginibus tetra. Arnob. adv. Gent. li. 2. p. 14.




Answ. 1. He does not deserve it; for you are not Gods. 2. You are not
Governors of the World, and so his fault respects not any such Law and
Judgment of yours, by which the World must be governed. 3. Nor have you the
Wisdom and Justice of God, to do that which is right to all. Yet are you not
bound your selves to take complacency in the evil of your Enemies, but to use
just means to bring him to a better mind and state.

. 37. The sum of all here proved is, that all sin deserves endless misery,
and naturally induces to it; and that all ungodly impenitent souls shall
certainly undergo it; and that none can be saved from this misery, but by
turning to God, and being saved from their sins.

CHAP. XVI. Of the present sinful and miserable state of this World.
See the Citations in Marg. Cap.
. 1. THough all men may know all this before said to be their duty, Bias in
Laert. inquit, Ita amandum quasi edio simus habituri: Plurimos enim esse malos:
And though Cicero in Lael. say, That it is a Sentence sapiente plane indigna,
it is his mistake of the sense of it. For it is true, that in well-grounded
Friendship we must avoid suspicion, (which is all that Cicero pleads for): but
yet we must know Men to be Men, and mutable: and all just Love is not well
grounded intimate Friendship.
and sin to be so evil, and to deserve such punishment, yet none do live
perfectly without sin, according to the Law of Nature.

I have heard but of few that pretend to such perfection, and those few have
confuted their own pretenses, and been the furthest from it of many others: And
therefore this I have no need to prove.

. 2. The greatest part of the World do bend their minds and lives to the
satisfying of their flesh, and live in ungodliness, intemperance, and
unrighteousness, neglecting God and future happiness, and that Holy life which
is the way thereto.

This being a matter of public or common fact, does need no other proof, than
acquaintance with the people of the World.

. 3. Yea, there is an aversness and enmity in them, to the life which God in
Nature does prescribe them; and a strong inclination to a fleshly Life.

There needs no other proof of this, than the wonderful difficulty which we
find in persuading men to change their Lives, to live to God, and to forsake
their sensuality and worldliness; and the abundance of Reason and labor that
is lost upon them, when we cannot so much as make them willing.

. 4. It is evident in the effect, that much of this comes with us into the
World.

1. How else should it be so universal as it is? How should it be found in all
sorts of Constitutions and Complexions? and in every Country and Age till now?
2. How should it work so early in Children as commonly it does? 3. How comes
it to prevail against the best Education, Helps and Means? Certainly all of us
feel from our childhood too much of the truth of this?

. 5. This natural pravity is quickly increased, In uno annulo omnes boni
principes possunt insculpi, inquit quidam in Vopisc. Aurel.
by the advantage of sensuality, which is active before Reason comes to any
power of resistance, and so gets stronger possession by Custom, and grows
to a confirmed habit.

. 6. And if vicious Education by vicious Parents be added, and bad company
second that, and the vulgar course, or Rulers countenance concur, the corrupt
inclination is quickly more radicated, and next to a Nature.

. 7. Many so far prevail against the light and law of Nature, Seneca says,
That a good man is a Phoenix, born once in five hundred years. Ep. 42,
as to grow strange to God and to themselves, to their end, and their work.
Even to doubt whether there be a God, or whether they have any other life to
live, and whether Holiness be good and necessary, and sin be bad and deserve
any punishment.

. 8. There is a great deal of sottish unteachableness on the minds and wills of
men, Lucian. in Tim. inquit, Boni possessio est, quae haud facile inveniri
potest; ut quae jamdudum e vita concesserit: Adeo obscura and pusilla, ut illam
vel Lynceus vix dum inveniat.
which hinders their conviction and reformation.

. 9. There is a great deal of senseless stupidity and hardheartedness on men,
which makes them sleepily neglect the greatest things which they are convinced
of.

. 10. There is in most a mavelous Inconsiderateness, as if they had not their
Reason awake to use; so that they will not soberly and seriously think of the
things which deeplyest concern them.

. 11. Most men are so taken up with the concernments of their Bodies, Diogenes
crying, O homines adeste! when a crowd came about him, drove them away, saying,
Homines vocavi, non sterquilinia.
that their Minds are pre-occupyed and made unfit for higher things.

All this is proved if we walk but in the World with open eyes.

. 12. The Love of the World and fleshly pleasure, is so powerful in the most,
that they love not the Holy Law of God, which forbids them that sensuality,
and commands them a holy and temperate life.

They are like Children that cry for what they love, Aristippus being asked,
Quid esset admirandum in vita? answered, Vir probus and moderatus? quoniam etsi
inter multos improbos agat, non tamen pervertitur. Stob.
and will not be restrained by telling them that its unwholsom: Reason
signifies nothing with them, as long as Sense and Appetite gainsay it: They
are angry with all that crosses their Appetites, though it be to save their
Lives: The Sense is become the predominant power in them, and Reason is
dethroned, and has left its power: Therefore Gods Law is unacceptable and
hateful to these brutish people; because it is quite against their
inclination, and that which the Flesh does call their Interest and Good.

. 13. Therefore they love not those who press them to the Obedience of this
Law, which is so ungrateful to them; and who condemn their sin by the holiness
of their lives; and that awaken their guilty Consciences by the serious mention
of the Retributions of the life to come.

Hence was Diogenes his searching Athens with a Lanthorn to find a man.
All this is bitter to the taste, and the Reasonableness, necessity and future
benefits, are things that they are much insensible of.

. 14. Therefore they love not God himself, as he is Holy, and Governs them by
a Holy Law, which is so much against their inclinations; And when Themistocles
had a Farm to sell, he bid the Crier tell it as its great commendation, that
there was an honest Neighbor dwelt near it, intimating the paucity of such.
as he forbids them all their sinful pleasure, and threatens damnation to
them if they rebel: Especially as his Justice will execute this: Indeed their
aversation from God in these respects, is no less than a Hating Him as God.

. 15. These Vices working continually in men's hearts, do fill them with
deceiving thoughts, and distracting passions, and unquietness, and engage them
in self-troubling ways, and deprive them of the Comforts of the Love of God,
and of a Holy life, and of the well-grounded hope of future blessedness.

Ut Scarabaei and vultures unguentis offenduntur, -- ita non omnibus placent
optima. Plutarch.
Though they have such a present pleasure as prevails with them, it brings
speedy smart and trouble: Just like the pleasure of scratching to a man that
has the Itch, which is quickly recompensed with smart if he go deep: Or like
the pleasure of drinking cold water to a man in a Fever, or a Dropsy, Vir
bonus and sapiens qualem vix repperit unum.

Millibus e cunctis hominum consultus Apollo. etc. Virg.

Vitio nostra quae amamus defendimus; and malumus ea excusare quam excutere.
Sen. Ep. 117.


which increases the disease. Sin is their sickness, and corrupts their
appetites, and though it have its proper pleasure, it depriveth them of the
pleasures and benefits of health.

. 16. These vices also so deprave sometimes, making every wicked man to be
principally for HIMSELF and for his LVSTS, that they are commonly distracted
with envy, malice, contention, persecutions, the fruits of Pride, and
Covetousness and sensuality; and these diseases are still troubling them, till
they work their ruin where they do prevail.

. 17. The same vices set Kingdoms and other Commonwealths together in bloody
Wars, and cause men to study to destroy one another, and glory in the success,
and fill the World with rapine and violence by Sea and Land; and make it seem
as necessary to their own preservation, to kill one another as their enemies,
as to kill Toads and Serpents, Wolves and Tigers, and much more; and with much
more care, and cost, and industry is it done. Absurdum est putare eum qui ab
aliquibus ex bono malus fuerit factus, eundem ab illis iterum ex malo bonum
fieri posse. Dion. Hal. 11.


. 18. If any wise and charitable persons would heal these vices, and reconcile
these contentions, and persuade persons and Nations to a holy, sober, peaceable
course, they are commonly hated and persecuted, they seldom succeed, nor can
their counsel be heard, through the multitude and fury of the vicious, whose
folly and violence bears down all. Ubi divitiae honori sunt, and eas gloria,
imperium, potentia, hebescere virtus, paupertas probro haberi innocentia pro
malevolentia duci incipit. Salust. in Cattilin.


. 19. And God himself does give the sinful World a taste of his displeasure by
painful sicknesses, consuming Plagues, Famines, Poverty, and many the like
Calamities, which fall upon mankind.

. 20. But his sorest Judgments are the forsaking of Men's souls, and leaving
them in all this folly and disorder, this sin and misery, to destroy themselves.

The principal Mercies and Punishments of this Life, Aelian. var. hist. l. 13.
says, that Theodata a Whore told Socrates, that he could draw away none of her
followers, but she could draw away his at her pleasure; and he answered, Non
mirum: Tu siquidem ad declivem tramitem omnes rapis; ego vero ad virtutem cogo,
ad quam arduus plerisque insolitus est ascensus.
are found on the Souls of men themselves. The greatest present Reward of
Obedience, is when God does more illuminate the mind, and send in more of his
celestial beams, and shed abroad his Love upon the heart, and fill it with the
Love of Goodness, and delight it in himself, and confirm the will against
temptations: And the greatest punishment is when God in displeasure for men's
disobedience, does withdraw this grace, and leave men to themselves, that they
that love not his grace should be without it, and follow their foolish
self-destroying lusts.

. 21. God cannot pardon an incapable subject, nor any but on terms consistent
with the honor of his Justice, Laws, and Government! Nor is there any that can
deliver a sinner from his punishment, upon any other terms whatsoever.

. 22. The conclusion is, that the sin and misery of Mankind in General is
great and lamentable, and their recovery a work of exceeding difficulty.

Obj. All this shows, that man's Nature was not made for a Holy life, nor for
a World to come: Else their aversness to it would not be so great and common.

Animi morbi sunt cupiditates immensae, inanes, divitiarum, gloriae
dominationis, libidinosarem etiam voluptatum accedunt aegritudines, molestiae,
merores, quae animos exedunt conficiuntque curis. Cic. 1. de finib.
Answ. This is fully answered before: It is proved, that Nature and Reason do
fully bear witness against his wickedness and declare his obligations, to a
better life, and his capacity of higher things: and that all this is his
rebellion against Nature and Reason! And it no more proves your Conclusion,
than your Children, or Servants aversness to obedience, peace and labor,
proves that these are not their duty, or Subjects rebellion proves that they
are not obliged to be loyal.

In naturalibus desideriis pauci non peccant. Arist. 3. Eth.
Obj. But it is incredible that God should thus far forsake his own Creation.

Answ. 1. There is no disputing against the light of the Sun, and the
experience of all the World: It is a thing visible and undeniable that this
case they are de facto in, and therefore that thus far they are forsaken: It
is no Wisdom to say, that is not, which all the World sees to be so, because
we think it unmeet that it should be so. 2. Is it incredible that God does
further than this forsake the wicked in the World of punishment? If he may
further forsake Hell, he may thus far forsake Earth, upon their great
provocations. We have no certainty of it, but it is not at all unlikely, that
the innumerable fixed Stars and Planets are inhabited Orbs, who have dwellers
answerable to their nature and preeminence: God only can recover lapsed man?

Nemo magnus sine aliquo afflatu Divino unquam fuit. Cicer. de Not. Deor. 2.


And if God do totally forsake Hell, as to his Mercy; and next to Hell, do much
forsake a sinful Earth that is likest and nearest unto Hell, and do glorify
his more abundant Mercy upon the more holy and happy inhabitants of all, or
almost all the other Orbs, what matter of discontent should this be to us. 3.
But God has not left even this dark and wicked Earth it self, without all
remedy, as shall be further showed. Of the Paucity of the good, and the
abounding of wickedness, almost all Poets, Orators, Philosophers and Historians
openly complain.


Read Cicero's third Book de Not. Deor. and you will see in Cotta's speech,
that the notoriously depraved Reason of man, and the prevalency and prosperity
of wickedness, was the great argument of the Atheists, against God and
Providence; which they thought unanswerable, because they looked no further
than this life, Pauci quos aequus amavit.

Jupiter aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus.


and did not foresee the time of full universal Justice. And whereas Cotta
says, that if there be a God, he should have made most men good, and prevented
all the evil in the World, and not only punish men when it is done, I shall
answer that among the objections in the Second Tome; and I before showed, how
little reason men have to expect that God should make every man as good as he
could make him, or make man indefectible; or to argue from man's sin against
Gods goodness: The free Creator, Lord and Benefactor, In vitia alter alterum
trudimus: quomodo ad salutem revocari potest, quem nullus retrahit, and populus
impellit? Senec. Ep. 29.

Serpunt vitia and contactu nocent, and in proximum quemque transiliunt. Id. de
Tranq. vit.

Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur; optimus ille

Qui minimis urgetur. Horat. 1. Ser. 3.

Unicuique dedit vitium natura creato. Propert.

Quid ulcus leviter tangam? Omnes mali sumus. Senec.

Si cupis bonus fieri, primum creed quod malus sis. Epictet. Enobri.

Novi ego hoc seculum moribus quibus sit: Malus bonum malum esse vult ut sit
sui similis: turbant, miscent, mores mali, rapax, avarus, invidus, sacrum
profanum, publicum privatum habent: Hiulca gens: haec ego doleo; haec sunt quae
excruciant; haec dies noctesque tibi canto ut caveas. Plaut.

Nifi enim talis (mala) esset natura hominum, non anteponerent vindictam
sanctitati and lucrum justitiae, invidentes alienae potentiae non laedenti: sed
volunt homines vindictae cupiditate communes leges dissolvere, etc. Thucid. l.
3.

Sed and boni, dicetis, sunt in rebus humanis; Viri sapientes, justi, inculpati
-- Res. Sint licet perhonesti, fuerintque laudabiles, -- sed audire deposcimus,
quot sint aut fuerint numero, -- Unus, duo, tres, -- centum certe numero
diffiniti -- At genus humanum non ex pauculis bonis, sed ex caeteris omnibus
aestimari convenit, ponderari: In toto enim pars est, non totum in part -- Et
quinam isti sunt, dicite? Philosophi credo, qui se esse solos sapientissimos
autumant -- Nempe illi qui cum suis quotidie cupiditatibus pugnant -- Qui ne in
vitia proritari facultatis possint alicujus instinctu, patrimonia and divitias
fugiunt, ne causas fibi afferant lapsus. Quod cum faciunt and curant,
apertissime animas esse indicant labiles, and infirmitate ad vitia proclives:
Nostra autem sententia, quod bonum natura est, neque emendari neque corrigi se
poscit: Immo ipsum debet quid sit malum nescire, si generis forma cujusque in
sua cogitat integritate perstare -- Qui luctatur animorum ingenitas corrigere
pravitates, is apertissime monstrat imperfectum se esse, quamvis omni and
pervicacia contendat. Arnob. adv. Gentes, lib. 2. in Auctuar. Bib. Pat. To. 1.
p. 20.


may vary his creatures and benefits as he sees meet, and may be proved good,
though he make not man Angelical, and though he permit his sin, and punish him
for sinning.

CHAP. XVII. What Natural Light declares of the Mercy of God to Sinners, and
of the Means and Hopes of Man's Recovery.
Creed mihi miseris caelestia numina parcent.

Nec semper laesos and sine fine premunt. Ovid. 3. de Pont.


. 1. NOtwithstanding all this forementioned sin and guilt and misery of man,
and Justice of God, Experience assures all the Earth, that Great Mercy is
still continued to them, and that they have to do with a Most Merciful God.

Men's Lives are continued even while they sin: Patience endures them: Time is
vouchsafed them: Food and raiment, and Friends and Habitations, and health and
ease and liberty is given them: When Piso in Cicero seeks after the summum
bonum, he proceeds by these steps, 1. Omnem naturam esse sui conservatricem.
Neminem esse qui ipse se oderit. 2. Neminem esse qui quomodo se habeat, nihil
sua censeat interesse: 3. Hominum e corpore and animo constare, primasque animi
parts esse, and secundas corporis. 4. Animum aliquid agere semper, neque ulla
condition quietem sempiteinam posse pati. 5. Bona esse quae naturae
convenient, camque perficiunt. 6. Animi duo genera esse virtutum; 1 Naturales,
viz. docilitas, memoria, ingenium: 2 Voluntarias quae in Voluntate posita magis
proprio nomine virtutes appellantur. 7. In prima Class maxim excellens,
confiderationem and cognitionem coelestium. 8. Virtutes autem voluntatis esse
praestantissimas. 9. Et ita concludit, Virtutem esse maxim expetendam, This is
the sum of the lib. 5. de Finib.
The Sun sends them its moving influence, its Light, and Heat; The Earth
supporteth them, and affords them fruit and maintenance and pleasure: The
Clouds yield them rain; the Air breath; and the Sea it self is not unkind, and
incommodious to them. Beasts, Birds and Fishes, and all inferior Creatures
serve them! And yet much more mercy they receive from God.

. 2. It is therefore manifest that God deals not with the sinful World
according to the utmost rigor of Justice, nor punishes them as much as they
deserve.

For all these Mercies they have forfeited, and deserved to be deprived of them.

Obj. But it is no mercy, which hardens them in sin, and ends in misery: It
is rather a punishment; as to give cold water to a man in a Fever. Answ. 1. If
it hardened them of its own nature, and not merely by their abuse, and if it
ended in misery by the designment of the Giver and the tendency of the gift,
then were it as you say, no mercy but a Plague. But it is Mercy which in its
nature and by the Donors will, has a fitness and tendency to men's recovery,
and to prevent their misery, and they are commanded and entreated accordingly
to use it; and are warned of the danger of abuse.

Obj. But God knows when he gives it them, that they will so abuse it.

Answ. Gods foreknowledge or Omniscience is his perfection, and will you argue
from thence against his Mercy? His foreknowledge of men's sin and misery causes
them not: What if he foreknew them not? Were it any praise to him to be
ignorant? And yet the Mercy would be but the same? If you will not be
reconciled to Gods ways, till he cease to be Omniscient, or till he prevent
all the sin and misery which he foreknoweth, you will perish in your enmity,
and he will easily justify his mercy against such accusations.

Obj. But God could give men so much more grace as to prevent men's sin and
misery if he would. Answ. True: he is not unable: And so he could make every
clod a tree, and every tree a beast, and every beast a man, and every man an
Angel, as I said before: but must he therefore do it?

Here note, that it is one thing to say of any Punishment, [This is so
deserved, that God may inflict it if he please, without Injustice, yea and
thereby demonstrate his Justice;] and another thing to say [This is so due that
God must or will inflict it, if he will be just; unless a compensation be made
to Justice.] It is of the first sort that I am now speaking: For God may have
variety of times, and measures, and kinds of Punishments, which he may use at
his own choice, and yet not leave the sin unpunished finally: But whether he
properly dispense with any Law, which is determinate as to the penalty, I am
not now to speak, it being not pertinent to this place and subject.

. 3. Therefore God does in some sort and measure, pardon sin to the generality
of mankind, while he remitteth some measure of the deserved punishment.

To remit or forgive the Punishment is so far to forgive the sin; for
forgiveness as to execution, is but non punire proceeding from commiseration or
mercy. And it is certain by all the Mercy bestowed on them, that God remitteth
something of the punishment, which in Law and Justice he might inflict. Though
this be not a total pardon, it is not therefore none at all.

. 4. The Goodness of Gods Nature, with this universal Experience of the World,
possesses all men's minds with this apprehension of God, that he is gracious,
merciful, long-suffering, and ready to forgive a capable subject, upon terms
consistent with his truth and honor, and the common good.

Saepe levant poenas, ereptaque lumina redunt

Cum been peccati poenituisse vident. Ovid. 1. de Pont.


Its true, that self-love and self-flattery does cause men to think of the Mercy
of God, as indulgent to their lusts, and suitable to their fleshly desires; and
therefore their conceits are none of the measure of his mercy: But yet it may
be perceived, that this foresaid conception of God as Merciful and ready to
forgive a capable subject, is warranted by the soberest Reason, Dissensio ab
aliis; a te reconciliatio incipiat: Cum ignoscls ita beneficium tuum tempera,
ut non ignoscere videaris, sed absolvere; Quia gravissimum poenae genus est,
contumeliosa venia. Senec.

Pulchrum est vitam donare petenti statim. Theb.


and is not bred by sin and error: For the wise and better, and less sinful
any is, the more he is inclined to such thoughts of God as of a part of his
Perfection.

. 5. This apprehension is increased in Mankind by Gods obliging us, to forgive
one another.

For though it does not follow, that God must forgive all that which he binds
us to forgive, for the Reasons before expressed; Yet we must believe, that the
Laws of God proceed from that Wisdom and Goodness which is his Perfection, and
that they bear the Image of them; and that the obeying of them tends to form
us more to his Image our selves, and to make us Holy as he is Holy: And
therefore that this Command of God to Man, to be merciful and forgive, does
intimate to us, that mercy and forgiveness are agreeable and pleasing unto God.

Nec ex templo ara, nec ex humana natura miserecordia tollenda est; inquit
Phocion, in Stobaeo.
. 6. God cannot cast away from his Love and from Felicity, any soul which truly
loves Him above all, and which so repents of his sin, as to turn to God in
Holiness of Heart and Life.

Here seems to arise before us a considerable difficulty. That God can find
in his heart to damn one that truly loves him, Facilius iis ignoscitur, qui
non perseverare, sed ab errato se revocare moliuntur: est enim humanum peccare,
se belluinum in errore perseverare. Cicer* in Vatin.
and is sanctified, is incredible: Because 1. then Gods own Image should be in
Hell, and a Saint be damned. 2. Because then the Creature should be readyer to
love God, than God to love him. 3. Then a Soul in Hell should have holy
desires, Prayers, Praises, and other acts of Love. 4. And a Soul capable of the
glorifying mercy of God, should miss of it: This therefore is not to be
believed: For God cannot but take complacency in them that love him, and bear
his Image: And those will be happy that God takes complacency in.

And yet on the other side, Do not the sins of them that love God, deserve
death and misery, according to his Law? And might he not inflict that on men
which they deserve? Does not Justice require punishment on them, Poenitenti
optimus est portus, mutatio confilii. Cicer. Phil. 1, 2.
that yet sin not away the Love of God, nor a state of Holiness? To this some
answer, that all those that consist with Love and Holiness, are Venial sins,
which deserve only temporal chastisement, and not perpetual misery: I rather
answer, Beatus est cui vel in senectute contigerit, ut sapentiam, verasque
opiniones consequi possit. Cicer. de finib.
1. That all sin considered in it self, abstracted from the Cause which
counterballanceth it, and procures pardoning mercy, does deserve perpetual
misery; and therefore so do the sins of the Best in themselves considered: But
that Grace which causes their Sanctification, and their Love to God, Read
Cato's speech in Cicer. de fin. l. 3. that the Principle of self-love and
preservation is the seed of virtue; and how every thing abhors its own hurt
and destruction.
does conjunctly cause the pardon of their sins; so that God will not deal with
such as in rigor they deserve. 2. And if the sin of any that Love God, should
provoke him to cast them into Hell, it follows not, that one that loves God
in sensu composito, should be damned: For God has an Order in his Punishments:
And first he would withdraw his Grace from such a one, and leave him to
himself; and then he will no longer Love God; and so it is not a Lover of God
that would be damned.

. 7. The sinful World is not so far forsaken of God, as to be shut up under
desperation, and utter impossibility of recovery and salvation.

For if that were so, they were not in Via, or under an obligation to use any
means, or accept of any mercy, in order to their recovery, nor could they
rationally do it, or be persuaded to it. There is no means to be used where
there is no end to be attained, and no hope of success.

. 8. The light of Nature, Scelerum si been poenitet, eradenda cupidinis, prava
sunt elementa. Hor.
and the foresaid dealings of God with men, continuing them under his
Government in Via, and manifold mercies, helps and means, do generally persuade
the Consciences of men that there are certain Duties required of them, and
certain Means to be used by them, in order to procure their recovery and
salvation, and to escape the misery deserved.

He that shall deny this, will turn the Earth into a Hell: he will teach men to
forbear all means and duties which tend to their conversion, pardon and
salvation, and to justify themselves in it, and desperately give over all
Religion, and begin the horrors and language of the damned.

Omnibus natura dedit fundamenta semenque virtutum. Se^. ep. 110.
. 9. The very command of God to use his appointed means for men's recovery, does
imply that it shall not be in vain, and does not only show a possibility, but
so great a hopefulness of the success to the obedient, as may encourage them
cheerfully to undertake it, and carry it through.

No man that is wise and merciful, will appoint his subject a course of means
to be used, for a thing impossible to be got: or will say, Labor thus all thy
life for it, but thou shall be never the nearer it, if thou do. If such an
Omniscient Physician do but bid me use such means for my cure and health, I may
take his command for half a promise, if I obey.

Homines ad Deos nulla re propius accedunt, quam salutem homonibus dando Nihil
habet fortuna majus quam ut possit* nec natura melius quam ut velit, servare.
Cic. p^o Ligar.

Notitia peccati, initium salutos. S^n. Says Epictetus, as our Parents deliver
us to Schoolmasters to be nurtured, so God delivers us to our Consciences,
whose nature is not to be to temned.


. 10. Conscience does bear witness against impenitent sinners, that the cause
of their sin, and the hinderance of their recovery is in themselves; and that
God is not unwilling to forgive and save them, if they were but meet for
forgiveness and salvation.

Even now men's consciences take God's part against themselves, and tell them,
that the Infinite Good, that communicates all the Goodness to the creature,
which it has, is not so likely to be the cause of so odious a thing as sin,
nor of man's destruction as he himself. If I see a Sheep lie torn in the
highway, I will sooner suspect the Wolf than a Lamb to be the cause, if I see
them both stand by: and if I see a Child drowned in scalding water, I will
sooner suspect that he fell in by folly and heedlesness himself, than that his
Mother wilfully cast him in. Is not silly naughty man much liker to be the
cause of sin and misery, than the wise and gracious God? Much more hereafter
will the sinners conscience justify God.

. 11. God has planted in the common nature of mankind an inseparable
inclination to Truth as Truth, and to Good as Good, and a Love to themselves,
and a desire to be happy, and a lothness to be miserable; together with some
reverence and honor of God, (till they have extinguished the belief of his
being) and a hatred and horror of the Devil, (while they believe he is): All
which are a fit Stock to plant Reforming-truths in, and Principles fit to be
improved for men's conversion, Nemo adeo ferus est* ut non mitescere possit

Si modo culturae patientem commodet aurem. Horat. ep. 1. Miserum te esse
judico* qui nunquam fueris miser: traxisti sine adversario vitam: Opus est ad
sui not tiam experimento. Quid quisque possit non nisi tentando didicit Sen. de
pro.

Non omnino Diis exosos esse, qui in hac vita cum aerumnarum varietate
luctantur; sed esse arcanas causas, etc. Macrob. l. 1. Saturn. Rem pateris
modicam and mediocri bile ferendam

Si flectas oculos majora ad crimina -- Juven.


and the excitation and improvement of them, is much of that recovering work.

. 12. Frequent and deep consideration being a great means of man's recovery, (by
improving the truth which he considers, and restoring Reason to the Throne)
it is a great advantage to man that he is naturally a Reasoning and Thoughtful
creature, his Intellect being propense to activity and knowledge.

. 13. And it is his great advantage, that his frequent and great afflictions
have a great tendency to awake his Reason to consideration, and to bring it to
the heart, and make it effectual.

And consequently that God casts us into such a Sea and wilderness of
troubles, that we should have these quickening Monitors still at hand.

. 14. And it is man's great advantage for his recovery, that Vanity and
Vexation are so legibly written on all things here below; and that frustrated
expectations, and unsatisfied minds, and the foreknowledge of the end of all,
and bodily pains which find no ease, with multitudes of bitter experiences, do
so abundantly help him to escape the snare (the love) of present things.

For all men that perish are condemned for loving the creature above the
Creator: and therefore such a world, which appears so evidently to be vain,
and empty, Quotidie morimur, quotidie enim demitur aliqua pars vitae: and tunc
quoque cum crescimus vita decrescit. Hunc ipsum quem agimus diem, cum morte
dividimus. Sen. ep. 24. Natura nihil hominibus brevitate vitae praestitit
melius. Id. Nihil aeque tibi proficiet ad temperantiam omnium rerum, quam
frequens cogitatio brevis aevi and hujus incerti. Quicquid facis respice ad
mortem. Sen. ep. 25.


and deceitful, and vexatious, and which all men know will turn them off at
last with as little comfort, as if they had never seen a day of pleasure in it;
I say, such a world, one would think, should give us an antidote against its
own deceit, and sufficiently wean us from its inordinate love. At least this is
a very great advantage.

. 15. It is also a common and great advantage for man's recovery, that his life
here is so short, and his death so certain, as that reason must needs tell him,
that the pleasures of sin are also short, and that he should always live as
parting with this world, and ready to enter into another.

The nearness of things makes them to work on the mind of man the more
powerfully: distant things, though sure and great, do hardly awaken the mind to
their reception and due consideration. If men lived 600 or 1000 years in the
world, it were no wonder if covetousness, and carnality, and security made them
like Devils, and worse than wild beasts to one another: But when men cannot
choose but know, that they must certainly and shortly see the end of all that
ever this world will do for them, and are never sure of another hour; this is
so great a help to sober consideration, and conversion, that it must be
monstrous stupidity and brutishness that must overcome it.

Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccati testis adstat. Sen. What then may
the presence of God do?

Clemens Alexand. was positive in it, that Philosophy was blessed to the saving
of many Heathens who obeyed it.

Tunc est consummata infaelicitas, ubi turpia non solum delectant, sed etiam
placent: and desinit esse remedio locus, ubi quae fuerant vitia, mores fiunt.
Sen. Prove.

At norbi perniciosiores pluresque sunt animi quam corporis -- Quo vero probari
potest, ut sibi mederi animus non possit, cum ipse medicinam corporis animus
invenerit? Cumque omnes qui corpore se curati passi sunt, non continuo
convalescant: Animi autem qui se sana i voluerint, praeceptisque sapientum
paracrint, sine ulla dubitatione sanentur. Cic. Tuscul. l. 3. p. ^70.


. 16. It is also a great advantage for man's conversion, that all the world
reveals God to him, and every thing tells him of the Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Love of God; and of his constant Presence; and so shows him an
object which should as easily overpower all sensual objects, which would
seduce his soul, as a mountain will weigh down a feather.

Though we see not God, (which would sure put an end to the controversy
whether we should be sensual or holy) yet while we have a glass as big as all
the world, which does continually represent him to us, one would think that no
reasonable creature should so much overlook him, as to be carried from him
with the trifles of this world.

. 17. Men that have not only the foresaid obligations, to Holiness, Justice and
Sobriety in their natures, but also all these Hopes, and Helps, and Means of
their recovery from sin to God, and yet frustrate all, and continue in
ungodliness, unrighteousness, or intemperance, impenitently to the end, are
utterly destitute of all just excuse, why God should not punish them with
endless misery: which is the case of all that perish.

. 18. All men shall be judged by the Law which was given them of God to live by.

For it is the same Law, which is, Regula Officii and Judicii: God will not
condemn men for not believing a truth, which mediately or immediately was never
revealed to them, and which they had no means to know: nor for not obeying a
Law which was never promulgated to them, nor they could not come to be
acquainted with: Physical impossibilities are not the matter of crimes, or of
condemnation.

. 19. If any persons are brought by these means alone to repent unfeignedly of
an ungodly, uncharitable and intemperate life, and to love God unfeignedly as
their God, above all; and to live a holy, obedient life: God will not condemn
such persons, though they wanted supernatural Revelation of his will. (As I
showed before. 6.)

. 20. Sunt enim ingeniis nostris semina innata virtutum, quae si adolescere
liceret, ipsa nos ad beatam vitam natura perduceret. Nunc autem simul ac editi
sumus in lucem, in omni continuo pravitate versamur, etc. Cic. 3. Tuscul.

N.B. That when Philosophers say, That all is good which Nature teaches, etc.
they mean by Nature, the true and sound constitution of the Soul, which they
distinguish from its diseases and corruption.


When sinners stand at many degrees distant from God and a holy life, and mercy
would draw them nearer him by degrees, they that have help and mercy sufficient
in suo genere, to have drawn them nearer God, and refused to obey it, do
forfeit the further helps of mercy, and may justly perish and be forsaken by
him; though their help was not immediately sufficient to all the further
degrees of duty which they were to do.

These things as clear in their proper light, I stand not to prove, because I
would not be unnecessarily tedious to the Reader.

And so much of GODLINESS, or Religion, as revealed by Natural Light.

Obj. But all Heathens and Infidels find not all this in the Book of Nature,
which you say is there.

Answ. I speak not of what men do see, but what they may see, if they will
improve their Reason. All this is undeniably legible in the Book of Nature; but
the infant, the idiot, the illiterate, the scholar, the smatterer, the Doctor,
the considerate, the inconsiderate, the sensual, the blinded, and the willing
diligent enquirer do not equally see and read that which is written in the same
characters to all.

PART II. Of CHRISTIANITY and Supernatural Revelation.
CHAP. I. Of the great need of a clearer Light, or fuller Revelation of the
Will of God, than all that has been opened before.
WHILST I resolved upon a deep and faithful search into the grounds of all
Religion, and a review and trial of all that I had my self believed, I thought
meet first to pass by Persons, and shut up my Books, and with retired Reason to
read the Book of Nature only: and what I have there found, I have justly told
you in the former Part; purposely omitting all that might be controverted by
any considerable sober reason, that I might neither stop my self nor my Reader
in the way; and that I might not deceive my self with plausible consequences of
unsound or questionable antecedents; nor discourage my Reader by the casting of
some doubtful passages in his way, which might tempt him to question all the
rest. For I know what a deal of handsome structure may fall through the
falsness of some one of the supports, which seemed to stand a great way out of
sight: And I have been wearied my self, with subtle discourses of learned men,
who in a long series of Ergo's have thought, that they have left all sure
behind them, when a few false suppositions were the life of all. And I know
that he who interposeth any doubtful things, does raise a diffidence in the
Reader's mind, which makes him suspect that the ground he stands on is not
firm, and whether all that he reads be not mere uncertain things. Nullus
unquam a mortali semine vir absolute bonus nascetur. Dion. Hal. l. 2. Truth
delivered by the halves, will be lamely practiced. Ideo peccamus, quia de
partibus vitae omnes deliberamus: de toto nemo deliberat. Sen.
Therefore leaving things controvertable for a fitter place and time, I have
thus far taken up so much as is plain and sure, (which I find of more
importance and usefulness to my own information and confirmation, than any of
those controvertible points would be, if I could never so certainly determine
them.

And now having perused the Book of Nature, I shall cast up the account, and
try what is yet wanting, and look abroad into the opinions of others in the
world, and search whence that which is yet wanting may be most fully, and
safely, and certainly supplied.

. 1. And first, when I look throughout the world, I find, that though all the
evidence aforesaid for the necessity of a holy virtuous life, be unquestionable
in natura rerum, yet most of the world observe it not, or discern but little of
it, nor much regard the light without; or the secret witness of their
consciences within.

Natural light or evidence is so unsuccessful in the world, that it loudly
tells us, something is yet wanting, what ever it is. We can discern what it
is which is necessary to man's happiness: but we can hardly discern whether de
facto any considerable number (at best) do by the teaching of nature alone
attain it. When we enquire into the Writings of the best of the Philosophers,
we find so little evidence of real holiness, that is, of the foresaid
Resignation, Subjection, and Love to God as God, that it leaves us much in
doubt whether indeed they were holy themselves or not, and whether they made
the Knowledge, Love, Obedience and Praise of God, the end and business of their
lives. However, there is too great evidence, that the world lies in darkness
and wickedness, where there is no more than natural light.

. 2. I find therefore that the discovery of the will of God, concerning our
duty and our end, called, The Law of Nature, is a matter of very great
difficulty, to them that have no supernatural light to help them.

Though all this is legible in Nature, which I have thence transcribed; yet if
I had not had another Teacher, I know not whether ever I should have found it
there. Nature is now a very hard book: when I have learnt it by my Teachers
help, I can tell partly what is there: but at the first perusal, I could not
understand it. It requires a great deal of time, and study, and help to
understand that, which when we do understand it, is as plain to us as the
highway.

. 3. Thence it must needs follow, What difficulties the wisest Heathens find
about God's prospering the wicked, and afflicting the good. And how dark were
they about the life to come? Therefore Seneca 's wise and good man was a
Phoenix.

Sine doctrina siquid been dicitur, adjuvante natura, tamen id quia fortuito
fit, semper paratum esse non potest. Cic. de Or. Etsi ingeniis magnis praediti
quidam, dicendi copiam sine ratione consequuntur. ars tamen dux certior est
quam natura. Aliud enim est poetarum more verba fundere, aliud, ea quae dicas
ratione and art distinguere. Cic. de sin. 4.


that it will be but few that will attain to understand the necessary parts of
the Law of Nature aright, by that means alone; and the multitude will be lest
in darkness still.

The common people have not leisure for so deep and long a search into nature,
as a few Philosophers made; nor are they disposed to it. And though reason
obliges them, in so necessary a case, to break through all difficulties, they
have not so full use of their reason as to do it.

Obj. But as Christian Teachers do instruct the people in that which they
cannot have leisure to search out themselves; so why may not Philosophers, who
have leisure for the search, ins;truct the people quickly, who have not leisure
to find out the truth without instruction.

Answ. Much might be done, if all men did their best: But, 1. The difficulty is
such, that the learned themselves are lamentably imperfect and unsatisfi'd, (as
I shall further show.) 2. Though the vulgar cannot search out the truth without
help, yet is it necessary that by help they come to see with their own eyes,
and rest not in a humane belief alone; especially when their Teachers are of so
many minds, that they know not which of them to believe. To learn the truth in
its proper evidence, is very hard to them that have no more than the light of
nature.

Obj. But what difficulty is there in these few precepts, that all men may not
easily learn them? [Thou shall love God above all, and repent of sin, and set
thy heart upon the Life to come, You may rerceive the Heathens g^at^ud, to God
by the ^rd^ of Cotta^. (...) Not. Deor. 3. page 109 Num^ is quod ^onus^ (...),
great. as D^s (...) un^a^n? At quod dives, quod honoratu, quod incolumis.
Jovemq^e Optimum Maximum ob eas res appellant, non quod nos justos, temperatos,
sapientes efficiat, sed quod salvos, incolumes, op^lentos, copiosos. --
Judicium hoc omnium mortalium, fortunam a Deo petendam, a seipso sumendam esse
sapientiam.
and love thy neighbor as thy self, etc.

Answ. There is no difficulty in learning these words: But, 1. There is great
difficulty in learning to understand the sense, and certain truth of that which
is contained in them. To know what God is, so far as is necessary to our
obedience and love, and to know what it is in him which is so amiable, and to
know that there is a Life to come, and what it is, and to know what is God's
will, and so what is duty, and what is the sin which we must repent of; these
are more difficult. Generals are soon named; but it is a particular
understanding which is necessary to practice. 2. And it is hard to see that
certainty and attractive Goodness in these things, as may draw the mind to the
practical embracements of them, from the love of other things. An obscure
doubtful wavering apprehension, is not strong enough to change the heart and
life.

. 4. These difficulties in the mere natural way of Revelation, will fill the
learned world with controversies: and those controversies will breed and feed
contentions, and eat out the heart of practical godliness, and make all
Religion seem an uncertain or unnecessary thing.

This is undoubtedly proved, 1. In the reason of the thing. 2. And in all the
worlds experience: so numerous were the controversies among Philosophers, so
various their Sects, so common their contentions, that the world despised them,
and all Religion for their sakes, and looked on most of them but as
Mountebanks, that set up for gain, or to get Disciples, or to show their wit:
Practical piety died in their hands.

Obj. This is a consequent not to be avoided, because no way has so resolved
difficulties, as to put an end to controversies and sects.

Answ. Certainly clearness is more desirable than obscurity, and concord and
unity than division; Therefore it concerns us to enquire how this mischief
may be amended, which is it that I am now about.

. 5. These difficulties also make it so long a work, to learn God's will by the
light of Nature only, that the time of their youth, and often of their lives, is
slipped away, before men can come to know why they lived.

It is true, that it is their own fault that causes all these inconveniences:
but its as true, Parvulos nobis natura dedit igniculos quos celeriter in aliis
moribus opinionibusque depravatis sic restinguimus, ut nusquam naturae lumen
appareat: -- Nunc autem simulatque editi in lucem and suscepti sumus, in omni
continuo pravitate versamur, ut pene cum lacte nutricis errorem suxisse
videamur: cum vero parentibus redditi, deinde magistris traditi sumus, tum ita
variis imbuimur erroribus, ut vanitati veritas, and opinioni confirmatae natura
ipsa cedat. Cic. 3. Tusc.

Multis signis natura declarat quid velit: -- obsurdescimus tamen nescio quo
modo, nec ea quae ab ea moventur audimus. Cic. Lael.

Si tales nos natura genuisset, ut eam ipsam intueri, and perspicere, eaque
optima duce cursum vitae conficere possemus: haud esset sane quod quisquam
rationem and doctrinam requireret cum natura sufficeret. Nune vero, etc. Cic.
3. Tusc.

Quicquid infixum and ingenitum est, lenitur art, non vincitur. S^n.


that their disease does need a cure, for which it concerns them to seek out.
The life of man is held upon a constant uncertainty, and no man is sure to live
another year: and therefore we have need of precepts so plain as may be easily
and quickly learnt, that we may be always ready, if death shall call us to an
account. I confess that what I have transcribed from nature is very plain
there, to one that already understands it: but whether the diseased blindness
of the world do not need yet something plainer, let experience determine.

. 6. That which would be sufficient for a sound understanding and will, is not
sufficient to a darkened diseased mind and heart, such as experience tells us
is found throughout the world.

To true reason which is at liberty, and not enthralled by sensuality and
error, the light of nature might have a sufficiency to lead men up to the love
of God, and a life of holiness: But experience tells us, that the reason of
the world is darkened, and captivated by sensuality, and that few men can well
use their own faculties. And such eyes need spectacles, such criples need
crutches; yea, such diseases call for a Physician. Prove once that the world is
not diseased, and then we will confess that their natural food may serve the
turn, without any other diet or Physic.

. 7. When I have by natural Reason silenced all my doubts about the Life to
come, I yet find in my self an uncouth unsatisfactory kind of apprehension of
my future state, till I look to supernatural evidence: which I perceive is from
a double cause. 1. Because a Soul in flesh, would fain have such apprehension
as participateth of sense. 2. And we are so conscious of our ignorance, that we
are apt still to suspect our own understandings, even when we have nothing to
say against the conclusion.

What I have said in the first part of this Book, does so fully satisfy my
Reason, as that I have nothing to say against it, which I cannot easily discern
to be unsound: and yet for all that, when I think of another world, by the help
of this natural light alone, I am rather amazed than satisfied; and am ready to
think, [All this seems true, and I have nothing of weight to say against it;
but alas how poor and uncertain a thing is man's understanding! how many are
deceived in things that seem as undeniable to them! How know I what one
particular may be unseen by me, which would change my judgment, and better
inform me in all the rest? If I could but see the world which I believe, or at
least but speak with one who had been there, or gave me sensible evidence of
his veracity, it would much confirm me.] Sense has got so much mastery in the
Soul, that we have much ado to take any apprehension for sure and satisfactory,
which has not some great correspondency with sense. This is not well: But it
is a disease which shows the need of a Physician, and of some other
satisfying light.

. 8. While we are thus scopt in our way by tediousness, difficulty, and a
subjective uncertainty about the end and duty of man, the flesh is still
active, and sin increases and gets advantage, and present things are still in
their deceiving power; and so the Soul grows worse and worse.

O curvae in terris animae, and coelestium inanes!

Quid juvat hoc, templis nostros immittere mores?

Et bona Diis ex hac scelerata ducere pulpa? Persius.

Non bove mactato coelestia numina gaudent:

Sed quae praestanda est, and sine test fides. Ovid. ep. ^9.


. 9. The Soul being thus vitiated and perverted by sin, is so partial,
slothful, negligent, unwilling, superficial, deceitful, and ^us^d^n in its
studies, that if the evidences of life everlasting bes^, and clear, and
satisfying to others, it will overlook them, or not perceive their certainty.

. 10. Though it be most evident by common experience, that the nature of man is
lamentably depraved, and that sin does overspread the world; yet how it
entered, and when, or which of our progenitors was the first transgressor and
cause, no natural light does fully or satisfactorily acquaint me.

. 11. And though Nature tell me that God cannot damn or hate a Soul that truly
loves him, and is sanctified, yet does it not show me a means that is likely
considerably to prevail to sanctify Souls, and turn them from the love of
present transitory things, to the love of God and Life eternal.

Though there be in nature the discovery of sufficient Reasons and Motives to
do it, Omne nefas, omnemque mali purgamine causam

Credebant nostri tollere posse seen, etc. Ah! nimium faciles, qui tristia
crimina caedis

Fulminea tolli posse putatis aqua. Ovid. 2. Fast.


where Reason is not in captivity; yet how unlikely they are to prevail with
others, both Reason and Experience fully testify.

. 12. And whereas God's special mercy and grace is necessary to so great a
change and cure, and this grace is forfeited by sin, and every sin deserves
more punishment, and this sin and punishment must be so far forgiven before God
can give us that grace which we have forfeited, Nature does not satisfactorily
teach me, how God is so far reconciled to Man, nor how the forgiveness of sin
may be by us so far procured. Multa miser metui quia seei multa proterve Idem.

In malis sperare bonum, nosi innocens nemo solet. Senec.




. 13. And where as I see at once in the world, both the a^o^ing of sin, which
deserves damnation, and the abounding of mercy to these that are under such
deserts; I am not satisfied by the halt of Nature, how God is so far
reconciled, and the ends of Government and Justice attained, as to deal with
the world so contrary to its deserts.

. 14. And while I am in this doubt of God's reconciliation, I am ready still to
fear, list present forbearance and mercy ^rt a^i^val, and will end at last in
greater misery: However I find it hard* if not impossible, to come to any
certainty of (...) pardon and salvation.

. 15. And while I am thus uncertain of pardon and the love of God, it must
needs make it an insuperable difficulty to me, to love God above my self and
all things: for to love a God that I think will damn me, or most probably may
do it, for ought I know is a thing that man can hardly do.

. 16. Turpe est quicquans mali perpetrare: been autem agere nullo periculo
proposito, multorum est: id vero proprium boni viri est, etiam cum periculo suo
honestatem in agentem sequi. Plut. in Mario. At men's sibi conscia facti

Praemetuens, adhibet stimulos, terrerque flagellis:

Nec videt interea qui terminus esse malorum

Possit, nec qui sit poenarum denique finis.

Atque eadem metuic magis haecne in morte gravescant. Lucret. 3.


And therefore I cannot see how the guilty world can be sanctified, nor brought
to forsake the sin and vanities which they love, as long as God, whom they must
turn to by love, does seem so unlovely to them.

. 17. And every temptation from present pleasure, commodity or honor, will be
like to prevail, while the love of God, and the happiness to come, are so dark
and doubtful, to guilty, misgiving ignorant Souls.

. 18. Nor can I see by Nature how a sinner can live comfortably in the world,
for want of clearer assurance of his future happiness.

For if he do but say as poor Seneca, Cicero, and others such. [Its most like
that there is another life for us, but we are not sure] it will both abate
their comfort in the fore-thoughts of it, and tempt them to venture upon
present pleasure, for fear of losing all: And if they were never so confident
of the life to come, and had no assurance of their own part in it, as not
knowing whether their sins be pardoned, still their comfort in it would be
small. And the world can give them no more than is proportionable to so small
and momentany a thing.

. 19. Nor do I see in Nature any full and suitable support against the pain and
fears of sufferings and death, while men doubt of that which should support
them.

. 20. I must therefore conclude, that the Light and Law of Nature, which was
suitable to uncorrupted reason, and will, and to an undepraved mind, is too
insufficient to the corrupted, vitiated guilty world; and that there is a
necessity of some recovering medicinal Revelation.

Which forced the very Heathens to fly to Oracles, Idols, Sacrifices, and
Religious Propitiations of the gods; there being scarce any Nation which had
not some such thing: though they used them, not only uneffectually, but to the
increase of their sin, and strengthening their presumption; (as too many poor
ignorant Christians now do their Masses and other such formalities and
superstitions.) But as Arnobius says, ( adv. Gentes, l. 7.) Crescit enim
multitudo peccantium, cum redimendi peccati spes datur: and facile itur ad
culpas, ubi est venalis ignoscentium gratia. He that hops to purchase
forgiveness with money, or sacrifices, or ways of cost, will strive rather to be
rich than to be innocent.

CHAP. II. Of the several Religions which are in the world.
HAving finished my enquiries into the state and book of Nature, I found it my
duty to enquire what other men thought in the world, and what were the reasons
of their several beliefs, that if they knew more than I had discovered (by what
means soever) I might become partaker of it.

. 1. And first I find that all the world, except those called Heathens, are
conscious of the necessity of supernatural Revelation; yea, the Heathens
themselves have some common apprehension of it.

. 2. Four sorts of Religions I find only considerable upon earth: The mere
Naturalists, called commonly Heathens and Idolaters: The Jews: The Mahometans:
and the Christians. The Heathens by their Oracles, Augures and Aruspices,
confess the necessity of some supernatural light; and the very Religion of all
the rest consists in it.

I.. 3. As for the Heathens, I find this much good among them: That some of
them have had a very great care of their Souls: and many have used exceeding
industry in seeking after knowledge, especially in the mysteries of the works
of God; and some of them have bent their minds higher to know God, and the
invisible worlds: That they commonly thought that there is a Life of
Retribution after death; and among the wisest of them, the sum of that is to
be found (though confusedly) which I have laid down in the first Part of this
Book.

Especially in Seneca, Cicero, Plutarch, Plato, Plotinus, Euvaglus says, That
Constantine so honored Sopater the Philosopher, that he made him usually sit
by him on the same bench.

Sure the Philosophers were falsely reported to Theoph. Antioch. ad Autol. l. 2.
p. 137. when he says that Zeno, Diogenes and Cleanthes's Books do teach to eat
man's flesh, and fathers to be roasted and eaten by the children, and sacrificed
by them, etc. Belyirg one another has been the Devil's means to destroy
charity on earth.


Jamblicus, Proclus, Porphyry, Julian the Apostate, Antoninus, Epectetus,
Arrian, etc. And for their Learning, and Wisdom, and Moral Virtues, the
Christian Bishops carried themselves respectfully to many of them, (as Basil to
Libanius, etc.) And in their days many of their Philosophers were honored by
the Christian Emperors, or at least by the inferior Magistrates and Christian
people, who judged that so great worth deserved honor, and that the confession
of so much Truth, deserved answerable love; especially Aedesius, Julianus,
Cappadox, Proaeresius, Maximus, Libanius, Acacius, Chrysanthus, etc. And the
Christians ever since have made great use of their Writings in their Schools;
especially of Aristotle's and Plato's with their followers.

. 4. And I find that the Idolatry of the wisest of them was not so foolish as
that of the Vulgar; but they thought that the Universe was one animated world,
and that the Universal Soul was the only Absolute Sovereign God, whom they
described much like as Christians do: and that the Sun, and Stars, and Earth,
and each particular Orb, was an individual Animal, part of the Universal world,
and besides the Universal, had each one a subordinate particular Soul, which
they worshipped as a subordinate particular Deity, as some Christians do the
Angels. And their Images they set up for such representations, by which they
thought these gods delighted to be remembered, and instrumentally to exercise
their virtues for the help of earthly mortals.

. 5. I find that except these Philosophers, and very few more, the generality
of the Heathens were and are foolish Idolaters, and ignorant, sensual brutish
men.

At this day through the world, they are that sort of men that are likest unto
Beasts, Sed nescio quomodo, nil tam absurd dici potest quod non dicatur ab
aliquo Philosophorum. Cic. Divinat. l. 2. p. 183.
except some few at Siam, China, the Indian Bannians, the Japonians, the
Ethnic Persians, and a few more. The greatest deformity of Nature is among
them: the least of sound knowledge, true policy, civility and piety is among
them. Abominable wickedness does no where so much abound. So that if the
doctrine and judgment of these may be judged of by the effect, it is most
insufficient to heal the diseased world, and reduce man to holiness, sobriety
and honesty.

. 6. I find that these few among the Heathens who attain to more knowledge in
the things which concern man's duty and happiness than the rest, do commonly
destroy all again by the mixture of some dot^ges and impious conceits.

Sed haec cadem number censes apud cos iplos valere, nisi admodum paucos a quibus
inventa, disputata, conscripta sunt? Quotus enim quisque Philosophorum
invenitur, qui sit ita moratus, ita animo ac vita constitutus ut ratio
postulat? qui disciplinam suam non ostentationem scientiae, sed legem vitae
putet? qui obtemperet ipse sibi, and decretis suis pareat? Videre licet alius
tanta levitate and jactatione, ut iis f^erit non didicisse necleus: alio^
pecuniae cupdo^, gloriae nonnul los, multos lib dinum servos: ut cum little vita
mirabibiliter pugnet oration: quod quidem mihi videtur turpissimum. Ut enim si
Grammaticum se professus quispiam barbare loquatur, aut si absurd canat is,
qui se haberi velit musicum, hoc turpior sit, quod in eo ipso peccet, cujus
profitetur scientiam: sic Philosophus in ratione vitae peccans, hoc turpior
est, quod in officio, cujus magister esse vult, labitur, artemque vitae
professus, delinquit in vita. Cic. Tusc. l. 2. page 252.
The Literali in China exel in many things, but besides abundance of ignorance
in Philosophy, they destroy all by denying the immortality of the Soul, and
affirming rewards and punishments to be only in this life, or but a little
longer. At least, none but the Souls of the good (say some of them) survive:
and though they confess One God, they give him no solemn worship. Their Sect
called Sciequia or Sciacca, is very clear for the Unity of the Godhead, the
joys of Heaven, and the torments of Hall, with some umbrage of the Trinity,
etc. But they blot all with the Pythagorean fopperies, affirming these Souls
which were in joy or misery, after a certain space to be sent again into
Bodies, and so to continue through frequent changes to eternity: to say nothing
of the wickedness of their lives. Their third Sect called Lauru is not worth
the naming, as being composed of fopperies, and sorceries, and impostures. All
the Japonian Sects also make the world to be eternal, and Souls to be
perpetuated through infinite transmigrations. The Siamenses, who seem the best
of all, and nearest to Christians, have many fopperies, and worship the Devil
for fear, as they do God for love. The Indian Bramenes, or Bannians, also have
the Pythagorean errors, and place their piety in redeeming Bruits, because they
have Souls which sometimes were humane. The Persians dispersed in India, who
confess God, and Heaven, and Hell, yet think that these are but of a thousand
years duration. And it is above a thousand years since they believed, that the
world should continue but a thousand years, and then Souls be released from
Hell, and a new world made.

. 7. Their great darkness and uncertainties appear by the innumerable sects and
differences which are among them; which are incomparably more numerous, than
all that are found in all parties in the world besides.

I need not tell you of the 288 Sects or Opinions de summo bono, which Varro
said was in his days: The difference which you may find in Laertius, Hesechius,
and others, between the Cynicks, Peripateticks, Academicks, Stoics, Scepticks,
Epicureans, etc. with all their sub-divisions, are enough. In Japan, the twelve
Sects, have their subdivisions. In China, the three general Sects, have so many
subdivisions, that Varenius says of them, [Singuli fontes Iabentibus paulatim
seculis, a fraudum magistris in tot maeandros derivati sunt, ut sub triplici
nomine trecentae mihi sectae inter se discrepantes numerari posse videantur:
sed and hae quotidianis incrementis augentur, and in pejus ruunt.] Petrus
Texeica says of the Indians, [In Regno Gazeratensivarii sunt ritus and sectae
incolarum, and quod mirum, vix familiam invenias in qua omnes congruant: alii
comedunt carnem, alii nequaquam; alii comedunt quidem, sed non mactant
animalia: alii nonnulla tantum animalia comedunt; alii tantum pisces; alii
tantum lac and herbas, etc. Johan. a Twist. says of the Indian Bramenes,
Numerantur sectae praecipui nominis octoginta tres: sed praeter has minus
illustrium magna est multitudo, ita ut singulae familiae peculiarem fere
foveant religionem. It were endless to speak of all the Sects in Africa and
America; to say nothing of the beastly part of them in Brasil, the Cape of good
hope, that is, Soldania, and the Islands of Cannibals, who know no God, (nor
Government, nor Civility some of them.) They are not only of as many minds as
countries, but of a multitude of sects in one and the same country.

. 8. I find not my self called or enabled to judge all these people as to their
final state, but only to say, that if any of them have a holy heart and life,
in the true love of God, they shall be saved; but without this, no form of
Religion will save any man, be it never so right.

. 9. But I find it to be my duty to love them for all the good which is in
them, and all that is true and good in their Religion, I will embrace: and
because it is so defective, to look further, and try what I can learn from
others.

There is so much lovely in a Cato, Cicero, Seneca, Antonine, Epictetus,
Plutarch, etc. in the Religions of Siam, in the dispersed Persian Ethnicks in
India, in the Bramans, or Bannians of India, in the Bonzii of Japan, and diverse
others in China and elsewhere, that it obliges us not only to love them
benevolently, but with much complacence. And as I will learn from Nature it
self what I can, so also from these Students of Nature. I will take up nothing
merely on their trust, nor reject any doctrine merely because it is theirs; but
all that is true and good in their Religions, as far as I can discern it, shall
be part of mine; and because I find them so dark and bad, I will betake me for
further information to those that trust to supernatural Revelation; which are
the Jews, Mahumetans and the Christians; of which I shall next consider apart.

In To 4. Bib. Pat* extat liber Hieronymi a Sancta Fide, ex Judaeo Christiani,
contra Judaeos and Talmud. qui ut dicit Approbatio 5000 Judaeos ad fidem
convertit. page 742, etc.
. 10. II. As to the Religion of the Jews, I need not say much of it by it self;
the Positive part of their doctrine being confessed by the Christians and
Mahumetans, to be of Divine Revelation; and the negative part, (their denying
of Christ) is to be tried, in the trial of Christianity.

The Reasons which are brought for the Christian Religion, if sound, will prove
the Old Testament, which the Jews believe; it being part of the Christians
Sacred Book: And the same reasons will confute the Jews rejection of Jesus
Christ. De Mahumetis origin, etc. vid. fragm. ex Anastas. Hist. Eccl. in B.P.
Gr. Lat. To. 2. page 289* etc.
I take that therefore to be the fittest place to treat of this subject, when I
come to the proofs of the Christian Faith. I oppose not what they have from
God: I must prove that to be of God, which they deny.

. 11. III. In the Religion of the Mahumetans I find much good, viz. A
Confession of one only God, and most of the Natural parts of Religion; a
vehement opposition to all Idolatry; A testimony to the Veracity of Moses, and
of Christ; that Christ is the Word of God, and a great Prophet, and the
Writings of the Apostles true: All this therefore where Christianity is
approved, must be embraced.

And there is no doubt but God has made use of Mahumet as a great Scourge to
the Idolaters of the World; as well as to the Christians who had abused their
sacred privileges and blessings: Wherever his Religion does prevail, he
casts down Images, and fills men's minds with a hatred of Idols, and all
conceit of multitude of Gods, and brings men to worship one God alone, and
does that by the sword in this, which the preaching of the Gospel had not done
in many obstinate Nations of Idolaters.

. 12. But withal I find a Man exalted as the chief of Prophets, Vid. Theodore
Abucare Opuscul. Mahumetem non esse ex Deo. etc. Et Euthym^i Zigaben.
Moamethica.
without any such proof as a wise man should be moved with; and an Alcoran
written by him below the rates of common Reason, being a Rhapsody of Nonsense
and Confesion; and many false and impious doctrines introduced; and a
tyrannical Empire and Religion twisted, and both erected, propagated, and
maintained, by irrational tyrannical means: As which discharge my reason from
the entertainment of this Religion.

1. That Mahomet was so great (or any) Prophet, is neither confirmed by any
true credible Miracle, nor by any eminency of Wisdom or Holiness, in which he
excelled other men; nor any thing else which Reason can judge to be a Divine
attestation. The contrary is sufficiently apparent in the irrationality of his
Alcoran: There is no true Learning nor excellency in it, but such as might be
expected among men of the more incult wits, and barbarous education: There is
nothing delivered methodically or rationally, with any evidence of solid
understanding: There is nothing, but the most nauseous repetition an hundred
times over of many simple incoherent speeches, in the dialect of a drunken man;
sometimes against Idolaters, and sometimes against Christians for calling
Christ, God; which all set together seem not to contain (in the whole Alcoran)
so much solid useful sense and reason as one leaf of some of those
Philosophers whom he opposes, however his time, had delivered him from their
Idolatry, and caused him more to approach the Christian Faith.

2. And who can think it any probable sign that he is the Prophet of truth,
whose Kingdom is of this World, erected by the Sword; who barbarously
suppresseth all rational enquiry into his doctrine, and all disputes against
it, all true Learning and rational helps, to advance and improve the Intellect
of man: and who teaches men to fight and kill for their Religion: Certainly,
the Kingdom of darkness is not the Kingdom of God but of the Devil: And the
friend of Ignorance is no Friend to Truth, to God, nor to mankind: And it is a
sign of a bad Cause that it cannot endure the light. If it be of God, why dare
they not soberly prove it to us, and hear what we have to object against it,
that Truth by the search may have the Victory: If Beasts had a Religion it
would be such as this.

3. Moreover, they have doctrines of Polygamy, and of a sensual kind of
Heaven, and of murdering men to increase their Kingdoms, and many the like,
which being contrary to the light of Nature, and unto certain common Truths, do
prove that the Prophet and his doctrine are not of God.

4. And his full attestation to Moses and Christ as the true Prophets of God,
does prove himself a false Prophet who so much contradicts them, and rages
against Christians as a blood-thirsty Enemy, when he has given so full a
testimony to Christ. The particulars of which I shall show anon.

CHAP. III. Of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION: and First, What it is.
What the Christian Religion is, judge not by the intruded opinions of any
Sect, but by the ancient Creeds and Summaries, which elsewhere I have recited
out of Tertullian and other ancients; and which you may find recited or
referred to in Usher and Vossius, de Symb.
. 1. IV. THE last sort of Religion to be enquired into, is CHRISTIANITY: in
which by the Providence of God I was educated, and at first received it by a
humane Faith, upon the word and reverence of my Parents and Teachers, being
unable in my Childhood rationally to try its grounds and evidences.

I shall declare to the Reader just in what Order I have received the Christian
Religion, that the Inquisition being the more clear and particular, the
satisfaction may be the greater: And it being primarily for my own use that I
draw up these Papers, I find it convenient to remember what is past, and to
insert the transcript of my own experiences; See the description of the
Christian Faith in Proclus ad Armenios de fide in Bib. Pal. Graecolat. To. 1.
page 311.
that I may fully try whether I have gone rationally, and faithfully to work or
not. I confess, that I took my Religion at first upon my Parents word: And who
could expect that in my Childhood I should be able to prove its grounds? But
whether God owned that method of Reception, Also the Catechis. of Junilius
Africanus, de part. div. Legis.
by any of his inward light and operations, and whether the efficacy of the
smallest beams, be any proof of the truth of the Christian Faith, I leave to
the Reader, Et Hermenopul. de Fide Orthod.
and shall my self only declare the naked history in truth.

. 2. In this Religion (received defectively both as to Matter and Grounds,) I
found a Power even in my Childhood, to awe my Soul, and check my sin and folly,
and make me careful of my salvation, and to make me love and honor true
wisdom and holiness of life.

. 3. But when I grew up to fuller use of Reason, and more distinctly understood
what I had generally and darkly received, the power of it did more surprise my
mind, and bring me to deeper consideration of spiritual and everlasting
things: It humbled me in the sense of my sin and its deserts: and made me think
more sensibly of a Savior: It resolved me for more exact Obedience to God; and
increased my love to God: and increased my love to persons and things, sermons,
writings, prayers, conference, which relished of plain resolved Godliness.

. 4. In all this time I never doubted of the Truth of this Religion; partly
retaining my first humane Belief, and partly awed and convinced by the
intrinsic evidence of its proper subject, end, and manner; and being taken up
about the humbling and reforming study of my self.

. 5. At last having for many years labored to compose my mind and life, to the
Principles of this Religion, I grew up to see more difficulties in it, than I
saw before: And partly by temptations, and partly by an inquisitive mind, which
was wounded with uncertainties and could not contemptuosly or carelessly cast
off the doubts which I was not able to resolve, I resumed afresh the whole
inquiry, and resolved to make as faithful a search into the nature and grounds
of this Religion, as if I had never been baptized into it.

The first thing I studied was, the Matter of Christianity, What it is? and the
next was the evidence and certainty of it: of which I shall speak distinctly.

. 6. The Christian Religion is to be considered, 1. In its self, as delivered
by God. 2. In its Reception and Practice by men professing it. In its self it
is Perfect, but not so easily discernable by a stranger; In the Practisers it
is imperfect here in this life; but more discernable by men that cannot so
quickly understand the Principles; and more forcibly constrains them to
perceive its holiness and worth; Where it is indeed sincerely practiced: And is
most dishonored and misunderstood through the wickedness of Hypocrites who
profess it.

Leg Julian. Toletin. cont Judaeus. Et Rabbi Samuel. Marrochiani de adventu
Messiae.
As the Impress on the Wax does make the Image more discernable than the
Sculpture on the Seal; but the Sculpture is true and perfect, when many
accidents may render the Impressed image imperfect and faulty: So is it in this
case. To a diligent Enquirer, Christianity is best known in its Principles
delivered by Christ the Author of it: and indeed is no otherwise perfectly
known; because it is no where else perfectly to be seen: But yet it is much
more visible, and taking with unskilful superficial Observers, in the
Professors Lives: For they can discern the good or evil of an action, who
perceive not the nature of the Rule and Precepts. The vital form in the
Rose-tree is the most excellent part; but the beauty and sweetness of the Rose
is more easily discerned. Effects are most sensible, but causes are most
excellent. And yet in some respect the Practice of Religion is more excellent
than the Precepts, in as much as the Precepts are Means to Practice: For the
end is more excellent than the Means as such. A poor man can easilyer perceive
the worth of Charity in the person that cloatheth and feeds and relieveth
him, than the worth of a treatise or sermon of Charity. Subjects easily
perceive the worth of a wise, and holy, and just, and merciful King or
Magistrate, in his actual Government, who are not much taken with the Precepts
which require yet more perfection: And among all descriptions, historical
Narratives, like Zenophons Cyrus, do take most with them. Doubtless, if ever
the Professors of Christianity should live according to their own Profession,
they would thereby overcome the opposition of the World, and propagate their
Religion with greatest success through all the Earth.

Because no man can well judge of the Truth of a doctrine, till he first know
what it is, I think it here necessary, to open the true nature of the Christian
Religion, and tell men truly what it is: Partly, because I perceive that
abundance that profess it hypocritically, by the mere power of Education, Laws
and Custom of their Country, do not understand it, and then are the easilyer
tempted to neglect or contemn it, or forsake it, if strongly tempted to it:
(even to forsake that which indeed they never truly received). And because its
possible some Aliens to Christianity may peruse these lines. Otherwise, were I
to speak only to those that already understand it, I might spare this
description.

. 7. The CHRISTIAN RELIGION contains two Parts: 1. All Theological Verities
which are of Natural Revelation. 2. Much more which is supernaturally revealed.
The supernatural Revelation is said in it to be partly written by God, partly
delivered by Angels, partly by inspired Prophets and Apostles, and partly by
Jesus Christ himself in person.

. 8. The supernatural Revelation recites most of the Natural, because the
searching of the great Book of Nature, is a long and difficult work, for the
now-corrupted, dark and slothful mind of the common sort of men.

. 9. These supernatural Revelations are all contained, 1. Most copiously in a
Book called, The Holy Bible, or Canonical Scriptures. 2. More summarily and
contractedly, in three Forms, called, The Belief, The Lords Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments: and most briefly and summarily, in a Sacramental Covenant: This
last contains all the Essential parts most briefly; and the second somewhat
fuller explaineth them; and the first (the holy Scriptures) contains also all
the Integral parts, or the whole frame.

. 10. Some of the present Professors of the Christian Religion, do differ about
the authority of some few Writings called Apocrypha, whether they are to be
numbered with the Canonical Books of God, or not: But those few containing in
them no considerable points of doctrine different from the rest, the
controversy does not very much concern the substance or doctrinal matter of
their Religion.

. 11. The sacred Scriptures are written very much. Historically, the Doctrines
being interspersed with the History.

. 12. This sacred Volume contains two Parts: The first called, The Old
Testament, containing the History of the Creation, and of the Deluge, and of
the Jewish Nation till after their Captivity; As also their Law, and Prophets.
The second called The New Testament, containing the History of the Birth, and
Life, and Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ; The sending
of his Apostles, the giving of the Holy Ghost; the course of their Ministry and
Miracles; with the sum of the doctrine preached first by Christ, and then by
them, and certain Epistles of theirs to diverse Churches and persons more fully
opening all that doctrine.

Genesis 1.
. 13. The sum of the History of the Old Testament is this: That in the
beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, with all things in them: Viz.
That having first made the Intellectual superior part of the World, and the
matter of the Elementary World in an unformed Mass, he did the first day
distinguish or form the active Element of Fire, and caused it to give light;
The second day he separated the rarefied Passive Element called Fire, expanding
it from the Earth upwards to be a separation and medium of action between the
superior and inferior parts: The third day he separated the rest of the
Passive Element, Earth and Water into their proper place, and set their bounds;
and made individual Plants, with their specific forms, and virtue of
generation. The fourth day he made the Sun, Moon and Stars, for Luminaries to
the Earth; either then forming them, or then appointing them to that Office
(but not revealing their other uses which are nothing to us.) The fifth day he
made Fishes and Birds, with the power of generation. The sixth day he made the
terrestrial Animals, and Man, with the like generative Power. And the seventh
day he appointed to be a Sabbath of Rest, on which he would be solemnly
worshipped by Mankind as our CREATOR. Having made one Man and one Woman, in
his own Image, that is with Intellects, Free Will, and executive Power, in
wisdom, holiness, and aptitude to Obey him, and with Dominion over the
sensitive and vegetative, and inanimate Creatures; he placed them in a Garden
of pleasure, wherein were two Sacramental Trees, one called, The Tree of Life,
and the other the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: And (besides the Law of
Nature) he tried him only with this positive prohibition, that he should not
eat of the Tree of Knowledge: Whereupon the Devil Caesarius Dialog. 3. Q. 122.
thinks that Adam was forty days in Paradise, and that therefore Lent is
kept, to show our hungring after Paradise. But that is a singular Fancy. And
after he changed it upon some old men's tradition of a longer time.
(who before this was fallen from his first state of innocence and felicity)
took occasion to persuade the Woman that Gods Threatening was not true; that he
meant not as he spoke; that he knew Man was capable of greater Knowledge, Genesis
2. and 3.
but envyed him that happiness; and that the eating of that Fruit, Transtulit
Deus hominem in Paradisum, ei undique occasiones suggerens ut cresceret, and
perfectus redderetur, and declaratus tandem Deus, in astra ascenderet. Mediam
etenim conditionem obtinuit homo; nec totus mortalis, nec totus immortalis
existens; verum utriusque extitit particeps. Theoph. Autio. ad Autol. l. 1. p.
129.
was not the way to death as God had threatened, but to Knowledge and
Exaltation: whereupon the woman seeing the beauty of the Fruit, and desiring
Knowledge, believed the Devil, and did eat of that which God forbad: The sin
being so heinous for a new-made Rational Creature, to believe that God was
false and bad, a liar and envious, which is indeed the nature of the Devil, and
to depart from his Love and Obedience for so small a matter, God did in Justice
presently sentence the Offenders to punishment: yet would not so lose his
new-made Creature, nor cast off Mankind, by the full execution of his deserved
punishment; but he resolved to commit the Recovery and Conduct of Mankind to a
Redeemer, who should better perform the work of salvation, than the first Man
Adam had done the work of adhaesion and obedience. This Savior is the Eternal
Wisdom and Word of God, who was in due time to assume the Nature of Man, and in
the mean time to stay the stroke of Justice, and to be the invisible Lawgiver
and Guide of Souls, communicating such measures of mercy, light, and spirit,
for their recovery, as he saw fit. (Of whom more anon): so that henceforward
God did no longer Govern man as a spotless innocent Creature, by the mere Law
of entire-Nature; but as a lapsed, guilty, depraved Creature, who must be
pardoned, reconciled, and renewed, and have Laws and Means made suitable to his
corrupted miserable state. Genesis 3.15.
Hereupon God published the Promise of a Savior, to be sent in due time: who
should confound the Devil that had accused God of falsehood, and of envying the
good of man, and had by lying murdered mankind; and should overcome all his
deceits and power, and rescue God's injured Honor, and the Souls of sinners,
and bring them safe to the everlasting blessedness which they were made for.
Thus God as man's Redeemer, (and not only as his Creator) governs him: He
taught Adam first to worship him now by Sacrifice, both in acknowledgment of
the Creator, and to teach him to believe in, and expect the Redeemer, who in
his assumed humanity was to become a Sacrifice for sin. This Worship by
Sacrifice Adam taught his two sons, Cain and Abel; who were the early
instances, types and beginnings of the two sorts of persons which
thence-forward would be in the world; Genesis 4.
viz. The holy Seed of Christ, and the wicked Seed of Satan: Cain, the elder,
(as corruption now is before Regeneration) offering the fruits of his land only
to his Creator; and Abel, the younger, sacrificing the firstlings of his flock
(of sheep) to his Redeemer, with a purified mind; God rejected the offering of
Cain, and accepted the sacrifice of Abel: Whereupon Cain, in imitation of the
Devil, envied his Brother, and in envy slew him, to foretell the world what the
corrupted nature of man would prove, and how malignant it would be against the
sanctified, and what the holy Seed that are accepted of God must look for in
this world, for the hope of an everlasting blessedness with God. After this,
God's patience waited on mankind, not executing the threatened death upon their
bodies, till they had lived seven or eight or nine hundred years a piece: which
mercy was abused to their greater sin, Genesis 5.
(the length of their lives occasioning their excessive sensuality, Genesis 6. and
7.
worldliness, and contempt of God, and life eternal) so that the number of the
holy Seed was at last so small, and the wickedness of mankind so great, that
God resolved to drown the world: Only righteous Noah and his family (eight
persons) he saved in an Ark, which he directed him to make, for the
preservation of himself, and the species of Aereal and Terrestrial Animals.
After which Flood, Genesis 8* and 9. and 10. and 11.
the earth was peopled in time from Noah, to whom God gave Precepts of Piety
and Justice, which by tradition came down to his posterity through the world.
But still the greater part did corrupt their ways, and followed Satan, and the
holy Seed was the smaller part: Genesis 12 to the end of the Book.
of whom Abraham, being exemplary in holiness and righteousness, with his son
Isaac, and his grandson Jacob, God did in special approbation of their
righteousness renew his gracious covenant with them, and enlarge it with the
addition of many temporal blessings, and special privileges to their posterity
after them; promising that they should possess the Land of Canaan, and be to
him a peculiar people above all the people of the earth: The children of Jacob
being afterward by a famine removed into Egypt, there multiplied to a great
people; The King of Egypt therefore oppressed them, and used them as slaves,
Exodus per totum.
to make his brick, by cruel impositions: Till at last God raised them up Moses
for a deliverer, to whom God committed his message to the King, and to whom he
gave power to work miracles for their deliverance, and whom he made their
Captain to lead them out of Egypt toward the promised Land. Ten times did
Moses with Aaron his Brother go to Pharaoh the King in vain, though each time
they wrought public miracles to convince him, till at last when God had in a
night destroyed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, Pharaoh did
unwillingly let the Seed of Jacob (or Israel) go: But repenting quickly, he
pursued after them with his Host, and overtook them just at the Red Sea, where
God wrought a miracle, opening the Sea, which the Israelites past through on
dry ground: but the King with his Host, who were hardened to pursue them, were
all drowned by the return of the waters, when the Israelites were over. Then
Moses led them on in the Wilderness toward the promised Land: Exodus and Numb.
but the great difficulties of the Wilderness tempted them to murmuring against
him that had brought them thither, and to unbelief against God, as if he could
not have provided for them: This provoked God to kill many thousands of them by
Plagues and Serpents, and to delay them forty years in that Wilderness, before
he gave them the Land of Promise: so that only two which came out of Egypt (
Caleb and Joshua) did live to enter it. But to confute their unbelief, God
wrought many miracles for them in this Wilderness: He caused the Rocks to give
them water: He fed them with Manna from above: Their shoes and clothes did not
wear in forty years. In this Wilderness Moses received from God a Law, by which
they were to be governed: In mount Sinai in flames of fire, with terrible
thunder, God appeared so far to Moses, as to speak to him, and instruct him in
all that he would have him do; He gave him the chief part of his Law in two
Tables of Stone, containing Ten Commandments, engraven thereon by God himself,
(or by Angelical ministration): The rest he instructed him in by word of voice.
Moses was made their Captain, and Aaron their High Priest, and all the Forms of
God's Worship settled, with abundance of Laws for Sacrifices and Ceremonies, to
typifie the Sacrifice and Reign of Christ: Josh. per tot. Judge.
When Moses and Aaron were dead in the Wilderness, God chose Joshua, Moses his
Servant, to be their Captain, who led them into Canaan, and miraculously
conquered all the inhabitants, and settled Israel in possession of the Land.
There they long remained under the government of a Chieftain, called a Judge,
successively chosen by God himself: 1 Samuel
Till at last they mutinied against that form of Government, and desired a King
like other Nations: Whereupon God gave them a bad King in displeasure; but next
him he chose David, a King of great and exemplary holiness, in whom God
delighted, and made his Kingdom hereditary. To David he gave a Son of
extraordinary wisdom, who by God's appointment built the famous Temple at
Jerusalem, yet did this Solomon, by the temptation of his Wives, to gratify
them, set up Idolatry also in the land; 1 King. 2 King. and 1 Chronicles. and 2 Chronicles.
which so provoked God, that he resolved to rend ten Tribes of the twelve out
of his sons hand; which accordingly was done, and they revolted and chose a
King of their own, and only the Tribes of Juda and Benjamin adhered to the
posterity of Solomon. The wise Sentences of Solomon, and the Psalms of David,
are here inserted in the Bible. The Reigns of the Kings of Juda and Israel are
afterward described; the wickedness and idolatry of most of their successive
Kings and people; till God being so much provoked by them, gave them up into
Captivity: Here is also inserted many Books of the Prophesies of those Prophets
which God sent from time to time, to call them from their sins, and warn them
of his foretold judgments: And, lastly, Ezra and Nehem.
here is contained some of the History of their state in Captivity, and the
return of the Jews by the favor of Cyrus; where in a tributary state they
remained in expectation of the promised Messiah, or Christ. Thus far is the
History of the Old Testament.

The Jews being too sensible of their Captivities and Tributes, and too
desirous of Temporal Greatness and Dominion, expected that the Messiah should
restore their Kingdom to its ancient splendor, and should subdue the Gentile
Nations to them: And to this sense they expounded all those passages in their
Prophets, which were spoken and meant of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, as
the Savior of Souls: which prejudiced them against the Messiah when he came:
so that though they looked and longed for his coming, yet when he came they
knew him not to be the Christ, but hated him and persecuted him, as the
Prophets had foretold: The fullness of time being come, Matthew. 1, 2, etc. Luke
1, 2; etc.
in which God would send the Promised Redeemer, the Eternal Wisdom and Word of
God, the Second in the Trinity, assumed a Humane Soul and Body, and was
conceived in the womb of a Virgin, by the holy Spirit of God, without man's
concurrence. His Birth was celebrated by Prophesies, and Apparitions, and
applause of Angels, and other Wonders: A Star appearing over the place, led
some Astronomers out of the East to worship him in the Cradle: Which Herod the
King being informed of, and that they called him the King of the Jews, he
caused all the Infants in that country to be killed, that he might not escape:
But by the warning of an Angel, Jesus was carried into Egypt, where he remained
till the death of Herod. At twelve years old he disputed with the Doctors in
the Temple: In this time rose a Prophet called John, who told them, that the
Kingdom of the Messiah was at hand, and called the people to Repentance, that
they might be prepared for him, and baptized all that professed Repentance into
the present expectation of the Savior: About the thirtieth year of his age,
Vid. Procli Homiliam de Nativ. Christi, interpret. Peltano.
Jesus resolved to enter upon the solemn performance of his undertaken work:
And, first, He went to John to be baptized by him, (the Captains being to wear
the same Colors with the Soldiers.) When John had baptized him, he declared
him to be the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: and when he
was baptized and prayed, the Heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended
in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, and a voice came from Heaven which
said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased: The first thing that
Jesus did after his Baptism, was, when he had fasted forty days and nights, to
expose himself to the utmost of Satan's temptations, who thereupon did diverse
ways assault him; Matthew. 4. Luke 4.
But Jesus perfectly overcame the Tempter, who had overcome the first Man Adam;
Thenceforth he preached the glad tidings of Salvation; and called men to
repentance, and choosing Twelve to be more constantly with him than the rest,
and to be witnesses of his works and doctrine, he revealed the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God: He went up and down with them teaching the people, and working
miracles to confirm his doctrine: He told them, that he was sent from God, to
reveal his will to lost mankind for their recovery, and to bring them to a
fuller knowledge of the unseen world, and the way thereto; and to be a Mediator
and Reconciler between God and Man, and to lay down his life as a Sacrifice for
sin; and that he would rise again from the dead the third day; and in the mean
time, to fulfill all righteousness, and give man an example of a perfect life:
Which accordingly he did: He never sinned in thought, word or deed: He chose a
poor inferior condition of life, to teach men by his example, to contemn the
wealth and honors of this world, in comparison of the favor of God, and the
hopes of immortality. He suffered patiently all indignities from men: He went
up and down as the living Image of Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness; doing
Miracles to manifest his Power, and opening the doctrine of God to manifest his
Wisdom, and healing men's bodies, and seeking the salvation of their souls, to
manifest his Goodness and his Love. Without any means, by his bare command, he
immediately cured Fevers, Palsies, and all diseases, cast out Devils, and
raised the dead to life again; and so open, uncontroled and numerous were his
Miracles, as that all men might see, that the Omnipotent God did thereby bear
witness to his Word. Yet did not the greatest part of the Jews believe in him,
for all these Miracles, because he came not in worldly pomp to restore their
Kingdom, and subdue the world: but they blasphemed his very Miracles, and said,
He did them by the power of the Devil: And fearing lest his fame should bring
envy and danger upon them from the Romans, who ruled over them, they were his
most malicious persecutors themselves: The doctrine which he preached was not
the unnecessary curiosities of Philosophy, nor the subservient Arts and
Sciences, which natural light reveals, and which natural men can sufficiently
teach: But it was to teach men to know God, and to know themselves, their sin
and danger, and how to be reconciled to God, and pardoned, and sanctified, and
saved: How to live in holiness to God, and in love and righteousness to men,
and in special amity and unity among themselves, (who are his disciples): How
to mortify sin, and to contemn the wealth and honors of the world, and to
deny the flesh its hurtful desires and lusts; and how to suffer any thing that
we shall be called to, for obedience to God, and the hopes of Heaven: To tell
us what shall be after death; how all men shall be judged, and what shall
become both of soul and body to everlasting: But his great work was, by the
great demonstrations of the Goodness and Love of God to lost mankind, (in their
free pardon and offered salvation) to win up men's hearts to the love of God,
and to raise their hopes and desires up to that blessed life, where they shall
see his glory, and love him, and be beloved by him for ever. At last, when he
had finished the work of his ministration in the flesh, he told his Disciples
of his approaching Suffering and Resurrection, and instituted the Sacrament of
his Body and Blood, in Bread and Wine, which he commands them to use for the
renewing of their covenant with him, and remembrance of him, Vid. Microlog. de
Eccles. observe. cap. 23.
and for the maintaining and signifying their communion with him and with each
other. After this, (his time being come) the Jews apprehended him, and though
upon a word of his mouth (to show his power) they fell all to the ground; yet
did they rise again and lay hands on him, and brought him before Pilate the
Roman Governor; and vehemently urged him to crucify him, contrary to his own
mind and conscience: They accused him of blasphemy, for saying he was the Son
of God; and of impiety, for saying, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will re-build it, (he meant his Body): and of treason against Caesar, for
calling himself a King, (though he told them that his Kingdom was not worldly,
but spiritual.) Hereupon they condemned him, and clothed him in purple like a
King in scorn, and set a Crown of thorns on his head, and put a Reed for a
Scepter into his hand, and led him about to be a derision: They covered his
eyes, and smote him, and buffeted him, and bid him tell who struck him: At last
they nailed him upon a Cross, and put him to open shame and death, betwixt two
Malefactors, (of whom, one of them reviled him, and the other believed on him):
they gave him gall and vinegar to drink: The Soldiers pierced his side with a
Spear, when he was dead. All his Disciples forsook him and fled; Peter having
before denied thrice that ever he knew him, when he was in danger. When he was
dead, the earth trembled, the rocks and the vail of the Temple rent, and
darkness was upon the earth, though their was no natural Eclipse; which made
the Captain of the Soldiers say, Verily this was the Son of God. When he was
taken down from the Cross, and laid in a stone-Sepulchre, they set a guard of
Soldiers to watch the grave, having a stone upon it, which they sealed;
because he had foretold them that he would rise again: All this is written by
the four Evangelists.
On the morning of the third day, being the first day of the week, an Angel
terrified the Soldiers, and rolled away the stone, and sat upon it; and when
his Disciples came, they found that Jesus was not there: And the Angel told
them, that he was risen, and would appear to them: Accordingly he often appeared
to them, sometimes as they walked by the way, and once as they were fishing,
but usually when they were assembled together: Thomas, who was one of them,
being absent at his first appearance to the rest, told them he would not
believe it, unless he saw the print of the nails, and might put his finger into
his wounded side: The next first day of the week, when they were assembled,
Jesus appeared to them, (the doors being shut) and called Thomas, and bad him
put his fingers into his side, and view the prints of the nails in his hands
and feet, and not be faithless but believing: After this he often appeared to
them, and once to above five hundred brethren at once: He earnestly pressed Peter
to show the love that he bare to himself, by the feeding of his flock: He
instructed his Apostles in the matters of their employment: He gave them
Commission to go into all the world, and preach the Gospel, and gave them the
tenor of the New Covenant of Grace, and made them the Rulers of his Church,
requiring them by Baptism solemnly to enter all into his Covenant, who consent
to the terms of it, and to assure them of pardon by his Blood, and of salvation
if they persevere: He required them to teach his Disciples to observe all
things which he had commanded them, and promised them that he would be with
them (by his Spirit, and grace, and powerful defense) to the end of the world.
And when he had been seen of them forty days, speaking of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God, being assembled with them, he commanded them not to
depart from Jerusalem, but wait till the holy Spirit came down upon them, which
he had promised them: But they, being tainted with some of the worldly
expectations of the Jews, and thinking that he who could rise from the dead,
would sure now make himself and his followers glorious in the world, began to
ask him whether he would at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel: But he
answered them, Act. 1.
[It is not for you to know the times or seasons which the Father has put in
his own power: But ye shall receive power, after that the holy Ghost is come
upon you, and ye shall be witnesses to me both at Jerusalem, and in all Judea
and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth.] And when he had said
this, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
sight: And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, two men
stood by them in white apparel, and said, Why gaze ye up into Heaven? This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as
ye have seen him go into Heaven. Upon this they returned to Jerusalem, and
continued together, Act. 2.
till ten days after: as they were all together, (both the Apostles and all the
rest of the Disciples) suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing
mighty wind, and the likeness of fiery cloven tongues sat on them all, and
they were filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak in other languages, as
the Spirit gave them utterance: By this they were enabled both to preach to
people of several languages, and to work other miracles to confirm their
doctrine; so that from this time forward, the holy Spirit which Christ sent
down upon Believers, was his great Witness and Agent in the world; and procured
the belief and entertainment of the Gospel wheresoever it came: For by this
extraordinary reception of the Spirit, the Apostles themselves were much
fullier instructed in the doctrine of salvation than they were before,
notwithstanding their long converse with Christ in person; (it being his
pleasure to illuminate them by supernatural infusion, that it might appear to
be no contrived design to deceive the world.) And they were enabled to preach
the word with power, and by this Spirit were infallibly guided in the
performance of the work of their Commissions, to settle Christ's Church in a
holy order, and to leave on record the doctrine which he had commanded them to
teach: Also they themselves did heal the sick, and cast out devils, and
prophecy, and by the laying on of their hands, the same holy Spirit was
ordinarily given to others that believed: so that Christians had all one gift
or other of that Spirit, by which they convinced and converted a great part of
the world in a short time: and all that were sincere, had the gift of
sanctification, and were regenerate by the Spirit, as well as by Baptismal
water, and had the love of God shed abroad in their hearts, by the holy Ghost
which was given them: A holy and heavenly mind and life, with mortification,
contempt of the world, self-denial, patience, and love to one another and to
all men, was the constant badge of all Christ's followers: Act. 2* and 3.
The first Sermon that Peter preached did convert three thousand of those
sinful Jews that had crucified Christ: And after that, many thousands of them
more were converted: One of their bloody persecutors, ( Saul a Pharisee) that
had been one of the murderers of the first Martyr Stephen, Act. 9.
and had haled many of them to prisons; as he was going on this business, was
struck down by the highway, a light from Heaven shining round about him, and a
voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art
thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks: And he trembling and astonished said, Lord,
what will thou have me to do? And the Lord said, Arise, and go into the City,
and it shall be told thee what thou must do: And the men that journeyed with
him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man: And so Saul was led
blind to Damascus, Act. per tot.
where one Ananias had a vision, commanding him to Baptize him, and his eyes
were opened: This Convert called Paul, did hence-forward preach the Gospel of
Christ, from Country to Country, in Syria, in Asia, at Rome, and a great part
of the world, in mavelous unwearied labors and sufferings, abuses and
imprisonments, converting multitudes, and planting Churches in many great
Cities and Countries, and working abundance of miracles where he went. His
History is laid down in part of the New Testament: There are also many of his
Epistles, (to Rome, to Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Coloss,
Thessalonica, to Timothy, to Titus, and to Philemon, and the Hebrews (as is
supposed) There are also the Epistles of Peter, James, John and Jude, with the
Revelation of John, containing many mysterious Prophesies. An Eunuch who was of
great power under the Queen of Ethiopia, was converted by Philip, and carried
the Gospel into his Country. The rest of the Apostles and other Disciples
carried it abroad a great part of the world, especially in the Roman Empire:
and though every where they met with opposition and persecution, yet by the
power of the holy Ghost, appearing in their Holiness, Languages and Miracles,
they prevailed and planted abundance of Churches, of which the most populous
were at Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome and Alexandria: And though they were all
dispersed abroad the world, and out of the reach of mutual converse, yet did
they never disagree in their Doctrine, in the smallest point, but proceeded
through sufferings in Unity and Holiness, in the work of saving Souls, till
most of them were put to death for the sake of Christ; having left the Churches
under the Government of their several Pastors, according to the will of Christ.



This is the abstract of the History of the holy Scriptures.

. 14. The sum of the Doctrine of Christianity is contained in these Articles
following, consisting of three general Heads: I. Things to be known and
believed. II. Things to be willed, and desired, and hoped. III. Things to be
done.

1 Cor. 8.4, 6. Matthew. 28.19 1 John 5.7. 1 Timothy 1.17. Ps. 139.7, 8, 9. and
147.5. Isa. 40.17. 1 Timothy 6.16. Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. Neh. 9.6. Rev. 4.8. and
15.3. Exodus 34.6, 7. Ezekiel. 18.4. Ps 47.7. and 119.68. and 145.9.
I. 1. There is one only GOD in Essence, in Three Essential Principles, POWER,
UNDERSTANDING and WILL; or OMNIPOTENCY, OMNISCIENCE and GOODNESS; in Three
Subsistences or Persons, the FATHER, the SON and the HOLY SPIRIT, who is a Mind
or Spirit, and therefore is most Simple, Incorruptible, Immortal, Impassionate,
Invisible, Intactible, etc. and is Indivisible, Eternal, Immense, Necessary,
Independent, Self-sufficient, Immutable, Absolute and Infinite in all
Perfections: The Principal Efficient, Dirigent and Final Cause of all the
world: The CREATOR of all, and therefore our Absolute OWNER, Prove. 16.4. Genesis
1.26. Deuteronomy. 30.19. Col. 3.10. Eccles. 7.29. Psalm. 8.5, 6. Mar. 12 30, 33. Deuteronomy.
6.5. and 10.12. and 1.32. Genesis 2.16, 17. Romans 6.23.

See an Exposition of the Creed briefly in Isidor. de Eccles. Offic. l. 2. c.
23. p. 222.

Of the Original of the Creed, see Vossi^s de Symbol. and Parker de Descensu ad
Inferos. Of the several Creeds of the Eastern and Western Churches, see Usher,
de Symbolis.


or Supreme RULER, and our Total BENEFACTOR, and CHIEF GOOD and END.

2. GOD made Man for himself; not to supply any want of his own, but for the
pleasing of his own Will and Love, in the Glory of his Perfections shining
forth in his works: In his own Image; that is, with Vital Power, Understanding
and Free Will, Able, Wise and Good; with Dominion over the Inferior Creatures,
as being in subordination to God their OWNER, their GOVERNOR and their
BENEFACTOR and END. And he bound him by the Law of his Nature to adhere to GOD
his MAKER; by Resignation, Devotion and Submission to him as his OWNER, by
Believing, Honoring and Obeying him as his RULER; and by Loving him, Trusting
and Seeking him, Delighting in him, Thanksgiving to him, and Praising him, as
his Grand BENEFACTOR, chief Good, and ultimate end, to exercise Charity and
Justice to each other; and to Govern all his inferior faculties by Reason
according to his Makers will, that he so might please him, and be Happy in his
Love: And, to try him, he particularly forbad him to eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, upon pain of death.

3. Genesis 3. Joh. 8.44. Romans 5.12.17, 18. Genesis 3.16, 17. Romans 3.9, 19, 23. and
6.23. Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 2.2. Heb. 2.14 Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12. Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 5.
Isa. 48.4. Job 14.4. and 25.4. Genesis 6.5. Hos. 11.7. Romans 5.18, 19. Romans 5.6,
10. Act. 4.12.
Man being tempted by Satan to break this Law of God, did believe the Tempter
who promised him impunity, and advancement in Knowledge, and who accused God as
false in his threatening, and as envying Man this great advancement: And so by
wilful sinning against him, he fell from God and his uprightness and
happiness, under the displeasure of God, the penalty of his Law, and the power
of Satan: And hence we are all conceived in sin, averse to good, and prone to
evil, and condemnation is passed upon all, and no mere Creature is able to
deliver us.

4. God so loved the World, Joh* 3.16, 17. and 4.42. 1 John 2.2. Romans 9.5. Joh.
10.30. 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 2.14, 16. Luke 1.27, 31, 35. Mat. 1.20, 21. Heb. 4.15.
Mat. 4. Heb. 7.26. Mat. 3.15. Act. 2.22. Heb. 2.3, 4. Heb. 9.26. and 10.12. 1 Timothy 2.6. Ephesians. 2.16. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Luke 23.43. Psalm. 16.10. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19.
2 Timothy 1.10. Heb. 2.14. Act. ^2.24, 9. and 3.21. Romans 9.5. Heb. 7.24. Act 2.36.
and 10.36. Heb. 8.2. and 10.21. Act. 3.23. and 5.31. Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.34. Ephesians.
4.8, 11, 12, 13. Romans 8.9, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
that he gave his only SON to be their REDEEMER, who being the Eternal WISDOM
and WORD of God, and so truly GOD and one in Essence with the FATHER, did
assume our Nature, and became Man, being conceived by the HOLY SPIRIT in the
Virgin Mary, and born of her, and called JESUS CHRIST: who being Holy and
without all sin, did conquer the Tempter and the World, fulfilling all
righteousness; He enacted and preached the Law or Covenant of Grace, confirming
his Doctrine by abundant uncontrolled Miracles; contemning the World, he
exposed himself to the malice and fury, and contempt of sinners, and gave up
himself a Sacrifice for our sins, and a Ransom for us, in suffering death on a
Cross, to reconcile us to God: He was buried, and went in Soul to the Souls
departed: And the third day he rose again, having conquered death; And after
forty days having instructed and authorized his Apostles in their Office, he
ascended up into Heaven in their sight; where he remains Glorified, and is
Lord of all; the chief Priest, and Prophet, and King of his Church, interceding
for us, teaching and governing us, by his Spirit, Ministers and Word.

5. The New Law and Covenant which Christ has procured, made and sealed (by
his Blood, Heb. 9.15. Joh 1.12. and 3.16. Act. 26.18. Gal. 5.6. Act. 11.13. and
3.19. and 20.21. Romans 8.1.13. Mar. 4.12. Romans 8 16, 17. Gal. 4.6. Joh. 3.6. 1
Cor. 6.17. Romans 8.9. Ephesians. 2.18.22 Rev. 2. and 3. Col. 1.22, 23. Heb. 4.1. Mar.
16.16. Joh. 3.3, 5.36. Heb. 12.14. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.9. and 2.12. Luke 13.3. Mat.
28.19. Mar. 16.15, 16. 2 Cor. 5.19. Joh. 6.37. and 10 28, 29. Joh. 14.26. and
15.26. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 16.13. Ephesians. 3.3, 5.
and 2.20. Isa. 8.20. Rev. 22.18, 19. 1 Timothy 6.14. Luke 16.29, 31. Act. 2.22.
and 5.32. and 19.11, 19. Heb. 2.3, 4. Gal. 3.1, 2, 3. Joh. 14.12. and 3.2. 1
Cor. 14. Act. 26.17, 18. Romans 8.9, 10, 11. Act. 16.14. Joh. 6.44. Ezekiel. 36.26.
Gal. 5.22. Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32. and 3.17. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 27. Romans
3.24. and 4.24. Joh. 1.12. Tit. 2.14. Romans 5.5. Mat. 10.37. 1 Cor. 6 11. Luke
1.75. 1 John 3.14. 1 Pet. 1.22. Act. 24.2. Gal. 5.17, 24. 1 John 2.15. 1 Cor.
1.7. 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. Tit. 1.2. and 3.7. Luke 23.43. and 16.22. 2 Cor. 5.1, 8.
Phil. 1.23. 2 Pet. 3.19. Luke 16.28. Act. 1.11.
his Sacraments, and his Spirit) is this; [That to all them who by true
Repentance and Faith, do forsake the Flesh, the World and the Devil, and give
up themselves to God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, their Creator, Redeemer
and Sanctifier, he will give Himself in these Relations, and take them as his
reconciled Children, pardoning their sins, and giving them his grace, and title
to Everlasting Happiness, and will glorify all that thus persevere: But will
condemn the unbelievers, impenitent, and ungodly, to everlasting punishment.]
This Covenant he has commanded his Ministers to proclaim and offer to all the
World, and to baptize all that consent thereunto, to invest them Sacramentally
in all these benefits, and enter them into his holy Catholic Church.

6. The Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, did first inspire
and guide the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, that they might truly and
fully reveal the Doctrine of Christ, and deliver it in Scripture to the Church,
as the Rule of our Faith and Life; and by abundance of evident, uncontrolled
Miracles, and gifts, to be the great witness of Christ, and of the truth of his
holy Word.

7. Where the Gospel is made known, the HOLY SPIRIT does by it illuminate the
minds of such as shall be saved, and opening and softening their hearts, does
draw them to believe in Christ, and turns them from the power of Satan unto
God: Whereupon they are joined to Christ the Head, and into the Holy Catholic
Church which is his Body, consisting of all true Believers, and are freely
justified and made the Sons of God, and a sanctified peculiar people unto him,
and do Love him above all, and serve him sincerely in holiness and
righteousness, loving and desiring the Communion of Saints, overcoming the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and living in Hope of the coming of Christ,
and of Everlasting life.

8. At death the Souls of the Justified go to Happiness with Christ, and the
Souls of the wicked to misery: And at the end of this World, the Lord Jesus
Christ will come again, and will raise the Bodies of all men from the dead, and
will judge all the World according to the good or evil which they have done: 1
Cor. 15. Joh. 5.^2, 29. Mat. 25. 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat. 25. and 13.41, 42, 43. 2 Timothy 4.8, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9, 10. and 2.12. Joh. 17.24.
And the righteous shall go into Everlasting Life, where they shall see Gods
Glory, and being perfected in Holiness, shall love and praise and please him
perfectly, and be loved by him for evermore; and the Wicked shall go into
Everlasting punishment with the Devil.

II. According to this Belief we do deliberately and seriously by unfeigned
consent of Will, take this One God, Luke 15.21. Act. 2.37. and 3.19. Romans 8.13.
Luke 14.33. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Exodus 20.3. Deuteronomy. 26.17. Josh. 24.16, 26. 2 Cor. 8.5.
Joh. 17.3. 1 Cor. 8.6. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1 John 1 3. Ephesians. 4.5, 6. Joh. 14.6.
Luke 5.14. and 14.26. Act. 9.6. Romans 6.13, 16. Luke 19.27. Joh. 3.10. Mat.
28.19. Ephesians. 2.18, 22. and 1.13, 14, 18. Romans 8.9, 13, 16, 26. 1 Cor. 2.10. Ephesians*
2.18.22. and 3.5, 16. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Isa. 44.3, 4, 5. Romans 15.6. See the
Lords Prayer.
the infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
for our only God, our reconciled Father, our Savior and our Sanctifyer, and
resolvedly give up our selves to him accordingly; entering into his Church
under the hands of his Ministers, by the solemnization of this Covenant in the
Sacrament of Baptism. And in prosecution of this Covenant, we proceed to stir
up our DESIRES by daily PRAYER to God in the Name of Christ, by the help of the
Holy Spirit, in the order following: 1. We desire the glorifying and hallowing
of the Name of God, that he may be known, and loved, and honored by the World,
and may be well-pleased in us, and we may delight in Him which is our ultimate
end. 2. That his Kingdom of Grace may be enlarged, and his Kingdom of Glory as
to the Perfected Church of the sanctified, may come: That Mankind may more
universally subject themselves to God their Creator and Redeemer, and be saved
by him. 3. That this Earth which is grown too like to Hell, may be made liker
to the Holy ones in Heaven, by a holy conformity to Gods Will, and Obedience to
all his Laws, denying and mortifying their own fleshly desires, wills and
minds. 4. That our Natures may have necessary support, protection and provision
in our daily service of God, and passage through this World, with which we
ought to be content. 5. That all our sins may be forgiven us through our
Redeemer, as we our selves are ready to pardon wrongs. 6. That we may be kept
from Temptations, and delivered from sin and misery, from Satan, from wicked
men, and from our selves: Concluding our Prayers with the joyful Praises of
God, our Heavenly Father, acknowledging his Kingdom, Power, and Glory for ever.

III. The Laws of Christian PRACTICE are these: 1. The Ten Commandments.

Jud. 21. Gal. 5.22. Luke 10.27. 1 Timothy 4.7. Isa. 64.7. Act. 24.16. Col. 3.5.
Romans 8.13. Heb. 3.11, 13. Mat. 15.18, 19. Luke 12.15. Romans 13.13, 14. 1 Cor.
3.18. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.3* 4. Psalm. 4.4. and 104.34. and 1.2.
and 119.97, 99. Genesis 24.63. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Psalm. 90.12. Luke 12.36. 2 Pet.
3.11.12. Luke 21.36. Psalm. 141.3. 1 Cor. 10.12. Psalm. 39.1. Prove. 4.23. Ephesians.
6.10, 19. 1 Pet. 5.9. Jam. 4.7. Psalm. 34.1. and 145.2. 1 Thessalonians. 3.17. Phil. 4.6.

Joh. 4.23, 24. Mat. 15.9. Isa. 1.13. Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Jer. 4.2. and
12.16. Jam. 5.12. Act. 2.42. and 6.2. and 20 7.28.30, 31, 36. 1 Cor. 14.16, 26.
Jam. 5.14. Phil. 1.4. 1 Cor. 11.24. and 10.16. Heb. 7.7. Rev. 1.10. Act. 20.7.
1 Cor. 16.2.

Ephesians. 6.4, 9. Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. Dan. 6.10. Act. 10.30. Psalm. 101. 1 Samuel 2.23,
29. Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.15. Col. 3.20, 22. Deuteronomy. 21.18.


That our Souls do firmly adhere to God, our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifyer,
by Faith, Love, Confidence, and Delight; that we seek him by desire, obedience
and hope; meditating on himself, his word and works of Creation, Redemption and
Sanctification, of Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell: exercising Repentance and
mortifying sin, especially atheism, unbelief, and unholiness, hardness of
heart, disobedience and unthankfulness, pride, worldliness and flesh-pleasing:
Examining our hearts; about our Graces, our Duties, and our sins: Watchfully
governing our thoughts, affections, passions, senses, appetites, words and
outward actions: Resisting temptations; and serving God with all our faculties,
and glorifying him in our Hearts, our Speeches, and our Lives.

2. That we worship God according to his Holiness, and his Word, in Spirit and
Truth, and not with Fopperies and Imagery according to our own devices, which
may dishonor him, and lead us to Idolatry.

3. That we ever use his Name with special Reverence; especially in appealing
to him by an Oath; abhorring profaneness, perjury, and breach of Vows and
Covenants to God.

4. That we meet in Holy Assemblies for his more solemn Worship; where the
Pastors teach his Word to their Flocks, and lead them in Prayer and Praise to
God, administer the Sacrament of Communion, and are the Guides of the Church in
Holy things; whom the people must hear, obey and honor; especially the Lords
Day must be thus spent in Holiness.

5. That Parents educate their Children in the Knowledge and Fear of God, and
in obedience of his Laws; and that Princes, Masters and all Superiors govern
in Holiness and Justice, for the glory of God, and the common good, according
to his Laws: And that Children love, honor and obey their Parents, and all
Subjects their Rulers, in due subordination unto God.

Math. 5.21, 22, 23, 25, 38, 39.
6. That we do nothing against our Neighbors Life or Bodily welfare, but
carefully preserve it as our own.

7. That no man defile his Neighbors wife, Mat. 5.27, 28, 29, 30.
nor commit Fornication; but preserve our own and others Chastity in thought,
word and deed.

8. That we wrong not another in his Estate, by stealing, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Ephesians.
4.28.
fraud, or any other means; but preserve our Neighbors Estate as our own.

9. That we pervert not Justice by false witness or otherwise; Prove. 19.5, 9.
and 21.28. Romans 13.9. Rev. 16.19. and 24.17. Prove. 17.23. and 31.5. Col. 3.9.
Prove. 12.22. and 6.17. and 13.5.
nor wrong our neighbor in his Name, by slanders, backbiting or reproach: That
we lie not; but speak the truth in love, and preserve our neighbors right and
honor as our own.

10. That we be not selfish, setting up our selves and our own, against our
Neighbor and his good, To. 7.7. and 13.4. Mat. 19.19 and 22.36. Luke 14.22,
23. Jam. 2.8. and 3.13. 1 Cor 13. Mat. 7.12. Ephesians 4 32. Col. 3.13.

1 John 4.16. Romans 13.9. 1 Thessalonians 4 9. 1 Pet. 1.22. and 3 8. and 2.17. Gal.
6.10. Ephesians. 2 10. Tit. 2.14.


desiring to draw from him unto our selves: But that we love our Neighbor as
our selves, desiring his welfare as our own; doing to others as (regularly) we
would have them do to us; forbearing and forgiving one another; loving even our
enemies, and doing good to all, according to our power, both for their Bodies
and their Souls.

This is the Substance of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

. 15. II. The sum or Abstract of the Christian Religion is contained in three
short Forms: The first called, The Creed, containing the matter of the
Christian Belief; The second called, The Lords Prayer, containing the matter of
Christian Desires and hope: The third called, The Law or Decalogue containing
the sum of Moral Duties; which are as follows.

The BELIEF.
1. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; 2. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and
buried, descended to Hades, of which read Bp. Usher in his Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge.

De totis Scripturis, haec breviatim collecta sunt ab Apostolis, ut quia plures
credentium literas nesciunt, vel qui sciunt prae occupationibus seculi
Scripturas lege^e non possunt, haec cord retinentes habeant sibi sufficientem
scientiam salutarem. Isidor. de Eccl. Offic. l. 2. c. 22. page (in Bibl. Patr.)
222.


Hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into Heaven, and
sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: from thence he shall come
again to judge the quick and the dead. 3. I believe in the Holy Ghost; the Holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness of sins, the
Resurrection of the body, and the Life Everlasting.

The LORDS PRAYER.
Our FATHER which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us: And lead
us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power and the Glory; for ever, Amen.

The Ten COMMANDMENTS.
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
God spoke all these words; saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

1. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

2. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the water
under the Earth: Thou shall not vow down thy self to them, nor serve them: For
I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the Fathers
upon the Children to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and
showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4. De die septimo qui inter omnes mortales celebris est, magna apud plerosque
ignorantia est. Hic enim dies qui ab Hebraeis Sabbatum vocatur, Graece siquis
interpretetur, Septimana, dicitur. Hoc nomine mortales omnes diem istum
appellant; at nominis causam nesciunt plerique Theophil. Antioch. ad Autol. li.
1. p. (mihi) 121. in B.P. Gr. L.T. 1.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor and do
all thy work: but the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shall not do any work; thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is
within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the Seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
Seventh day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother; that thy days may be long upon the Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall not kill.

7. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

8. Thou shall not Steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House: thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

. 16. The ten Commandments are summed up by Christ into these two, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul, and might; and Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self.

. 17. These Commandments being first delivered to the Jews, are continued by
Christ, as the sum of the Law of Nature; only instead of Deliverance of the
Jews from Egypt, he has made our Redemption from sin and Satan, which was
thereby typified, to be the fundamental motive; And he has removed the
memorial of the Creation-Rest, from the seventh day-Sabbath, to be kept on the
Lords day, which is the first, with the Commemoration of his Resurrection, and
our Redemption, in the solemn Worship of his holy Assemblies.

. 18. III. The briefest Summary of the Christian Religion, Matthew. 28.19. Romans
8.1. and 6 4 1 Pet. 3.21, 22. Heb. 6.2. Act. 2.38, 41. Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 11.

De modo Baptizandi antiquo vide Walafridum Strabon. de rebus Eccles. cap. 26.
p. (Bibl. Pat.) 691. Et Ivon. Carnol. sermon. de sacram. Neophytorum, p. 767,
768, etc.


containing the Essentials only, is in the Sacramental Covenant of Grace:
Wherein the Penitent Believer, renouncing the Flesh, the World and the Devil,
does solemnly give up himself to God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, as his
only God, his Father, his Savior and his Sanctifier, engaging himself hereby
to a Holy life (of Resignation, Obedience and Love); and receiving the pardon
of all his sins, and title to the further helps of grace, to the favor of God,
and everlasting life: This Covenant is first entered by the Sacrament of
Baptism, and after renewed in our communion with the Church, in the Sacrament
of the Body and Blood of Christ.

So that the Christian Religion is but [Faith in God our Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifyer, producing the hope of Life Everlasting, and possessing us with the
love of God and Man: And all this expressed in the genuine fruits of Patience,
Obedience, and Praise to God, and works of Charity and Justice unto Man.

. 19. That all this Religion might be the better understood, received and
practiced by us, the Word of God, came down into Flesh, Joh. 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.21.
and gave us a perfect Example of it in his most perfect Life; in perfect
holiness and innocence, conquering all temptations, contemning the honors,
riches and pleasures of the World; in perfect patience, and meekness, and
condescension, and in the perfect Love of God and Man.

When perfect Doctrine is seconded by Perfect Exemplariness of Life, there can
be no greater Light set before us, to lead us out of our state of darkness into
the everlasting Light. And had it not been a pattern of holy Power, Wisdom and
Goodness; of Self-denial, Obedience and Love; of Patience, and of Truth and
Prudence, and of contempt of all inferior things, even of Life it self, for
the Love of God, and for Life eternal; it would not have been a full
exemplification of his Doctrine; nor a perfect Revelation of it to the World.
Example brings Doctrine near our Senses, and thereby makes it more clear and
powerful.

Joh. 3:5, 6. and 7.38, 39. Gal. 4.6. and 5.18, 25. Romans 8.9, 13. 2 Cor. 3.3. 1
Cor. 6.11. and 2.10, 11. Jer. 31.33. Psalm. 1.2. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 John 4.7. and
5.4, 18.
. 20. It is the undertaken Office of Jesus Christ, to send the Holy Spirit into
Believers minds, and to write out the substance of this Law upon their hearts,
and give them such holy and heavenly inclinations, that it may become as it
were a Natural Law unto them, and they obey it with love, facility and delight
(though not in perfection till they arrive at the state of Perfection.)

So much to show WHAT the Christian Religion is.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nature and Properties of the Christian Religion.
HAving understood the matter and words of the Christian Religion, before I
proceeded any further, Nihil est ad defendendum Puritate tutius: nihil ad
dicendum Veritate facilius. inq. Ambros.
I thought it meet to pass a judgment upon the nature, temperament,
constitution and properties of it. And therein I found that which must needs be
a great preparative to belief.

. 1. And first, I found, that it is a most holy and spiritual Religion,
resolved into the most excellent Principles and Ends, glorifying God, and
humbling man, and teaching us the most divine and heavenly life, in the love
and patient service of our Creator.

1. It is most Holy, for it calls us up entirely unto God, Nulla major ad
amorem invitatio quam praevenire amantem: and nimis durus est animus, qui, si
delectionem nolebat impendere, nolit rependere. August. de Catech. rud.

In eo quod amatur, aut non laboratur, aut labor amatur. August. de san. Vid.

Ad Divos adeunto cast: pietatem adhibento, opes amovento: qui secus faxit,
Deus ipse vindex erit. Leges Romans in Cic. de Leg. 2. p. 237. Significat
probitatem Deo gratam esse, sumptum esse removendum. Ib p. 239.


and consists in our absolute dedication and devotedness to him. 2. It is
most Spiritual, leading us from things carnal and terrene; and being
principally about the government of the Soul; and placing all our felicity in
things spiritual, and not in fleshly pleasures with the Epicureans and
Mahometans: It teaches us to worship God in a spiritual manner, and not either
irrationally, toyishly, or irreverently: And it directs our lives to a daily
converse with God in holiness. 3. The Principles of it are the three
Essentialities of God in Unity, viz. the Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness;
and the three grand Relations of God to Man, as founded in his three most
famous works, viz, as our Creator, our Redeemer, and our Regenerater or
Sanctifier; and the three great Relations arising from Creation, and also from
Redemption, viz. as he is our Owner, our Ruler and our Benefactor or chiefest
Good and End. 4. The Ends of the Christian Religion, I find are proximately the
saving of man from Satan, and the Justice of God; the sanctifying them to God,
and purifying them from sin, the pardon of their sins, and the everlasting
happiness of their Souls, in the pleasing and fruition of God for ever. In a
word, it is but the redeeming us from our carnal self, the world, and the
devil, to the love and service of our Creator. 5. Nothing can be spoken more
honorably of God in all his perfections, in the language of poor mortals, than
what the Christian Religion speaks of him. 6. And no Religion so much
humbles man, by opening the malignity both of his original and actual sin, and
declaring the displeasure of God against it. 7. It teaches us who once lived
as without God in the world, to live wholly unto God, Christianus nemo recte
dicitur, nisi qui Christo moribus, prout valet, coequatur. Maxim.

Christiani nomen frustra sortitur, qui Christum minime imitatur: Quid enim
tibi prodest vocari quod non es, and nomen usurpare alienum? sed si Christianum
te esse delectat, quae Christian tatis sunt gere, and merito tibi Christiani
nomen assume. August. de vita Christiani.

Ille vere Christianus est, qui omnibus misericordiam facit, qui nulla omnino
movetur injuria; qui alienum dolorem tanquam propium sentit; cujus mensam
pauper non ignorant; qui coram hominibus inglorius habetur, ut coram Deo and
Angeli glorietur: qui terrena contemnit, ut possit habere coelestia; qui
opprimi pauperem se praesente non patitur, qui miseris subvenit, etc. August.
de vita Christ.


and to make nothing of all the world in comparison of him. 8. And it teaches
us to live upon the hopes of heaven, and fetch our motives and our comforts
from it.

. 2. I find that the Christian Religion is the most pure, and clean, and
utterly opposite to all that is evil.

There is no virtue which it commends not, nor duty which it commands not,
nor vice which it condemns not, nor sin which it forbids not.

The chief thing in it which occasioneth the rebellion and displeasure of the
world against it, is the purity and goodness of it, which is contrary to their
sensual nature, and as Physic to their licentious lives: would it indulge
their vices, and give them leave to sin, they could endure it.

. 3. Particularly it most vehemently condemns the grand vices of Pride,
Worldliness, and Sensuality, and all their polluting and pernicious fruits.

1. No Religion does so much to teach men Humility, and make Pride appear an
odious thing. It opens the malignity of it, as it lifts up the mind against
God or Man: it condemns it as Satan's image: it gives us a multitude of
humbling precepts and motives, and secondeth them all with the strangest
example of condescension and lowliness in Christ that was ever presented to the
view of man. Whereas I find even in the famousest of the Roman Heathens, that a
great deal of pride was taken for a virtue, and men were instructed and
exhorted to be proud, under pretense of maintaining and vindicating their
honor; and true Humility was taken for disgraceful baseness, and men were
driven from it by the scorn, not only of the vulgar, but of Philosophers
themselves.

2. And there is no Religion that is fitted so much to the destruction of
Worldliness, or of the love of Riches, as Christianity is: Omnis creatura cum
bona sit, and been potest amari, and male: Been scilicet ordine constituto;
male ordine perturbato. August de Civet. Dei.

Omnium malorum affectuum principium est Philautia; finis autem superbia:
Philautia, amor est. quo corpus complectimur, rationi non consentaneus. Hanc
qui amp taver^t, ead^m opera, omnes affectus ex ea orient, abscidit Maxim. de
Charitat.


for it teaches men most effectually the vanity of the world; it appoints
them a holy life, so hateful to worldly men, as will occasion them to feel the
vexation of the world; it opens to them the hopes of a life so much better,
as may teach them to take all the wealth and glory of this world for a shadow,
a feather, or a dream. It condemns worldly love, as the sin inconsistent with
the love of God, and the certain mark of a drossy unsanctified miserable soul.
It sets before us such an example of Christ, as must needs shame worldliness
with all true believers.

3. And for Sensuality, it opens the shame of its beastiality, and makes the
carnal mind and life to be enmity to God, and the contrary to that spiritual
mind and life, which is the property of all that shall be saved: It strictly
and vehemently condemns all gluttony and excess of drink; all ryotting and
time-wasting needless sports; all fornication, and ribald talk, and wanton
carriage, words or thoughts: Whereas I find among Heathens and Mahometans, that
inordinate sensuality was much indulged: excess of eating and drinking was made
a matter of no great blame: time-wasting Plays were as little accused, as if
men had no greater matter to do in the world, than to pass away time in some
sensual or fantastical delight: either by fornication, or many wives at once,
their lust was gratified; and so their minds were debased, polluted, and called
down and made unfit for spiritual contemplation and a holy life. From whence no
doubt it came to pass, that they were so dark about things spiritual and
divine, and so overspread with errors about many plain and necessary things.

. 4. There is no Religion which so notably detecteth and disgraceth the sin of
SELFISHNESS, nor so effectually teaches SELF-DENIAL, as the Christian Religion
does.

It makes man understand the nature of his corrupt depraved state; that it is
a falling from GOD to SELF: and that his recovery lies in returning from SELF
to GOD. It shows him how selfishness is the principle of divisions, enmity,
wrath, contentions, envy, malice, covetousness, injustice, oppression, wars,
uncharitableness, and all the iniquity of the world. And how self is the grand
enemy of God, and Man, and of the Public good and peace; and contrary to the
love of God and our neighbor, and the Commonwealth. It gives us so many
precepts for self-denial, as no other Religion did ever mention; and such an
example against it in Jesus Christ, as is the astonishment of Men and Angels.
And therefore all other Religions did in vain attempt the true purifying of
heart and life, or the pacifying of the divided minds of men, while they let
alone this sin of selfishness, (or lightly touched it) which is the root and
heart of all the rest.

. 5. No Religion does so much reveal to us the Nature of God, Sic intelligimus
Deum, si possumus, quantum possumus; sine qualitate bonum, sine quantitate
magnum, sine indigentia Creatorem, sine situ praesentem, sine habitu omnia
continentem, sine loco ubique torum, sine tempo^e sempiternum, sine ulla sui
mutatione, mutabilia omnia facientem, nihilque patientem. Quisquis Deum ita
cogitat, etsi nondum potest invenire quid sit, pie tamen cavet, quantum potest,
al quid de eo sentire quod non sit. Aug. de Trinit. l. 5. c. 1.
and his works for Man, and Relations to him, as the Christian Religion does.

And doubtless that is the most excellent doctrine which makes known God most
to man's mind; and that is the best Religion, which brings man nearest to his
Creator, in love and purity. Few of the Heathens knew God in his Unity; and
fewer in the Trinity of his Essential Primalities: many questioned his
particular Providence and Government: they knew not man's relation or duty to
him, while they were distracted with the observance of a multitude of Gods,
they indeed had none. Though God be incomprehensible to us all, yet is there a
great deal of the glory of his perfections, revealed to us in the light of
Christianity, which we may seek in vain with any other sort of men.

. 6. No Religion does so wonderfully open, and magnify, and reconcile God's
Justice and Mercy to Mankind, as Christianity does.

It shows how his Justice is founded in his Holiness, and his governing
Relation: it justifies it by opening the purity of his Nature, the evil of
sin, and the use of punishment to the right government of the world: and it
magnifieth it by opening the dreadfulness and certainty of his penalties, and
the sufferings of our Redeemer when he made himself a Sacrifice for our sins.
By the revelation of justice, sin and misery, it reveals the wonderful
greatness of Gods mercy: it opens those operations and effects of it, which
Heathenism and Mahometanism are utter strangers to: they speak diminutively
both of Mercy and Justice, and cannot tell how to make God merciful, without
making him unjust; nor to make him just, without obscuring the glory of his
mercy: which is peculiarly set forth in the work of Redemption, and the
Covenant of Grace, and promise of everlasting Blessedness.

. 7. The Christian Religion opens many other parts of holy doctrine, which
are unknown to men that learned them not from thence.

Such as the doctrine of the Creation, and the Fall, and of original sin, and of
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, and the right worshipping of God: of
which, mention is made before more distinctly.

. 8. No Religion can be more Charitable; Romans 13.9. 1 Timothy 1.14. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
1 Timothy 1.5, 6. 1 John 4.7, 8. and 2.11, 14, 23.

Sine charitate quomodo quis veram contritionem habere poterit, quomodo ergo
peccatorum remissionem. Aug.

Deus, quia hominem nudum fragilemque formavit, dedit ei praeter caetera hunc
pietatis affectum, ut homo hominem tucatur, diligat, foveat, contraque omnia
pericula and accipiat and praestet auxilium. Summum igitur inter se hominum
vinculum est humanitas; quod qui disruperit, nefarius and parricida
existimandus est. Lactant. Inst. l. 6. c. 10.


for it wholly consists in the love of God and one another, and in the means
to kindle and maintain this love.

The whole Law of Christ is fulfilled in love: even in loving God for himself,
above all; and our neighbors as our selves for the sake of God; yea, our
enemies so far as there is any thing amiable in them. The end of all the
Commandments is love, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and unfeigned
faith. And all Christians are obliged to love each other with a pure heart, and
fervently; yea, to show that love which they profess to Christ himself, by the
loving of one another: How frequently and earnestly is this great duty pressed
by Christ and his Apostles? how great a stress does he lay upon it? He makes
it the evidence of our love to God: He promises salvation to it: He forbids
selfishness, that it may not hinder it: He commands us to live in the
constant expression of it, and to provoke one another to love and to good
works: He has made himself the most matchless and wonderful example of it: He
has told us, that according to men's charity he will judge them at the last
day. How dry and barren are all Religions and Writings that we have ever come
to the knowledge of in the world, in the point of love, and the fruits of love,
in comparison of the Gospel of Jesus Christ?

. 9. I find that the Christian Religion is most for Unity and Peace of any
Religion in the world; most vehemently commanding them, and appointing the
fittest means for the attaining of them.

1. All Christians are commanded to be of one mind, to think the same things,
and speak the same things; and discord and division and contention is earnestly
forbidden them, Tale bonum est bonum pacis, ut in rebus creatis nil gratiosius
soleat audiri, nil delectabilius concupisci, and nil utilius possideri:
Spiritus enim humanus, nunquam vivificat membra nisi suerint unita; sic
spiritus sanctus nunquam vivificat ecclesiae membra, nisi fuerint in pace
unita. Aug. de civ. Dei.

Pax vera est concordiam habere cum moribus probis, and litigare cum vitiis.
Cassian.

Nec inveniri potest forma expressior conversationis angelicae, quam unitas
socialis. Idem. in Psalm.


and condemned, and all occasions which may lead them thereunto. 2. And they
have one Head and Center, one God and Savior, who is their common Governor,
End and Interest, in whom therefore they may all unite: when most others in the
world do show a man no further end than self-preservation; and so while self is
each man's end and interest, there are as many ends as men; and how then is it
possible that such should have any true unity and concord? But to every true
Christian, the pleasing and glorifying of God, and the promoting of his Kingdom
for the salvation of the world, is above all self-interest whatsoever; and
therefore in this they are all united: And though they all seek their own
felicity and salvation, it is only in the seeking of this higher end; which is
finis amantis; sed creaturae amantis creatorem; the end of a lover, which
desires unity, and respects both the lover and the beloved; but it is not
the end of the love of equals, but of the creature to the Creator, who
therefore prefers his beloved before himself in his intentions. So that it
is only this holy centring in God, that can ever make men all of a mind, and
agree the disagreeing world: While Self is every man's end, they will have such
constant contrariety of interests, that it will be impossible for them to
agree; but covetousness, ambition and sensuality will keep them in factions,
contentions and wars continually. Moreover it is Christianity that most urges,
and effectually gives a hearty love to one another, and teaches them to love
their neighbors as themselves, and to do as they would have others to do by
them: and this is the true root and spring of concord. And it is Christianity
which most teaches the forgiving of wrongs, and loving of enemies, and
forbearing that revenge, which Heathens were wont to account an honor. And it
is Christianity which teaches men to contemn all the riches and honors of the
world, which is the bone that worldly dogs do fight for, and the great occasion
of their strife: and it teaches them to mortify all those vices, which feed
men's divisions and contentions. So that if any man live as a Christian, he must
needs be a man of unity and peace. If you say, that the contrary appears in
the practice of Christians; I shall answer that with the rest of the objections
by themselves: I shall only say now, That if this that I have laid down be
certainly the doctrine of Christ, then it is as certain, that the contrary is
contrary to Christianity, and that so far such persons are no Christians: It is
hypocrites that take up the name of Christians for worldly advantage, and are
no Christians indeed, who live thus contrary to the nature and precepts of
Christianity which they profess.

. 10. The Christian Religion is most exactly just, in its Rules and Precepts,
and vehemently condemns all injustice, fraud, persecution and oppression.

What juster Rule can there be than to suit all our actions to the perfect Law
of Primitive Justice, and to do as we would be done by? What more effectual
principle of Justice can there be, than Charity and Self-denial? to love all
men for God, and to account our neighbors welfare as our own? Bring all men
but to love their neighbors as themselves, and they will have little
inclination to cruelty, oppression, fraud, or any other injuries. And when
Heaven is made the reward of Justice and Mercy, and Hell the reward of
Injustice and Cruelty, we have the greatest Motives that humane nature is
capable of.

. 11. Ordo in ecclesia ita statuit, ut alii sint oves, alii vero pastores: ita
ut hi imperent, illi vero obediant: sitque hoc tanquam caput, illud pedes,
illud manus, hoc oculi, illud vero aliud corporis membrum, quo omnia recte
inter se conveniant, commodumque tam ad praefectos, quam ad subditos redunder.
Nazianz. Orde Modest. in Disput.
The Christian Religion is the most excellent Rule for order and government in
the world, and for the peace of Kingdoms and their stability: in that it
prescribes the only method of true Government, and condemns both impiety and
tyranny in the Governors, and all sedition and rebellion in the subjects.

1. It sets Government on the only foundation, (the Authority which men
receive from God) and teaches men to rule as the Officers of the Universal
King, in due subordination to him; for his glory, and according to his Laws;
and lets them know that they have no power but from God, and therefore none
against him; and that they must be judged by him themselves for all their
Government: and that all oppression, tyranny and persecution will be to their
own confusion in the end. 2. It teaches Subjects to honor their Superiors,
and to obey them in all things, in which they disobey not God: and to be
patient under all oppressions; and to avoid all murmurings, tumults and
rebellions, and this for fear of God's condemnation. And certainly these are
the most powerful means for peace; and for the happy order and government of
Societies.

. 12. The Christian Religion greatly condemns all fierceness, and impatience
and discontentedness; and requires a meek and patient frame of mind; and
therefore must needs conduce to the forementioned Unity and Peace.

Simula aequitas est duplex iniquitas. Aug. in Psalm. 23.
. 13. It is wholly for sincerity and uprightness of heart, and greatly
condemns all hypocrisy: It gives Laws for the very disposition of the
mind, and for the government of the secretest thoughts, affections and
actions; and condemeth every sin which the World observes not, or condemns
not.

Duas Civitates duo facient Amores: Jerusalem, facit amor Dei: Babylonem facit
amor seculi: Interroget igitur unusquisque se quid amet, and inveniet unde sit
Civis. August. in Psalm. 64.
. 14. I find, that the Christian Religion is not fitted to any Worldly
designs; but only to the sanctifying of men's hearts and lives, and the saving
of their Souls. Christ did not contrive by dominion or riches, to win the
ungodly multitude to be his admirers, but by holy Precepts and Discipline to
make his Disciples good and happy.

Mahomet took the way of violence, and fleshly baits, and blind obedience, to
bring in the multitude, and to advance a Worldly Kingdom: But Christ goes the
clean contrary way; He calls men to a life of Self-denial, and patient
suffering in the World; he calls them to contemn the riches, honors, and
pleasures of the World; and to forsake all, even life it self for him, and
tells them that they can on no lower terms than these be Disciples. He has
set up a Discipline in his Church, to cast out all Drunkards, Fornicators,
Covetous-persons, Railers, and other such scandalous sinners who are
impenitent; and will have none in his true mystical Church, but such as are
truly holy; nor none in his visible Church, but such as are professed to be so.
He turns away all that come not up to his spiritual and holy terms; and he
casts out all that notoriously violate them, if they do not repent.

Multo facilius invenit Syderum conditorem humilis pietas, quam syderum ordinem
superba curiositas. August. de Eclips.
. 15. The Christian Religion contains all things Necessary to man's happiness,
and takes men off unprofitable speculations; and does not overwhelme the
minds of men, with multitudes of needless things.

It is for the most things unnecessary, as well as uncertain, with which the
Philosophers have troubled the World; They have lost true wisdom in a
Wilderness of fruitless controversies. But Christianity is a Religion to make
men holy and happy, Doctrina Spiritus non curiostatem acuit, sed charitatem
accendit. Bern. in Can^.

O beata regio deliciarum! ad quam suspiro de valle lachrymarum; ubi sapientia
sine ignorantia, ubi memoria sine oblivione, intellectus sine errore, ratio
sine obscuritate fulgeb. t. Bernard.


and therefore it contains these necessary substantial Precepts, which
conduce hereunto. And it takes men off unnecessary things, which else would
take up their minds, and talk, and time, from things necessary. And so its
suited to the generality of men, and not only to a few that have nothing else
to do, but wander in a Wilderness of vain Speculations; and it is fitted to
Man's best and ultimate end, and not to a fantastical delight.

. 16. It tends to exalt the mind of man, to the most high and heavenly
elevation that it is capable of in this life.

For it teaches men (as is aforesaid) to live in the Spirit, upon the things
above, in the continual Love of God, and desires and endeavors for everlasting
glory: Than which man's mind has nothing more high, and honorable, and
excellent, to be employed about. Illud est verum ac summum gaudium, quod non de
creatura, sed de creatore concipitur; quod cum acceperis, nemo tollet a te; cui
ali^nde comparata omnis jucunditas moeror est; omnis suavitas dolor est; omne
dulce amarum est; omne quod delectare potest molestum est. Bernard.


. 17. It leads men to the joyfullest Life that humane Nature is capable of on
Earth.

For it leads us to the assurance of the Love of God, and of the pardon of
all our sins, and of endless glory when we die: It assures us, that we shall
live for ever, in the sight of the glory of God, with Jesus Christ, and be like
the Angels, and be perfected in holiness and happiness, and be employed in the
Love and Praises of God for evermore: It commands us to live in the foresight
of these everlasting Pleasures, and to keep the taste of them always upon our
minds, and in daily meditation on the Love of God, to live in the daily
Returns of Love, and to make this our continual Feast and Pleasure. And can the
mind of man on Earth, have higher and greater delights than these?

. 18. Nihil prodigae satis est voluptati: semper famem patitur sui quae
alimentis perpetuis nescit impleri. Ambros. in. Luke 6.
The Christian Religion forbids men no Bodily pleasure, but that which
hinders their greater pleasure, and tends to their pain or sorrow, nor does
it deny them any earthly thing, which is truly for their good.

Indeed it takes the brutish appetite and flesh, to be an unfit Judge of what
is truly good and desirable for us: And it forbids much which the Flesh
does crave: Because either it tends to the wrong of others, or the breach of
order in the World; Delectatio ^rdit and praeteriit, vulneravit and transiit,
mise^um fecit and abiit, infoelicem reddidit, and reliquit, Ambros.
or to the corrupting of man's mind, and diverting it from things sublime and
spiritual, or putting it out of relish with that which is our true felicity, or
the way thereto. It is only on such accounts, and in such cases as these, that
Christ forbids us the pleasures of the flesh: And so will Parents restrain
the appetites of their Children, and Physicians of their Patients, and every
wise man will restrain his own, Qui pro modica delecta^ione dat illud, pro quo
Christus ^e tradidit, stultum Christum reputat mercatorem. August.
when present sensual pleasure tends to greater future pain. The satisfying
delights of man can be no where but in the love of God, and in a heavenly life,
and in the foresight of endless joys, and in the knowledge and means which
lead to these: And the unwholsom luscious pleasures of the Flesh, do greatly
tend to draw down the mind, Centum decies centum annos demus deliciis? Quaenam
erit ex his ad aeternitatem compensatio? Chrysostom. de ^epar ^aps.
and corrupt the affections, and dull our desires and endeavors toward these
higher things: And therefore our Savior does strictlyer here diet us, than is
pleasing to diseased Souls. But he loves not our sorrows or pains, nor envyeth
us any desirable pleasure: He came not to torment us, but to save us from
torment: If he forbid us any delight, it is because he would have us have
better and more, which that would keep us from. If he teach us to deny our
Honor with men, it is but that we may have Honor with God and Angels. If he
call us from our present wealth and profit, Ipse est Christianus qui and in
domo sua peregrinum se esse cognoscit. Patria nostra sursum est: ibi hospites
non erimus. August. in Psalm. 32.
it is but to secure our Everlasting Riches, and prevent our loss. All his
Precepts are wholly fitted to our own good; though our good be not the highest
ultimate end, but the Glory and Pleasure of our Maker.

. 19. There cannot possibly be any higher motives to sincere piety and honesty
given to the World, than the Christian Religion sets before them; even the
joys of Heaven, and the pains of Hell, Delicatus es miles, si putas sine pugna
te posse v^ncere: fortiter dimica, atrociter in praelio ^oncerta, considera
pactum, conditionem quam accessisti, militium c^i nomen dedisti: Ita enim quos
miraris omnes pugnaverunt, vicerunt, triumpharunt. Chrysostom.
and all the pleasures and privileges of an holy life: And therefore it must
needs be the powerful means to all that is truly good and happy.

. 20. It stronglyest fortifieth the mind of Man, against the power of all
temptations.

For as it enervateth the Temptation, by teaching us to mortify the lusts of
the flesh, and to contemn the World, so it always counterpoiseth it with the
Authority of God, the Joys of Heaven, the punishment of Hell; which are in the
balance against all the pleasures of sin, as a Mountain is against a Feather.

. 21. It affords us the most powerful Supports and Comforts in every
suffering; that we may bear it patiently and with joy.

For it assures us of the Love of God, and of the pardon of our greater
sufferings: It shows us how to be gainers by all, and shows us the glory
and joy which will be the end of all.

. 22. Beati, qui habitant ibi, laudabunt Deum in secula seculorum, Amen. Regnum
Dei conceditur in praedestinatione, promittitur in vocatione, ostenditur in
justificatione, percipitur in glorificatione. Bernard.
It affords us the greatest Cordials against the fears of death.

For it assures us of endless happiness after death. And if a Socrates, or
Cicero, or Seneca, could fetch any comfort from a doubtful conjecture of
another life, what may a Christian do that has an undoubted assurance of it,
and also of the nature and greatness of the felicity which we there expect: And
why should he fear dying, who looks to pass into endless pleasure. And
therefore Christianity conduces (not to pusillanimity, but) to the greatest
fortitude and nobleness of mind: For what should daunt him who is above the
fears of sufferings and death.

. 23. Illae honestae esse voluptates putandae sunt, quae non sunt implicatae
dolori, nec poenitendi causam afferunt, nec alio ullo detrimento afficiunt eos
qui perfruuntur nec ultra modum progrediuntur, nec nos multum a gravioribus
negotiis abstrahunt, aut sibi servire cogunt. Proprie voluptates sunt quae
insunt, aut annexae sunt cognitioni divini numinis, and scientiis, and
virtutibus. Nemesius de Not. Hom. cap. 18. de Volupt.
It contains nothing which any man can rationally fear, can be any way a
hinderance to his salvation.

This will be more cleared when I have answered the objections against it.

. 24. It contains nothing that has the least contrariety to any Natural
Verity or Law; but contrarily comprehends all the Law of Nature, as its first
and principal part, and that in the most clear and legible character,
superadding much more which Naturalists know not.

So that if there be any good in other Religions (as there is some in all), it
is all contained in the Christian Religion, with the addition of much more:
There is no truth or goodness in the Religion of the Philosophers, the
Platonists, the Stoics, the Pythagorean Bannians in India, the Bonzii in
Japan, or those in Siam, China, Persia, or any other parts, nor among the
Mahometans or Jews, which is not contained in the Doctrine and Religion of the
Christians.

. 25. Accordingly it has all the real Evidence which the true parts of any
other Religion has, with the addition of much more supernatural evidence.

For all that is justly called the Law of Nature, (which is the first part of
the Christian Religion) is evidenced by the light of Nature: and this
Christians have as well as others: and all that is of true supernatural
Revelation, they have above others by its proper evidence. How excellently does
Seneca speak against a vain curiosity of speech in diverse of his Epistles, and
with what contempt and vehement indignation?

This also is to be applied to the spirituality and plainness of the Christian
way of Worship.

In exordio nascentis Ecclesiae non eo quo nunc modo vel ordine sacra
celebrabantur Missarum solemnia test Gregorio, etc. Et fortasse primis
temporibus solius Pauli Epistolae legebantur, postmodum intermixtae aliae
lectiones sunt, etc. Berno Ab. Augiens. de quibusdam ad Messam pertin. c. 1. p
698. Bibl. Patr.

Orationes autem quas collectas dicimus, a diversis auctoribas compositae
creduntur, a Gelasio praesule Romano, and beato Gregorio Papa. Idem ibid. Lege
and Microlog. Eccles. observat. cap. 12. and 13. and Hugo a S. Victore de
offic. In Romana Ecclesia Eccles. l. 2. c. 16. una tantum dicitur collecta,
nisi, etc.




. 26. The style of the Sacred Scripture is plain, and therefore fit for all;
and yet Majestical and Spiritual, suited to its high and noble ends.

Were it expressed in those terms of Art, which the Masters of each sect have
devised to transmit their opinions to posterity by, they would be fit for none
but those few, who by acquaintance with such terms, esteem themselves, or are
esteemed learned men: And yet the men of another sect might little understand
them. For most new Sect-masters in Philosophy, devised new terms, as well as
new principles or opinions: Though at Athens, where the principal Sects were
near together, the diversity was not so great as among them at a further
distance, yet was there enough to trouble their disciples. He that
understands Zoroaster and Trismegistus, may not understand Pythagoras; and he
that understands him, may not understand his follower Plato; and he that
understands him, may not understand Aristotle: and so of Telesius,
Parmenides, Anaxagoras, Aristippus, Antisthenes, Zeno, Chrysippus, Heraclitus,
Democritus, Pyrrho, Epicurus, with all the rest: And among Christians
themselves, the degenerated Heretics and Sectaries, that make their own
opinions, do make also their own terms of Art; so that if you compare the
Valentinians, Basilidians, Apollinarians, etc. and our late Wigelians,
Paracelsians, Rosicrucians, Belimenists, Familists, Libertines, Quakers, etc.
you shall find that he that seems to understand one Sect, must learn, as it
were, a new language, before he can understand the rest. So that if the
Scripture must have been phrased according to Philosophers terms of art, who
knows to which Sect it must have been suited? and every day there rises up a
Campanella, a Thomas White, etc. who are reforming the old terms and arts, and
making both new; so that nothing which is of universal use, as Religion is, can
be fitted to any such uncertain measure. Christ has therefore dealt much
better with the world, and spoken plainly the things which the simple and all
must know, and yet spoken sublimely of things mysterious, heavenly and sublime.

This is the true nature and character of Christianity.

CHAP. V. Of the Congruities in the Christian Religion, which make it the more
easily credible, and are great preparatives to Faith.
BEcause Truth is never contrary to it self, Deus est Principium Effectivum in
Creatione, Refectivum in Redemptione, Perfectivum in sanctificatione. Joh. a
Combis Comp. Theolog. l. 4. c. 1.
nor agreeable with error, it is a way that reason teaches all men, in the
trying of any questioned point, to reduce it to those that are unquestionable,
and see whether or no they accord with those: And to mark the unquestionable
Ends of Religion, and try how it suiteth its means thereunto: And therefore men
of all sober professions have their determinate principles and ends, by which
they try such particular opinions; as Christians do by their analogy of faith.
And in this trial of Christianity, I shall tell you what I find it.

. 1. I find in general, that there is an admirable concord between Natural
Verity, and the Gospel of Christ; and that Grace is medicinal to Nature; and
that where Natural light ends, Supernatural begins; and that the
superstructure which Christ has built upon Nature, is wonderfully adapted to
its foundation.

This is made manifest in all the first part of this Treatise. Reason, which is
our Nature, is not destroyed, but repaired, illuminated, elevated and improved,
by the Christian faith. Free Will, which is our Nature, is made more
excellently free by Christianity. Self-love, which is our Nature, is not
destroyed, but improved by right conduct and help to our attainment of its
ends. The Natural part of Religion is so far from being abrogated by
Christianity, that the latter does but subserve the former. Christ is the way
to God the Father. The duty which we owe by Nature to our Creator, we owe him
still; and Christ came to enable and teach us to perform it: the love of God
our Creator with all our hearts is still our duty: and faith in Christ is but
the means to the love of God, and the bellows to kindle that holy fire. The
Redeemer came to recover us to our Creator; He takes not the Book of the
Creatures or Nature out of our hands, but teaches us better to read and use
it. And so it is through all the rest.

Read chap. 16. with the citations.
. 2. I find also that the state of this present world is exceeding suitable to
the Scripture-character of it; that it is exceeding evil, and a deluge of sin
and misery, does declare its great necessity of a Savior, and shows it still
to be a place unmeet to be the home and happiness of Saints.

Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille Qui minimis urgetur. Ho al.
Of all the parts of God's Creation, this earth does seem to be next to Hell:
certainly it is greatly defiled with sin, and overwhelmed with manifold
calamities; and though God has not totally forsaken it, nor turned away his
mercy as he has done from Hell, yet is he much estranged from it: so that
those who are not recovered by grace, are next to devils. The badness of the
world occasioned the Manichees to think, that God made it not; and Arnobius
with them to run into that error, to hold, that God made not man, which he so
vehemently defends, lib 2. advers. gentes: yet professing, that he who made
us, and whence evil comes, is a thing to us unknown.
And alas how numerous and considerable are they to denominate it, [ an evil
world!] Those that Christ calls out of it, he sanctifies, and makes them
unlike the world: and his grace does not give them a worldly felicity, nor
settle them in a Rest or Kingdom here; but it saves them from this world, as
from a place of snares, and a company of cheaters, robbers and murderers; and
from a tempestuous Sea, whose waves seem ready still to drown us.

I. I find it is a world of Sin. II. And of Temptation. III. And of Calamity.

I. For Sin, it is become, as it were, its nature, it lives with men from the
birth to the grave. It is an ignorant world, that wandereth in darkness; and
yet a proud self-conceited world, that will not be convinced of its ignorance;
and is never more furiously confident, than when it is most deceived and most
blind. Even natural wisdom is so rare, and folly has the major vote and
strength, that wise men are wearied with resisting folly, and ready in
discouragements to leave the foolish world unto it self, as an incurable
Bedlam: so fierce are fools against instruction, and so hard is it to make them
know that they are ignorant, or to convince men of their mistakes and errors:
The Learner thinks his Teacher doteth; Unicuique dedit vitium natura creato.
Propert.
and he that has but wit enough to distinguish him from a bruit, is as
confident as if he were a Doctor. The Learned themselves are for the most part
but half-witted men, who either take up with lazy studies, Sed quia caecus
inest vitiis amor, o^ne futurum,

Despicitur, suadent brevem praesentia fructum

Et ruit in vetit^m damni secura libico. Claud. 2. Eur.


or else have the disadvantage of incapable temperatures and wits, or of
unhappy Teachers and false principles received by ill education, which keep out
truth: so that they are but fitted to trouble the world with their contentions,
or deceive men by their errors: and yet have they not the acquaintance with
their ignorance, which might make them learn of such as can instruct them; but
if there be among many but one that is wiser than the rest, he is thought to be
unfit to live among them, if he will not deny his knowledge, Egregium
sanctumque virum si cerno, b^membri

Hoc monstrum puero, vel miranti sub aratro

Piscibus inventis, and foetae comparo mulae. Juven. Sat. 13.


and own their errors, and confess that modesty and order require, that either
the highest, or the major vote are the masters of truth, and all is false that
is against their opinions.

It is an Atheistical ungodly world, that knows not its Maker; or forgets,
contemns, and wilfully disobeyeth him, while in words it does confess him:
and yet an hypocritical world, that will speak honorably of God, He that will
peruse that notable description of the state of mortals, and of souls in flesh,
which Arnobius has, adv. Gentes, lib. 2. p. 18, 19. Annot. Bib. Pat. (too long
to be transcribed) shall see the vanity and shame of this corrupted world
expressed to the life.
and of virtue and piety, of justice and charity, while they are neglecting and
rejecting them, and cannot endure the practice of that which their tongues
commend: almost all sorts will prefer the life to come in words, when indeed
they utterly neglect it, and prefer the fleshly pleasures of this life: They
cry out of the vanity and vexation of the world, and yet they set their hearts
upon it, and love it better than God and the world to come: they will have some
Religion, to mock God, and deceive themselves, which shall go no deeper than
the knee and tongue, in forms, or ceremonies, or a dissembled affection and
profession. But to be devoted absolutely to God, in self-resignation, obedience
and love, how rare is it even in them who cannot deny, but the Law of Nature it
self does primarily and undeniably oblige them to it? Their Religion is but
self-condemnation, while their tongues condemn their hearts and lives.

It is a sensual brutish world, and seems to have hired out their reason to
the service of their appetites and lusts: gluttony, and excess of drink, and
sports, and plays, and gaming, with pride, and wantonness, and fornication, and
uncleanness, and worldly pomp, and the covetous gathering of provision for the
flesh, to satisfy these lusts, is the business and pleasure of their lives:
and if you tell them of Reason, Nostri tantum qui Christiani vocamur nulla
vobis cura est; finitis enim nos qui nihil mali patramus, immo omnium piissime
justissimeque cum erga Deum tum imperium vestrum nos gerimus, exagitari, rapi,
fugari, nomen duntaxat nostrum plerisque impugnantibus. Athenagor. Apolog. p. 1.
or the Law of God to take them off, you may almost as well think to reason a
hungry Dog from his carrion, or a lustful Boar to forbear his lust.

And it is a Selfish world, where every man is as an idol to himself; and
affected to himself and his own interest, as if he were all the world: drawing
all that he can from others, to fill his own insatiable desires: loving all
men, and honoring, and esteeming, and praising them, according to the measure
of their esteem of him, or their agreeableness to his opinions, ways or
interest: self-love, self-conceit, self-esteem, self-will and self-seeking, is
the soul and business of the world. And therefore no wonder that it is a
divided and contentious world, when it has as many ends as men; and every man
is for himself, and draws his own way. No wonder that there is such variety
of apprehensions, that no two men are in all things of a mind: and that the
world is like a company of drunken men together by the ears, or of blind men
fighting with they know not whom, and for they know not what. And that ignorant
sects, and contentious wranglers, and furious fighters, are the bulkie parts of
it. And that striving who shall Rule, or be Greatest, or have his will, is the
worlds employment.

It is a dreaming and distracted world, that spend their days and cares for
nothing; and are as serious in following a feather, and in the pursuit of that,
which they confess is vanity and dying in their hands, as if indeed they knew
it to be true felicity: they are like children, busy in hunting butterflies;
or like boys at football, as eager in the pursuit, and in over-turning one
another, as if it were for their lives, or for some great desirable prize: or
liker to a heap of Ants, that gad about as busily, and make as much ado for
sticks and dust, as if they were about some magnificent work. Thus does the
vain deceived world lay out their thoughts and time upon impertinencies, and
talk and walk like so many Noctambulo's in their sleep: they study, and care,
and weep, and laugh, and labor, and fight, as men in a dream: and will hardly
be persuaded, but it is reality which they pursue, till death come and awake
them. Like a Stage Play, O ingratum and impium seculum! O in privatam perniciem
incredibili pectoris obstinatione pronum! s^aliquis a^ vos medicus ex summotis
venisset, and incognitis regionibus, medicamen pollicens -- certatim
blanditiis, etc. Quaenam est haec foritas, quae libido tam ca^nifex,
inexpiabile bellum indicere nihil de te merito? Dilacerare si detur velle eum
per viscera, qui non modo nullum intulerit malum nulli, sed benignus hostibus,
etc. Arnob. l. 1. in fine.
or a Poppet-play, where all things seem to be what they are not, and all
parties seem to do what they do not, and then depart, and are all disroab'd and
unmasked; such is the life of the most of this world, who spend their days in a
serious jeasting, and in a busy doing nothing.

It is a malignant world, that has an inbred radicated enmity to all that
virtue and goodness which they want: they are so captivated to their fleshly
pleasures and worldly interests, that the first sight, approach or motion, of
reason, holiness, mortification and self-denial, is met by them with
heart-rising, indignation and opposition: in which their fury bears down all
argument, and neither gives them leave considerately to use their own reason,
or hearken to another: there are few that are truly wise, and good, and
heavenly, that escape their hatred and beastly rage. And when Countries have
thought to remedy this plague, by changing their forms of Government,
experience has told them, that the vice and root of their calamity lies in
the blindness and wickedness of corrupted nature, which no form of Government
will cure: and that the Doves that are governed by Hawks and Kites, must be
their prey, Prosperum ac faelix scelus virtus vocatur. Quis nomen unquam
sceleris errori dedit? saepe error ingens sceleris obtinuit locum. Sen. Herc.
fur.
whether it be one or many that has the Sovereignty.

Yea, it is an unthankful world, that in the exercise of this malignant
cruelty, will begin with those that deserve best at their hands. He that would
instruct them, and stop them in their sin, and save their souls, does
ordinarily make himself a prey: Anaxarchum, Democritium a Cyprio tyranno
excarnificatum accepimus: Zenonem Eleatem in tormentis necatum: Quid dicam de
Socrate, cujus morti illachrymari soleo Platonem logens. Many more such
instances has Cotta in Cicero, de Not. Deor. l. 3. p. 107, 108.
and they are not content to take away their lives, but they will (among their
credulous rabble) take away the reputation of their honesty: and no wisdom or
learning was ever so great, no innocence so unspotted, no honesty, justice or
charity so untainted, no holiness so venerable, that could ever privilege the
owners from their rage, or make the possessors to escape their malice. Even
Jesus Christ, that never committed sin, and that came into the world with the
most matchless love, and to do them the greatest good, was yet prosecuted
furiously to a shameful death; and not only so, but in his humiliation his
judgment was taken away; and he was condemned as an evil doer, who was the
greatest enemy to sin that ever was born into the World: He was accused of
Blasphemy (for calling himself the Son of God) of Impiety (for talking of
destroying the Temple) and of Treason (for saying he was a King). And his
Apostles that went about the World to save men's Souls, and proclaim to them the
joyful tidings of salvation, had little better entertainment: wherever they
came, bonds and afflictions did abide them; And if they had not been taught to
rejoice in tribulations, they could have expected little joy on earth. And it
was not only Christians that were thus used, but honesty in the Heathens was
usually met with opposition and reproach, as Seneca himself does often complain,
Yea, how few have there been that have been famous for any excellency of wit or
learning, or any addition to the Worlds understanding, but their reward has
been reproach, imprisonment or death? Did Socrates die in his bed? Or was he
not murdered by the rage of wicked Hypocrites? Plato durst not speak his mind,
Primusque de vitae ratione disseruit Socrates, primusque Philosophorum damnatus
moritur. Laert. in Socrat. page 92.

Campanella tells us himself of his 30 years cruel persecution, and torments
in the Inquisition.


for fear of his Masters reward. Aristippus left Athens, ne bis peccarent in
Philosophiam: not only Solon, but most benefactors to any Commonwealth have
suffered for their beneficence. Demosthenes, Cato, Cicero, Seneca, could none
of them save their lives from fury, by their great learning or honesty. Yea,
among nominal Christians, he that told them of an Antipodes, was excommunicated
by the Papal Authority for an Heretic; And a Savonarola, Arnoldus de Villa
Nova, Paulus, Scaliger, etc. could not be wiser than their Neighbors, but to
their cost: No nor Arias Montanus himself. Campanella was fain in prison to
compile his New Philosophy, and with the pleasure of his inventions to bear the
torments which were their sour sauce. Even Galilaeus that discovered so many
new Orbs, and taught this World the way of clearer acquaintance with its
neighbors, could not escape the Reverend Justice of the Papalists, but must
lie in a Prison, as if O sapientia had been written on his doors, (as the old
Woman cried out to Thales, when he fell into a ditch, while he was by his
instrument taking the height of a Starr.) And Sir Walter Rawleigh could not
save his head by his Learned History of the World (but must be one part of its
History himself); nor yet by his great observation, Hist. part. 1. l. 4. c. 3.
sect. 6.
how Antipater is taken for a bloody Tyrant, for killing Demosthenes, Judices
non tam quid commiserit reus aliquis nostrum ^inquirunt, quam ipsi nomini
tanquam certo sceleri illudunt. Athenago^. ub^ supr.
and how Arts and Learning have power to disgrace any man that does evil to the
famous Masters of them. Peter Ramus that had done so much in Philosophy for the
Learned World, was requited by a butcherly barbarous murder, being one of the
30000 or 40000 that were so used in the French Massacre. And many a holy person
perished in the 200000 murdered by the Irish. It were endless to instance the
ungrateful cruelties of the World; and what entertainment it has given to
wise and godly men; even those whom it superstitiously adoreth when it has
murdered them.

And in all this wickedness, it is wilful, and stupid, and incorrigible, and
ordinary means do little to the Cure. Thus is it a sinful evil World.

II. And it is a Tempting World that would make all bad as it is it self: Vitia
de mercede sollicitant: Avaritia pecuniam promittit: Luxuria multas ac varias
voluptates: Ambitio purpuram and plausum; and ex hoc potentiam and quicquid
potentia ponit. Senec. Ep. 59.
Wherever the sanctifying Truth of God does come to illuminate and reform men,
the World is presently up in arms against it; and fights against that which
would save men's Souls, as if it were a Plague or Enemy that would destroy them.
Princes think it is against their interest, and the people find that it is
against their lusts: And so the sin of Tyranny keeps the Gospel out of the
greatest part of the World; and popular fury resists it where it comes. The
Empires of the Turks, and Tartarian, and China, are sad instances of the
success of Tyranny against the means of men's salvation: And the Empire of Japan
has given the World an instance of such unparalled cruelty to that end, as
makes the persecutions of Nero and Dioclesian, and even the Popish
Inquisition, and almost the Massacres of Piedmont, France and Ireland, In vitia
alter alterum trudimus. Quomodo ad salutem revocari potest, quem populus
impellit, and nullus retrahit? Senec. Ep. 29.
to seem very merciful acts of Charity. What rage, what inhumane fury has been
showed, through all the World, to keep out Knowledge, and keep the Nations in
their darkness and misery, and forbid relief? But for Error and Deceit,
Idolatry and Superstition, how industriously are they propagated? Empire and
Arts, Power and Learning, are employed to deceive and undo the World. And
though Empire be Gods Ordinance, and Arts his gifts, they are turned against
him in the far greatest part of the Earth, and Satan is served by them, as if
they had been ordained by him. Almost every Country has their proper
opinions, When just Aristides was made Treasurer at Athens, though he most
uprightly discharged his Office, ^hemistocles accused him, and got him
condemned as for Bribery: But by the favor of some of the greatest he was
delivered, and restored to his Office for another year: The next year he did by
connivence gratify all the Pillagers of the Commonwealth that would grow rich
by the common loss: And at the years end they offered him the Office again with
great honor. But he refused it, and said, that their honor was a greater
disgrace than their condemnation: For when he did well they condemned him, and
when he gave way to the unjust, they honored him. Plutar.

When he was to be condemned by the popular Vote, one came to him in the crowd,
that could not write, and not knowing who he was, desired him to write his name
to Aristides condemnation; for he was resolved to give his voice against him,
because he was called A Righteous Man: Aristides did as he desired, and wrote
his name without discovering himself to him.


and a Religion fitted to resist Religion: He that is an Idolater, or a
Mohammedan, or Infidel, would make more: And they that are against all serious
Religion, are as eager to make others of their mind, as if it were a work of
charity or commodity: And he that is endeavoring to undo Souls, is as
vehement in it, as he that is endeavoring to save them. He that has any
passion or corrupt affection is as inclinable to convey it to another, as fire
is to kindle fire, or one that has the Plague to infect his Neighbor.
Covetousness, ambition, voluptuousness, lust, and wrath and revenge, are all
contagious. Rioters think it strange if we run not with them into all excess.
The very noise of their impertinent talk and business, and the great ado that
they make in doing nothing, is a great diverter of those that are about them,
from serious business and sober consideration: They keep men so busy about
their vanities, that they can find no leisure to remember that they are men,
or to think what business they have in the World, nor where it is that they
must dwell for ever. And when their folly and selfishness has set them all
together by the ears, they must needs draw or drive others into the fire of
contention with them; They cry, Who is on my side? who? And he that will not be
of one party or other, but will keep his peace, shall lose it by the enmity of
all: And no man shall be taken for orthodox or honest, that will not be of that
Faction whose commendation he desires: And when he has humoured them, he
shall go for a knave or a reproached person, with all the rest: A peaceable man
shall hardly find the peace which he desires to himself; but it is ten to one
but he loses his labor if he would make peace between others; especially, if
he have an honest ambition, of extending that blessing to Parties and
Countries, or any great and considerable numbers. If by tyranny and cruelty, by
prisons, and torments, and death, they cannot affright men from honesty and the
obedience of God, at least they will vex them in their way, and be as thorns
and briars to them in this Wilderness.

III. And it is a calamitous, miserable World. It is void of the comforts of
sacred Illumination, and of the assured Love of God, and of the exercise of
wisdom, or holiness: The delights of Saints in loving God, and waiting for
eternal Life, are unknown to all the multitudes of the ungodly: They are
confounded and lost in their ignorance and error; and tormented with their own
passions, divisions and contentions. Their vices are part of their disquietment
and pain, though pleasure be their intended end. It is a pitiful servitude
that they are in to Satan, and an endless drudgery that they follow, in serving
their covetousness, pride, and lust; and a tiresome task to care and labor to
make provision for their fleshly appetites and wills. They are led captive by
Satan to do his will; and yet in doing it they do their own, and are in love
with their Captivity, and glory in their Chains. They are engaged daily against
God and Mercy, against their Happiness, and their Friends that would procure
it; and think him their Enemy that would make them wiser. They go under the
guilt of all this sin; and they have no assurance of pardon or deliverance: And
God overtaketh them many times with bodily distresses here: Sicknesses and
pains consume men, and torment them; Wars, and plagues do send them by
thousands, out of the World, which they took for their felicity: Fire and
famine, piracy and robbery, and fraud, impoverish them: The frustrations of
their hope torment them. And yet under all, they are hardened against God, and
fall not out with their sin and folly, but with the Justice of Heaven, and with
its instruments, or rather with all that bears the Image of the Holiness of
God. This is the visible condition of this World.

Obj. If you say, How can all this stand with the infinite Goodness of God? I
have answered it before: It shows you, that it is not this World, which is
the great demonstration of the Goodness or Love of God, from whence we must
take our estimate of it by the effects. If you will judge of the Kings
splendor, and bounty, and clemency, will you go seek for examples and
demonstrations of it in the Gaol, and at the Gallows, or rather at the Court?
Hell is as the Gallows, and Earth is as the Gaol: Measure not Gods bounty and
mercy by these: It is no sign of unmercifulness in God that there are Flies and
Worms, and Toads, and Serpents on Earth as well as Men: nor that Earth was not
made as indefectible as Heaven: And when men have drowned themselves in sin, it
is no want of Goodness in God, but it is Goodness it self which causes the
demonstrations of his Justice on them. This World is not so much to all Gods
Creation, as a wen or wart upon a Man's body is to the whole body: And if it
were all forsaken of God, as it has forsaken him, it were proportionably no
more than the cutting off such a wart or Wen. God has many thousand thousand
thousand times more capacious Regions, which it is like have more noble and
blessed Inhabitants: Look to them, if you would see his Love, in its most
glorious demonstration: Justice also must be demonstrated if men will sin. And
if Hell be quite forsaken, and Earth which is next it be partly forsaken of the
favor of God, for all that God may gloriously demonstrate his Love, to a
thousand thousand-fold more subjects (of the nobler Regions) than he does
demonstrate his Justice on in Hell or Earth. Says Cicero ( laughing at
Epicurus) Ego summum dolorem (summum dico, etiamsi december atomis est major
alius) non continuo dico esse brevem: multosque possem bonos viros nominare qui
complures annos doloribus podagrae cruci^ntur maximis: Tuscul. l. 2. p. 263.
But these two things I gather for the confirmation of my Faith. 1. That the
sin and misery of the World is such, that it groaneth for a Savior; And when I
hear of a Physician sent from Heaven, I easily believe it, when I see the
woeful World mortally diseased, and gasping in its deep distress. The condition
of the World is visibly so suitable to the whole Office of Christ, and to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, that I am driven to think, that if God have mercy for
it, some Physician and extraordinary help shall be afforded it: And when I see
none else but Jesus Christ, whom Reason will allow me to believe is that
Physician, it somewhat prepares my mind to look toward him with hope.

2. And also the Evil of this present World, is very suitable to the Doctrine
of Christ, when he tells us that he came not to settle us here in a state of
Prosperity, nor to make the World our Rest or Portion; but to save us from it,
as our enemy and calamity, our danger and our Wilderness and trouble; and to
bring up our hearts first, and then our selves to a better World, which he
calls us to seek, and to make sure of. Whereas I find, that most other
Religions, though they say something of a Life hereafter, yet lead men to look
for most or much of their felicity here, as consisting in the fruition of this
World, which experience tells me is so miserable.

. 3. Moreover I find, that the Law of entire Nature was no more suitable to
Nature in its integrity, than the Law of Grace revealed by Christ is suitable
to us in our lapsed state: so that it may be called, the Law of Nature-lapsed
and restorable; (Naturae lapsae restaurandae.)

Nature entire and Nature depraved, If any say, that still Perfect Obedience is
possible, I will not litigare de nomine, but say as Cicero, Ut nihil interest
utrum nemo valeat; an nemo possit valere; sic non intelligo quid intersit,
utrum nemo sit sapiens an nemo esse possit. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 3. page 138.
(mihi) so I say of keeping the Law perfectly.
must have the same pattern and rule of perfection ultimately to be conformed
to; because lapsed man must seek to return to his integrity: But lapsed or
corrupted man does moreover need another Law, which shall first tend to his
restoration from that lost and miserable state. And it was no more necessary to
man in innocence to have a suitable Law for his preservation and confirmation,
than it is to man in sin and guilt to have a Law of Grace for his pardon and
recovery, and a course of means prescribed him for the healing of his Soul, and
for the escaping of the stroke of Justice. The following particulars further
open this.

. 4. It seems very congruous to Reason, that as Monarchy is the perfectest
sort of Government (which it is probable is even among the Angels) so Mankind
should have one universal Head or Monarch over them.

Kingdoms have their several Monarchs; but there is surely an Universal Monarch
over them all! we know that God is the primary Sovereign; but it is very
probable to Nature, that there is a subordinate Sovereign or general
Administrator under him: It is not only the Scriptures that speak a Prince of
the Devils, and of Principalities, and Powers, and Thrones, and Dominions,
among the happy Spirits; and that talk of the Angels that are Princes of
several Kingdoms, Dan. 10. but even the Philosophers and most Idolaters, have
from this apprehension, been drawn to the worship of such, Almost all the
Heathens in the World, who worshipped one God as Chief, had their Demigods, as
their particular Protectors, and favorers, or Mediators; as intimating that
Man is conscious of the need of some Mediator of access to the supreme Deity.
as an inferior kind of Deity. And if man must have a subordinate universal
King, it is meet that it be one that is also Man: As Angels and Devils have
Principals of their own sort and nature, and not of others.

. 5. It seems congruous to Reason, that this Head be one that is fitted to be
our Captain General, himself to lead us by Conduct, Precept and Example, in
our warfare against those Devils, who also are said to have their Prince and
General.

As Devils fight against us under a Prince of their own nature, so is it
congruous, that we fight against them, under a Prince of our own nature, who
has himself first conquered him, and will go on before us in the fight.

. 6. It is congruous to Reason, that lapsed Man under the guilt of sin, and
desert of punishment, who is unable to deliver himself, and unworthy of
immediate access to God, should have a Mediator for his restoration and
reconciliation with God: If any be found fit for so high an Office.

. 7. And it is congruous to Reason, that this Mediator be one, in whom God does
condescend to Man, and one in whom man may be encouraged to ascend to God, as
to one that will forgive and save him: And one that has made himself known to
man, and also has free access to God.

. 8. It is congruous to Reason, that lapsed, guilty, darkened sinners, that
know so little of God, and of his Will, and of their own Concernments, and of
the other World, should have a Teacher sent from Heaven, of greater Authority
and Credit than an Angel, to acquaint us with God and his will, and the Life
that we are going to, more certainly and fully than would be done by Nature
only.

The most learned men of Greece and Rome, that saw by Reason the Immortality of
the Soul, the life to come, and the Perfections of God, were yet so
distrustful of their own Reasons, that they spoke of the Life to come with
great pauses of doubtfulness or darkness: And were many of them glad to run to
Oracles, and Augures and Aruspices to try if they could get any additionall
light by superficial Revelation. How glad then would they have been of a
certain Teacher sent from Heaven?
That this is very desirable no man can doubt: How gladly would men receive a
Letter or Book that dropped from Heaven? Or an Angel that were sent thence to
tell them what is there, and what they must for ever trust to? Yea, if it were
but one of their old acquaintance from the dead? But all this would leave them
in uncertainty still, and they would be doubtful of the credit and truth of
any such a Messenger: And therefore to have one of fuller Authority, that shall
confirm his Word by unquestionable attestations, would very much satisfy men.
I have proved, that Nature it self reveals to us, a Life of Retribution after
this; and that Immortality of Souls may be proved without Scripture: But yet
there is still a darkness and unacquaintedness, and consequently a doubting and
questioning the certainty of it, upon a carnal mind: And it would greatly
satisfy such, if besides mere Reason, they had some proof which is more
agreeable to a mind in flesh; and might either speak with some credible
Messenger who has been in Heaven, and fully knows all these matters; or at
least might be certainly informed of his Reports. And indeed, to men that are
fallen into such a dark depravedness of Reason, and such Strangers to God and
Heaven as mankind is, Falsum est; pejores n^orimur quam nascimur: nostrum
istud, non naturae vitium est. Quid enim turpius quam in ipso limine
securitatis esse solicitum. Senec.
it is become needful that they have more than natural light, to show them the
nature, the excellency and certainty of the happiness to come; or else they are
never like so to love and seek it, and prefer it before all earthly things, as
is necessary to them that will attain it. For few men will seek with their
utmost labor, or let go all other things to attain a happiness, which they are
not well persuaded of the reality of. And though sound reason might well
persuade them of it, Saepe Jovem vidi cum jam sua mittere vellet

Fulmina thure ^dato sustinuisse manum; At si negligitur, magnis injuria poenis
Solvitur.

Ovid. 5. Fast. Dei injuriae Deo curae. Tacit. Annal. l. 1.

Virtutum omnium excellentissima justitia. Ammian. Marcel* l. 20.


yet reason is now become so blind, and unsound, and partial, and enslaved to
the flesh, that it is not fit for such an office, according to our necessity,
without some heavenly Revelation.

. 9. And it is exceeding congruous to man's necessity, who is fallen under the
power and fears of death, as well as the doubts and estrangedness to the other
world, that he that will save and heal us, do himself in our nature rise from
the dead, and ascend up into heaven, to give us thereby a visible
demonstration, that indeed there is a Resurrection and a life to come for us to
look for.

Though God was not obliged to do thus much for us, yet Reason tells us, that
if he will do it, it is very suitable to our necessities. For all the
reasonings in the world do not satisfy in such things, so much as ocular
demonstration: when we either see a man that is risen from the dead, or have
certain testimony of it, it facilitateth the belief of our own resurrection:
and he that is gone into Heaven before us, assures us that a Heaven there is.

. 10. When God in mercy would forgive and save a sinful people, it was very
congruous to reason, that there should be some fit means provided, to
demonstrate his holiness in his justice, and to vindicate the honor of his
Laws and Government, and so to secure the ends of both.

For if God make a penal Law and execute it not, but let man sin with impunity,
and do nothing which may deter him, nor demonstrate his Justice, as much as the
sinners sufferings would do, it would tell the world, that he that gave them
the Law, and thereby told them, that he would rule and judge them by it, did
but deceive them, and meant not as he spoke: And it would bring both the Law
and Governor into contempt, and persuade men to sin without any fear: and he
that was questioned for the second crime, would say, I ventured, because I
suffered not for the first. It was the devils first way of tempting men to sin,
to persuade mankind that God meant not as he spoke in his threatening of their
death, but that they should not die, though God had threatened it. And if God
himself should by his actions say the same, it would tempt them more to sin
than Satan could, as his credibility is greater. Therefore he that is a
Governor must be just as well as merciful; and if God should have pardoned
sinners, without such a sacrifice or substitute means, as might preserve the
honor of his Law and Government, and the future innocence of his Subjects, as
well as their punishment in the full sense of the Law would have done, the
consequents would have been such, as I will leave to your own judgments.

. 11. And it was very congruous to reason, that so odious a thing as sin should
be publicly condemned and put to shame, although the sinner be forgiven: As it
was done in the life and death of Christ.

For the purity of God is irreconcilable to sin, though not to the sinner; and
therefore it was meet that the sin have all the public shame, though the
sinner escape: and that God be not like weak imperfect man, who cannot do good,
without doing or encouraging evil.

. 12. It is congruous to our condition, that seeing even the upright do renew
their sins, their consciences should have some remedy for the renewal of their
peace and comfort, that it sink them not into desperation; which is most
suitably provided for them in Jesus Christ.

For when we were pardoned once, and again, and often, and yet shall sin, he that
knows the desert of sin, and purity of God, will have need also to know of
some stated certain course of remedy.

. 13. It was meet that the sinful world have not only a certain Teacher, but
also a perfect pattern before them, of righteousness, love, self-denial,
meekness, patience, contempt of lower things, etc. which is given us by Jesus
Christ alone.

And therefore the Gospel is written Historically, with Doctrins intermixed,
that we might have both perfect Precepts and Pattern.

. 14. It was very congruous to a world universally lapsed, that God should make
with it a new Law and Covenant of Grace; and that this Covenant should tender
us the pardon of our sins, and be a conditional act of oblivion: And that
sinners be not left to the mere Law of perfect Nature, which was to preserve
that innocence which they have already lost.

To say [Thou shall perfectly obey] to a man that has already disobeyed, and
is unfitted for perfect obedience, is no sufficient direction for his pardon
and recovery. Perhaps you will say, That God's gracious Nature is instead of a Law
of Grace or Promise. But though that be the spring of all our hopes, yet that
cannot justly quiet the sinner of it self alone, because he is just as well as
merciful, and Justice has its objects, and pardon depends on the free will
of God, which cannot be known to us without its proper signs. The Devils may
say that the Nature of God is good and gracious, and so may any condemned
malefactor say of a good and gracious Judge and King; and yet that is but a
slender reason to prove his impunity or pardon. All will confess, that absolute
pardon of all men would be unbeseeming a wise and righteous Governor. And if
it must be conditional, who but God can tell what must be the condition? If you
say, That Nature tells us, That converting Repentance is the condition. I
answer, 1 Nature tells us, That God cannot damn a holy loving Soul, that has
his Image: but yet it tells us not, That this is the only or whole condition.
2. It is not such a Repentance as lies but in a frightened wish, that the sin
had not been done, but such a one as consists in the change of the mind, and
heart, and life, and contains a hatred to the sin repented of, and a love to
God and Holiness: and we have as much need of a Savior to help us to this
repentance, as to help us to a pardon.

. 15. It is very congruous to our miserable state, that the Condition of this
Covenant of Grace should be on our part, the acknowledgment of our Benefactor,
and the thankful acceptance of the benefit, and a hearty consent for the future
to Religiosi sunt cui facienda and v^tanda discernunt. Mac^ob. Saturn. l. 3.

Non votis neque supplicamentis mulicbribus auxilia Deorum parantur; sed
vigilando, agendo, been consulendo, prospere cedunt omnia: ubi socordiae te
atque ignaviae tradideris, nequicquam Deos implores, irati enim insensique
sunt. Salust. in Cat^lin.


follow his conduct, and use his appointed means in order to our full recovery:
which is the condition of the Christian Covenant.

. 16. Seeing man's fall was from his God unto himself, especially in point of
love; and his real recovery must be, by bringing up his soul to the love of God
again. Mysterii opus and finem, sacrificari sc^licet and sanctificari fidele^,
ipse est solus qui peragit. De his autem preces sunt orationes and
supplicationes sacerdotis. Illa enim sunt Domini, haec ve^o se^vi: servator
donat, sacerdos p^oiis quae data sunt ^ratias agit. Nicol Cabas;il. Liturg.
Expos. c. 49. advers. Eos qui dicunt sanctorum in sacro mysterio memoriam esse
sacerdotis pro eis ad Deum supplicationem.
And seeing a guilty condemned sinner can hardly love that God, who in justice
will damn and punish him; nothing can be more congruous and effectual to man's
recovery to God, than that God should be represented to him as most amiable;
that is, as one that is so willing to pardon and save him, as to do it by the
most astonishing expressions of love, in such an Agent, and Pledge, and Glass
of Love as Jesus Christ.

The whole design of Christ's Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension
and Intercession, is but to be the most wonderful and glorious declaration of
the goodness and love of God to sinners: that as the great frame of the
Universe demonstrateth his power, so should the Redeemer be the demonstration
of his love. That we may see both the wise contrivances of his love, and at how
dear a rate he is content to save us; that our lives may be employed in
beholding and admiring the glory of his love, in this incomprehensible
representation. That we may love him, as men that are fetched up from the very
gates of hell, and from under the sentence of condemnation, and made by grace
the heirs of life.

. 17. Especially to have a quickening Head, who will give the Spirit of grace to
all his members, to change their hearts, and kindle this holy love within them,
is most congruous to accomplish man's recovery.

So dark are our minds, and so bad our hearts, so strong are our lusts, and so
many our temptations, that bare teaching would not serve our turn, without a
Spirit of light, and life, and love to open our eyes, and turn our hearts, and
make all outward means effectual.

. 18. The Commission of the Gospel Ministry to preach this Gospel of pardon and
salvation, and to baptize Consenters, and gather and guide the Church of
Christ, with Fatherly love, is also very congruous to the state of the world,
with whom they have to do.

. 19. It is congruous to the state of our trembling Souls, that are conscious
of their former guilt, and present unworthiness, that in all their prayers and
worship of God, they should come to him in a Name that is more worthy and
acceptable than their own, and offer their services by a Hand or Intercessor so
beloved of God.

Though an impious soul can never expect to be accepted with God, upon the
merits of another, yet a penitent soul, who is conscious of former wickedness,
and continued faults, may hope for that mercy by grace through a Redeemer, of
which he could have less hopes without one.

. 20. It is congruous to their state, who have Satan their accuser, that they
have a Patron, a High priest and Justifier with God.

Not that God is in danger of being mistaken by false accusation, or to do us
any injustice; but when our real guilt is before his face, (and the malice of
Satan will seek thereupon to procure our damnation) there must also be just
reasons before him for our pardon, which it is the office of a Savior to plead
or to present, that is, to be God's Instrument of our deliverance upon that
account.

. 21. It is exceeding congruous to our condition (of darkness and fear) to have
a Head and Savior in the possession of Glory, to whom we may commend our
departing souls at the time of death, and who will receive them to himself;
that we may not tremble at the thoughts of death and of eternity.

For though the infinite goodness of God be our chief encouragement, yet seeing
he is holy and just, and we are sinners, we have need of a mediate
encouragement, and of such condescending love as is come near unto us, and has
taken up our nature already into heaven. A Savior that has been on earth in
flesh; that has died, and rose, and revived, and is now in the possession of
Blessedness, is a great emboldner of our thoughts, when we look toward another
world; which else we should think of with more doubting, fearful and unwilling
minds. To have a friend gone before us, who is so Powerful, so Good, and has
made us his Interest; to think that he is Lord of the world that we are going
to, and has undertaken to receive us to himself when we go hence, is a great
reviving to our amazed, fearful, Perturbatione temporum eos etiam qui vero
judicio nullius criminis convinci queunt, maximis involvi criminibus haud est
very dissimile. Pachymer. l. 1.
departing souls.

. 22. And it is very congruous to the case of an afflicted persecuted people,
who are misrepresented and slandered in this world, and suffer for the hopes of
a better life, to have a Savior who is the judge of all the world, to justify
them publicly before all, and to cause their righteousness to shine as the
light, and to turn all their sufferings into endless joys.

. 23. And it seems exceeding congruous to reason, seeing that the Divine
Essence is an inaccessible Light, that we should for ever have a Mediator of
Fruition, as well as of Acquisition, by whom the Deity may shine in
communicated Glory and Love to us for evermore: and that God be for evermore
eminently delighted and glorified in Him, than in us, as he excels us in
dignity and all perfections; even as in One Sun, his Power and Glory is more
demonstrated, than in a world of Worms.

Q. Si divinae Scriptura probationibus sufficient, quid necessaria est
Religioni fides? R. Fides nostra super ratione quidem est, non tamen temerarie
and irrationabiliter assumitur. Ea enim quae ratio edocet, fides intelligit:
and ubi ratio defecerit, fides praecurrit: Non enim utcunque audita credimus,
sed ea quae ratio non improbat. Verum quod consequi ad plenum non potest,
fideli prudentia confitemur. Junilius African. de part. div. Leg. l. 2. c. 30.
Whether all these things be true or not, I am further to enquire; but I find
now, that they are very congruous to our condition, and to Reason; and that if
they be so, no man can deny, but that there is wonderful Wisdom and Love to man
in the design and execution: and that it is to man a very desirable thing that
it should be so. And therefore that we should be exceeding willing to find any
sound proof that it is so indeed; though not with a willingness which shall
corrupt and pervert our judgments by self-flattery, but such as will only
excite them to the wise and sober examination of the case.

The EVIDENCES of the VERITY we shall next enquire after.

CHAP. VI. Of the WITNESS of JESUS CHRIST, or the demonstrative Evidence of his
Verity and Authority.
Q. Unde probamus libros Religionis nostrae divina esse in spiratione
conscriptos? R. Ex multis, quorum primum est ipsius Scripturae veritas: deinde
ordo rerum, consonantia praeceptorum, modus locutionis fine ambitu, puritasque
verborum. Additur conscribentium and praedicantium qualitas, quod divina
homines, excelsa vates, infacundi subtilia, non nisi divino repleti spiritu
tradidissent. Tum praedicationis virtus, quam dum praedicaretur (licet a paucis
despectis) obtinuit. Accedunt his rectificatio contrariorum, ut Sybillarum vel
Philosophorum; expulsio adversariorum, utilitas consequentium, exitus eorum
quae per acceptationes and figuras and praedictiones, quae praedicta sunt ad
postremum; miracula jugiter facta, donee Scriptura ipsa susciperetur a
gentibus. De qua hoc nunc ad proximum miraculum sufficit, quod ab omnibus
suscepta cognoscitur. Junilius African, de part. div. Leg. l. 2. c. 29.
THough all that is said may be a reasonable preparative to faith, it is more
cogent evidence which is necessary to convince us, that Jesus Christ is the
Savior of the world. That a man appearing like one of us, is the Eternal Word
of God incarnate, is a thing which no man is bound to believe, without very
sound evidence to prove it. God has made Reason essential to our Nature: it is
not our weakness, but our natural excellency, and his Image on our nature.
Therefore he never called us to renounce it, and to lay it by: for we have no
way to know Principles, but by an Intellectual discerning them in their proper
Evidence: and no way to know conclusions by, but by a rational discerning their
necessary connection to those principles. If God would have us know without
reason, he would not have made us reasonable creatures: man has no way of
mental discerning or knowledge, but by understanding things in their proper
evidence: to know without this, were to know without knowledge. Faith is an act
or species of knowledge, it is so far from being contrary to reason, that it is
but an act of cleared elevated reason: it is not an act of immediate intuition
of God or Jesus Christ himself; but a knowledge of the truth by the divine
evidence of its certainty: they that wrangle against us, for giving reason for
our Religion, seem to tell us, that they have none for their own; or else
reprehend us for being men. If they had to do with them, who make God to be but
the Prime Reason, would they say that Faith is something above Reason, and
therefore something above God? I believe that our Reason or Intellection is far
from being univocally the same thing with God's: but I believe that God is
Intellection, Reason or Wisdom eminenter, though not formaliter: and that
though the name be first used, to signify the lower derivative Reason of many,
yet we have no higher to express the Wisdom of God by, nor better notion to
apprehend it by, than this which is its Image. I conclude therefore, that

. 1. The Christian Religion must be the most Rational in the world, or that
which has the soundest reason for it, if it be the truest. And the proof of it
must be, by producing the evidences of its truth.

. 2. The evidence which Faith requires is properly called Evidence of
credibility.

. 3. When we speak of Humane Faith, as such, Credibility is somewhat short of
proper Certainty: but when we speak of Divine Faith, ( or a Belief of God)
evidence of Credibility is evidence of Certainty.

. 4. The great Witness of Jesus Christ, or the demonstrative Evidence of his
Verity and Authority, was The HOLY SPIRIT.

. 5. The Word or Doctrine of Jesus Christ, has four several infallible
testimonies of God's Spirit, which (though each of them alone is convincing,
yet) all together make up this one great Evidence: that is, 1. Antecedently. 2.
Constitutively or Inherently. 3. Concomitantly, and 4. Subsequently: of which I
shall speak in course.

. 6.1. Antecedently the Spirit of Prophecy, was a Witness to Jesus Christ.

Under which I comprehend the prediction also of Types: He that was many
hundred years before (yea, Heb. 10.15. 1 Pet. 1.10. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20
from age to age) foretold to come as the Messiah or Savior, by Divine
prediction of Promises, Prophesies and Types, is certainly the true Messiah our
Savior: But Jesus Christ was so foretold: Ergo. --

1. For Promises and Prophesies, Genesis 3.15. presently after the Fall of Adam,
God said, [I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.] As it
is certain that it was Satan principally, and the Serpent but instrumentally,
that is spoken of as the deceiver of Eve; so it is as plain, that it was Satan
and his wicked followers principally, and the Serpent and its seed only as the
instruments, that are here meant in the condemnation. And that it is the seed
of the woman, by an excellency so called, that is primarily here meant, (and
under him her natural seed secondarily) is proved not only by the Hebrew
Masculine Gender, but by the fulfilling of this Promise in the Expository
effects, and in other Promises to the like effect. The rest of the Promises and
Prophesies to this purpose are so many, that to recite them all would swell the
Book too big; and therefore I must suppose, that the Reader perusing the Sacred
Scripture it self, Lege Disputationem Gregentii cum Herbano Judeo.
will acquaint himself with them there: only a few I shall repeat.

Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed.

Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come.

The whole second Psalm is a Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ: Why do the
heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing: The Kings of the earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Anointed, etc. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. I will
declare the decree, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee: Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Be wise
therefore, O ye Kings, be learned, ye Judges of the earth: serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish,
etc.

Psalm. 16.10. For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thine holy one to see corruption.

Psalm. 22.16, 17, 18. Dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have
enclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet: I may tell all my bones: they
look and stare upon me: they part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my
vesture.

Psalm. 69.21. They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink.

Isa. 53. Who has believed our report* and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? for he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out
of a dry ground; he has no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him: He is despised and rejected of
men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our
faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has born
our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He
was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought
as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth. He was taken from prison, and from judgment, and who
shall declare his generation. For he was cut off out of the land of the living,
for the transgression of my people was he stricken: and he made his grave with
the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence,
nor was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has
put him to grief. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall
see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied* by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured
out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare
the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

Isa. 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given: and the
government shall be upon his shoulders: and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, The mighty God, The Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of
David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to stablish it with judgment and
with justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform this.

Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
name Immanuel.

Dan. 9.24, etc. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy
holy City, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. Know therefore
and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks and
threescore and two weeks; the street shall be built, and the wall even in
troublous times. And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off,
but not for himself. And the people of the Prince that shall come, shall
destroy the City, and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood,
and unto the end of the war desolations are determined. And he shall confirm
the Covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the over-spreading of
abomination he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that
determined be poured upon the desolate.

Mal. 3.1, 2, 3. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even
the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in; behold, he shall come, says
the Lord of hosts: But who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand
when he appears? For he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap, and
he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, etc.

I omit the rest to avoid prolixity. There is scarce any passage of the Birth,
Life, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension or Glory of our Savior, which
are not particularly prophesied of in the Old Testament; but nothing so
copiously as his Righteousness and his Kingdom. The Prophecy of Isaiah is full
of such, and is but a Prophetical Gospel.

To these must be adjoined the Prophetical Types, even the typical Persons, and
the typical Ordinances and Actions. It would be too long to open, how his
sufferings from the malignant world was typified in the Death of Abel, and the
attempted oblation of Isaac, and the selling of Joseph. And his work of
Salvation, in Noah, and his preserved Ark and Family: And his Paternity as to
Believers, in Abraham: And his Kingly conduct and deliverance of the Church, by
Moses and his deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, and conduct of them in
the Wilderness; and by Joshua's victorious bringing them into the Land of
Promise: His Reign and Kingdom by David, and his building of the Church by
Solomon, and his Priesthood by Aaron and his Successors, etc.

And it would take up a just volume to open all the typical Ordinances and
Actions, which prefigured Christ: See Whately on the Types, and Lud. Crocii
Epicris. and most largely Micrelius's Judas, or second Part of his Book against
Infidels.
from the institution of Circumcision, and the Passover or Paschal Lamb, to the
end of all the Mosaical Ceremonies, Christ is the signification and the end of
all. I will only crave your consideration of the custom of Sacrificing in the
general: it came into the world immediately upon man's sin: we find Cain and
Abel, the two first persons born into the world, employed in it. From thence to
this day it has continued (in doctrine, though the practice be restrained) with
the Jews: it was no peculiar Ceremony of their Law, but has been commonly
exercised by almost all Nations through the world, both Greeks, Romans and
Barbarians. And it yet continues in most countries of the Heathens, where the
Doctrine of Christ has not abolished it, as it has done both with the
Christians and Mahometans. (For the Mahometans borrow the confession of one
God, and the rejection of Idols and Sacrifices originally from the Christians.)
Now I must confess, that I am not able to satisfy my self of the original and
universality of the custom of Sacrificing, upon any reasons, but those of the
Christians: either it was a prophetical promissory institution of God himself,
to lapsed Adam, to point him to a Savior, the second Adam; or else it must be
from the Law of Nature, or else it is from some other positive Institution, or
else it must be an universal Error. There can no fifth way that is probable be
imagined. And, 1. I am not able to see that the mere Light or Law of Nature
should be the original cause; for then it would be all men's duty still: and
what reason can Nature give us to judge, that God is delighted in the blood and
pain of the innocent bruits? or that the killing and offering of them should be
any satisfaction to his justice for our sins, or any rational means to avert
his judgments, or procure our forgiveness? If it be said that [It was but a
ceremonial confession, that we our selves deserve death, as that creature
suffered it] I answer, Confession is indeed due from us by the Law of Nature;
but the question is, of the killing of the poor beasts, and offering them in
sacrifice. If the exercise of our own penitence by confession were all, that
might be done as well without the creatures blood and death. What is it that
this adds to a penitent confession? and why was the oblation to God contained
in the Sacrifice? If you say, that the life of bruits is not so regardable, but
that we take it away for our daily food; I answer, Its true, that it is allowed
us for the maintenance of our lives; but yet it is not to be cast away in vain,
nor is God to be represented as one that does delight in blood: And the common
sense of all the world in their sacrificing has been, that besides the
confession of their own desert, there is somewhat in it to appease God's
displeasure; and none that I ever read of did take it for a mere confessing
sign or action. If it be said, that they did it to signify their homage to
God; I answer, Why then did they not offer him only the living creature rather
than the dead? all took it to be a propitiatory action. And if there had been
an aptitude in this sign to betoken our penitent confession only, yet when God
knows our confessions as well without it, and when the tongue is made the
natural instrument to express the mind, and there are variety of other signs,
it is incredible that all the world should ever (even so early) hit upon this
one strange way of expression, without some special revelation or command of
God.

2. And it cannot be said with any credibility, that God made any other
revelation of his will, to the world for Sacrificing, beside what is made in
Nature, and in holy Scripture: for who ever dreamt of such a thing? or has
delivered us any such revelation, and told us when, and to whom, and how it was
made?

3. And it is not credible that it was taken up erroneously by all the world,
as their vices or superstitions are: for though it is past question that error
has caused the abuse of it through the world, yet for the thing it self there
is no probability of such an original. For what can we imagine should induce men
to it, and make all Nations (how various soever their Idols are) to agree in
this way of worshipping and propitiating them? There is nothing of sensuality
in it, that by gratifying a lust of the flesh, might have such an universal
effect? And it must be some universal Light, or some universal Lust or
Interest, that must cause such an universal concord. Nay, on the contrary you
shall find that Tradition, and the custom of their Forefathers, is the common
argument pleaded for sacrificing through all the world, even in the Ancients
Historical reports of it.

4. Therefore it remains, very probable at least, that they received it
indeed by tradition from their forefathers: and that could be from none
originally but the universal progenitor of mankind, who was capable of
conveying it to all his posterity, (for no History mentions any later
original nor could any later than Adam or Noah have made it so universal.) And
no man can imagine why God should institute it, if it were not to intimate the
translating of our punishment into our Redeemer, and to point us to the great
Sacrifice which is truly propitiatory, and is the great demonstration of his
Justice, who in Mercy does forgive.

. 7. II. The second Witness of the Spirit, which is inherent and constitutive
to the Gospel of Christ, is that image of God, the unimitable character of
Divinity, which by the holy Spirit is put into the doctrine of Christ, as the
very life or soul of it, (together with the same on the pattern of his own
life.)

1. On Christ himself, the unimitable Image of God in his Perfection, is a
testimony of his veracity: (which I ascribe to the holy Spirit, as the ultimate
Operator in the Trinity, even that holy Spirit by which he was conceived, and
which fell upon him at his Baptism, and which, Matthew. 12. his enemies did
blaspheme) Many men have so lived, that no notable sin of commission has been
found or observed in them by the world at a distance. But the most virtuous,
except Christ, was never without discernable infirmities, and sins of omission.
No man ever convicted him of any sin, either in word or deed; His obedience to
the Law of God was every way perfect, He was the most excellent Representative
of the Divine Perfections: All Christians agree in the main Doctrins of a holy
life. Leg. Marc. Eremit. de Lege Spirituali, and Dorothei Doctrinas, and
Benedicti Instrumenta virtutum, Macarii Homil. Hesychii Presb. ad Theodul.
Centuriae; Tho. Kempis. and Thauleri opera; and of the later true Papists,
Sales Introduction to a devout life, Benedicti de Benedict. Regul. Barbanson,
de Amore Dei: Parsons of Resolution, Cressy's Sancta Sophia, etc. And among the
Protestants, the number of holy Treatises is so great, that I shall not name
any in so numerous a Treasury: So that however the spirit of contention causes
many of them to overlook the good that is in one another, and aggravate the
evil, yet Holiness is the Doctrine of all the Christians in the world, and the
practice of all that are sincere: And while the Sects and Hypocrites do rail at
one another, yet in all they speak against sin. I have often thought, Why is it
that as Christians, man live together in love; but as Parties, when they come
to the interest of their Sects, they hate, revile and persecute one another?
And I answer it, Because as Christians they give no cause of hatred to each
other; but as Sects and Parties, they leave God's way, and show their
selfishness and loathsome faults, and are inclined to injure one another, and
so do again suffer by those whom they have injured. But the Wisdom from above
is pure and peaceable, etc. Leg. etiam Thalessi Centuriae, and Nili Paraenesis.
The Omnipotency of God appeared in his Miracles; The Wisdom of God in his holy
Doctrine; and the Love of God in his matchless expressions of Love, and in all
the Holiness of his life. He was so far from pride, worldliness, sensuality,
malice, impatiency, or any sin, that the world had never such a pattern of
self-denial, humility, contempt of all the wealth and honors of the world,
charity, meekness, patience, etc. as in him. He obeyed his Father to the death.
He healed men's bodies, and showed his pity to their souls, and opened the way
of life even to his enemies: He instructed the ignorant, and preached
repentance to the impenitent, and suffered patiently the unthankful requitals
of them that rendered him evil for good. He endured patiently to be reviled,
scorned, buffeted, spit upon, crowned with thorns, nailed to a cross, and put
to death; and this upon the false accusation and imputation of being an evil
doer: In a word, He was perfect, and sinless, and manifested first all that
obedience and holiness in his life, which he put into his Laws, and prescribed
unto others: And such Perfection is inseparable from Veracity.

Obj. How know we what faults he might have, which come not to our knowledge?

Answ. 1. You may see by his enemies accusations, partly what he was free from,
when you see all that malice could invent to charge him with. 2. If the
Narrative of his Life in the Gospel have that evident proof, which I shall anon
produce, there can remain no doubt of the perfect holiness and innocence of
Christ in his Person and his Life.

Object. We find him accused of many crimes, as of being a gluttonous person,
and a Wine-bibber; of blasphemy, and impiety, and treason.

Answ. The very accusations are such as show their falsehood, and his innocence.
He is called a gluttonous person, and a Wine-bibber, because he did eat and
drink as other men in temperance and sobriety, and did not tie himself to a
wilderness life of austerity, in total abstinence from common meats and wine,
as John Baptist did, and as they thought he that professed extraordinary
sanctity should have done. They accused him of eating with publicans and
sinners, because he went to them as a Physician to heal their souls, and lived
a sociable charitable life, and did not observe the Laws of proud Pharisaical
separation. They accused him of blasphemy and treason, for saying the truth,
that he was the Son of God, and the King of Israel: And of impiety, for talking
of pulling down the Temple, when he did but prophecy of his own death and
resurrection. And this was all that malice had to say.

Object. He carried himself contemptuously to Magistrates: He called Herod the
King, [That Fox] The Scribes and Pharisees he railed at, and called them
hypocrites, painted sepulchers, a generation of vipers, etc. When he was called
to answer whether they should pay tribute to Caesar, he does but put off the
resolution by ambiguity, instead of an open exhorting them to obedience, and
says, [ Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's.] And when he was called to
for tribute for him, he pays it but as a way to avoid offense, having pleaded
first his own immunity.

Answ. 1. His speeches of Herod and the Scribes and Pharisees are not
revilings, but a free and just reprehension of their sin: which being done by
God's commission, and in his Name, and for his cause, is no more to be called
reviling, than an arrest of a Felon or Traitor in the Kings name, or an
accusation put in against him for his crimes, should be so called. God will not
forbear damning impenitent rebels, though they call it cruelty; nor will he
forbear the reprehension and shaming of their villainies, though they call it
railing; nor will he flatter proud rebellious dust, though they call flattery a
necessary civility; nor will he give leave to his Messengers to leave sin in
honor, and to let the proud do what their list, and quietly damn themselves
and others, without plain reproof, though it be called unreverent sawciness or
sedition. 2. And he that considers how little Title Caesar had to the Kingdom
of the Jews, and that the sword alone is a better proof of force and strength,
than of Authority, and is a Plea which an Usurper may have on his side, will
rather praise the submission and peaceableness of Christ, than blame him as
disloyal. But for the doctrine of Obedience in general, who has ever taught it
more plainly and pressingly, than Christ and his Apostles?

2. The Gospel or doctrine of Christ it self also, has the very Image and
Superscription of God, I will not say, imprinted on it, for that is too little,
but intrinsecally animating and constituting it, which is apparent in the
Matter, and the Method, and the Style.

1. The Matter and Design contains the most wonderful expression of the
Wisdom of God, that ever was made to man on earth. All is mysterious, yet
admirably fit, consistent and congruous, as is before declared. That a world
which is visibly and undeniably fallen into wickedness: and misery, should have
a Redeemer, Savior and Mediator toward God! That he should be one that is
near enough to God and unto us, and has the nature of both: that he should be
the second Adam, the Root of the Redeemed and Regenerate: that God should give
all mercy from himself, from his own bounty and fullness, and not as unwilling
be persuaded to it by another; and therefore that the Redeemer be not any Angel
or intermediate person, but God himself: that thus God come nearer unto man,
who is revolted from him, to draw up man again to Him: that he lose not the
world, and yet do not violate his governing Justice: that he be so merciful, as
not to be unrighteous, nor permit his Laws and Government to be despised; and
yet so just, as to save the penitent renewed souls: that he give man a new Law
and conditions of salvation, suitable to his lapsed guilty state; and leave him
not under a Law and conditions, which were fitted to the innocent: that he
revealed himself to the apostate world in that way, which only is fit for their
recovery, that is, in his admirable love and goodness, that so love might win
our love, and attract those hearts, which under guilt and the terrors of
condemning justice would never have been brought to love him: that guilty souls
have such evidence of God's reconciliation to encourage them, to expect his
pardon, and to come to him with joy and boldness in their addresses; having a
Mediator to trust in, Cum Dominus pelam dicit, [Ego n medio vestri sum, sicut
qui ministrat] quis adeo saevus aut mentis inop. est, ut omnem n^ox fastum and
ambitionem non respuat? Cui universa sancta, men^coue and ratione praedita
creatura, cultum and ministerium defert, quique eadem prorsus cum Deo Patie
Majestate and potestate pollet, is Ministri persona sumpt^, discipulorum pedes
lavat. T^tus Bostrenso, in Luc. cap. 21.
and his Sacrifice, Merits, and acceptable Name, to plead with God: that
Justice and Mercy are so admirably conjoined in these effects: that Satan, and
the world, and death, should be so conquered, in a suffering way, and man have
so perfect a pattern to imitate, for self-denial, humility, contempt of honor,
wealth and life, and exact obedience, and resignation to the will of God, with
perfect love to God and man: that the world should be under such an universal
Administrator, and the Church be all united in such a Head; and have one in
their nature that has risen from the dead, to be in possession of the glory
which they are going to, and thence to send down his Spirit to sanctify them,
and fit them for Heaven; and afterward to be their Judge, and to receive them
unto blessedness: and that sinners now be not condemned merely for want of
innocence, but for rejecting the grace and mercy which would have saved them:
that we have all this taught us by a Messenger from Heaven, Diligens Lector
intelliget unam faciem esse Eloquiorum Sacrorum; cum distinct considerabit,
quid sit admonitio, quid sit preceptum, quid prohibitio, quid remissio; and
haec nec se invicem impugnare, nec a seipsis distare; sed in omnibus sanitatis
remed um moderare. Hildebert. Canoman. Epist. 83. argum.
and a perfect rule of life delivered to us by him, and all this sealed by a
Divine attestation: that this doctrine is suited to the capacity of the weakest,
and yet so mysterious as to exercise the strongest wits: and is delivered to
us, not by an imposing force, but by the exhortations and persuasions of men
like our selves, commissioned to open the evidences of truth and necessity in
the Gospel: All this is no less than the Image and wonderful effect of the
Wisdom of God.

And his Goodness and Love is as resplendent in it all: for this is the effect
of the whole design, to set up a Glass in the work of our Redemption, in which
God's Love and Goodness should be as wonderfully represented to mankind, as his
Power was in the works of Creation. Here sinful man is saved by a means which
he never thought of or desired: he is fetched up from the gates of hell;
redeemed from the Sentence of the righteous violated Law of God, and the
execution of his Justice: The Eternal Word so condescendeth to man in the
assumption of our nature, as that the greatness of the love and mercy,
incomprehensible to man, becomes the greatest difficulty to our belief. He
reveals to us the things of the world above, and brings life and
immortality to light: He dwells with men; He converseth with the meanest: He
preaches the glad tidings of Salvation to the world: He refuses not such
familiarity with the poorest or the worst, as is needful to their cure: He
spends his time in doing good, and healing all manner of bodily diseases: He
refuses the honors and riches of the world, and the pleasures of the flesh,
to work out our salvation: He bears the ingratitude and abuse of sinners, and
endures to be scorned, buffeted, spit upon, tormented and crucified by those,
to whom he had done no greater wrong than to seek their salvation: He makes
himself a Sacrifice for sin, to show the world what sin deserved, and to save
them from the deserved punishment. God had at first decreed and declared, that
death should be the punishment of sin: and Satan had maliciously drawn man to
it, by contradicting this threatening of God, and making man believe that God
would falsify his word, and that he did envy man the felicity of his
advancement to be liker God in knowledge: And now Christ will first justify
the truth and righteousness of God, and will demonstrate himself by dying in
our stead, that death is indeed the wages of sin; and will show the world, that
God is so far from envying their felicity, that he will purchase it at the
dearest rate, and deliver them freely from the misery which sin and Satan had
involved them in. Thus Enemies are reconciled by the sufferings of him whom
they offended; even by his sufferings in the flesh, whose Godhead could not
suffer; and by his death as Man, who as God was most immortal. As soon as he
was risen, he first appeared to a Woman, who had been a sinner, and sent her as
his first messenger with words of love and comfort to his disconsolate
Disciples, who had but lately sinfully forsaken him: He gives them no
upbraiding words, but meltingly says to her, [ Go to my brethren, and say unto
them, Joh. 20.17.
I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, to my God and your God.] He after
this familiarly converseth with them, and instructs them in the things
concerning the Kingdom of God. He makes an Universal Pardon or Act of Oblivion
in a Covenant of Grace, for all the world, that will not reject it; and
appoints Messengers to preach it unto all; Duo, sine pluribus, faciunt
hominem sanctum, viz. Cognitio and Amor: hoc est, Cognitio Veritatis, and Amor
bonitatis. Sed ad cognitionem Dei qui est Veritas, non pote, venire, nisi per
cognitionem tui^ipsius: nec ad amorem Dei qui est bonitas, nisi per amorem
proximi tui. Ad cognitionem tui-ipsius potes pervenire per frequentem
meditationem: ad cognitionem Dei per puram contemplationem. Edmund. Cantuar.
Specul. Eccles. cap. 3. vid. plura. c. 29. etc.
and what ever pains or suffering it cost them, to go through all with patience
and alacrity, and to stick at nothing for the saving of men's souls. He gave the
holy Spirit miraculously to them, to enable them to carry on this work; and to
leave upon record to the world, the infallible narrative of his Life and
Doctrine: His Gospel is filled up with matter of consolation, with the promises
of mercy, pardon and salvation, the description of the privileges of holy
Souls, justification, adoption, peace and joy: and finally, He governs and
defends his Church, and pleads our cause, and secureth our interest in
Heaven, according to the promises of this his word. Thus is the Gospel the very
Image of the Wisdom and Goodness of God. And such a Doctrine from such a Person
must needs be Divine.

2. And the Method and Style of it is most excellent, because most suitable to
its holy ends: not with the excellency of frothy wit, which is but to express a
wanton fancy, and please the ears of aerie persons, who play with words, when
they should close with wisdom and heavenly light: (such excellency of speech
must receive its estimate by its use and end:) But as the end is most Divine,
so the light that shines in the Gospel is Heavenly and Divine: the Method of
the Books themselves is various, according to the time and occasions of their
writing, (the objections against them are to be answered by themselves anon):
But the Method of the whole Doctrine of Christianity set together, is the most
admirable and perfect in the world; beginning with God in Unity of Essence,
proceeding to his Trinity of Essential Active Principles, and of Persons, and
so to his Trinity of Works, Creation, Redemption and Regeneration, and of
Relations of God and Man accordingly, and to the second Trinity of Relations,
as he is our Owner, Ruler and Chief Good: And hence it brancheth it self into a
multitude of benefits flowing from all these Relations of God to Man, and a
multitude of answerable duties flowing from our Correlations to God, and all in
perfect method, twisted and inoculated into each other, making a kind of
cirulation between Mercies and Duties, as in man's body there is of the arterial
and venal blood and spirits, till in the issue, as all Mercy came from God, and
Duty subordinately from man, so Mercy and Duty do terminate in the Everlasting
Pleasure of God ultimately, and man subordinately, in that mutual love which is
here begun, and there is perfected. This method you may somewhat perceive in
the description of the Christian Religion, before laid down.

3. And the style also is suited to the end and matter: not to the pleasing of
curious ears, but to the declaring of heavenly mysteries: not to the conceits
of Logicians, who have put their understandings into the fetters of their own
ill-devised notions, and expect that all men that will be accounted wise,
should use the same notions which they have thus devised, and about which they
are utterly disagreed among themselves: But in a Language suitable both to the
subject, and to the world of persons to whom this word is sent, who are
commonly ignorant, and unlearned, and dull: That being the best Physic which
is most suitable to the Patients temper and disease. And though the particular
Writers of the Sacred Scriptures have their several Styles, yet is there in
them all in common a Style which is spiritual, powerful and divine; which
bears its testimony proportionably of that Spirit, which is the common Author
in them all: (But of this more among the Difficulties and Objections anon.)

But for the discerning of all this Image of God in the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, Reason will allow me to expect these necessary qualifications in him
that must discern it: 1. That before he come to supernatural Revelations, he be
not unacquainted with those natural Revelations, which are antecedent, and
should be foreknown (as I have in this book explained them with their
evidence): For there is no coming to the highest step of the Ladder, without
beginning at the lowest: Men ignorant of things knowable, by Natural Reason,
are unprepared for higher things. 2. It is reasonably expected that he be one
that is not treacherous and false to those Natural Truths which he has
received: For how can he be expected to be impartial and faithful in seeking
after more Truth, who is unfaithful to that which he is convinced of? or that
he should receive that Truth which he does not yet know, who is false to that
which he already knows? Or that he should discern the evidence of
extraordinary Revelation, who opposes with enmity the ordinary light or Law of
Nature? Or that God should vouchsafe his further light and conduct to that Man,
who wilfully sins against him, in despite of all his former teachings? 3.
It is requisite that he be one that is not a stranger to himself, but
acquainted with the case of his heart and life, and know his sins, and his
corrupt inclinations, and that guilt, and disorder, and misery, in which his
need of mercy does consist: For he is no fit Judge of the Prescripts of his
Physician, who knows not his own disease and temperature. But of this more
anon.

. 8. III. The third way of the Spirits witness to Jesus Christ, is
Concomitantly, by the miraculous gifts and works of Himself, and his Disciples;
which are a cogent Evidence of Gods attestation to the truth of his Doctrine.

. 9. By the Miracles of Christ I mean, 1. His miraculous actions upon others:
2. His miracles in his Death and Resurrection: 3. His predictions.

The appearance of the Angel to Zachary, and his dumbness, his Prophecy and
Elizabeth's, with the Angels appearance to Mary, the Angels appearance and
Evangelizing to the Shepherds; the Prophecy of Simeon and of Anna, the Star
and the testimony of the wise Men of the East, the testimony of John Baptist,
that Christ should baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, and that he was
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World: These and more such I
pass by as presupposed. Luke 2.46.
At twelve years of age he disputed with the Doctors in the Temple, to their
admiration. At his Baptism the Holy Ghost came down upon him in the likeness of
a Dove, and a voice from Heaven said, Luke 3.22.
Thou art my beloved Son, in Thee I am well-pleased. When he was baptized, he
fasted forty days and nights, and permitted Satan to tempt him
extraordinarily, by carrying him from place to place, Luke 4. Mat. 4.
that he might extraordinarily overcome. When Nathanael came to him, At qui
causas causis, parts partibus volumus aequa^e, magis nos valemus ostendere
quid in Christo fuerimus secuti, quam in Philosophis quid vos. Ac nos quidem in
illo secuti haec sumus: Opera illa magnifica potentissimafque virtutes, quas
variis edidit, exhibu^tque miraculis, quibus quivis posset ad necessitatem
credulitatis adduci, and judicare fideliter, non esse quae fierent hominis sed
Divinae alicujus and incognitae porestatis. Vos in Philosophis virtutes secuti
quas estis? ut magis vo^illis, quam nos Christo oportuerit credere? Quisquam ne
illorum aliquando verbo uno potuit, aut unius imperii jussione non dicam maris
insanias aut tempestatum furores prohibere, compescere, non coecis restituere
lumina, non ad vitam revocare defurc^os, non annosas dissovere passiones sed
quod levissimum est furenculum, scabiem, aut inhaerentem spinulam callo una
interdictione sanare? -- Personarum contentio non est eloquentiae viribus, sed
gestorum operum virtute pendenda. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2.
he told him his heart, and told him what talk he had with Philip afar off,
till he convinced him that he was Omniscient. At Cana of Galilee at a Feast, he
turned their Water into Wine. At Capernaum he dispossessed a Demoniack, Luke
4.33, 34, etc. He healed Simons Mother of a Fever at a word, Luke 4.38, 39. He
healed multitudes of torments, diseases, and madness, Mat. 4.24. Luke 4.40, 41.
He cleanses a Leaper by a word, Math. 8.2, 3. Luke 5.12. so also he does by a
Paralitick, Math. 9. Luke 5. He tells the Samaritane woman all that she had
done, Joh. 4. At Capernaum he healed a Noble-mans Son by a word, Joh. 4. At
Jerusalem he cured an impotent Man that had waited five and thirty years: A
touch of his Garment cures a Woman diseased with an Issue of blood twelve
years, Math. 9.20. He cured two blind men with a touch, and a word, Math.
9.28, 29. He dispossessed another Demoniack, Mat. 9.32. He raises Jairus
daughter at a word, (who was dead, or seemed so,) Mat. 9.23, 24. He
dispossessed another Demoniack, blind and dumb, Mat. 12. He heals the
Servant of a Centurion ready to dye, by a word, Luke 7. He raises the Son of a
Widow from death that was carried out in a Biere to be buried, Luke 7. With
five Barley Loaves and two small Fishes, he feeds five thousand, and twelve
baskets full of the fragments did remain, Mat. 14. Joh. 6. He walks upon the
waters of the Sea, Mat. 14. He causes Peter to do the like, Mat. 14. All the
diseased of the Country were perfectly healed by touching the hem of his
garment, Mat. 14.36. He again healed multitudes, lame, dumb, blind, maimed,
etc. Math. 15. He again fed four thousand with seven Loaves, and a few little
Fishes, and seven baskets full were left, Math. 15. He restores a man born
blind to his sight, Joh. 9. In the sight of three of his Disciples he is
transfigured into a Glory which they could not behold, and Moses and Elias
talked with him, and a voice out of the Cloud said, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well-pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17. Luke 9. He healed the Lunatic,
Mat. 17. Multitudes are healed by him, Mat. 19.2. Two blind men are healed,
Mat. 20. He healed a Crooked woman, Luk 13.11. He withers up a fruitless Tree
at a word, Mark 11. He restores a blind man nigh to Jericho, Luke 18.35. He
restores Lazarus from death to life, that was four days dead and buried, Joh.
11. He foretells Judas, that he would betray him: And he frequently and
plainly foretold his own sufferings, death and resurrection. And he expressly
foretold the destruction of Jerusalem and of the Temple, and the great calamity
of that place, even before that generation past away, Mat. 24, etc. He
prophesied his death the night before in the institution of his Supper. When he
dyed, the Sun was darkened, and the Earth trembled, and the Vail of the Temple
rent, and the dead bodies of many arose, and appeared: so that the Captain that
kept guard, said, Truly this was the Son of God, Mat. 27. When he was crucified
and buried, though his Gravestone was sealed, and a guard of Soldiers set to
watch it, Angels appeared, and rolled away the Stone, and spoke to those that
enquired after him: And he rose and revived, and staid forty days on Earth
with his Disciples: He appeared to them by the way: He came often among them on
the First day of the week, at their Meetings, when the doors were shut: He
called Thomas to see the prints of the Nails, and put his finger into his side,
and not be faithless but believing, till he forced him to cry out, My Lord, and
my God! Joh. 20. He appears to them as they are fishing, and works a
miracle in their draught, and provideth them broiled Fish, and eats with
them: He expostulated with Simon, and engaged him as he loved him to feed his
Sheep, and discourses of the age of John, Joh. 21. He gives his Apostles
their full Commission for their gathering his Church by Preaching and Baptism,
and edifying it by teaching them all that he had commanded them, and gives
them the Keys of it, Mat. 28. Joh. 19. and 20. He appears to above five
hundred Brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15. He showed himself to them by many
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God; and being assembled with them, commanded them
to tarry at Jerusalem till the Spirit came down (miraculously) upon them: And
he ascended up to Heaven, before their eyes, Act. 1. And two Angels appeared to
them, as they were gazing after him, and told them, that thus he should come
again. When Pentecost was come, when they were all together (about a hundred
and twenty) the Holy Spirit came upon them visibly, in the appearance of fiery
Cloven Tongues, and sat on each of them, and caused them to speak the
languages of many Nations, which they had never learned, in the hearing of all:
Upon the notice of which, and by Peter's Exhortation, about three thousand were
then at once converted. Act. 2. After this, Peter and John do heal a man at the
entrance of the Temple, who had been lame from his birth, and this by the name
of Jesus, before the People: Act. 3. One that was above forty years old, Act.
4.22. When they were forbidden to preach, upon their praises to God, the place
was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 4.31. Ananias
and Sapphira are struck dead by Peter's word, for hypocrisy and lying, Act. 5.
And many Signs and Wonders were done by them among the People, Act. 5.12.
Insomuch that they brought the sick into the streets, and laid them on Beds and
Couches, that at least Peter's shadow might overshaddow them, Act. 5.14, 15. And
a multitude came out of the Cities round about to Jerusalem bringing sick
folks, and Demoniacks, and they were healed every one, v. 16. Upon this, the
Apostles were shut into the common Prison; But an Angel by night opened the
Prison and brought them out, and bid them go preach to the People in the
Temple, Act. 5. When Stephen was martyred, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing at his right hand, Act. 7. Philip at Samaria cured Demoniacks,
Palsies, Lameness, and so converted the people of that City; insomuch that
Simon the Sorcerer himself believed: The Holy Ghost is then given by the
Imposition of the hands of Peter and John, so that Simon offered money for that
gift, Act. 8. Philip is led by the Spirit to convert the Ethiopian Nobleman,
and then carried away, Act. 8. Saul who was one of the murderers of Stephen,
and a great Persecutor of the Church, is stricken down to the Earth, and called
by Jesus Christ, appearing in a light, and speaking to him from Heaven, and is
sent to preach the Gospel, which he does with zeal and power, and patient
labors, to the death, Act. 9. Ananias is commanded by God to instruct him and
baptize him after his first call, Act. 9 Peter at Lydda cures Aeneas by a
word, who had kept his bed eight years of a Palsy, Act. 8. At Joppa he raises
Tabitha from the dead, Act. 9. Cornelius by an Angel is directed to send for
Peter to preach the Gospel to him: The Holy Ghost fell on all that heard his
words, Act. 10. Agabus prophesied of the Dearth, Act. 11. Peter imprisoned by
Herod is delivered by an Angel, who opened the doors, and loosed his bonds, and
brought him out, Act. 12. Herod is eaten to death with worms, Act. 12. At
Paphos Elymas the Sorcerer is stricken blind by Paul's word, for resisting the
Gospel, and Sergius the Roman Deputy is thereby made a Believer, Act. 13. At
Lystra, Paul by a word cures a Creeple that was so born: insomuch as the
People would have done sacrifice to him and Barna^as as to Mercury and Jupiter,
Act. 14. Paul casts out a divining Devil, Act. 16. And being imprisoned and
scourged with Silas, and their feet in the Stocks, at midnight as they sang
Praises to God, an Earthquake shook the foundations of the Prison, the doors
were all opened, and all their bonds loosed, and the Jailor converted, Act. 16.
The Holy Ghost came upon twelve Disciples, upon the imposition of Paul's hands,
Act. 19. And God wrought so many miracles by his hands at Ephesus, that from
his body were brought to the sick, handkerchiefs, and aprons, and the diseases
departed from them, Act. 19. At Troas he raised Eutychus to life, Act. 20. His
sufferings at Jerusalem are foretold by Agabus, Act. 21. At Melita the people
took him for a God, because the Viper hurt him not that fastened on his hand:
And there he cured the Father of Publius the chief man of the Island, of a Flux
and Fever, by Prayer and Imposition of hands. In a word, in all places where
the Apostles came these miracles were wrought, and in all the Churches the
gifts of the Holy Ghost were usual, either of Prophecy or of healing, or of
speaking strange languages, or interpreting them, some had one, and some
another, and some had most or all. And by such miracles were the Christian
Churches planted. And all this power Christ had foretold them of at his
departure from them, Mark. 16.17. [These signs shall follow them that believe:
in my Name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they
shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt
them; they shall lay their hands on the sick and they shall recover.] Yea in
his Lifetime on Earth, he sent forth his Apostles, and seventy Disciples with
the same power, which they exercised openly, Luke 9.1. etc. and 10.16, 17. Thus
was the Gospel confirmed by multitudes of open miracles.

And Christ's own Resurrection and Ascension was the greatest of all. T^ia totus
mundus mirabatur: Christum post mortem surrex isse; cum ca^ne coelum
ascendisse; and per duodecim Apostolos Piscatores mundum convertiss^. Chrysostom.
in Math.
And here it must be noted, that these Miracles were 1. Not one or two, but
multitudes: 2. Not obscure and doubtful, but evident and unquestionable: 3.
Not controlled or checked by any greater contrary Miracles, as the wonders of
the Egyptian Sorcerers were by Moses; but altogether uncontrolled: 4. Not in
one place only, but in all Countries where they came: 5. Not by one or two
persons only, but by very many who were scattered up and down in the World.

And that miracles, and such miracles as these, are a certain proof of the
truth of Christ and Christianity, is most evident; in that they are the
attestation of God himself.

1. It is undeniable, that they are the effects of Gods own Power: If any
question, whether God do them immediately, or whether an Angel or Spirit may
not do them, that makes no difference in the case considerable: for all
creatures are absolutely dependant upon God, and can use no power but what he
gives them, and continues in them, and exercises by them: the power of the
creatures is all of it the power of God: without him they are nothing, and can
do nothing: and God is as near to the effect himself, when he uses an
instrument, as when he uses none. So that undoubtedly it is God's work.

2. And God having no voice, but created, reveals his mind to man by his
operations: and as he cannot lie, so his infinite wisdom and goodness will not
give up the world to such unavoidable deceit, as such a multitude of miracles
would lead them into, if they were used to attest a lie. If I cannot know him
to be sent of God, who raises the dead, and shows me such a Seal of
Omnipotency to his Commission, I have no possibility of knowing who speaks
from God at all, nor of escaping deceit in the greatest matters; of which God
by his Omnipotent Arm would be the cause. But none of this can stand with the
Nature and righteous Government of God. This therefore is an infallible proof
of the Veracity of Christ and his Apostles: and the truth of the History of
these Miracles shall be further opened anon.

. 10. IV. The fourth part of the Spirit's Testimony to Christ is subsequent,
Ideo non omnibus sanctis miracula attribuuntur, ne perniciosissimo errore
decipiantur infirmi, aestimantes in talibus factis esse majora bona, quam in
operibus justitiae, quibus vita aeterna comparatur. Aug. de Civ. Dei, 33.
in the work of Regeneration or Sanctification: in which he effectually
illuminateth the mind, and renews the soul and life to a true resignation,
obedience, and love of God, and to a heavenly mind and conversation: and so
proves Christ to be really and effectively the SAVIOVR.

This evidence is commonly much overlooked, and made little account of by the
ungodly, who have no such Renovation on themselves: because though it may be
discerned in others by the fruits, yet they that have it not in themselves, are
much hindered from discerning it; Christianity is thus truly and orderly
described by Augustine, de Agon. cap. 18.
partly because it is at a distance from them, and because it is in it self
seated in the heart, where it is neither felt nor seen by others, but in the
effects. And partly because the effects are imperfect, and clouded with a
mixture of remaining faults: but especially, because that ungodly men have a
secret enmity to holy things, and thence to holy persons, and therefore are
falsely prejudiced against them: Fides est prima, quae subjugat animam Deo;
deinde praecepta dat vivendi; quibus custoditis spes nostra firmatur and
nutritur, cum quod cognitio and actio beatum faciunt, in cognitione cavendus
est error, in action nequitia.
which is increased by cross interests and courses in their converse. But yet
indeed, the Spirit of Regeneration is a plenary evidence of the truth of Christ
and Christianity.

To manifest which, I shall 1. consider, What it is, and does. 2. How and by
what means. 3. On whom. 4. Against what opposition. 5. That it is Christ indeed
that does it.

I. The change which is made by the Spirit of Christ, does consist in these
particulars following: 1. It takes down pride, and makes men humble and low
in their own eyes: to which end it acquainteth them with their sin, and their
desert and misery. Ille justus and sancti vivit, qui rerum in teger aestimator
est: Ipse est qui ordinatam habet charitatem, ne aut diligat quod non est
diligendum, aut non diligat quod est diligendum, aut amplius diligat quod minus
est diligendum, aut minus diligat quod amplius est diligendum; aut minus aut
amplius quod aeque diligendum est. August. de Doctr. Christian.
2. It teaches men self-denial, and causes them to resign themselves to God,
and use themselves as being wholly his own. 3. It absolutely subjecteth the
Soul to God, and sits up his Authority as absolute, over our thoughts, and
words, and all our actions. And makes the Christians life a course of careful
obedience to his Laws, so far as they understand them. 4. It takes up a
Christians mind with the thankful sense of his Redemption; so that the pardon
of his sins, and his deliverance from hell, and his hopes of everlasting glory,
do form his soul to a holy gratitude, and make the expressions of it to be his
work. 5. It gives man a sense of the love of God, as his gracious Redeemer;
and so of the goodness and mercifulness of his Nature: It causes them to think
of God as their greatest Benefactor, and as one that loves them; and as LOVE
it self: and so it reconcileth their estranged alienated minds to him, and
makes the love of God to be the very constitution and life of the Soul. 6. It
causes men to believe that there is an everlasting Glory to be enjoyed by holy
Souls; where we shall see the glory of God, and be filled with his love, and
exercised in perfect love and praise, and be with Christ, his Angels and
Saints, for evermore: It causes them to take this felicity for their portion,
and to set their hearts upon it, and to make it the chief care and business of
all their lives to seek it. 1. It causes them to live in the joyful hopes and
foresight of this blessedness, and to do all that they do as means thereunto:
and thus it sweetneth all their lives, and makes Religion their chief delight.
8. It accordingly employeth their thoughts and tongues; so that the praises of
God, and the mention of their everlasting blessedness, and of the way thereto,
is their most delightful conference, as it beseems travelers to the City of
God: and so their political converse is in heaven. 9. And thus it abateth the
fears of death, as being but their passage to everlasting life: And those that
are confirmed Christians indeed, do joyfully entertain it, and long to see
their glorified Lord, and the blessed Majesty of their great Creator. 10. It
causes men to love all sanctified persons with a special love of complacency,
and all mankind with a love of benevolence; even to love our neighbors as our
selves, and to abhor that selfishness which would engage us against our
neighbors good. 11. It causes men to love their enemies, and to forgive and
forbear, and to avoid all unjust and unmerciful revenge. It makes men meek,
long-suffering and patient, though not impassionate, insensible, or void of
that anger, Apud Christianos, non qui patitur, sed qui facit injuriam miser
est. H^e^on.
which is the necessary opposer of sin and folly. 12. It employeth men in doing
all the good they can: it makes them long for the holiness and happiness of
one another's souls, and desirous to do good to those that are in need,
according to our power. 13. This true Regeneration by the Spirit of Christ,
does make those Superiors that has it, even Princes, Magistrates, Parents and
Masters, to Rule those under them in holiness, love and justice, with
self-denial; seeking more the pleasing of God, and the happiness of their
Subjects, for soul and body, than any carnal selfish interest of their own: and
therefore it must needs be the blessing of that happy Kingdom, Society or
Family, which has such a holy Governor, (O that they were not so few!) 14. It
makes subjects, and children, and servants, submissive, and conscionable in
all the duties of their Relations; and to honor their Superiors as the
Officers of God, Sanctitatis causa servanda sunt, pudicitia corporis, castitas
animae, and veritas doctrinae. Aug. ibid.
and to obey them in all just subordination to him. 15. It causes men to love
Justice, and to do as they would be done by, and to desire the welfare of the
souls, bodies, estates and honor of their neighbors as their own. 16. It
causes men to subdue their adpetites, and lusts, and fleshly desires, and to
set up the government of God and sanctified Reason over them; and to take their
flesh for that greatest enemy (in our corrupted state) which we must chiefly
watch against, and master, as being a Rebel against God and Reason. It allows
a man so much sensitive pleasure as God forbids not, and as tends to the
holiness of the soul, and furthereth us in God's service; and all the rest it
rebukes and resists. 17. It causes men to estimate all the wealth, and
honor, and dignities of the world, as they have respect to God and a better
world, and as they either help or hinder us in the pleasing of God, and seeking
immortality: and as they are against God and our spiritual work and happiness,
it causes us to account them but as mere vanity, Fid^s attingit inaccessa,
deprehendit ignota, comprehendit immensa, apprehendit novissima: Ipsam denique
aeternitatem suo illo vastissimo sinu quodammodo circumcludit. Bern. in Cant.
loss and dung. 18. It keeps men in a life of watchfulness against all those
temptations, which would draw them from this holy course, and in a continual
warfare against Satan and his Kingdom, under conduct of Jesus Christ. 19. It
causes men to prepare for sufferings in this world, and to look for no great
matters here: to expect persecutions, crosses, losses, wants, defamations,
injuries, and painful sicknesses, and death; and to spend their time in
preparing all that furniture of mind, which is necessary to their support and
comfort in such a day of trial; that they may be patient and joyful in
tribulation and bodily distress, as having a comfortable relation to God and
Heaven, which will incomparably weigh down all. 20. It causes men to
acknowledge, that all this grace and mercy is from the love of God alone, and
to depend on him for it by faith in Christ; and to devote and refer all to
himself again; and make it our ultimate end to please him; and thus to subserve
him as the first Efficient, the chief Dirigent, and the ultimate, final Cause
of all: of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things; to whom be Glory
for ever, Amen.

This is the true description of that Regenerate Sanctified state, Quatuor
mirabilis fecit Deus: de Piscatore primum Ecclesiae pastorem: de persecutore
magistrum and doctorem gentium: de publicano primum Evangelistam; de latrone
primum Coelicolam. Chrysostom. in Matthew.
which the Spirit of Christ does work on all whom he will save, and that are
Christians indeed, and not in Name only. And certainly this is the Image of
God's Holiness, and the just constitution and use of a reasonable Soul: And
therefore he that brings men to this is a Real Savior, (of whom more anon.)

II. And it is very considerable, by what means, and in what manner all this is
done: It is done by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and that in
plainness and simplicity: The curiosity of artificial oratory does usually but
hinder the success, as painting does the light of windows: Multo melius est, ex
duobus imperfectis rusticitatem sanctam habere, quam eloquentiam peccatricem.
Hieron. ad Nepo^.
It was a few plain men, that came with spiritual power, and not with the
entising words of humane wisdom, or curiosities of vain Philosophy, who did
more in this work than any of their successors have done since. As in Naturals,
every thing is apt to communicate its own nature, and not another; heat
causes heat, and cold causes cold; The better any Philosopher was, the nearer
he came to the Christian Pastors, as to the converting of souls; that is, They
wrought the greatest reformation on their Auditors. Laertius says of Socrates,
that Theaetetum cum de disciplina dissereret, ut ait Plato, mirifice immutatum,
divinumque ferme remisit. Eutyphrona, qui patri diem dixerat, quaedam de
justitia and pietate loquens, ab instituto revocav^t. Lysidem hortando maxim
moralem fecit. Lamproclem fillum in matrem immitem and ferum, ut ait Zenophon,
suadendo ad reverentiam reduxit. Glauco^em Platonis fratrem ad rempublicam
accedere volentem, a proposito retraxit, quod is rudis esset, ignarusque rerum.
These were the converts of Socrates; a change agreeable to the verities which
he delivered. But it is another kind of success that the doctrine of
Christianity has had.
so wit by communication causes wit, and common learning causes common
learning; and so it is holiness and love which are fittest to communicate and
cause holiness and love: which common qualifications are too low for (though
they may be helpful in their several places and degrees.) what contemned
instruments has God used in the world, to do that for the regenerating of
souls, which the greatest Emperors by their Laws, nor the subtilest
Philosophers by their Precepts, did not? The Athenian Philosophers despised
Paul, and Gallio counted his doctrine but a supertitious talk about names and
words; but Satan himself despised not those, whom he tempted men to despise,
but perceived they were like to be the ruin of his Kingdom, and therefore
every where stirred up the most vehement furious resistance of them. It is
evident therefore, that there is an inward effectual operation of the holy
Ghost, which gives success to these means, which are naturally in themselves
so weak.

And it is to be observed, that this great change is very often wrought on a
sudden, in a prevalent (though not a perfect) degree. One Sermon has done that
for a many thousand sinners, which twenty years teaching of the greatest
Philosophers never did. One Sermon has turned them from the sins which they
had lived in all their days; and has turned them to a life which they were
strangers to before, or else abhorred: One Sermon has taken down the world,
which had their hearts, and has put it under their feet, and has turned their
hearts to another world: which shows that there is an internal Agent, more
powerful than the speaker.

And it is remarkable that in the main, the change is wrought in one and the
same method: first, humbling men for sin and misery, and then leading them to
Jesus Christ as the remedy, and to God by him; and so kindling the love of God
in them by the bellows of faith; and then leading them toward perfection in
the exercises of that holy love.

III. And it will further lead us to the original of this Change, to consider
on whom it is thus wrought. 1. For their place and time. 2. Their quality in
themselves. 3. And as compared to each other. 4. And as to their numbers.

1. For time and place, it is in all ages since Christ (to say nothing of the
former ages now) and in all Nations and Countries which have received him and
his Gospel, that Souls have been thus regenerated to God. If it had been only a
fanatic rapture of brainsick men, it would have been like the effects of the
Heresies of the Valentinians, Basilidians, Gnostics, Montanists, etc. or of
the Swenckfeldians, Weigelians, Behmenists, Quakers, and other such
Enthusiasts, who make a stir for one Age, in some one corner of the world, and
then go out with a perpetual stink. In all Ages and Countries, these effects of
Christian Doctrine are the very same as they were in the first Age, and the
first Country where it was preached. Just such effects as it has in one
Kingdom or Family, it has in all others who equally receive it; and just such
persons as Christians were in the first Ages at Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch,
Philippi, etc. such are they now in England, according to their several degrees
of grace, (though not in miracles and things extraordinary to the Church.) The
children of no one father are so like as all God's sanctified children are
throughout the world.

2. As to their civil quality, it is men of all degrees that are thus
sanctified, though fewest of the Princes and great ones of the world. And as to
their moral qualification, it sometime falls on men prepared by a considering
sober temper, and by natural plainness and honesty of heart; and sometimes it
befalls such as are most profane, and drowned in sin, and never dreamt of
such a change; nay, purposely set their minds against it: These God does often
suddenly surprise by an over-powering light, and
suitable-constraining-overcoming attraction, and makes them new men.

3. And as to their capacities compared, there is plainly a distinguishing hand
that disposes of the work. Sometimes a persecuting Saul is converted by a
voice from Heaven, when Pharisees that were less Persecutors are left in their
unregeneracy. Sometimes under the same Sermon, one that was more profane and
less prepared is converted, when another that was more sober and better
disposed remains as he was before: The husband and the wife, the Parents and
the Children, Brothers and Sisters, Companions and Friends, are divided by this
work, and one converted and the other not: Though none is deprived of this
Mercy, but upon the guilt of their forfeiture, resistance, or contempt; yet is
there plainly the effect of some special choice of the Holy Spirit, in taking
out some of these that abused and forfeited grace, and changing them by an
insuperable work.

4. And as to the number, it is many thousands that are thus renewed; enough to
show the Love and Power of him that calls them: But yet the far smaller part
of mankind, to show his Dominion, and distinguishing will, who knows the
reason of all his works: (of which more anon.)

IV. Consider what Opposition this work of Grace does overcome: 1. Within us.
2. Without us.

1. Within men, it finds 1. A dungeon of Ignorance, Nullus sanctus and justus
caret peccato; nec tamen ex hoc desinit esse justus vel sanctus: Cum affectu
teneat sanctitatem. August. de desin. Eccles. dogm.
which it dispelleth by it is heavenly light. 2. Abundance of error and
prejudice which it unteacheth men. 3. A stupid hardened heart, which it
softeneth; and a senseless sleepiness of Soul, which it overcomes, by
awakening quickening power: 4. A love to sin, which it turns into hatred: 5.
An idolizing self-esteem, and self-conceitedness, and self-love, and
self-willedness, To the grand objection, of the many that are not reformed by
Christianity, let Cicero answer, who telling us how few Philosophers lived as
they taught, objecteth. [Nonne verendum, si est ita ut dicis, ne Philosophiam
falsa gloria exornes? Quod est enim majus argumentum nihil eam prodesse, quam
quosdam perfectos Philosophos turpiter vivere? Resp. Nullum vero id quidem
argumentum est: nam ut agri non omnes frugiferi sunt qui coluntur, sic animi
non omnes culti fructum ferunt; atque ut ager quamvis fertilis sine cultura
fructuosus esse non potest, sic fine doctrina animus: ita est utraque res sine
altera debilis. Cultura autem animi Philosophia est, quae extrahit vitia
radicitus, and praeparat animos ad salus accipicudos. Tuscul. 2, p. 252, 253.
which it turns into self-loathing and self-denial: not making us loath our
selves as Natural, or as Renewed, but as corrupt with sin, and abusers of
Mercy; and such as by wilful folly have wronged God, and undone themselves: So
that Repentance makes men fall out with themselves, and become as loathsome in
their own eyes. 6. It finds in us an over-valuing love of this present World,
and a foolish inordinate desire to its profits, dignities, and honors; which
it destroys and turns into a rational contempt. 7. It finds in us a
prevailing sensuality, and an unreasonable appetite and lust; and a Flesh that
would bear down both Reason and the Authority of God: And this it subdueth, and
mortifieth it is inordinate desires, and brings it under the Laws of God. 8.
It finds all this radicated and confirmed by Custom: And overcomes those
sins, which a sinner has turned as into his Nature, and has lived in the love
and practice of all his days. All this and more opposition within us grace
does overcome in all the sanctified: And there is not one of all these if well
considered of, but will appear to be of no small strength, and difficulty to be
truly conquered.

2. And without us, the holy Spirit overcomes, 1. Worldly allurements, 2.
Worldly men, 3. All other assaults of Satan.

1. While the Soul is in flesh, and works by the means of the outward senses,
these present things will be a strong temptation to us: Prosperity and plenty,
wealth and honor, ease and pleasure are accommodated to the desires of the
flesh; partly to its natural appetite, and much more to it as inordinate by
corruption: And the flesh cares not for Reason, how much soever it gainsay:
And then all these entising things are near us, and still present with us, and
before our eyes; when Heavenly things are all unseen: And the sweetness of
honor, wealth and pleasure, is known by feeling, and therefore known easily
and by all; when the goodness of things spiritual is known only by Reason, and
believing: All which laid together (with sad experience) do fully show, that it
must be a very great work to overcome this World, and raise the heart above it
to a better, and so to sanctify a soul.

2. And worldly men do rise up against this Holy work, as as well as worldly
things: Undeniable experience assures us, that through all the World, ungodly
sensual men, have a mavelous implacable hatred to Godlyness and true
mortification; and will by flattery or slanders, or scorns, or plots, or cruel
violence, do all that they are able to resist it: So that he that will live a
holy temperate life, must make himself a scorn, if not a prey: The foolish wit
of the ungodly is bent, to reason men out of Faith, Hope, and Holiness, and to
cavil against our obedience to God, and to disgrace all that course of life,
which is necessary to salvation. And it is a great work to overcome all these
temptations of the foolish and furious World. Great I say, because of the great
folly and corruption of unregenerate men, on whom it must be wrought; though it
would be smaller to a wise and considerate person. To be made as an Owl, and
hunted as a Partridge or a beast of Prey, by those that we converse with, when
we might have their favor, and friendship, and Preferments, if we would say
and do as they, this is not easy to flesh and blood: But its easy to the
Spirit of God.

3. The Devil is so notoriously an enemy to this sanctifying work, that it is a
strong discovery that Christ was sent from God to do it. What a stir does he
first make to keep out the Gospel, that it may not be Preached to the Nations
of the World? And where that will not serve, what a stir does he make to
debauch Christ's Ministers, and corrupt them by ignorance, heresy, error,
schism, domineering pride, sensuality, covetousness, slothfulness and
negligence, that they may do the work of Christ deceitfully, as if they did it
not: Yea, and if it may be, to win them to his service, to destroy the Church
by Oppression or Division, under pretense of serving Christ? And what cunning
and industry does this Serpent use, to insinuate into great ones and Rulers of
the Earth, a prejudice against Christ and Godliness, and to make them believe,
that all that are seriously Godly are their enemies, and are against some
interest of theirs, that so he might take the sword which God has put into
their hands, and turn it to his own service against him that gave it? How
cunning and diligent is he to seduce men that begin to set themselves to a
Religious life, into some false Opinions, or dividing Sects, or scandalous
unjustifiable practice, that thereby he may triumph against Christ, and have
something to say against Religion, from the faults of men, when he has nothing
to say against it justly from it self? and that he may have something to say to
those Rulers and People, with whom he would fain make Religion odious? How
cunningly does he engage ungodly men, to be his Servants in seducing others,
and making them such as they are themselves, and in standing up for sin and
darkness against the light and life of Faith? So that ungodly men are but the
Soldiers and Preachers of the Devil, in all parts employed to fight against
God, and draw men from holiness and justice, and temperance, to sin, and to
damnation: So that it is a very discernable thing, that Satan is the Head of
one party in the World, as the Destroying Prince of Darkness and deceit; and
that Christ is the Head of the other party, as the Prince of light, and truth,
and holiness: And that there is a continued war or opposition, between these
two Kingdoms or Armies, in all parts and ages of the World (of which I have
fullyer treated in another Book Treatise against Infidelity, Part 3.
) If any shall say, How know you that all this is the work of Satan? I shall
have fitter occasion to answer that anon: I shall now say but this, that the
nature of the work, the tendency of it, the irrational, erroneous, or brutish
tyrannical manner of doing it, the internal importunity and manner of his
suggestions, and the effects of all, and the contrariety of it to God and Man,
will soon show a considerate man the author. (Though more shall be anon added.)

V. All this aforegoing will show a reasonable man, that the Spirits
Regenerating work is such, as is a full attestation of God to that Doctrine, by
which it is effected. And if any now say, How prove you, that all this is to be
ascribed to Jesus Christ, any more than to Socrates or to Seneca, or Cicero: I
answer: 1. So much truth of a sacred tendency, as Plato, or Pythagoras, or
Socrates, or any Philosopher taught, might do some good, and work some
reformation, according to its quality and degree: But as it was a lame
imperfect doctrine which they taught, so was it a very lame imperfect
reformation which they wrought, unlike the effects of the Doctrine and Spirit
of Jesus Christ: I need to say no more of this, than to desire any man to make
an impartial and judicious comparison between them. And, besides much more, he
shall quickly find these differences following: 1. That the Philosophers
Disciples had a very poor, dark, disordered knowledge of God, Difference
between the effects of Philosophy and Christianity.
in comparison of the Christians: and that mixed with odious fopperies, either
blasphemous or idolatrous. 2. The Philosophers spoke of God, and the Life to
come almost altogether notionally, as they did of Logic or Physics; and very
few of them Practically, as a thing that man's happiness or misery was so much
concerned in. 3. They spoke very jejunely and dryly about a holy state and
course of life, and the duty of Man to God, in resignation, devotedness,
obedience and love. 4. They said little comparatively to the true humbling of a
Soul, nor in the just discovery of the evil of sin, nor for self-denial. 5.
They gave too great countenance to Pride, and Worldliness, and pleasing the
senses by excess. 6. Some of the strictest of the Philosophers, were for a
Community of Wives; Laertius says of the Stoics (in Zenone li. 6. p. 442.)
Placet item illis uxores quoque communes esse oportere apud sapientes, ut
quilibet illi congrediatur quae sibi prior occurrit, ut ait Zeno in Rep. and
Chrysippus de Rep. Diogone item Cynico and Platone hujus rei autoribus. What
blindness and impurity against Nature was in this opinion?
The Doctrine of true Love to one another, is taught by them exceeding lamely
and defectively: 7. Revenge is too much indulged by them, and loving our
Enemies, and forgiving great wrongs, was little known, or taught, or practiced:
8. They were so pitifully unacquainted with the certainty and blessedness of
the Life to come, that they say nothing of it, that is ever likely to make any
considerable number set their hearts on Heaven, and to live a heavenly Life. 9.
They were so unacquainted with the nature and will of God, that they taught and
used such a manner of Worship as tended rather to delude and corrupt men, than
to sanctify them: 10. They meddled so little with the inward sins and duties of
the heart, especially about the holy Love of God; and their goodness was so
much in outward acts, and in mere respect to men; that they were not like to
sanctify the Soul, or make the Man good, that his actions might be good; but
only to polish men for Civil Societies; with the addition of a little Varnish
of Superstition and Hypocrisy. 11. Their very style is either suitable to dead
speculation, as a Lecture of Metaphysics; or slight and dull, and unlike to
be effectual to convert and sanctify men's Souls: 12. Almost all is done in
such a disputing sophistical way, and clogged with so many obscurities,
uncertainties, and self-contradictions, and mixed in heaps of Physical and
Logical Subtilties, that they were unfit for the common peoples benefit, and
could tend but to the benefit of a few. 13. Experience taught, and still
teaches the World, that Holy Souls and Lives, that were sincerely set upon God
and Heaven, were strangers amongst the Disciples of the Philosophers, and other
Heathens: Or if it be thought that there were some such among them, certainly,
they were very few, in comparison of true Christians, and those few very dark,
and diseased and defective: with us, a Child at ten years old will know more
of God, and show more true piety, than did any of their Philosophers; with us
poor women, and laboring persons, do live in that holiness, and heavenliness
of mind and conversation, which the wisest of the Philosophers never did
attain. I spoke of this before, but here also thought meet, to show you the
difference between the effect of Christ's doctrine and the Philosophers.

2. And that all this is justly to be imputed to Christ himself, I shall now
prove. 1. He gave them a perfect pattern for his holy, obedient, heavenly Life,
in his own person and his conversation here on Earth. 2. His Doctrine and Law
requires all this holiness which I described to you: You find the Prescript
in his Word, of which the holy Souls and Lives of men are but a transcript. 3.
All his Institutions and Ordinances are but means and helps to this. 4. He has
made it the condition of man's Salvation to be thus holy, in sincerity, and to
desire and seek after perfection in it: He takes no other for true Christians
indeed, nor will save any other at the last. 5. All his comforting Promises of
mercy and defense are made only to such. 6. He has made it the Office of his
Ministers through the World, to persuade and draw men to this Holiness: And if
you hear the Sermons, and read the Books which any faithful Minister of Christ
does preach or write, you will soon see that this is the business of them all:
And you may soon perceive, that these Ministers have another kind of preaching
and writing than the Philosophers had; more clear, more congruous, more
spiritual, more powerful, and likely to win men to Holiness and Heavenliness:
When our Divines and their Philosophers are compared, as to their promoting of
true Holiness, verily, the latter seem to be but as Glowworms, and the former
to be the Candles for the Family of God: And yet I truly value the wisdom and
virtue which I find in a Plato, a Seneca, a Cicero, an Antonine, or any of
them. If you say, our advantage is because coming after all, we have the helps
of all, even of those Philosophers. I answer, mark in our Books and Sermons
whether it be any thing but Christianity which we preach? It is from Christ and
Scripture, that we fetch our Doctrine, and not from the Philosophers: we use
their helps in Logic, Physics, etc. But that is nothing to our Doctrine! He
that taught me to speak English, did not teach me the Doctrine which I preach
in English: And he that teaches me to use the Instruments of Logic, does not
teach me the doctrine about which I use them. And why did not those
Philosophers by all their art, attain to that skill in this Sacred work, as the
Ministers of Christ do, when they had as much or more of the Arts than we? I
read indeed of many good Orations then used; even in those of the Emperor
Julian, there is much good; and in Antonine, Arrian, Epictetus, Plutarch, more.
And I read of much taking-Oratory of the Bonzii in Japan, etc. But compared to
the endeavors of Christian Divines, they are poor, pedantick, barren things,
and little sparks; and the success of them is but answerable. 7. Christ did
before hand promise to send his Spirit into men's Souls, to do all this work
upon all his Chosen. And as he promised, just so he does. 8. And we find by
experience, that it is the preaching of Christ's doctrine by which the work is
done: It is by the reading of the sacred Scripture, or hearing the Doctrine of
it opened and applied to us, that Souls are thus changed, as is before
described: And if it be by the medicines which he sends us himself, by the
hands of his own Servants, that we are healed, we need not doubt whether it be
he that healed us. His Doctrine does it as the instrumental Cause; for we find
it adapted thereunto, and we find nothing done upon us but by that Doctrine;
nor any remaining effect but what is the impression of it: But his Spirit
inwardly renews us as the Principal cause, and works with and by the Word:
For we find that the Word does not work upon all; nor upon all alike, that are
alike prepared: But we easily perceive a voluntary distinguishing choice in the
operation. And we find a power more than can be in the words alone, in the
effect upon our selves. The heart is like the Wax, and the Word like the Seal,
and the Spirit like the hand that strongly applies it: We feel upon our
hearts, that (though nothing is done without the Seal, yet) a greater force
does make the impression than the weight of the Seal alone could cause.

By this time it is evident, that this work of Sanctification is the
attestation of God by which he publicly owneth the Gospel, and declares to
the World, that Christ is the Savior, and his Word is true: For 1. It is
certain that this work of Renovation is the work of God: For 1. It is his Image
on the Soul: It is the life of the Soul as flowing from his Holy Life: wherein
are contained the Trinity of Perfections: It is the Power of the Soul, by which
it can overcome the Flesh, the World and the Devil, which without it none is
able to do: It is the Wisdom of the Soul, produced by his Light and Wisdom; by
which we know the difference between Good and Evil, and our Reason is restored
to its dominion over fleshly sense: It is the Goodness of the Soul, by which it
is made suitable to the Eternal Good; and fit to know him, love him, praise
him, serve him, and enjoy him: And therefore nothing lower than his Goodness
can be its principal Cause.

2. It subserveth the Interest of God in the World: And recovereth the apostate
Soul to himself: It disposes it to honor him, love him and obey him: It
delivers up the whole man to him as his own: It casts down all that
rebelleth against him: It casts out all which was preferred before him: It
rejects all which stands up against him, and would seduce and tempt us from
him: And therefore it is certainly his work.

3. Whose else should it be? Would Satan or any evil cause produce so excellent
an effect? would the worst of beings do the best of works? (It is the best that
is done in this lower world) Would any enemy of God so much honor him, and
promote his interest, and restore him his own? would any enemy of mankind thus
advance us, and bring us up to a life of the highest honor and delights, that
we are capable of on earth, and give us the hopes of life eternal?

And if any good Angel, or other Cause, should do it, all reason will confess,
that they do it but as the Messengers or Instruments of God, and as second
causes, and not as the first Cause: for otherwise we should make them gods. For
my own part, my Soul perceives, that it is God himself that has imprinted
this his Image on me, and has hereby, as it were, written upon me his Name and
Mark, even HOLINESS TO THE LORD; and I bear about me continually a Witness of
Himself, his Son, and holy Spirit; a Witness within me, which is the Seal of
God, and the pledge of his love, and the earnest of my heavenly inheritance.

And if our Sanctification be thus of GOD, it is certainly his attestation to
the truth of Christ, and to his Gospel: for, 1. No man that knows the
perfections of God, will ever believe, that he would bless a deceiver, and a
lie, to be the means of the most holy and excellent work that ever was done in
the world. If Christ were a Deceiver, his crime would be so execrable, as would
engage the Justice of God against him, as he is the righteous Governor of the
world: And therefore he would not so highly honor him, to be his chiefest
instrument for the worlds Renovation. He is not impotent to need such
instruments; he is not ignorant, that he should so mistake in the choice of
instruments; he is not bad, that he should love and use such Instruments, and
comply with their deceits. These things are all so clear and sure, that I
cannot doubt of them.

2. No man that knows the mercifulness of God, and the Justice of his
Government can believe, that he would give up Mankind so remedilesly to
seduction; yea, and be the principal causer of it himself. For if besides
Prophecy, and a holy Doctrine, and a multitude of famous Miracles, a Deceiver
might also be the great Renewer and Sanctifier of the world, to bring man back
to the obedience of God, and to repair his Image on Mankind; what possibility
were there of our discovery of that deceit? Or rather should we not say, he
were a blessed Deceiver, that had deceived us from our sin and misery, and
brought back our straying souls to God?

3. Nay, when Christ foretold men, that he would send his Spirit to do all
this work, and would renew men for eternal life, and thus be with us to the end
of the world; and when I see all this done, I must needs believe, that he that
can send down a Sanctifying Spirit, a Spirit of Life, a Spirit of Power, Light
and Love, to make his Doctrine in the mouths of his Ministers effectual to men's
Regeneration and Sanctification, is no less himself than God, or certainly no
less than his certain Administrator.

4. What need I more to prove the Cause than the adequate effect? When I find
that Christ does actually save me, shall I question whether he be my Savior?
When I find that he saves thousands about me, and offers the same to others,
shall I doubt whether he be the Savior of the world? Sure he that heals us
all, and that so wonderfully and so cheaply, may well be called our Physician.
If he had promised only to save us, I might have doubted whether he would
perform it, and consequently whether he be indeed the Savior. But when he
performs it on my self, and performs it on thousands round about me, to
doubt yet whether he be the Savior, when he actually saves us, is to be
ignorant in despite of Reason and Experience. I conclude therefore that the
Spirit of Sanctification is the infallible Witness of the Verity of the Gospel,
and the Veracity of Jesus Christ.

5. And I entreat all that read this, further to observe, the great use and
advantage of this testimony above others: in that it is continued from
Generation to Generation, and not as the gift and testimony of Miracles, which
continued plentifully but one Age, and with diminution somewhat after: this is
Christ's witness to the end of the world, in every Country, and to every Soul:
yea, and continually dwelling in them: For if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. He that is not able to examine the History
which reports the Miracles to him, may be able to find upon his Soul the
Image of God imprinted by the Gospel, and to know that the Gospel has that
Image in it self which it imprinteth upon others; and that it comes from God,
which leads men so directly unto God; and that it is certainly his own means
which he blesses to so great and excellent ends.

6. Note also, that part of the work of the Spirit of God in succeeding the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, does consist in the effectual production of Faith it
self: for though the work be wrought by the Reasons of the Gospel, and the
Evidences of Truth; yet is it also wrought by the Spirit of God, concurring
with that evidence, and as the internal Efficient, exciting the sluggish
faculties to do their office, and illustrating the understanding, and fitting
the will to entertain the truth: for the difficulties are so great, and the
temptations to unbelief so subtle and violent, and our own indisposedness
through corruption, the greatest impediment of all, that the bare Word alone
would not produce a belief of that lively vigorous nature, as is necessary to
its noble effects and ends, without the internal cooperation of the Spirit. So
that Christ does not only teach us the Christian Faith and Religion, but does
give it us, and work it in us by his Spirit. And he that can do so, does prove
the Divine approbation of his Doctrine, without which, he could not have the
command of men's Souls.

7. Note also, that the Gospel proposes to the Soul of man both Truth and
Goodness: and the Truth is in order to the Good, and subservient to it: That
Christ is indeed the Savior, and his Word infallibly true, is believed, that
we may be made partakers of his Salvation, and of the Grace and Glory promised.
And when the Spirit by the Gospel has regenerated and renewed any Soul, he
has given him part of that grace in possession, and has procreated in him the
habitual love of God, and of holiness, with a love to that Savior and holy
Word which brought him to it. So that this Love is now become as a new Nature
to the Soul: and this being done, the Soul cleaves now as fast to Christ and
the Gospel by Love, as by Belief: not that love becomes an irrational causless
love, nor continues without the continuance of Belief, or Belief without the
Reasons and Evidence of Verity and Credibility: But Love now by concurrence
greatly assisteth Faith it self, and is the faster hold of the two: so that the
Soul that is very weak in its Reasoning faculty, and may often lose the sight of
these Evidences of truth, which it did once perceive, may still hold fast by
this holy Love. As the man that by reasoning has been convinced that honey is
sweet, will easilier change his mind than he that has tasted it; so Love is
the Souls taste, which causes its fastest adherence to God and to the Gospel.
If a caviller dispute with a loving child, or parent, or friend, to alienate
their hearts from one another, and would persuade them that it is but
dissembled love that is professed to them by their relations and friends; Love
will do more here to hinder the belief of such a slander, than Reason alone can
do: and where Reason is not strong enough to answer all that the caviller can
say, yet Love may be strong enough to reject it.

And here I must observe how often I have noted the great mercy of God, to
abundance of poor people, whose reasoning faculty would have failed them in
temptations to Atheism and Infidelity, if they had not had a stronger hold than
that, and their Faith had not been radicated in the Will by Love: I have known
a great number of women who never read a Treatise that pleaded the Cause of the
Christian Religion, nor were able to answer a crafty Infidel, that yet in the
very decaying time of Nature, at fourscore years of age and upward, have lived
in that sense of the Love of God, and in such Love to him and to their Savior,
as that they have longed to die, and be with Christ, and lived in all humility,
charity, and piety, such blameless, exemplary, heavenly Lives, in the joyful
expectation of their Change, as has showed the firmness of their Faith; and
the Love and Experience which was in them, would have rejected a temptation to
Atheism and Unbelief, more effectually than the strongest Reason alone could
ever do. Yet none have cause to reproach such, and say, Their Wills lead their
Understandings, and they customarily and obstinately believe they know not why:
for they have known sufficient reason to believe, and their understandings have
been illuminated to see the truth of true Religion; and it was this knowledge
of Faith which bred their Love and Experience: but when that is done, as Love
is the more noble and perfect operation of the Soul (having the most excellent
object) so it will act more powerfully and prevailingly, and has the strongest
hold: Nor are all they without Light and Reason for their belief, who cannot
form it into arguments, and answer all that is said against it.

Obj. But may not all this which you call Regeneration, and the Image of God,
be the mere power of fantasy, and affectation? and may not all these people
force themselves, like melancholy persons, to conceit that they have that which
indeed they have not?

Answ. 1. I plead for no superstition, granting what Torquatus the Epicurean in
Cic. de fin. l. 1. p. 87. that Superstitione qui imbutus est, quietus esse
nunquam potest: But I like not the quietness which intoxication, madness, or
ignorance of danger does procure.
They are not melancholy persons that I speak of, but those that are as
capable as any others to know their own minds, and what is upon their own
hearts. 2. It is not one or two, but millions. 3. Nature has given man so
great acquaintance with himself, by a power of perceiving his own operations,
that his own cogitations and desires are the first thing that naturally he can
know: and therefore if he cannot know them, he can know nothing. If I cannot
know what I think, and what I love and hate, I can know nothing at all. 4. That
they are really minded and affected as they seem, and have in them that love to
God, and Heaven, and Holiness which they profess, Though there be much
difference, and though prejudice, and saction, and the interest of their
parties, cause uncharitable hypocrites to slander and rail at all that are
against their sect and mind, yet among all Christians, there are holy serious
persons to be sound, though such as the worldly sort do vilify: And all of
them write for Purity, Holiness, Love and Peace, (of which more after.) Read
the writings of Thaulerus, and that excellent holy Book of Gerardus
Zutphaniens. de Reformatione interiori, and de spiritualibus ascensionibus;
where you will see a speculum of other kind of purity than the Philosophers
held sorth.
they show to all the world by the effects: 1. In that it rules the main
course of their lives, and disposes of them in the world. 2. In that these
apprehensions and affections overruled all their worldly fleshly interest, and
cause them to deny the pleasures of the flesh, and the profits and honors of
the world. 3. In that they are constant in it to the death, and have no other
mind in their distress; when as Seneca says, Nothing feigned is of long
continuance, for all forced things are bending back to their natural state. 4.
In that they will lay down their lives, and forsake all the world, for the
hopes which faith in Christ begets in them.

And if the objectors mean, that all this is true, and yet it is but upon
delusion or mistake that they raise these hopes, and raise these affections; I
answer, This is the thing that I am disproving: 1. The love of God, and a holy
mind and life, is not a dream of the Soul, or a deliration: I have proved from
Natural reason in the first Book, that it is the end, and use, and perfection
of man's faculties: that if God be God, and man be man, we are to love him
above all, and to obey him as our absolute Sovereign, and to live as devoted to
him, and to delight in his love. Man were more ignoble or miserable than a
beast, if this were not his work. And is that a dream or a delusion, which
causes a man to live as a man? to the ends that he was made for? and according
to the nature and use of his reason and all his faculties? 2. While the proofs
of the excellency and necessity of a holy life are so fully before laid down,
from natural and supernatural revelation, the Objector does but refuse to see
in the open light, when he satisfies himself with a bare assertion, that all
this is no sufficient ground for a holy life, but that it is taken up upon
mistake. 3. All the world is convinced at one time or other, that on the
contrary it is the unholy, fleshly, worldly life, which is the dream and
dotage, and is caused by the grossest error and deceit.

Object. But how shall I know that there is indeed such holiness in Christians
as you mention, and that it is not dissembled and counterfeit?

Answ. I have told you in the foregoing answer. 1. If you were truly
Christians, you might know it by possession in your selves: as you know that
you love your friend, or a learned man knows that he has learning. 2. If you
have it not your selves, you may see that others do not dissemble, when you see
them, as aforesaid, make it the drift of all their lives, and prefer it before
their worldly interest, and their lives, and hold on constantly in it to the
death. When you see a holy life, what reason have you to question a holy heart?
especially among so great a number, you may well know, that if some be
dissemblers, all the rest are not so.

Obj. But I see no Christians that are really so holy: I see nothing in the
best of them above civility, but only self-conceit, and affectation, and
strictness in their several forms and modes of Worship.

Answ. 1. If you are no better than such your self, it is the greatest shame
and plague of heart that you could have confessed: and it must needs be,
because you have been false to the very light of Nature, and of Grace. 2. If
you know no Christians that are truly holy, it must needs be, either because
you are unacquainted with them, or because your malice will not give you leave
to see any good in these that you dislike. And if you have acquainted your self
with no Christians that were truly holy, what could it be but malice or
sensuality that turned you away from their acquaintance, when there have been
so many round about you? If you have been intimate with them, and known their
secret and open conversation, and yet have not seen any holiness in them, it
can be no better than wilful malice that has blinded you. And because a
negative witness that knows not whether it be so or not, is not to be
regarded against an affirming witness who knows what he says, Serpit hodie
putrida tabes hypocrisis per omne corpus ecclesiae; and quo tolerantius, eo
desperatius; eoque periculosius quo communius. Bernard.
I will here leave my testimony as in the presence of God, the searcher of
hearts, and the revenger of a lie, yea, even of lies pretended for his glory?

I have considered of the characters of a Christian in the twenty particulars
before expressed in this Chapter, (. 10.) and I have examined my soul
concerning them all; and as far as I am able to know my self, I must profess,
in humble thankfulness to my Redeemer, that there is none of them which I find
not in me: And seeing God has given me his testimony within me, to the truth
of the Gospel of his Son, I take it to be my duty in the profession of it, to
give my testimony of it to unbelievers. And I must as solemnly profess, that I
have had acquaintance with hundreds, if not thousands, on whom I have seen such
evidences of a holy heavenly mind, which nothing but uncharitable and
unrighteous censure could deny. Cum dilectione fidem Christiani: sine
dilectione fides daemonum: Qui autem non credunt, pejores sunt quam daemones.
Aug. de Charit.

Hypocrita ut sine fine crucietur, vivere sine fine compellitur: ut cujus vita
hic mortua fuit in culpa, illic ejus mors vivit in poena. Greg. Mor. l. 2.


And I have had special intimate familiarity, with very many, in all whom I
have discerned the Image of God, in such innocence, charity, justice, holiness,
contempt of the world, mortification, self-denial, humility, patience and
heavenly mindedness, in such a measure, that I have seen no cause to question
their sincerity, but great cause to love and honor them as the Saints of God:
yea, I bless the Lord that most of my converse in the world, since the 22d year
of my age, has been with such; and much of it, six years sooner. Therefore for
my own part, I cannot be ignorant that Christ has a sanctified people upon
earth.

Object. Nihil prodest aestimare quod non fis: and duplicis peccati ress es,
non habere quod crederis, and quod habueris simulare. Hieron. ep. ad fill.
Maurit.
But how can one man know another's heart to be sincere?

Answ. I pretend not to know by an infallible certainty the heart of any single
individual person: But, 1. I have in such a course of effects as is mentioned
before, great reason to be very confident of it, and no reason to deny it,
concerning very many. A child cannot be infallibly certain that his father or
mother loves him, because he knows not the heart: But when he considers of
the ordinariness of natural affection, and has always found such usage, as
dearest love does use to cause, he has much reason to be confident of it, and
none to deny it. 2. There may be a certainty that all conjunctly do not
counterfeit, when you have no certainty of any single individual. As I can be
sure that all the mothers in the world do not counterfeit love to their
children, though I cannot be certain of it in any individual. Siquis hominem
qui sanctus non est, sanctum esse crediderit, and Dei cum j^nxerit sucietati,
Christum vio^ (...) membra (...) Omnes (...) Ch^ist^ cor^u (...): Qui in
Christi corpore errat and la^ctur dicens membrum ejus esse sanctum cum non sit,
vel non sanctus cum fit, vide quali crimine obnoxious fiat. Hieron. in Phil.


Object But it is not all Christians, nor most, that are thus holy.

Answ. It is all that are Christians in deed and truth. Christ is so far from
owning any other, that he will condemn them the more for abusing his Name to
the covering of their sins: All are not Christians who have the name of
Christians: in all professions, the vulgar rabble of the ignorant and ungodly,
do use to join with the party that is uppermost, and seem to be of the Religion
which is most for their worldly ends, be it right or wrong, when indeed they
are of none at all. Hypocrites are no true Christians, but the persons that
Christ is most displeased with. Judge but by his precepts and example, and you
will see who they are that are Christians indeed.

Object. But what if the preaching or writings of a Minister do convert and
sanctify men, it does not follow that they are Saviors of the world.

Answ. What ever they do, they do it as the Ministers and Messengers of Christ,
by his Doctrine, and not by any of their own: by his Commission, and in his
Name, and by his Power or Spirit. Therefore it witnesses to his truth and
honor, who is indeed the Savior, which they never affirmed of themselves.

Object. What if Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, the Japonian Bonzii, The
Graecians, Romans and Mahometans take the murder of many thousands in unjust
wars to be glorious, and yet punish the murder of single persons. Their renown
was got by the most transcendent, unjust and most inhumane cruelties: Their
Alexanders and Caesar's were renowned murderers and thieves. Aristotle and
Cicero make revenge a laudable thing, and the omission of it a dishonor. Of
the cruel murderous sport of their Gladiators; the killing their servants when
they were angry; their streams of blood wherewith Rome almost in every age had
flowed, by those Civil Wars which pride and unjust usurpations had produced,
etc. it is needless to tell any that have read their Histories.

Even Cato could lend his wife to his neighbor; and the Mahometans may have
many, and put them away again: and many other such sensualities are the
temperature of their Religion, which was hatched in war, and maintained by it,
and even constituted of war and carnality, added to some precepts of honesty
borrowed from Christianity, and from the honester Heathens.


the Indian Bramenes, etc. do bring any souls to a holy state, (as its like
they did) it will not follow that they were all Saviors of the world.

Answ. 1. They have but an imperfect Doctrine, and consequently make on the
minds of men but a lame defective change: and that change but upon few, and
that but for a few Ages, and then another Sect succeeds them: So that they
have no such attestation and approbation of God, as Christ has in the
renovation of so many thousands all abroad the world, and that for so many ages
together. 2. They did not affirm themselves to be the Sons of God, and the
Saviors of the world; if they had, God would not have annexed such a testimony
to their word, as he does to Christ's. 3. The mercy of God is over all his
works. He has compassion upon all Nations; and sets up some candles, where
the Sun is not yet risen: The Light and Law of Nature are his, as well as the
Light and Law of Supernatural Revelation: and accordingly he has his
instruments for the communication of them, to the rude and ignorant part of the
world. All the truth which any Philosopher teaches, is God's truth: and it is
no wonder if a God of so much goodness, do bless his own truth, according to
its nature and proportion, who ever be the messenger of it. Whether the success
of Philosophy, be ever the true sanctification and salvation of any souls, is a
thing that I meddle not with; (it belongs not to us, and therefore is not
revealed to us:) But it is visible in the Gospel, that all that part of
practical doctrine which the Philosophers taught, is contained in the doctrine
of Christ, as a part in the whole: and therefore the impress and effect is more
full and perfect, as the doctrine; and the impress and effect of the
Philosophers doctrine, can be no better than the cause, which is partial and
defective, and mixed with much corruption and untruth. All that is good in the
Philosophers is in the doctrine of Christ: but they had abundance of false
opinions and idolatries to corrupt it; when Christianity has nothing but clean
and pure. So that as no Philosopher affirmed himself to be the Savior, so his
doctrine was not attested by the plenary and common effect of Regeneration; as
Christ's was: but as they were but the Ministers of the God of Nature, so they
had but an answerable help from God; who could not be supposed (however, had
they wrought miracles) to have attested more than themselves asserted, or laid
claim to.

Object. But Mahomet ventured on a higher arrogation and pretense; and yet if
his doctrine sanctify men, it will not justify his pretenses.

Answ. 1. It is not proved, that his Doctrine does truly sanctify any: 2. The
effect which it has can be but lame, defective, and mixed with much vanity and
error, as his doctrine is: for the effect cannot excel the cause. 3. That part
of his doctrine which is good, and does good, is not his own, but part of
Christ's, from whom he borrowed it, and to whom the good effects are to be
ascribed. 4. Mahomet never pretended to be the Son of God, and Savior of the
World, but only to be a Prophet: Therefore his cause is much like that of the
Philosophers forementioned, saving that he gives a fuller testimony to Christ.
5. If Mahomet had proved his Word, by antecedent Prophesies, Promises, and
Types, through many ages; and by inherent purity, and by concomitant Miracles,
and by such wonderful subsequent communications of renewing sanctifying grace,
by the Spirit of God, so ordinary in the World; we should all have had reason
to believe his Word: But if he pretend only to be a Prophet, and give us none
of all these proofs, but a foppish, ridiculous bundle of Nonsense, full of
carnal doctrines, mixed with holy truth, which he had from Christ, we must judge
accordingly of his Authority and Word, notwithstanding God may make use of that
common truth, to produce an answerable degree of Goodness, among those that
hear and know no better.

These Objections may be further answered anon, among the rest: And thus much
shall here suffice of the great and cogent Evidences of the truth of the
Christian Faith.

CHAP. VII. Of the subservient proofs, and means, by which the forementioned
Evidences are brought to our certain knowledge.
THE witness of the Spirit in the four ways of Evidence already opened, is
proved to be sure, and cogent, if first it be proved to be true, that indeed
such a witness to Jesus Christ, has been given to the World: The Argument is
undeniable, when the Minor is proved, [ He, whose Word is attested by God, by
many thousand years predictions, by the inherent Image of God upon the frame of
his doctrine, by multitudes of uncontrolled Miracles, and by the success of his
Doctrine to the true Regeneration of a great part of the World, is certainly to
be believed: But such is Jesus Christ: Ergo, -- ] I have been hitherto for the
most part proving the Major Proposition, and now come to the Minor; as to the
several branches.

. 1. I. The Prophetical Testimony of the Spirit, is yet legible, in the
Promises, Prophesies and Types, and main design of the Old Testament.

. 2. The Books of Holy Scripture where all these are sound, are certain
uncorrupted records thereof; preserved by the unquestioned tradition and care,
and to this day attested by the general confession, of the Jews, who are the
bitterest enemies to Christianity.

There are no men of reason that I have heard of, that deny the Books of Moses,
and the Psalms, and the Prophets, etc. to be indeed those that went under those
titles from the beginning: And that there can be no considerable corruption in
them, which might much concern their testimony to Christ, the comparing of all
the Copies, and the Versions, yet extant, will evince; together with the
testimony of all sorts of enemies; and the moral impossibility of their
corruption. But I will not stand to prove that which no sober adversary does
deny. To these Books the Christians did appeal, and to these the Jews profess
to stand.

. 3. II. The constitutive inherent image of God upon the Gospel of Christ, is
also still visible in the Books themselves; and needs no other proof, than a
capable Reader (as before described.)

. 4. The preaching and Writings of the Ministers of Christ, do serve to
illustrate this, and help men to discern it; but add nothing to the inherent
perfection of the Gospel, for matter, or for method.

. 5. III. The testimony of the age of Miracles fore-described, can be known
naturally no way, but by sight or other senses to those present, and by report
or history to those absent.

Miracula ubicunque fiunt, vix a tota civitate feruntur, etc. Nam plerumque
fiunt ignorantibus caeteris, maxim si magna sit civitas; at quando alibi
aliisque narrantur, tanta ea commendat autoritas, ut sine difficultate vel
dubitatione credantur. Aug. de Civit. Dei. 22.
. 6. The Apostles and many thousand others saw the Miracles wrought by Christ;
and needed no other proof of them than their senses.

The many thousands who at twice were fed by Miracle were witnesses of that.
The multitude were witnesses of his healing the blind, the lame, the
paralitick, the Demoniacks, etc. The Pharisees themselves made the strictest
search into the cure of the man born blind, Joh. 9. and the raising of Lazarus
from the dead, and many more. His miracles were few of them hid, but openly
done before the World.

. 7. The Apostles and many hundreds more, were witnesses of Christ's own
Resurrection; and needed no other proof but their sense.

At diverse times he appeared to them, together and apart: and yielded to Thomas
his unbelief so far, as to call him to put his finger into his side, and see
the print of the Nails: He instructed them concerning the Kingdom of God, for
forty days, Act. 1. He gave them their Commission, Mar. 16. Mat. 28. Joh. 21.
He expostulated with Peter, and engaged him to feed his Lambs: He was seen of
more than five hundred brethren at once: And lastly appeared after his
ascension to Paul, and to John that wrote the Revelations.

. 8. The Apostles also were eyewitnesses of his ascension: Act. 1.

What he had foretold them, they saw him fulfill.

. 9. All these eyewitnesses were not themselves deluded, in thinking they saw
those things which indeed they did not see.

For 1. They were persons of competent understanding, as their Writings show;
and therefore not like Children that might be cheated with palpable deceits. 2.
They were many (the twelve Apostles, and 70 Disciples, and all the rest,
besides the many thousands of the common people that only wondered at him, but
followed him not. One or two may be easilyer deceived than such multitudes. 3.
The matters of fact were done near them, where they were present, and not far
off. 4. They were done in the open light, and not in a corner, or in the dark.
5. They were done many times over, and not once or twice only. 6. The nature of
the things was such, as a juggling deluding of the senses could not serve for
so common a deceit: As when the persons that were born blind, the lame, the
Paralitick, etc. were seen to be perfectly healed; and so of the rest. 7. They
were persons who followed Christ, and were still with him, (or very often): and
therefore if they had been once deceived, they could not be so always 8. And
vigilant subtle enemies were about them, that would have helped them to have
detected a deceit. 9 Yea, the twelve Apostles and 70 Disciples were employed
themselves in working Miracles, healing the sick and Demoniacks, in Christ's own
lifetime; and rejoiced in it: And they could not be deceived for diverse years
together in the things which they saw, and heard, and felt, and also in that
which they did themselves: Besides that, all their own Miracles which they
wrought after Christ's ascension, prove that they were not deceived. 10 There is
no way left then but one to deceive them; and that is, if God himself should
alter and delude all their senses, which it is certain that he did not do: For
then he had been the chief cause of all the delusion, and all the consequents
of it in the World: He that has given men sight, and hearing, and feeling,
will not delude them all by unresistable alterations and deceits, and then
forbid them to believe those lies, and propagate them to others. Man has no
other way of knowing things sensible but by sense. He that has his senses
sound, and the object proportionate and at a just distance, and the medium fit,
and his understanding sound, may well trust his senses; especially when it is
the case of many: Unum boni Viri verbum, unus nutus, sexcentis argumentis ac
verborum continuationibus parem fidem meretur. Plutar. in Phocion.
And if sense in those cases should be deceived, we should be bound to be
deceived, as having no other way of knowing, or of detecting the deceit.

. 10. Those that saw not Christ's miracles, nor saw him risen, received all
these matters of fact, Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quam auriti december. Qui
audiunt, audita dicunt: qui vident, plane sciunt. Plaut. Truc.
from the testimony of them that said they saw them: (Having no other way by
which they could receive them.)

. 11. Supposing now Christ's Resurrection and Miracles to be true, it is
certain, that their use and obligation must extend to more than those that saw
them; even to persons absent, and of other generations.

This I have fully and undenyably proved, in a Disputation in my Book against
Infidelity: by such arguments as these.

1. The use and obligation of such Miracles does extend to all that have
sufficient evidence of their truth. But the Nations and generations which never
saw them, may have sufficient evidence of their truth (that they were done):
Ergo, the use and obligation does extend to such.

The Major is past all contradiction. He that has sufficient evidence of the
truth of the fact, is obliged to believe it. The Minor is to be proved in the
following Sections.

2. The contrary doctrine makes it impossible for God to oblige the World by
Miracles, according to their proper use. But it is not impossible: Therefore
that doctrine is false.

Here note, that the use and force of miracles lies in their being
extraordinary, rather than in the Power which they manifest: For it is as great
an effect of Omnipotency to have the Sun move, as to stand still: Now if
miracles oblige none to believe but those that see them, then every man in
every City, Country, Town, Family, and in all generations to the end of the
World, must see Christ risen, or not believe it, and must see Lazarus risen, or
not believe it; and must see all the miracles himself which oblige him to
believe: But this is an absurdity, and contradiction, making Miracles Gods
ordinary works, and so as no miracles.

Every man expects himself to be believed: and therefore owes just belief to
others.
3. They that teach men that they are bound to believe no Miracles but what they
see, do deprive all after-ages of all the benefit of all the miraculous works
of God, both Mercies and Judgments, which their forefathers saw: But God
wrought them not only for them that saw them; but also for the absent, The
testimony of one or two eyewitnesses, is to be preferred before many learned
conjectures and argumentations. Many wise men heretofore thought that they
proved by argument, that there were no Antipodes, and others that men could not
live under the Equator and Poles; But one Voyage of Columbus has fully
confuted all the first; and many since have confuted both the one and the
other; and are now believed against all those learned Arguments by almost all.
and aftertimes.

4. By the same reason, they will disoblige men from believing any other
matters of fact, which they never saw themselves: And that is to make them like
new comers into the World, yea, like Children and Fools, and to be incapable of
Humane Society.

5. This reasoning would rob God of the honor of all his most wondrous works,
as from any but those that see them: so that no absent person, nor following
age should be obliged to mention them, believe them, or honor him for them:
which is absurd and impious.

6. The World would be still as it were to begin anew, and no age must be the
wiser for all the experiences of those that have gone before; if we must not
believe what we never saw. And if men must not learn thus much of their
Ancestors, why should they be obliged to learn any thing else, but Children be
left to learn only by their own eyesight?

7. If we are not bound to believe Gods wondrous works which have been before
our days, then our ancestors are not bound to tell them us, nor we to be
thankful for them: The Israelites should not have told their Posterity how
they were brought out of the Land of Egypt, nor England keep a day of
Thanksgiving for its deliverance from the Powder Plot: But the consequent is
absurd: Ergo, so is the antecedent. What have we our tongues for, but to speak
of what we know to others? The love that Parents have to their Children will
oblige them to acquaint them with all things useful which they know. The Love
which men have naturally to truth, will oblige them to divulge it. Who that had
but seen an Angel, or received instructions by a Voice from Heaven, or seen the
dead raised, would not tell others what he had seen and heard? And to what end
should he tell them, if they were not obliged to believe it.

8. Governments, and Justice, and all humane converse is maintained by the
belief of others, and the reports and records of things which we see not: Few
of the Subjects see their King. Witnesses carry it in every cause of Justice:
Thus Princes prove their Successions and title to their Crowns, and all men
their Estates, by the records or testimony of others.

9. It is impudent arrogance for every Infidel to tie God to be at his beck, to
work Miracles as often as he requires it: To say, I will not believe without a
Miracle; and if thou work never so many in the sight of others, I will not
believe unless I may see them my self.

. 12. There need not be new Revelations and Miracles, to confirm the former,
and oblige men to believe them: For then there must be more Revelations and
Miracles, to confirm the former, and oblige men to believe those; and so on to
the end of the World: And then God could not govern the World by a settled Law
by Revelations once made; which is absurd.

. 13. Therefore the only natural way to know all such matters of fact is
sensible apprehension to those that are present; and credible report, tradition
or history, to those that are absent (as is aforesaid): which is the necessary
medium to convey it from their sense to our understandings: And in this must we
acquiesce, as the natural means which God will use.

. 14. We are not bound to believe all history or report: Therefore we must be
able to discern between the credible, and the incredible; neither receiving
all, nor rejecting all; but making choice, as there is cause.

. 15. History is more or less credible, as it has more or less evidence of
truth: 1. Some that is credible has only evidence of probability; and such is
that of mere Humane Faith: 2. Some has evidence of certainty, from Natural
causes concurring; where the conclusion is both of knowledge, and of Humane
Faith. 3. And some has evidence of certainty from supernatural attestation,
which is both of Humane Faith, and of Divine.

Quod si falsa historia illa rerum est, unde tam brevi tempore totus mundus
ista religione completus est? aut in unam coire qui potuerunt mentem, gentes
regionibus disjunctae? Ventis, coelo, convexionibusque dimotae: Imo, quia haec
omnia and ab ipso cernebant geri, and ab ejus praeconibus qui per orbem totum
missi -- veritatis ipsius vi victae, and dederunt se Deo, nec in magnis posuere
dispendiis, membra vobis projicere, and viscera sua lanianda praebere. Arnob.
l. 1. p. 9.
. 16. That history or report which has no more evidence than the mere wisdom
and honesty of the author or reporter (supposing him an imperfect man) is but
probable, and the Conclusion though credible, is not infallible, and can have
no certainty, but that which some call Moral; and that in several degrees, as
the wisdom and honesty of the reporter is either more or less.

. 17. II. Where there is an evident impossibility that all the witnesses or
reporters should lie, or be deceived, there the Conclusion is credible, by
humane Faith, and also sure, by a natural certainty.

. 18. Where these things concur, it is impossible that that report or history
should be false: 1. When it is certain, that the reporters were not themselves
deceived: 2. When it is certain that indeed the report is theirs. 3. When they
took their salvation to lie upon the truth of the thing reported, and of their
own report. 4. When they expected Worldly ruin by their testimony, and could
look for no commodity by it, which would make them any reparation. 5. When they
give full proof of their honesty and conscience. 6. When their testimony is
concordant, and they speak the same things, though they had no opportunity to
conspire to deceive men; yea, when their numbers, distance and quality make
this impossible. 7. When they bear their testimony in the time and place, where
it might well be contradicted, and the falsity detected, if it were not true;
and among the most malicious enemies; and yet those enemies, either confess the
matter of fact, or give no regardable reason against it. 8. When the reporters
are men of various tempers, countries, and civil interests. 9. When the
reporters fall out, or greatly differ among themselves, even to separations,
and condemnations of one another, and yet none ever detecteth or confesses any
falsehood in the said reports. 10. When the reporters being numerous, and such
as profess that Lying is a damnable sin, and such as laid down their liberties,
or lives in asserting their testimonies, did yet never any of them in life or
death, repent and confess any falsehood or deceit. 11. When their report
convinces thousands, in that place and time, who would have more abhorred them
if it had been untrue.

Nay, where some of these concur, the conclusion may be of certainty: some of
these instances resolve the point into natural necessity. 1. It is of natural
necessity that men love themselves, and their own felicity, and be unwilling of
their undoing and misery. The Will though free, is quaedam natura; and has its
natural necessary inclination to that good, which is apprehended as its own
felicity, or else to have omnimodam rationem boni; and its natural necessary
inclination against that evil, (or aversation from it) which is apprehended as
its own undoing or misery, or to have omnimodam rationem mali: Its liberty is
only servato ordine finis: And some acts that are free are nevertheless of
infallible certain futurition, and of some kind of necessity; like the Love
and Obedience of the Saints in Heaven. 2. Nothing can be without a cause
sufficient to produce it: But some things here instanced can have no cause
sufficient to produce them, if the thing testified were false: As the consent
of enemies; their not gainsaying; the concurrence of so many, and so distant,
and of such bitter Opposites, against their own common worldly interest, and to
the confessed ruin of their souls; and the belief of many thousands that could
have disproved it if false; and more which I shall open by and by. There is a
natural certainty that Alexander was the King of Macedonia, and Caesar Emperor
of Rome, and that there is such a place as Rome and Paris, and Venice and
Constantinople: And that we have had Civil Wars between the King and
Parliament, in England, and between the Houses of York and Lancaster; and that
many thousands were murdered by the French Massacre, and many more by the
Irish, and that the Statutes of this Land were made by the Kings and
Parliaments whose names they bear, etc. Because that 1. There is no cause in
Nature which could produce the concurrence of so many testimonies; of men so
distant and contrary, if it were not true. 2. And on the contrary side, there
are natural causes which would infallibly produce a credible contradiction to
these reports if they were false.

. 19. III. When they that testify such matters of fact, do affirm that they do
it by Gods own command, and prove this by multitudes of evident uncontrolled
Miracles, their report is both humane and divine, and to be believed as most
certain by a divine belief.

This is before proved, in the proof of the validity of the testimony of
Miracles, and such Miracles as these.

. 20. The Testimonies of the Apostles and other Disciples of Christ, concerning
his Resurrection and Miracles, were credible by all these three several sorts
of credibility: 1. They were credible (and most credible) by a humane belief,
as they were the testimony of honest (and extraordinarily honest) men. 2. They
were credible, as reported with concauses of natural certainty. 3. They were
credible, as attested by God, by Miracles, and therefore certain, by a
certainty of Divine belief.

. 21. I. They that observe in the Writings of the said Disciples, the footsteps
of eminent piety, sincerity, simplicity, self-denial, contempt of the World,
expectation of a better World, a desire to please and glorify God, though by
their own reproach and sufferings, mortification, love to souls, forgiving
enemies, condemning liars, with high spirituality and heavenly-mindedness, etc.
Must needs confess them to be most eminently credible by a humane Faith: (They
being also acquainted with the thing reported).

. 22. II. 1. That the Apostles were not themselves deceived I have proved
before. 2. That the Report was theirs, the Churches that saw and heard them
knew by sense (And how we know it, I am to show anon). 3. That they took their
own salvation to lie upon the belief of the Gospel which they preached, is very
evident, both in the whole drift and manner of their Writings, and in their
labors, sufferings and death: And that they took a Lie to be a damning sin.

He that does but impartially read the Writings of the Apostles and
Evangelists, will easily believe that they believed what they preached
themselves, and looked for salvation by Jesus Christ: Much more if he further
consider of their forsaking all, and laboring and dying in and for these
expectations: And Nature taught them as well as Christ, to know that a Lie was
a damning sin: They teach us themselves, that Liars are without, as Dogs, Rev.
21.22.
and not admitted into the Kingdom of God: And that God needs not our Lie to
his Glory; nor must we do evil that good may come by it: Therefore they could
never think that it would help them to Heaven, to spend their labors, and lay
down their lives, in promoting a known lie, to deceive the World. Ambiguae, si
quando citabere testis Incertaeque rei, Phalaris licet imperet ut sis

Falsus, and admoto dictet perjuria tauro; Summum creed nefas vitam praeferre
pudori,

Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causes. Juven. 8.




. 22. 4. That they expected temporal ruin by their Religion, without any
worldly satisfaction, is manifest both in Christ's prediction, telling them that
it would be so, and in the tenor of his Covenant, calling them to forsake life
and all, if they will be his Disciples, and in the history of their own lives
and labors, in which they met with no other usage than was thus foretold them.

Many of them had not much wealth to lose; but every man naturally loves his
ease, and peace, and life. And some of them, though not many, had Worldly
riches, (as Zacheus, Joseph of Arimathea, etc.) and commonly they had
possessions, which they sold, and laid down the price at the Apostles feet. And
the Apostles had ways of comfortable living in the world: instead of all this
they underwent reproach, imprisonments, scourgings, and death. Commodity or
preferment they could not expect by it.

Object. But to men that had been but low in the world, the very applause of
the people would seem a sufficient satisfaction for their sufferings; To be
Teachers, and have many followers, is a thing that some people would venture
liberty and life for.

Answ. Lay all these following things together, and you may be certain that
this was not the case. 1. Even women, and many that were not teachers, were of
the same belief. 2. The Teachers did all of them set up their Lord, and not
themselves, but de^ased and denied themselves for his honor and service. 3.
Their way of teaching was in travel and labor, where they must deny all
fleshly ease and pleasure, and so must have nothing but bare applause, if that
had been it which they sought after. 4. They suffered so much reproach and
shame from the unbelievers, who were the rich and ruling party as would have
much over-ballanced their applause among believers. They were persecuted,
imprisoned, scourged, scorned, and made as the offscouring of the world. 5.
They were so many, that no single person was like to be carried so far with
that ambition, when his honor was held in equality with so many. 6. One of the
great vices which they preached and wrote against was pride, and self-seeking,
and over-valuing men, and following sect-masters, and crying up Paul, 1 Cor. 1.
and 2. and 3. Act. 20.
Apollo, or Cephas, etc. And those that thus sought to set up themselves, and
draw away Disciples after them, were the men whom they especially condemned. 7.
Sed non creditis gesta haec. Sed qui ea conspicati sunt fieri, and sub oculis
suis viderunt agi, testes optimi certissimique authors, and crediderunt haec
ipsi and credendo posteris nobis haud exilibus cum approbationibus tradiderunt.
Quinam isti sunt, fortasse quaeritis: Gentes, populi, nationes, and incredulum
illud genus humanum; quod nisi aperta res esset, and luce ipsa clarior, nunquam
rebus hujusmodi credulitatis suae commodarent assensum. At nunquid dicemus
illius temporis homines usque adeo fuisse vanos, mendaces, stol^dos, brutos, ut
quae nunquam viderant, vidisse se fingerent? and quae facta non erant falsis
proderent testimoniis, ut puerili assertione firmarent? Cumque possent vobiscum
and unanimiter vivere, and inoffensas ducere conjunctiones, gratu^ta
susciperent odia, and execrabili haberentur nomine. Arnob. l. 1.
If they had done, as this objection supposes, they must have all the way gone
on against their certain knowledge and conscience, in teaching lies in matter
of fact. And though some men would go far in seeking followers and applause,
when they believe the doctrine which they preach themselves, yet hardly in
preaching that which they know to be false: the stirrings of conscience would
torment some of them, among so many, and at last break out into open confession
and detection of the fraud. 8. And if they had gone thus violently against
their consciences, they must needs know that it was their Souls, as well as
their lives and liberties which they forfeited. 9. And the piety and humility
of their writings shows, that applause was not their end and prize: if they
had sought this, they would have fitted their endeavors to it; whereas it is
the sanctifying and saving of souls, through faith in Jesus Christ, which they
bent their labors toward. 10. So many men could never have agreed among
themselves in such a scattered case, to carry on the juggle and deceit, without
detection. Now tell us, if you can, where ever so many persons in the world, so
notably humble, pious and self-denying, did preach against pride, man-pleasing
and lying, as damnable sins, and debase themselves, and suffer so much reproach
and persecution, and go through such labor and travel, and lay down their
lives, and confessedly hazard their souls for ever, and all this to get
followers, that should believe in another man, by persuading men that he
wrought miracles, and rose from the dead, when they knew themselves that all
were lies which they thus laboriously divulged? If you give an instance in the
Disciples of Mahomet, the case was nothing so: no such miracles attested! no
such witnesses to proclaim it! no such consequents of such a testimony! none of
all this was so: but only a Deceiver makes a few barbarous people believe that
he had Revelations, and was a Prophet, and being a Soldier, and prospering in
War, he sets up and keeps up a Kingdom by the Sword, his Preachers being
such as being thus deluded, did themselves believe the things which they spoke,
and found it the way to worldly greatness.

. 24. 5. That the witnesses of Christ were men of honesty and conscience, is
before proved. 6. That it was not possible for so many persons, to conspire so
successfully to deceive the world, is manifest from 1. their persons; 2. their
calling; 3. their doctrine; 4. and their manner of ministration and labors.

1. For their Persons, they were, 1. Many; 2. Not men of such worldly craft and
subtilty, as to be apt for such designs: 3 Of variety of tempers and interests;
men and women. 2. For their Callings, the Apostles knew the matter of fact
indeed by common sense; but their sufficiency and gifts by which they carried
on their ministry, were suddenly given them by the holy Ghost, when Christ
himself was ascended from them. And Paul, that had conferred with none of them,
yet preached the same Gospel, being converted by a voice from heaven in the
heat of his persecution. 3. Their doctrine contains so many and mysterious
particulars, that they could never have concorded in it all, in their way. 4.
And their labors did so disperse them about the world, that many new emergent
cases must needs have cast them into several minds or ways, if they had not
agreed by the unity of that Spirit, which was the common Teacher of them all.

. 25. 7. That the Disciples of Christ divulged his Miracles and Resurrection,
in the same Place and Age, where the truth or falsehood might soon have been
searched out, and yet that the bitterest enemies either denied not, or confuted
not their report, is apparent, partly by their confessions, and partly by the
nonexistence of any such confutations.

That the Disciples in that Age and Country did divulge these Miracles, is
denied by none: for it was their employment, and by it they gathered the
several Churches: and their writings not long after written declare it to this
day. That the enemies confuted not their report appears, 1. not only in the
Gospel-history, which shows that they denied not many of his Miracles, but
imputed them to conjuration and the power of Satan; but also by the disputes
and writings of the Jews, in all Ages since, which do go the same way. 2. And
if the enemies had been able to confute these Miracles, no doubt but they would
have done it; having so much advantage, wit and malice.

Object. Perhaps they did, and their writings never come to our knowledge.

Answ. The unbelieving Jews were as careful to preserve their writings as any
other men: and they had better advantage to do it than the Christians had: and
therefore if there had been any such writings, yea, or verbal confutations, the
Jews of this age had been as like to have received them, as all the other
ancient writings which they yet receive. Josephus his testimony of Christ is
commonly known; and though some think it so full and plain, that it is like to
be inserted by some Christian, Prophetizare and virtutes facere and daemonia
ejicere interdum non est meriti illius qui operatur; sed invocatio Christi hoc
agit, vel ob utilitatem little qui vident and audiunt, vel, etc. Hieron. in
Matthew. 7.

Operum Dei causa fi lateat hominem, non se obliviscatur esse hominem, nec
propterea Deo det insipientiam, quia non been capit ejus sapientiam. Aug. de
spir. and lit.


yet they give no proof of their opinion; and the credit of all copies
justifies the contrary; except only that these words are like to have been
thrust in, [This is Christ] which some Annotator putting into the Margin, might
after be put into the Text. And that the Jews wanted not will or industry to
confute the Christians, appears by what Justin Martyr says to Tryphon of
their malice, [That they sent out into all parts of the world their choicest
men to persuade the people against the Christians, that they are Atheists, and
would abolish the Deity, and that they were convict of gross impiety.]

. 26. 8. The great diversity of believers and reporters of the Gospel Miracles,
does the more fully evince, that there was no conspiracy for deceit.

There were learned and unlearned Jews and Gentiles, rich and poor, men and
women, some that followed Christ, and some (as Paul) that perhaps never saw
him: and for all these to be at once inspired by the holy Ghost, and
thenceforth unanimously to accord and concur in the same doctrine and work,
does show a supernatural cause. Rationem de occulto Dei consil^o quaerere, nil
aliud est quam contra ejus consilium superbire. Gregor. Hom.


. 27. 9. There were dissentions upon many accidents, and some of them to the
utmost distance, which would certainly have detected the fallacy, if there had
been any such, in the matters of fact, so easily detected.

1. In Christ's own family there was a Judas, who betrayed him for money: This
Judas was one that had followed Christ, and seen his Miracles, and had been
sent out to preach, and wrought miracles himself. If there had been any
collusion in all this, what likelier man was there in the world to have
detected it? yea, and his conscience would never have accused, but justified
him, he need not to have gone and hanged or precipitated himself, and said, I
have sinned in betraying the innocent blood? The Pharisees who hired him to
betray his Master, might, by money and authority, have easily procured him, to
have wrote against him, and detected his fraud, if he had been fraudulent: it
would have tended to Judas his justification and advancement. But God is the
great defender of truth.

2. And there were many baptized persons, who were long in good repute and
communion with the Christians, who fell off from them to several Sects and
Heresies; not denying the dignity and truth of Christ, but superinducing into
his doctrine many corrupting fancies of their own; such as the Jud^iz^rs, the
Simonians, the Nicolaitans, the Ebonites, the Cerinthians, the Gnostics, the
Valentinians, Basilidians, and many more: And many of these were in the days of
the Apostles, and greatly troubled the Churches, and hindered the Gospel;
insomuch as the Apostles rise up against them with more indignation, than
against the Infidels; calling them dogs, 2 Pet. 2. Jude. Tit. 3.10.

Nulla major est comprobatio quam gestarum ab eo fides rerum; quam virtutum
novitas, quam omnia victa decieta, dissolutaque fatalia, quae popoli gen^esque
suo generis sub limine nullo dissentiente vicere: quae nec ipsi audent
falsitatis arguere, quorum antiquas seu patrias leges vanitatis e^se
plenissitas atque in^nillimae superstitionis ostendir. A^nob. ^dv. Ge^t. l. 1.


wolves, evil workers, deceivers, bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
etc. They write largely against them; they charge the Churches to avoid them,
and turn away from them, and after a first and second admonition to reject them
as men that are self-condemned, etc. And who knows not that among so many men
thus excommunicated, vilified, and thereby irritated, some of them would
certainly have detected the deceit, if they had known any deceit to have been
in the reports of the aforesaid Miracles. Passion would not have been
restrained among so many and such, when they were thus provoked.

3. And some in those times, as well as in all following ages, have forsaken
the faith, and apostatized to open infidelity: and certainly their judgment,
their interest, and their malice, would have caused them to detect the fraud,
if they had known any in the matters of fact of these Miracles. For it is not
possible that all these causes should not bring forth this effect, where there
was no valuable impediment. If you again say, It may be they did detect such
frauds by words or writings, which come not to our knowledge; I answer again,
1. The Jews then, that have in all ages disputed and written against
Christianity, would certainly have made use of some such testimony, instead of
charging all upon Magic, and the power of the devil. 2. And it is to me a full
evidence, that there were no such deniers of the Miracles of Christ, when I
find that the Apostles never wrote against any such, nor contended with them,
nor were ever put to answer any of their writings or objections: When all men
will confess that their writings must needs be written according to the state
and occasion of those times in which they wrote them: and if then there had
been any books or reasonings divulged against Christ's miracles, they would
either have wrote purposely against them, or let fall some confutations of
them, in their Epistles to the Churches: but there are no such things at all.

. 28. 10. Seeing it is so heinous a crime to divulge lies in multitudes of
matters of fact, to deceive the world into a blasphemy, it is scarce possible,
that the consciences of so many persons, of so much piety as their writings
prove, should never be touched with remorse for so great a villainy, either in
life, or at the hour of death, and force some one of them to detect all the
fraud, if they had been guilty of it.

There is a natural conscience in the worst of men, (much more in the best)
which will at some time do its office, and will constrain men to confess,
especially their heinous crimes, and especially at the time of death, when they
see that their lies will serve their worldly interest no more: and especially
if they be men that indeed believe another life. Now consider if the Apostles
and Disciples had been deceivers, how heinous a crime they had committed: 1. To
affirm a man to be God incarnate, and to be the Savior of the world,
Occursurus forsitan est cum aliis multis calumniosis and puerilibus vocibus.
Magus fuit, clandestinis artibus omnia illa perfecit, Aegyptiorum ex adytis
angelorum potentium nomina, and remotas furatus est disciplinas. Quid dicitis O
parvuli? incomperta vobis and nescia temerariae vocis loquacitate garrientes?
Ergone illa quae gesta sunt, daemonum fuere praestigiae, and magicarum artium
lud^? Potestis aliquem nobis designare, monstrare, ex omnibus illis Magis, qui
unquam fuere per secula, consimile aliquid Christo millesima ex part qui
fecerit? Qui sine ulla vi carminum, etc. Arnob. ubi sup. l. 1.
on whom all men must trust their souls, etc. if he had been but a deceiver. 2.
To make such abundance of lies in open matters of fact. 3. To frame hereupon a
new Law to the world. 4. To overthrow the Law of Moses, which was there in
force. 5. To abuse the intellects of so many thousand persons with such
untruths, and to call the world to such a needless work as the Christian
Religion would be, if all this were false! to put the world upon such tasks, as
forsaking all for Christ. 6. To draw so many to lose their lives in martyrdom
to attest a lie. 7. To lose their own time, and spend all their lives and
labor upon so bad a work: All these set together, would prove them far worst
than any thieves, or murderers, or traitors, if they knew it to be a lie which
they preached and attested: There are now no men known on earth, even in this
age of villainies, guilty of such a heinous crime as this. And let any man that
reads the Apostles writings, or considers of their lives and deaths,
consider whether it be not next to an impossibility, that so many, and such
persons, should go on in such a way, upon no greater motives of benefit than
they expected; nay, through such labors, reproach and sufferings, and not one
of them to the death be constrained by conscience to detect the fraud, and
undeceive the world.

. 29. 11. Lastly, it is not possible, that so many thousands of such persons as
they presently converted, should ever have been persuaded to believe their
reports of these matters of fact, in a time and place, where it was so easy to
disprove them, if they had been false.

For, 1. The understanding is not free as the will is, but only participative,
in quantum a voluntate imperatur: and a man cannot believe what he will, nor
deny belief to cogent evidence, though against his will: The Intellects acts,
as in themselves, are necessitated, and per modum naturae. 2. And all these new
converts had understandings which were naturally inclined to truth as truth,
and averse to falsehood; and they had all self-love: and they all embraced now a
doctrine which would expose them to suffering and calamity in the world: And
therefore both nature and interest obliged them to be at the labor of
enquiring, whether these things were so or not, before they ran themselves into
so great misery: And the three thousand which Peter converted at his first
Sermon, must also take the shame of being murderers of their Savior, and for
this they were pricked at the heart: And Paul must be branded for a confessed
persecutor, and guilty of the blood of Stephen! And would so many men run
themselves into all this for nothing, to save the labor of an easy enquiry,
after some matters of public fact? How easily might they go and be satisfied,
whether Christ fed so many thousand twice miraculously, and whether he healed
such as he was said to heal, who were then living? and whether he raised
Lazarus, and others, from death, who were then living? and whether the earth
trembled, and the vail of the Temple rent, and the Sun was darkened at his
death? And whether the witnesses of his Resurrection were sufficient? And if
none of this had been true, it would have turned them all from the belief of
the Apostles, to deride them.

Object. Is not the unbelief of the most, a greater reason against the Gospel,
than the belief of the smaller number is for it.

Answ. No: 1. Because it is a negative which they were for: and many witnesses
to a negative, is not so good as a few to an affirmative. 2. Most of them were
kept from the very hearing of the Apostles, which should inform them and excite
them. 3. Most men every where follow their Rulers, and look to their worldly
interest, and never much mind or discuss such matters, as tend to their
salvation, especially by the way of suffering and disgrace. 4. We believe not
that the unbelieving party did deny Christ's miracles, but fathered them upon
the devil; therefore even their testimony is for Christ: only they hired the
Soldiers to say, that Christ was stolen out of the Sepulcher while they slept,
of which they never brought any proof, nor could possibly do it, (if asleep.)

. 29. III. I have proved Christ's Miracles to be, 1. Credible, by the highest
humane faith. 2. Certain, by natural evidence, there being a natural
impossibility that the testimonies should be false. 3. I am next to prove that
they are certain by supernatural evidence, ( which is the same with natural
evidence, as in the effect, but is called supernatural from the way of causing
it.)

. 30. The same works of the SPIRIT, inherent, 2 Pet. 2.16. Eyewitnesses of his
Majesty on the Mount.
concomitant and subsequent, were the infallible proof of the truth of the
Disciples testimony of Christ, his Person, Miracles and Doctrine.

. 31. I. They were persons of holy lives, and holiness is the lively impress or
constitution of their doctrine, now visible in their writings.

What was before said of the Doctrine of Christ himself, is true of theirs: And
as the Kings Coin is known by his Image and Superscription, or rather as an
unimitable author is known by his Writings, for matter, method and style, even
so is Gods Spirit known in them and in their doctrine.

. 32. II. Their miraculous gifts and works were so evident and so many and
uncontrolled, as amount to an infallible proof, that Gods are his Witness in
the World, and shows the most infallible proof of his assertions.

. 33. 1. Their gifts and miracles were many in kind: as their sudden
illumination, when the Spirit fell upon them, and knowing that which they were
ignorant of before: Their prophesying and speaking in languages never before
learned by them, and interpreting such prophesies and languages; their
dispossessing D^moniacks, and healing diseases, their deliverances by Angels
out of closed Prisons and Fetters; their inflicting Judgments on Opposers and
offenders, their raising the dead; and the conveying of the same Spirit to
others by the Imposition of the Apostles hands.

1. It is not the least testimony of the veracity of the Apostles, that even
while they lived with Jesus Christ, they remained ignorant of much of the
mystery of the Gospel, and some (that are since necessary) articles of Faith,
as of his Death and Burial, and Resurrection, and Ascension, and much of the
spiritual nature of his Kingdom, and Privileges of Believers; and that all
this was made known to them upon a sudden, without any teaching, studying or
common means, Act. 1. and 2. Joh. 14. and 16.
by the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon them: And that Christ had promised
them his Spirit before, to lead them into all truth, and bid them wait at
Jerusalem till they received it: And it came upon them at the appointed time,
on the day of Pentecost: And he promised that this Spirit should be sent on
others, and become his Agent or Advocate in the World, to do his work in his
bodily absence, and bear witness of him. And he told his Disciples, that this
Spirit should be better to them than his bodily presence, and therefore it
would be for their good that he should go from them into Heaven: So that
Christ's teaching them immediately and miraculously by this sudden giving them
his Spirit, is an infallible proof both of his truth and theirs.

2. This prophesying was partly by foretelling things to come (as Agabus did
the dearth, and Paul's bonds) and partly the exposition of old Prophesies, and
partly the spiritual instruction of the People, by sudden inspirations; And
those that were enabled to it, were people of themselves unable for such
things, and ignorant but a little while before.

3. Their speaking in various languages was a thing which no natural means
could produce. Fernelius and many other Physicians, who were very loath to
believe diabolical possessions, do confess themselves convinced by hearing the
possessed speak Greek and Hebrew, which they had never learned: How much more
convincing is this evidence, when so many speak in so many languages, even in
the language of all the Inhabitants of the Countries round about them; and this
upon these sudden inspirations of the Spirit.

4. Their interpreting of such tongues also, which they never learnt, was no
less a proof of a supernatural power and attestation.

5. Their deliverances are recorded in the Scriptures: Peter, Act. 12. and Paul
and Sil^s, Act. 16. had their bonds all loosed, and the Prison-doors opened by
an Angel and a Miracle; which must be by a Power that sufficiently attesteth
their verity.

6. And they inflicted judgments on Delinquents by no less a power: Ananias
and Sapphira one after another were struck dead upon the word of Peter, for
their Hypocrisy and lies: Elymas the Sorcerer was struck blind by Paul, in
the presence (or knowledge) of the Governor of the Country: And the
excommunicated were often given up to Satan, to suffer some extraordinary
penalty.

7. Their healing Demoniacks, the lame, the blind, the paralitick, and all
manner of diseases with a word, or by Prayer and Imposition of hands in the
name of Christ, yea upon the conveyance of Napkins and Clothes from their
bodies, is witnessed in the many Texts which I have before cited out of the
Acts of the Apostles. And this Christ promised them particularly beforehand:
And it was the occasion of that Unction of the sick, which some have still
continued as a Sacrament.

8. Their raising the dead, is also among the forecited passages; so Peter
raised Dorcas or Tabitha, Act. 9. and (its like) Paul Eutichus, Act. 20.

9. And it is the greatest evidence of all, that the same Spirit was given to
so many others, by their Imposition of hands and Prayer; and all these had some
of these wonderful gifts; either prophesies, tongues, healing, or some such
like.

. 34. 2. These Miracles were wrought by multitudes of persons, and not only by
a few; even by the Apostles, and seventy Disciples, and others on whom they
laid their hands; which was by the generality or greater part of the Christians.

If it were but by one or two men that Miracles were wrought, there would be
greater room for doubting of the truth: But when it shall be by hundreds and
thousands, there can be no difficulty in the proof: That the Apostles and the
seventy Disciples wrought them in Christ's own time, is declared before: Math.
16.17. Math. 10.1, 2. Luke 10.1, 17, 19. Act. 2.1, 2, 3. Math. 3.11.
That they wrought them more abundantly after, and that the same Spirit was
then commonly given to others, I shall now further prove (besides all the
Histories of it before recited.) That upon the Imposition of the Apostles
hands, or Baptism, or Prayer, the Holy Ghost was given, is expressed Act. 2.38.
to three thousand at once the Holy Ghost was given. Act. 4.31. All the assembly
were filled with the Holy Ghost: And with great power gave the Apostles witness
of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all. v.
33. Act. 8.15, 17. The Samaritans received the Holy Ghost upon the prayer of
Peter and John, so that Simon Magus would fain have bought that gift with
Money. Act. 9.7. Paul was filled with the Holy Ghost by the imposition of
Ananias's hands. Act. 10.44, 45, 47. Upon Peter's preaching, the Holy Ghost fell
on all the Family, and Kindred, and Friends of Cornelius who heard him preach,
and they spoke with tongues, and magnified God. Act. 11.15. Even in the same
manner as it fell on the Apostles. Act. 13.52. The Disciples were filled with
the Holy Ghost. Act. 19.6. Twelve men upon Paul's imposition of hands, received
the Holy Ghost, and spoke with tongues, and prophesied. The Holy Ghost was
given to the Roman Christians, Romans 5.5. Yea, he tells them, If any have not
the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9. The same was given to
the Church of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.19. and 12.12, 13. And to the Church of
the Galatians, Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 5. And to the Church of the Ephesians, Ephesians.
1.13. and 4.30. To the Philippians, Phil. 1.19.27. and 2.1. To the Colossians,
Col. 1.8. To the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. and 1.6. And what this Spirit
was and did, you may find in 1 Cor. 12.4, 7, etc. There are diversities of
gifts, but the same Spirit: But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal: For, to one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, to another faith
by the same Spirit, to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit, to
another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of
Spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of
tongues: But all these works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to
every man severally as he will -- For by one Spirit we are all baptized into
one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit. And in 1 Cor. 14. the gift of speaking with tongues
was so common in the Church of the Corinthians, that the Apostle is fain to
give them instructions for the moderate use of it, lest they hindered the
edification of the Church, by suppressing prophecy or instruction in known
tongues: And therefore he persuades them to use it but more sparingly. Quid
soboles, virtusque Dei, and sapientia Christus?

Nonne satis vanis curas erroribus aufert? Nosque simul monitis and factis
edocet unum Cuncta Deum regere, -- et cum Omnipotens verbo sternit mare, vel
pede calcat;

Et verbo morbos abigit, vel Daemonas urget;

Aut reduces animas in corpora sancta remittit; Jamque diu exanimes tumulis
jubet ire reclufis; Integratque putres vita remeante sepultos: Nonne potestatem
propriam satis indicat auctor? Qui solus naturam omnem vitamque gubernat.
Claudian. Mammert. Carmen post lib. de Anim.




And James (5.14, 15.) exhorts Christians when they were sick, to send to the
Elders of the Church, that they may pray for them and anoint them, and they may
be forgiven and recover: By which it seems it was no unusual thing in those
times to be healed by the Prayers of the Elders. Yea, the very Hypocrites, and
ungodly persons, that had only the barren profession of Christianity, had the
gift of Miracles, without the grace of Sanctification: And this Christ
foretold, Matthew. 7.22. Many shall say in that day, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out devils? and done many wonderful works?

Obj. But all were not healed by them: Paul left Trophimus at Miletum sick: Why
does not Paul cure Timothy of his weak stomach and infirmity, without drinking
of Wine, if he could do it?

Answ. 1. Certainly, they did not cure all men that were sick: For then who
would have dyed? It was none of the intent of the Spirit of Christ, in working
Miracles, to make men immortal here on earth; and to keep them from Heaven? 2.
And it is easily confessed, that the Spirit was not at the command or will of
them that had it: And therefore they could not do what and when they pleased,
but what the Spirit pleased; And his operations were at his own time and
disposal. And this proves the more fully, that it was the testimony of God,
and not the contrivance of the wit of man. 3. And miracles and tongues were not
for them that believed, but rather for them that believed not: And therefore a
Trophimus or a Timothy might be unhealed.

. 35. 3. These Miracles were oftentimes wrought, even for many years together,
in several Countries and places through the World, where the Apostles and
Disciples came: and not only once, or for a little space of time.

Dissimulation might be easilyer cloaked for a few acts, than it can be for so
many years. At least these gifts and miracles continued during the Age of the
Apostles, though not performed every day, or so commonly as might make them
uneffectual, yet so frequently as to give success to the Gospel, and to keep up
a reverence of Christianity in the World. They were wrought not only at
Jerusalem, but at Samaria, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, Philippi, and the rest of
the Churches through the World.

. 36. 4. They were also wrought in the presence of multitudes, and not only in
a corner, where there was more possibility of deceit.

The Holy Ghost fell on the Apostles and all the Disciples at Jerusalem before
all the people; that is, They all heard them speak in several tongues, the
wonderful works of God; even the Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the
Inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judaea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia,
Pamphylia, Egypt, Lybia, Cyrene, Rome, Jews and Proselites, Cretes, and
Arabians, Act. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. It was three thousand that the Holy Ghost
fell on, Act. 2.38. Those that went into the Temple, and all the people, saw
the lame man, that was cured by Peter and John, Act. 3. The death of Ananias
and Sapphira was a public thing, so that fear fell on all, and hypocrites were
deterred from joining with the Church, Act. 5. The gifts of tongues, and
interpretation, were commonly exercised before Congregations or multitudes. And
crowds of people flocked to them to be healed; As with Christ they uncovered
the roofs of the houses to lay the sick before him; so with the Apostles they
strove who might come within their shadow, or touch the hem of their garment,
or have Clothes or Napkins from them, that they might be healed. So that here
was an age of public Miracles.

. 37. 5. All these miracles were uncontrolled; that is, They were not wrought
in opposition to any controlling Truth, which has certain evidence
contradicting this; nor yet were they overtopt by any greater miracles for the
contrary.

A miracle (if God should permit it to be wrought in such a case) might be said
to be controlled, either of these two ways: 1. If a man should work Miracles
to contradict the certain light of Nature, or persuade men to that which is
certainly false: 2. If men should do wonders as Jannes and Jam^res the Egyptian
Sorcerers, which should be overtopt by greater wonders, as those of Moses, and
as Simon Magus, and Elymas by Peter and Paul; In these cases God could not be
said to deceive men, by his power or permission, when he gives them a
sufficient preservative. But these Miracles had no such control, but prevailed
without any check from contradictory Truths or Miracles. Thus Christ performed
his Promise, Joh. 14.12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on
me, the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works than these shall
he do, because I go unto the Father.

. 38. III. The third testimony of the Spirit to the truth of the Apostles
witness, was the mavelous success of their doctrine to the sanctifying of
souls; which as it could not be done without the power and Spirit of God, so
neither would the righteous and merciful Governor of the World; have made a
company of profligate liars and deceivers his instruments of doing this
excellent work by cheats and falsehoods.

This I spoke of before, as it is the Seal of Christ's own doctrine: I now speak
of it only as it is the Seal of the Apostles verity in their testimony of the
Resurrection and Miracles of Christ. Peter converted three thousand at once:
Many thousands and myriads up and down the world were speedily converted. And
what was this Conversion. They were brought unfeignedly to love God above all,
and their neighbors as themselves. Act. 2.42, 46. They continued steadfastly in
the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayer: And
all that believed were together and had all things common, (not by levelling,
but by lone) and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men,
as every man had need, and did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart, praising God, and having favor with all the People.

Act. 4.32. The multitude of Believers were of one heart, and of one soul,
neither said any of them that ought of the things that he possessed was his
own, but they had all things common.

All that are in Christ, have his Spirit, and are spiritually minded, and walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts: The world is crucified to
them, and they to the world, Gal. 5.24. and 6.14. They are chosen to be holy
and unblameable in love, Ephesians. 1.4. They walk as renewed in the spirit of their
minds, with all lowliness and meekness, and long-suffering, forbearing one
another, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace:
Ephesians. 4.23.2.3. As being created unto good works in Christ: Ephesians. 2.10. Without
corrupt communication, bitterness, wrath, clamor, evil-speaking, fornication,
uncleanness, covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking and jeasting, Ephesians. 4.29.
and 5.3.4. Denying ungodlyness and worldly lusts, living soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world, as redeemed from all iniquity, and purified as
a peculiar people to Christ, zealous of good works: Tit. 2.12, 14. Having their
conversation in Heaven, from whence they expect their Redeemer to translate
them into Glory, Phil. 3.20, 21. These were the fruits of the Ministry of the
Apostles.

And God was pleased to bless their labors more than any others since, and
make better, holyer, heavenlyer Christians, by the means of their endeavors;
that so he might give, a fuller proof of the truth of their testimony of Christ.

. 39. It is the great advantage of our Faith, that these second attestations to
the Disciples testimony of the Miracles of Christ, are much more open, evident,
and convincing, to us at this distance, than the Miracles of Christ himself;
that so there might be no place for rational doubting.

The sorts of their miracles were as numerous as his: They were wrought by
hundreds and thousands, and not by Christ alone. They were wrought for an age,
and not for three years and a half alone: They were wrought in a great part of
the World, and not in Judaea and Galilee alone: They were done in the face of
abundance of Congregations, and not before the Jews only: And they succeeded to
the conversion and sanctification of many thousands more than did the preaching
of Christ himself. So that if any thing that is said before, of the
confirmation of Christ's own miracles, had wanted evidence, it is abundantly
made up in the evidence of their miracles who were the reporters and witnesses
of his.

. 40. I have hitherto been showing you, how the miracles of Christ were proved,
attested, and made certainly known to the first Churches planted by the
Apostles themselves, viz. by the testimony of the Spirit, 1. In their doctrine
and lives, 2. In their miracles, and 3. In their success, in the sanctification
of men's souls: I am next to show you how these matters of fact, or actions of
the Apostles, are certainly proved, or brought down to us.

. 41. And this is by the same three ways of proof as the Apostles proved to
the first Churches, their testimony: (though with much difference in the point
of miracles) viz. I. We have it by the most credible humane testimony: II. By
such testimony as has a natural certainty: III. And by some of that testimony
of God, which is also a supernatural evidence: Of all which I must speak in
order (supposing what is said before.)

. 42. I. The only natural way of transmitting those things down to us, is by
Historical Conveyance: And the authors of this History, are, both the Churches
of Christ, and their enemies: The credibility of which Testimonies will be
fullyer opened, under the second degree of proofs; which comprehends this.

. 43. II. That there is a natural Impossibility that our History of the
Apostles gifts and miracles should be false, will appear by reviewing all the
particulars by which the same was proved of the Apostles testimony of the
miracles of Christ; And in many respects, with much more advantage.

. 44. (1.) It is naturally impossible that all Reporters could be themselves
deceived: For 1. They were many thousands, in several Countries through the
World: And therefore could not be all either mad or senseless: 2. They were men
that took their salvation to be most nearly concerned in the thing, and were to
forsake the pleasures of the World, and suffer from men for their Religion: and
therefore could not be utterly careless in examining the thing: 3. They were
present upon the place, and eyewitnesses, and ear-witnesses of all. 4. The
Languages were said to be spoken, in their assemblies, and the miracles done
among them, for many years, even an age together: And it is impossible all
Countries could be cheated by juggling, in matters which their eyes and ears
were such competent witnesses of, for so many years together. 5. They were said
to be the objects of many of these miracles themselves; viz. That the cures
were wrought on many of them; that the same Spirit was given to them all. 6.
And they were said to be the Agents themselves in the several works of that
Spirit, according to their several gifts. So that their common deceit must be
impossible.

If any man should now among us, take on him to speak with diverse Languages, or
tell the Churches that diverse Languages are spoke among them in their hearing,
by unlearned men; and that Prophesyings, Interpretations, miraculous cures,
etc. are wrought among them, and name the persons, time and place; and should
tell them that they had all some sort or other of the same gifts themselves;
were it possible for the people to believe all this, if it were a Lie? Would
they not say, when did we ever hear your Languages? or when did we ever see
your Cures and other Miracles? when did we see an Ananias and Saphira die? When
did we do any such works our selves? Do we not know what we do? Men could not
believe such palpable untruths in matter of public fact, so near them, among
them, upon them, and much less could so many thousands believe this, in so many
Nations, if it were false: Because the understanding is not free in it self;
but per modum naturae is necessitated by cogent evidence. Absurd doctrines may
easily deceive many thousands; and so may false History do by men at a
sufficient distance: But he that thinks the ears and eyes and other senses of
so many thousand sound persons, were all deceived thus in presence, will sure
never trust his own ears or eyes or sense in any thing; nor expect that any man
eise should ever believe him, who so little believes his own sense and
understanding.

. 45. (2.) That the reporters were not purposely the Deceivers of the World by
wilful falsehood, is also certain by these following evidences.

. 46. It was not possible that so many thousands in all Countries, should have
wit and cunning enough for such a contrivance, and could keep it secret among
themselves, that it should never be detected.

They that think they were all so stupid as to be themselves deceived, cannot
also think that they were all so cunning as to conspire the deceiving of all
the World, so successfully and undiscovered. But it is past doubt, that for
their Naturals, they were ordinary persons, neither such mad people as all to
think they saw, and heard, and did things which were nothing so, for so long
together; nor yet so subtle as to be able to lay such a deceiving plot, and
carry it on so closely to the end. And they that suspect the Apostles and first
Disciples to be the Authors of the plot, will not suspect all the Churches too:
For if there were Deceivers, there must be some to be deceived by them: If
Christ deceived the Disciples, then the Disciples could not be wilful
deceivers themselves: For if they were themselves deceived, they could not
(therein) be wilful deceivers: And then how came they to confirm their
testimony by Miracles? If the Apostles only were deceivers, then all the
Disciples and Evangelists who assisted them must be deceived, and not wilful
deceivers. And then how came they also to do miracles? If all the Apostles and
Disciples of the first Edition were wilful Deceivers, then all the Churches
through the World which were gathered by them, were deceived by them, and then
they were not wilsul deceivers themselves: which is all that I am now proving,
having proved before that they were not deceived.

. 47. 2. If they had been cunning enough, it is most inprobable that so many
thousands in so many Nations, should be so bad, as to desire and endeavor at
such a rate as their own temporal and eternal ruin, to deceive all the world
into a blasphemy without any benefit to themselves, which might be rationally
sufficient to seem a tempting compensation to them.

Nemo jam infamiam incutiat; nemo aliud existimet: quia nee fas est ulli de sua
religione mentiri. Tertul. Apo^. c. 20.
. 48. For all these Churches which witnessed the Apostles Miracles, 1. Did
profess to believe lying and deceiving to be a heinous sin. 2. And to believe
an everlasting punishment for liars. 3. They were taught by their Religion to
expect calamity in this world. 4. They had experience enough to confirm them in
that expectation: Therefore they had no motive which could be sufficient to
make them guilty of so costly a deceit.

For, 1. Operari sequitur esse. A man will do ill, but according to the measure
that he is ill; and as bad as humane nature is, it is not yet so much depraved,
as that thousands through the world could agree, without any commodity to move
them to it, to ruin their own estates, and lives, and souls for ever, merely
to make the world believe that other men did miracles, and to draw them to
believe a known untruth. And, 2. as free as the will is, it is yet a thing that
has its nature and inclination, and cannot act without a cause and object;
which must be some apparent good: Therefore when there is no good-appearing,
but wickedness and misery, it cannot will it. So that this seems inconsistent
with humane nature.

Quid adeo simile Philosophus and Christianus? Graeciae discipulus and coeli?
famae negotiator and vitae? verborum and factorum operator. Tertul. Apol. c. 46.
. 49. And the certain history of their lives does show, that they were persons
extraordinary good and conscionable: being holy, heavenly and contemners of
this world, and ready to suffer for their Religion: and therefore could not be
so extremely bad, as to ruin themselves only to do mischief to the world and
their posterity.

. 50. And their enemies bare them witness, that they did and suffered all this
in the hopes of a reward in heaven: which proves that they were not wilful
liars and deceivers: for no man can look for a reward in heaven, for the
greatest known-villany on earth, even for suffering, to cheat all the world
into a blasphemy.

Even Lucian scoffeth at the Christians for running into sufferings, and hoping
to be rewarded for it with a life everlasting.

. 51. 3. If they had been never so cunning and so bad, yet was it impossible
that they should be able for the successful execution of such a deceit, as will
appear by all these following evidences.

. 52. 1. It was impossible that so many thousands, at such a distance, who
never saw each others faces, could lay the plot, in a way of concord; but one
would have been of one mind, and another of another.

. 53. 2. It is impossible that they should agree in carrying it on, and keeping
it secret through all the world, if they had accorded in the first contrivance
and attempts.

. 54. 3. It is impossible that all the thousands of adversaries among them, who
were eyewitnesses and ear-witnesses as well as they, should not discover the
deceit.

All those Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and other Countrymen, mentioned Act. 2.
were not Christians: and the Christians, though many, were but a small part of
the Cities and Countries where they dwelt. And Paul says, that Tongues and
Miracles were for the sake of unbelievers; and unbelievers were ordinarily
admitted into the Christian assemblies: and the Christians went among them to
preach; and most of the miracles were wrought in their sight and hearing.

. 55. 4. It is impossible that the falling out of Christians among themselves,
among so many thousands in several Nations, should never have detected the
deceit, if they had been all such deceivers.

. 56. 5. It is impossible but some of the multitudes of the perverted,
exasperated, separating, or excommunicate Heretics, (which were then in most
Countries where there were Christians, and opposed the Orthodox, and were
opposed by them) should have detected this deceit, if it had been such.

. 57. 6. It is impossible but some of the Apostates of those times, who are
supposed to have joined in the deceit, would have detected it to the world,
when they fell off from Christianity.

. 58. 7. It is scarce possible among so many thousands in several Lands, that
none of their own consciences living or dying, should be constrained in remorse
and terror, to detect so great an evil to the world.

. 59. 8. Much more impossible is it, that under the conscience of such a
villainy, they should live, and suffer, and die rejoycingly, and think it a
happy exchange to forsake life and all, for the hopes of a reward in heaven for
this very thing.

. 60. 9. Lastly, it is impossible, that these thousands of Christians should be
able to deceive many more than themselves, into the belief of the same
untruths, in the very time and place, where the things were said to be done;
and where the detection of the deceit had been easy, yea, unavoidable.

Christianity was then upon the increase: they that were converted, did convert
more than themselves. Suppose in Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, Rome, etc. some
thousands believed by the preaching of the Apostles, in a few years at the
first: in a few years more, there were as many more added. Now supposing all
this had been but a cheat, if the Christians had told their neighbors, [Among
us, unlearned men speak in the Languages of all Countries; they cast out
devils; they cure all diseases with prayer and anointing; they prophecy, and
interpret Tongues; they do many other miracles; and the same Spirit is given to
others by their imposition of hands; and all this in the Name and by the Power
of Jesus:] would not their neighbors easily know whether this were true or
not? And if it were false, would they not hate such deceivers, and make them a
common scorn, instead of being converted by them?

. 61. The foresaid impossibilities are herein founded: 1. There is no effect
without a sufficient cause. 2. A necessary cause, not sufficiently hindered,
will bring forth its answerable effect. But the opposed supposition makes
effects without any sufficient cause, and necessary causes without their
adequate effects.

. 62. The providence of God permitted dissentions and heresies to arise among
Christians, and rivals and false Teachers to raise hard reports of the
Apostles, and the people to be somewhat alienated from them, that the Apostles
might by challenges appeal to miracles; and future ages might be convinced,
that the matter of fact could not be contradicted.

The Romans had contentions among themselves, the strong and the weak
contemning or condemning one another, about meats and days, Romans 14. and 15.
The Corinthians were divided into factions, and exasperated against Paul by
false Apostles; so that he is fain at large to vindicate his Ministry: and he
does it partly by appealing both to miracles and works of power wrought among
them, and by the Spirit given to themselves, 2 Cor. 12.12. and 13.3, 4, 5. and
1 Cor. 12.7, 12, 13. The Galatians were more alienated from Paul by Jewish
Teachers, and seemed to take him as an enemy, for telling them the truth, and
he feared that he had bestowed on them labor in vain; and in this case he
vehemently rebukes them, and appealeth first to miracles wrought among them,
and before their eyes, and next to the Spirit given to themselves: Gal. 3.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey
the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth
crucified among you? This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by
the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? He therefore that ministers
to you the Spirit, and works miracles among you, does he it by the works of
the law, or by the hearing of faith? Now if no such miracles were wrought among
them, and if no such Spirit was received by themselves, would this argument
have silenced adversaries, and reconciled the minds of the Galatians? or rather
have made them deride the cause that must have such a defense, and say, [Who be
they that work miracles among us? and when did we receive such a Spirit?] So to
the Romans, this is Paul's testimonial, Romans 15.18, 19. For I will not dare to
speak of any of those things which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the
Gentiles obedient by word and deed: Through mighty signs and wonders, by the
power of the Spirit of God, etc. And to the Corinthians he says, 1 Cor. 14.18.
I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than you all. So Gal. 2.8. 1 Cor.
14.22. Tongues are for a sign to them that believe not. So Acts 2.43. and 4.30.
and 5.12. and 7.36. and 8.13. and 14.3. and 6.8. and 8.6, 13. and 15.12. and
19.11. 1 Cor. 12.10. Miracles are still made the confirmation of the Apostles
testimony and doctrine.

And in Heb. 2.3, 4. you have the just method of the proof and progress of
Christianity, [ Which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, (but how is
that known?) and was confirmed to us by them that heard him. (But how shall we
know that they said truth?) God also bearing them witness with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his
own will.

And Act. 4.33. And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the
resurrection of the Lord Jesus. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3. That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life, (for the life was
manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you that
eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;) that which
we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us, etc.

. 63. III. The miracles of the Apostles are not only attested by the Churches
which were eyewitnesses of them, 1. By the way of most credible humane
testimony. 2. And by natural evidence of infallible certainty: but also, 3. By
supernatural testimony of God himself, as appears in these following
evidences.

. 64. 1. Many miracles were wrought by those first Churches, who were the
witnesses of the Apostles miracles; which is a divine attestation to their
testimony.

1. The Scriptures forecited tell us, that the same holy Ghost was given to
them all, though all had not the same gifts; and that tongues, and healing, and
miracles were the gifts of many, though not of all: which, as I have showed,
they could not themselves have believed of themselves, if it had not been true.
Yea, sufficient historical testimony tells us, that for three or four hundred
years, (at least till Constantine owned and protected Christianity by Secular
Power) miracles were wrought in confirmation of the Christian faith. It has
been the devils craft to seek to destroy the credit of them, partly by
hypocrites, who have counterfeited miracles; and partly by lying Legends of the
carnal proud domineering part of the Church, who have told the world so many
palpable lies, that they seemed to do it in design, to persuade them to believe
nothing that is true. But yet all wise men will know the difference between
History credible and incredible. The many testimonies of the miracles of
Gregory Thaumaturgus, and many others, mentioned by Eusebius, and almost all
other Christian Writers of those times, and those mentioned by Augustine, de
Civitate Dei, lib. 22 cap. 8. and Retract. lib. 1. cap. 13. and passim; and by
Cyprian, Tertullian, and many more, will not be thought incredible by impartial
considering men.

. 65. 2. The eminent sanctity of the Pastors of the Churches, with the success
of their testimony and doctrine, for the true sanctification of many thousand
souls, is God's own attestation to their testimony and doctrine.

How far the sanctifying renewing success of the doctrine, is a Divine
attestation to its verity, I have before opened: and how far God owneth even
the truths of Philosophy, by blessing them with an adequate proportionable
success. The defective partial truths of Philosophy, produce a defective
partial reformation; (how far God accepts it, belongs not to my present
business to determine.) The more full and integral discovery of God's will, by
Jesus Christ, does produce a more full and integral renovation. And, 1. The
cause is known by the effect. 2. And God will not (as is before said) bless a
lie to do the most excellent work in all the world. Now it is a thing most
evident, that God has still blessed the Ministry of the Christian Pastors in
all ages, to the renewing of many thousand souls: That this is truly so, I
shall somewhat fullier show anon: but that it is God's own attestation, I have
showed before.

. 66. I have opened the validity of the Apostles testimony of the Resurrection
and miracles of Christ, and the first Churches certain testimony of the
miracles of the Apostles; both of them having a threefold certainty, Moral,
Natural, and Supernatural: In all which I have supposed, that such a testimony
the Churches have indeed given down to their posterity; which is the thing that
remains lastly to be here proved.

. 67. The doctrine and miracles of Christ and his Apostles have been delivered
us down from the first Churches, by all these following ways of history. 1. By
delivering to us the same writings of the Apostles and Evangelists which they
received from their hands themselves as certain truth, and delivered down as
such to us: even the holy Scriptures of the New Testament. They that believed
their words, believed their writings, and have told us their belief, by
preserving them for posterity as Sacred Verities.

In the holy Scriptures, the life, and death, and doctrine of Christ is
contained; with the doctrine of the Apostles, and so much of the history of
their Preaching and Miracles, as Luke was an eyewitness of, or had certain
knowledge of, (who was commonly Paul's companion) by which we may partly judge
of the Acts of the rest of the Apostles. And if the Churches had not believed
all these, they would not have delivered them as the infallible Writings of the
inspired Apostles to their Posterity.

. 68 2. The very successive Being of Christians and Churches, is the fullest
history that they believed those things which made them Christians and
Churches; which was the doctrine and miracles of Christ.

A Christian is nothing else but one that receives the Doctrine, Resurrection,
and Miracles of Christ, as certain truth, by the preaching and Miracles of his
great Witnesses, the Apostles: so many Christians, as there ever were, so many
believers of these things there have been. It was this Doctrine and Miracles
that made them Christians, and planted these Churches: And if any man think it
questionable, whether there have been Christians ever since Christ's time, in
the World, All history will satisfy him, Roman, Mohammedan, Jewish and
Christian, without any one dissenting voice. Pliny, Suetonius, Tacitus,
Marcellinus, Eunapius, Lucian and Porphyry and Julian, and all such enemies may
convince him: He shall read the history of their sufferings, which will tell
him, that certainly such a sort of persons there was then in the World.

. 69. 3. The succession of Pastors and Preachers in all generations, is another
proof: For it was their office to read publicly, and preach this same
Scripture to the Church and World, as the truth of God.

I speak not of a succession of Pastors in this one City or that, or by this or
that particular way of ordination, having nothing here to do with that: But
that a certain succession there has been since the days of the Apostles, is
past question: For 1. Else there had been no particular Churches: 2. Nor no
baptism: 3. Nor no public Worship of God. 4. Nor no Synods, or Discipline: But
this is not denied.

. 70. 4. The continuance of Baptism, which is the kernel or sum of all
Christianity, proves the continuance of the Christian Faith. For all
Christians in Baptism, were baptized into the vowed belief and obedience of the
Son and Holy Ghost as well as of the Father.

. 71. 5. The delivering down of the three breviate Symbols, of Faith, Desire
and Duty, the Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue, is the Churches delivery of
the Christian Religion, as that which all Christians have believed.

. 72. 6. The constant communion of the Church in solemn Assemblies, and setting
apart the Lords Day to that use, was a delivery of the Christian Faith, which
those assemblies all professed to believe.

. 73. 7. The constant preaching and reading of these same Scriptures in those
Assemblies, and celebrating there the Sacrament of Christ's death, and the
custom of open professing their Belief, and the Prayers and praises of God for
the Resurrection and Miracles of Christ, are all open, undeniable testimonies
that these things were believed by those Churches.

. 74. 8. The frequent disputes which Christians in all ages have held with the
adversaries of the Scripture and Christianity, do show that they believed all
these Scriptures, and the Doctrines and Miracles therein contained.

. 75. 9. The Writings of the Christians in all ages, their Apologies,
Commentaries, Histories, Devotional treatises; all bear the same testimony,
that we have these things by their tradition.

. 76. 10. The Confessions, Sufferings and Martyrdom of many in most ages, do
bear the same testimony, that they believed this, for which they suffered; and
that posterity received it from them.

. 77. 11. The Decrees and Canons of the Synods or Councils of the Bishops of
the Churches, are another part of the history of the same belief.

. 78. 12. Lastly, the decrees and laws of Princes concerning them, are another
part of the history; showing that they did believe these things.

. 79. And if any question whether our Scriptures which contain these histories
and doctrines be indeed the same, which these Churches received and delivered
from the Apostles, he may easily be convinced, as follows.

. 80. 1. Various Copies of it in the Hebrew and Greek text, were very quickly
scattered about the World, and are yet found in all Nations agreeing in all
material passages.

. 81. 2. These Scriptures were translated into many Languages, of which there
are yet extant, the Syriack, Arabic, Ethiopick, Persian, etc. which agree in
all material things.

. 82. 3. It was the stated Office of the Ministers in all the Churches in the
World, to read these Scriptures openly to the People, and preach on them, in
all their solemn Assemblies: And a thing so publicly maintained and used,
could not possibly be altered materially.

. 83. 4. All private Christians were exhorted to read and use the same
Scriptures also, in their Families, and in secret.

. 84. 5. This being through so many Nations of the World it was not possible
that they could all agree upon a corruption of the Scriptures: nor is there
mention in any history of any attempt of any such agreement.

. 85. 6. If they would have met together for that end, they could not possibly
have all consented: Because they were of so many minds, and parties, and
inclinations.

. 86. 7. Especially when all Christians by their Religion, take it to be matter
of damnation, to add to or diminish from these sacred Writings, as being the
inspired Word of God.

. 87. 8. And every Christian took it for the rule of his Faith, and the Charter
for his heavenly Inheritance; and therefore would certainly have had his action
against the Corrupters of it.

As the Laws of this Land, being recorded, and having Lawyers and Judges whose
calling is continually to use them, and men holding their Estates and safety by
them, if any would alter them all the rest would quickly detect it, and be upon
his head.

. 88. 9. Yea, the many Sects and Contentions among Christians, and the many
Heretics that were at enmity with them, would certainly have detected any
combination to corrupt the Scriptures.

. 89. 10. Some few Heretics in the beginning did attempt to bring in the
Gospel of Nicodemus, and some other forged Writings, and to have corrupted some
parts of Scripture; and the Churches presently cried them down.

. 90. 11. Most Heretics have pleaded these same Scriptures; and denied them
not to be genuine: Yea, Julian, Celsus, Porphyry, and other Heathens did not
deny it, but took it as a certain truth.

. 91. 12. The ancient Writers of the Church, Clemens, Ignatius, Justin,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius, Athenagoras, Lactantius, Eusebius,
Nazianzene, Nyssen, Basil, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Hierom, Augustine, etc. do
all cite these Scriptures as we now have them in all things material.

. 92. 13. The Christian Emperors have inserted the mention of some passages in
their Laws, in the same words as they are in our Bibles.

. 93. 14. Several Councils have not only cited several passages out of them,
but pleaded them still as the Word of God, and enumerated the particular Books
which constitute the whole Systeme.

All this set together will tell any man of reason, consideration, and
impartiality, that we have much fuller certainty that these Scriptures are the
same which the first Churches received from the Apostles, than they can have
that Virgil's, Ovid's, Cicero's or Plutarch's works are theirs; or that the
Statutes of this Land are current. Yea, were it not lest I be too tedious, I
might distinctly show you the forementioned threefold certainty of all this: 1.
A moral certainty of the strongest humane Faith. 2. A natural certainty
grounded upon Physical impossibilities of the contrary. 3. And somewhat of a
Divine supernatural attestation, by the continued blessing of God on the
Scriptures for the sanctifying of souls in every age.

And this brings me up to the last part of this Chapter: I have all this
while been showing how the three first parts of the Spirits witness to Christ,
are made known to us, viz. Prophecy, the Holiness of the Doctrine, and
Miracles: I come now in a word to the fourth.

. 94. IV. How may we certainly know the fourth part of the SPIRITS witness to
Christ, Mat. 1 21. He shall save his People from their sins: Vide qu^e de
nomine Jesu habe^ Beda in Luc. 2. l. 1. c. 7. fol. 62. p. 2. de numero 888. in
literis numeralibus (...) incluso.
viz. The success of his doctrine in the Regeneration of his Disciples, and the
actual saving them from their sins?

Answ. I shall answer this, 1. As to the times past, and 2. As to the present
age.

. 95. 1. What men have been in times past, we have but these three ways to
know: 1. By the History of those ages; 2. By their remaining works: 3. By their
successors in whom their belief and qualities are continued. And 1. that there
have been holy persons in all ages (yea, that all true Christians were such) we
have as good testimony as History can afford: whether you will judge of them by
their profession, life or sufferings. 2. Their remaining works are very great
testimonies what a spirit of Holiness, Charity and Justice, does breath in the
writings of those holy men, which are come to our hands? Clemens Romanus,
Ignatius, Cyprian, Ephrem Syrus, Macarius, Augustine, Gregory Nazianzene, Gr.
Nyssen, Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Salvian, Cassianus, Bernard, etc. 3. Those
that succeed them at this day in the serious profession of Christianity, are a
living history of the virtues of their ancestors.

96. 2. Of the sanctity of the Christians of this present age, there is a
double knowledge to be had: 1. By them that are Regenerate themselves: 2. By
them that are not: Between these ways of knowledge the difference must be
great. Sicut Ars in eo qui nactus est illam, ita gratia Spiritus in eo qui
recepit, semper quidem praesens, at non perpetuo operans est Basil. de Spir.
saacl.


. 97. 1. As he that has learning, or love to his Parents, or loyalty to his
King, or faithfulness to his friend, may know that he has it; so may he that
is renewed by the Spirit of God, and has a predominant love to God, a heavenly
mind and conversation, a hatred of sin, a delight in holiness, a love to all
men, even his enemies, a contempt of the World, a mastery over his fleshly
appetite, Animae afflatae ac illustratae Spiritu, fiunt and ipsae Spirituales;
and in alios gratiam emittunt: Hinc futurorum praescientia, arcanorum
intelligentia, occultorum comprehensio, donorum distributiones, coelestis
conversatio, cum Angelis chorea; Hinc gaudium nunquam finiendum, hinc in Deo
perseverantia, and cum Deo similitudo, and quo nihil sublimius exp^ti potest,
hinc est ut Divinus fias. Basil. ibid.
sense and lusts; a holy Government of his passions, thoughts, and tongue; with
a longing desire to be perfect in all this, and a supporting hope to see Gods
glory, and enjoy him in the delights of Love and Praise, for evermore.

. 98. This evidence of the Spirit of Sanctification in our selves is not the
reason or motive of our first faith, but of our confirmation; and fuller
assurance in believing afterward: For a man must in some sort believe in
Christ before he can know that he is sanctified by him.

The rest of the motives are sufficient to begin the work of Faith: and are the
means which God ordinarily uses to that end.

. 99. It is Christ's appointed Method that by learning of Him and using his
appointed means, Men be brought up to such a degree of Holiness, as to be able
to discern this witness in themselves, and thence to grow up to full assurance
of Faith and Hope: Therefore if any one that has heard the Gospel, do want
this inward assuring testimony, it is because they have been false to the truth
and means before revealed to them.

He that will but enquire into the Gospel, and receive it and obey it so far as
he has reason to do it, and not be false to his own Reason and Interest, shall
receive that renewing sanctifying Spirit, which will be an abiding witness in
himself. But if he will reject known truth, and refuse known duty, and neglect
the most reasonable means that are proposed to him, he must blame himself if he
continue in unbelief, and want that evidence which others have. Suppose, that
in a common Plague, one Physician should be famed to be the only and infallible
Curer of all that take his remedies; and suppose many defame him, and say, Hoc
itaque prodest in Deum credere, recta fide, Deum colere, Deum nosse, ut and
been vivendi ab illo fit nobis auxilium; and si peccaverimus, indulgentiam
mereamur; non in factis quae odit, securi perseverante, etc. August. de fid.
and ope^b^. c. 21. p. 34.
He is but a Deceiver: and others tell you, [He has cured us and many
thousands, and we can easily convince you, that his Remedies have nothing in
them that is hurtful; and therefore you may safely try them; especially having
no other help;] He that will so far believe in him, and trust him now, as to
try his Remedies, may live; but he that will not, must blame none but himself,
if he die of his disease: He that tries, shall know by his own cure and
experience, that his Physician is no Deceiver: And he that will not, and yet
complains that he wants that experimental knowledge, does but talk like a
peevish self-destroyer.

. 100. 2. He that yet has not the evidence of the Spirit of Regeneration in
himself, may yet be convinced that it is in others; and thereby may know that
Christ is indeed the Savior of the World, and no deceiver.

Even as in the aforesaid instance, he that never tried the Physician himself,
yet if he see thousands cured by him, may know by that, that he is not a
deceiver; and so may be persuaded to trust and try him himself.

Non in meditatione Sermonis and structura verborum, sed in rebus opere
declarandis, tanquam doctrina viva, professio nostra posita est: Athenagor.
Apol. B.P. p. 78. Yet there he complains that they were accused of the most
odious villages, without all show of cause.
. 101. The way to know that others are thus regenerated, is 1. By believing
them Fide humana, 2. By discerning it in the effects.

And though it be too frequent to have presumptuous self-conceited persons, to
affirm that the Spirit of Christ has renewed them, when it is no such matter,
yet all humane testimony of matters so near men, even within them, is not
therefore incredible; but wise men will discern a credible person from an
incredible. In the forementioned instance, many may tell you, that they are
cured by the Physician, when it is not so; but will you therefore believe no
one that tells you that he is cured? Many may boast of that learning which
they have not, and tell you that they have knowledge in Mathematics, or in
several Arts; But is no man therefore to be believed that says the same?

But yet I persuade no man here to take up with the bare belief of another man's
word, where he sees not enough in the effects, to second it, and to persuade a
reasonable man that it is true. But as he that hears a man that was sick,
profess that he is cured, may well believe him, if he see him eat, and drink,
and sleep, and labor, and laugh as the healthful use to do; so he that
hears a sober man profess with humble thanks to God, that he has changed and
renewed him by his Spirit, may well believe him, if he see him live like a
renewed man.

. 102. Though you cannot be infallibly certain of the sincerity of any one
individual person, but your self (because we know not the heart); yet may you
be certain that all do not dissemble.

Because there is a natural impossibility, that interests, and motives, and
sufficient causes should concur to lead them to it: As before I said, we are
not certain of any individual woman that she does not dissemble Love to her
Husband and Children: but we may be certain that all the women in the World do
not; from many natural proofs which might be given.

. 103. Spiritus sanctus conceditur ad usum, ad miraculum, ad salutem, ad
auxilium, ad solatium, ad fervorem. Ad usum vitae, bonis and malis communia
bona tribuens: Ad miraculum in signis and prodigiis. Ad salutem, cum toto cord
revertitur ad Deum. Ad auxisium, cum in omni collectatione adjuvat insi^mitatem
nostiam: Ad solatium, cum testimonium perhibet spiritui nost^o, quod filii Dei
sumus. Ad fervorem, cum in cordibus perfectorum vehementius spirans validum
ignem charitatis accendit. Bern. Sermon. 15 Pentecost.
All these effects of Renovation may be discerned in others. 1. You may
discern, that they are much grieved for their former sins. 2. That they are
weary of the remnant of their corruption or infirmity. 3. That they long and
labor to be delivered, and to have their cure perfected, and live in the
diligent use of means to that end. 4. That they live in no sin, but smaller
humane frailties. 5. That all the riches in the world would not hire them
deliberately and wilfully to sin; but they will rather choose to suffer what
man can lay upon them. 6. That they are vile in their own eyes, because of
their remaining imperfections. 7. That they do no wrong or injustice to any; or
if they do wrong any, they are ready to confess it, and make them satisfaction.
8. That they love all good men with a love of complacency, and all bad men with
a love of benevolence, yea, even their enemies; and instead of revenge are
ready to forgive, and to do what good they can for them and all men. And that
they hate bad men in opposition to complacency, but as they hate themselves for
their sins. 9. That they love all doctrines, persons and practices which are
holy, temperate, just and charitable. 10. That their passions at least are so
far governed, that they do not carry them to swear, curse or rail, or slander,
or fight, or to do evil. 11. That their tongues are used to speak with
reverence of holy and righteous things, and not to filthy ribbald, railing,
lying, or other wicked speech. 12. That they suffer not their lusts to carry
them to fornication, nor their appetites to drunkenness or notable excess. 13.
That nothing below God himself, is the principle object of their devotion: but
to know him, to love him, to serve and please him, and to delight in these, is
the greatest care, and desire, and endeavor of their souls. 14. That their
chiefest hopes are of heaven, and everlasting happiness with God, in the
perfection of this sight and love. 15. That the ruling motives are fetched from
God, and the life to come, which most command their choice, their comforts, and
their lives. 16. That in comparison of this, all worldly riches, honors and
dignities, are sordid contemptible things in their esteem. 17. That for the
hope of this, they are much supported with patience under all sufferings in the
way. 18. That they value and use the things of this world, in their callings
and labors, in subserviency to God and Heaven, as a means to its proper end.
19. That they use their relations in the same subserviency; ruling chiefly for
God, if they be superiors, and obeying chiefly for God, if they be inferiors;
and that with fidelity, submission and patience, so far as they can know his
will. 20. That their care and daily business in the world is, by diligent
redeeming precious time, in getting and doing what good they can, to make ready
for death, and judgment, to secure their everlasting happiness, and to please
their God.

. 104. All this may be discerned in others, with so great probability of their
sincerity, that no charitable reason shall have cause to question it. And I
repeat my testimony, that here is not a word which I have not faithfully copied
out of my own heart and experience; and that I have been acquainted with
multitudes, who, I verily believe, were much better than my self, and had a
greater measure of all this grace.

. 105. If any shall say, that men superstitiously appoint themselves
unnecessary tasks, and forbid themselves many lawful things, and then call this
by the name of Holiness: I answer, That many indeed do so, but it is no such
that I am speaking of: Let reason judge* whether in this or any of the
foregoing descriptions of Holiness there be any such thing at all contained.

. 106. He that will be able to discern this Spirit of God in others, must
necessarily observe these reasonable conditions. 1. Choose not those that are
notoriously No-christians, to judge of Christianity by; a drunkard, fornicator,
voluptuous, carnal, worldly, proud or selfish person, calling himself a
Christian, is certainly but an hypocrite: And shall Christianity be judged of
by a lying hypocrite? 2. As you must choose such to try by, as are truly
serious in their Religion, so you must be intimate and familiar with them, and
not strangers, that see them as afar off: for they make no vain ostentation of
their piety. And how can they discern the divine motions of their souls, that
only see them in common conversation? 3. You must not judge of them by the
revilings of ignorant ungodly men. 4. Nor by the reproach of selfish men, that
are moved only by some interest of their own. 5. Nor by the words of faction,
(Civil or Religious) which judges of all men according to the interest of
their sect, or cause and party. 6. Nor by your own partial interest, which will
make you judge of men, not as they are indeed, and toward God, but as they
either answer or cross your interests and desires. 7. Nor must you judge of all
by some that prove hypocrites, who once seemed sincere. 8. Nor must you judge
of a man by some particular fall or failing, which is contrary to the bent of
his heart and life, and is his greatest sorrow. 9. Nor must you come with a
fore-stalled and malicious mind, hating that holiness your self which you
enquire after; for malice is blind, and a constant false interpreter and a
slanderer. 10. You must know what Holiness and Honesty is, before you can well
judge of them.

These conditions are all so reasonable and just, that he, that lives among
religious honest men, and will stand at a distance, unacquainted with their
lives, and maliciously revile them, upon the seduction of false reports, or of
interest either his own interest, or the interest of a faction, and will say, I
see no such honest and renewed persons, but a company of self-conceited
hypocrites; this man's confirmed infidelity and damnation, is the just
punishment of his wilful blindness, partiality and malice, which made him false
to God, to truth, and to his own soul.

. 107. It is not some but All true Christians, Inseperabilis est bona vita a
fide quae per dilectionem operatur, imo vero ea ipsa est bona vita. Aug. de
fid. and oper. c. 23.
that ever were or are in the world, who have within them this witness or
evidence of the Spirit of Regeneration.

As I have before said, Christ will own no others, Romans 8. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 2
Cor. 5.17. Luke 14.26.33. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
none of his. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are
passed away, behold, all things are become new. He that forsakes not all that
he has, cannot be my disciple. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with its affections and lusts. Indeed the Church visible,
which is but the congregate Societies of professed Christians, has many in it,
that have none of this Spirit or grace; but such are only Christians
equivocally, and not in the primary proper sense: 1 John 5.7, 8, 9, 10. There
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost;
and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness on earth, the
Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood; and these three agree in one. If we
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the
witness of God, which he has testified of his Son. He that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself: He that believes not God, has made
him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son.

. 108. The more any one is a Christian in degree, the more he has of this
witness of the sanctifying Spirit in himself, and the holier he is.

See what I cited before of Socrates and his Converts.
. 109. The nearer any Philosopher or others are like to Christians, the nearer
they come to this renewed Image of God.

. 110. As this Image of God, the holiness of the soul, is the very end and work
of a true Savior, so the true effecting of it on all true Christians, is
actually their begun salvation; and therefore the standing infallible witness
of Christ, which should confound unbelief in all that are indeed his own.

Nulla in discendo mora est, ubi spiritus sanctus doctor adest. Beda in Luc.
This (which I spoke of the fore going Chapter) is a testimony in every holy
soul, which the gates of hell shall not prevail against. He that undertaketh to
cure all of the Plague, or Stone, or Gout, or Fever, that will take his
medicines, and be ruled by him, is certainly no deceiver, if he do that which
he undertaketh. He that undertaketh to teach all men Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, Music, etc. who will come and learn of him, is certainly no
deceiver if he do it. What is it that Jesus Christ has undertaken? Think of
that, and then tell me whether he be a deceiver. He never undertook to make his
Disciples Kings, or Lords, or rich, or honorable in the world; nor yet to make
them the best Logicians, Orators, Astronomers, Mathematicians, Physicians,
Musicians, Spiritus Paracletus dat pignus salutis, robur vitae, scientiae
lumen. Pignus salutis, ut ipse reddat testimonium spiritui tuo quod filius Dei
sis: Robur vitae, ut quod per naturam tibi est impossible, per gratiam ejus
non solum possibile sed facile fiat: Lumen scientiae, ut cum omnia been
feceris, te servum in utilem pute^; and quicquid boni in te inveneris, illi
tribuas, a quo omne bonum est. Bern. Sermon. 2. Pentec.
etc. but to make them the best men: to renew them to the love of God in
holiness, and thereby to save them from their sins, and give them repentance
unto life. Nor has he promised this to all that are baptized or called
Christians, but only to those that sincerely consent to learn of him, and take
his counsel, and use the remedies which he prescribes them. And is it not
certain that Christ does truly perform this undertaking? How then can he be a
deceiver, who does perform all that he undertaketh? Of this all true Christians
have a just demonstration in themselves, which is his witness.

Object. But Christ undertaketh more than this, even to bring us to everlasting
blessedness in heaven.

Answ. It is our comfort that he does so: but methinks its easy to believe
him in that, if he perform the rest: For, 1. I have proved in the first part of
this Book, that by the light of nature, a future life of retribution must be
expected, and that man is made for a future happiness. 2. And who then should
have that happiness, but the holy and renewed souls? Does not natural reason
tell you, that so good a God will show his love to those that are good, that
is, to those that love him? 3. And what think you is to be done to bring any
man to heaven, but to pardon him, and make him holy? 4. And the nature of the
work does greatly help our faith. For this holiness is nothing but the
beginning of that happiness.

When we find that Christ has by his Spirit begun to make us know God, and
love him, and delight in him, and praise him; it is the easier to make us
believe that he will perfect it. He that promises to convey me safely to the
Antipodes, may easily be believed when he has brought me past the greatest
difficulties of the voyage. He that will teach me to sing artificially, has
merited credit, when he has taught me the gradual tones, the Scale of Music,
the Sol-fa-ing, the Cliffs, the Quantity, the Moods, the Rules of time, etc. He
that causes me to love God on earth, may be believed if he promise me that I
shall love him more in heaven: And he that causes me to desire heaven above
earth, before I see it, may be believed when he promises, that it shall be my
great delight when I am there. It is God's work to love them that love him, and
to reward the obedient; and I must needs believe that God will do his work, and
will never fail the just expectations of any creature. All my doubt is, whether
I shall do my part, and whether I shall be a prepared subject for that
felicity: and he that resolves this, resolves all: He that will make me fit
for heaven, has overcome the greatest difficulty of my belief; and I should
the more easily believe that he will do the rest, and that I shall surely come
to heaven when I am fit for it.

Object. But Christ does not only undertake to regenerate and to save us, but
also to justify us, and this by a strange way, by his Sacrifice and Merits.

Answ. The greater is his wisdom and goodness, as made known to us. I am sure
an unpardoned unrighteous person, is incapable of felicity in that state: and I
am sure I cannot pardon my self, nor well know which way else to seek it. And I
am sure that so excellent and holy a person, is fitter to be well-beloved of
God I than. But I pray you remember, 1. That he undertaketh not to pardon or
justify any man, whom he does not renew and sanctify. 2. And that all his
means, which seem so strange to you, are but to restore God's Image on you, and
fit you for his love and service. And this we can testify by experience that
he has done, in some measure in us: and if I find his means successful, I will
not quarrel with it, because it seems strange to me. A Physician may
prescribe me remedies for some mortal disease, which I understand not, but seem
unlike to do the cure: but if I find that those unlikely means effect it, I
will not quarrel with him, nor refuse them, till I know my self to be wiser
than he, and have found out some surer means.

It is most evident then, that he who saves us is our Savior; and he that
saves us from sin, will save us from punishment; and he that makes us fit for
pardon, does procure our pardon; and he that causes us to love God above all,
does fit us to enjoy his love; and he that makes us both to love him, and to
be beloved by him, does prepare us for heaven, and is truly the MEDIATOR.

. III. Four or five Consectaries are evident from this, which I have been
proving: 1. That we have left no room for their insipid cavil, who say, that we
fly to a private spirit, or conceit, or Enthusiasm, for the evidence of our
faith.

Of this see Amyraldus in These. Salmuriens.
There are some indeed that talk of the mere persuasion, or inward active
testimony of the Spirit, as if it were an inward word that said to us, This is
the word of God: But this is not it which I have been speaking of; but the
objective testimony, or evidence of our Regeneration, which could not be
effected but, 1. by a perfect doctrine; and, 2 by the concurrent work or
blessing of God's Spirit, which he would not give to confirm a lie. The Spirit
is Christ's witness in the four ways forementioned: and he does moreover cause
me to believe, and increase that faith, by blessing due means: But for any
Enthusiasm, or unproved bare persuasion, we own it not.

. 112. II. That Malignity is the highway to Infidelity: As the holiness of his
members is Christ's last continued witness in the world; so the malicious
slandering and scorning at godly men, or vilifying them for self-interest, or
the interest of a faction; is the devils means to frustrate this testimony.

. 113. III. That the destruction of true Church Discipline, tends to the
destruction of Christianity in the world, by laying Christ's Vineyard common to
the Wilderness, and confounding godly and the notoriorsly ungodly, and
representing Christianity to Pagans and Infidels, as a barren notion, or a
common and debauching way.

. 114. IV. That the scandals and wickedness of nominal Christians, is on the
same accounts, the devils way, to extirpate Christianity from the earth.

. 115. V. That the great mercy of God has provided a sure and standing means
for the ascertaining multitudes of holy Christians of the truth of the Gospel,
who have neither skill nor leisure to acquaint themselves with the History of
the Church, and records of Antiquity, nor to reason it out against a learned
subtle caviler, from other extrinsick arguments.

Abundance of honest holy souls, O magna vis veritatis! quae contra hominum
ingenia, calliditatem, sole tiam, contraque fictas omnium insid^as facile se
per se ipsam defendat* Cicer p^o Cael^.
do live in the fervent love of God, and in hatred of sin, and in sincere
obedience, in justice and charity to all men, and in heavenly desires and
delights; who yet cannot well dispute for their Religion; nor yet do they need
to fly to believe as the Church believes, though they know not what or why,
nor what the Church is: But they have that Spirit within them, which is the
living witness and Advocate of Christ, and the seal of God, and the earnest of
their salvation; not a mere pretense that the Spirit persuades them, and they
know not by what evidence; nor yet that they count it most pious to believe
strongliest, without evidence, when they least know why: but they have the
spirit of Renovation and Adoption, turning the very bent of their hearts and
lives from the world to God, and from earth to heaven, and from carnality to
spirituality, and from sin to holiness. And this fully assures them, that
Christ, who has actually saved them, is their Savior, and that he who makes
good all his undertaking, is no deceiver, and that God would not sanctify his
people in the world by a blasphemy, a deceit and lie, and that Christ who has
performed his promise in this, which is his earnest, will perform the rest. And
withal the very love to God, and Holiness, and Heaven, which is thus made
their new nature by the Spirit of Christ, will hold fast in the hour of
temptation, when reasoning otherwise is too weak. O what a blessed advantage
have the sanctified against all temptations to unbelief: And how lamentably are
ungodly Sensualists disadvantaged, who have deprived themselves of this
inherent testimony. If two men were born blind, and one of them had been
cured, and had been showed the Candlelight and twilight, how easy is it for
him to believe his Physician, if he promise also to show him the Sun? in
comparison of what it is to the other who never saw the light?

CHAP. VIII. Of some other subservient and Collateral Arguments for the
Christian Verity.
HAving largely opened the great Evidence of the Christian Verity, viz. The
SPIRIT in its four ways of testifying, Accidentally, Inherently,
Concomitantly, and Subsequently, I shall more briefly recite some other
subservient Arguments, which I find most satisfactory to my own understanding.

. 1. I. The natural evidence of the truth of the Scripture, about the Creation
of the World, does make it the more Credible to me in all things else.

For that is a thing which none but God himself could reveal to us: For the
Scripture tells what was done, before there was any man in being. And that
this World is not eternal, nor of any longer continuance, is exceeding
probable, by the state of all things in it. 1. Arts and Sciences are far from
that maturity, which a longer continuance, or an Eternity would have produced.
Guns and Printing are but lately found out: The body of man is not yet well
Anatomized; A Sellius his milkie Veins, and Pecquets Receptacle of the Chyle,
and Bartholines Glandules, and the Vasa Lymphatica, are of late discovery:
Galilaeus his Glasses, and his four Medicaean Planets, and the Lunary mutations
of Venus, and the strange either opacous parts and shape of Saturn, or the
proximity of two other Stars which mishape it to our sight, the shadowy parts
of the Moon, etc. with the innumerable Stars in the Via Lactea, etc. were all
unknown to former ages. Gilberts magnetical discoveries (I speak not of those
questionable Inferences which Campanella and others contradict) the nature of
many Minerals and Plants, the chief operations and effects of Chemistry,
abundance of secrets for the cure of many diseases, even the most excellent
medicaments, are all of very late invention. Almost all Arts and Sciences are
increasing nearer toward Perfection. Ocular demonstrations by the Telescope,
and sensible experiments, are daily multiplied: Yea, the World it self is not
all discovered to any one part; but a great part of it was but lately made
known even to the Europeans, whose knowledge is greatest, by Columbus, and
Americus Vesputianus; and it is not long since it was first measured by a
Circumnavigation. If the World had been eternal, or of much longer duration
than the Scripture speaks, it is not credible that multiplied experiences,
would not have brought it above that Infancy of knowledge in which it so long
continued.

Obj. Cursed Wars by Fire and Depopulation, consume all Antiquities, and put
the World still to begin anew.

Answ. It does indeed do much this way; but it is not so much that War could
do: For when it is in one Country, others are free, and some would fly, or lie
hid or survive, who would preserve Arts and Sciences, and be teachers of the
rest. Who can think now that any Wars are like to make America, or Galilaeus's
Stars unknown again? or any of the forenamed Inventions to be lost.

2. Moreover, it is strange, if the World were eternal, or much elder than
Scripture speaks, that no part of the World should show us any elder Monument
of Antiquity; no engraven Stones or Plates; no Mausolus, Pyramids, or Pillars;
no Books; no Chronological Tables, no Histories or Genealogies, or other
Memorials and Records. I know to this also, cursed Wars may contribute much:
But not so much, as to leave nothing to inquisitive Successors.

. 2. II. It greatly confirms my belief of the Holy Scriptures, to find by
certain experience, the Original and Universal pravity of man's nature, how
great it is, and wherein it does consist; exactly agreeing with this Sacred
Word; when no others have made such a full discovery of it.

This I have opened, and proved before; and he is a stranger to the World and
to himself, that sees it not: Were it not lest I weary the Reader with length,
how fully and plainly could I manifest it?

. 3. III. The certain observation of the universal Spiritual War, which has
been carried on according to the first Gospel, between the Woman's and the
Serpent's seed, does much confirm me of the truth of the Scriptures.

Even between the carnal hypocritical nominal Christian, and the true
Christian: as Gal. 4.29. As then he that was born after the Flesh persecuted
him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.
Such a contrariety there is, even between Cain and Abel, Children of the same
Father; such an implacable enmity throughout all the World, in almost all
wicked men against Godliness it self, and those that sincerely love and follow
it; such a hatred in those that are Orthodoxly bred, against the true power,
use and practice, of the Religion which they themselves profess; such a
resolute resistance of all that is seriously good and holy, and tends but to
the saving of the resisters; that it is but a public visible acting of all
those things which the Scripture speaks of; and a fulfilling them in all ages
and places in the sight of all the World. Of which having treated largely in my
Treatise against Infidelity, of the sin against the Holy Ghost, I refer you
thither.

. 4. IV. It much confirms me to find that there is no other Religion
professed in the World, that an impartial rational man can rest in.

That man is made for another life, the light of Nature proves to all men: And
some way or other there must be opened to us to attain it: Mahometanisme I
think not worthy a confutation. Judaisme must be much beholden to Christianity
for its proofs, and is but the introduction to it, inclusively considered. The
Heathens or mere Naturalists are so blind, so idolatrous, so divided into
innumerable sects, so lost and bewildred in uncertainties, and show us so
little holy fruit of their Theology, that I can incline to no more than to take
those natural Verities which they confess, and which they cast among the
rubbish of their fopperies and wickedness, and to wipe them clean, and take
them for some part of my Religion. Christianity or nothing is the way.

. 5. V. It much confirms me to observe, that commonly the most true and
serious Christians, are the holiest and most honest, righteous men; and that
the worse men are, the greater enemies they are to true Christianity: And then
to think, how incredible it is that God should lead all the worst men into the
truth, and leave the best and godlyest in an error.

In small matters, or common secular things, this were no wonder: But in the
matter of Believing, worshipping and pleasing God, and saving of Souls, it is
not credible. As for the belief of a Life to come, no men are so far from it as
the vilest Whoremongers, Drunkards, perjured persons, Murderers, Oppressors,
Tyrants, Thieves, Rebels, or if any other name can denote the worst of men: And
none so much believe a Life to come as the most godly, honest-hearted persons:
And can a man that knows that there is a God, believe that he will leave all
good men in so great an error, and rightly inform and guide all these Beasts,
or living walking images of the Devil. The same in a great measure is true of
the friends and enemies of Christianity.

. 6. VI. It has been a great convincing argument with me, against both
Atheism and Infidelity, to observe the marvelous Providence of God, for
diverse of his servants, and the strange answer of Prayers, which I my self, and
ordinarily other Christians have had.

I have been and am as backward to ungrounded credulity about wonders, as most
men, that will not strive against knowledge. But I have been often convinced by
great experience, and testimonies which I believed equally with my eyesight,
of such actions of God, as I think would have convinced most, that should know
as much of them as I did. But few of them are fit to mention: For some of them
so much concern my self, that strangers may be tempted to think that they
savor of self-esteem; and some of them the factions and parties in these
times, will by their interest be engaged to distaste; And some of them have
been done on persons, whose after scandalous Crimes have made me think it unfit
to mention them; lest I should seem to put honor on a scandalous sinner, or
seem to dishonor Gods Works by mentioning such an object of them: And I have
much observed, that whatever wonder I ever knew done, in answer to Prayer, or
attestation of any good, the Devil has with mavelous subtilty, endeavored
by some error or scandal of men, to turn it all against Christ and to his own
advantage. But yet God declares the truth of his Promises, by the deliverances
of his Servants, and the granting of prayers which are put up to him in the
name of Christ. I will not dispute whether these actions shall be called
Miracles, or not: It is enough for my purpose, if they be but attesting
Providence. All Church History tells us of many such heretofore: how great
things have been done, and deliverances wrought upon Christians earnest Prayer
to God. The success of the Thundering Legion in the Army of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, in Germany, is commonly mentioned: You may see it in the Apolog. of
Justin Martyr and Tertullian: See more in Pamelius's Notes on Tertull. N. 64.
Cyprian says to Demetrius, page 328 of the Christians casting out of Devils,
[O si audire velles and videre, quando a nobis adjurantur and torqientur
spiritalibus flagris, and verborum tormentis de obsessis corporibus ejiciuntur,
quando ejulantes and gementes voce humana, and potestate divina flagella and
verbera sentientes, venturum judicium confitentur. Veni and cognosce vera esse
quae dicimus: and quia sic Deos colere te dicis, vel ipsis quos colis, creed:
aut si volueris and ti^i credere, de te ipso loquetur, audiente te, qui nunc
tuum pectus obsedit. Videlis nos rogari ab eis quos tu rogas, tamen ab eis quos
tu adoras; videbis sub manu nostra stare vinctos, and tremere captivos, quos tu
suspicis and veneraris ut Dominos: certe vel sic confundi in istis erroribus
tuis poteris, cum conspexeris and audieris deos tuos, quid sint, interrogatione
nostra statim prodere, etc.

But it were tedious to recite all that Antiquity tells us of this kind:
Later times have their testimonies also: Bayname could tell the Papists, that
burned him, in the midst of his flames, [Lo, ye Papists, here is a Miracle: I
feel no more pain in this fire than in a bed of Down; it is as sweet to me as a
bed of Roses]. Bishop Farrar could say, when he went to the fire [If I stir
in the fire, believe not my doctrine]; and accordingly remained unmoved: Many
more you may see in Martyrologies and Church History. It was the merciful
Providence of God to Mris. Honywood, See her story in Fuller's Worthy's of
England.
who in her passionate self-accusations, when the Minister was persuading her
of the pardon of her sin, threw the glass which was in her hand up to the wall,
saying, she was as certainly an hypocrite, as that glass would break; and it
fell to the ground, and remained unbroken. They were convincing Providence
which God exercised on the leading women of the Familistical Sect which
troubled New England: when one of them, Mris. Dyer, brought forth a Monster
that had the parts of Man, Beast, Birds and Fishes; and the other their
Prophetess, Mris. Hutchinson, brought forth about thirty misshapen lumps or
births at once; and thereby the Land was awakened, and delivered from the
danger Which Mr. Weld of New England has printed: And upon Mr. Stubs his
Extenuation, in his Book for Sir Henry Vane, against me, in Letters since he
has fully confirmed.

The many Miracles mentioned by such credible persons as Augustine (de Civit.
Dei) and other learned holy men, deserve some credit sure.

Victor Uticensis tells of many Confessors whose tongues were cut out by the
Arrian Vandal Hunnerichus, who spoke freely without tongues: And Aenaeas
Gazaeus in a notable Treatise for the Immortality of the Soul says the same,
and that he saw them himself; and has more such Wonders.

Ego novi multa bonorum virorum corpora, quae etiam phalanges daemonum,
tantopere terretent, quantopere ipsi vexabant hominem abs se captum atque
obsessum: itemque morbos innumeros quibus curandis ars medica non sufficeret,
ipsa facile curarent, perpurgarent, omninoque auferrent. Id. ibid. page 411.
B.P.

Even Cicero speaking of some sacrilegious impious persons, could observe, Qui
vero ex his and omnium scelerum principes fuerunt, and praeter caeteros in omni
Religione impii, non solum vita cruciati (vel cum cruciatu, ut Lambinus) atque
dedecore, verum etiam sepultura ac justis exequiis caruerunt Lib. 2. de leg. p.
245. And to the objection, that it often falls out otherwise, and that the best
suffer most, he answers, Non recte existimamus quae poena sit divina: and
opinionibus vulgi rapimur in errorem, ne^vera cernimus: Morte aut dolor
corporis, aut luctu animi aut offenfione judicii, hominum miserias ponderamus:
quae fateor humana esse, and multis bonis viris accidisse: sceleris autem poena
tristis, and praeter cos eventus qui sequuntur, per se ipsa maxima est. Videmus
eos qui nisi odissent patriam, nun quam inimici nobis fuissent, ardentes cum
cupiditate, tum metu, tum conscientia; quid ag^rent modo timentes, vicissim
contemnentes Religiones. And he concludes, Duplicem poenam esse Divinam, quod
constaret and ex vexandis vivorum animis, and ea fama mortuorum, ut little
exitium and judicio vivorum, and gaudio comprobetur. Ibid.

I desire the learned Reader to read the three Miracles which Aen. Gazaeus
says he saw with his own eyes, in his Theophrast. in Bib. Pat. Gr. To. 2. page
414, 415. The first of an old man, that raised one from the dead: The second of
a good man, that when he was dying, promised his Scholar, that was blind, that
within seven days he should have his fight; which accordingly came to pass: The
third, of the Confessions before mentioned, that by prayer could speak most
articulately without tongues: All these he professes he saw with his own eyes:
And the rationality and piety of his writings makes his testimony the more
credible.

Lege Palladii Historiam Lausiac. cap. 52. de Miraculo ab ipso viso.

Though I know that as Apparitions, so Miracles are too often counterfeit, yet
all that are recorded by the ancient Doctors and Historians cannot be so
thought, especially when we have seen something like them.


.

My own deliverances by prayer (because they were my own) I think not fit here
to express: Nor many other persons that were familiar with me, some yet living,
and some dead: Nor would I mention such small things as corporal deliverances
and cures, but only because they are matters of sense, and somewhat unusual,
and not as supposing them the great matters which Christians have to look after
or expect in answer to their prayers: they are far greater things which prayer
brings to all true Christians: the strength of the Spirit against temptations,
the mortification of those sins, which nature, constitution, temperature,
custom and interest, would most strongly draw them to; the special assistances
of God in duty, the information of the mind, by a light which shows the
evidence of truth in a special clearness; the resolution of doubts; the
conquest of passions; the elevation of the soul in divine love and praises; the
joy of the holy Ghost, and comfortable thoughts of the coming of Christ, and
our endless blessedness with God in Heaven. These are the Answers of Prayer,
which are the fulfilling of the promises of Christ, and which are of greater
moment than Miracles; of which we have ordinary experience.

. 7. VII. It confirms my belief of the Gospel, to observe the connaturality
and suitableness which it has to the best and holiest souls: that by how much
the better, in true honesty, and charity, and heavenliness any man is, by so
much the more is the Gospel beloved, pleasant, and suitable to him; as humane
food is to humane nature.

My much converse in the world, with men of all sorts, but most with the
persons now described, has given me opportunity to be fully assured of the
truth of this experiment, beyond all doubt. And that which is the best in man,
is certainly of God: and therefore that which is suitable and connatural to the
best in man, must be of God also.

. 8. VIII. It confirms my belief of the Gospel, to find it so very suitable
to the worlds diseases, necessities and business; to reconcile them to God, and
fill them with love and heavenly mindedness; which other Religions do meddle
with so little, and superficially, and ineffectually.

. 9. IX. The matter of the Gospel is so holy and spiritual, and against all
sin, and evil spirits, that it is incredible that evil spirits, or very bad
men, should be the inventers of it: And yet to forge so many miracles and
matters of fact, and call a man God, and to perplex the world with needless
delusory strictnesses, and to father all this on God himself, would have been a
villainy so transcendent, that none but men extremely bad could do it. Therefore
it must needs be the design of Heaven, and not of Men.

. 10. X. When I deeply consider the evidence of verity in the Gospel, it has
as much to convince me, as I could have chosen or desired.

. 11. 1. If I had been put myself to choose by what means God should open to
man the things of the unseen world, I could have desired no more than that a
messenger might come to us from heaven to tell it us; unless we had either
sight and sense, or immediate vision and fruition.

And I am fully satisfied, 1. That spiritual things are invisible, and are no
objects of corporeal sense. 2. That it is not meet and honorable to God's
Wisdom and Justice, to govern rational free Agents in via, by sight and sense.
It would be no trial, or thanks to the most sensual wretch, to forbear his sin,
if Heaven and Hell were open to his sight. 3. That spiritual vision, and
fruition is our state in patria; our end and perfection, and not fit for the
state of trial and travelers in the way.

. 12. 2. If I had been to choose who this Messenger should be, I could have
preferred none before him, who is the very Wisdom, Truth, and Word of God.

Had it been but an Angel, I might have thought that his Indefectibility and
Veracity is uncertain to mankind on earth: but Wisdom and Truth it self can
never lie.

. 13. 3. If I had been to choose in what way this Messenger should converse
with man, as an effectual and suitable Teacher of these Mysteries, and how the
work of Mediation between God and man should be performed, I could have desired
no fitter way than that he should assume our nature, and in that nature
familiarly instruct us, and be our example, and our High Priest toward God, by
his Merit, Sacrifice and Intercession.

. 14. 4. Had I been to choose what way he should prove his Message to be of
God, I could not have chosen a more satisfying way than that of Prophecy,
Sanctity, and open numerous and uncontrouled Miracles, with his own
Resurrection and Ascension, and giving the holy Ghost to be his Advocate and
Witness continually to the world.

. 15. 5. I could not have expected that these Miracles should be done in the
sight of all the persons in the world, in every place and age, (for then they
would be but as common works) but rather before such chosen Witnesses, as were
fit to communicate them to others.

. 16. 6. Nor could I have chosen a fitter way for such Witnesses to confirm
their testimony by, than by the same Spirit of holiness and power, and by such
a stream of Miracles as the Apostles wrought, and such success in the actual
renovation of their followers.

. 17. 7. Nor could I well have chosen a more meet and convincing way of History
or Tradition, to convey down all these things to us, than that before
described, which has been used by God.

. 18. 8. Nor could I have chosen any one standing Seal and Witness of Christ,
so fit for all persons, learned and unlearned, and to endure through all
generations, as is the actual saving of men, by the real renovation of their
hearts and lives by the holy Spirit, reclaiming them from selfishness,
sensuality, worldliness, and other sin, and bringing them up to the Image of
God's holiness, in love and heavenliness; which is the continued work of Christ.

So that when God has done all things so, as my very reason is constrained to
acknowledge best, what should I desire more? I confess I feel still, that my
nature would fain be satisfied by the way of sight and sense. Could I see
heaven and hell, I think it would most effectually end all doubts: But my
Reason is satisfied, that it is a thing unmeet, and utterly unsuitable to a
world, that must be morally governed and conducted to their end.

. 19. XI. The temptations of Satan, by which he would hinder us from faith,
love and obedience, are so palpable, malicious and importunate, that they do
much to confirm me of the truth and goodness of that word and way, which he so
much resists.

I think that there are few men, good or bad, if they will observe both the
inward suggestions with which they are often solicited, for matter, manner and
season, and the outward impediments to every good work, and invitations to
evil, which they meet with in their conversations, but may be convinced that
there are malicious spirits, who are enemies to Christ and us, and continually
by temptations fight against him.

. 20. XII. The Devils contracts with Witches, Of the abundance of Witches at
that time read Bishop Hall, Sol. 15. p. 53, 54.

Read Edm. Bower, of the Salisbury Witch.


opposing Christ, and engaging them to renounce their Baptism, and to forsake
his ways, is some confirmation of the Christian verity.

That Witches really there are, as I said before, he that will read Remigius
and Bodin only may be satisfied; as also the Malleus maleficorum Danaeus, etc.
and the numerous instances in Suffolk and Essex about 21 years ago, may further
satisfy them. And that the Devil draws them to such renunciations of the
Covenant and Ordinances of Christ, the many Histories of it are full proof.

. 21. XIII. Though many such reports are fabulous and delusory, yet there have
been certainly proved in all ages, such Apparitions, as either by opposition or
defense have born some testimony to the Christian faith.

Of both these last, see what I have written in my Treat. of Infidelity, and in
the Saints Rest, Part 2. And read Lavater de Spectris, and Zanchius, tom. 3.
lib. 4 cap. 10. and cap. 20. Daelrio, etc. And what I said before, especially
the Narrative called, The Devil of Mascon, and Dr. Moor of Atheism.

. 22. XIV. The speeches and actions of persons possessed by the Devil, usually
raging blasphemously against Christ, does somewhat confirm the Christian verity.

That there are and have been many such, there has been unquestionable
evidence. See my Saints Rest, part 2. page 258, etc. Zanchius, tom. 3. lib. 4.
cap. 10. page 288. Forestus de Venenis, observe. 8. in Schol. Pet. Mart. Loc.
Com. Clas. 1. cap. 9. Fernel. de abdit. rerum causis, lib. 2. cap. 16. Platerus
observe. page 20. de stupore Doemon. etc. Tertul. Apol. cap. 23. Cyprian. Epis.
ad Demetrium. Origin. in Matthew. 17. Augustine. de Divinat. Doemon. etc.

. 23. XV. Lastly, the testimony of the enemies of Christianity is some
encouragement to faith.

What conjectures there be, Porphyry was so convinced of the truth of Daniel's
Prophey, that he is fain to say, That it was written after the things were
fulfilled, says Grot.
that Pythagoras had his knowledge from the Jews, and Plato was not a stranger
to Moses's writings, has been showed by many. How plain it is, that the wiser
and better any Heathens have been, the nearer they have come in their doctrines
to that of Jesus Christ. I need not say much to convince the considerate, Imoi^
Petri miracula Phlegon Adriani Imperatoris libertus in Annalibus suis
commemoravit: in^uit Grotius de Verit. Rel. l. 3.
that are men of reading. How the Jews were convinced of the miracles of
Christ, and fled to the accusation of Christ as a Magician, is already showed.
The wisest and best of the Roman Emperors favored them. Dion Cassius in the
life of Nerva Cocceius, page 1. says, [ Caeterum Nerva omnes qui impietatis in
Deos rei fuerant, eos absolvi voluit: exules in patriam reduxit: (These that
were called Impietatis rei, were the Jews and Christians who refused to
sacrifice to Idols) And he adds, [Et ne servi de caetero dominos
criminarentur, edicto vetuit, neve liceret aut impietatis, aut Judaicae sectae
quemquam dehinc insimulari.] It seems by this, that when displeased servants
would be revenged on their masters, they used to accuse them of Christianity or
Judaism.

Fuit vero prodigiorum apud sepulchra editorum tanta frequentia, tot little
testes, ut etiam Porphyrio ejus rei confessionem expresserit: inquit Grot. l. 3.
Trajan did something against the Christians, being provoked by the Jews, who
(says Dion Cassius in vita Trajani) did make one Andrew their Captain, and
about Cyrene murdered of Greeks and Romans above two hundred thousand men. But
upon Pliny's information of the Christians innocence and unjust sufferings,
their persecutions were moderated.

Adrian also was exasperated by the Jews, who as Ael. Spartianus says in
Adrian: I know what a stir is made about Josephus testimony of Christ, some
accounting it current, and some as foisted in by some Christian: but I doubt
not to say, that to those who well consider all, the middle opinion of B. Usher
will appear to be far the most probable: viz. That the whole sentence is
current, except those words, [This was Christ.] And that some Christian having
wrote those words as expository in the margin of his book, they afterward crept
thence into the text.

Athenagoras tells M. Aurel. Antoninus the Emperor, and L. Aur. Commodus to
whom he wrote, Nec dubito quin vos etiam doctissimi and sapientissimi
Principes, historias and scripta Moses, Esaiae, Hieremiae, and reliquorum
Prophetarum aliqua ex part cognoveritis. -- Sed vobis relinquo qui libros
novistis, studiosius in illorum prophetias inquirere ac perpendere, etc. Apol.
p. in B. p. 56, 57. And it is like that Antonine learned somewhat from the
Scriptures, as well as Severus, if he so well knew them; and thence received
some of his wisdom and virtue.


Moverunt bellum, quod vetebantur mutilare genitalia: (And the Christians were
taken for a sort of Jews, and so suffered often for their faults:) But
Serennius Granianus Legatus, a Roman Nobleman, writing to Adrian how unjust it
was upon vulgar clamor to kill innocent Christians, only for their Religion:
Adrian wrote to Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, that no Christian should
suffer but for proved crimes. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4.

Lampridius in Alexand. Sever. says, [ Quod (viz. Templum Christo facere) and
Adrianus cogitasse fertur; qui Templa in omnibus civitatibus sine simulachris
j^ssit fieri: quae hodie idcirco, quia non habent numina, dicuntur Adriani;
quae ille ad hoc parasse dicebatur: sed prohibitus est ab his, qui consulentes
sacra repererant, omnes Christianos futuros, si id optato evenisset, and templa
reliqua deserenda.

Lucian honors the Christians, while he derideth them for their sufferings
and faith; saying, [ Persuaserunt sibi infoelices Christiani, se immortalitate
fruituros, perpetuoque victuros esse: ideo and mortem magno contemnunt animo:
ac non pauci sua sponte semetipsos occidendos offerunt: Postquam vero semel a
nobis d^sciverunt, Graecorum Deos constanter abnegant, etc.

When Adrian had found how the Christians differed from the Jews, and had
suffered by Barchochebas, because they would not join in the Rebellion, when he
had ended the war, he gave Jerusalem to the Christians and others to inhabit,
says Eusebius.

Antoninus Pius published this Edict for the Christians, [ Si quisquam cuiquam
Christiano, quia Christianus sit, pergat molestiae quicquam aut criminis
infer, ille cui crimen illatum erit, etiamsi Christianus reipsa deprehensus
sit, absolvatur: qui autem illum accusaverat, justum debitumque supplicium
subeat. Adding a Decree of Adrian's, thus: [ Pro quibus hominibus and alii
provinciarum Praesides, jam ante Divo Patri meo scripserunt; Quibus ille
rescripsit, nequid interturbarent hoc genus hominum nisi qui convicti essent
tentasse quippiam contra Rempublicam. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4.

And though under that excellent Prince, Antoninus Philosophus, some
persecution was raised, it was mostly by Officers, at a great distance, in
France, etc. yet all was staid, and favor showed them, upon the miraculous
relief of the Army by rain, upon the Christian Soldiers prayers, (called Legio
Fulminatrix) when they were in war with the Quadi: of which see Jul. Capitolin.
Dion Cass. Tertul. Apolog. Eusebius. lib. 5. Orosium, etc. His Letters to the
Senate are these: [ Credibile est Christianos, licet eos impios existimemus,
Deum pro munimento habere in pectore: simul enim atque humi sese abjecerunt,
and preces fuderunt* ad ignotum mihi Deum, statim e coelo pluvia delapsa est,
in nos quidem frigidissima, in nostros vero hosts grando and fulmina: eorumque
orationibus and precibus statim Deus praesto fuit, qui neque vinci neque
expugnari potest. Quamobrem concedamus talibus, ut sint Christiani, ne quae
tela ejus generis contra nos petant and impetrent.

After this Emperor, a company of Beasts successively followed; yet most of
them were restrained from great persecutions: Commodus was restrained by
Martia, a friend to the Christians as Dio Cass. writes; and others by other
means. And the Christians often tendered their Apologies: among whom Apollonius,
a Senator, in the reign of Commodus, offered a book for Christianity, and was
beheaded; Eusebius. lib. 5. But of all the Emperors that were from Augustus to
Constantine, there were but ten that persecuted the Christians, of whom, those
that I have mentioned, who reversed their Decrees, or restrained the
persecutors, were a part.

Septim. Severus forbad any to become Christians: but what judgments did fall
upon diverse of his Presidents, who persecuted the Christians, and what
convictions some of them had by Miracles, is worth the reading in Tertullian ad
Scapul.

Alexander Severus, the most excellent of all the Heathen Emperors, (not
excepting Antoninus Philos.) was guided by the renowned Vlpian, and his mother
Mammea, (supposed a Christian:) of him, says Lampridius, [ Judaeis privilegia
reservavit: Christianos esse passus est: Yea, in the mornings he went to prayer
in lacario suo, in quo and divos principes, sed optimos electos, and animas
sanctiores, in queis and Apollonium; and quantum scriptor suorum temporum
dicit, Christum, Abraham, and Orpheum, and hujusmodi Deos habebat.] Yea, says
the same Lampridius, [ Christo templum facere voluit, eumque inter Deos
recipere: Quod and Adrianus cogitasse fertur,] -- etc. ut ante. -- And after --
[Cum Christiani quendam locum, qui publicus fuerat, occupassent; contra,
popinarii dicerent sibi eum deberi; rescripsit, melius esse ut quomodocunque
illic Deus colatur; quam popinariis dedatur.] The great strictness of the
Christian Churches in the election of their Pastors, he made his example in the
choice of his Officers: [Dicebatque grave esse, cum id Christiani and Judaei
facerent in praedicandis sacerdotibus qui ordinandi sunt, non fieri in
provinciarum rectoribus, quibus fortunae hominum committuntur and capita.] That
is, [Nomina eorum proponebat, hortans populum, siquis quid haberet criminis,
probaret manifestis rebus; si non probaret, poenam subire capitis.] He made a
saying of Christ his Motto, says Lamprid. [Clamabatque saepius quod a
quibusdam sive Judaeis sive Christianis audierat, and tenebat; idque per
praeconem cum aliquem emendaret, dici jubebat, QVOD TIBI NON VIS, ALTERI NE
FECERIS: Quam sententiam usque adeo dilexit, ut and in palatio, and in publicis
operibus, praescribi juberet.] Thus you see what opinion the best Roman Heathen
Emperors had of Christ and the Christians: Paul had liberty in Rome to preach
in his hired house to any that would come and hear him, Act. 28.31. no man
forbidding him. And those Emperors that did persecute Christianity, were
either such Beasts as Nero, or at best such as never understood the reason of
that Religion, but persecuted they knew not what. And it was not so much for
the positive parts of Christianity that they persecuted them, as for the
Negatives, even for denying honor and worship to those Idols, whom the Romans
had been long accustomed to adore. So that [Tollite impios, tollite impios] was
the cry of the rabble, as if it had been ungodliness to deny their gods: And to
sacrifice or burn incense on the Idols Altars, was that ordinary command, which
they disobeyed, to the suffering of death.

As Grotius says, lib. 3. Multa habemus testimonia quae historiae istis libris
traditae parts aliquot confirmant. Sic Jesum cruci affixum, ab ipso and
discipulis ejus miracula patrata, and Haelraei and Pagani memorant. De Herod,
Pilato, Festo, Faelice, de Johanne Baptista, de Gamaliele, de Jerosolymorum
excidio, exstant scripta luculentissima Josephi edita paulo post annum a
Christi abitu 40. Cum quibus consentiunt ea quae apud Thalmudicos de iisdem
temporibus leguntur. Neronis saevitiam in Christianos Tacitus memoriae
prodidit. Exstabant olim and libri tum privatorum ut Phlegontis, tum and acta
publica, ad quae Christiani provocabant, quilus constabat de eo sidere, quod
post Christum natum apparuit, de terrae motu, and solis deliquio contra
naturam, plenissimo lunae orb, circa tempus quo Christus crucis supplicio
affectus est.

Celsus and Julian do not deny the miracles of Christ: Mahomet himself
confesses Christ to be a true Prophet, and the Word of God, and condemns the
Jews for rejecting him: he confesses his miraculous Nativity, and mighty
works, and that he was sent from heaven to preach the Gospel: He brings in
God as saying, [ We have delivered our declarations to Jesus the Son of Mary,
and strengthened him by the holy Ghost.] And, [We have delivered him the Gospel,
in which is direction and light, etc.] And he teaches his followers this
Creed, [ Say, We believe in God, and that which was delivered to Moses and
Jesus, and which was delivered to the Prophets from their Lord: we distinguish
not between any of them, and we deliver up our selves to his faith.] And if
Christ be to be believed, as Mahomet says, then Christianity is the true
Religion: for as for his and his followers reports, that the Scriptures are
changed, and that we have put out Christ's prediction, that Mahomet must be
sent, etc. they are fables, not only unproved, but before here proved utterly
impossible.

Read Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. l. 8 c. 17, and 18. and l. 9. c. 10. of God's
strange judgments on Maximinus the Emperor, whose bowels being tormented, and
his lower parts ulcerated with innumerable worms, and so great a stink, as
killed some of his Physicians; which forced him to confess, that what had
befallen him was deservedly, for his madness against Christ, (for he had
forbidden the Christians their assemblies, and persecuted them): wherefore he
commanded that they should cease persecuting the Christians; and that by a Law
and Imperial Edict, their Assemblies should be again restored: He confessed his
sins, and begged the Christians Prayers, and professed that if he were
recovered, he would worship the God of the Christians, whom by experience he
had found to be the true God.

See Bishop Fotherby Atheomast. l. 1. c. 3. p. 140, 141. comparing his case
with Antiochus his.

Paulus Orosius, histor. li. 6. fine, tells us of a Fountain of Oil which
flowed a whole day in Augustus Reign, and how Augustus refused to be called
Dominus, and how he shut up Janus Temple because of the Universal Peace, and
that eo tempore, id est, eo anno quo fortissimam verissimamque pacem
ordinatione Dei Caesar composuit, natus est Christus; cujus adventum pax ista
famulata est; in cujus ortu audientibus hominibus exultantes Angeli cecinerunt,
Gloria in excelsis Deo and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.

See also what after others he says of Tyberius motioning to the Senate, that
Christ might be accounted a God; and Sejanus resisting it: li 7. Auct. Bib.
Pat. To. 1. p. 209. where he says also that aliquanti Graecorum libri attested
the darkness at Christ's death. And li. 7. p. 216. he shows, that as after the
ten Plagues of Egypt, the Israelites were delivered and the Egyptians
destroyed, so was it in the Roman Empire with the Christians and Pagans, after
the particular revenges of the ten Persecutions. But because he is a Christian
Historian, I cite no more from him.

CHAP. IX. Yet Faith has many Difficulties to overcome: What they are; and
what their Causes.
THere are two sorts of persons who may possibly peruse these things, and are
of tempers so contrary, Omnis credendi difficultas non temere ex futili
nulliusque judidicii opinione nascitur; sed ex valida causa, and
verisimilitudine plurimum munita: Tum enim incredulitas rationem justam habet,
quum ipsa res de qua non creditur, quiddam incredibile continet. Nam rebus quae
dubitandi causam non habent, non credere, eorum est qui sano judicio in
discutienda veritate minime utuntur. Athenagor. leg. page 82.
that what helps one may hurt the other: The first are those who see so many
objections and difficulties, that they are turned from the due apprehension of
the Evidences of Christianity, and can think of nothing but stumbling blocks to
their Faith. To tell these men of more difficulties, may add to their
discouragement, and do them hurt: And yet I am not of their mind that think
they should be therefore silenced: For that may tempt them to imagine them
unanswerable, if they come into their minds: The better way for these men is,
to desire them better to study the Evidence of truth: And there are other men,
who must be thought on, who seeing no difficulties in the work of Faith, do
continue unfortified against them, and keep up a Belief by mere extrinsick
helps and advantages, which will fall as soon as the storms assault it: And
because no doubt is well overcome that is not known, and Nil tam certum quam
quod ex dubio certum est, I will venture to open the Difficulties of Believing.

. 1. That Believing in Christ is a work of Difficulty, is proved both by the
paucity of sound Believers, and the imperfection of Faith in the sincere; and
the great and wonderful means which must be used to bring men to believe.

Superficial Believers are a small part of the whole World, and sound Believers
are a small part of professed Christians: And these sound Believers have many a
temptation, and some of them many a troublesome doubt, and all of them a Faith
which is too far from perfection. And yet all the Miracles, Evidences,
Arguments and Operations aforesaid, must be used to bring them even to this.

. 2. The Difficulties are I. Some of them in the things to be believed, II.
Some of them in extrinsecal impediments: III. And some of them in the mind of
Man who must believe.

. 3. I. 1. The mysteriousness of the doctrine of the blessed Trinity, has
always been a difficulty to Faith, and occasioned many to avoid Christianity,
especially the Mahometanes; and many Heretics to take up Devices of their own,
to shift it off.

. 4. 2. The Incarnation of the second Person, the Eternal Word, and the
personal union of the Divine Nature with the Humane, is so strange a
condescension of God to man, as makes this the greatest of difficulties, and
the greatest stumbling block to Infidels and Heretics.

. 5. 3. The Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ, and the advancement of
man's nature in him above the Angelical nature, and glory, is a difficulty.

. 6. 4. To believe all the history of the Miracles of Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles, is difficult, because of the strangeness of the things.

Si animus fit quinta illa, non nominata magis quam intellecta natura: multo
integ^iora and puriora sunt ut a terra longissime se efferant. Cicer. Tuscul.
Qu. l. 1. p. 223.
. 7. 5. It is not without difficulty firmly to believe the Immortality of
Souls, and the endlesness of the felicity of the life to come.

. 8. 6. And it has proved hard to many to believe the endless miseries of
damned souls in Hell.

. 9. 7. And it is as hard to believe the paucity of the blessed, and that the
damned are the far greater number.

. 10. 8. And that so great a change, and so holy a life, is necessary to
salvation, has proved a difficulty to some.

. 11. 9. The doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, is one of the greatest
difficulties of all.

. 12. 10. So is Christ's coming into the World so late, and the revealing of
his Gospel to so few, by Prophecy before, and by Preaching since.

. 13. 11. So also was the appearing Meanness of the Person of Christ, and of
his Parentage, place and condition in the World; together with the manner of
his birth.

. 14 12. The manner of his sufferings and death, upon a Cross, as a Malefactor,
under the charge of Blasphemy, Impiety and Treason, has still been a
stumbling block both to Jews and Gentiles.

. 15. 13. So has the fewness and meanness of his followers, and the number and
worldly preeminence and prosperity of unbelievers, and enemies of Christ.

. 16. 14. The want of excellency of speech and art in the holy Scriptures, that
they equal not other Writings in Logical method and exactness, and in
Oratorical elegancies, is a great offense to unbelievers.

. 17. 15. As also that the Physics of Scripture so much differs from
Philosophers.

. 18. 16. As also the seeming Contradictions of the Scripture do much offend
them.

. 19. 17. And it offends them, that Faith in Christ himself, is made a thing
of such excellency and necessity to salvation.

. 20. 18. And it is hard to believe, that present adversity and undoing in the
World, is for our benefit and everlasting good.

. 21. 19. And it offends many, that the doctrine of Christ does seem not
suited to Kingdoms and Civil Government, but only for a few private persons.

. 22. 20. Lastly, the Prophesies which seem not intelligible or not fulfilled,
prove matter of difficulty and offense. There are intrinsecal difficulties of
Faith.

. 23. II. The outward adventitious impediments to the Belief of the Christian
Faith are such as these. 1. Because many Christians, especially the Papists,
have corrupted the doctrine of Faith, and propose gross falsehoods contrary to
common sense and reason, as necessary points of Christian Faith: (as in the
point of Transubstantiation.)

. 24. 2. They have given the World either false or insufficient reasons and
motives, for the belief of the Christian Verity; which being discerned
confirms them in Infidelity.

. 25. 3. They have corrupted Gods Worship, and have turned it from rational and
spiritual, into a multitude of irrational ceremonious fopperies; fitted to move
contempt and laughter in unbelievers.

. 26. 4. They have corrupted the doctrine of Morality, and thereby hidden much
of the holiness and purity of the Christian Religion.

. 27. 5. They have corrupted Church History, obtruding or divulging a multitude
of ridiculous falsehoods in their Legends and Books of Miracles; contrived
purposely by Satan to tempt men to disbelieve the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles.

. 28. 6. They make Christianity odious, by upholding their own Sect and power,
by fire and blood and inhumane Cruelties.

. 29. 7. They openly manifest that ambition and worldly dignities and
prosperity, in the Clergy, is their very Religion: and withal pretend, that
their party or Sect is all the Church.

. 30. 8. And the great disagreement among Christians, is a stumbling block to
unbelievers; while the Greeks and Romans strive who shall be the greatest; and
both they and many others Sects, are condemning, unchurching, and reproaching
one another.

Leg. Nazianz. Orat. 26. and 32.
. 31. 9. The undisciplined Churches, and wicked lives of the greatest part of
professed Christians, especially in the Greek and Latin Churches, is a great
confirmation of Infidels in their unbelief.

. 32. 10. And it tempts many to Apostasy, to observe the scandalous errors
and miscarriages of many who seemed more godly than the rest.

. 33. 11. It is an impediment to Christianity, that the richest, and greatest,
the learned, and the far greatest number in the World, have been still against
it.

. 34. 12. The custom of the Country, and Tradition of their Fathers, and the
reasonings and cavils of men that have both ability and opportunity, and
advantage, does bear down the truth in the Countries, while Infidels prevail.

. 35. 13. The Tyranny of cruel persecuting Princes, in the Mahometane and
Heathen parts of the World, is the grand Impediment to the progress of
Christianity, by keeping away the means of knowledge.

And of this the Roman party of Christians, has given them an encouraging
example, dealing more cruelly with their Fellow Christians than the Turks and
some Heathen Princes do. So that Tyranny is the great sin which keeps out the
Gospel from most parts of the Earth.

. 36. III But no Impediments of Faith are so great, as those within us. As 1.
the natural strangeness of all corrupted minds to God, and their blindeness in
all spiritual things.

. 37. 2. Most persons in the World, have weak, injudicious, unfurnished heads,
wanting the common, natural preparatives to Faith, not able to see the force of
a reason, in things beyond the reach of sense.

. 38. 3. The carnal mind is enmity against the Holiness of Christianity, and
therefore will still oppose the receiving of its principles.

. 39. 4. By the advantages of Nature, Education, Custom, and Company, men are
early possessed with prejudices and false conceits, against a life of Faith and
Holiness; Magni autem est ingenii, revocare mentem a sensibus, and cogitationem
a consuetudine abducere. Cicero Tuscul. Qu. l. 1. p. 222.
which keep out reforming truths.

. 40. 5. It is very natural to incorporated Souls, to desire a sensible way of
satisfaction, and to take up with things present and seen, and to be little
affected with things unseen, and above our senses.

. 41. 6 Our strangeness to the Language, Idiomes, Proverbial speeches then
used, does disadvantage us as to the understanding of the Scriptures.

. 42. 7. So does our strangeness to the Places and Customs of the Country, and
many other matters of fact.

. 43. 8. Our distance from those Ages, does make it necessary, that matters of
fact be received by humane report and Historical Evidence: And too few are well
acquainted with such History.

. 44. 9. Most men do forfeit the helps of Grace by wilful sinning; and make
Atheism and Infidelity seem to be desirable to their carnal Interest, and so
are willing to be deceived: and forsaking God, they are forsaken of him, flying
from the Light, and overcoming Truth, and debauching Conscience, and disabling
Reason, for their sensual delights.

. 45. 10. Those men that have most need of means and help, are so averse and
lazy, that they will not be at the pains and patience, to read, and confer,
and consider, and pray, and use the means which is needful to their
information; but settle their judgment by slight and slothful thoughts.

. 46. 11. Yet are the same men proud and self-conceited, and unacquainted with
the weakness of their own understandings, and pass a quick and confident
judgment, on things which they never understood: It being natural to men to
judge according to what they do actually apprehend, and not according to what
they should apprehend, or is apprehended by another.

. 47. 12. Most men think it the wisest way, because it is the easiest, to be at
a venture of the Religion of the King and the Country where they live; and to
do as the most about them do (which is seldom best.)

. 48. 13. Men are grown strangers to themselves, and know not what man is; nor
what is a reasonable Soul; but have so abused their higher faculties, that they
are grown ignorant of their dignity and use; and know not that in themselves
which should help their Faith.

. 49. 14. Men are grown so bad and false, and prone to lying themselves, that
it makes them the more incredulous of God and man, as judging of others by
themselves.

. 50. 15. The cares of the Body and World, do so take up the minds of men,
that they cannot afford the matters of God and their salvation, such retired
serious thoughts as they do necessarily require.

. 51. 16. Too few have the happiness of judicious Guides, who rightly discern
the Methods and Evidences of the Gospel, and tempt not men to unbelief, by
their mistaken grounds, and unsound reasonings. These are the Impediments and
difficulties of Faith, in the Persons themselves who should believe.

CHAP. X. The Intrinsecal Difficulties in the Christian Faith, resolved.
Object. I. THe Doctrine of the Trinity is not intelligible or credible.

Answ. 1. Nothing at all in God can be comprehended, or fully known by any
creatures: God were not God, that is, Perfect and Infinite, if he were
comprehensible by such Worms as we. Nothing is so certainly known as God, and
yet nothing so imperfectly.

2. The doctrine of the Trinity in Unity is so intelligible and credible, and
is so admirably apparent in its products, in the methods of Nature and
Morality, that to a wise Observer it makes Christianity much the more
credible, because it opens more fully, See Part 1. Chap. 5. Pardon the
Repetitions here for the reasons after-mentioned.
these excellent mysteries and methods. It is intelligible and certain that MAN
is made in the Image of God: And that the noblest Creatures bear most of the
impress of their Makers excellency: And that the invisible Deity is here to be
known by us, See before in the Marg. of Chap. 5. Part 1. the Collection of
Christoph. Simpson of Trinity in Unity, in the Harmony of Musical Concordance,
in The Division-Violist. page 17.
as in the Glass of his visible works: Of which the Rational or Intellectual
Nature is the highest with which we are acquainted. And it is most certain,
that in the Unity of man's Mind or Soul, there is a Trinity of Essentialities,
or Primalities (as Campanella calls them) that is, such faculties as are so
little distinct from the Essence of the Soul as such, that Philosophers are not
yet agreed, whether they shall say, it is realiter, formaliter, relative vel
denominatione extrinseca. To pass by the three faculties of Vegetation,
sensation and intellection; In the Soul as Intellectual there are the Essential
faculties, of Power (executive or communicative ad extra) Intellect and Will;
Posse, Scire, Velle; Read Campanella's Metaphysics, and his Atheismus
triumphatus of this.
And accordingly in morality or virtue, there is in one New Creature, or holy
Nature, wisdom, goodness, and ability or fortitude (and promptitude) to act
according to them. And in our Relation to things below us, in the unity of our
Dominion or superiority, there is a Trinity of Relations; Richardus in Opuscul.
ad S. Bernard: de appropriatis personarum, inquit, Quod Potentia, Sapientia and
Bonitas, sunt notissima quid sint apud nos, qui ex visibilibus invisibilia Dei
per ea quae facta sunt, intellecta conspicimus: Et quoniam in Elementis and
plantis and brutis reperitur Potentia sine sapientia; and in Homine and in
Angelo reperitur Potentia, sed non sine sapientia: Et in Lucifero reperitur
Potentia and Sapientia, sine Bonitate and Charitate, se^ Bona Voluntate: Sed in
Homine bono, bonoque in Angelo, non datur Bona Voluntas, nisi adsit Posse and
Scire: Igitur sunt tria haec distincta; et POSSE est per se ut principale,
SAPIENTIA est a POTENTIA, and ab utrisque VOLUNTAS and AMOR.
viz. we are their Owners, their Rulers (according to their capacity) and their
End and Benefactors: so that in the Unity of Gods Image upon man, there is this
natural, moral and dominative Image: and in the Natural, the Trinity of
Essential faculties, and in the Moral, the Trinity of holy Virtues; and in the
Dominative, a Trinity of superior Relations.

And though the further we go from the root, the more darkness, and
dissimilitude appears to us, yet it is strange to see even in the Body, what
Analogies there are to the Faculties of the Soul; In the superior, middle, and
inferior Regions: And in them the natural, vital, and animal parts, with the
three sorts of Humors; three sorts of Concoctions, and three sorts of Spirits,
answerable thereto, and admirably united: with much more, which a just Scheme
would open to you. And therefore seeing God is known to us by this his Image,
and in this Glass, though we must not think that any thing in God is formally
the same as it is in Man; yet certainly we must judge, that all this is
eminently in God; and that we have no fitter notions and names concerning his
incomprehensible Perfections, than what are borrowed from the Mind of man.
Therefore it is thus undeniable, that GOD is in the Unity of his Eternal,
Infinite Essence, a Trinity of Essentialities, or Active Principles: viz.
POWER, INTELLECT and WILL: And in their HOLY Perfections, they are,
Omnipotency, Omniscience (or Wisdom) and Goodness: And in his Relative
Supremacy is contained this Trinity of Relations, He is our OWNER, our RECTOR
and our CHIEF GOOD, that is, Our Benefactor and our end.

And as in Man's Soul, the Posse, Scire, Velle, are not three parts of the Soul,
it being the whole Soul quae potest, quae intelligit and quae vult; and yet
these three are not formaliter, (or how you will otherwise call the
distinction) the same: Ecce in uno capite, duo tibi sunt Oculi: sed est
substantiae eorum unus Aspectus, etc. Quod si unius substantiae in te ista bina
continent unitatem, non v^s in Deo Patre and Filio vere duas personas unam
habere substantiam. Arnobius Conflict. cum Serapione. p. 354.

Vid. Caesarii dialog. Q. 2. de triplici lumine (...), inquit Theophil.
Antioch. ad Antol. l. 1. p. 3.

Leg. August, de Trinitate, and Dialog. ex eo excerpt. de Trinit. in B.P. Gr.
Lat. To. 1. p 540.


Even so in GOD, it is not one Part of God that has POWER, and another that
has UNDERSTANDING, and another that has WILL; but the whole Deity is POWER,
the whole is UNDERSTANDING, and the whole is WILL: The whole is Omnipotency,
the whole is Wisdom, and the whole is Goodness (the Fountain of that which in
man is called Holiness or Moral Goodness): And yet formally to understand is
not to will, and to will is not to be able to execute.

If you say, what is all this to the Trinity of Hypostases or persons, I
answer, Either the three Subsistences in the Trinity are the same, with the
Potentia, Intellectus and Voluntas, in the Divine Essence, or not: If they are
the same, there is nothing at all intelligible, incredible or uncertain in it:
For natural Reason knows that there is all these eminently in God; And
whoever will think that any humane language can speak of him, must confess that
his Omnipotence, Wisdom and Goodness, his Power, Intellect and Will, must be
thus to man's apprehension distinguished: Otherwise we must say nothing at all
of God, or say that his power is his willing, and his willing is his knowing,
and that he wills all the sin which he knows, and all that he can do: which
language will, at best, signify nothing to any man.

And it is to be noted, that our Savior in his Eternal subsistence, is called
in Scripture, The WISDOM of God, (or his internal Word): and in his Operations
in the Creation; he is called, The Word of God, as operative or efficient: and
in his Incarnation, he is called The Son of God: Though these terms be not
always and only thus used, yet usually they are.

The Words of an ancient godly Writer before cited, are considerable; Potho
Prumensis, de statu domus Dei, lib. 1. Nihil aliud est Filius vel Verbum Dei,
quam Cogitatio, vel Ars, vel Sapientia ejus -- Nihil aliud Sp. sanctus quam
Amor Dei intelligitur. Id. Ibid. page 542, 543.

Leg. and Hilar. de Trinit.


p. 567. in Biblioth. Patr. T. 9. [ Tria sunt invisibilia Dei, h. e. Potentia,
Sapientia, Benignitas, a quibus omnia procedunt, in quibus omnia subsistunt,
per quae omnia reguntur: Pater est Potentia, Filius Sapientia, Sparitus sanctus
Benignitas. Potentia creat, Sapientia gubernat, ^ Benignitas conservat.
Potentia per Benignitatem sapienter creat: Sapientia per potentiam benign
gubernat: Benignitas per sapientiam potenter conservat: Sicut Imago in speculo
cernitur, sic in ratione animae. Vid. Maxim. Mystagog. Ecclesiast. cap. 6. Per
talem rationem venit homo ad cognitionem Dei, quod est Unus in substantia, and
Trinus in Personis. Istud idem videt homo in seipso: Nam ipse videt been quod
semper habuit homo in seipso Potentiam, and post Potentiam, Sapientiam: -- Et
de ambabus venit Amor: and quando videt homo quod ita est in seipso, ex hoc
intelliget been quod ita est in Deo, qui est ultra illum: viz. Quod in Deo fit
Potestas, and de illa Potestate venit sapientia, and de utraque venit Amor. Et
propter hoc quod ex prima persona venit secunda, and de ambabus procedit
tertia, ideo prima persona vocatur Pater, secunda Filius, tertia Spiritus S.
Isto modo venit homo primo ad cognitionem Dei sui creatoris, quomodo est fine
principio, and quare vocatur Deus, ^nus substantia, trinus personis. Et quia
prima persona vocatur Pater, secunda Filius, tertia Spiritus Sanctus; and quia
appropinquatur Potestas Patri, Sapientia Filio, Bonitas and Amor Sp. Sancto:
Tali modo debet cognoscere Deum Filium, and iste modus cognitionis est
fundamentum contemplationis. Edmund. Archiepis. Cantuari. Specul. Eccles. cap
28.

See more of this before, tom. 1. cap. 5.


Huic similitudini Dei approximat homo; cui Potentia Dei dat Bonum posse;
sapientia tribuit scire; Benignitas prae^tat velle: Haec triplex Animae
rationalis vis est; scil. Posse, Scire, Velle; quae supradictis tribus fidei,
spei, and charitati cooperantur, etc. Read more in the Author, and in Raimundus
Lullius: and among latter Writers, in Campanella, Raymundus de sabundis, etc.
as I said before. He that will give you a scheme of Divinity in the true
method, will but show you how all God's Works and Laws flow from these Three
Essentialities or Principles; and the three great Relations founded in them,
(His being our Owner, Ruler, and Chief Good:) And how all our duty is branched
out accordingly in our correlations: He will show you the Trinity of Graces,
Faith, Hope and Love; and the three summary Rules, the Creed, Lord's Prayer and
Decalogue; and, in a word, would show you, that the Trinity reveals it self
through the whole frame of true Theology or Morality. But who is able to
discern it in the smaller and innumerable branches?

Yea, if ever it were to be hoped, that our Physics should be brought into the
light of certainty and true method, you would see Unity in Trinity in all
things in the world. You would see that in the Sun, and the other Celestial
Luminaries, (which are the glorious Images of the Intellectual world) in the
Unity of their Essence, there is a Moving, Illuminating and Heating Power: and
that no one of these is formally the other: nor is any one of them a Part of
the Sun or other Luminary, much less a mere accident of quality, but an
Essential Active Principle or Power; the whole Luminary being essentially a
Principle of Motion, Light and Heat; which are not accidents in them, but Acts
flowing immediately from their Essential Powers, as Intellection and Volition
from the Soul.

I shall now say no more of this, but profess, that the discovery of the
emanations or products of the Trinity, and the Image and Vestigia of it, in the
course of Nature, and Method of Morality, does much increase my reverence to
the Christian Doctrine, so far is the Trinity from being to me a
stumbling block.

Object. But what are such Trinities in Unity as these to the Trinity of
Persons in the Deity? such weak arguments will but increase incredulity. Will
you pretend to prove the Trinity by natural reason? or would you persuade us
that it is but three of God's Attributes, or our inadequate conceptions of him?
Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa: Ergo, No creature can reveal to us the
Trinity.

Answ. 1. It is one thing to prove the Sacred Trinity of Persons, by such
reason (or to undertake fully to open the mystery) and it is another thing to
prove that the Doctrine is neither incredible nor unlikely to be true; and that
it implies no contradiction or discordancy, but rather seems very congruous
both to the frame of nature, and of certain moral verities. This only is my
task against the Infidel.

2. It is one thing to show in the creatures a clear demonstration of this
Trinity of Persons, by showing an effect that fully answers it; and another
thing to show such vestigia, adumbration or image of it, as has those
dissimilitudes which must be allowed in any created image of God. This is it
which I am to do.

3. He that confounds the Attributes of God, and distinguishes not those
which express these three Essential Primalities, or Active Principles, to which
our faculties are analogous, from the rest; or that thinks that we should
cast by this distinction, under the name of an inadequate conception, so far as
we can imagine these Principles to be the same, and that there is not truly in
the Deity a sufficient ground for this distinction, is not the man that I am
willing now to debate this cause with; I have done that sufficiently before.
Whether the distinction be real, formal or denominative, the Thomists, Scotists
and Nominals have disputed more than enough. But even the Nominals say, that
there is a sufficient ground for the denomination, which some call Virtual, and
some Relative. And they that dispute of the distinction of Persons, do
accordingly differ, calling it either Relative, Virtual, Formal or Modal, or
ratione ratiocinata, as they imagine best. And they that differ about these, do
accordingly differ about the difference of the faculties of our souls. For my
part I see not the least reason to doubt, but that the Trinity of Divine
Primalities, Principles and Perfections has made its impress on man's soul, in
its three parts, viz. the Natural, the Moral, and the Dominative parts: in the
first we have an Active Power, an Intellect and Free Will. In the second
Fortitude, (or holy promptitude and strength) Wisdom and Goodness, (or Love:)
In the third, we are to the inferior creatures their Owners, Rulers and
Benefactors, or End: and what ever you will call our faculties and their moral
perfections, it is undoubted that in God, his Omnipotency, Wisdom and Goodness
are his Essence, and yet as much distinct as is aforesaid. And what mortal man
is able to say, whether the distinction of Persons be either greater or less
than this? And remember, that as I speak of Motion, Light and Heat, both as in
the faculties of the Sun, (as I may call them) and in the Acts or Emanations;
and of the Power, Intellect and Will of man, both as in the Faculties and Acts;
so do I here of the Divine Primalities; yet so, as supposing that in God, who
is called a Pure Act, there is not such a difference between Power and Act, as
there is in man or other creatures.

4. No man, I think, is able to prove, that the works of the Trinity, ad extra,
are any more undivided, than the works of the three Essential Active
Principles: they are so undivided, as that yet the work of Creation is
eminently, or most notably ascribed to the Father, (as is also the sending of
the Son into the world, the forgiving of sin for his sake, etc.) and the work
of Redemption to the Son, and the work of Sanctification to the holy Ghost: We
shall be as loath to say, that the Father or holy Ghost was incarnate for us, or
died for us, or mediates for us, as that the Power or Love of God* does the
works which belong to his Wisdom. And the Essential Wisdom and Love of God are
no more communicable to man, than the Son and holy Spirit, who are said to be
given to us, and to dwell within us. The Scripture often calls Christ the
Wisdom of God: and (...) is both the Ratio and Oration, the Internal and
Expressed (or Incarnate) Word. And he that understands that by the holy
Ghost, which is said in Scripture to be given to believers, is meant the
habitual or prevalent LOVE to GOD, will better understand how the holy Ghost is
said to be given to them that already have so much of it as to cause them to
believe. Abundance of Heretics have troubled the Church with their
self-devised opinions about the Trinity, and the Person and Natures of Christ:
and I am loath to say, how much many of the Orthodox have troubled it also, with
their self-conceited, misguided, uncharitable zeal, against those whom they
judged Heretics: The present divisions between the Roman Church, the Greeks,
the Armenians, Syrians, Copties and Ethiopians, is too sad a proof of this: and
the long contention between the Greeks and Latins about the terms Hypostasis
and Persona.

5. And I would advise the Reader to be none of those, See Bp. Lucy, in the end
of his Book against Hobs, proving the Trinity by Lully's reasons.
that shall charge with Heresy all those Schoolmen and late Divines, both
Papists and Protestants, who say, that the Three Persons are Deus seipsum
intelligens, Deus a seipso intellectus, and Deus a seipso amatus, (though I am
not one that say as they:) nor yet those holy men whom I have here cited, (
Potho Prumensis, Edmundus Archiepisc. Cantuariensis and Parisiensis, and many
others, who expressly say, that Potentia, Sapientia and Amor, are the Father,
Son and holy Ghost.

6. But for my own part, as I unfeignedly account the doctrine of the Trinity,
the very sum and kernel of the Christian Religion* (as expressed in our Baptism)
and Athanasius his Creed, the best explication of it that ever I read; so I
think it very unmeet in these tremendous mysteries, to go further than we have
God's own light to guide us: And it is none of my purpose at all to join with
either of the two forementioned parties; nor to assert that the mystery of
the blessed Trinity of Hypostases or Persons is no other than this
uncontroverted Trinity of Essential Principles. All that I endeavor is but as
aforesaid, to show that this Doctrine is neither contradictory, incredible, nor
unlikely, by showing the vestigia or Image of it, and that which is as liable
to exception, and yet of unquestionable truth. And if the three Hypostases be
not the same with the Trinity of Principles aforesaid, yet no man can give a
sufficient reason, why Three in One should not be truly credible and probable
in the one instance, when common natural reason is fully satisfied of it in the
other. He must better understand the difference between a Person and such an
Essential Principle in Divinis, than any mortal man does, who will undertake to
prove from the Title of a [Person] that one is incredible or unlikely, when the
other is so clear and sure: or rather, he understands it not at all, that so
imagines. For my part, I again from my heart profess, that the Image or
Vestigia of Trinity in Unity through the most notable parts of Nature and
Morality, do increase my estimation of the Christian Religion, because of the
admirable congruity and harmony.

Arnobius junior, in his conflict, cum Serapion, uses this similitude: As fire
and gold are two distinct substances, yet fire is of it self invisible, till by
union with the heated gold it becomes visible: So Christ's Divine Nature and
his Humane, etc. Leg. page 368, 369. And to the question, Utrum Pater Filium
genuerit Necessitate an Voluntate, he answers, Neither because understanding
or Wisdom is not necessitated, and yet is antecedent to Volition: But by
Necessity he seems to mean that which is by constraint. Vid. Not. Fevardent.
in loc. Leg. Methodii Resp. ad eos qui dicunt, Quid profuit nobis Filius Dei
homo factus? etc. Edit. per Gretser.
Object. II. But who is able to believe the Incarnation and Hypostatical Union?
If you should read that a Kings Son, in compassion to poor flies, or fleas, or
lice, had himself become a fly, or flea, or louse, (had it been in his power)
to save their lives, would you have thought it credible? And yet the
condescension had been nothing to this, as being but of a creature to a
creature.

Answ. This is indeed the greatest difficulty of faith: but if you do not
mistake the matter, you will find it also the greatest excellency of faith. 1.
Therefore you must take heed of making it difficult by your own error: think
not that the Godhead was turned into man, (as you talk of a man becoming a
fly) nor yet that there was the least real change upon the Deity by this
incarnation: nor the least real abasement, dishonor, loss, injury or suffering
to it thereby. For all these are not to be called difficulties, but
impossibilities and blasphemies. There is no abatement of any of the Divine
Perfections by it, nor no confinement of the Essence: but as the soul of man
does animate the body, so the Eternal Word does, as it were, animate the whole
humane Nature of Christ. As Athanasius says, As the reasonable soul and humane
flesh do make one man, so God and Man are one Christ: and that without any
coarctation, limitation, or restriction of the Deity. 2. And this should be no
strange Doctrine, nor incredible to most of the Philosophers of the world, who
have one part of them taught, that God is the Soul of the world; and that the
whole Universe is thus animated by him: and another part, that he is the Soul
of Souls, or Intelligences, Tunilius de part. Div. Leg. l. 1. c. 19. says,
that Et essentia vel natura facit, quia ei nihil accidens est, and tamen
voluntate, quia nihil facit necessitate vel coactus. Speaking of his operations
as he is Bonas, Sapiens, Fortis.

Leg. Ruperti Tuitiens. de Divin. Offic. l. 11. c. 2, and 3, and 4. Quod nomen
Patris, Fil^i and Sp. Sancti propria very Dei descriptio sit, etc. per totum
lib. Arnob. ubi supra, l. 1. tells the Heathens, how many they worship as
Gods, who once were men, as Jupiter, Aesculapius, Hercules, etc. p. 6.

Leg. Theodori Presbyteri Rhaithuensis Praepar. and Meditat. de Incarnat.
Christi, and Heresibus circa eandem.

Leg. and Theodori Abucarae Opuscul. 2. explan. vocum quibus Philosophi
utuntur, etc. Et ejusdem fidem orthodox. missam ad Armen. a Thoma Patriarch.
Hierosol.

Vide and Theoriani Dialog. cum Generaliss. Armeniorum.

At Deus Verbum nihil ipsum a societate and animae immutatum neque illorum
imbecilitatis particeps, sed eis suam divinitatem impartiens, unum cum eis fit;
and permanet, quod erat ante junctionem. Vid. caetera in Nemesio Emissen. de
Natura hom. cap. 3.


animating them as they do bodies. That therefore which they affirm of all,
cannot by them be thought incredible of one. And it is little less, if any
thing at all, which the Peripateticks themselves have taught of the assistant
Forms (Intelligences) which move the Orbs; and of the Agent, Intellect in man;
and some of them, of the universal soul in all men. And what all their vulgar
people have thought of the Deifying of Heroes, and other men, it is needless to
recite; Julian himself believed the like of Aesculapius. None of these
Philosophers then have any reason to stumble at this, which is but agreeable to
their own opinions. And indeed the opinion, that God is the Soul of souls, or
of the Intellectual world, has that in it, which may be a strong temptation to
the wisest to imagine it: Though indeed he is no constitutive form of any of
those creatures, but to be their Creator and total efficient is much more. What
Union it is which we call Hypostatical, we do not fully understand our selves:
but we are sure that it is such as no more abaseth the Deity, than its
concourse with the Sun in its efficiencies.

Object. But what kin are these assertions of Philosophers to yours, of the
Incarnation of the Eternal Word and Wisdom of God?

Answ. What was it but an Incarnation of a Deity, which they affirmed of
Aesculapius and such others? And they that thought God to be the Soul of the
world, thought that the world was as much animated with the Deity, as we affirm
the humane Nature of Christ to have been; yea, for ought I see, whilst they
thought that this soul was parcelled out to every individual, and that Matter
only did pro tempore individuate, they made every man to be God incarnate. And
can they believe that it is so with every man, and yet think it incredible in
Christianity, that our humane Nature is personally united to the Divine? I
think in this they contradict themselves.

3. And it is no way incredible that God should value man according to his
natural worth and usefulness, as an intellectual agent, capable of Knowing, and
Loving, and Praising him, and Enjoying him: His creating us such, and his
abundant mercies to us, do abundantly prove the truth of this. Nor is it
incredible that he should be willing that his depraved creature should be
restored to the use and ends of its nature: nor is it incredible that God
should choose the best and fittest means to effect all this. Nothing more
credible than all this.

4. And it is not incredible at all, that the Incarnation of the Eternal Word
should be the fittest means for this reparation: If we consider, 1. What
question we should have made of the word of an Angel, or any mere creature,
that should have said, he came from God to teach us; seeing we could not be so
certain that he was infallible, and indefectible. 2. And how short a creature
would have fallen in the Priestly part of Mediation. 3. And how insufficient he
would have been for the Kingly Dignity, and universal Government and Protection
of the Church, and Judgment of the world. 4. And withal, that God Himself,
being the Glorifier of Himself, and the Donor of all felicity to us, it is very
congruous, that he should most eminently Himself perform the most eminent of
these works of mercy.

5. And it much assisteth my belief of the Incarnation, to consider, that
certainly the work that was to be done for man's recovery, was the winning of
his heart to the Love of God, from himself and other creatures: and there was
no way imaginable so fit to inflame us with love to God, as for him most
wonderfully to manifest his love to us: which is more done in the work of man's
Redemption, than any other way imaginable; so that being the most suitable
means to restore us to the love of God, it is fittest to be the way of our
recovery; and so the more credible.

6. And it much suppresseth temptation to unbelief in me, to consider, that the
three grand works in which God's Essentialities declare themselves, must needs
be all such as beseems God; that is, most wonderful, transcending man's
comprehension. And as his Omnipotency showed it self (with Wisdom and Love) in
the great work of Creation, so was it meet that his Wisdom should show it self
most wonderfully in the great work of Redemption, in order to the as wonderful
declaration of his Love and Goodness, in the great work of our Salvation, (our
Regeneration, and Glorification.) And therefore if this were not a wonderful
work, it were not fit to be parallel with the Creation, in demonstrating God's
Perfections to our minds.

Object. III. But how incredible is it that humane nature should, in a
glorified Christ, be set above the Angelical nature.

Answ. There is no arguing in the dark, from things unknown, against what is
fully brought to light. What God has done for man, the Scripture has
revealed, and also that Christ himself is far above the Angels: But what Christ
has done for Angels, or for any other world of creatures, God thought not meet
to make us acquainted with. There have been Christians who have thought, (by
plausible reasonings from many Texts of Scripture) that Christ has three
Natures, the Divine, and a Super-angelical, and a Humane; and that the Eternal
Word did first unite it self to the Super-angelical nature, and in that created
the world; and in that appeared to Abraham and the other Fathers; and then
assumed the Humane nature last of all for Redemption: And thus they would
reconcile the Arrians and the Orthodox. But the most Christians hold only two
Natures in Christ: but then they say, that he that has promised that we shall
be equal with the Angels, does know that the nature of Man's Soul and of Angels
differ so little, that in advancing one, he does as it were advance both: and
certainly makes no disorder in nature, by exalting the inferior in sensu
composito, above the Superior and more excellent. Let us not then deceive our
selves, by arguing from things unknown.

Object. IV. There are things so incredible in the Scripture-Miracles, that it
is hard to believe them to be true.

Answ. 1. No doubt but Miracles must be Wonders: they were not else so
sufficient to be a divine attestation, if they were not things exceeding our
power and reach. But why should they be thought incredible? Is it because they
transcend the Power of God, or his Wisdom, or his Goodness? Or because they are
harder to him than the things which our eyes are daily witnesses of? Is not the
motion of the Sun and Orbs, and especially of the Primum Mobile, which the
Peripateticks teach; yea, or that of the Earth and Globes, which others teach,
as great a work, as any miracle mentioned in the holy Scriptures? Shall any man
that ever considered the number, magnitude, glory, and motions of the Fixed
Stars, object any difficulty to God? Is it not as easy to raise one man from
the dead, as to give life to all the living?

2. And are not Miracles according to our own necessities and desires? Do not
men call for signs and wonders, and say, If I saw one rise from the dead, or
saw a Miracle, I would believe? Or at least, I cannot believe that Christ is
the Son of God, unless he work Miracles? And shall that be a hinderance to your
belief, which is your last remedy against unbelief? Will you not believe
without miracles, and yet will you not believe them because they are Miracles?
This is but mere perverseness? as much as to say, we will neither believe with
Miracles nor without.

3. Impartially consider of the proof I have before given you, of the certain
truth of the matter of Fact, that such miracles were really done: and then you
may see not only that they are to be believed, but the doctrine to be the
rather believed for their sakes.

Fuge garrulitates anxias Philosophorum qui asserere non erubescunt, suas
canumque animas eandem tenere speciem. Basil Hexam. l. 8. Interp. Eustath.

Leg. Mammerti Claudiani lib. 3. de statu Animae; and praecipue Gr. Nyssenum:
and quae ex eo cit^ntur in Caesarii Dialog. 3.

This stuck with Galen and some such.

His and talibus adductus Socrates, nec patronum quaesivit ad judicium capitis,
nec judicibus supplex fuit: Adhibuitque liberam contumaciam a magnitudine animi
ductam, non a superbia: and supremo vitae die de hoc ipso multa disseruit; and
paucis ante d^ebus, cum facile posset educi e custodia, noluit: Et cum pene in
manu jam mortiferum illud teneret poculum, locutus ita est, ut non ad mortem,
verum in coelum videretur ascendere. Ita enim censebat atque disseruit: Duas
esse vias, duplicesque cursus animorum e corpore excedentium: Nam qui se
humanis vitiis contaminassent, and se totos libidinibus dedissent quibus
coecati velut domesticis vitiis atque flagitiis se inquinassent vel in
Republica violanda frauds inexpiabiles concepissent, iis devium quoddam iter
esse seclusum a Concilio Deorum: Qui autem se integros castosque servassent,
quibusque fuisset minima cum corporibus contagio, seseque ab his semper
sevocassent, essentque in corporibus humanis vitam imitati Deorum, his ad illos
a quibus essent profecti, reditum facilem patere. Cicer. Tuscul. 1. page 233.


Obj. V. It is hard to believe the Immortality of the Soul, and the Life to
come, when we consider how much the soul depends in its operations on the
body; and how it seems but gradually to exceed the bruits: Especially to
believe the Eternity of it, or its joys; when omne quod oritur interit; And if
Eternity a part ante be proper to God, why not Eternity a part post?

Answ. 1. The Immortality of the Soul, and consequently its perpetual duration,
and a life of Retribution after this, did not seem things incredible to most of
the Heathens and Infidels in the World: And I have proved it before by evidence
of Nature to common Reason. So that to make that incredible in Christianity,
which Philosophers and almost all the World hold, and which has cogent natural
evidence, is to put out the eye of Reason as well as of Faith.

2. And that it has much use of, or dependence on the body in its present
operations, is no proof at all that when it is out of the body it can no
otherwise act or operate. Not to meddle with the controversy, whether it take
with it hence the material sensitive Soul as a body afterward to act by? or
whether it fabricate to it self an ethereal body? or remain without any body
of it self? It is certain, that it was not the Body that was the Principle of
Intellection and Volition here: but it was the Soul which did all in the body,
but according to the mode of its present coexistence: seeing then that it was
the Soul that did it here, why may it not also do it hereafter? If the Candle
shine in the Lanthorn, It can shine out of it, though with some difference: He
is scarce rational that doubts whether there be such things as incorporeal
invisible intelligences, minds or spirits: And if they can act without bodies,
why may not our minds? Though the Egg would die if the shell were broken, or
the Hen did not sit upon it, it does not follow, that therefore the Chicken
cannot live without a shell, or sitting on. Though the Embrio and Infant must
have a continuity with the mother, and be nourished by her nourishment, it does
not follow, that therefore it must be so with him, when he is born and grown up
to ripeness of age. And when there is full proof that Souls have a future life
to live, it is a folly to doubt of it, merely because we cannot conceive of the
manner of their acting without a body: For he that is not desirous to be
deceived, must reduce things uncertain and dark, to those that are clear and
certain, and not contrarily: All good arguing is a notioribus, and not a minus
notis. The nearer any Being is in excellency unto God, the more there is in it
which is hard to be comprehended: Spirits and Minds are excellent Beings; and
therefore very imperfectly known even by themselves, while they are in the
Lanthorn, the Shell, the Womb of flesh. The Eye is not made to see its own
sight, though it may see in a Glass the Organ of its sight: And as sight sees
not sight, nor hearing hears not hearing, nor taste tastes not tasting, etc.
the act being not its own object; But yet by seeing other things, I am most
certain that I see, and by hearing, tasting, smelling, etc. I am certain that I
hear, taste, and smell; so is not the Intellect here fitted intuitively to
understand its own act of understanding; but by understanding other objects, it
understands that it does understand: (Though I confess, some learned men in
this think otherwise, viz. that the Intellect intuitively knows it self.) If
a man have a Watch which is kept in order, to tell him the hour of the day,
though he know not the reason of the frame, the parts and motions, nor how to
take it into pieces, and set it again together, yet it serves his turn to the
use he bought it for. And a Ship may carry him who is unacquainted with the
workmanship that is in it: And so if a man's Soul know how to love and please its
Maker, and know it self morally, it attaineth its end, Campanella well inteth,
that the Soul has naturally a certain inward knowledge or sense of it self;
but when men go about to bring this to such a knowledge as we have of things
extrinsical by ratiocination, they oft-times reason themselves into Ignorance
and Error. And Cicero has the very same. Nec vero de hoc quisquam dubitare
posset, nisi idem nobis accideret diligenter de animo cogitantibus, quod iis
saepe usu venit, qui acriter oculis deficientem solemn intuerentur, ut aspectum
omnino amitterent; sic mentis acies seipsam intuens, nonnunquam hebescit; ob
eamque causam contemplandi diligentiam amittimus. Cic. Tusc. l. 1. p. 233.
though it know not it self physically so far, as to be able to anatomize its
faculties and acts. Argue not therefore from obscurities against the Light.

And that man does not differ from a bruit only in degree, but specifically, he
that is indeed a man does know: Considering what operations the mind of man
has above Bruits; not only in all the most abstruse and wonderful Arts and
Sciences, Astronomy, Geometry, Music, Physic, Navigation, Legislation,
Logic, Rhetoric, etc. but also his knowledge of a Creator, a love and fear of
him, an obedience to him, and a care for an Everlasting Life: Whether Bruits
have Analogical Ratiocination or not, it is certain that these things are far
above them.

2. If by the Eternity of our felicity were meant only an Aevum of very long
duration, it would be so strong a motive to Godliness and Christianity, as with
any rational man, as to weigh down all the counter-pleasures of this world.

3. But as long as there is no want of Power in God to perpetuate our
blessedness, nor any proof that it is disagreeable to his Wisdom or his Will,
why should that seem incredible to us, which is sealed and attested so fully by
supernatural revelation, as I have proved? If once the revelation be proved to
be Divine, there is nothing in this which reason will not believe.

4. And all they that confess the immortality and perpetuity of the soul, must
confess the perpetuity of its pleasure or pain.

5. And why should it be hard for the Peripatetick to believe the perpetuity of
the soul, who will needs believe the eternity of the world it self, both as a
part ante, and a part post? Surely it should seem no difficulty to any of
that opinion.

Object. VI. Who can believe that God will torment his creatures in the flames
of hell for ever? Is this agreeable to infinite Goodness?

Answ. 1. I have fully answered this already, chap. 15. Sosipatra ubi --
incidisset in disputationem de anima in genere; quae ejus pars supplicio
puniatur, quaeque interitus sit expers, dum furore quodam divino incitata
rapitur, etc. Eunap. in Aedes. p. 594. Et, ut quod gnotum est pateat, haec est
hominis vera mors, cum animae nescientes Deum, perlongissimi temporis cruciatu
consumuntur ignifero, in quem illas jacium quidam crudeliter saevi, and ante
Christum incogniti, and ab solo sciente detecti. This was the conceit of Arnob.
adv. Gent. l. 2. p. 14.
part 1. and therefore I must entreat the Objector to peruse his Answer there:
Only I shall now say, that it is not incredible that God is the Governor of
the world; nor that he has given man a Law; nor that his Law has penalties to
the disobedient; nor that he is just; and will judge the world according to
that Law, and make good his threatenings: nor is it incredible that those who
chose sin, when they were foretold of the punishment, and refused Godliness,
when they were foretold of the blessed reward and fruits, and this with
obstinacy to the last, should have no better than they chose. It is not
incredible that unholy enemies of God and Holiness, should not live hereafter
in the blessed sight and love, and holy delightful fruition of God, no more
than that a Swine is not made a King: nor that an immortal Soul, who is
excluded immortal happiness by his wilful refusal, should know his folly, and
know what he has lost by it: nor that such knowledge should be his continual
torment: nor is it incredible that God will not continue to him the pleasures
of whoredom, and gluttony, and drunkenness, and sports, and worldly wealth, or
tyrannical domination, to quiet him in his loss of heaven: nor that he will
deprive him of the temporal mercies which now content him, or may afford him
any delight hereafter: nor is it incredible, if his body rise again, that it
shall be partaker with his soul: nor that God, who might deprive him of his
being, if he had been innocent, may make him worse, or bring him into a
condition to which he would prefer annihilation, when he is an obstinate
impenitent sinner. It is not incredible, that a good King or Judge may hang a
Felon or Traitor, for a crime against man and humane society. Nor is it any
goodness in them to be unjust, or to cherish murderers by impunity: none of all
this is at all incredible. But it is indeed incredible, till conscience have
humbled him, that the Thief or Murderer should like this penalty, or think well
of the Judge: or that a sinner, who judges of good and evil in others as Dogs
do, by the interest of his throat or flesh, and thinks them good only that love
him, and bad that hurt him and are against him, should ever believe that it is
the amiable goodness of God, which causes him in justice to condemn the wicked.

We say not that corporeal fire does touch the soul. Sed memo^atae apud inferos
poenae and suppliciorum generibus multiformes: Ecquis erit tam brutus, and
rerum consequentias nesciens, qui animis incorruptibilibus credat, aut tenebras
tartareas posse aliquid nocere? aut igneos fluvios aut ^aenosis gurgitibus
paludes; aut rotarum volubilium circumactus. Quod enim eontiguum non est, and a
legibus dissolutionis amotum est, licet omnibus ambiatur flammis, -- illibatum
necesse est permaneat. Arnob. advers. Gent. l. 2. p. 17. Auct. Bibl. Pat. To. 1.
2. But yet let not misunderstanding make this seem harder to you than indeed it
is. Do not think that souls in hell are hanged up in flames, as beasts are
hanged in a butchers shambles: or that souls have any pain but what is suitable
to souls, (and that is more than bodies bear:) It is an affliction in rational
ways, which falls on rational spirits. Devils are now in torment, and yet have
a malignant kingdom and order, and rule in the children of disobedience; and go
up and down seeking whom they may devour. We know not the particular manner of
their sufferings, but that they are forsaken of God, and deprived of his
complacential love and mercy; and have the rational misery before described,
and such also as shall be suitable to such kind of bodies as they shall have.
And while they are immortal, no wonder if their misery be so.

Object. VII. Who can believe that the damned shall be far more than the saved?
and the devil have more than God? How will this stand with the infinite
goodness of God?

Answ. I have fully answered this before in Part 1. chap. 11. and should now
add but this; 1. In our enquiries, And seeing most of the Heathens believe the
Immortality of souls, and the Justice of God, it is meet that they believe a
punishment for the bad, as they do a reward for the good. As Arnobius says,
lib. 2. advers. Gent. Cum igitur haec ita sunt, quaenam injustitia tanta est,
ut fatui vobis credulitate in ista videamur? Cum vos and similia credere, and
in eadem videamus expectatione versari? Si irrisione existimamur digni, quod
spem nobis hujusmodi pollicemur, and vos eadem expectat irrisio, qui spem vobis
immortalitatis adsciscitis. Si tenetis aliquam sequiminique ratione, and nobis
portione ex ista rationem concedite. Si nobis haec gaudia Plato promisisset --
Consentaneum fuerat ejus suscipere nos cultus, a quo tantum doni expectaremus
and muneris. Nunc cum eam Christus non tantum promiserit, verum etiam
virtutibus tantis manifestaverit, posse compleri, quid alienum facimus aut
stultitiae crimen quibus rationibus sustinemus, si ejus nomini Majestatique
substernimur a quo speramus utrumque and mortem cruciabilem fugere, and vitam
aeternitate donari? page 17. A^ct. Bib. Pat. To. 1.
we must begin with the primum cognita, or notissima, as aforesaid: that God is
most good, and also just, and punishes sinners, is before proved to be among
the notissima, or primum cognita; and therefore it is most certain, that these
are no way contradictory to each other.

2. And if it be no contradiction to God's goodness, to punish and cast off for
ever the lesser part of the world, then it is none to punish or cast off the
greater part. The inequality of number will not alter the case.

3. It is no way against the goodness of humane Governors, in some cases, to
punish even the greater number, according to their deserts.

4. Can any man that opens his eyes deny it in matter of fact, that the far
greater part of the world is actually ungodly, worldly, sensual and
disobedient? Or that such are meet for punishment, and unmeet for the love and
holy fruition of God? When I see that most men are ungodly, and incapable of
Heaven, is it not harder to reason, to believe that these shall have that joy
and employment of which they are incapable, than that they shall have the
punishment which agrees with their capacity, desert and choice? Must I believe
that God's enemies shall love him for ever, merely because they are the greater
number? If one man that dies unrenewed be capable of heaven, another is so,
and all are so: Therefore I must either believe that no impenitent ungodly
person is saved, or that all be saved. The number therefore is nothing to the
deciding of the case.

5. Can any man in his wits deny, that it is as sure that God permits sin in
the world, as that the Sun shines on us: yea, that he permits that
universal enormous deluge of wickedness which the world groaneth under at this
day? And that this sin is the souls calamity; and to a right judgment, is much
worse than punishment, what ever beastly sensuality may gainsay. If then the
visible wickedness of the world be permitted by God, without any impeachment of
his goodness, then certainly his goodness may consist with punishment, (which
as such is good, when sin is evil:) And much of this punishment also is but
materially permitted by God, and executed by sinners upon themselves.

6. The wisdom and goodness of God saw it meet, for the right government of
this world, to put the threatenings of an everlasting punishment in his Law:
(and how can that man have the face to say, it was needless, or too much in the
Law, with whom it proved not enough to weigh down the trifling interests of the
flesh.) And if it was meet to put that penalty in the Law, it is just and meet
to put that Law into execution, how many soever fall under the penalty of it,
(as has been proved.)

7. The goodness of God consists not in a Will to make all his creatures as
great, or good and happy, as he can: but it is essentially in his infinite
perfections; and expressively in the communication of so much to his creatures,
as he sees meet, and in the accomplishment of his own pleasure, by such ways
of Benignity and Justice as are most suitable to his Wisdom and Holiness. Man's
personal interest is an unfit rule and measure of God's goodness.

8. To recite what I said, and speak it plainlier, I confess it greatly
quieteth my mind against this great objection of the numbers that are damned
and cast off for ever, to consider how small a part this earth is of God's
creation, as well as how sinful and impenitent. Ask any Astronomer, that has
considered the innumerable number of the fixed Stars and Planets, with their
distances, and magnitude, and glory, Of the probability of the habitation of
the Planets, see Gassendus, and his reasons, that the inhabitants are not men
of our species, but that the inhabitants are diversified as the habitations
are, and other things in the universe.
and the uncertainty that we have whether there be not as many more, or an
hundred or thousand times as many, unseen to man, as all those which we see
(considering the defectiveness of man's sight, and the Planets about Jupiter,
with the innumerable Stars in the Milky way, which the Tube has lately
discovered, which man's eyes without it could not see,) I say, ask any man who
knows these things, whether all this earth be any more in comparison of the
whole creation, Though Cicero frequently derideth the superstitious fear of
Hell, yet he means not of all future punishment of the wicked, but of the
Poets fables of Styt, Cerberus, Tantalus, and Sysiphus kind of penalties, and
of Minos and Rhadamanthu^ the infernal Judges.
than one Prison is to a Kingdom or Empire, or the paring of one nail, or a
little mole, or wart, or a hair, in comparison of the whole body. And if God
should cast off all this earth, and use all the sinners in it as they deserve,
it is no more sign of a want of benignity or mercy in him, than it is for a
King to cast one subject of a million into a Jail, and to hang him for his
murder, or treason, or rebellion; or for a man to kill one louse, which is but
a molestation to the body which bears it; or than it is to pare a man's nails,
or cut off a wart, or a hair, or to pull out a rotten aching tooth. Sed
Gegenetis Christus humani (inquitis) c^nservator advenit cur non omnes aequali
munifi^entia liberat? Resp. Aequaliter liberat, qui aequa^i^et omnes vocat:
Haud ab ind^lgentia principali quemquam repellit, aut respuit: qui sublimibus,
infimis, servis, etc. uniformiter potestatem ven^endi ad se facit? Patet
omnibus fons vitae, neque ab jure potandi quisquam prohibetur. Si tibi
fastidium tantum est, ut oblati respuas beneficium muneris, quinimo si tantum
sapientia praevales, ut ea quae offeruntur a Christo ludum and ineptias nomines
quid invitans peccat, cujus solum sunt hae parts, ut sub tui juris arbitrio
fructum suae benignitatis exponat? -- An orandus es ut beneficium salutis a Deo
digneris accipere, and tibi aspernanti, fugientique longissime, infundenda est
in gremium divinae benevolentiae gratia? Vis sumere quod offertur, and in tuos
usus convertere consulueris tu tibi. Aspernaris, contemnis and despicis, te
muneris commoditate privaveris. Nulli Deus infert necessitatem. Object. Nolo
(inquis) and voluntatem non babeo. Resp. Quid ergo criminaris Deum, tanquam
tibi desit? Opem desideras tibi far, cujus dona and munera non tantum
asperneris and fugias, verum in alia verba cognomines, and jocularibus facetiis
prosequaris. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2.
I know it is a thing uncertain and unrevealed to us, whether all these Globes
be inhabited or not: but he that considers, that there is scarce any
uninhabitable place on earth, or in the water, or air, but men, or beasts, or
birds, or fishes, or flies, or worms and moles do take up almost all, will
think it a probability so near a certainty, as not to be much doubted of, that
the vaster and more glorious parts of the Creation are not uninhabited; but
that they have Inhabitants answerable to their magnitude and glory (as Palaces
have other inhabitants than Cottages): and that there is a connaturality and
agreeableness there as well as here, between the Region or Globe, and the
inhabitants. But whether it be the Globes themselves, or only the inter-spaces,
or other parts that are thus inhabited, no reason can doubt, but that those
more vast and glorious spaces are proportionably possessed: And whether they
are all to be called Angels or Spirits, or by what other name, is unrevealed to
us: but what ever they are called, I make no question but our number to theirs
is not one to a million at the most.

Now this being so, for ought we know those glorious parts may have inhabitants
without any sin or misery; who are filled with their Makers love and goodness;
and so are fitter to be the demonstration of that love and goodness, than this
sinful molehill or dungeon of ignorance is. If I were sure that God would save
all mankind, and only leave the devils in their damnation, and forsake no part
of his Creation but their Hell, it would not be any great stumbling to my
faith: Or if Earth were all God's creation, and I were sure that he would
condemn but one man of a hundred thousand, or a million, and that only for
final impenitency in the contempt of the mercy which would have saved him; this
would be no great difficulty to my faith. Why then should it be an offense to
us, if God, for their final refusal of his grace, do for ever forsake and
punish the far greater part of this little dark and sinful world, while he
glorifieth his Benignity and Love abundantly upon innumerable Angels, and
blessed Spirits, and inhabitants of those more large and glorious seats? If you
would judge of the Beneficence of a King, will you go to the Jail and the
Gallows to discern it, or to his Palace and all the rest of his Kingdom? And
will you make a few condemned malefactors the measure of it? or all the rest of
his obedient prosperous subjects? If Hell be totally forsaken of God, as having
totally forsaken him; and if Earth have made it self next to Hell, and be
forsaken as to the far greater part, because that greater part has forsaken
him; as long as there may be millions of blessed ones above, to one of these
forsaken ones on earth, it should be no offense to any but the selfish guilty
sinner. I confess I rather look on it as a great demonstration of God's
holiness and goodness in his Justice, that he will punish the rebellious
according to his Laws; and a great demonstration of his Goodness in his Mercy,
that he will save any of such a rebellious world, and has not forsaken it
utterly as Hell: Eunomiani minas futuri supplicii and gehennae, non ad
veritatem, sed ad metum prolatas aiebant. Hermenopul. de Sectis. Sect. 13.
And when of all the thousands of Worlds or Globes which he has made, we know
of none forsaken by him, but Hell, and part of the Earth, all the Devils, and
most of Men; we should admire the glory of his bounty, and be thankful with
joy, that we are not of the forsaken number; and that even among sinners, he
will cast off none but those that finally reject his mercy.

But selfishness and sense do make men blind, and judge of Good and Evil only
by self-interest and feeling; and the malefactor will hardly magnify Justice,
nor take it to be a sign of Goodness: But God will be God whether selfish
rebels will or not.

Obj. That any thing existeth besides God cannot be known but by sense or
history: Have you either of these for those Inhabitants? And if we may go by
Conjectures, for ought you know there may as many of those Worlds be damned, as
of earthly men.

Ans. 1. Some men are so little conscious of their humanity, that they think
that nothing is known at all: But he that knows by sense that He is himself,
and that there is a World about him, and then by Reason that there is a God,
may know also by Reason that there are other Creatures which he never saw:
Neither sense nor history told us of the inhabitants of the (then) unknown
parts of the World; and yet it had been easy to gather at least a strong
probability that there are such. He that knows that an intelligent Nature is
better than a non-intelligent, and then knows that God has made man
intelligent, and then thinks what difference there is in matter, magnitude
and glory, between the dirty body of Man with the Earth he lives in, and those
vast and glorious Ethereal spaces; will quickly judge that it is a thing
incredible, that God should have no Creatures nobler than man, nor imprint more
of his Image upon any in those more glorious Regions, than on us that dwell as
Snails in such a shell; or that there should be such a strange disproportion in
the works of God, as that a punctum of dirty earth only should be possessed of
the Divine or Intellectual nature, and the vast and glorious Orbs or Spaces be
made only to look on, or to serve these mortal Worms: But proofs go according
to the preparation of the Receivers mind: Nothing is a proof to the unprepared
and prejudiced.

2. We have sense by the Telescope to tell us, that the Moon has parts
unequal, and looks much like the habitable Earth: And we have sense to tell
us, that there are Witches and Apparitions, and consequently other kind of
intellectual Wights than we. And we have History to tell us of the appearances
and offices of Angels: And if there be certainly such wights, our eyes may help
us to conjecture at their Numbers (compared to us) by the spaces which they
inhabit.

3. There is a proportion and harmony in all the works of God: And therefore we
that see how much the superior Orbs do in glory excel this dirty Earth, have
reason to think that the nature of the Inhabitants is suited to their
Habitations; and consequently that they are more excellent Creatures than we,
and therefore less sinful, and therefore more happy.

4. Yet after all this, I am neither asserting that all this is so, nor bound
to prove it. I only argue, that you who are offended at the numbers that sin
and perish, do wrangle in the dark, and speak against you know not what.
Conjecture is enough for me, to prove that you do foolishly to argue against
experience (of the sin and misery of the most) upon mere uncertainties. You
will not censure the actions of a Prince or General, when your ignorance of
their Counsels makes you uncertain of the cause; yea and of the matter of fact
it self. The proof lies on your part, and not on mine: You say, our doctrine
is incredible, because so few are saved, and yet confess that for ought you
know, taking all together it may be many millions for one that perishes. I
think by proving you uncertain of this, I prove you foolish in your Infidelity.
And if you will conjecture then, that there may as many of those other Regions
be damned, 1. You show your selves much more harsh in your censures than the
Christians are, whose harshness you are now reproving: Yea you conjecture this
without all ground or probability. And will you say then, For ought I know it
may be so, Ergo, Christianity is incredible? Can a groundless conjecture allow
any rational man such a Conclusion?

Obj. But you say your selves that many of the Angels fell, and are now Devils.

Answ. But we say not how many: we never said that it is the whole number of
the Glorious Inhabitants of all the superior World, who are called Angels, as
Messengers or Officers about man: we know not how small a part of them
comparatively it may be: And of them we know not how few fell. Augustine
conjectured that it was the tenth part; but we have no ground for any such
conjecture.

Obj. But it is incredible that the World should perish for one man's sin, whom
they never knew, nor could prevent?

Ans. 1. To them that know what Generation is, and what the Son is to the
Father, it is not incredible at all that the unholy Parents do not beget holy
Children, nor convey to them that which they have not themselves: nor yet that
God should hate the unholy: Nor that the Parents choice should signify much
for their Childrens state, who have no wills of their own fit for actual
choice; nor that restored imperfect holiness should not be conveyed to Children
by natural propagation; which came to the Parents by Regeneration: nor that the
Children of Traitors should be disinherited for their Fathers faults: nor that
the Children of Drunkards and Gluttons should be naturally diseased.

2. No man in the World does perish for Adams sin alone without his own:
(Though we judge the case of Infants to allow you no exception, yet to carry
the controversy to them into the dark, and to argue a minus notis, is not the
property of such as seek impartially for truth.) Christ has procured a new
Covenant upon which all those that hear the Gospel, shall again be tried for
life or death: And those that hear it not, have diverse means which have a
tendency to their recovery, and are under undeniable Obligations to use those
means in order to their recovery: which if they do not faithfully, they perish
for their own sin. Should it not make Christianity the more easily credible,
when certain experience assures us, how prone even Infants are to sin, and how
universally the World is drowned in wickedness; and then to find so admirable
and suitable a Remedy revealed?

Obj. But Punishment is to warn others from sinning: But after this life there
will be none to warn: therefore there will be no punishment, because the end of
punishing cease.

Answ. 1. It is a false position, that punishment is only or chiefly to be a
warning to others. It is chiefly for the ultimate end of Government, which
secundum quid among men, is the bonum publicum; but simpliciter, in Gods
Government, it is the Glorifying or demonstration of the Holiness and Justice
of God the universal Governor, to the pleasure of his holy will.

See more of this before, Part 1 Chapter 15. The Reader man pardon this speaking of
the same thing twice, both because the Objection requires the repetition, and
because I think it needful to most Readers; to procure their observation.
2. It is the Penalty as Threatened in the Law, and not the penalty as executed,
which is the first necessary means to deter others from offending: And then
the execution is secondarily necessary, because the Law must be fulfilled. It
is not the actual hanging of a murderer; which is the first necessary
instrument or means to restrain murderers: But it is the Penalty in the Law,
which says that Murderers shall be hanged: And the commination of the Law
would be no restraint, if it were not that it relates to a just execution. So
that it was necessary to the restraint of sinners in this world, Aut ideo
gregem pusillum appellat, quia totum hominum genus, ne dum soli sancti, cum
immensa illa Angelorum multitudine, collatum, perexiguus grex est. Est enim
illorum multitudo incredibilis, hominum nume um infinitis pene partibus
exceden^. Titus ^ostrens. in Luc. cap. 12.
that God should threaten Hell in his Law: And therefore it is necessary that
he execute that Law; or else it would be delusory, and contemptible.

3. How know we who shall survive this present World, to whom God may make man's
Hell a warning? Are not the Devils now set out in Scripture for a warning to
Man? And how know we what other Creatures God has, to whom these punished
sinners may be a warning? Or whether the New Earth, wherein Righteousness must
dwell, according to Gods Promise (2 Pet. 3.12, 13.) shall not have use of this
warning to keep them in their righteousness? As long as all these things are
probable, and the contrary utterly uncertain, how foolish a thing is it, to go
from the light of a plain Revelation and Scripture, and argue from our dark
uncertainties and improbabilities against that light? And all because self-love
and guilt does make sinners unwilling to believe the truth? So much for the
Objection against Hell.

Obj. VIII. But it is incredible, that all those shall be damned that live
honestly and soberly, and do no body harm, if they do not also live a holy and
heavenly life, and forsake all for another World.

We deny not but that there are different degrees of punishment according to
the difference of men's sins.
Answ. It is but selfishness and blindness, which makes men call him an honest
man, and speak lightly of his wickedness who prefers the dung and trifles of
this World, before his Maker, and Everlasting glory. What if a pack of
Murderers, Thieves and Rebels, do live together in love, and do one another no
harm? shall that excuse their murders or rebellions, and give them the name of
honest men? Etsi mortalibus in decies millenos annos haec extemis sensibus
exposita vita producatur, nunquam tamen opinor tantae Angelorum and Daemonum
multitudini, hamanarum animamarum numerus par erit. Aeneas Gazaeus de Anima
Theophrastus p. 399.
What is the Creature to the Creator? what greater wickedness can man commit,
than to deny, despise and disobey his Maker? and to prefer the most
contemptible vanity before him? and to choose the transitory pleasure of
sinning, before the endless fruition of his God? what is wronging a Neighbor,
in comparison of this wrong? shall a sinner refuse his everlasting happiness
when it is offered him, and then think to have it, when he can possess the
pleasure of sin no longer? and all because he did no man wrong? Does he think
to refuse Heaven, and yet to have it? If he refuse the Love of God, and
perfection of Holiness, he refuses Heaven. It is so far from being incredible
that the unholy should be damned, and the Holy only saved, that the contrary is
impossible: I would not believe an Angel from Heaven, if he should tell me that
one unholy Soul, in sensu composito, while such, shall be saved, and have the
heavenly felicity: because it is a mere contradiction. For to be blessed in
Heaven, is to be happy in the perfect Love of God: And to love God without
Holiness, signifies to love him without loving him. Are these the Objections
of unbelief?

Obj. IX. The Resurrection of these Numerical Bodies, when they are devoured
and turned into the substance of other bodies, is a thing incredible Cum non
esses, re formavit ex humida and mini^a substantia, and ex minutissima guttula,
quae nec ipsi aliquando erat. Thioph. Antioch. ad Antolych. l. 1.
.

Answ. 1. If it be neither against the Power, the Wisdom, or the Will of God,
it is not incredible at all. One that had never heard nor thought of the way of
generation, would think it as unlikely a thing that an Aco^n should bring forth
an Oak, or such a thing as sperma humanum the Body of a man, as you do that the
body rise again. And the Platonists think, that all Souls presently upon their
departure hence do fabricate to themselves either acreal or ethereal bodies:
And why should you think them so alienated from the bodies which they lived in,
as only to be incapable of those? If we knew what the hoc idem of the Body is,
we might have more particular explicit satisfaction: In the mean time we must
implicitly trust in God. Leg. Finem Disput. Zachariae Scholast. Mitylen.
But it is not against any of these. Who can say, that God is unable to raise
the dead, who sees so much greater things performed by him, in the daily
motion of the Sun (or Earth) and in the support and course of the whole frame
of Nature? He that can every Spring give a kind of Resurrection, to Plants and
Flowers, and Fruits of the Earth, can easily raise our bodies from the dust.
And no man can prove, that the Wisdom of God, or yet his Will, are against our
Resurrection; but that both are for it, Lege etiam Athenagoram de Resurrectione.

Read Garbut of the Resurrection.


may be proved by his Promises: Shall that which is beyond the power of Man, be
therefore objected as a difficulty to God?

2. Yea, it is congruous to the Wisdom and Governing Justice of God, that the
same Body which was partaker with the Soul in sin and duty, should be partaker
with it in suffering or felicity? Read Aen. Gazaeus his Theophrastus, where is
a handsome discourse of the Resurrection.


3. The Lord Jesus Christ did purposely die and rise again in his humane body,
to put the Resurrection out of doubt, by undeniable ocular demonstration, and
by the certainty of belief.

4. There is some Natural Reason for the Resurrection in the Souls inclination
to its Body. As it is unwilling to lay it down, it will be willing to reassume
it, when God shall say, The time is come. As we may conclude at night when they
are going to bed, that the people of City and Country will rise the next
morning, and put on their Clothes, and not go naked about the streets, because
there is in them a Natural inclination to rising and to clothes, and a natural
aversness to lie still or to go uncloathed; so may we conclude from the souls
natural inclination to its body, that it will reassume it as soon as God
consents.

5. And all our Objections which reason from supposed contradictions vanish;
because none of us all have so much skill in Physics as to know what it is
which individuateth this Numerical Body, and so what it is which is to be
restored: But we all confess, that it is not the present mass of flesh and
humors, which being in a continual flux, is not the same this year which it
was the last, and may vanish long before we die.

Obj. X. If Christ be indeed the Savior of the World, why came he not into the
World till it was 4000 years old? And why was he before revealed to so few? and
to them so darkly? Did God care for none on earth, but a few Jews? or did he
not care for the Worlds recovery till the later age, when it drew toward its
end?

Answ. It is hard for the Governor of the World, by ordinary means, to
satisfy all self-conceited persons of the wisdom and equity of his dealings.
But 1. it belongs not to us, but to our free Benefactor, to determine of the
measure, and season of his benefits: May he not do with his own as he list? And
shall we deny or question a proved truth, because the reason of the
circumstances is unrevealed to us? If our Physician come to cure us of a mortal
disease, would we reject him because he came not sooner? and because he cured
not all others that were sick as well as us?

2. The Eternal Wisdom and Word of God, the second Person in the Trinity, was
the Savior of the World before he was incarnate. He did not only by his
Undertaking, make his future performances valid, as to the merit and
satisfaction necessary to our deliverance; If Philosophy be medicinal to the
foolish world, why were Thales, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and
Zeno born no sooner? but the world suffered to lie so long in ignorance? Answer
this your selves, and you are answered.
but he instructed Mankind in order to their recovery, and Ruled them upon
terms of grace, and so did the work of a Redeemer or Mediator, even as Prophet,
Priest and King, before his Incarnation. He enacted the Covenant of Grace, that
whoever repents and believes shall be saved; and so gave men a conditional
pardon of their sins.

3. And though Repentance and the Love of God, was necessary to all that would
be saved, even as a constitutive cause of their salvation; yet that Faith in
the Mediator, which is but the means to the Love of God, and to sanctification,
Arnobius answers this Objection, partly by alleging man's ignorance of what
God did to former ages, and partly by asserting Gods mercy to them* adv. Gentes
li. 2.
was not always, nor in all places, in the same particular Articles necessary
as it is now, where the Gospel is preached. Before Christ's coming, a more
general belief might serve the turn, for men's salvation; without believing,
that [This Jesus is the Christ; that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead, and
buried, and descended to Hades, and rose again the third day, and ascended into
Heaven, etc.] And as more is necessary to be believed, since Christ's
incarnation and resurrection than before; so more was before necessary to the
Jews, who had the Oracles of God, and had more revealed to them than to other
Nations who had less revealed: And now more is necessary where the Gospel
comes, than where it does not.

4. So that the Gentiles had a Savior before Christ's Incarnation, and not only
the Jews. They were reprieved from Legal Justice, and not dealt with by God
upon the proper terms of the Covenant of Works, or mere Nature: They had all of
them much of that mercy which they had forfeited; Obj. Quid visum est ut ante
horas pauculas sospitator Christus coeli ex arcibus mitteretur? Resp. Quae
causa est quod serius hyems, aestas, autumnus fiant? -- Non minus inficias
nescire nos: nec promptum est cu^quam Dei mentem videre, aut quibus modis
ordinaverit res suas, homo animal coecum and ipsum se nesciens ullis potest
rationibus consequi -- Nec continuo sequitur ut infecta fiant quae facta sunt,
and amittat res fidem, quae potestatibus est monstratum. Id. ib.
which came to them by the Grace of the Redeemer. They had time and helps to
turn to God, and a course of means appointed them to use, in order to their
recovery and salvation: According to the use of which they shall be judged:
They were not with the Devils left remediless, and shut out of all hope, under
final desperation: No one ever perished in any Age or Nation of the World, who
by believing in a merciful, pardoning, holy God, was recovered to love God
above all. And if they did not this, they were all without a just excuse.

5. The course of Grace as that of Nature, does wisely proceed from low degrees
to higher, and brings not things to perfection at the first: The Sun was not
made the first day of the Creation; nor was Man made, till all things were
prepared for him. The Churches Infancy was to go before its Maturity. We have
some light of the Sun, before it rise; much more before it come to the height:
As Christ now teaches his Church more plainly, when he is himself gone into
Glory, even by his Pastors whom he fitteth for that work, and by his Spirit; so
did he (though more obscurely yet sufficiently) teach it before he came in the
flesh, by Prophets and Priests: His work of Salvation consists in bringing
men to live in Love and Obedience: And his way of Teaching them his saving
doctrine is by his Ministers without, Nam quod nobis objectare consuestis,
novellam esse Religionem nostram, and ante dies propemodum paucos natam, neque
vos potuisse antiquam and patriam linquere, etc. ratione istud intenditur
nulla: Quid enim si hoc modo culpam velimus infligere, prioribus illis and
antiquissimis seculis, quod inventis frugibus glandes spreverint, quod
corticibus contegi, and amiciri desierint pellibus, postquam vestis excogitatae
est textili, -- Commune est omnibus and-ab ipsis pene incunabulis traditum,
bona malis anteferre, inutilibus utilia praeponere -- Convenit ut inspiciatis
non factum, nec quid reliquerimus opponere, sed secuti quid simus potissimum
contucri. Arnob. ib. l. 2. And he next instanceth, what abundance of things
they had then innovated at Rome. Et postea -- sed novellum nomen est nostrum,
and ante dies paucos Religio est nata quam sequimur: Resp. Ut interim concedam
-- Quid est in negotiis hominum, quod vel opere corporis and manibus fiat, vel
solius animae disciplina and cognitione teneatur, quod non ex aliquo coeperit
tempore? Philosophia, Musica, Astronomia, etc. Id. ib. p. 24.
and by his Spirit within: And thus he did before his coming in flesh, and thus
he does since: we that are born since his coming, see not his Person, any more
than they who were born before. But we have his Word, Ministers, and Spirit,
and so had they: His reconciling sacrifice was effectual morally in esse
cognito and volito before the performance of it: And the means of reconciling
our minds to God, were sufficient in their kind before, though more full and
excellent since his coming.

If you would not be deluded into Infidelity by this objection (which indeed is
one of the greatest difficulties of Faith) you must not further one error by
another. 1. Think not that God is hired or persuaded by Christ as against his
will to forgive men's sins and save their souls, or to do them any good.
Understand, that no good comes to man, or any Creature, but totally from Gods
will and Love, who is the Original and Eternal Goodness. All the question is
but of the modus conferendi, the way of his Conveyance: And then it will not
seem incredible, that he should give out his mercy by degrees, and with some
diversity.

2. Think not that Christianity does teach men, that all those who were not of
the Jewish Nation or Church then, or that are not now of the Christian Church,
were so cast off and forsaken by God as the Devils are, to be left as utterly
hopeless or remediless: nor that they were upon no other terms for salvation,
than man in innocence was under; which was [Obey perfectly and live; or if thou
sin, thou shall die]: For this had been to leave them as hopeless as the
Devils, when once they had sinned.

3. And think not that Christ can show no mercy, nor do any thing toward the
salvation of a sinner, before he is known himself to the sinner; especially
before he is known as an incarnate Mediator, or one that is to be incarnate. He
struck down Paul, and spoke to him from Heaven, before Paul knew him: He sent
Philip to the Eunuch, before he knew him, and Peter to Cornelius, and sends
the Gospel to Heathen Nations, before they know him. If the Apostles
themselves, even after that they had lived long with Christ, and heard his
preaching, and seen his Miracles, yea and preached and wrought Miracles
themselves, did not yet understand that he must suffer, and die, and rise
again, and send down the Spirit, etc. you may conjecture by this what the
common Faith of those before Christ's coming was, who were saved.

4. Think not therefore that Christ has no way or degree of effectual
Teaching, but by the express doctrine of his Incarnation, Death and
Resurrection, which is now THE GOSPEL.

5. And think not that all the mercies which Pagan Nations have from God, are
no acts of Grace, nor have any tendency to their conversion and salvation.
Doubtless, it is the same Redeemer, even the eternal Wisdom and Word of God,
who before his Incarnation gave greater mercy to the Jews, Religionis autoritas
non est tempore estimanda sed numine. Id. ib. Yet next he says, Our Religion
is the oldest, because God is so, though Christ came but lately to teach it us
better.
and lesser to the Gentiles: He does by these mercies oblige or lead men to
Repentance and Gratitude, and reveal God as merciful and ready to forgive all
capable sinners: As even under the Law, Exodus* 34. he revealed himself fullyer
to Moses, [ The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, etc.] though he will by no means (no not by
Christ) clear the guilty, that is, either say to the wicked, thou art just, or
pardon any incapable subject. Doubtless, mercy binds Heathens to know God as
merciful, and to love him, and to improve that mercy to their attainment of
more, and to seek after further knowledge, and to be better than they are; and
they are set under a certain course of Means, and appointed Duty, in order to
their recovery and salvation: Else it might be said, that they have nothing to
do for their own recovery, and consequently sin not by omitting it. By all this
you may perceive, that Christ did much by Mercies and Teaching before his
Incarnation, and since for all the World, which has a tendency to their
conversion, recovery and salvation.

Obj. XI. The conception of a Virgin, without man, is improbable; and must all
depend upon the credit of her own word: And the meanness of his Parentage,
breeding and condition, does more increase the difficulty.

Answ. 1. It was meet that the birth of Christ should begin, in a Miracle, when
his life was to be spent and finished in Miracles. 2. It is no more than was
promised before by the Prophet, Isa. 7.14. A Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, etc. And why should the fulfilling of a Prophecy by miracle be
incredible? 3. It is neither above nor against the Power, Wisdom or Love of
God, and therefore it should not seem incredible. There is no contradiction or
impossibility in it; nor any thing contrary to Sense or Reason. Reason says
indeed, that it is above the power of man, and above the common course of
Nature; but not that it is above the Power of the God of Nature: Is it any
harder for God to cause a Virgin to conceive by the Holy Ghost, than to make
the first of Humane kind, (or any other kind) of nothing? 4. It was meet that
he who was to be a Sacrifice for sin, and a Teacher and pattern of perfect
righteousness, and a Mediator between God and Man, should not be an ordinary
Child of Adam, nor be himself defiled with Original or actual sin; and
therefore that he should be in a peculiar sense the Son of God. 5. And this
does not depend only on the Credit of the Virgin-mothers word, but on the
multitude of Miracles whereby God himself confirmed the truth of it.

And as for the Meanness of his Person and Condition, 1. It was a needful part
of the humiliation which he was for our sins to undergo; that he should take
upon him the form of a Servant, and make himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7,
8, 9. 2. It was a suitable testimony against the pride, carnality, and
worldly-mindedness of deluded men, who overvalue the honor and pleasure and
riches of the World: And a suitable means to teach men to judge of things
aright, and value every thing truly as it is. The contrary whereof is the
cause of all the sin and misery of the World. He that was to cure men of the
Love of the World, and all its riches, dignities and pleasure, and he that was
to save them from this, by the Office of a Savior, could not have taken a more
effectual way, than to teach them by his own example, and to go before them in
the settled contempt of all these vanities, and preferring the true and durable
felicity. 3. Look inwardly to his Godhead, and spiritual perfections: Look
upward to his present state of Glory, who has now all power given into his
hands, and is made Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Look forward
to the day of his glorious appearing, when he shall come with all his Celestial
Retinue, to judge the World: And then you will see the Dignity and excellency
of Christ. If you prefer not spiritual and heavenly dignities your selves,
you are incapable of them, and cannot be saved: But if you do, you may see the
excellencies of Christ. He that knows how vain a bubble the honor of man and
the glory of this world is, will not be offended at the King of Saints because
his Kingdom is not of this World: And he that knows any thing of the
difference between God and the Creature, Heaven and Earth, will not despise the
Eternal Jehovah, because he wears not a silken Coat, and dwells not in the
gilded Palaces of a Prince: If Earthly Glory had been the highest, it had been
the glory of Christ: And if he had come to make us happy by the rich man's way,
Luke 16. To be clothed in Purple and Silk, and faring sumptuously every day,
then would he have led us this way by his example. But when it is the work of a
Savior to save us from the flesh, and from this present evil World, the Means
must be suited to the end.

Obj. XII. But it is a very hard thing to believe that person to be God
Incarnate, and the Savior of the World, who suffered on a Cross, as a
Blasphemer and a Traitor that usurped the Title of a King.

Answ. The Cross of Christ has ever been the stumbling block of the proud and
worldly sort of men. But it is the confidence and consolation of true
Believers. For 1. It was not for his own sins but for ours that he suffered:
Even so was it prophesied of him, Isa. 53.4. Surely, he has born our griefs,
Leg. Ivon Carnotens. de rebus Ecclesiast. cap. Quare Deus natus and passus est?
Bibl. Pat. To. 10. page 809, 810. Etiam Ruper. Tuitiens. li. 3. de Divinis
Offic. cap. 14. de eo quod solet quaeri, Cur Deus lapsum hominis evenire
permiserit, pro quo Incarnatio ejus necessaria fuit? page 897. Pythagoras
samius suspicione dominationis injusta vivus concrematus in fano est: Nunquid
ea quae docuit, vim propriam perdiderunt, quia non Spiritum sponte, sed
crudelitate appetitus effudit: similiter Socrates civitatis suae judicio
damnatus, etc. Aquilius, Trebonius, Regulus, acerbissinarum mortium experti
sunt formas: nunquid idcirco post vitam judicati sunt turpes? Nemo unquam
innocens male interemptus infamis est; nec turpitudinis alicujus commaculatur
nota, qui non suo merito, poenas graves, sed truciatoris perpetitur saevitatem.
Arnob. adv. Gent. li. 1. p. 7.
and carried our sorrows; yet did we esteem him stricken of God, and afflicted:
But he was wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed:
All we like Sheep have gone astray, we have every one turned to his own way,
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. And it is impudent
ingratitude to make those his sufferings the occasion of our unbelief, which we
were the causes of our selves; and to be ashamed of that Cross which we laid
upon him by our sins. It is not worth the labor to answer the slanders of his
accusers, about his usurpation of a Kingdom, when they believed it not
themselves: He was above a worldly Kingdom. And it could be no blasphemy for
him to say that he was the Son of God, when he had so fully proved it by his
works.

2. His suffering as a reputed Malefactor on a Cross, was a principal part of
the merit of his Patience: For many a man can bear the corporal pain, who
cannot so far deny his honor, as to bear the imputation of a Crime: For the
innocent Son of God, that was never convict of sin, to suffer under the name of
a Blasphemer and a Traitor, was greater condescension, than to have suffered
under the name of an innocent person.

3. And in all this it was needful that the Savior of Mankind, should not
only be a Sacrifice and Ransom for our sinful Souls, but also should heal us
of the over-love of Life, and Honor by his Example. Had not his self-denial
and patience extended to the loss of all things in this World, both life it
self, and the reputation of his righteousness, it had not been a perfect
example of self-denial and patience unto us. And then it had been unmeet for so
great a work, as the cure of our Pride and love of Life. Had Christ come to
deliver the Jews from Captivity, or to make his Followers great on Earth, as
Mahomet did, he would have suited the Means to such an End: But when he came to
save men from pride, and self-love, and the esteem of this World, and to bring
them to Patience, and full obedience to the will of God, and to place all their
happiness in another life, true Reason tells us that there was no example so
fit for this end, as Patient submission to the greatest sufferings. The Cross
of Christ then shall be our glory, and not our stumbling block or shame. Let
the Children of the Devil boast, that they are able to do hurt, and to trample
upon others: The Disciples of Christ will rather boast, that they can patiently
endure to be abused, as knowing that their Pride and Love of the World, is the
enemy which they are most concerned in conquering.

Obj. XIII. It was but a few mean unlearned persons who believed in him at the
first: And it is not past a sixth part of the World, that yet believes in him:
And of these, few do it judiciously and from their hearts, but because their
Kings or Parents, or Country are of that Religion.

Answ. 1. As to the Number I have answered it before. It is no great number
comparatively that are Kings, or Lords, or Learned men, and truly judicious and
wise: will you therefore set light by any of these? Things excellent are seldom
common. The Earth has more Stones than Gold or Pearls. How gallantly have your
Learned Philosophers excelled us? When the Pyrrhonians and Arcesilas his new
Academeticks have learned to know that ^ing can be known; and the one sort of
them say that they know not that much neither. But whether they dare say that
they know that they know not that much they have not told us. Of them even
Cicero learned as much to doubt as to know.
All those believed in Christ who heard his word, and saw his works, and had
wise, considerate, honest hearts, to receive the sufficient evidence of truth.
The greater part are every where ignorant, rash, injudicious, dishonest, and
carried away with prejudice, fancy, custom, error and carnal interest. If all
men have means in its own kind sufficient to bring them to believe, to
understand so much as God immediately requires of them, it is their fault who
after this are ignorant and unbelieving; and if it prove their misery, let them
thank themselves. But yet Christ will not leave the success of his undertaking
so far to the will of man, as to be uncertain of his expected fruits: He has
his chosen ones throughout the World, and will bring them effectually to Faith
and Holiness, to Grace and Glory, though all the Powers of Hell do rage against
it: In them is his delight, and them he will conform to his Fathers will, and
restore them to his Image, Quicquid nil verum statuens Academia duplex

Personat; arroso quicquid sapit ungue Cleanthes -- Apol. Sidonius Carm. 2. p.
123.


and fit them to love and serve him here, and enjoy him for ever: And though
they are not the greater number, they shall be the everlasting demonstration of
his Wisdom, Love, and Holiness: And when you see all the worlds of more blessed
Inhabitants, you will see that the Damned were the smaller number, and the
Blessed in all probability many millions to one: If the Devil have the greater
number in this World, God will have the greater number in the rest.

2. It was the wise design of Jesus Christ, that few in comparison should be
converted by his personal converse or teaching, and thousands might be suddenly
converted upon his Ascension, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost: Both
because his Resurrection and Ascension were part of the Articles to be
believed, and were the chiefest of all his Miracles which did convert men: And
therefore he would Rise from the dead before the multitude should be called:
And because the Spirit as it was his extraordinary Witness and Advocate on
Earth, was to be given by him after he ascended into glory; And he would have
the World see, that the Conversion of men to Faith and Sanctity, was not the
effect of any politic Confederacy between him and them, but the effect of Gods
Power, Light and Love: so that it should be a great confirmation to our Faith
to consider, that those multitudes believed by the wonderful testimony and
work of the Holy Ghost, upon the Disciples, when Christ had been crucified in
despite, who yet believed not before, but were his Crucifiers: It was not so
hard nor honorable an act to believe in him; when he went about working
Miracles, and seemed in a possibility to restore their temporal Kingdom, as to
believe in him after he had been crucified among Malefactors. He therefore that
could after this by the Spirit and Miracles, bring so many thousands to
believe, did show that he was alive himself and in full power.

3. And that the Apostles were mean unlearned men, is a great confirmation to
our Faith. For now it is apparent that they had their abilities, wisdom and
successes from the Spirit and Power of God: But if they had been Philosophers
or cunning men, it might have been more suspected to be a laid contrivance
between Christ and them. Indeed for all his Miracles, they began to be in doubt
of him themselves, when he was dead and buried, till they saw him risen again,
and had the Spirit came upon them, and this last undeniable evidence, and this
heavenly insuperable Call and Conviction was it, which miraculously settled them
in the Faith.

Quid nobis est investigare ^a quae neque scire compendium, neque ignorare
detrimentum est ullum? Remittite haec Deo, atque ipsum scire concedite, quid,
quare, and unde sit? debuerit esse aut non esse. Vestris non est rationibus
liberum implicare vos talibus, and tam remotas inutiliter curare res: Vestra in
ancipiti sita est salus animarum vestrarum; and nisi vos applicatis Dei
Principis notioni, a corporalibus vinculis exolutos, expectat mors saeva; non
repentinam afferens extinctionem, sed pertractum temporis cruciabilis poenae
acerbitate consumens. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2.
4. And that Savior, who came not to make us Worldlings, but to save us from
this present evil World, and to cure our esteem and love of worldly things, did
think it meetest both to appear in the form of a poor man himself, and to
choose Disciples of the like condition, and not to choose the worldly wise, and
great, and honorable, to be the first attesters of his miracles, or preachers
of his Gospel. Though he had some that were of place and quality in the World,
(as Nicodemus, Joseph, Cornelius, Sergius Paulus, etc.) yet his Power needed
not such Instruments: As he would not teach us to magnify worldly Pomp, nor
value things by outward appearance, as the deluded dreaming world does, so he
would show us, that he needs not Kings nor Philosophers, by worldly power or
wisdom to set up his Kingdom. He gives power, but he receives none: He
sets up Kings, and by him they reign; but they set not up him, nor does he
reign by any of them: Nor will he be beholden to great men, or learned men for
their help, to promote his cause and interest in the World. The largeness of
his mercy indeed extends to Kings, and all in Authority, as well as to the
poor, and if they will not reject it, nor break his bonds, but kiss the Son,
before his wrath break forth against them, they may be saved as well as others:
( Psalm. 2.1, 2, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.) But he will not use them in the first
setting up of his Church in the World, lest men should think, that it was set
up by the Learning, Policy or Power of man: 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. and 2.5,
6, 7, 10, 13. and 13.19, etc. And therefore he would not be voted one of the
Gods by Tyberius, or Adrians Senate, nor accept of the worship of Alexander
Sev^rus, who in his Lararium worshipped him as one of his Demigods; nor
receive any such beggarly Deity from man; but when Constantine acknowledged him
as God indeed, he accepted his acknowledgement. Those unlearned men whom he
used were made wiser in an hour by the Holy Ghost, than all the Philosophers in
the World: And those mean contemned persons overcame the Learning and Power of
the World, and not by Arms as Mahomet, but against Arms and Arguments, wit and
rage, by the Spirit alone they subdued the greatest powers to their Lord.

Obj. XIV. But it does sapere scenam, sound like a Poetical fiction, that God
should satisfy his own Justice, and Christ should die instead of our being
damned, and this to appease the wrath of God, as if God were angry, and
delighted in the blood or sufferings of the innocent.

Answ. Ignorance is the great cause of unbelief. This objection comes from
many errors, and false conceits about the things of which it speaks. Lege
pretiosissimum Grotii lib. de satisfactione: Item Zarnovecium and Johan. Junium
and Essenium de satisf.
1. If the word [Satisfaction] offend you, use only the Scripture-words, that
Christ was a Sacrifice, an Atonement, a Propitiation, a Price, etc. And if this
be incredible, how came it to pass that sacrificing was the custom of all the
world? Does not this objection as much militate against this? was God angry?
Pontifex ille credo est qui principaliter apud divinitatem summae Trinitatis
humani generis oblata sanctificat, peccata expiat, vota commendat. Ipse ergo
verus sacerdos est, quia Filius Dei secundum id quod aequalis est Patri, non
tam preces fundit, quam prec^ntes exaudit; homo potius hic intelligendus est,
quem Pontificem Apostolus d^cens, nostrisque infirmitatibus compati, etc.
Claudian Mammert. de statu Animae contr. Faust. l. 1 c 3.
or was he delighted in the blood and sufferings of harmless sheep and other
cattle? and must these either satisfy him, or appease his wrath? What think
you should be the cause, that sacrificing was thus commonly used in all ages
through all the earth, if it savoured but of poetical fiction?

2. God has no such thing as a passion of anger to be appeased, nor is he at
all delighted in the blood or sufferings of the worst, much less of the
innocent, nor does he sell his mercy for blood; nor is his satisfaction any
reparation of any loss of his, which he receives from another. But, 1. Do you
understand what Government is? and what Divine Government is? and what is the
end of it? even the pleasing of the will of God in the demonstrations of his
own perfections: if you do, you will know, that it was necessary that God's
penal Laws should not be broken by a rebel world, without being executed on
them according to their true intent and meaning, or without such an equivalent
demonstration of his Justice, as might vindicate the Law and Lawgiver from
contempt, and the imputation of ignorance or levity, and might attain the ends
of Government as much, as if all sinners had suffered themselves: And this is
it that we mean by a Sacrifice, Ransom, or Satisfaction. Shall God be a
Governor and have no Laws? or shall he have Laws that have no penalties? or
shall he set up a lying scar-crow to frighten sinners by deceit? and have Laws
which are never meant for execution? Are any of these becoming God? Or shall he
let the Devil go for true, who told Eve at first, You shall not die? and let
the world sin on with boldness, and laugh at his Laws, and say, God did but
frighten us with a few words, which he never intended to fulfill? or should God
have damned all the world according to their desert? If none of all this be
credible to you, then certainly nothing should be more credible, than that his
wisdom has found out some way, to exercise pardoning saving mercy, without any
injury to his governing justice and truth, and without exposing his Laws and
himself to the contempt of sinners, or emboldening them in their sins; even a
way which shall vindicate his honor, and attain his ends of government, as
well as if we had been all punished with death and hell; and yet may save us
with the great advantage of honor to his mercy; and in the fullest
demonstration of that love and goodness, which may win our love. And where will
you find this done but in Jesus Christ alone? 2. You must distinguish between
Anger and Justice: when God is said to be angry, it means no more but that he
is displeased with sin and sinners, and executes his governing-justice on
them. 3. You must distinguish between sufferings in themselves considered, and
as in their signification and effects: God loved not any man's pain and
suffering and death, as in it self considered, and as evil to us: (no not of a
sacrificed beast) but he loves the demonstration of his truth, and justice,
and holiness, and the vindication of his Laws from the contempt of sinners, and
the other good ends attained by this means: and so as a means adapted to such
ends he loves the punishment of sin.

Object. XV. It is a suspicious sign that he seeks but to set up his name,
and get disciples, that he makes it so necessary to salvation to believe in
him; and not only to repent and turn to God.

Answ. He makes not believing in him necessary, sub ratione finis, as our
holiness and love to God is; but only sub ratione medii, as a means to make us
holy, and work us up to the love of God. He proclaims himself to be the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, by whom it is that we must come to the Father; and
that he will save to the uttermost all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. Joh.
14.6. So that he commands Faith but as the bellows of Love, to kindle in us
the heavenly flames. And I pray you, how should he do this otherwise? Can we
learn of him, if we take him for a deceiver? Will we follow his example, if we
believe him not to be our pattern? Will we obey him, if we believe not that he
is our Lord? Will we be comforted by his gracious promises and covenant, and
come to God with ever the more boldness and hope of mercy, if we believe not in
his Sacrifice and Merits? Shall we be comforted at death in hope that he will
justify us, and receive our souls, if we believe not that he lives, and will
judge the world, and is the Lord of life and glory? Will you learn of Plato or
Aristotle, if you believe not that they are fit to be your Teachers? Or will
you take Physic of any Physician whom you trust not, but take him for a
deceiver? Or will you go in the Vessel with a Pilot, or serve in the Army under
a Captain, whom you cannot trust? To believe in Christ, which is made so
necessary to our justification and salvation, is not a dead opinion, nor the
joining with a party that cries up his name: But it is to become Christians
indeed; that is, to take him unfeignedly for our Savior, and give up our
selves to him by resolved consent or covenant, to be saved by him from sin and
punishment, and reconciled to God, and brought to perfect holiness and glory.
This is true justifying and saving faith. And it is our own necessities that
have made this faith so necessary as a means to our own salvation. And shall we
make it necessary for our selves, and then quarrel with him for making it
necessary in his Covenant?

Object. XVI. If Christ were the Son of God, and his Apostles inspired by the
holy Ghost, and the Scriptures were God's Word, they would excel all other men
and writings in all true rational worth and excellency: whereas Aristotle
excels them in Logic and Philosophy, and Cicero and Demosthenes in Oratory,
and Seneca in ingenious expressions of morality, etc.

The parts and style of men may vary, who speak the same truth. Sentit ut
Py^hagoras, dividit ut Socrates, explicat ut Plato, implicat ut Aristoteles, ut
Aeschines blanditur, ut Demosthenes irascitur, vernat ut Hortensius, ut
Cethegus, incitat ut Curio, moratur ut Fabius, simulat ut Crassus, dissimulat
ut Caesar, suadet ut Cato, dissuadet ut Appius, persuadet ut Tullius: instruit
ut Hieronimus, destruit ut Lactantius, astruit ut Augustinus, attollitur ut
Hilarious, summittitur ut Joannes, ut Basilius corripit, ut Gregorius
consolatur, ut Orosius affluit, ut Ruffinus stringitur, ut Eusebius narrat; ut
Eucheus sollicitat, ut Paulinus provocat, ut Ambrosius perseverat. Sidonius Ep
Mamme^t. pop. l. de

Even as your Heathen Authors had their several styles, so had the Sacred
Writers. Qua Cris^us brevitate pla^er, quo pondere Varro. Quo genio Plautus,
quo flumine Quintilianus. Qua pompa Tacitus nunquam sine laud loquendus. Apol.
Sidonius Carm 2. Auctuar. Bib. Patr. p. 123.


Answ. You may as well argue, that Aristotle was no wiser than a Minstrel,
because he could not fiddle so well, nor than a Painter, because he could not
limn so well; or than a harlot, because he could not dress himself so neatly.
Means are to be estimated according to their fitness for their ends. Christ
himself excelled all mankind, in all true perfections; and yet it became him
not to exercise all men's arts, to show that he excels them. He came not into
the world to teach men Architecture, Navigation, Medicine, Astronomy, Grammar,
Music, Logic, Rhetoric, etc. and therefore showed not his skill in these.
The world had sufficient helps and means for these in Nature. It was to save
men from sin and hell, Nihil fide nostra ini quius fingi posset, si in eruditos
tantum, and dicendi facultate and Logicis demonstrationibus excellentes
caderet: popularis autem multitudo, ut auro and argento aliisque omnibus rebus,
quae hic in pretio habentur, atque a plerisque avide expetuntur, sic hoc quoque
frustraretur, ac Deus id quod altum and excelsum est, and ad paucos pertingit,
gratum acceptumque haberet; contra, quod propinquius est, nec vulgi captum
superat, aspernaretur and rejiceret. Nazianz. Orat. 26. p. 458.

Sed ab indoctis hominibus and rudibus scripta sunt. Et idcirco non sunt facili
auditione credenda. Vide ne magis fortior haec causa fit: cur illa sint nullis
coinqu^nata mendaciis; mente simplici prodita, and ignara lenociniis ampliare
Trivialis and sordidus sermo est: Nunquam enim veritas sectata est fucum, nec
quod exploratum and certum est, circumduci se patitur orationis per ambitum
longiorem: Collectiones Enthymemeta, definitiones, omniaque illa ornamenta
quibus fides quaeritur assertionis, suspicantes adjuvant, non veritatis
lineamenta demonstrant -- Soloecismis, Barbarismis, inquis obsitae sunt tes
vestrae -- Puerilis sane and angusti pectoris reprehensio: Quam si admitteremus
ut vera sit -- Quid enim officit, O quaeso? aut quam praestat intellectui
tarditatem? utiumne quid leve, an hirsuta cum asperitate promatur? inflectatur
quod acui, an acuatur quod oportebat inflecti -- Arnob. l. 1. p. 10.

Dissoluti est pectoris, in rebus seriis quaerere voluptatem -- Atsi verum
spectes, nullus sermo natura est integer, vitiosus similiter nullus: Quaenam
enim est ratio naturalis, aut in mundi constitutionibus lex scripta, ut hic
paries dicatur, and haec sella? Id. ibid.


and bring them to pardon, holiness and heaven, that Christ was incarnate, and
that the Apostles were inspired, and the Scriptures written: and to be fitted
to these ends, is the excellency to be expected in them: and in this they
excel all persons and writings in the world. As God does not syllogize or know
by our imperfect way of ratiocination, but yet knows all things better than
syllogizers do; so Christ has a more high and excellent kind of Logic and
Oratory, and a more apt and spiritual and powerful style, than Aristotle,
Demosthenes, Cicero or Seneca. He showed not that skill in methodical healing
which Hippocrates and Galen showed: But he showed more and better skill, when
he could heal with a word, and raise the dead, and had the power of life and
death, so did he bring more convincing evidence than Aristotle, and persuaded
more powerfully than Demosthenes or Cicero. And though this kind of formal
learning was below him, and below the inspired messengers of his Gospel, yet
his inferior servants (an Aquinas, a Scotus, an Ockam, a Scaliger, a Ramus, a
Gassendus) do match or excel the old Philosophers, and abundance of Christians
equalize or excel a Demosthenes or Cicero, in the truest Oratory.

2. His mercy had a general design, for the salvation of all sorts and ranks of
men, and therefore was not to confine it self to a few trifling pedantick
Logicians and Orators, or those that had learned to speak in their new-made
words and phrases: but he must speak in the common Dialect of all those whom he
would instruct and save. As the Statutes of the land, or the Books of Physic,
which are most excellent, are written in a style which is fitted to the subject
matter, and to the Readers, and not in Syllogisms, or terms of Logic; so was
it more necessary that it should be with the doctrine of salvation. The poor
and unlearned were the greatest number of those that were to be converted and
saved by the Gospel, and still to use the holy Scriptures.

3. There is greater exactness of true Logical method in some parts of the
Scripture, (as e. g. in the Covenant of Faith, the Lord's Prayer, and the
Decalogue) than any is to be found in Aristotle or Cicero; though men that
understand them not do not observe it. The particular Books of Scripture were
written at several times, and on several occasions, and not as one methodical
system, (though the Spirit that indicted it, has made it indeed a methodical
system, agreeably to its design:) but if you saw the doctrines of all this
Bible uno intuitu, in a perfect scheme, as it is truly intended by the Spirit
of God; if you saw all begin the Divine Unity, and branch out it self into the
Trinity, and thence into the Trinity of Relations and Correlations, and thence
into the multiplied branches of Mercy and Precepts, and all these accepted and
improved in Duty and Gratitude by man, and returned up in Love to the blessed
Trinity and Unity again, and all this in perfect order, proportion and harmony;
you would see the most admirable perfect method that ever was set before you in
the world: The resemblance of it is in the circular motion of the humors and
spirits in man's body, which are delivered on from vessel to vessel, and
perfected in all their motions. I know there are many systems and schemes
attempted, which show not this: but that is because the wisdom of this method
is so exceeding great, that it is yet but imperfectly understood: for my own
part, I may say as those that have made some progress in Anatomy beyond their
Ancestors, that they have no thought that they have yet discovered all; but
rejoice in what they have discovered, which showed them the hopes and
possibility of more. So I am far from a perfect comprehension of this wonderful
method of Divinity; but I have seen that which truly assures me, that it
excels all the art of Philosophers and Orators, and that it is really a most
beautiful frame, and harmonious consort; and that more is within my prospect
than I am yet come to.

4. Moreover it is Christ who gave all men all the gifts they have: to
Logicians, Orators, Astronomers, Grammarians, Physicians, and Musicians, etc.
what ever gifts are suited to men's just ends and callings, he bestows on
them; and to his Apostles he gave those gifts which were most suitable to their
work: I do not undervalue the gifts of Nature or Art in any; I make it not,
with Aristotle, an argument for the contempt of Music, Jovem neque canere,
neque cytharam pulsare; but I may say, that as God has greater excellencies in
himself, so has he greater gifts to give; and such gifts as were fittest for
the confirmation of the truth of the Gospel, and first planting of the Churches
he gave to the Apostles: and such as were fit for the edifying of the Church he
gives to his Ministers ever since. And such as were fit for the improvement of
Nature, in lower things, he gave the Philosophers and Artists of the world.

Object. XVII. The Scripture has many contradictions in it, in points of
History, Chronology, and other things: Therefore it is not the word of God.

Answ. Nothing but ignorance makes men think so: understand once the true
meaning, and allow for the errors of Printers, Transcribers and Translators,
and there will no such thing be found. Young Students, in all Sciences, think
their books are full of contradictions; which they can easily reconcile, when
they come to understand them. Books that have been so often translated into so
many Languages, and the Originals and Translations so often transcribed, may
easily fall into some disagreement between the Original and Translations; and
the various Copies may have diverse inconsiderable verbal differences. But all
the world must needs confess, that in all these Books, there is no
contradiction in any point of Doctrine, much less in such as our salvation
rests on.

There are two opinions among Christians about the Books of the holy Scripture:
the one is, That the Scriptures are so entirely and perfectly the product of
the Spirit's Inspiration; that there is no word in them which is not infallibly
true. The other is, That the Spirit was promised and given to the Apostles, to
enable them to preach to the world the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and to
teach men to observe what ever Christ commanded; and truly to deliver the
History of his Life and Sufferings, and Resurrection, (which they have done
accordingly.) But not to make them perfect and indefectible in every word,
which they should speak or write, no not about Sacred things; but only in that
which they delivered to the Church, as necessary to salvation, and as the Rule
of Faith and Life: but every Chronological and Historical narrative, is not the
Rule of Faith or Life. I think that the first opinion is right, and that no one
error or contradiction in any matter, can be proved in the Scriptures: yet all
are agreed in this, that it is so of Divine Inspiration, as yet in the manner,
and method, and style, to partake of the various abilities of the Writers, and
consequently of their humane imperfections. And that it is a mere mistake,
which Infidels deceive themselves by, to think that the Writings cannot be of
Divine Inspiration, unless the Book, in order, and style, and all other
excellencies, be as perfect as God himself could make it: Though we should
grant that it is less Logical than Aristotle, and less Oratorical and
Grammatical and exact in words, than Demosthenes or Cicero, it would be no
disparagement to the certain truth of all that is in it. It does not follow
that David must be the ablest man for strength, nor that he must use the
weapons which in themselves are most excellent, if he be called of God to
overcome Goliath; but rather that it may be known that he is called of God, he
shall do it with less excellence of strength and weapons, than other men: and
so there may be some real weakness (not culpable) in the Writings of the
several Prophets and Apostles in point of style and method, which shall show
the more that they are sent of God to do great things by little humane
excellency of speech, (and yet that humane excellency be never the more to be
disliked, no more than a sword, because David used but a sling and stone.) If
Amos have one degree of parts, and Jeremiah another, and Isaiah another, etc.
God does not equal them all by Inspiration, but only cause every man to speak
his saving truth in their own language, and dialect, and style. As the body of
Adam was made of the common earth, though God breathed into him a rational
soul, (and so is the body of every Saint, even such as may partake of the
infirmities of parents) so Scripture has its style, and language, and methods
so from God, as we have our bodies; even so that there may be in them the
effects of humane imperfection; and it is not so extraordinarily of God as the
truth of the Doctrine is: All is so from God, as to be suitable to its proper
ends: but the body of Scripture is not so extraordinarily from him, as the soul
of it is; as if it were the most excellent and exact in every kind of ornament
and perfection. The Truth and Goodness is the soul of the Scripture, together
with the power manifested in it: and in these it does indeed excel. So that
variety of gifts in the Prophets and Apostles, may cause variety of style and
other accidental excellencies in the parts of the holy Scriptures, and yet all
these parts be animated with one soul of Power, Truth and Goodness.

But those men who think that these humane imperfections of the Writers do
extend further, and may appear in some by-passages of Chronologies or History,
which are no proper part of the Rule of Faith and Life, do not hereby destroy
the Christian cause. For God might enable his Apostles to an infallible
recording and preaching of the Gospel, even all things necessary to salvation,
though he had not made them infallible in every by-passage and circumstance, no
more than they were indefectible in life.

As for them that say, I can believe no man in any thing, who is mistaken in
one thing, (at least as infallible) they speak against common sense and reason:
for a man may be infallibly acquainted with some things, who is not so in all:
An Historian may infallibly acquaint me, that there was a Fight at Lepanto, at
Edgehill, at York, at Naseby; or an Insurrection and Massacre in Ireland and
Paris, etc. who cannot tell me all the circumstances of it: or he may
infallibly tell men of the late Fire which consumed London, though he cannot
tell just whose houses were burnt, and may mistake about the Causers of it, and
the circumstances. A Lawyer may infallibly tell you whether your cause be good
or bad, in the main, who yet may misreport some circumstances in the opening of
it. A Physician, in his Historical observations, may partly err as an
Historian in some circumstances, and yet be infallible as a Physician in some
plain cases which belong directly to his Art. I do not believe that any man can
prove the least error in the holy Scripture in any point, according to its true
intent and meaning: but if he could, the Gospel, as a Rule of Faith and Life,
in things necessary to salvation, might be nevertheless proved infallible by
all the evidence before given.

Object. XVIII. The Physics in Gen: 1. are contrary to all true Philosophy,
and suited to the vulgars erroneous conceits.

Answ. No such matter: there is sounder doctrine of Physics in Genesis 1. than
any Philosopher has who contradicts it. And as long as they are altogether
by the ears among themselves, and so little agreed in most of their Philosophy,
but leave it to this day, either to the Scepticks to deride as utterly
uncertain, or to any Novelist to form anew, Lege Basilii Hexamer. and Greg.
Nysseni addit.
into what principles and hypothesis he please; the judgment of Philosophers is
of no great value, to prejudice any against the Scriptures. The sum of Genesis 1.
is but this, [That God having first made the Basil says, that In principio is
In the beginning of time; but that the intellectual world is here presupposed:
Erat antiquissima creaturae ordinatio, illis quae extra mundum sunt, apta
virtutibus, orta sine tempore, sempiterna sibique propria: in qua conditor
omnium Deus opera certa constituit, id est, lumen intellectibile, conveniens
beatitudini amantium Dominum: Rationabile, invisibilesque dico naturas, and
omnium intellectibilium decorationem, quae capacitatem nostrae mentis excedunt,
quorum nec vocabula reperire possibile est. Haec substantiam invisibilis mundi
replevisse sciendum est, etc. Basil. Hex. interp. Eustath. l. 1.

Caesarius Dial. 1. Qu. 50 and Qu. 51. says, That Moses past by the Nations of
Angels, and began with the creation of the visible world, and that the first
day he created Matter, and afterward other things of that, etc. And that of the
Light first made, God made the Sun. But he ignorantly denies its circular
motion.


Intellectual Superior part of the world, and the matter of the Elementary
world in an unformed Mass or Chaos, did the first day distinguish or form the
active Element of Fire, and caused it to give Light: The second day he
separated the attenuated or rarifi'd part of the passive Element, which we call
the Air; expanding it from the earth upwards, to separate the clouds from the
lower waters, and to be the medium of Light. (And whether in different degrees
of purity, it fill not all the space between all the Globes both fixed and
planetary, is a question which we may more probably affirm than deny; unless
there be any waters also upwards by condensation, which we cannot disprove:)
The third day he separated the rest of the passive Element, Earth and Sea, into
their proper place and bounds: and also made individual Plants, in their
specific forms and virtue of generation, or multiplication of individuals: The
fourth day he made the Sun, Moon and Stars, (either then forming them, or then
making them Luminaries to the earth, and appointing them their relative office;
but has not told us of their other uses, which are nothing to us.) The fifth
day he made inferior Sensitives, Fishes and Birds, the inhabitants of Water
and Air, with the power of generation or multiplication of individuals. The
sixth day he made first the terrestrial Animals, and then Man, with the power
also of generation or multiplication. And the seventh day, having taken
complacency in all the works of this glorious perfected frame of Nature, he
appointed to be observed by mankind as a day of rest from worldly labors, for
the worshipping of Him their Omnipotent Creator, in commemoration of this work.]

This is the sum and sense of the Physics of Genesis 1. And here is no error in
all this, what ever prejudice Philosophers may imagine.

Object. XIX. It is a suspicious sign, that Believing is commanded us instead
of knowing, and that we must take all upon trust without any proof.

Answ. This is a mere slander. Know as much as you are able to know: Christ
came not to hinder, but to help your knowledge: Faith is but a mode, or act of
knowing: How will you know matters of History which are past, and matters of
the unseen world, but by believing? If you could have an Angel come from heaven
to tell you what is there, would you quarrel because you are put upon believing
him? if you can know it without believing and testimony, do: God bids you
believe nothing but what he gives you sufficient reason to believe: Evidence
of credibility in Divine faith, is evidence of certainty: Believers in
Scripture usually say, [We know that thou art the Christ, etc.] You are not
forbidden, but encouraged to try the spirits, and not to believe every spirit
nor pretended prophet: Let this Treatise testify, whether you have not Reason
and evidence for Belief: it is Mahomet's doctrine and not Christ's, which
forbids examination.

Object. XX. It imposes upon us an incredible thing, when it persuades us,
that our undoing, and calamity, and death, are the way to our felicity and our
gain; and that sufferings work together for our good: At least these are hard
terms, which we cannot undergo, nor think it wisdom to lose a certainty for
uncertain hopes.

Answ. Suppose but the truth of the Gospel proved, yea or but the Immortality
and Retribution for Souls hereafter, (which the light of Nature proves) and
then we may well say, that this Objection savoureth more of the Beast than of
the Man: A Heathen can answer it though not so well as a Christian: Seneca and
Plutarch, Antonine, and Epictetus have done it in part. And what a dotage is it
to call things present, Certainties, when they are certainly ready to pass
away, and you are uncertain to possess them another hour? who can be ignorant
what haste Time makes, Sed and no^ in h^jusmodi casibus non auxiliatur Deus.
Prompta and manifesta causa est. Nihil enim est nobis promissum ad hanc vitam*
nec in carunculae hujus folliculo constitutis, opis al^quid sponsum est,
auxiliique decretum: Quinimo edocti sumus minas omnes quaecunque sunt parvi
ducere -- Atque ista quam dicitis persecut onis asperitas, liberatio nostra
est, non persecutio: nec poenam vexat o inferet, sed ad lucem libertat^s
educet: Arnobius adv. Gent. l. 2. in fine.
and how like the Life of man is to a dream? What sweetness is now left of all
the pleasant cups and morsels, and all the merry hours you have had, and all
the proud or lustful fancies, which have tickled your deluded fleshly minds?
Are they not more terrible than comfortable to your most retired sober
thoughts? and what an inconsiderable moment is it, till it will be so with all
the rest? All that the World can possibly afford you, will not make Death the
more welcome, nor less terrible to you; nor abate a jot of the pains of Hell. It
is as comfortable to die poor as rich, and a life of pain and weakness and
persecution, will end as pleasantly as a life of Pomp and wealth, and
pleasures. If it be no unreasonable motion of a Physician to tell you of
blood-letting, vomiting, parging and strict diet, to save your lives, nor any
hard dealing in your Parents, to set you many years to School, to endure both
the labor of learning and the Rod; and after that to set you to a seven years
Apprentice-ship, and all this for things of a transitory nature; since God
deserves not to be accused as too severe, if he train you up for Heaven, more
strictly and in a more suffering way, than the flesh desires. Either you
believe that there is a future Life of Retribution, or you do not: If not, the
foregoing Evidences must first convince you, before you will be fit to debate
the case, whether sufferings are for your hurt or benefit: But if you do
believe a life to come, you must needs believe that its concernments weigh down
all the matters of fleshly interest in this World, as much as a mountain would
weigh down a feather: And then do but further bethink your selves impartially,
whether a life of Prosperity or of Adversity be the liker to tempt you into the
Love of this World, and to wean away your thoughts and desires from the
heavenly felicity? Judge but rightly first of your own interest, and you will
be fitter to judge of the Doctrine of Christ.

Obj. XXI. Christ seems to calculate all his Precepts to the poorer sort of
peoples state, as if he had never hoped that Kings and Nobles would be
Christians: If men think as hardly of the Rich as he does, and take them to be
so bad, and their salvation so difficult, how will they ever honor their Kings
and Governors? And if all men must suffer such as abuse and injure them, and
must turn the other cheek to him that strikes them, and give him their Coat
who takes away their Cloak, what use will there be for Magistrates and
Judicatures?

Ans. 1. Christ fitteth his Precepts to the benefit of all men: But in so doing
he must needs tell them of the danger of over-loving this World, as being the
most mortal sin which he came to cure: And he must needs tell them what a
dangerous temptation a flesh-pleasing prosperous state is to the most, to
entice them to this pernicious sin. Had he silenced such necessary truths as
these, he could not have been their Savior: For how should he save them from
sin, if he conceal the evil and the danger of it? If the corruption of man's
Nature be so great, that Riches and Honors, and Pleasures are ordinarily made
the occasions of men's perdition, must Christ be Christ and never tell them of
it? And is he to be blamed for telling them the truth? or they rather who
create these difficulties and dangers to themselves? Christ teaches men to
honor a Sacred Office, such as Magistracy is, without honoring Vice, or
betraying sinners by concealing their temptations. And to holy faithful Rulers
he teaches us, to give a double honor. They that will prove, that most of the
great and wealthy shall be saved, must prove first that most of them are godly,
and mortified, heavenly persons: And the fit proof of that must be by showing
us the men that are so.

2. The Laws of Christ require every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers,
and not resist; and this not only for fear of their wrath, but for Conscience
sake; and to pay honor and custom to all whom it is due to. And what more can
be desired for the support of Government.

3. Yea, nothing more tends to the comfort and quietness of Governors, than
the obedience of those Precepts of patience and peace, which the Objection
quarrelleth with. If Subjects would love each other as themselves, and forgive
injuries, and love their enemies, what could be more joyful to a faithful
Governor? And to the Question, What use would there be then of Judicatures? I
answer, They would be useful to good men for their protection against the
injuries of the bad; where we are but Defendants; And also in Cases where it is
not want of Love, but of Knowledge, which causes the Controversy, and when no
fit arbitration can decide it: And they will be useful among contentious
persons: For all men are not true Believers: The most will be (ordinarily) the
worst: As we will not be Fornicators, Thieves, Perjured, etc. lest you should
say, To what purpose is the Law against such offenders? so we will not be
revengefull and contentious, lest you should say, To what end are Judicatures?
The Law is to prevent offenses by threatened penalties: And that is the happyest
Commonwealth, where the Law does most without the Judge, and where Judicatures
have least employment: For there is none to be expected on Earth so happy,
where mere LOVE (of Virtue and of one another) will prevent the use both of
Penal Laws and Judicatures.

4. And it is but selfishness, and contentiousness, and private revenge which
Christ forbids, and not the necessary defense or vindication of any Talent
which God has committed to our trust, so it be with the preservation of
brotherly Love and Peace.

5. And that Christ foreknew what Princes and States would be converted to the
Faith, is manifest, 1. In all his Prophets, who have foretold it (that Kings
shall be our Nursing Fathers, etc.) 2. In that Christ prophesied himself, that
when he was lifted up, he would draw all men to him. 3. By the Prophecies of
John, who says, that the Kingdoms of the World should become the Kingdoms of
the Lord, and of his Christ.

Obj. Sed and ipse pollicetur ^uae non probat. R^sp. Ita est: Nulla enim
futurorum existere potest comprobatio. Arnob. lib. 2.
Obj. XXII. But it is the obscurity of all those Phophecies which is one of the
difficulties of our Faith, and that they are never like to be fulfilled: Almost
all your Expositors differ about the sense of John's Revelations: And the
Calling of the Jews, and bringing in all the Gentiles to their subjection, seem
to be plainly prophesyed of, which are never like to come to pass.

Answ. 1. Prophecies are seldom a Rule of Life, but an Encouragement to hope,
and a Confirmation to Faith when they are fulfilled: And therefore if the
particularities be dark, and understood by few, so the general scope be
understood, it should be no matter of offense or wonder. It is doctrine and
precept, and promises of salvation, which are the daily food of Faith.

2. If no man can hitherto truly say, that any one Promise or Prophecy has
failed, why should we think that hereafter they will fail? what though the
things seem improbable to us? They are never the unliker to be accomplished by
God: The Conversion of the Gentiles, of the Roman Empire, and so many other
Nations of the World, was once as improbable as the Calling of the Jews is: and
yet it was done.

3. And many of those Prophecies are hereby fulfilled, it being not a worldly
Kingdom, as the carnal Jews imagined, which the Prophets foretold of the
Messiah, but the spiritual Kingdom of a Savior: When the power and glory of
the Roman Empire in its greatest height, did submit and resign it self to
Christ, with many other Kingdoms of the world, there was more of those
Prophecies then fulfilled, than selfishness will suffer the Jews to understand.
And the rest shall all be fulfilled in their season. But as in all Sciences, it
is but a few of the extraordinarily wise, who reach the most subtle and
difficult points, so it will be but a very few Christians who will understand
the most difficult prophecies, till the accomplishment interpret them.

Obj. XXIII. But the difficulties are as great in the Doctrines as in the
Prophecies: Who is able to reconcile Gods Decrees; foreknowledge and
efficacious special Grace, with man's Free Will, and the righteousness of Gods
Judgment, and the reasonableness of his Precepts, Promises and Threats? How
Gods Decrees are all fulfilled, and in him we live, and move, and be, Read
Cicero de Fato, de Divinatione, etc. and all those Philosophers de Fato, whose
Opinions Grotius has collected, and you will see that they had the same doubts
as we, but were less able to resolve them.
and are not sufficient for a good thought of our selves, but to believe, to
will, and to do, is given us, and he will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens, and it is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy: And yet that he would not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live, and that he would have
all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and lays all the blame
of their misery on themselves.

Ans. First, consider these things apart and in themselves, Intellectum est
optimum cognoscere voluntatem Dei: O^nium superior efficitur homo, qui ob^d
erit veritati. Pachomius in mo^i^. per Voss. Ed^t.
and then comparatively as they respect each other. 1. Is it an incredible
thing, that all Being should be from the First Being? and all Goodness from the
Infinite, Eternal Good? and that nothing should be unknown to the infinite
omniscient Wisdom? and that nothing can overcome the Power of the Omnipotent?
Leg. librum excel. D. Strangii Scoti de hisce controversiis. Plurima etiam
consideratu dignissima sunt in Ro^. B^ o^ii Metaphysic.
or that he is certainly able to procure the accomplishment of all his own
Will? and that none shall disappoint his Purposes, nor make him fall short of
any of his Councils or Decrees? Go no further now, and do not by false or
uncertain Doctrine make difficulties to your selves, which God never made, and
then tell me whether any of this be doubtful?

2. On the other side, is it incredible, that Man is a rational free Agent, and
that he is a Creature governable by Laws, and that God is his Ruler, Lawgiver,
and Judge? and that his Laws must command and prohibit, and the sanction
contain rewards and punishments? and that men should be judged righteously
according to their works? or that the Messengers of Christ should entreat and
persuade men to obey? and that they should be moved as men by motives of good
or evil to themselves? Is there any thing in this that is incredible or
uncertain? I think there is not.

And these difficulties will concern you nevertheless, whether you are
Christians or not? They are harder points to Philosophers than to us: and they
have been their controversies before Christ came into the World: They are
points that belong to the natural part of Theology, and not that which rests
only on supernatural Revelation; and therefore this is nothing against Christ.

2. But yet I will answer your question, Who can reconcile these things? 1.
They can do much to the reconciling of them, who can distinguish a mere
Volition or Purpose or Decree, from an efficacious pre-determining influx:
Dorothaeus Doct. 6. to prove the unsearchableness of Gods Counsels and
differencing grace, does instance in two young Maids in natural temper much
like, both brought as Captives in a Ship to be sold. A holy woman bought one of
them, and instructed her in holiness. A Harlot bought the other, and taught her
the trade of wickedness: And who, says he, can give the reason of this event?
2. And can distinguish between those effects which need a positive cause and
purpose or decree, and those nullities which having no cause but defective, do
need no positive purpose or decree. 3. And can distinguish between the need we
have of Medicinal Grace for holy actions, and the need we have of common help
for every action natural and free. 4. And can distinguish between an absolute
Volition, and a limited Volition in tantum and ad hoc, and no further. 5. They
that can distinguish between man's Natural liberty of self-determination, and
his Civil liberty from restraint of Law, and his moral liberty from vicious
habits: 6. They that can well difference man's Natural power or faculties, from
his moral power of good and holy disposition: 7. They that know what a free
Power is, and how far the causer of that Power is or is not the cause of the
act or its omission. 8. They that can distinguish between those acts which God
does as our Owner or as our free Benefactor, and those which he does as Rector:
9. And between those which he does as Rector by his Legislative will,
antecedent to men's keeping or breaking of his Laws, and by his Judicial and
executive will, as consequent to these acts of man. 10. He that can distinguish
between Gods method in giving both the first Call of the Gospel, and the first
internal Grace to receive it, and of his giving the Grace of further
sanctification, justification, and glory: 11. And between the manner of his
procuring our first faith, and the procuring our following sanctification. 12.
And he that knows how easy it is with God to attain what he wills, without
destroying the Liberty of our wills: (As a Miller can make the stream of water
turn his Mill and grind his Corn, without altering any thing in the
inclination of the water.) 13. And withal how incomprehensible the nature and
manner of Gods operation is to Man; and how transcendently it is above all
Physical agency by corporeal contact or motion: I say, he that understands
and can apply these distinctions, can reconcile the Decrees and concourse of
God, with his Government and man's Free Will, as far as is necessary to the
quieting of our understandings.

Obj. XXIV. But the Christian Faith does seem to be but Humane and not Divine,
in that it is to be resolved into the Credit of Men: Even of those men who tell
us, that they saw Christ's miracles, and saw him risen and ascend; and of those
who saw the miracles of the Apostles; and of those who tell us, that the first
Churches witness that they saw such things. The certainty cannot exceed the
weakest of the Premises: And this is the argument: [The Doctrine which was
attested by Miracles is of God: But the Christian Doctrine was attested by
Miracles: Proved: The spectators averred it to others, who have transmitted the
Testimony down to us.] So that you are no surer of the Doctrine than of the
Miracles, and no surer of the Miracles than of the Humane Testimony which has
delivered it to you.

Ans. If you will be at the labor to read over what I have written before, you
shall find a threefold testimony to Christ, besides this of Miracles: And you
shall find the Apostles testimony of Christ's Miracles and Resurrection
attested by more than a humane testimony: And you shall find the Miracles of
the Apostles also to have a fuller attestation: Even 1. besides the most
credible humane testimony, 2. a natural impossibility of deceit and falsehood,
3. and a further attestation of God supernaturally: And you shall find that
the Gospel has its certain evidence, in the sanctifying effect by the
cooperation of the holy Spirit of Christ unto this day. Peruse it impartially,
and you will find all this in what is said.

What would men rather desire to attest the veracity of a Messenger from
Heaven, than Miracles: Evident, uncontrolled; multiplied miracles? And must
this messenger live in every age, and go into every Land, to do these Miracles
in the presence of every living Soul? If not, how would those that live in
another Land or Age, be brought to the knowledge of them, but by the testimony
of those that saw them? And how would you have such testimonies better
confirmed, than by multiplied miracles, delivered in a way which cannot
possibly deceive? and fully and perpetually attested by the Spirit of effectual
sanctification on Believers? It is an unreasonable arrogance to tell our Maker,
that we will not believe any miracles which he does, by whomsoever or howsoever
witnessed, unless we see them our selves with our own eyes; and so they be made
as common as the shining of the Sun; (and then we should contemn them as of no
validity.)

So much shall here suffice against the Objections from the Intrinsecal
difficulties in the Christian Faith. Many more are answered in my Treatise
against Infidelity published heretofore.

CHAP. XI. The Objections from things Extrinsecal resolved.
Obj. I. ALL men are Liars: and History may convey down abundance of Untruths:
Who lives with his eyes open among men, that may not perceive him partially
men write? and how falsely through partiality? and with what brazen-faced
impudency the most palpable falsehoods in public matters of fact, are most
confidently averred? and that in the Land, the City, the Age, the Year, of the
transaction? who then can lay his salvation upon the truth of the history of
acts and miracles done, one thousand six hundred years ago.

Answ. The Father of Lies no doubt can divulge them, as well by Pen or Press as
by the Tongue: And it is not an unnecessary Caution to Readers and Hearers too,
to take heed what they believe; especially, 1. when one Sect or party speaks
against another; 2. or when carnal Interest requires men to say what they do;
3. or when falling out provokes them to asperse any others; 4. or when the
stream of the popular vogue, or countenance of men in power has a finger in
it; 5. or when it is as probably contradicted by as credible men; 6. or when
the higher Powers deter all from contradicting it, and dissenters have not
liberty of speech.

But none of these, nor any such, are in our present case: There are Liars in
the world; but shall none therefore be believed? There is history which is
false; but is none therefore true? Is there not a certainty in that history
which tells us of the Norman Conquest of this Land? and of the series of
Kings which have been since then; and of the Statutes which they and their
Parliaments have made? yea, of a battle and other transaction, before the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ? Does the falsehood of Historians make it uncertain
whether ever there was a Pope at Rome, or a King in France, or an Inquisition
in Spain, etc?

But I have proved, that it is more than the bare credit of any Tradition or
Historians in the world, which assure us of the truth both of fact and
doctrine, in the Christian Faith.

Obj. II. Are not the Legends written with as great confidence as the
Scriptures? and greater multitudes of Miracles there mentioned, and believed by
the Subjects of the Pope? And yet they are denied and derided by the
Protestants?

Ans. Credible History reports many miracles done in the first ages of the
Christian Church, and some since in several ages and places: And the truth of
these was the Cloak for the Legends multiplied falsities: which were not
written by men that wrought Miracles themselves to attest them; nor that proved
the verity of their writings as the Apostles did: Nor were they ever generally
received by the Christian Churches, but were written a while ago, by a few
ignorant superstitious Friars, in an age of darkness, and in the manner,
exposing the stories to laughter and contempt, and are lamented by many of the
most learned Papists themselves, and not believed by the multitude of the
people. And shall no Chronicles, no Records, no certain History be believed, as
long as there are any foolish superstitious Liars left upon the Earth? Then
Liars will effectually serve the Devil indeed, if they can procure men to
believe neither humane testimony, nor Divine.

Obj. III. Many Friars and Fanatics, Quakers and other Enthusiasts have by the
power of Conceit, been transported into such streins of speech, as in the
Apostles were accounted fruits of the Spirit: Yea, to a pretense of Prophecy
and Miracles: And how know we that it was not so with the Apostles?

How like are the stories of Eunapius, of ^amblichus, Aedesius, Sosipatra the
wife of Eustathius, and others, their raptures, prophesies, visions, miracles,
to those of the Roman Legends, and the Quakers?
Answ. 1. It is the Devils way of opposing Christ, to do it by apish imitation:
So would the Egyptian Magicians have discredited the miracles of Moses. And
Christianity consists not of any words which another may not speak, or any
actions of devotion, or gesture, or formality, which no man else can do. There
are no words which seem to signify a rapture (which are not miraculous) but
they may be counterfeited: But yet as a Statuary or Painter may be known from a
Creator, and a Statue from a Man, so may the Devils imitations and fictions
from the evidences of Christianity which he would imitate. Look through the
four parts of the testimony of the Spirit, and you may see this to be so. 1.
What antecedent Prophesies have foretold us of these men's actions? 2. What
frame of Holy doctrine do they deliver bearing the Image of God, besides so
much of Christ's own doctrine as they acknowledge? 3 And what Miracles are with
any probability pretended to be done by any of them (unless you mean any
Preacher of Christianity in confirmation of that common Christian Faith.) There
are no Quakers or other Fanatics among us, that I can hear of, who pretend to
miracles: In their first arising, two or three of them were raised to a
confidence that they had the Apostolical gift of the Spirit, and should speak
with unlearnt Languages, and heal the sick, and raise the dead; but they failed
in the performance, and made themselves the common scorn, by the vanity of
their attempts: Not one of them that ever spoke a word of any Language but what
he had learnt; nor one that cured any disease by Miracle: One of them at
Worcester half famished, and then (as is most probable) drowned himself; and a
woman that was their Leader undertook to raise him from the dead; But she spoke
to him as the Priests of Baal to their God, that could not hear; and made but
matter of laughter and pity to those that heard of it. There has not been in
England in our days, that ever I could hear of, either by Jesuit, Friar,
Quaker, or other Fanatic, so much as a handsome Cheat, resembling a Miracle,
which the People might not easily see, to be a transparent foolery. But many
wonders I have known done at the earnest Prayers of humble Christians. So that
he who shall compare the Friars and Fanatics with the Apostles and other
Disciples of Christ, (whose Miracles were such as afore-described) will see
that the Devils apish design, though it may cheat forsaken Souls into
infidelity, is such as may confirm the faith of sober men. 4. And what Spirit
of sanctification does accompany any of their peculiar doctrines? If any of
them do any good in the World, it is only by the doctrine of Christ: But for
their own doctrines, what do they but cheat men and draw the simple into sin? A
Friar by his own doctrine may draw men to some foppery or ridiculous ceremony,
or subjection to that Clergy, whose holy diligence consists in striving who
shall be greatest, and Lord it over the inheritance of Christ, and rule them by
constraint, and not willingly. A Quaker by his own doctrine may teach men to
cast away their bands, and cuffs, and points, and hat-bands, and to say [Thou]
instead of [You] and to put off their hats to no men, and to be the public and
private revilers of the holiest and ablest Preachers of the Gospel, and the
best of the people, and with truculent countenances to rail at God's servants
in a horrid abuse of Scripture-terms. If this image and work of the Devil were
indeed the image and work of God, it were some testimony of the verity of their
doctrine. And yet even these Sects do but like a flash of lightning, appear for
a moment, and are suddenly extinct, and some other sect or fraternity
succeeds them. The Quakers already recant most of those rigidities, on which
at first they laid out their chiefest zeal. If a flash of such lightning, or a
squib, or glowworm, be argument sufficient to prove that there is no other
Sun, then Friars and Fanatics, as often as they are mad, may warrant you to
believe that all men are so too, even Christ and his Apostles.

Object. IV. But the power of cheaters, and credulity of the vulgar is almost
incredible. The great number of Papists who believe their holy cheats, and the
greater number of Mahometans, who believe in a most sottish ignorant deceiver,
do tell us what a folly it is to believe for company.

Answ. This is sufficiently answered already: no doubt but cheaters may do much
with the ignorant and credulous multitude: but does it follow thence, that
there is nothing certain in the world? None of these were ever so successful in
deceiving, as to make men of sound understanding and senses believe, that they
saw the lame, and blind, and deaf, and sick, and lunatic, healed, and the dead
raised, and that they themselves performed the like, and that they saw and were
instructed by one risen from the dead, when there was no such thing; or that
abundance of men did speak in many unlearned tongues, and heal the lame, and
blind, and sick, and raise the dead; and this for many years together, in many
Countries, before many Congregations; and that they procured the same spirit to
those that believed them, to do the like; and that by this means they planted
Churches of such believers through the world: Who is it that has been such a
successful deceiver?

As for the Mahometans, they do but believe by education and humane authority,
that Mahomet was a great Prophet, whose sword, and not his miracles, has made
his sect so strong, that they dare not speak against it. Those few miracles
which he pretends to, are ridiculous unproved dreams. And if there be found a
people in the world, that by a Tyrants power may be so barbarously educated as
to believe any foppery, how foolish and vain soever be the report, it does not
follow, that full and unquestionable evidence is not to be believed.

Object. But what can be imagined by the wit of man more certain than sense?
when it is sound senses, and all the senses, and all men's senses, upon an
object suitable and near, with convenient media, Sensus nostros, non parens,
non nutrix, non magister, non poeta, non scena depravat; non multitudinis
consensu^ abducit a vero: Animis omnes tenduntur infid^ae, vel ab ii^ quos modo
enumeravi vel ab ea quae penitus in omni sensu implicata insidet imitatrix boni
voluptas, malorum autem matter omnium. Cic. de leg. 1. p. 226.
etc. And yet in the point of Transubstantiation, it is not a few fools, but
Princes, Popes, Prelates, Pastors, Doctors, and the most profound and subtle
Schoolmen, with whole Kingdoms of People of all sorts, who believe that all
these senses are deceived, both other men's and their own. What therefore may
not be believed in the world?

Answ. And yet a nihil scitur vel certum est, is an inhumane foolish
consequence of all this; nor has it any force against the certainty of the
Scripture Miracles. For, 1. All this is not a believing that positively they
see, and feel, and taste, and hear, that which indeed they do not: but it is a
believing that they do not see, and hear, and feel, and taste, that which
indeed they do: they are made believe that there is no Bread and Wine, when
indeed there is. But this is no delusion of the senses, but of the
understanding, denying credit to the sense: If you had proved that all these
Princes, Lords, Prelates and People, had verily thought that they had seen, and
tasted, and felt Bread and Wine, when it was not so, then you might have
carried the cause of unbelief; but upon no other terms (which is to be
remarked) than by proving that nothing in all the world is certain or credible.
For all the certainty of the Intellect is so far founded in the certainty of
sense, and resolved into it, in this life, that it cannot possibly go beyond
it. If you suppose not all men's sound consenting senses to have as much
infallibility, as man is capable of in this life, for the ordinary conduct of
his judgment, you must grant that there is no further infallibility to be had
by any natural way. For he that is not certain of the infallibility of such
consenting senses, is not certain that ever there was a Bible, a Pope, a
Priest, a Man, a Council, a Church, a World, or any thing.

2. And for my part I do not believe, that all these that you mention do really
believe, that their senses are deceived: (though if they did, its nothing to
our case.) Most of them are frightened for carnal preservation into a silencing
of their belief: others know not what Transubstantiation means. Many are
cheated by the Priests changing the question, and when they are about to
consider, Whether all our senses be certain that this is Bread and Wine? they
are made believe that the question is, Whether our senses are certain of the
Negative, that here is not the real Body and Blood of Christ. And they are
taught to believe, that sense is not deceived about the Accidents, which they
call the Species, Of the Canon of the Scripture, read Dr. Reynolds, de. lib.
Apocr. and Bishop Cousin, his full Collections on that subject. Vide etiam Carm.
Jambic. Amphilochii in Auct. Bibl. Pat. To. 1. page 624. Many Papists confess,
that the H. Scriptures contain all things necessary to the salvation of all.
but about the Substance only; when most of the simple people by the species do
understand the Bread and Wine it self, which they think is to the invisible
body of Christ, like as our bodies, or the body of a Plant, is to the soul. So
that although this instance be one of the greatest in the world, of infatuation
by humane authority and words, it is nothing against the Christian verity.

Object. V. You are not yet agreed among your selves what Christianity is, as
to the matter of Rule: the Papists say, it is all the Decrees de fide (at
least) in all General Councils, together with the Scriptures Canonical and
Apocriphal: The Protestants take up with the Canonical Scriptures alone,
Quemadmodum ^enim siquis vellet sapientiam hujus seculi exercere, non aliter
hoc consequi poterit, nisi dogmata Philosophorum legate; sic quicunque volumus
p^etatem in Deum exercere, non ^li^nde discemus quam ex Scripturis Divin^s. S.
H^ppel^t. Homil. A^ctuat. Bibl. Pat. To. 1. p. 622.
and have not near so much in their Faith or Religion, as the Papists have.

Answ. What it is to be a Christian, all the world may easily perceive, in that
solemn Sacrament, Covenant or Vow, in which they are solemnly entered into the
Church and profession of Christianity, and made Christians. And the ancient
Creed does tell the world, what has always been the faith which was professed.
And those sacred Scriptures which the Churches did receive, does tell the world
what they took for the entire comprehension of their Religion. But if any Sects
have been since tempted to any additions, enlargements, or corruptions, its
nothing to the disparagement of Christ, who never promised, that no man should
ever abuse his Word, and that he would keep all the world from adding or
corrupting it. Receive but so much as the doctrine of Christ, which has
certain proof that it was indeed his, delivered by himself, or his inspired
Apostles, and we desire no more.

Object. VI. But you are not agreed of the reasons and resolution of your
faith: one resolves it into the authority of the Church, and others into a
private spirit, and each one seems sufficiently to prove the groundlesness of
the others faith.

Answ. Dark minded men do suffer themselves to be fooled with a noise of words
not-understood. Do you know what is meant by the resolution and grounds of
faith? Faith is the believing of a conclusion, which has two premises to infer
and prove it: and there must be more argumentation for the proof of such
premises, and faith in its several respects and dependances, may be said to be
resolved into more things than one, even into every one of these. This general
and ambiguous word [Resolution] is used oft'ner to puzzle than resolve. And the
grounds and reasons of faith are more than one, and what they are I have fully
opened to you in this Treatise. A great many of dreaming wranglers contend
about the Logical names of the Objectum quod, and quo, and ad quod; the
objectum formale, and materiale, per se, and per accidens, primarium and
secundarium; ratio formalis quae, qua and sub qua; objectum univocationis,
communitatis, perfectionis, originis, virtutis, adaequationis, etc. the motiva
fidei, resolutio, and many such words; which are not wholly useless, but are
commonly used but to make a noise to carry men from the sense, and to make men
believe that the controversy is de re, which is merely de nomine. Every true
Christian has some solid reason for his faith, but every one is not learned
and accurate enough to see the true order of its causes and evidences, and to
analize it thoroughly as he ought. And you will take it for no disproof of
Euclid or Aristotle, that all that read them, do not sufficiently understand
all their Demonstrations, but disagree in many things among themselves.

Object. VII. Thus Julian in his Orations, and ^unapius in Aedesio, page (mihi)
598, etc.
You make it a ridiculous Idolatry to worship the Sun, and Jupiter, and Venus,
and other Planets and Stars, which in all probability are animate, and have
souls as much nobler than ours as their bodies are, (for it is like God's works
are done in proportion and harmony:) and so they seem to be to us as
subordinate Deities: And yet at the same time you will worship your Virgin
Mary, and the very image of Christ, yea, the Image of the Cross which he was
hanged on; and the salita capita, and rotten bones of your Martyrs, to the
dishonor of Princes, who put them to death as malefactors: Is not the Sun more
worthy of honor than these?

Answ. 1. We ever granted to an Eunapius, Julian, Porphyry or Celsus, that the
Sun, and all the Stars and Planets, are to be honored according to their
proper excellency and use: that is, to be esteemed as the most glorious of all
the visible works of God; which show to us his Omnipotency, Wisdom and
Goodness, and are used as his instruments to convey to us his chief corporal
mercies, and on whom, under God, our bodies are dependant, being incomparably
less excellent than theirs. But whether they are animated or no, is to us
utterly uncertain: and if we were sure they were, yet we are sure that they are
the products of the Will of the Eternal Being: And he that made both them and
us, is the Governor of them and us: and therefore as long as he has no way
taught us to call them Gods, nor to pray to them, nor offer them any sacrifice,
as being uncertain whether they understand what we do or say; nor has any way
revealed that this is his will, nay, and has expressly forbidden us to do so;
Reason forbids us to do any more, than honorably to esteem and praise them
as they are, and use them to the ends which our Creator has appointed.

2. And for the Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary, we do no otherwise by them: we
honor them by estimation, love and praise, agreeable to all the worth which
God has bestowed on them: (and the holiness of humane souls, which is his
image, is more intelligible to us, and so more distinctly amiable, than the
form of the Sun and Planets is.) But we pray not to them, because we know not
whether they hear us, or know when we are sincere or hypocritical; nor have we
any such precepts from our common Lord. It is but some ignorant mistaken
Christians who pray to the dead, or give more than due veneration to their
memories. And it is Christ, and not every ignorant Christian, or mistaken Sect,
that I am justifying against the cavils of unbelief.

Object. VIII. You make the holiness of Christian doctrine a great part of the
evidence of your faith; As you cannot judge of the faculties of man by an
instant, so neither of the nature of Christianity by instant Christians. A
primo mirabil ter occulta est natura, nec perspici nec cognosci potest;
progiedientibus autem aetatibus sensim, tardeve potius nosmetipsos cognoscimus:
Itaque illa prima commendatio quae a natura nostri facta est, nobis obscura and
ince^ta est; primusque apperitus ille animi, tantum agit ut salvi atque integri
esse possimus: cum autem despicere caeperimus and sentire quid simu^, and quid
ab animantibus coeteris differamus, tum ea sequi incipimus ad quae nati sumus.
cic. de fin. l. 5. p. 192. So is it here.
and yet Papists and Protestants maintain each others doctrine to be wicked:
and such, especially against Kings and Government, as Seneca, or Cicero, or
Plutarch would have abhorred. The Protestants tell the Papists of the General
Council at the Lateran, sub Innoc. 3. where, Can. 3. it is made a very part of
their Religion, That temporal Lords who exterminate not Heretics, may be
admonished and excommunicated, and their Dominions given by the Pope to others,
and subjects disobliged from their allegiance: they tell them of the doctrine
of their leading Doctors, that Kings excommunicate are no Kings, but may be
killed: And of the many Rebellions which the Pope has raised against Kings and
Emperors. And the Papists say, that the Protestants are worse than they, and
that their Religion has every where been introduced by rebellion, or
stablished by it: and that the Bible (which is your Religion) has caused most
rebellions, and therefore they dare not let the people read it: And is this
your holy doctrine?

Answ. 1. That Christianity is incomparably more for Government and due
subjection, than Heathenism, is past all doubt to those that are impartial
Judges. How few of all the Roman Heathen Emperors was there, that died not by
subjects hands? Among the Athenians, a King and a Tyrant were words too often
of the same significant. How hateful the name of a King was among the Romans,
is well known. How few even of their most renowned Orators and Philosophers
were not put to death, upon accusation of resistance of some Prince: ( Brutus,
Cicero, Cato, Seneca, etc.) Cicero, pro Milone, can say, [ Non se obstrinxit
scelere, siquis Tyrannum occidat; quamvis familiarem (which Brutus practiced on
Caesar) Et Tuscul. 5. Nulla nobis cum Tyrannis societas est, neque est contra
naturam spoliare eum quem honestum est necare. Much more such dangerous
doctrine has Cicero. Seneca Traged. Hercul. fur. says, [ Victima haud ulla
amplior potest, magisque opima mactari Jovi, Quam Rex iniquus -- But
Christianity teaches us subjection to bad Rulers, and not only to the good.
The ordinary Writings of the Athenian and Roman learned men are so bitter
against Kings, and so much for the peoples power, that it is mere impudency for
men of their Religion to asperse Christianity as injurious to Kings. How things
were used to be carried at Rome, you may perceive by these words of Lampridius,
who wondering that Heliogabalus was killed no sooner, but permitted three years,
says, [ Mirum fortasse cuipiam videatur, Constantine venerabilis, quod haec
clades quam retuli loco Principum fuerit, and quidem prope triennio, ita ut
nemo inventus fuerit qui istum a gubernaculis Romanae Majestatis abduceret; cum
Neroni, Vitellio, Caligulae, coeterisque hujusmodi nunquam tyrannicida defuerit.

Hesichius in Arcesil. says, Arcesilaus Regum neminem magnopere coluit:
Quamobrem legatione ad Antigonum fungens pro patria, nihil obtinuit. And Laert.
makes Solon resolve not to live in his own Country, merely because there was a
Tyrant, that is, a King, that had by a faction set up himself, Cum Antistibus
agamus ut ex libris illis (Sibillinis) quidvis potius quam Regem proferant:
Quem Romae posthac nec Dii nec homines esse patientur. Cic. Divinat. l. 2. p.
186.
and yet ruled, as he professed, as righteously as a Senate. And he says of
Thales, that it was one of the rarities which he spoke of, Rempubl. vidisse
Tyrannum senem. And of Chrysippus, Quod videtur aspernator Regum, immodice
fuisse, etc.

We do not deny but there are three sorts of Christians that are too much for
the resisting and destroying of bad Governors, and speak much as these
Heathens did: Imperatorem necesse est ut suspiciamus, ut enim quem Dominus
noster elegit: ut merito dixerim, Noster est magis Caesar, ut a Deo nostro
constitutus. Tertul. Apol. c. 33.
The one sort are some over-philosophical learned men, who have more conversed
with the ancient Greeks and Romans than with Christian Writers. Such was honest
Petrarch, who perilously says, Et sane si vel unum Patria civem bonum habeat,
malum Dominum diutius non habebit. The second sort are the faction of the Pope,
who are led to it by mere interest, their Religion and Clergy-interest both
consist in an universal Kingdom or Government over Kings and all the Christian
world: it is no wonder therefore to find them industrious to subject all powers
to themselves. The third sort are here and there a few Enthusiasts, or
fanatical deluded persons, who are like the turbulent Zealots among the Jews,
who occasioned the combustions and bloodshed at Jerusalem, about the time of
its destruction: who are but the ignoranter sort of Christians, misled by
pretenses of zeal or inspiration, for want of judgment, stayedness and
experience. And this is vitium personae, and is no disparagement to Christ. As
for any doctrines of rebellion or sedition, or deposing and killing
excommunicate Kings, there is none more condemns them than Christ. It is not
every proud or covetous person that makes the name of Christianity or
Church Government a cloak for his usurpation, ambition or worldliness, that we
are pleading for: Beda in Apocal. 13. fol. 211. p. 2. expounds the number of
Antichrist 666 by reference to 1 King 10.14. 2 Chronicles. 9.13. where Solomon's
yearly revenue of Gold was 666 talents: and so he says, Antichrist shall exact
that tribute of money to himself, which is due to a true King. As if
covetousness and great revenues were the number of the Beast.

Et in cap. 17. In purpura fucus simulati regiminus: In coccino, cruentus
habitus impietatis demonstratur. Fol. 214. p. 2.

Vobis humana aestimatio innocentiam tradidit: humana item dominatio imperavit:
Inde nec plenae nec adeo timendae estis disciplinae: Tanta est prudentia
hominis ad demonstrandum bonum, quantum authoritas ad exigendum: tam illa falli
facilis quam ista contemni. Tertul. Apol. c. 45.


A Roman Prefect was wont to say, Make me the Bishop of Rome, and I will be a
Christian: What if the match had been made, and the Pagan had turned Christian
in profession for that Bishopric? and had lived like a Pagan still, and
domineered according to his ambition? would Christianity have been ever the
worse for that? Judge of Christ by his own Book and doctrine, and not by the
Council of Laterane, nor by the books, or doctrine, or practice of any proud
and worldly hypocrite, who abuses his Name to sin against him. Christ never
promised to make such Laws, as no man could abuse or break. Yet withal let me
tell you, that the spleen and envy of factious persons, does usually cause them
to belie each other, and make each others doctrine as odious as they can: and
if wrangling boys fall out and call one another bastards, it is no good proof
that they are so indeed.

Object. But those of you that do escape the doctrines of disloyalty, are
traitors against your Countries liberties, and base-spirited men, and
flatterers of Princes, and defenders of tyranny and oppression, and all to beg
their countenance for your Religion. The Christian spirit is poor and private
in comparison of the old Greek and Roman genius, which would stand up against
the proudest Tyrant.

Answ. It seems Christianity is hot and cold, as malice fancieth it. Indeed the
doctrine of it is so much for submission, patience and peace, as gives more
countenance to this accusation than the former, but is guilty of neither of the
crimes. It is not flattering hypocrites that I am to defend, let them bear
their shame; but it is the doctrine of Christ which is the thing in question.
Did Christ flatter Herod, when he said, Go tell that Fox, Behold, I cast out
devils etc? Luke 13.32* Did John Baptist flatter him, when he lost his liberty
and life for reprehending his filthy lust? Did Christ flatter the Pharisees?
Matthew. 23. Does James flatter the rich and great, Jam. 5.1, etc. Go to now, ye
rich men, weep and houl, for the miseries that shall come upon you: your riches
are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten; your gold and silver is cankered,
and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh
as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for the last days -- Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton, ye have nourished your hearts
as in a day of slaughter: ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does
not resist you. And, Jam. 2.6. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before
the judgment-seats? Christianity teaches us to lament the sin of Tyranny, the
grand crime which keeps out the Gospel from the Nations of Infidels and
Pagans through the earth, and eclipseth its glory in the Popish Principalities:
It teaches us to resist tyrannical Usurpers in the defense of our true and
lawful Kings. But if it teach men patiently to suffer, rather than rebelliously
resist, that is not from baseness but true nobleness of spirit, exceeding both
the Greek and Roman genius: in that it proceeds from a contempt of those
inferior trifles, which they rebel for, and from that satisfaction in the
hopes of endless glory, which makes it easy to them to bear the loss of
liberty, life, or any thing on earth; and from obedience to their highest Lord.
But in a lawful way they can defend their Countries and liberties as gallantly,
as ever Heathens did.

Object. IX. If your Religion had reason for it, what need it be kept up by
cruelty and blood? how many thousands and hundred thousands has sword, and
fire, and inquisition devoured, as for the supporting of Religion? and when
they are thus compelled, how know you who believes Christianity indeed?

In ecclesia non coactum, sed acquiescentem oportet ad meliora converti: Non
est enim qui curare possit invitum. Chrysostom.

Nemo invitus been agit, etiamsi bonum est quod facit. Aug. Confess.


Answ. This is none of the way or work of Christianity; but of that sect which
is raised by worldly interest and design, and must accordingly be kept up. In
Christ's own family, two of his Disciples would have called for fire from
heaven to consume those that rejected him; but he rebuked them, and told them
that they knew not what manner of spirit they were of, and that he came not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them: Will you now lay the blame of that
consuming zeal on Christ, which he so rebukes? The same two men would have
been preferred before the rest, to sit at his right hand and his left hand in
his Kingdom; and his Disciples strove who should be the greatest: Did Christ
countenance this? or did he not sharply reprehend them, and tell them that they
must not have titles and domination as secular Princes have, but be as little
children in humility, and their greatness must consist in being greatliest
serviceable, even in being servants to all. If men after this will take no
warning, but fight, and kill, and burn, and torment men, in carnal zeal,
Praefecti vel Antistetis vitium est non quam optimum esse, nec novas subinde
virtutum accessiones facere: siquidem virtutis suae praestantia, multitudinem
ad mediocritatem tracturus sit. Nazian. Orat. 1. p. 8.
and pride, and tyranny; shall this be imputed to Christ, who in his doctrine
and life has formed such a testimony against this crime, as never was done by
any else in the world, and as is become an offense to unbelievers?

Object. X. We see not that the Leaders in the Christian Religion do really
themselves believe it: Pope Leo the tenth called it, Fabula de Christo: What do
men make of it but a Trade to live by? a means to get Abbeys, and Bishoprics,
and Benefices, and to live at ease and fleshly pleasure: and what do Secular
Rulers make of it, but a means to keep their subjects in awe?

Answ. Profecto ars quaedam artium, and scientia scientiarum mihi esse videtur,
hominem regere, animal omnium maxim varium and multiplex. Id. ibid.
He that knows no other Christians in the world but such as these, knows
none at all, and is unfit to judge of those whom he knows not. True
Christians are men, that place all their happiness and hopes in the life to
come, and use this life in order to the next, and contemn all the wealth and
glory of the world, in comparison of the love of God and their salvation. True
Pastors and Bishops of the Church do thirst after the conversion and happiness
of sinners, and spend their lives in diligent labors to these ends; not
thinking it too much to stoop to the poorest for their good, nor regarding
worldly wealth and glory in comparison of the winning of one soul, nor counting
their lives dear, if they may but finish their course and ministry with joy.
Luke 15. Act. 20. Heb. 13.7.17. etc. They are hypocrites, and not true
Christians, whom the objection does describe, by what names or titles soever
they be dignified, and are more disowned by Christ than by any other in the
world.

Object. XI. Christians are divided into so many sects among themselves, and
every one condemning others, that we have reason to suspect them all: Sicut
noxium est si unitas defit bonis, ita perniciosum est si sit in malis.
Perversos quippe Unitas corroborat, dum concordant; and tanto magis
incorrigibiles, quanto unanimes fecit. Greg. Moral. l. 33.

Sed perturbat nos opinionum varietas hominumque dissensio: and quia non idem
contingit in sensibus, hos natura certos putamus: Illa quae aliis sic, aliis
secus, nec iisdem semper uno modo videntur, ficta esse dicimus. Quod est long
aliter. Cic. de leg. 1. p. 226.


for how know we which of them to believe or follow?

Answ. 1. Christianity is but One, and easily known; and all Christians do
indeed hold this as certain, by common agreement and consent, they differ not
at all about that which I am pleading for: there may be a difference, whether
the Pope of Rome or the Patriarch of Constantinople be the greater, or whether
one Bishop must rule over all, and such like matters of carnal quarrel; but
there is no difference whether Christ be the Savior of the world, or whether
all his doctrine be infallibly true: and the more they quarrel about their
personal interests and by-opinions, the most valid is their testimony in the
things wherein they all agree: it is not those things which they differ about,
that I am now pleading for, or persuading any to embrace; but those wherein
they all consent.

2. But if they agree not in all the Integrals of their Religion, it is no
wonder, nor infers any more than that they are not all perfect in the
knowledge of such high and mysterious things: and when no man understands all
that is in Aristotle, nor no two interpreters of him agree in every exposition,
no, nor any two men in all the world agree in every opinion, who hold any thing
of their own, what wonder if Christians differ in many points of difficulty.

3. But their differences are nothing in comparison of the Heathen
Philosophers, who were of so many minds and ways, that there was scarce any
coherence among them, nor many things which they could ever agree in.

4. The very differences of abundance of honest Christians, is occasioned by
their earnest desire to please God, and do nothing but what is just and right,
and their high esteem of piety and honesty, while the imperfection of their
judgments keeps them from knowing in all things, what it is which indeed is
that good and righteous way which they should take. If children do differ and
fall out, if it be but in striving who shall do best, and please their father,
it is the more excusable: enemies do not so: idiots fall not out in
School-disputes or Philosophical controversies: swine will not fall out for
gold or jewels, if they be cast before them in the streets: but it is like that
men may.

5. But the great sidings and factions kept up in the world, and the cruelties
exercised thereupon, are from worldly hypocrites, who under the mask of
Christianity, are playing their own game: And why must Christ be answerable for
those whom he most abhors, and will most terribly condemn?

Spiritus sanctus est Patris and Filii Amor and connexio: ad ipsum pertinet
societas, qua efficimur unum corpus unici Filii Dei. Sicut enim unum corpus
hominis multis constat membris, and vegetat omnia membra una anima, faciens in
oculo ut videat, in aure ut audiat, etc. Ita Spiritus sanctus membra corporis
Christi quod est ecclesia, continet and vegetat. Et sicut humani corporis
membrum praecisum, formam quidem qua membrum cognoscitur retinet, etc. Sic
quicunque a praedictae pacis unitate divisus est, sacramentum quidem tanquam
formam retinet, sed spiritu praeter unitatem non vivit. Frustra ergo foris de
forma gloriantur, nisi i^tus spiritu vegetentur. Aug. de Great.

Nullus Christianus malus est nisi hanc professionem simulaverit. Athenag. leg.
pro Christ. p 3.

Nemo (in carceribus vestris) Christianus nisi plane tantum Christianus: aut si
aliud, jam non Christianus. Tert. Apol. c. 43.


Object. XII. You boast of the holiness of Christians, and we see not but they
are worse than Heathens and Mahometans: they are more drunken, and greater
deceivers in their dealings, as lustful and unclean, as covetous and carnal, as
proud and ambitious, as tyrannical and perfidious, as cruel and contentious:
insomuch as among the Turkish Mahometans, and the Indian Banians, the
wickedness of Christians is the grand cause that they abhor Christianity, and
it keeps out your Religion from most Nations of the earth: so that it is a
proverb among them, when any is suspected of treachery, What, do you think I am
a Christian? And Acosta witnesses the like of the West Indies.

Answ. 1. Every man knows, that the vulgar rabble, who indeed are of no
Religion, will seem to be of the Religion which is most for their worldly
advantage, or else which their Ancestors and Custom have delivered to them: And
who can expect that such should live as Christians, who are no Christians? You
may as well blame men, because Images do not labor, and are not learned, wise
and virtuous. We never took all for Christians indeed, who for carnal interest,
or custom, or tradition, take up the bare name, and desire to be called
Christians: rebels may affect the name of loyal subjects: and thieves and
robbers, the name of true and honest men: Shall loyalty, truth and honesty
therefore be judged of by such as them? Nothing can be more unrighteous, than
to judge of Christianity by those hypocrites, whom Christ has told us shall be
condemned to the sorest punishment, and whom he hates above all sorts of
sinners. What if Julian, Celsus, Porphyry, or any of these objectors, should
call themselves Christians, and live in drunkenness, cruelty, perjury or
deceit, is it any reason that Christ should be reproached for their crimes?
Christianity is not a dead opinion or name, but an active heavenly principle,
renewing and governing heart and life. I have before showed what Christianity
is.

2. In the Dominions of the Turks and other Infidel Princes, the Christians by
oppression are kept without the means of knowledge; and so their ignorance has
caused them to degenerate, for the greater part, into a sensual sottish sort of
people, unlike to Christians. And in the Dominions of the Moscovite, tyranny
has set up a jealousy of the Gospel, and suppressed Preaching, for fear lest
Preachers should injure the Emperor. And in the West, the usurpation and
tyranny of the Papacy has locked up the Scriptures from that people in an
unknown tongue, that they know no more what Christ says, than the Priest
thinks meet to tell them, lest they should be loosened from their dependence on
the Roman Oracle. And thus Ignorance with the most destroys Christianity, and
leaves men but the shadow, image and name: For belief is an intellectual act,
and a sort of knowing, and no man can believe really he knows not what. If
any Disciples in the School of Christ have met with such Teachers, as think it
their virtue and proficiency to be ignorant, call not such Christians as know
not what Christianity is, and judge not of Christ's doctrine by them that never
read or heard it, or are not able to give you any good account of it. But
blessed be the Lord, there are many thousand better Christians.

Object. XIII. But it is not the ignorant rabble only, but many of your most
zealous Professors of Christianity, who have been as false, as proud, and
turbulent and seditious, as any others.

Answ. 1. That the true genuine Christian Ut ubicunque triticum, ibi and
zizania: sic ubicunque fuerit bonum Dei, i^l^c erit and scandalum inimici.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. 6. Hom. 33.

Sed dicet aliquis etiam de nostris excedere quosdam a regula disciplinae:
Desunt tum Christiani haberi apud nos. Philosophi vero illi cum talibus factis
in nomine and in honor sapientiae perseverant. Tertul. Apol c 46. See a
notable exhortation in Dorothaeus, Doct. 5. ne nos ipso i^f^memu, How unhappy
they are that go on their own heads, and want good guides in Religion. Bibl.
Pat. Gr. lat. ^o. 1. p. 778.


is not so, you may see past doubt by the doctrine and life of Christ and his
Apostles. And that there are thousands and millions of humble, holy, faithful
Christians in the world, is a truth which nothing but ignorance or malice can
deny. 2. Hypocrites are no true Christians, what zeal soever they pretend:
There is a zeal for self and interest, which is often masked with the name of
zeal for Christ. It is not the seeming, but the real Christian, which we have
to justify. 3. It is commonly a few young unexperienced novices, which are
tempted into disorders. But Christ will bring them to repentance for all,
before he will forgive and save them. Look into the Scripture, and see whether
it do not disown and contradict every fault, both great and small, which ever
you knew any Christian commit? If it do, (as visibly it does) why must Christ
be blamed for our faults, when he is condemning them, and reproving us, and
curing us of them?

Object. XIV. The greater part of the world is against Christianity: Heathens
and Infidels are the far greater part of the earth: and the greatest Princes
and learned Philosophers have been and are on the other side.

Answ. 1. The greater number of the world are not Kings nor Philosophers, nor
wise nor good men: and yet that is no disparagement to Kings, or learned, or
good men. 2. The most of the world do not know what Christianity is, nor ever
heard the reasons of it; and therefore no wonder if they are not Christians.
And if the most of the world be ignorant and carnal, and such as have subjected
their reason to their lusts, no wonder if they are not wise. 3. There is no
where in the world so much learning as among the Christians, experience puts
that past dispute with those, that have any true knowledge of the world.
Mahomitanism cannot endure the light of learning, and therefore does suppress
or slight it. The old Greeks and Romans had much learning, which did but
prepare for the reception of Christianity, at whose service it has continued
ever since. But barbarous ignorance has over spread almost all the rest of the
world: even the learning of the Chinenses and the Pythagoreans of the East, is
but childishness and dotage, in comparison of the learning of the present
Christians.

Object. XV. For all that you say, when we hear subtle arguings against
Christianity, it staggereth us, and we are not able to confute them.

Answ. That is indeed the common case of tempted men: their own weakness and
ignorance is their enemies strength: But your ignorance should be lamented, and
not the Christian cause accused: it is a dishonor to your selves, but it is
none to Christ: Do your duty, and you may be more capable of discerning the
evidence of truth.

Object. XVI. An hoc usquequaque aliter in vita? and non ex maxima part de
tota judicabis. An dubium est quin virtus ita maximam partem obtineat in rebus
humanis, ut reliquas obruat? Audebo quae secundum naturam sunt Bona appellare,
nec fraudare suo veteri nomine, virtutis autem amplitudinem quasi in altera
librae lance ponere. Terram, mihi creed, ea lanx, and maria deprimet: semper
enim ex eo quod maxima^ parts continet, latissimeque funditur, res tota
appellatur. Dicimus aliquem hilarem vivere? ^gitur si semel tristior effectus
est, an hilara vita amissa est? Cic. de fin. l. 5 page 209.

Isti ipsi qui voluptate and dolor omnia metiuntur, nonne clammt, sapienti
plus semper adesse quod velit, quam quod nolit. Id, ibid.


But the sufferings which attend Christianity are so great, that we cannot bear
them: in most places it is persecuted by Princes and Magistrates: and it
restrains us from our pleasures, and puts us upon an ungrateful
troublesome life: Those that revolt from Christ because of sufferings, are like
him that Cicero, ibid. speaks of Nobis H^racleo^es ille Dionysius flagitiose
descivisse videtur a Stoicis, propter oculorum dolorem. Quasi hoc didicisset a
Zenone, non dolere cum doleret! Illud audierat, nec tamen didicerat, Malum
illud non esse, quia turpe non esset, and esset ferendum viro. p. 209.

Qui per virtutem peritat, non interit. Plaut. in du capt.


and we are not souls that have no bodies, and therefore cannot slight these
things.

Answ. But you have souls that were made to rule your bodies, and are more
worthy and durable than they; and were your souls such as reason tells you
they should be, no life on earth would be so delectable to you, as that which
you account so troublesome. And if you will choose things perishing for your
portion, and be content with the momentary pleasures of a dream, you must
patiently undergo the fruits of such a foolish choice. And if eternal glory
will not compensate what ever you can lose by the wrath of man, or by the
crossing of your fleshly minds, you may let it go, and boast of your better
choice as you find cause.

How much did the light of nature teach the Stoics, the Cynicks, and many
other Sects, which differs not much in austerity from Christ's precepts of
mortification and self-denial? Socrates could say, [ Opes ac nobilitates, non
solum nihil in se habere honestatis, verum omne malum ex eis aboriri. Laert. l.
2. in Socr. p. 99. Dicebat and unicum esse bonum scientiam, malumque unicum,
inscitiam. Id. ib. Et referenti quod illum Athenienses mori d^crevissent, and
natura illos, inquit. Ib. Et multa prius de immortalitate animorum ac praeclara
disserens, cicutam bibit. p. 105. Magna animi sublimitate carpentes se and
objurgantes contemnebat. p. 96. When he was publicly derided, Omnia ferebat
aequo animo. And when one kicked him, and the people marvelled at his patience,
he said, What if an Ass had kicked me, should I have sued him at Law? p. 93.
When he saw in Fairs and Shops what abundance of things are set to sale, he
rejoycingly said, Quam multis ipse non egeo? and cum libere quo vellet abire
carcere liceret, noluit, and plorantes severe increpavit, pulcherrimosque
sermones illos vinctus prosecutus est. If so many Philosophers thought it a
shameful note of cowardice, for a man to live and not to kill himself, when he
was falling into shame or misery, much greater reason has a true believer, to
be willing to die in a lawful way, for the sake of Christ, and the hope of
glory, and to be less fearful of death than a Brutus, a Cato, a Seneca, or a
Socrates, though not to inflict it on themselves. Soundly believe the promises
of Christ, and then you will never much stick at suffering. To lose a feather,
and win a Crown, is a bargain that very few would grudge at. And profanely with
Esau to sell the birthright for a morsel, to part with heaven for the paltry
pleasures of flesh and fancy, were below the reason of a man, if sin had not
unmann'd him. Matthew. 16.25, 26. Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it;
and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. For what is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

Virulent Eunapius gives us the witness of natural reason, for a holy
mortified life, whilst he makes it the glory of the Philosophers, whom he
celebrateth. Of Antoninus the son of Aedesius, he says, [ Totum se dedidit
atque applicuit Diis loci gentilibus, and sacris mysticis and arcanis; citoque
in Deorum immortalium contubernium receptus est; neglecta prorsus corporis
cura, ejusque voluptatibus remisso nuntio, and sapientiae studio profano vulgo
incognitum amplexus. -- Cuncti mortales hujusce viri temperantiam, constantiam
and inflecti nesciam mentem demirati suere. Eunap* in Aedes. What a Saint does
he make Jamblichus to be? of whom it was feigned, that in his Prayers he would
be lifted up above ten cubits from the earth, and his garments changed into a
golden color, till he had done? Eun. in Jambl. p. 572. Even while he raileth
at the Alexandrian Monks, ut homines quidem specie, sed vitam turpem porcorum
more exigentes, etc. p. 598. (contrary to the evidence of abundant History) he
bears witness against a vicious life. And if holiness, and mortification or
temperance be so laudable, even in the judgment of the bitterest Heathens, why
should it be thought intolerable strictness, as it is more clearly and sweetly
proposed in the Christian verity. And if he say of Jamblicus, [Ob justitiae
cultum, facilem ad deorum aures accessum habuit;] we may boldly say that the
righteous God loves righteousness; and that the prayers of the upright are his
delight; and that their sufferings shall not always be forgotten; nor their
faithful labors prove in vain.

CHAP. XII. The reasonable Conditions required of them, who will overcome the
difficulties of Believing, and will not undo themselves by wilful Infidelity.
I Have answered the objections against Christianity, but have not removed the
chiefest impediments: for recipitur ad modum recipientis; the grand impediments
are within, even the incapacity, or indisposition, or frowardness of the
persons that should believe. It is not every head and heart that is fit for
heavenly truth and work. I will next therefore tell you what conditions Reason
it self will require of them that would not be deceived: that so you may not
lay that blame on Christ, if you be infidels, which belongs only to your
selves.

Non meretur audire veritatem, qui fraudulenter interrogat. Ambros.
Cond. 1. Come not, in your studies of these sacred Mysteries, with an enmity
against the doctrine which you must study; or at least suspend your enmity, so
far as is necessary, to an impartial search and examination.

For ill will cannot easily believe well. Malice and partiality will blind the
strongest wits, and hide the force of the plainest evidence.

Con. 2. Drown not the love of truth in a vicious fleshly heart and life; and
forfeit not the light of supernatural revelation, by wilful sinning against
natural light, and debauching your consciences, by abusing the knowledge which
already you have.

Read the beginning of Theophil. Antioch: ad Antolyc. showing that wickedness
causes further Atheism, and that it blinds sinners that they cannot know God.
Sensuality and wilful debauchery is the common temptation to Infidelity: when
men have once so heinously abused God, as that they must needs believe, that if
there be a God, he must be a terror to them; and if there be a judgment and a
life of retribution, it is like to go ill with them, a little thing will
persuade such men, that there is no God, nor life to come indeed. When they
once hope it is so, and take it for their interest, and a desirable thing, they
will easily believe that it is so indeed. And God is just, and begins the
executions of his justice in this world: and the forsaking of a soul that
hates the light, and wilfully resists and abuses knowledge, is one of his
most dreadful judgments. That man who will be a drunkard, a glutton, a
whore-monger, a proud ambitious worldling, in despite of the common light of
nature, can hardly expect that God should give him the light of grace.
Despighting truth, and enslaving reason, and turning a man into a beast, is not
the way to heavenly illumination.

Cond. 3. Be not ignorant of the common natural Truths, (which are recited in
the first part of this book) for supernatural revelation presupposes natural;
and grace, which makes us Saints, supposes that reason has constituted us
men: and all true Knowledge is methodically attained.

It is a great wrong to the Christian cause, that too many preachers of it have
missed the true method, and still begun at supernatural revelations, and built
even natural certainties thereupon; and have either not known, or concealed
much of the fore-written natural verities. And it is an exceeding great cause
of the multiplying of Infidels, that most men are dull or idle drones, and
unacquainted with the common natural truths, which must give light to
Christianity, and prepare men to receive it. And they think to know what is in
Heaven before they will learn what they are themselves, and what it is to be a
man.

Cond. 4. Get a true Anatomy, Analysis, or Description of Christianity in your
minds: for if you know not the true nature of it first, you will be lamentably
disadvantaged in enquiring into the truth of it.

For Christianity well understood in the quiddity, will illustrate the mind
with such a winning beauty, as will make us meet its evidence halfway, and
will do much to convince us by its proper light.

Cond. 5. When you have got the true method of the Christian doctrine, or
Analysis of faith, begin at the Essentials or primitive truths, and proceed in
order, according to the dependencies of truths; and do not begin at the latter
end, nor study the conclusion before the premises.

Cond. 6. Yet look on the whole scheme or frame of causes and evidences, and
take them entirely and conjunct; and not as peevish factious men, who in
splenish zeal against another sect, reject and vilify the evidence which they
plead.

Viva lectio est vita sanctorum. Greg. Mor. 24.
This is the Devils gain, by the raising of sects and contentions in the Church:
he will engage a Papist for the mere interest of his sect, to speak lightly of
the Scripture and the Spirit; and many Protestants in mere opposition to the
Papists, to slight Tradition, and the testimony of the Church, denying it its
proper authority and use. As if in the setting of a Watch or Clock, one would
be for one wheel, and another for another, and each in peevishness cast away
that which another would make use of, when it will never go true without them
all. Faction and contentions are deadly enemies to truth.

Cond. 7. Mark well the suitableness of the remedy to the disease; that is, of
Christianity to the depraved state of man: and mark well the lamentable effects
of that universal depravation, that your experience may tell you how
unquestionable it is.

Cond. 8. Mark well how connaturally Christianity does relish with holy souls;
and how well it suiteth with honest principles and hearts; so that the better
any man is, the better it pleases him. And how potently all debauchery,
villainy and vice befriendeth the cause of Atheists and unbelievers.

Cond. 9. Take a considerate just survey of the common enmity against
Christianity and Holiness, in all the wicked of the world; and the notorious
war which is every where managed between Christ and the Devil, and their
several followers, that you may know Christ partly by his enemies.

Cond. 10. Impartially mark the effects of Christian doctrine, where ever it is
sincerely entertained, and see what Religion makes the best men: and judge not
of serious Christians at a distance, by false reports of ignorant or malicious
adversaries: And then you will see that Christ is actually the Savior of souls.

Cond. 11. Be not liars your selves, lest it dispose you to think all others to
be liars, and to judge of the words of others by your own.

Cond. 12. An vero nisi Deum genus humanum respicere* eique praeesse putaremu^,
adeo puritati and innocentiae studeremus? Nequaquam, sed quia persuasissimi
sum^s, Deo cui and no^ and m^nd^m hunc condid^t, transactae hic vitae totius
rations nos reddituros, moderatum, benignum, and plerisque contemptum vivendi
genus deligimus. Quippe nullum in hac vita tantum malum, etiamsi capitis
periculum agatur, supervenire nobis posse a^b tramur, quod omnino sit minimi,
immo nihili faciendum prae illa quam a summo judice expectamus olim
foelicitate, etc. Athenag. Apol. p. 58. in B.P.

Si enim solam hanc praesentem vitam nos victuros crederemus, suspicioni foret
locus, nos carni and sanguini indulgentes, aut avarit^a aut concupiscentia
captos, peccare? Nos vero omnibus non modo factis sed cogitationibus and
sermonibus nostris, tum noctu tum interdiu, Deum adesse scimus; eumque and
totum esse lumen, and quae in cordibus nostris latent videre, and hac mortali
vita defunctos, alteram hac terrestri long meliorem, nempe coelestem, nos
victuros. Id. ibid. p. 77.


Be-think you truly what persons you should be your selves, and what lives you
should live, if you did not believe the Christian doctrine: or if you do not
believe it, mark what effect your unbelief has on your lives.

For my own part, I am assured, if it were not for the Christian doctrine, my
heart and life would be much worse than it is; though I had read Epictetus,
Arrian, Plato, Plotinus, Jamblichus, Proclus, Seneca, Cicero, Plutarch, every
word: and those few of my neighborhood, who have fallen off to infidelity,
have at once fallen to debauchery, and abuse of their nearest relations, and
differed as much in their lives from what they were before in their profession
of Christianity, (though unsound) as a leprous body differs from one in
comeliness and health.

Cond. 13. Be well acquainted (if possible) with Church History, that you may
understand by what Tradition Christianity has descended to us.

For he that knows nothing but what he has seen, or receives a Bible, or
the Creed, without knowing any further whence and which way it comes to us, is
greatly disadvantaged as to the reception of the faith.

Cond. 14. In all your reading of the holy Scriptures, allow still for your
ignorance in the languages, proverbs, customs, and circumstances, which are
needful to the understanding of particular Texts: and when difficulties stop
you, be sure that no such ignorance remain the cause.

He that will but read Brugensis, Grotius, Hammond, and many other that open
such phrases and circumstances, with Topographers, and Bochartus, and such
others as write of the Animals, Utensils, and other circumstances of those
times, will see what gross errors the opening of some one word or phrase may
deliver the Reader from.

Cond. 15. Understand what excellencies and perfections they be which the
Spirit of God intended to adorn the holy Scriptures with, and also what sort of
humane imperfections are consistent with these its proper perfections: that so
false expectations may not tempt you into unbelief.

It seduceth many to infidelity to imagine, that if Scripture be the word of
God, it must needs be most perfect in every accident and mode; which were never
intended to be part of its perfection. Whereas God did purposely make use of
those men, and of that style and manner of expression, which was defective in
some points of natural excellency, that so the supernatural excellency might be
the more apparent. As Christ cured the blind with clay and spittle, and David
slew Goliath with a sling. The excellency of the means must be estimated by its
aptitude to its end.

Cond. 16. If you see the evidences of the truth of Christianity in the whole,
let that suffice you for the belief of the several parts, when you see not the
true answer to particular exceptions.

If you see it soundly proved, that Christ is the Messenger of the Father, and
that his word is true, and that the holy Scripture is his word; this is enough
to quiet any sober mind, when it cannot confute every particular objection: or
else no man should ever hold fast any thing in the world; if he must let all go
after the fullest proof, upon every exception which he cannot answer. The
inference is sure. If the whole be true, the parts are true.

Cond. 17. Observe well the many effects of Angels ministration, and the
evidences of a communion between us and the spirits of the unseen world: for
this will much facilitate your belief.

Cond. 18. Overlook not the plain evidences of the Apparitions, Witches, and
wonderful events which fall out in the times and places where you live: and
what reflections they have upon the Christian cause.

Cond. 19. Observe well the notable answers of Prayers, in matters internal and
external, in others and in your selves.

Cond. 20. Be well studied at home, about the capacity, use and tendency of all
your faculties; and you will find that your very nature points you up to
another life, and is made only to be happy in that knowledge, love and fruition
of God, which the Gospel most effectually leads you to.

Cond. 21. Mark well the prophesies of Christ himself, both of the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the successes of his Apostles in the world, etc. and mark how
exactly they are all fulfilled.

Cond. 22. Let no pretense of humility tempt you to debase humane nature below
its proper excellency; lest thence you be tempted to think it incapable of the
everlasting sight and fruition of God.

The devils way of destroying is oftentimes by overdoing. The proud devil will
help you to be very humble, and help you to deny the excellency of reason and
natural freewill, and all supernatural inclinations, when he can make use of it
to persuade you, that man is but a subtle sort of bruit, and has a soul but
gradually different from sensitives, and so is not made for another life.

Cond. 23. Yet come to Christ as humble learners, and not as arrogant
self-conceited censurers: and think not that you are capable of understanding
every thing as soon as you hear it.

Cond. 24. Judge not of the main cause of Christianity, or of particular texts
or points, by sudden hasty thoughts and glances; as if it were a business to be
cursorily done: but allow it your most deliberate sober studies, your most
diligent labor, and such time and patience, as reason may tell you are
necessary to a learner in so great a cause.

Cond. 25. Call not so great a matter to the trial in a case of melancholy and
natural incapacity; but stay till you are fitter to perform the search.

It is one of the common cheats of Satan, to persuade poor weak, and melancholy
persons, that have but half the use of their understandings, to go then to try
the Christian Religion, when they can scarce cast up an intricate account, nor
are fit to judge of any great and difficult thing. And then he has an
advantage to confound them, and fill them with blasphemous and unbelieving
thoughts; and if not to shake their habitual faith, yet greatly to perplex
them, and disturb their peace. The soundest wit and most composed, is fittest
for so great a task.

Cond. 26. When upon sober trial you have discerned the evidences of the
Christian verity, record what you have found true: and judge not the next time
against those evidences, till you have equal opportunity for a full
consideration of them.

In this case the Tempter much abuses many injudicious souls: when by good
advice and soberest meditation, they have seen the evidence of truth in
satisfying clearness, he will after surprise them, when their minds are darker,
or their thoughts more scattered, or the former evidence is out of mind, and
push them on suddenly then to judge of the matters of immortality, and of the
Christian cause, that what he cannot get by truth of argument, he may get by
the incapacity of the disputant: As if a man that once saw a mountain some
miles distant from him, in a clear day, should be tempted to believe that he
was deceived, because he sees it not in a misty day, or when he is in a
valley, or within the house: Or as if a man that in many days hard study, has
cast up an intricate large account, and set it right under his hand, should be
called suddenly to give up the same account anew, without looking on that which
he before cast up; when as if his first account be lost, he must have equal
time, and helps, and fitness, before he can set it as right again. Take it not
therefore as any disparagement to the Christian truth, if you cannot on a
sudden give your selves so satisfactory an account of it, as formerly in more
clearness, and by greater studies you have done.

Cond. 27. Gratify not Satan so much, as to question well resolved points, as
often as he will move you to it.

Though you must prove all things, till, as learning, you come to understand
them in their proper evidence, time and order; yet you must record and hold
fast that which you have proved, and not suffer the devil to put you to the
answer of one and the same question over and over, as often as he please: this
is to give him our time, and to admit him to debate his cause with us by
temptation, as frequently as he will: which you would not allow to a ruffian to
the debauching of your wife or servants: and you provoke God to give you up to
error, when no resolution will serve your turn. After just resolution, the
tempter is to be rejected and not disputed with; as a troublesome fellow that
would interrupt us in our work.

Cond. 28. Where you find your own understandings insufficient, have recourse
for help to some truly wise judicious Divine.

Not to every weak Christian, nor unskilful Minister, who is not well grounded
in his own Religion: but to those that have thoroughly studied it themselves:
you may meet with many difficulties in Theology, and in the Text, which you
think can never be well solved, which are nothing to them that understand the
thing. No Novice in the study of Logic, Astronomy, Geometry, or any Art or
Science, will think that every difficulty that he meets with, does prove that
his Author was deceived, unless he be able to resolve it of himself: but he
will ask his Tutor, or some one versed in those matters to resolve it: and then
he will see that his ignorance was the cause of all his doubts.

Cond. 29. Labor faithfully to receive all holy truths with a practical
intent, and to work them on your hearts according to their nature, weight and
use. For the doctrine of Christianity is scientia affectiva practica; a
doctrine for Head, Heart and Life. And if that which is made for the Heart, be
not admitted to the Heart, and rooted there, it is half rejected while it
seems received, and is not in its proper place and soil.

If you are yet in doubt of any of the supernatural Verities, admit those
truths to your hearts which you are convinced of: else you are false to them
and to your selves, and forfeit all further helps of grace.

Object. This is but a trick of deceit to engage the affections, when you want
arguments to convince the judgment: Perit omne judicium cum res transit in
affectum.

Answ. When the affection is inordinate, and over-runs the judgment, this
saying has some truth; but it is most false as of ordinate affections which
follow sound judgment. For by suscitation of the faculties, such affections
greatly help the judgment: Dubitamus, ambigimus, necesse quod dicitut plenum
fidei suspicam^r: committamus nos Deo, nec plus apud nos valeat incredulitas
nostra, quam illius nominis and potentiae magnitudo: ne dum ipsi nobis
argumenta conquirimus quibus esse videatur falsum id quod esse novimus atque
adnitimur verum, obrepat dies extremus, and inimicae mortis reperiamur in
faucibus. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2. verbis ultim.
and judgment is but the eye of the soul to guide the man, and it is but the
passage to the will, where humane acts are more complete. If your wife be
taught that conjugal love is due to her husband; and your child, that filial
love and reverence is due to his father; such affections will not blind their
judgments; but contrarily they do not sincerely receive these precepts, if they
let them not into the heart, and answer them not with these affections.

And here is the great difference between the faith of an honest sanctified
Plowman, and of a carnal unsanctified Lord or Doctor: the one opens his heart
to the doctrine which he receives, and faithfully admits it to its proper
work, and so embraces it practically, and in love; and therefore holds it
fast as a radicated experienced truth, when he cannot answer all cavils that
are brought against it. The other superficially receives it into the brain, by
mere speculation; and treacherously shuts up his heart against it, and never
gave it real rooting; and therefore in the time of trial loses that unsound
superficial belief which he has. God blesses his word to the heart that
honestly and practically receives it, rather than to him that imprisoneth it
in unrighteousness.

Cond. 30. Lastly, if yet any doubts remain, bethink you which is the surest
side, which you may follow with least danger, and where you are certain to
undergo the smallest l^ss.

It is pity that any should hesitate in a matter of such evidence and weight,
and should think with any doubtfulness, of Christianity as an uncertain thing:
But yet true Believers may have cause to say, Lord, help our unbelief, and
increase our faith. And all doubting will not prove the unsoundness of belief.
The true mark to know when Faith is true and saving, notwithstanding all such
doubtings, is the measure of its prevalency with our hearts and lives: That
belief in Christ and the life to come is true and saving, notwithstanding all
doubtings, which habitually possesses us with the love of God above all, and
resolves the will to prefer the pleasing of him, and the hopes of heaven,
before all the treasures and pleasures of this world, and causes us in our
endeavors to live accordingly. And that faith is unsound which will not do
this, how well soever it may be defended by dispute. Therefore at least, for
the resolving of your wills for choice and practice, if you must doubt, yet
consider which is the safest side. If Christ be the Savior of the world, he
will bring Believers to Grace and Glory: and you are sure there is nothing but
Quae mala Stoici non audent appellare; aspera autem, and incommoda and
^ejici^nda, and aliena naturae esse concedunt; ea n^s mala dicimus, sed ex^gua,
and porro minima. Piso de Peripat. and Academ. in Cicer. de fin. l. 5. p. 204.

Cum ergo haec fit conditio futurorum ut teneri and comprehendi nullius possim
anticipationis attactu, nonne purior ratio est, ex duobus incertis and in
ambigua expectatione pendentibus, id potius credere, quod aliquas spes ferat,
quam omnin^ quod nullas? In illo enim periculi nihil est, si quod dicitur
imminere, cassum fiat and vacuum; In hoc damnum est maximum, (id est ^alutis
amissio) fi cum tempus advenerit, aperiatur hoc fuisse mendacium. Quid dicitis
O nescii etiam ^e^u and miseratione dignissimi; Ita non tam extimescitis, ne
forte haec vera sint, quae sunt despectui vobis, and praebent materiam risus?
Nec saltem vobiscum sub obscuris cogitationibus volvitis, ne quod hodie credere
obstinata renuitis perversitate redarguat serum tempus and irrevocabilis
p^enitentia castiget? Nonne vel haec saltem vobis fidem faciunt argumenta
credendi, quod jam per omnes terras in tam brevi tempore immensi hujus
sacrament^ diffusa sunt? etc. Arnob. l. 2. p. 12.


transitory trifles which you can possibly lose by such a choice. For certainly
his precepts are holy and safe, and no man can imagine rationally that they can
endanger the soul. But if you reject him by infidelity, you are lost for ever:
for there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and fire, which shall devour his adversaries for ever. There is no
other Savior for him, who finally refuses the only Savior. And if you
doubted whether faith might not prove an error, you could never see any cause
to fear, that it should prove a hinderance to your salvation: for salvation it
self is an unknown thing to most that do not believe in Christ: and no man can
well think, that a man who is led by an age of such miracles, so credibly
reported to us, to believe in one that leads up souls to the love of God, and
a holy and heavenly mind and life, can ever perish for being so led to such a
guide, and then led by him in so good a way, and to so good an end.

AND thus, Reader, I have faithfully told thee, what reasonings my own soul
has had about its way to everlasting life, and what enquiries it has made
into the truth of the Christian faith: I have gone to my own Heart for those
reasons, which have satisfied my self, and not to my Books, (from which I have
been many years separated) for such as satisfy other men, and not my self: I
have told thee what I believe, and why. Yet other men's reasonings perhaps may
give more light to others, though these are they that have prevailed most with
me. Therefore I desire the Reader, that would have more said, to peruse
especially these excellent Books: Camero's Praelectiones de Ver^o Dei, with the
Theses Salmurienses and Sedanenses on that subject: Grotius de Veritate
Religionis Christianae: Marsilius Ficinus de Relig. Christ. cum notis Lud.
Crocii: Lodovicus Vives de Verit. Fid. Christ. Phil. Morney du Plessis de
Verit. Fid. Christ. John Goodwin of the Authority of the Scriptures:
Campanella's Atheismus Triumphatus: Hieronymus Savonarola's Triumphus Crucis,
(both excellent Books, excepting the errors of their times) Raymundus de
Sabundis his Theologia Naturalis: Micrelli Ethnophronius (an excellent Book)
Raymundus Lullius Articul. Fid. Alexander Gill (out of him) on the Creed: Mr.
Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae (a late and very worthy labor) Dr. Jackson on
the Creed: Mr. Vincent Hatecliffe's Aut Deus aut Nihil (for the first part of
Religion:) passing by Lessius, Parsons, and abundance more; and Common
Place-books, which many of them treat very well on this subject. And of the
Ancients, Augustine de Civitate Dei, and Eusebii Preparatio and Demonstratio
Evangelica, are the fullest; and almost all of them have somewhat to this use,
as Justin, M. Athenagoras, Tatianus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexand. Origin
against Celsus, etc. Cyprian, Lactantius, Athanasius, Basile Gr. Nazianzene,
Nyssen, etc.

For my own part, I humbly thank the Heavenly Majesty, for the advantages which
my education gave me, for the timely reception of the Christian faith: But
temptations and difficulties have so often called me to clear my grounds, and
try the evidences of that Religion, which I had first received upon the
commendation of my Parents, that I have long thought no Subject more worthy of
my most serious faithful search; and have wondered at the great number of
Christians, who could spend their lives in studying the superstructures, and
wrangling about many small uncertainties, to the great disturbance of the
Church's peace, and found no more need to be confirmed in the faith. In this
enquiry, I have most clearly to my full satisfaction discerned, all those
natural evidences for GODLINESS or HOLINESS which I have laid down in the first
part of this Book. And I have discerned the congruous superstruction and
connection of the CHRISTIAN Religion thereunto: I have found by unquestionable
experience the sinful and depraved state of man: and I have discerned the
admirable suitableness of the remedy to the malady: I have also discerned the
attestation of God, in the grand evidence, the HOLY SPIRIT, the ADVOCATE or
Agent of Jesus Christ: viz. 1. The antecedent evidence in the Spirit of
Prophecy, leading unto Christ. 2. The inherent constituent evidence of the
Gospel, and of Christ, the Image of God, in the Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
both of Christ and of his doctrine. 3. The concomitant evidence of Miracles, in
the Life, Resurrection, and Prophecies of Christ, and in the abundant Miracles
of the Apostles and other his Disciples through the world. 4. The subsequent
evidence, in the successes of the Gospel, to the true sanctification of
millions of souls, by the powerful efficacy of Divine cooperation. I have
spent most of my life in converse with such truly sanctified persons, and in
preaching this Gospel (through the great mercy of God) with such success upon
no small numbers: so that I am certain by full experience of the reality of
that holy change, which cannot be done but with the cooperation of God. I have
seen that this change is another matter than fancy, opinion, or factious
conjunction with a Sect; [Even the setting up God in the soul as God, as our
Owner, Ruler, and Chief Good, and the devoting of the soul to him in
Resignation, Obedience and thankful Love; the seeking of an everlasting
felicity in his glorious sight and love in heaven; the contempt of this world,
as it pleases the flesh, and the holy use of it, as the way to our felicity
and pleasing God; the subduing and denying all carnal desires, which would
rebel against God and reason, and restoring Reason to the government of the
lower faculties: the denying of that inordinate selfishness, which sets up
our interest against our neighbors; and the respecting and loving our
neighbors as our selves; and doing to others as we would be done by; and doing
good to all men as far as we have power: the holy governing of our inferiors,
and obeying our superiors in order to these ends: living soberly, righteously
and godly in this world; and in the patient bearing of all afflictions, and
diligent serving God in our several places, to redeem our time, and prepare for
death, and wait with longing for the everlasting glory, the hope of which is
caused in us by faith in Christ, our Ransom, Reconciler, Example, Teacher,
Governor and Judge.] This is the true nature of the Religion expressed in the
Gospel, and impressed on the souls of sanctified men. By this effect, I know
that Christ is the Savior of the world, and no deceiver, as I know a man to be
a true Physician and no deceiver, when I see him ordinarily and thoroughly
perform the cures which he undertaketh. He saves us actually from the power of
our sins, and brings up our hearts to God, and therefore we may boldly say,
He is our Savior: This witness through his mercy I have in my self, and is
always with me, and in those whom I converse with round about me. I have also
upon just enquiry found, that the witnesses of Christ's Resurrection and
Miracles have delivered us their testimony with a threefold evidence: 1. The
evidence of just credibility to a humane belief. 2. The evidence of natural
certainty in the natural impossibilities of deceit. 3. The evidence of
supernatural divine attestation, in, 1. The Image of God on their hearts and
doctrine: 2. Their miracles: and, 3. Their sanctifying success. And I have
found that the witnesses of the Miracles of the Apostles themselves, have also
given us the same three degrees of proof of the Verity of their testimony;
though Miracles continue not now as then. And I have looked round about me in
the world, as diligently and impartially as I could, to see whether Christ, and
the way which he has prescribed us, have any competitor which may make it
difficult, to resolve which to prefer and follow. And as I have found that none
but GOD alone has absolute Dominion and Sovereignty over us, and is our chief
Benefactor, nor fit to be our felicity and ultimate end; so I have found, that
there is no one so fit to be taken for our Mediator and the Way to God, as
Jesus Christ: none else that has a natural aptitude, none else among men that
is perfect without sin, that has conquered Satan, the world and death; that is
a Messenger from Heaven so infallible and sure; whose Doctrine and Life is
suited to our case: none else that is become a Sacrifice for our sins, and has
risen from the dead, and ascended into Glory, and does govern and preserve us,
and will judge the world, and has power to give the holy Ghost, both for Gifts
and Graces, nor that actually gives it to the sanctifying of all his sincere
followers; none else that has such a Church and Kingdom, contemning the world,
and contemned by the world, and so truly fitted to the pleasing of God, and the
future fruition of him in Glory. I see that Judaism is but the porch of
Christianity; and if Christ had not confirmed the verity of the Old Testament
to me, I should have found the difficulty of believing it much greater. And as
for Mahometanism, besides the common truths which it retains, (of the Unity
of the Godhead, the Verity of Christ, and the Life to come, etc.) there is
nothing else which at all inviteth my understanding. And as for Heathenism, the
case that it has brought the miserable world into, is much to be pitied and
deplored: Leg. Idiotae contemtemplat. de Amore Dei.
Much precious truth is revealed to us by Nature; but experience tells us of
the need of more: and Christianity has all which Nature teaches, with a great
deal more. So that Christianity has no considerable competitor.

And as for worldly wealth and honor, superiority and command of others, the
favor, applause and praise of great ones, or of the multitude, voluptuousness,
and fleshly delights, etc. ease, long life, or any accommodations of the flesh,
yea, learning it self, as it is but the pleasing of the fancy in the knowledge
of unnecessary things; all these I have perused, and found them to be deceit
and trouble: a glimpse of heaven, a taste of the love of God in Christ, yea, a
fervent desire after God, yea, a penitent tear, is better than them all, and
yields a delight which leaves a better taste behind it, and which my Reason
more approves in the review: and the vanity of all inferior pleasures
appears to me in the common effects: they distract and corrupt the minds of
those that have the greatest measure of them, and make them the calamity of
their times, the furious afflicters of the upright, and the pity of all sober
standers-by, who see them turn the world into a Bedlam: and how all their
honor, wealth and sport will leave them at a dying hour, and with what
dejected minds unwelcome death will be entertained by them, and with what sad
reviews they will look back upon all their lives, and in what sordid dust and
darkness they must leave the rotting flesh, when their souls are gone to
receive their doom, before the Judge of all the world. All these are things
which were past all doubt with me, since I had any solid use of reason, and
things which are still before my eyes.

Wherefore, my God, I look to Thee, I come to Thee, to Thee alone! No man, no
worldly creature Made me; none of them did Redeem me; none of them did Renew my
soul, none of them will justify me at thy Bar, nor forgive my sin, nor save me
from thy penal Justice: none of them will be a full or a perpetual felicity or
portion for my soul. I am not a stranger to their promises and performances: I
have trusted them too far, and followed them too long! O that it had been less,
(though I must thankfully acknowledge, that Mercy did early show me their
deceit, and turn my enquiring thoughts to thee:) to thee I resign my self, for
I am thine own! to thee I subject all the powers of my soul and body, for thou
art my Rightful Sovereign Governor: from thee I thankfully accept of all the
benefits and comforts of my life: Illa enim gloria quid est nifi aeternum
Angelorum ^eatorumque spirituum convivium, quod est semper laudare Deum? Ad hoc
vitae praesentis inopia nullatenu, valet contingere. Scire autem ubi sit, and
praegustare, illud gaudio spei, fitire and esurire quod gustaveris, haec est
illa quae dicitur sanctorum in hac vita perfectio. Hugo a S. Victore Erud.
Theol. de offic. eccl. l. 2. cap. 19.
in thee I expect my true felicity and content: to know thee, and love thee,
and delight in thee, must be my blessedness, or I must have none. The little
tastes of this sweetness which my thirsty soul has had, do tell me that there
is no other real joy. I feel that thou have made my mind to know thee, and I
feel thou have made my heart to love thee, my tongue to praise thee, and all
that I am and have to serve thee! And even in the panting languishing desires
and motions of my soul, I find that thou, and only thou, art its resting place:
and though Love do now but search, and pray, and cry, and weep, and is reaching
upward, but cannot reach, the glorious light, the blessed knowledge, the
perfect love, for which it longs; yet by its eye, its aim, its motions, its
moans, its groans, I know its meaning, where it would be, and I know its end.
My displaced soul will never be well, till it come near to thee, till it know
thee better, till it love thee more. It loves it self, and justifyeth that self
love, when it can love thee: it loathes it self, and is weary of it self as a
lifeless burden, when it feels no pantings after thee. Were thou to be found in
the most solitary desert, it would seek thee; or in the uttermost parts of the
earth, it would make after thee: thy presence makes a crowd, a Church: thy
converse makes a closet, or solitary wood or field, to be kin to the Angelical
Chore. The creature were dead, if thou were not its life; and ugly, if thou
were not its beauty; and insignificant, if thou were not its sense. The soul is
deformed, which is without thine Image; and lifeless, which lives not in love
to thee, if love be not its pulse, and prayer, and praise, its constant breath:
the Mind is unlearned which reads not thy Name on all the world, and sees
not HOLINESS TO THE LORD engraven upon the face of every creature. He doteth
that doubts of thy Being or Perfections, and he dreameth who does not live to
thee. O let me have no other portion! no reason, no love, no life, but what is
devoted to thee, employed on thee, and for thee here, and shall be perfected in
thee, the only perfect final object, for evermore. Upon the holy Altar erected
by thy Son, and by his hands, and his Mediation, I humbly devote and offer thee
THIS HEART: O that I could say with greater feeling, This flaming, loving,
longing, Heart! But the sacred fire which must kindle on my sacrifice, must
come from thee; it will not else ascend unto thee: let it consume this dross,
so the nobler part may know its home. All that I can say to commend it to thine
acceptance, is, that I hope it is washed in precious blood, and that there is
something in it that is thine own; it still looks toward thee, and groaneth
to thee, and follows after thee, and will be content with gold, and mirth,
and honor, and such inferior fooleries no more: it lies at thy doors, and
will be entertained or perish. Though alas, it loves thee not as it would, I
boldly say, it longs to love thee, it loves to love thee; it seeks, it craves
no greater blessedness than perfect endless mutual love: it is vowed to thee,
even to thee alone; and will never take up with shadows more, but is resolved
to lie down in sorrow and despair, if thou will not be its REST and JOY. It
hates it self for loving thee no more; accounting no want, deformity, shame or
pain so great and grievous a calamity.

For thee the Glorious Blessed GOD, it is that I come to Jesus Christ. If he
did not reconcile my guilty soul to thee; and did not teach it the heavenly art
and work of Love, by the sweet communications of thy love, he could be no
Savior for me. Thou art my only ultimate end; it is only a guide and way to
thee that my anxious soul has so much studied: and none can teach me rightly
to know thee, and to love thee, and to live to thee, but thy self: it must be a
Teacher sent from thee, that must conduct me to thee. I have long looked round
about me in the world, to see if there were a more lucid Region, from whence
thy will and glory might be better seen, than that in which my lot is fallen:
But no Traveller that I can speak with, no Book which I have turned over, no
Creature which I can see, does tell me more than Jesus Christ. I can find no
way so suitable to my soul, no medicine so fitted to my misery, no bellows so
fit to kindle love, as faith in Christ, the Glass and Messenger of thy love. I
see no doctrine so divine and heavenly, as bearing the image and superscription
of God; nor any so fully confirmed and delivered by the attestation of thy own
Omnipotency; nor any which so purely pleads thy cause, and calls the soul from
self and vanity, and condemns its sin and purifieth it, and leads it directly
unto thee; and though my former ignorance disabled me to look back to the Ages
past, and to see the methods of thy providence, and when I look into thy Word,
disabled me from seeing the beauteous methods of thy Truth; thou have given me
a glimpse of clearer light, which has discovered the reasons and methods of
grace, which I then discerned not: and in the midst of my most hideous
temptations and perplexed thoughts, thou kepst alive the root of faith, and
kepst alive the love to thee and unto Holiness which it had kindled. Thou have
mercifully given me the witness in my self; not an unreasonable persuasion in
my mind, but that renewed nature, those holy and heavenly desires and delights,
which sure can come from none but thee. And O how much more have I perceived in
many of thy servants, than in my self! thou have cast my lot among the souls
whom Christ has healed, I have daily conversed with those whom he has raised
from the dead. I have seen the power of thy Gospel upon sinners: All the love
that ever I perceived kindled toward thee, and all the true obedience that
ever I saw performed to thee, has been effected by the word of Jesus Christ:
how often has his Spirit helped me to pray! and how often have thou heard those
prayers! what pledges have thou given to my staggering faith, in the words
which prayer has procured, both for my self and many others? And if Confidence
in Christ be yet deceit, must I not say that thou have deceived me? who I know
can neither be deceived, or by any falsehood or seduction deceive.

On thee therefore, O my dear Redeemer, do I cast and trust this sinful soul!
with Thee and with thy holy Spirit I renew my Covenant; I know no other; I have
no other; I can have no other Savior but thy self: To thee I deliver up this
soul which thou have redeemed, not to be advanced to the wealth, and honors,
and pleasures of this world; but to be delivered from them, and to be healed of
sin, and brought to God; and to be saved from this present evil world, which is
the portion of the ungodly and unbelievers: to be washed in thy Blood, and
illuminated, quickened, and confirmed by thy SPIRIT; and conducted in the ways
of holiness and love: and at last to be presented justified and spotless to the
Father of spirits, and possessed of the glory which thou have promised. O thou
that have prepared so dear a medicine for the clensing of polluted guilty
souls, leave not this unworthy soul in its guilt, or in its pollution! O thou
that know the Father, and his Will, and art nearest to him, and most beloved
of him, cause me in my degree to know the Father; acquaint me with so much of
his will, as concerns my duty, or my just encouragement: leave not my soul to
groap in darkness, seeing thou art the Sun and Lord of Light. O heal my
estranged thoughts of God! is he my light, and life, and all my hope? and must
I dwell with him for ever? and yet shall I know him no better than thus? shall
I learn no more that have such a Teacher? and shall I get no nearer him, while
I have a Savior and a Head so near? O give my faith a clearer prospect into
that better world! and let me not be so much unacquainted with the place in
which I must abide for ever! And as thou have prepared a Heaven for holy souls,
prepare this too-unprepared soul for Heaven, which has not long to stay on
earth. And when at death I resign it into thy hands, receive it as thine own,
and finish the work which thou have begun, in placing it among the blessed
Spirits, who are filled with the sight and love of God. I trust thee living;
let me trust thee dying, and never be ashamed of my trust.

And unto Thee, the Eternal Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the
Son, the Communicative LOVE, who condescendest to make Perfect the Elect of
God, do I deliver up this dark imperfect soul, to be further renewed, confirmed
and perfected, according to the holy Covenant. Refuse not to bless it with
thine indwelling and operations; quicken it with thy life; irradiate it by thy
light; sanctify it by thy love; actuate it purely, powerfully and constantly
by thy holy motions. And though the way of this thy sacred influx be beyond the
reach of humane apprehension; yet let me know the reality and saving power of
it, by the happy effects. Thou art more to fouls, than souls to bodies, than
light to eyes. O leave not my soul as a carrion destitute of thy life; nor its
eyes as useless, destitute of thy light; nor leave it as a senseless block
without thy motion. The remembrance of what I was without thee, does make me
fear lest thou should withold thy grace. Alas, I feel, I daily feel that
I am dead to all good, and all that is good is dead to me, if thou be not the
life of all. Teachings and reproofs, mercies and corrections, yea, the Gospel
it self, and all the liveliest Books and Sermons, are dead to me, because I am
dead to them: yea, God is as no God to me, and Heaven as no Heaven, and Christ
as no Christ, and the clearest evidences of Scripture verity are as no proofs
at all, if thou represent them not with light and power to my soul: Even as all
the glory of the world is as nothing to me, without the light by which it is
seen. O thou that have begun, and given me those heavenly intimations and
desires, which flesh and blood could never give me, suffer not my folly to
quench these sparks, nor this brutish flesh to prevail against thee, nor the
powers of hell to stifle and kill such a heavenly seed. O pardon that folly and
wilfulness, which has too often, too obdurately and too unthankfully striven
against thy grace; and depart not from an unkind and sinful soul! I remember
with grief and shame, how I wilfully bore down thy motions; punish it not with
desertion, and give me not over to my self. Art thou not in Covenant with me,
as my Sanctifier, and Confirmer, and Comforter? I never undertook to do these
things for my self; but I consent that thou should work them on me. As thou
art the Agent and Advocate of Jesus my Lord, O plead his cause effectually in
my soul, against the suggestions of Satan and my unbelief; and finish his
healing saving work; and let not the flesh or world prevail. Be in me the
resident witness of my Lord, the Author of my Prayers, the Spirit of Adoption,
the Seal of God, and the earnest of mine inheritance. Let not my nights be so
long, and my days so short, nor sin eclipse those beams, which have often
illuminated my soul. Without thee, Books are senseless scrawls, studies are
dreams, learning is a glowworm, and wit is but wantonness, impertinency and
folly. Transcribe those sacred precepts on my heart, which by thy dictates and
inspirations are recorded in thy holy word. I refuse not thy help for tears and
groans: but O shed abroad that love upon my heart, which may keep it in a
continual life of love. And teach me the work which I must do in Heaven:
refresh my soul with the delights of holiness, and the joys which arise from
the believing hopes of the everlasting Joys: Exercise my heart and tongue in
the holy praises of my Lord. Strengthen me in sufferings; and conquer the
terrors of death and hell. Make me the more heavenly, by how much the faster I
am hastening to heaven: and let my last thoughts, words and works on earth, be
likest to those which shall be my first in the state of glorious immortality;
where the Kingdom is delivered up to the Father, and GOD will for ever be All,
and In all: of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things, To whom be
glory for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XIII. Consectaries: Vid. Pet. Damian: Dom. vobisc. c. 6. de unit. Eccles.
1. What Party of Christians should we join with, or be of, seeing they are
divided into so many Sects?
Psalm. 1. Mat. ^8.19. Act. 11*26.
I Shall briefly dispatch the Answer of this Question in these following
Propositions.

. 1. GODLYNESS and CHRISTIANITY is our only Religion; and if any party have any
other, we must renounce it.

1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 14.
. 2. The Church of Christ being his Body is but One, and has many Parts, but
should have no Parties; but Unity and Concord without Division.

1 Cor. 1.10. Act. 20.30. Romans 16, 17.
. 3. Therefore no Christian must be of a Party or Sect as such, that is, as
dividing it self from the rest, causing schism, or contention in the Body; or
making a rent unnecessarily in any particular Church, which is a part.

1 Cor. 3.3* 4, 5. Act. 24.14. Act. 28.22.
. 4. But when Parties and Sects do trouble the Church, we must still hold to
our mere Christianity, and desire to be called by no other name, than
Christians (with the Epithets of sincerity): And if men will put the name of a
Party or Sect upon us, for holding to Christianity only, against all corrupting
Sects, we must hold on our way, and bear their obloquy.

Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mar. 16.16. Heb. 6.1, 2, 3.
. 5. What CHRISTIANITY is may be known, 1. Most summarily in the Baptismal
Covenant, in which we are by solemnization made Christians, in which renouncing
the Flesh, the World and the Devil, we give up our selves devotedly to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifyer. 2. By the
ancient summary Rules of Faith, Hope and Charity, the Creed, the Lords Prayer
and the Decalogue. 3. Integrally in the sacred Scriptures, which are the
Records of the Doctrine of Christ and the Holy Spirit.

1 Cor. 14.26. 40.
. 6. But there are many circumstances of Religious Worship, which Scripture
does not particularly determine of, but only give general Rules for the
determination of them, (as what Chapter shall be read, what Text preached on,
what Translation used, what Meeter or Tune of Psalms, what time, what place,
what Seat or Pulpit, or Cup or other Vtensils, what Vesture, gesture, etc.
whether we shall use Notes for memory in preaching? what method we shall preach
in? whether we shall pray in the same words often, or in various; with a book,
or without; with many other). In all which the People must have an obediential
respect to the conduct of the lawful Pastors of the Churches.

. 7. Differing opinions or practices about things indifferent, Romans 14. and 15.
Gal. 2.13, 14, 15. Phil. 3.16, 17.
no nor about the mere integrals of Religion, which are not Essentials, do not
make men of different Religions or Churches (universally considered.)

. 8. Nothing will warrant us to separate from a Church as no Church, but the
want of something Essential to a Church.

. 9. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15. Col. 1.18. and 2.19. 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 4.12. and
5.23. Math. 28 19. 1 Cor. 5.
The Essential or Constitutive parts of the Church Catholic (or Universal) are
Christ the Head, and all Christians as the Members.

. 10. All sincere and sanctified Christians are the members of the Church
mystical, invisible, or regenerate: And all Professors of sincere Christianity,
that is, all Baptized persons, not apostatised nor excommunicate, are the
members of the Church visible; which is integrated of the particular Churches.

. 11. It is essential to particular political Churches, Act. 14.23. Phil. 1.1.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
that they be constituted of true Bishops or Pastors, and of flocks of baptized
or professed Christians: United in these Relations, for holy communion in the
worshipping of God, and the promoting of the salvation of the several members.

. 12. It is essential to a true Bishop or Pastor of the Church, Math. 28.19,
20. and 18.15.18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.36. Jam. 5.14. Act. 2.42.
Act. 8.1.
to be in Office, (that is, in Authority and Obligation) appointed by Christ in
subordination to him in the three parts of his Offices, Prophetical, Priestly
and Kingly: That is, to teach the people; to stand between them and God in
Worship; and to guide or or govern them by the Paternal exercise of the Keys
of his Church.

. 13. He that does not nullify or unchurch a Church, may lawfully remove from
one Church to another, and make choice of the best and purest, or that which is
most suited to his own Edification, if he be a Freeman.

Romans 9.3. 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
. 14. But in case of such choice or personal removal, the Interest of the whole
Church, or of Religion in common, must be first taken into consideration, by
him that would rightly judge of the lawfulness of the fact.

. 15. If a Church which in all other respects is purest and best, will impose
any sin upon all that will have local communion with it, Romans 3.8.
though we must not separate from that Church as no Church, yet must we not
commit that sin, but patiently suffer them to exclude us from their communion.

. 16. True Heresy, (that is, an Error contradictory to an essential Article of
the Christian Faith) if it be seriously and really held, Tit. 3.10. 2 John 10.
Heb. 5.11, 12. 1 Cor. 15 1, 2, etc. Luke 18.34. Joh. 12.16. Gal. 5 2. and 1.7,
8, 9. and 3.1, 2.
so that the contrary truth is not held seriously and really, does nullify the
Christianity of him that holds it, and the Church State of that Congregation
which so professes it. But so does not that fundamental Error which is held
but in words through ignorance, thinking it may consist with the contrary
truth, while that truth is not denied, but held majore fide; In isto
factiosissimo soeculo, vix quisquam eximie doctus haereseos suspicione carebat.
Erasm. in Vita Hieronym.

Et profecto ita est, ut id habendum sit antiquissimum and Deo proximum, quod
sit optimum. Cic. de leg. l. 2. p. 244.


so that we have reason to believe that if they did discern the contradiction,
they would rather forsake the error than the truth.

But of this more elsewhere.

CHAP. XIV. Consectary II. I entreat the Reader to peruse the Lord Bacons
Considerations, and Mr. Hales of Schism, and Mr. Stillingfleets. Ireni^on,
especially page 117. and Mr. Jer. Buroughs Irenicon: which will all much
promote his understanding in this point: And Grotius de Imper. sum. pa.
Of the true Interest of Christ, and his Church, and the Souls of Men: Of the
means to promote it; and its Enemies and Impediments in the World.
SO great and common is the Enmity against Christianity in the World, yea,
against the life and reality of it in all the Hypocrites of the Visible Church,
that the guilty will not bear the detection of their guilt; And therefore the
Reader must excuse me for passing over the one half of that which should be
said upon this subject, because they that need it cannot suffer it.

. 1. Luke 14.26, 29, 33.
Every true Christian prefers the Interest of Christ and of Religion, before
all worldly Interest of his own, or any others.

For he that sets himself or any thing above his God, has indeed no God:
For if he be not Maximus, Sapientissimus, Optimus, Greatest, Wisest and Best,
he is not God: And if he be not really taken as such, he is not taken for their
God. And he that has no God, has no Religion. And he that has no Religion is
no Christian: And if he call himself a Christian, he is an Hypocrite.

. 2. Romans 9.3. and 15.7. 1 Cor. 10.31. Ephesians. 1.12.14.
Though we must prefer the Interest of Christ and the Church above the
Interest of our Souls: yet must we never set them in competition or opposition,
but in a due conjunction, though not in an equality.

I add this to warn men of some common dangerous errors in this point: some
think that if they do but feel themselves more moved with another Ministers
preaching, or more edified with another way of Discipline, they may presently
withdraw themselves to that Minister or Discipline, without regard to the Unity
and good of the Church where they are, or whatever public evil follow it.
Whereas he that seems to deny even to his Soul some present edification for
the public good, shall find that even this will turn to his greater
edification.

And some, on the contrary extreme, have got a conceit that till they can find
that they can be content to be damned for Christ, if God would so have it, they
are not sincere. Which is a case that no Christian should put to his own heart,
being such as God never put to any man: All the trial that God puts us to,
is but whether we can deny this transitory life, and the vanities of the World,
and the pleasures of the flesh, for the Love of God, and the Hopes of Glory:
And he that does thus much shall undoubtedly be saved. But to think that you
must ask your hearts such a question, as whether you can be content to be
damned for Christ, is but to abuse God and your selves. Indeed both Reason and
Religion command us, to esteem God infinitely above our selves, and the
Churches welfare above our own; because that which is best, must be best
esteemed and loved: But yet though we must ever acknowledge this inequality,
Yet that we must never disjoyn them nor set them in a positive opposition or
competition, nor really do any thing which tends to our damnation, upon any
pretense of the Churches good, is past all question. He that has made the love
of our selves and felicity inseparable from man, has made us no duty
inconsistent with this inclination, that is, with our humanity it self: For God
has conjoined these necessary ends, and we must not separate them.

Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Col. 1.24. 1 Timothy 4.16. and 4.7.8

Romans 11.36. Prove. 16.4. 1 Cor. 10.31.


. 3. The Interest of the Church, is but the Interest of the Souls that
constitute the Church, and to prefer it above our own, is but to prefer
many above one.

. 4. He that does most for the public good, and the Souls of many, does
thereby most effectually promote his own consolation and salvation.

. 5. The Interest of God, is the Vltimate End of Religion, Church, and
particular Souls.

. 6. Gods Interest is not any addition to his Perfection or Blessedness; Ephesians.
3.10.21. and 5.27, 29. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10, 11.

Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Math. 25.


but the pleasing of his Will in the Glory of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness
shining forth in Jesus Christ, and in his Church.

. 7. Therefore to promote Gods Interest, is by promoting the Churches Interest.

. 8. The Interest of the Church consists, I. Intensive, in its HOLINESS: II.
Conjunctive and harmonice, in its Unity, Concord, and Order: III. Extensive, in
its increase and the multiplication of Believers.

Ephesians. 5.25.26. Tit. 2.19. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. and 1.3.14, 15, 16.22, 8, 6.
. 9. I. The HOLINESS of the Church consists, 1. In its Resignation and
submission to God its Owner. 2. In its subjection and obedience to God its
Ruler. 3. In its Gratitude and Love to God its Benefactor and Ultimate End.

Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 1.18. Math. 28.19. Heb. 5.9.
. 10. These acts consist, 1. In a right estimation and Belief of the mind: 2.
In a right Volition, Choice and Resolution of the Will: 3. In the right
ordering of the Life.

Mat. 28.20. Gal. 1.7. 2 Timothy 1.13. Act. 20.20, etc. 1 Timothy 4.2. 1 Timothy 5.17.
. 11. The Means of the Churches HOLINESS are these: 1. Holy Doctrine: Because
as all Holiness enters by the understanding, so Truth is the instrumental
cause of all.

. 12. 2. The holy, serious, reverent, skillful and diligent preaching of this
doctrine, by due explication, proof and application, suitably to the various
auditors. Act. 20. 1 Timothy ^.18, 19. and 3.2. and 4 12.

1 Cor. 5. Mat. 18.15 2 Thessalonians. 3. Romans 16.16, 17. 1 Timothy 5.20.




. 13. 3. The holy lives and private converse of the Pastors of the Church.

. 14. 4. Holy Discipline faithfully administered; encouraging all that are
godly, and comforting the penitent, and humbling the proud, and disgracing open
sin, and casting out the proved impenitent gross sinners, that they infect not
the rest, embolden not the wicked, and dishonor not the Church in the eyes of
the unbelievers. Act. 20. 2 Timothy 2.15.2. and 1 Timothy 3.2. 3 John 8. Act. 18.26.
Romans 16.3. 1 Timothy 6.18. Tit. 3.8.


. 15. 5. The election and ordination of able and holy Pastors, fit for this
work.

. 16. 6. The conjunct endeavors of the wisest and most experienced members of
the flock, not usurping any Ecclesiastical office, but by their wisdom, and
authority, and example in their private capacities, seconding the labors of
the Pastors, and not leaving all to be done by them alone. 1 Timothy 3.5. Ephesians.
6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. and 11.18, 19. Act. 10.2, 24.


. 17. 7. Especially the holy instructing and governing of families, by
catechizing inferiors, and exhorting them to the due care of their souls, and
helping them to understand and remember the public teaching of the Pastors,
and praying and praising God with them, and reading the Scripture and holy
books, especially on the Lord's day; 1 Pet. 3.2. Phil. 2.15. 2 Pet. 3.14. Tit.
2.5. 1 Timothy 6.1. Romans 2.24.

Joh. 17.21. 1 Cor. 1.10.

Isa. 32.1. and 52.5. and 49.23. Hos. 8.4, 5. Psalm. 2. Dan. 9.6, 8. Romans 13.3,
5, 6.

2 Pet. 2. Gal. 1.7, 8. 1 Timothy 3.6. and 5.22. and 4.15 16. and 6.4, 5. 1 Cor.
5. 1 Timothy 3.7. Mar. 9.38, 39. Phil. 1.15. Jam. 3.1.15, 17. 1 Samuel 2. Act.
20.30, 31. Romans 16.16, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 26.14, 15. Ezekiel. 22.27.
Hos. 9.15. and 7.3. Zeph. 3.3. 1 Cor. 2.6, 8.


and laboring to reform their lives.

. 18. 8. The blameless lives, and holy conference, converse and example of the
members of the Church among themselves: Holiness begets holiness, and
increases it, as fire kindles fire.

. 19. 9. The unity, concord, and love of Christians to one another.

. 20. 10. And lastly, holy Princes and Magistrates, to encourage piety, and to
protect the Church, and to be a terror to evil doers. These are the means of
holiness.

. 21. The contraries of all these may easily be discerned to be the destroyers
of holiness, and pernicious to the Church. 1. Unholy doctrine. 2. Ignorant,
unskilful, negligent, cold or envious preaching. 3. The unholy lives of them
that preach it. 4. Discipline neglected, or perverted, to the encouraging of
the ungodly, and afflicting of the most holy and upright of the flocks. 5. The
election or ordination of insufficient, negligent, or ungodly Pastors. 6. The
negligence of the wisest of the flock, or the restraint of them by the spirit
of jealousy and envy, from doing their private parts in assistance of the
Pastors. 7. The neglect of holy instructing, and governing of families; and the
lewd example of the governors of them. 8. The scandalous or barren lives of
Christians. 9. The divisions and discord of Christians among themselves. 10.
And bad Magistrates, who give an ill example, or afflict the godly, or
encourage vice, or at least suppress it not.

22. To these may be added, 1. The degenerating of Religious strictness, Math.
15.2, 3, 9, 11, 13. Col. 2.20* 21, 2^. Mar. 2 26. Luke 6.2. and 13, 14, 15.
Joh. 5.18. Joh. 11.49. and 18.13. Act 4.6. and 23.2. 2 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6.12. and 1 Timothy 4 15. Math. 9.37, 38. 1 Cor. 3.9. Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.3. 1 Cor. 14.26, 15,
16.31, 33, 34, 35. Math. 15.9, 13. Romans 14. and 15. Act. 15.28. 1 John 4.1. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. 1 King. 22.22, 23. 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. Matthew. 24.24. Matthew.
15.2.11.13. and 12.2. Luke 13.14, 15. Joh 4.16. Luke 9.54. Act. 11.36. and
22.22. Romans 10.2. Prove. 1.32. Jam. 5.5, 6.
from what God requires, into another thing, by humane corruptions gradually
introduced; as is seen among too many Friars, as well as in the Pharisees of
old. 2. A degenerating of holy Institutions of Christ, into another thing, by
the like gradual corruptions, as is seen in the Roman Sacrifice of the Mass. 3.
The degenerating of Church-Offices by the like corruptions, as is seen in the
Papacy, and its manifold supporters. 4. The diversion of the Pastors of the
Church to secular employments. 5. The diminishing the number of the Pastors of
the Church, as proportioned to the number of souls: as if one schoolmaster
alone should have ten thousand scholars; or ten thousand soldiers but one or
two officers. 6. The pretending of the soul and power of Religion, to destroy
the body or external part: or making use of the body or external part, to
destroy the soul and power; and setting things in opposition which are
conjunct. 7. The preferring either the imposition or opposition of things
indifferent before things necessary. 8. An apish imitation of Christ by Satan
and his instruments, by counterfeiting inspirations, revelations, visions,
prophesies, miracles, apparitions, sanctity, zeal, and new institutions in the
Church. 9. An over-doing, or being righteous over much, by doing more than God
would have us, (over-doing being one of the devils ways of undoing) When Satan
pretends to be a Saint, he will be stricter than Christ, as the Pharisees
were in their company, Sabbath-rest and ceremonies: and he will be zealous with
a fiery consuming zeal. 10. Accidentally, prosperity it self consumes piety in
the Church: if it occasion the perdition of the world, the Church is not out of
danger of it.

Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 1.22. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians 4.15, 16.
. 23. II. The unity and concord, and harmony of the Church consists, 1. In
their Universal Adoption, or One Relation to God, as their reconciled Father in
Christ. 2. In the one Relation they have all to Christ their Head. 3. Romans 8.9.
and 10.15, 17, 8. Gal. 1.6, 7, 8. Phil. 1.17, 27. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. 1 Pet. 1.22.
Ephesians 3 17. and 4 16. Heb 10 24. 1 Cor. 1 10 1 John 3 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.
In the unity of the Spirit, which dwells and works in them all. 4. In
their One Relation to the Body or Church of Christ, as its members. 5. In the
unity of that Faith which stateth them in these relations. 6. In the unity of
the Baptismal Covenant, which initiateth them. 7. In the unity of the Gospel,
(in the Essentials) which is the common rule of their faith and life, and the
ground of their hope and comfort. 8. In the bond of mutual brotherly love. 9.
In the concord of a holy life. 10. In the unity of the End which they all
intend, and shall at last attain, (the pleasing of God, and the heavenly glory.)

. 24. The Means of this Unity and Concord are, 1. All, Phil. 2 4 ^1 2 Cor.
13.14. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.11, 15, 16. 1 Thessalonians 5.12, 13. Tit. 1 9.11. Luke
21.15 1 Timothy 3, 4 5, 6. 1 Pet 5.2, 3. Act. 20.20. etc. 2 Cor. 1 24. 1 Timothy 5 1.
Tit. 3.10. 1 Cor. 5. Joh. 17.21, 23. Act. 15. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
1 Pet 5.5. Luke 22.24, 26, 27. 1 Pet. 5.2.3. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7, 11. 1 King.
15.13, 29. 2 King. 10.17, 28. Rom 13.3, 4, 5, 6.
as aforesaid, which promote their holiness. From holiness is the centring of
all hearts in God: and it destroys that dividing Selfishness, which makes
men have as many ends as they are persons. 2. The learning and ability of the
Pastors, to hold the flocks together by the force of truth, and to stop the
mouths of cavilling dividers and seducers: When no gainsayers are able to
stand before the evidence of that truth which they demonstrate. 3. The holy
lives of Pastors, which keep up the love of truth and them in the peoples
hearts. 4. By the paternal government of the Pastors, ruling them, not by
force, but willingly, and in fatherly love, and a loving familiar converse with
them. 5. By the just execution of Discipline on the impenitent, that the godly
may see that wickedness is disowned. 6 By the concord of the Pastors among
themselves; and the prudent use of Synods or Councils to that end. 7. By the
humble and submissive respect of the people to their Pastors. 8 By keeping up
the interest and authority of the most ancient and experienced of the flock,
over the young and unexperienced, who are the common causes of division. 9. By
the Pastors avoiding all temptations to worldliness and pride, that they tear
not the Church, by striving who shall be the greatest, or have the preeminence.
10. By godly Magistrates keeping their power in their own hand, and using it to
rebuke intolerable false Teachers, and to encourage the peaceable, and
restrain the railing and violence of Pastors and parties against each other;
and by impartial keeping the Church's peace.

. 25. Hence the causes of Church-divisions are discernable. 2 Chronicles. 28.23.
Ezekiel. 18.30. Number. 32.23. 1 Timothy 3.6.
1. The increase of ungodliness and sin, which is as fire in the thatch, Ephesians.
4.14. 3 John 9, 10. 1 King. 2^.24, 25. 1 Cor. 1.11. and 3.3, 4. 1 Cor. 5.5, 12,
etc. Tit. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5 12, 14. 3 John 9.

Non qui jussus aliquid facit, miser est; sed qui invitus. Senec. ep. 62.

Nullum violentum est perpetuum.


and possesses all men with dividing principles, practices and ends. 2. The
disability of Pastors, over-topt in parts by every Sectary. 3. The ungodliness
of the Pastors, which looseneth the hearts of the people from them. 4. The
strangeness, violence, or hurtfulness of the Pastors. 5. The encouragement and
tolleration of all the most flagitious and impenitent in undisciplined
Churches, which frighteneth men out of the Church as from a ruinous house, and
tempts them to an unwarrantable separation, because the Pastors will not make
a necessary and regular separation. 6. The discord of the Bishops among
themselves. 7. The peoples ignorance of the Pastoral power, and their own duty.
8. An unruly, fierce, censorious spirit in many of the young and unexperienced
of the flock. 9. The Pastors striving who shall be the greatest, and seeking
great things in the world, or popular applause and admiration. 10. The
Magistrates either permitting the endeavors of dividing Teachers in palpable
cases; or suffering self-seeking Pastors or people to disturb the Church.

Jam. 4.1, 2 Phil 2.4 21. 1 King. 12.31, 32. and 22 27. Rev. 13.16, 17. 1 Cor.
12.12, 28. Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 13, 16. 3 John 9. Matthew. 15.2, 3. 1 Timothy 3.3.
. 26. But next to common ungodliness, the great causes of the most ruinating
Church-divisions, are, 1. Wars and dissentions among Princes and States, and
civil factions in Kingdoms; whereby the Clergy are drawn or forced to engage
themselves on one side or other: and then the prevailing side stigmatizeth
those as scandalous who were not for them, and think themselves engaged by
their interest to extirpate them. 2. Mistaking the just terms of union and
communion, and setting up a false center, as that which all men must unite in.
Thus have the Roman party divided themselves from the Greeks and Protestants,
and made the greatest schism in the Church that ever was made in it: 1. By
setting up a false usurping constitutive Head, the Roman Bishop, and pretending
that none are members of the Church who are not his subjects, and so condemning
the far greatest part of the Catholic Church. 2 By imposing an Oath and diverse
gross corruptions in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, upon all that will be in
their communion, and condemning those that receive them not, Act. 20.30, 31.
Romans 16.17. 1 Timothy 1.19 Ephesians. 4 14. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 23, 24, 25.
and so departing from the Scripture-sufficiency. These two usurpations are the
grand dividers.

. 27. All Heretics also, (who speak perverse things against Christianity, to
draw away Disciples after them) or Schismatics, (who unwarrantably separate
from those Churches in which they ought to abide, that they may gather new
congregations, after their own mind) are the immediate adversaries of
Church-union and concord. Romans 14. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. and 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Luke
22.24. 1 King 22.27. Gal. 5 15.


. 28. So are the importune and virulent Disputations of contentious Wits, about
unnecessary things, or matters of faction and self-interest.

. 29. Especially when the Magistrate lends his sword to one party of the
contenders, to suppress or be revenged on the rest, and to dispute with
arguments of steel.

. 30. Act. 15. Surely there is no better way to stop the rising of new sects
and schisms, than to reform abuses, to compound the smaller differences, to
proceed mildly, and not with sanguinary persecutions, and rather to take off
the principal Authors by winning and advancing them, than to enrage them by
violence and bitterness. Lord Verulam Essay, 58.
The well-ordered Councils of Bishops or Pastors of several Churches, assembled
together, have been justly esteemed a convenient means of maintaining the
concord and peace of Christians, and a fit remedy for the cure of heresies,
corruptions and divisions. And when the cause requires it, those councils
should consist of as many as can conveniently meet, even from the most distant
Churches, which can send their Bishops without incurring greater hurt or
discommodity, than their presence will countervail in doing good. And therefore
the councils called General in the Dominions of the Christian Roman Emperors,
were commendable, and very profitable to the Church, when rightly used. But
whereas the Pope does argue, that he is the constitutive Head of the whole
catholic Church throughout the world, because his Predecessors did often preside
in those councils, it is most evident to any one, who will make a faithful
search into the History of them, that those councils were so far from
representing all the Churches in the world, that they were constituted only of
the Churches or Subjects of the Roman Empire, and those that having formerly
been parts of the Empire, continued that way of communion when they fell into
the hands of conquerors; their conquerors being commonly Pagans, Infidels or
Arrian Heretics. I except only now and then two or three, or an inconsiderable
number of neighbor Bishops. There were none of the Representatives of the
Churches in all the other parts of the world: as I have proved in my
Disputation with Mr. Johnson, and desire the Reader, who thinks that his
Reply does need any confutation, but to peruse Ortelius, or any true Map of the
Roman Empire; and Myraeus, or any Notitia Episcopatuum, and withal the names of
the Bishops in each Council; and then let him ask his conscience whether those
Councils were true or equal Representatives of all the Christian world, or only
of the Subjects or Churches of one Empire; with a few inconsiderable accidental
auxiliaries: and if he smile not at Mr. Johnson's instances of the Bishops of
Thrace, (and other such Countries) as if they had been out of the verge of the
Roman Empire, at least he shall excuse me from confuting such Replies.

And since then Christ has enlarged his Church to many more Nations and remote
parts of the world, and we are not hopeless that the Gospel may yet be preached
to the remotest parts of the earth; and an equal just Representative may become
more impossible than it now is: Yet now such proper universal Councils are so
far from being the constitutive visible Head of the Church, (or the Pope as
there presiding) or any necessary means of its Unity and Peace, that rebus sic
stantibus, they are morally impossible. For, 1. Their distance is so great,
from Abassia, Egypt, Armenia, Syria, Mexico, New England, and other parts, to
those of Muscovy, Sweden, Norway, etc. that it will be unlawful and impossible
to undertake such journeys, and deprive the Church of the labors of the
Pastors so long on this account. 2. It cannot be expected, that many live to
perform the journey, and return. 3. The Princes in whose countries they live,
or through whose dominions they must pass, are many of them Infidels, and will
not suffer it, and many still in wars, and most of them full of
State-jealousies. 4. When they come together, the number (of just
Representatives, which may be proportioned to the several parts of the Church,
and may be more than a mockery or faction) will be so great, that they will not
be capable of just debates, such as the great matters of Religion do require:
or if they be, it will be so long as will frustrate the work, and waste their
age before they can return: when usually the cause which required their
congregating will bear no such delays. 5. They cannot all speak to the
understanding of the Council in one and the same language, (for all the
commoness of Greek and Latin) God has neither promised that all Bishops shall
be able to converse in one tongue, nor actually performed it. 6. Such a council
never was in any Christian Emperors time; for they neither could nor did
summon all the just Representatives of the Churches in other Princes dominions,
Isa 9.17. Phil. 2.21. Act. 8.18 20. 1 Timothy 6.10. 1 John 2.15. Gal. 5.11. and
6.1^ 13, 14.
but only those in their own.

. 31. The predominancy of Selfishness and Self-interest in all hypocrites,
(that are but Christians in name, and not by true Regeneration) and the great
numbers of such Hypocrites in the visible Church, are the summary of all the
great causes of Divisions, and the Prognostics of their continuance.

. 32. Unity and harmony will be imperfect, Luke 22.24. Act. 15.39. Gal. 2.12,
13, 14, 15.
whilst true Holiness is so rare and imperfect: And to expect the contrary,
and so to drive on an ill-grounded unholy unity, is a great cause of the
Division and distraction of the Churches.

. 33. When differing opinions cause discord betwixt several Churches, the means
of Christian concord is, Phil. 3.15, 16. Romans 14. and 15. 1 Pet. 3.15.
(not an agreement in every opinion, but) to send to each other a Profession of
the true Christian Faith, subscribed, with a Renunciation of all that is
contrary thereto; and to require Christian Love and Communion on these terms,
with a mutual patience and pardon of each others infirmities.

. 34. No Christian must pretend Holiness, Romans 16.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 12, 13. 1
Cor. 1.10. and 2. and 3. throughout.
against Unity and Peace; nor Unity and Peace against Holiness; but take them
as inseparable in point of Duty: And every tender Conscience should be as
tender of Church-division and real Schism, as of drunkenness, whoredom, or
such other enormous sins. Jam. 3.14, 15, 16, 17.

. 35. III. The extensive interest of the Church, consisting in the
multiplication of Christians, is 1. Principally in the multiplication of the
Regenerate-members of the Church-mystical: 2. And subordinately in the
multiplication of Professed Christians in the Church Visible.

. 36. It is not another, but the very same Christianity, Math. 28.19. Mar.
16.16. Ephesians. 6.24. 1 Cor. 16.22. Romans 8 9.
which in sincerity constituteth a mystical member, and in Profession a Visible
member of the Church (which is not two Churches, but one): so that all are
Hypocrites who are not sincere.

. 37. Math. 28.19.
The instituted door or entrance into the Church visible is by Baptism.

. 38. Act. 2.41, 42. Act. 8.37, 38.
The Pastors of the Church by the power of the Keys are Judges who are to be
admitted by Baptism, and to Baptize them: And the people are to take the
baptized for Church Members, and in point of public communion, to see as with
their Pastors eyes (ordinarily): though as to Private converse they are Judges
themselves.

See my Treat. of Confirmation,
. 39. Those that are baptized in Infancy, should at age have a solemn
transition into the rank of adult members, upon a solemn serious owning and
renewing of their Baptismal Covenant.

Act. 8.37. and 13.21, 22. Act. 2.41. Luke 14.16, 18, 2^ ^3.
. 40. God does not require a false profession of Christianity but a true: But
yet he appoints his Ministers to take a Profession not proved false, as
credibly true: Because we are no heart-searchers, and every one should be best
acquainted with himself; and God will have every man the chooser or refuser of
his own felicity, that the comfort or sorrow may be most his own: And a humane
belief of them that have not forfeited their credit, especially about their own
hearts, is necessary to humane converse.

Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. Math. 10.1. and 7.22, 23.
. 41. And God takes occasion of Hypocrites intrusion, 1. To do good to the
Church by the excellent gifts of many Hypocrites: 2. To do good to themselves,
by the means or helps of Grace which they meet with in the Church.

Mar. 16.16. Act. 5.13.
. 42. But the proper appointed place, which all that are not (at age) persuaded
to the profession of true Christianity, should continue in, is the state of
Catechumens, or Audientes; mere Learners in order to be made Christians.

Romans 9.6. Math. 13.41, 42, 47.20.22.
. 43. The Visible Church is much larger than the Mystical (though but one
Church) that is, the Church has more Professing than Regenerate Members, and
will have to the end of the World; and none must expect that they be
commensurate.

. 44. As a Corn Field, has 1. Corn, 2. Straw and Chafe, Math. 13.36.28. and
3.12. Psalm. 1.4. Jer. 23.28.
and 3. Weeds and stricken ears; and is denominated from the Corn, which is the
chief (preserved) part; but the straw must not be cast out because it is
necessary for the Corn; but the weeds must be pulled up, except when doing it
may hurt the Wheat, Even so the Church has 1. Sincere Christians, from whom it
is denominated; 2. Close Hypocrites, whose gifts are for the good of the
sincere, and must not be cast out by the Pastors; 3. Heretics and notorious
wicked men, who are impenitent after due admonition: and these must be cast
out, Math. 13.28, 29, 30.
except when it may hazard the Church.

2 Timothy 2.10. Joh. 11.^2. 1 Timothy 2.4.
. 45. The means of increasing the Church, must ultimately be intended always
to the increase of the Church mystical, for Holiness and Salvation.

. 46. These means are, 1. Act. 2.44, 46. and 4.32, 34. and 9 31. and 12.24.
Act. 9.15. 2 Timothy 2.21. Act. 20.20, etc. Joh. 17.24, 25. 2 Timothy 2.25. Joh.
4.22, 23, 24.
All the forementioned means of holiness: for holiness is the Church's glory;
the Image of God, which will make it illustrious and beautiful in the eyes of
men, when they are sober and impartial; and will do most to win them home to
Christ. 2. Especially the great abilities, holiness, patience and unwearied
diligence of the Ministers of Christ, is a needful means. 3. The advancements
of Arts and Sciences, does much to prepare the way. 4. The agreement and love
of Christians among themselves. 5. Love to the infidels and ungodly, and doing
all the good we can even to their bodies. 6. A spiritual, pure, rational and
decent worshipping of God. 7. And the concord of Christian Princes among
themselves, for the countenancing and promoting the labors of such Preachers,
as are fitted for this work.

. 47 The hindrances then of the Church's increase, Isa. 9.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Romans 2.21, 24. 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit. 2.5. 1 Pet. 3.16, 17. and 4.15. and 2.12.

Read Joseph Acosta of this at large. And Thom. D.S. Jesu de convers. Gent.

1 Cor. 14.2, etc. 7.10, 11, 14, 16, 22, 23.

Read Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection, p. 526.


and of the conversion of the heathen and infidel world are, 1. Above all, the
wickedness of professed Christians, whose falsehood, and debauchery, and
unholiness, persuades the poor Infidels, that Christianity is worse than their
own Religion, because they see that the men are worse that live among them.
And, 2. the badness of the Pastors, (especially in the Greek and Latin
Churches) and the destruction of Church Discipline, and impurity of the
Churches hereupon, together with the ignorance and unskilfulness of most for so
great a work, is a great impediment. 3. The defectiveness in Arts and Sciences.
4. The many divisions and unbrotherly contentions of Christians among
themselves, either for Religion or for worldly things. 5. Not devoting our
selves and all that we have to the winning of Infidels, by love, and doing them
good. 6. A carnal, Vos aeris tinnitibus and tibiarum sonis -- persuasum habetis
Deos delectari and affici, irasque aliquando conceptas eorum satisfactione
melliri. Nos inconvenient ducimus, quinimo incredibile judicamus, eos qui
gradibus mill genus omne virtutum perfectionis transierint summitate, in
voluptatibus habere arque in deliciis esse res eas, quas homo sapiens rideat,
and quae non aliis videantur continere aliquid gratiae, quam infantibus
parvulis and trivialiter and populariter institutis. Haec cum ita se habeant,
cumque fit opinionum tanta nostrarum vestrarumque diversitas, ubi ant nos
impii, aut vos pii; cum ex partium sensibus pietatis debeat atque impietatis
ratio ponderari? Non enim qui simulachrum sibi aliquod conficit, quod pro Deo
veneretur is habendus est rebus esse deditus divinis. Opinio religionem facit;
and recta de Dios men's: ut nihil eos existimes contra Decus praesumptae
sublimitatis appetere. Arnob. adv. Gentes l. 7. in Bib. Pat. Auct. To. 1. p.
60. Suppose these words spoken by us to the Papists.
irrational or undecent manner of worshipping God: for they will contemn that
God, whose worship seems to them ridiculous and contemptible. 7. The
discords, wars or selfishness of Christian Princes, who unite not their
strength to encourage and promote this noble work; Acosta is very large and
honest in this reproof and lamentation of the sins of the Clergy.
but rather hinder it, by weakening the hands of the laborers at home. 8.
Especially when the very Preachers themselves are guilty of covetous or
ambitious designs, and under pretense of preaching Christ, are seeking riches,
or setting up themselves, or those that they depend on. These have kept under
the Church of Christ, and hindered the conversion of the world till now.

Read Pet. Massaeus his Hist. Ind. and Epist. Jesuit. and Histor. Japon. and
Chin.

The King of Terenate told Sir Francis Drake, We agree with you in Religion
against the Portugals, that we must not worship flocks and stones. Fuller's
Holy State in the Life of Sir Francis Drake, out of a M.S. of one of his
company. What a scandal is such Worship against the Christian cause. Act. 9.31.


. 48. The attempts of the Jesuits in Congo, Japon and China were a very noble
work, and so was the Portugal Kings encouragements: but two things spoiled
their suceess, (which Protestants are not liable to:) 1. That when they took
down the Heathens Images, they set them up others in the stead; and made them
think that the main difference was, but whose Image they should worship: And
withal by their Agnus Dei's, and such like trinkets, made Religion seem
childish and contemptible. 2. But especially, that they made them see, that
while they seemed to promote Religion, and to save their souls, they came to
promote their own wealth, or the Popes dominion, and to bring their Kings under
a foreign power.

. 49. The honest attempts of Mr. Elliots in New England is much more agreeable
to the Apostles way, and makes more serious spiritual Christians. But the
quality of place and people, and the greatness of wants, does hinder the
multiplication of Converts. And higher attempts were very desirable.

As for the grand controversy of per se aut per alium, read Grotius de Imper.
page 290, 291. [Nam illud quod quis per alium facit, per se facere videtur] ad
eas duntaxat pertinet actiones, quarum causa efficiens proxima a jure
indefinita est.]
. 50. The translating of fit Books into the language of the Infidels, and
dispersing them, may in time prove the sowing of a holy fruitful seed.

. 51. Prosperity uses greatly to increase the Church extensively, in the
number of visible members; and adversity and persecution to increase it
intensively, by increasing holiness in the tried and refined: Therefore God
uses to send vicissitudes of prosperity and adversity, like Summer and Winter,
to the Churches, that each may do its proper work.

. 52. Every true Christian should daily lament the common infidelity and
impiety of the world, that the interest of true Christianity is confined into
so narrow a room on earth: and to pray with his first and earnestest desires,
that more laborers may be sent forth, and that God's Name may be hallowed, Dr.
Jer. Tailor of Repent. ^ref. [I am sure we cannot give account of Souls of
which we have no notice.]

Leg. Athanas. Patri. Constantine de necessaria Episcop. residentia.


his Kingdom come, and his will be done on earth, that it may be liker Heaven,
which now is grown so like to Hell. But yet to comfort himself in considering
(as is before said) that as this earth is to all the nobler world, but as one
molehill to all England; so if God had forsaken all, it had been but as the
cutting off a cancer from a man, or as the casting away of the paring of his
nails, in comparison of all the rest.

Therefore should we long for the coming of our Lord, and the better world,
which we have in hope. HOW long, Lord, holy and true, how long? Come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly, Amen. For we, according to his promise, look for new
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 14.

Exodus 6.12. Behold the children of Israel have not hearkened to me, how then
shall Pharaoh hear me? Ezekiel. 3. Not to many people of a strange speech, and of
an hard language, whose words thou can not understand: surely had I sent thee
to them, they would have hearkened unto thee. But the house of Israel will not
hearken unto thee, for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house of
Israel are impudent and hard-hearted.
October. 16. 1666.
THE CONCLUSION, Defending the Soul's Immortality against the Somatists or
Epicureans, and other Pseudophilosophers.
THough in this Treatise I have not wilfully balked any regardable objections,
which I thought might stick with an intelligent Reader, about the truth of the
things here delivered, yet those which are proper to the Somatical irreligious
sect of Philosophers, I thought fitter to put here as an Appendix by
themselves, that they might not stop the more sober in their way.

As to the Subject and Method of this Discourse, it consists of these four
parts: 1. The proof of the Deity, and what God is. 2. Of the certain
obligations which lie upon man to be holy and obedient to this God. 3. The
proofs of a life of Retribution hereafter, where the holy and obedient shall be
blessed, and the unholy and disobedient punished. Si vis Deorum speciem
apprehendere, proprietates Animae rationalis ultimae cogita, and oppositas in
perfectione Diis attribue. Jamblit. de Myster. per Fici^.
4. The proofs of the verity of the Christian faith.

For the first of these, (that there is a God) though I have proved it beyond
all rational contradiction, yet I have dispatched it with haste and brevity:
because it is to the mind as the Sun is to the eye, and so evident in all that
is evident in the world, that there needs nothing to the proving of it, but
to help the Reader to a rational capacity and aptitude, to see that which all
the world declares. The common argument, from the effects to the cause, in all
the entities and motions in the world, is undeniable. Whatsoever any Being
has, and has not originally from it self, or independently in it self, it
must needs have from another: and that other cannot act beyond its power, nor
give that which it has not either formally or eminently: Therefore he that
finds in the world about him, so much entity and motion, so much
Intellection, Volition and Operation, and so much Wisdom, Goodness and Power,
must needs know that all these have some cause, which formally or eminently, or
in a way of transcendency, has more it self than it gives to others. I
measured my endeavors about this subject, according as the occasions of my own
soul had led me: among all the temptations which have at any time assaulted me,
I have found those so contemptible and inconsiderable as to their strength,
which would have made me doubt of the being of a God, that I am apt to think
that it is so with others. And therefore in the review of this discourse, I
find no reason to stand to answer any man's objections, against the Being, or
essential Attributes or Properties of God.

And for the second point, (that we all owe to this God our absolute
Resignation, Obedience and Love, and so that Holiness is naturally our duty) it
does so naturally result from the Nature of God and Man compared, that I can
scarce think of any thing worthy of a confutation which can be said against it,
but that which denies the Nature of God or Man; and therefore is either
confuted under the first head, or is to be confuted under the third.

When Machumet had taken Constantinople, and demanded of the Patriarch an
account of the Christian says, Georg. Scholarius, alias Gennadius, then
Patriarch, wrote that brief summary which you may find in Mart. Crusius his
Turco Graec. l. 2. Hist. Eccles. p. 10, etc. which very well opens the
mystery of the Trinity, and of Christianity, with seven reasons of it.
As for the fourth particular, contained in the second Tome, (the truth of the
Gospel) I find not any reason to defend it more particularly, nor to answer any
more objections than I have done: for in proving the truth, I have proved all
the contradictory assertions to be false; and I have answered already the
greatest objections: and after this, to answer every ignorant exception of
unsatisfied persons, against the several passages of the Scripture, would be
tedious, and not necessary to the end of my design. And indeed I perceive not
that any considerable number are troubled with doubtings of the truth of the
Christian faith, in a prevalent degree, who are well convinced of those
antecedent verities of the Deity, and of the natural obligation and necessity
of Holiness, and of the Immortality of the soul, or of a future life of reward
and punishment; and that live in any reasonable conformity to these natural
principles which they profess. For when natural evidence has sufficiently
convinced a man, that he is obliged to be holy, in absolute obedience and love
to his Creator, through the hopes and fears of another life; he is very much
prepared to close with the design and doctrine of the Gospel, which is so far
from contradicting this, that it does but confirm it, and show us the way by
which it may most certainly be brought to pass.

And therefore my observation and experiences constrain me to think, that there
is no point which I have insisted on, which so much calls for my vindication,
as the third, about the Life to come.

I know there is a sort of over-wise and over-doing Divines, who will tell
their followers in private, where there is none to contradict them, that the
method of this Treatise is perverse, as appealing too much to natural light,
and over-valuing humane reason; and that I should have done no more but shortly
tell men, that All that which God speaks in his word is true; and that
propria luce, it is evident that the Scripture is the Word of God; and that to
all God's Elect he will give his Spirit to cause them to discern it: and that
this much alone had been better than all these disputes and reasons: but these
over-wise men, who need themselves no reason for their Religion, and judge
accordingly of others, and think that those men who rest not in the authority
of Jesus Christ, should rest in theirs, are many of them so well acquainted
with me, as not to expect that I should trouble them in their way, Tr^ Plat^
and Aristotle were of one opinion abode the Soul, Mirandula and Mars. Ficinus
upon Priscians ^heophrastus, de Anima, have largely labored to evince.
or reason against them, who speak against reason; even in the greatest matters
which our reason is given us for. As much as I am addicted to scribbling, I can
quietly dismiss this sort of men, and love their zeal, without the labor of
opening their ignorance.

My task therefore in this conclusion, shall be only to defend the doctrine
delivered in this foregoing Treatise, of the Life to come, Galen is known to
speak many objections against Plato, and the Soul's immortality: but in other
places he speaks doubtfully. And if really Ne^esius had those words out of
such a book of Galen, as he cites, de Any. c. 2. p. 481. he would then seem to
have thought better of the Rational Soul.
or the Soul's Immortality, against some who call themselves Philosophers. For
of men so called, it is but a small part who at all gainsay this weighty truth.
The followers of Plato the Divine Philosopher, with the Pythagoreans, the
Stoics, the Cynicks, and diverse other Sects, are so much for it, that indeed
the most of them go too far, and make the soul to be eternal both a part art,
and a part post: and Cicero does conclude from its self-moving power, that it
is certainly eternal and divine: Insomuch that not only Arnobius, but many
other ancient Christians, write so much against Plato for holding the soul to
be naturally immortal, and assert themselves, that it is of a middle nature,
between that which is naturally immortal, Plotinus his last words were ( as
Porphyry says in his life) [I am now returning that which is Divine in us, to
that which is Divine in the Universe.]
and that which is merely mortal, that he that does not well understand them,
may be scandalized at their expressions, and think that he reads the
Philosopher defending the souls immortality, and the Christian opposing it. And
though Aristotle's opinion be questioned by many, yet Cicero, who lived in time
and places wherein he had better advantage than we to know his meaning, does
frequently affirm, that he was in the main of Plato's mind; and that the
Academicks, Peripateticks and Stoics differed more in words than sense;
chiding the Stoics for their schism or separation, in setting up a School or
Sect as new, which had almost nothing new but words. Not only Fernelius (de
abditis rerum causis) but many others have vindicated Aristotle, however his
obscurity has given men occasion to keep up that controversy. And if the book
de Mundo be undoubtedly his, I see no reason to make any more question of his
meaning; much less if that book be his which is entitled, Mystica Egypt. and
Chald. Philos. which Aben Ama Arabs translated out of Greek into Arabic, which
Franc. Roseus brought from Damascus, and Moses Rovas Medicus Haebr. translated
into Italian, and Pet. Nicol. Castelinus into Latin, and Patricius thinks
Aristotle took from Plato's mouth.

It is only then the Epicureans, and some novel Somatists that I have now to
answer, who think they have much to say against the separated subsistence and
immortality of man's soul, which I may reduce to these objections following.

I. Matter and Motion, without any more, may do all that which you ascribe to
incorporeal substances or souls: therefore you assert them without ground. II.
To confirm this, the bruits have sense, imagination, thought and reason, by
matter and motion only, without immortal or incorporeal substances: therefore
by sense, imagination, thoughts or reason, you cannot prove that man has more.
III. Forms are but Accidents, that is, Qualities, or the mode of matter, and
not Substances different from matter: therefore it is so with humane souls. IV.
The soul depends upon matter in its operations, and acts according to it,
and not without it: therefore it is material, and consequently mortal. V. No
immaterial substance moves that which is material, or is the principle of its
operations: but the soul moves the body as the principle of its operations:
ergo. VI. If in our dreams the thoughts do operate only according to the
accidental irregular motion of the spirits, and sometime be so unactive, that
we do not so much as dream, then the soul is nothing but the said active
spirits, or some material corruptible thing: but, etc. ergo. VII. Sense is a
more perfect apprehension than Reason: therefore Bruits, which have sense, have
as noble and perfect a kind of soul as man; or at least reason is no proof of
the immateriality of souls. VIII. Sensation and Intellection are both but
Reception, and and the soul is but a patient in them: Ergo, it is not a
self-moving, and so not an incorporeal substance. IX. Nothing is in the
understanding but what is first in the sense: Ergo, the understanding can reach
no further than to sensible things: Ergo, it is it self of no higher a kind. X.
Corporeal objects move the soul: Ergo, it is corporeal. For things material
cannot work upon that which is immaterial. XI. If the soul were incorporeal, it
would know it self to be so: but it is not only ignorant of that, but has no
true notion, but merely negative, of immaterial beings. XI. That which is
generated is corruptible: but the soul is generated, as is proved by Senertus,
and many others. XIII. Quicquid oritur interit; that which is not eternal as to
the past duration, is not eternal as to the future duration: but all Christians
maintain, that the soul is either created or generated, and not of eternal
duration, as to what is past: and all the Philosophers, or most who took it to
be eternal as to future duration, went on that ground, that it was so
antecedently. XIV. You give us none but moral arguments for the soul's
immortality. XV. Nay, you confess, that the soul's eternal duration cannot by
you be proved by any natural evidence; though you think you so prove a life of
Retribution. XVI. The soul and body are like a candle, where oil, and week, and
fire, (which are all) are in flexu continuo, and as there is not the same
individual flame this hour as was the last, so neither have we the same
individual souls: Ergo, they are incapable of a life of Retribution hereafter.
XVII. If the soul be a durable substance, (as we must confess no substance is
annihilated) it is most likely to come from the anima mundi, or some universal
soul of that orb or system of which it is a part, and so to return to it again,
as the beams to the Sun; and so to cease its individuation, and consequently to
be incapable of a life of Retribution. XVIII. The Platonists who hold the souls
immortality, (and some Platonic Divines too) have so many fopperies about its
vehicles, regions and transmutations, as makes their principal doctrine the
less credible. XIX. If the soul should continue its individuation, yet its
actings will be nothing like what they are in the body; nor can they exercise a
memory of what they did in the body, as having not the material spirits and
nerves, by which memory is exercised: and therefore they can have no proper
retribution, especially punishment, for any thing here done. XX. The belief of
the immortality of the soul does fill men with fears, and take up their lives
in superstitious cares for a life to come, which might be spent in quietness,
and in public works: and it fills the world with all those religious sects and
controversies, which have so long destroyed Charity and Peace.

These are the Objections which I have here to answer.

OBJECTION I.
MAtter and Motion, without any more, may do all that which you ascribe to
souls.

Answ. When nothing seems to us more false and absurd, The Platonists opinion
that the Soul is all the Man, and that Animus cujusque is est quisque, is
incomparably more probable, and of honester tendency, than theirs that think
the Body is all the Man. Qui putant hominem esse ex Anima corporeque
compositum, consequenter utile a justo sejungunt; Qui vero hominem esse animam
conjungunt. Proclus de Anim. and doem. per Ficin

What then will they hold and do, that think man is tantum corpus. For as
Proclus there says, and Cicero often, most Philosophers agree that vivere
secundum suam naturam, is man's great duty and felicity: Therefore as men
differ about man's Nature, they will differ about his Duty and felicity: They
that think he is all Body, will describe his work and his happiness
accordingly* a truth of sad and desperate consequence.


than the matter of your objection; you cannot expect that your naked assertion
should satisfy us without proof: and a satisfactory proof must reach to all
the noblest instances, and must have better evidence than the bold and
confident affirmations of men, who expect that their conceptions should be
taken for the flower of reason, whilst they are pleading against the reasoning
nature it self. And to what Authors will they send us for the proof of this
assertion? Is it to Mr. Hobs? We have perused him, and weighed his reasons, and
find them such as reflect no dishonor on the understandings of those, who
judge them to be void of probability as well as cogent evidence. But after so
smart a castigation as he has received from the learned D^ Ward, (now Bishop
of Exeter) and from that clear-headed Primate of Ireland, Dr. Bramhal, I hope
it will not be expected, that I trouble my self or my Reader with him here. Is
it to Gassendus? He writes for the immaterial created humane soul himself. And
Charity obliges me not to charge him with prevarication, whatsoever to
Cartesius or any where else he writes, which seems injurious to this
Doctrine. And if Sorberius number it with his honors, (in vita Gassendi) that
Mr. Hobs could not sufficiently admire his works, Qui Heroem nostrum nunquam
majorem apparere pronunciabat, quam in retundendis larvis, tenues in auras tam
facile diffugientibus, gladio imperviis, nec ictum clava excipientibus: ita
enim sentiebat vir emunctae naris de Meditationibus Cartesii and de illa
Gassendi disquisitione, etc. It was because he weighed not honor in an English
balance, nor judged not of an Englishman by an English judgment, nor himself
well perceived what was indeed honorable or dishonorable in his friend. If
you send us to Epicurus and Lucretius, they are so overwhelmed with the number
of adversaries that have fallen upon them, that it is a dishonor to give them
another blow. Besides all the crowd of Peripateticks, Platonists and Stoics,
even the moderate latitudinarian Cicero has spit so often in the face of
Epicurus, that when Gassendus has labored hard in wiping it, he thought meet
to let this spot alone. But because it is only this sort of men, that are the
adversaries with whom we do contend, I will this once be so troublesome to the
Reader, as to give him first some general countercharges and reasons, against
the authority of these men; and next some particular reasons against the
objected sufficiency of Matter and Motion, to do the offices which we ascribe
to souls.

And, 1. When I find men dispute against Man, and reason against the power of
Reason, I think humane interest allows me to be distrustful of their
sophist^y, and to yield no further than I have cogent evidence. If man's soul
be his form, he denies man to be man, who denies him that soul.

2. I find Philosophers so little agreed among themselves, that it greatly
diminishes their authority and requires a man who is just to his reason, to
make a very accurate trial before he fall it with any of their opinions. Their
divisions are sufficiently opened and aggravated by Laertius, Cicero, and many
more of themselves; and contemptuously displayed by Hermas, Arnobius,
Athenagoras, Lactantius, Eusebius, and many other Christians. There are few
things that one asserteth, but there are many to rise up against him and
contradict it. They must better defend themselves against one another, before
their authority be much reverenced by others.

3. I find the wisest of them so conscious of their ignorance, that they take
most for uncertain which they say themselves; and confess they talk but in the
dark: which made the Pyrrhonians and Arcesilas have so many followers; and
Cicero with the Academicks so over-modest in disclaiming certainty and
confidence, and writing by Dialogues with so much indifferency and wavering as
they did. I need not send you to Zanchez his Nihil scitur, nor to our Mr.
Glanvil's Vanity of Dogmatizing, for satisfaction. The learned Gassendus his
modesty is sufficient, who if he speak of Occult Qualities, will ask you, What
Qualities are not occult? And if he speak of the magnitude and distances of the
Stars, will tell you how little possibility of assurance is left to mortals,
The truth is, as Fire is per essentiam, a moving, enlightening, heating
substance; so the soul is per essentiam, a Life or Vital Principle; and
therefore, as Porphyry argues, for the soul to die, is for life it self to
die; or that which is per essentiam life, to cease to be what it is.
about those things which others with over much confidence have asserted. And
about the case in hand, he could no better defend Epicurus against Cicero's
[Hoc est optare, and provincias dare atomis, non disputare] than by confessing
[ Vere quidem id objici; sed eam tamen esse ingenii humani imbecilitatem, ut
objici idem nemini non possit -- De ipsis principiis dicere nil aliud licet,
nisi quod haec isto, illa illo modo se habeant, ex suae naturae necessitate;
cum ignoremus germanam causam ob quam ita se habeant; immo cum ea frustra
quaeratur, nisi sit cundum in infinitum.. 1. l. 3. c. 7. page 275. And
ingenuously he confesses,. 2. l. 2. c. 3. p. 560. Verum quicquid dicatur
(scil. per Cartesium and Epicurum) hypothesis semper mera est, ac difficultas
remanet, fierique nihil tutius potest, quam profitendo ignorantiam, totum quem
videmus rerum ordinem in arbitrium, summi opificis confer. Dicere certe quod
aliqui, solemn v.g. idcirco hic potius quam alibi esse, quia ejus naturae ita
exigat, id quidem vere dicitur; sed interim nil aliud est, quam respondere
ipsum quaesitum, and dissimulando ignorantiam, videri esse animi in causam
optimam parum grati. Which is true and applicable to many other cases. And it
is ingenuously confessed lately by the very ingenious Mr. Samuel Parker, [ I am
lately grown such a despairing Sceptick in all Physiological Theories, that I
cannot concern myself in the truth or falsehood of any hypotheses. For though I
prefer the Mechanical hypotheses before any other, yet methinks their
contexture is too slight and brittle to have any stress laid upon them: and I
can resemble them to nothing better than your glass drops, from which if the
least portion be broken, the whole compages immediately dissolves and shatters
into dust and atoms: for their parts which rather lie than hang together, being
supported only by the thin film of a brittle conjecture, (not annealed by
experience and observation) etc. And upon the like reasons it is rejected by
that eminently learned and industrious man, Dr. Willis, de ferment. p. 3. At
quoniam principia sua supponit potius quam demonstrat, docetque qualis figurae
elementa ista corporum sint, non quae ipsa fuerint, atque etiam notiones
inducit valde subtiles and a sensu remotas, quaeque naturae phaenomenis quando
ad particularia descenditur, non satis quadrant, hac insuper habita, etc.

Quibusdam qui ne ignem calere putant, nisi cum manu contrectarint, nihil
credendum esse placet, quod supra progredientem naturam videatur. Multorum
quoque studia tardantur, quod id credere noluit quod minus sub ^orum
cognitionem cadit: quae errorum pravitas ex ingeniorum imbecilitate defluxit:
siquidem cum sensuum angustiae ex quibus hominem agnitio eruitur, in externorum
sensilium genere versentur, satis notum esse debet, his tanquam compedibus
intelligentiae cursum retardari, divinaque capessere nequire. Paul. Cartes^n 1
Sent. dis. 9. p. 22.
4. And I find that the Philosophers that have rejected or vilified Epicurus and
his way, have been very numerous; multitudes to a few, and of the most
venerable names in the ages and places where they lived; and no one sect of
them so vilified by the rest, as the Epicureans were by all.

5. I find also, that the most who in this age adhere to the Epicurean (or
Cartes^an) Hypothesis, are the younger sort of ingenious men, who have received
prejudice against the Peripateticks, Platonists and Stoics, before they did
ever thoroughly study them; but reverencing more some person noted for much
ingenuity, by his authority have been drawn to defend, what they scarce
understand themselves. And that it is the mere novelty of some of these
new-started notions, which makes them so much followed; as novelties in
Religion are with some young and wanton wits: and accordingly I expect, that
ere long they will grow out of fashion, and die again before ever they come to
have such supporters as the other Philosophy has had.

6. Respicere ad plurima, to take in all that must be taken in, is the
character of true wisdom. But I find that the Epicureans do respicere ad pauca;
they look so much at things corporeal, that they quite overlook the noblest
natures; and they reduce all to Matter and Motion, because nothing but Matter
and Motion is thoroughly studied by them. And like idle Boys, who tear out all
the hard leaves of their books, and say they have learned all when they have
learnt the rest; so do they cut off and deny the noblest parts of nature, and
then sweep together the dust of agitated Atoms, and tell us that they have
resolved all the Phenomenon in Nature.

7. And I find that they are very kind natured to their own conceptions, and
take those for demonstrations, which other men think are liker dreams.

8. I perceive that they are deluded by taking the vestigia and images of
things, for the things themselves. The Intellectual nature is the image of the
Divine, and the Sensitive of the Intellectual, and the Vegetative of the
Sensitive, and the Fiery of the Incorporeal. And when they can prove no more in
any of the lower, but such an image of the higher, they would on that advantage
confound them all; and would hence conclude that Bruits are intellectual, and
deny the differencing forms of all things.

9. I find that as they look so much at the Organ, as to overlook the Agent;
and look so much at the particles of matter, as to overlook the different
natures of it: so do they observe the second cause with so narrow a mind, as
much to overlook the first: or when they have acknowledged that there is a
God, they think they have done fair, though afterward they consider not that
interest of his in all operations, which their own concessions necessarily
infer.

10. Lastly, I perceive that they proceed not methodically in their
collections, but confound all by mixing certainties with uncertainties. Whereas
the first, the great, the most discernable truths, should be first congested as
CERTAINTIES by themselves, and the uncertainties should not be pleaded against
them, nor suffered to stand in contest with them.

Perceiving all these general Reasons to distrust this sort of Philosophers
above others, though I resolve to be impartial, I cannot willingly be so
foolish, as to overlook their disadvantage in the present cause.

II. The particular reasons which dissuade me from believing the Epicurean
sufficiency of Matter and Motion are these following.

1. They all (with whom I have now to do) are constrained to confess an
incorporeal intellectual substance; even that there is a God, and that GOD is
such. Epicurus himself does not deny it, yea, seems to speak magnificently of
God, and in honor to him would excuse his providence from the minding of
inferior things. For, 1. They know that matter did not make it self; and
motion is but its mode: and therefore matter cannot be made by its own motion.
Its being is in order of nature before its motion. And matter is in it self so
dull a thing, (and by the adversaries stripped of all forms, which are not
caused by motion) that if it were said to be from eternity in its duration,
they will confess it could be but as an eternal effect of some nobler cause. So
that at the first word they grant, that matter has an incorporeal cause. 2.
And motion, as it is found in matter, could not cause it self; though it be but
of the mode of matter, it is such a mode as must have a cause. Read the Mystic.
Egypt. and Chald. Philos. to prove that souls are not corporeal; and Nemesius
and Mammertus.
And the passive matter yet unmoved, is supposed by themselves to be void of
all antecedent moving power. So that they are all fain to say, that God made
the matter, and gave it the first push. And so all matter and motion is reduced
to a first efficient, who is incorporeal: And therefore an incorporeal being is
acknowledged.

If the soul be nothing but Matter and Motion, then no man is the same this
year as he was the last. For Matter is in fluxu continuo, as they object
themselves anon: We have not the same slesh and blood to day which we lately
had: and the motion of this instant is not the same with the motion which
succeeds in the next: So that no man's soul, and consequently no man, is long
the same: and so (as I have said after) Kings will lose their titles to their
Crowns, and all men to their lands, as being not the same who were born heirs
to them. And there must be no rewards or punishments, unless you will reward
and punish one for another's faults: And they need no more to fear the pain or
death which will befall them, than that which befall their neighbor, because
it is not the man that now is who must undergo it. Nor should any man have a
wife or child of his own one year together. If they like not these consequents,
let them either prove that Identifying Matter and Motion are permanent, or
grant that some other permanent thing does identifie the person. See this as
the argument of Ammonius and Numenias, pressed by Nemesius de Anim. c. 2. p. 477.
Vid. and Clean this argumenta pro animae corporeitate a Nemesio profligata
ibid. p. 479 etc.


2. I meet with none of them who dare deny this God to be an intellectual free
Agent; so that though it be granted them, that intelligere, velle be not in God
the same thing formally as it is in man; yet is it something which eminently
must be so called; man having no fitter conception or expression of it, than
from these acts of his own soul. Epicurus will not make God defectively
ignorant, impotent, or bad. When themselves divide all things into such as have
understanding, and such as have none; of which part do they suppose GOD to
stand? Things that are void of understanding, (formally or eminently) are below
the dignity of things that have understanding. So that they confess there is
existent an incorporeal, intelligent, free Agent.

3. As they confess that this intellectual Agent is the first cause both of
matter and motion, so they cannot deny that he still causes both, by his
continued influx or causing efficacy. For there can be no effect without a
cause; and therefore when the cause cease, the effect must cease. The
material part of a moral cause may cease, and yet the effect continue. But that
moral causation continues which is proportioned to the effect. The Parent may
die while the child surviveth: but there is a continued cause of the life of
the child, proportioned to the effect. Matter is not an independent being. To
say that God has made it self-sufficient and independent, is to say that he
has made it a God. Suppose but a total cessation of the Divine emanation,
influx and causation, and you must needs suppose also the cessation of all
Beings. If you say that when God has once given it a Being, it will continue
of it self, till his power annihilate it: I answer, if it continue without a
continuing causation, it must continue as an independent self-sufficient being.
But this is a contradiction, because it is a creature; GOD is no effect, and
therefore needs no cause of subsistence: but the creature is an effect, and
cannot subsist a moment without a continued cause. As the beams or communicated
light cannot continue an instant, if there were a total cessation of the
emanation of the luminary, because their being is merely dependent: and they
need no other positive annihilation, besides the cessation of the causation
which did continue them. It was from one of your own Poets that Paul cited, [In
him we live, and move, and have our being, for we are his offspring.] And
nothing is more abhorrent to all common reason, than that this stone or dirt,
which was nothing as yesterday, should be a God to it self, even one
independent self-sufficient being, as soon as it is created; and so that God
made as many demy-gods as atoms. We see past doubt, that one creature cannot
subsist or move without another, on which it is dependent; how much less can
any creature subsist or move without its continued reception of its Creator's
influx. If you could suppose that for one moment there were no God, you must
suppose there would be nothing. If I thought any would deny this, besides those
inflated vertiginous brains, that are not to be disputed with, I would say more
for the illustration of it.

Object. But though matter subsist not without a continued divine causation, or
emanation, or efficacious volition; yet motion may continue when all divine
causation of it cease: Because when God has given it one push, that causes
a motion, which causes another motion, and that another, and so in infinitum,
if there were no stop.

Answ. 1. If this were so, it must be on supposition of a vis motiva
communicata vel impressa: for if there had been no such, the first motion would
have not been, or all have presently ceased for want of a continued cause. As
there is no motion sine vi motiva, so none can be communicated, but by the
communication of that force. Action is not nothing: nor will be caused by
nothing: As the delapsus gravium would presently cease, if we could cause the
pondus or gravity to cease; so is it in all other motions. If there be no vis
or strength communicated along with the motion, there would be nothing in that
motion to cause another motion, nor in that to cause another. (And if it were
by way of traction, if the cause cease which is the prima trahens, all the
motion cease: and so also if it be by way of pulsion) So that in every
motion, there is something more than matter and motion.

2. All motion (of things below within our reach) has many impediments: and
therefore would cease, if the first cause continued not his powerful efficacy.
If the doctrine of Matter and Motion only were true, there would never be any
true miracles in the world, but all things go on from motion to motion as the
first touch did put them into a necessity: whereas (however the world has been
deluded by many fictions, yet) many certain miracles there have been. Whether
the removing of the mountain by says mentioned by M. Paulus Venetus, J. 1.
cap. 18. be true or not, and the non-dissolution of excommunicate bodies in
Constantinople, mentioned in Mart. Crusius his Hist. Eccles. Turco graec. l. 2.
with multitudes of the likes which most Historians have, etc. Yet certainly
that there have been some such, has been fully proved unto many.
It is tedious and needless to enumerate instances.

3. The moving power of the noblest creatures, is not purely active, but partly
passive and partly active, and must receive the influx of the highest cause*
before it can act or communicate any thing. Therefore as soon as the first
mover should cease, the rest would be soon stopped, though some active power was
communicated to them. As we see in a Clock when the poise is down, and in a
Watch when the spring is down; the motion cease first where it first began.

4. Can you constrain your reason to imagine, that God is the sole principal
active cause, for the first touch, and, as it were, for one minute, or instant,
(while he causes the first motus) and is an unactive being, or no cause ever
after, (save only reputative, because he caused the first.) This is to say,
that God was God till he made the world, and ever since he has done nothing,
but left every atom or creature to be God. Is God so mutable, to do all for one
instant, and to do nothing ever after?

5. The infiniteness and perfection of God fully proves, that all continued
motion is by the continuance of his efficiency. For it is undeniable, that he
who made all things is every where, or present to all his creatures, in the
most intimate proximity. And it is certain, that he cannot but know them all:
and also that his Benignity maintains all their beings and well-beings; and
therefore that he is not an unactive being; but that his power as well as his
wisdom and Goodness, is continually in act. How strangely do these Epicureans
differ from Aristotle? who durst not deny the Eternity of the World, lest he
should make God an unactive Being ad extra, from Eternity till the Creation?
When As these men feign him to have given but one instantaneous push, and to
have been coetera otiosus, or unactive from Eternity.

Seeing then it cannot by sober reason be denied, that God himself is by a
continued Causation, the Preserver and intimate first mover of all things, it
must needs thence follow, that matter and motion are still insufficient of
themselves: and that this is to be none of the Controversy between us: but
only whether it be any created Nature, Power, or other Cause, by which God
causes motion in any thing, or all things? or whether he do it by his own
immediate Causation alone without the use of any second Cause, save mere motion
it self? so that the insufficiency of Matter and Motion to continual
alterations and productions, must be confessed by all that confess there is a
God.

4. It is also manifest in the effect, that it is not a mere motion of the
first Cause, which appears in the being and motions of the Creature. There is
apparently a tendency in the Creatures motion to a certain end, which is an
attractive Good; and there is a certain Order in all motions to that end; and
certain Laws, or Guidances and overrulings, to keep them in that Order: so that
Wisdom and Goodness do eminently appear in them all, in their beings, natures,
differences, excellencies, order and ends, as well as Motion the effect of
Power. 1. It is certain that God who is unmoved himself, is the first mover of
all: 2. And if God were not unmoved, but by self-motion caused motion, yet he
exerteth Wisdom and Goodness in his Creation and Providence, as well as Motion.
1. He that is Infinite, and therefore not properly in any place or space, or at
least is limited in none, can himself by Locomotion move himself in none: which
methinks none should question: And they that make the World infinite, or at
least indefinite, as they call it, methinks should not deny the Infiniteness
of God: And they acknowledge no motion themselves but Locomotion, or migratio a
loco in locum. But says Gassendus, Vol. 1. page 337. Et certe captum omnem
fugit, ut quippiam quantumvis sit alteri praesens conjunctumque, ipsum moveat,
si in seipso immotum maneat, etc. -- Itaque necesse omnino videtur, ut cum in
serie moventium quorum moventur alia ab aliis procedi in infinitum non possit,
perveniatur ad unum primum; non quod immotum moveat, sed quod ipsum per se
moveatur. Answ. You gather from hence, that it is the contexture of the most
subtle Atoms which is the form and first mover in physical beings. But you
granted before, that God moved those Atoms, and also put a moving inclination
into them. And atoms are far from being unum or primum. You said before
[sufficiat Deum quidem esse incorporeum, ac pervadere fovereq, universam mundi
machinam.] And if so, then movere etiam as well as fovere. Either you mean as
you speak in confessing a God or not: If not, it is unworthy a Philosopher to
dissemble for any worldly respects whatsoever. If you do, then, Is it beyond
your capacity to conceive that God being unmoved moves all things? or not? If
not, why should it be beyond your capacity to conceive the same in a second
Order of a second spiritual being? The reason as to motion is of the same
kind. If yea; then either you believe God is the first Mover or not: If not,
withdraw your former Confession. If yea, what Locomotion (for you deny all
other) can you ascribe to God, who is unbounded and infinite? what place is he
moved from, and what place is he moved into? And is his motion rectus vel
circularis? is it one or multifarious? or rather will you not renounce all
these? 2. And as God moves being unmoved, so he does more than move: He moves
Orderly, and gives Rules and Guidances to motion; and moves graciously to the
felicity of the Creature, and to a desirable end. A Horse can move more than a
man; for he has more strength or moving power: But he moves not so regularly
nor to such intended ends, because he has not wisdom and benignity or goodness
as Man has. He that builds a House or Ship, or writes such Volumes as
Gassendus did, does somewhat more than barely move, which a Swallow or a Hare
could have done as swiftly: And he that looks on the works of God, even to
the Heavens and Earth as Gassendus has himself described them, and sees not
the effects of Wisdom and Goodness in the Order, and tendency, and ends of
motion, as well as Power in motion it self, did take his survey but in his
dream: says Balbus in Cicero de Not. Deor. l. 2. p. 62. Hoc qui existimat
fieri potuisse (that is, for the World to be made by mere fortuitous motion of
atoms, etc.) non intelligo cur non idem putet, si innumerabiles unius and
viginti formae literarum, aliquo coniciantur, posse ex his in terram excussis
Annals Ennii, ut di^inceps legi possint effici, quod nescio an in uno quidem
versu possit tantum valere fortuna. Quod si mundum efficere potest concursus
atomorum, cur porticum, cur templum, cur domum, cur navem non potest, quae sunt
minus operosa, and multo quidem faciliora? Certe ita temere de mundo effutiunt,
ut mihi quidem nunquam hunc admirabilem coeli ornatum, qui locus est proximus,
suspexisse videantur. Where he brings in this passage as from Aristotle, that
if we should imagine men to have lived in some Dungeon or Cavern in the Earth,
and never to have seen the Sun or Light, or World, as we do, and if there
should be a doubt or dispute among them, whether there be a God; and if you
should presently bring up these men into our places, where they might look
above them and about them, to the Sun and Stars, and Heaven and Earth; they
would quickly by such a sight be convinced that there is a God. But as he truly
adds, Assiduitate quotidiana and consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi,
neque admirantur neque requirunt rations earum rerum quas semper vident:
perinde quasi novitas nos magis quam magnitude rerum debeat adexquirendas
causas excitare.

But I suppose it will be granted me, that the first mover does more than
merely move, the effects of Wisdom and Goodness being so legible on all the
World; but you will say, that to do it wisely and to attain good ends by it, etc.
is but the modus of action with the effect, and therefore matter and motion
rightly ordered may be nevertheless sufficient to all effects. To which I
answer, that the Creatures motion requires not only that the Creator move
them, but that he place and order them, and move them rightly, and that he
remove and overcome impediments, etc. Therefore there is necessary in the first
mover, both Wisdom and Love as well as Power: And neither his Power, Wisdom or
Love are Locomotion in himself. And this much being proved, that in every
motion, there is Divine Power, Wisdom and Love, which is more than matter and
motion it self, I proceed next to enquire,

5. Do you think there is any thing existent in the World, besides matter and
motion, or not? As to mere site, and figure and other such order or modes of
matter, I know you will not deny them to have now a being as well as motion.
But is there no different tendency to motion in the parts of matter? Is there
not in many Creatures a Power, an Inclination, or aptitude to motion, besides
motion it self? Is there not a reason a priore to be given, why one Creature is
more agile and active than another? and why they act in their various ways?
Why is fire more active than earth? and a Swallow than a Snail? If you say,
that the different ratio motus is in some extrinsecal agent only which moves
them, you will hardly show any possibility of that, when the same Sun, by the
same virtue (or motion as you will say) is it that moves all: And if it were
so, you must go up to the first Cause, to ask for the different motions of
those movers; when our enquiry now is de natura moventium and motorum
Creatorum? If you say, that it is the Ratio recipiendi in the different
magnitudes or positions of the parts of matter, which is the cause of different
motions; I would know, 1. Whether this difference of magnitude and figure and
site, being now antecedently necessary to different motions, was not so
heretofore as well as now? If you say, No, you feign without proof a state of
things and order of Causes, contrary to that which all men's sense perceives to
be now existent? And who is the wiser Philosopher? he that judges the course
and nature of things to be, and have been what he now finds it, till the
contrary be proved? or he that finds it one thing, and feigneth it sometime
to have been another without any proof? That which is now antecedently
necessary to diversity of motion, it is like was so heretofore. 2. And then how
could one simple equal act of God, setting the first matter into motion, cause
such an inequality in motions to this day, if it be true that you hold, that
only that which is moved or in motion it self can move? and that motion is all
that is necessary to the diversity? 3. Either the first matter was made solid
in larger parcels, or all conjunct, or in Atoms: If it was made first in
Atoms, then Motion caused not Division. If it was made conjunct and solid,
then motion caused not conjunction and solidity. And if the first division, or
conjunction, site and figure of matter was all antecedent to motion and without
it, we have no reason to think that it is the sole Cause of all things now.

But surely quantity, figure and site, are not all that now is antecedent to
motion. Does not a man feel in himself a certain Power, to sudden and voluntary
motion? He that sat still, can suddenly rise and go: And if you say, that he
performs that sudden motion by some antecedent motion, I answer, that I grant
that; but the question is, whether by that alone? or whether a Power distinct
from motion it self, be not as evidently the Cause? For otherwise the
antecedent motion would proceed but according to its own proportion: It would
not in a minute make so sudden and great an alteration. I can restrain also
that motion which some antecedent motion ( e.g. passion) urges me to? Surely
this Power of doing or not doing, is somewhat different from doing it self. A
power of not-moving is not motion.

And what is the Pondus which Gassendus does add to magnitude and figure as a
third pre-requisite in Atoms? I perceive he knows not what to make of it
himself. But in conclusion it must be no natural Gravity by which the parts are
inclined to the whole in themselves, but the mere effect of pulsion or
traction, or both. At the first he was for both conjunct, pulsion of the Air,
and traction of the Atoms from the Earth: But of this he repented, as seeing
impulsionem aeris nullam esse: and was for the traction of Atoms alone. (Than
which, his Friends conceit of the pulsive motion of the Sun in its Diastole or
whatever other motion, is the cause, does seem less absurd.) But that man that
would have me believe that if a Rock were in the air, or if Paul's Steeple
should fall, the descent would be only by the traction of the hamuli of
invisible Atoms, (or by the pulsion of Air and Sun conjunct) must come nearer
first, and tell me how the hamuli of atoms can fasten upon a marble rock? and
how they come to have so much strength as to move that rock (which no man can
move in its proper place) if there be no such thing as strength or power
besides actual motion? and why it is that those drawing atoms do move so
powerfully Earthwards, when at the same time it is supposed, that as many or
more atoms are moving upwards by the Suns attraction, and more are moved
circularly with the Earth? why do not these stop or hinder one another? and why
does not the Rock as well go upward with the ascending atoms? And when the
Rock descends, does it carry down none of the ascendants with it? As likely
as for the descendants to carry down it. Are those atoms that carry down the
Rock, more powerful than an hundred thousand men, who could not lift it up at
all; much less so swiftly? And why do not the same (partial) atoms, bear down
a Feather, or the Birds that fly quietly in the air? And why feel we not the
power of their motion upon us? How easily can some men believe any thing, while
they think that their increase of wisdom lies in believing no more than
evidence constrains them to? If Gassendus his instance of the Lodestone put
under the balance to increase the pondus of the Iron, prove any thing, it will
prove something more than a traction of the hooked atoms, even the traction of
Nature that needs no hooks.

And mark, Those that fly to this ingenita dispositio vel pondus, will in other
words grant that Nature, form or quality which they deny. And those that grant
nothing to move but former motion, must needs make some degrees of motion daily
to diminish in the World, one thing or other still ceasing its motion; and all
motion within our knowledge having such constant impedition, that before this
time we may think all things would have stood still, if their opinion were
true. If they say that the Sun or some superior Movers renew the motion of
things inferior, I grant it; But that is because it has a moving nature: For
if they say, that the Sun it self has not the least impedition to diminish the
degrees of its motion, they speak not only without any proof, but contrary to
our observation of all things known, and to their own opinion, who make the Air
impeditive to other motions, and the effluvia of other Globes to be impeditive
to the Sun.
I pray you, what Gassendus grants, when he says [ Vnum omnino supponere par
est, viz. quantacunque fuit atomis mobilitas ingenita tanta constanter
perseverare, so that, says he, they may be hindered from moving, but not from
endeavoring to move and free themselves from their restraint. What need we
more than this? or what more do we plead for? It is granted us then that when a
moveable or active being is stopped from motion, it does not thereby lose its
mobile or active nature or disposition: And so, that it is not only motion that
causes motion; But that there is in atomis mobilitas ingenita, which
continues when the motion cease. You Will say perhaps, that he means only a
passive receptivity by which one thing is easier moved by an exterior cause
than another. But you mistake him: for he takes not mobilitas ingenita only
passively, but also actively, and therefore says, that [it endeavors to
move and free it self.] And lib. 5. c. 2. he says, [Non motus sed impetus, ab
initio perseverat; vel nisus perpetuus.] which is as much as I desire now. For
then there is somewhat besides matter and motion; even as Impetus and Nisus,
which must also come from a Power which per nisum and impetum does show it self.

And indeed, it does not only overpass our Reason, but contradict it, that mere
subtilty of matter, or smallness of particles, should be all the cause of
motion that is found in the matter it self. Must we believe that an Alcohol
impalpalile of Marble or Gold, if it could but be anatomized more, would be as
moveable as fire; or would thereby turn to fire it self: or as active as the
Vital and Intellectual Creatures; yea turned to such a thing it self: If all
matter was Atoms at first, then all was fire, and all was of one kind, and
equally moveable: And what has made the difference since? And if you will
feign that God made some parts Atoms, and some parts more gross; or that he
distinguished matter ab initio into Cartesius his materia subtilis, globuli
aetherei, and grosser matter, why may not we better say, that the same Creator
has distinguished matter by different natures and powers, which we find them
possessed of? And by what proof do you distinguish matter into those three
degrees, or sorts, any more than into two, or four, or six, or ten, or ten
hundred? who can choose but shake the head, to see wise Philosophers thus
impose upon the world? and at the same time say, It is the first duty of a man
that would be wise, to believe no more than by evidence he is forced to? Yea,
and at the same time to say, These are but our Hypotheses, which says one, I
acknowledge to be false, and says another, I cannot say is true: and yet they
are our foundation; and from these our Philosophical Verities result; which
must make you wise, who must believe nothing without proof. Alas, what is man!

And I would know whether they can prove against Gassendus, that Impetus and
Nisus vel conatus is ipse motus? when the heaviest poise is at a Clock that
stands still, the poise does not move; but it does niti vel conari: Hold but
a Weight of an hundred pounds of Lead in your hand, as immovable as possible,
I am of opinion you will feel that it does incline to motion, though it move
not. Is not this inclination then somewhat different from motion? If you tell
me again of nothing but the invisible tractive hooked atoms, I advise you to
involve a thousand pound of Lead in a sufficient Case of Feathers, which it
seems are charmed from the power or touch of atoms, and try then whether it be
no heavier than the Feathers are? The same I may say of a Spring of Steel which
is wound up in a standing Watch, or other Engine. There is no proof of any
motion: and yet there is a Conatus different from motion. You Will say perhaps
that the particles in the Steel are all in motion, among themselves: but when
will you prove it? and prove also that they are so in the Lead or Rock that by
Gravity inclines to descent? and prove also that the particles are moved by an
extrinsick mover only, and have no principle of motion in themselves?

Moreover, what think you is the nature of all our Habits? Is there nothing in
a Habit but actual motion? Suppose that you sleep without a dream? or that a
Lethargy intercept your intellectual motion? or that other business alienate
your thoughts? Do you think that all your Learning is thereby obliterated? Or
that you are after as unapt for your arts and trades as if you had never learnt
them? Let a Musician, an Astronomer, a Physician, try! whether they will not,
return more expert than an Idiot? what then is this Habit? It is not actual
motion it self? Else it would be totally extinct when the motion is but for an
hour intercepted. If you say, that there is other motion in us still, to renew
it: I answer, why should that other, ( e.g. the motion of the Lungs or Heart,
or the Circulation of the blood) make you an Artist the next morning, any more
than your Neighbor, if that were all? You Will grant, I suppose, that a Habit is
somewhat distinct from Motion, but it is the Effect of it only, and one of the
Phenomenon which we say that matter and motion are sufficient for. To which I
answer, Do you deny that a Habit does it self conduce to future motion, or not?
If not, it is no Habit: If yea, then as to future actions there is more than
matter and motion needful: and the Principles are more: And then what reason
have you to contradict us, who finding some Principles in Nature which conduce
to motion as much and more than Habits do, do assert such Principles? And how
know you that former motion proceeds not from such Natures, or Principles,
when you confess that later motions do so? If you say that Habits are nothing
but a Cursus motuum, as of water that by running in a certain Channel is
inclined to run that way again: I answer, They are certainly something that
remain when the action cease; and therefore are an Inclination ad agendum, as
well as a cursus actionum; And they are something that are active Principles,
and not only so many Channels which the Spirits have made themselves in the
brains and nerves: Otherwise the numberless variety of objects would so furrow
and channel the brain that they would consume it, (as gutta cavat lapidem, etc.)

6. And do you know what you oblige your selves to, when you undertake to solve
all phenomenon by matter and motion only? and how have you satisfied the
studious and impartial World herein? I hope you will not put off all questions
that are put to you, with these same two general words only? when we ask you,
what causes the descensus gravium, do not tell us, It is matter and motion:
but tell us the differences in the motion or matter which cause this effect as
different from others: What is the reason in motion that Fire ascends? what
is the reason that the motus projectorum does continue? why does the Ant take
one course, and the Be another, and the Fly another, etc. what different
motions are they that are the cause? what motion is it that causes the Hen to
sit on her Eggs in fasting and patience, and to know her Chickens, and to
cherish them till they are mature, and then beat them away? And so almost of
all other Birds and Beasts? What is the difference in motion that causes one
Creature to love this food, and another that; that one eats Grass, and
another Flesh? that every seed does bring forth only its proper species? what
are the differences in motion, which cause the difference in odor, and taste
and virtue, and shape of leaves, and flowers, and fruits, etc. between all the
Plants that cover the Earth? that all that come of one seed have an agreement
in leaf, and flower, and fruit, and odor, and taste, and virtue, e.g.
Germander, Betony, Peony, etc. what are the different motions that cause all
these differences? even in the very seeds themselves? To tell us only in
general that the difference is all made by motion, is to put an end to
learning, and studies, and to give one answer to all the questions in the
world, and one description of all beings in the world: You may as well tell us,
that you salve all the Phenomenon, to tell us, that all things are Entities,
and made and moved by God. It is a fair advancement of Knowledge indeed, to
cast away and deny all the noblest parts of the world, and to tell us, that all
the rest is matter of various magnitude and figure, variously moved and placed.
This is short Philosophy. And the particular specifying differences, you do
not, you cannot tell us, according to your Principles.

Gassendus,. 1. l. 3. c. 2. denies the transmutation of Elements. Others of
the Atomists tell us, that every Hour changes the Elements, and that continual
motion is continually turning one into another: And that Fire e.g. is but that
part of matter which falls under such or such a motion: And that the same
matter which is Fire this moment while it moves, is something else the next
when that motion cease: And that whatever matter falls under the same
motion, be it Stone or Earth, or any thing, it is presently by that motion
turned to Fire, as Fire may be into Stone or Earth. But that which we expect
from them is, to tell us, what motion it is that makes the different Elements?
and what does constitute them? and what transmuteth them, and not to put us off
with two general words, when they boast of solving all the Phenomenon.

We expect also to hear from them, how Density and Solidity come to be the
effects of motion? And how the Cohesion of the particles of Gold or Marble, or
Glue, is caused by the mere magnitude and figure of Matter, or by the motion of
it, without any other material properties.

And they must give us a better account than they have yet done, of the true
cause of sense in matter and motion. They know our argument, but I could never
yet understand how they answer it. We say that Nihil dat quod non habet, vel
formaliter vel eminenter. (All the objections against this Maxim they may find
answered (besides others) in Campanella, de sensu rerum.) Atoms, as matter,
have no sense: they smart not, they see not, they feel no delight, etc.
Formaliter you will not imagine that they have sense: and they cannot have it.
eminenter, being not above it, but below it; and showing us nothing that does
transcend it, or is like it. And motion is no substance, but a mode of matter,
and therefore has it self no sense.

Object Does not Campanella, Telesius, etc. argue, that all things have sense?

Answ. 1. Their fanaticisms are no part of our Physical Creed. 2. They mean,
when all is done, but this much, that there is some Image or Participation of
Life in Inanimates, of Sense in Vegetatives, of Reason in Sensitives* and of
Angelical Intellection in Rationals. 3. As it is said in the Mystic. Egypt.
and Chald. Philos. ascribed to Aristotle, [Et si quibusdam videtur quod
elementa habent Animam, illa est aliena adventitiaque eis. Cumque sint viva,
vita illis est accidentaria, non naturalis: alioquin forent inalterabilia.] l.
12. c. 11. So the Sticks deifi'd the fire, and made it Intellectual; but it was
not as it is matter, but as they supposed it animated with an intellectual
form. So many of the ancients thought, that the Angels were compounded of an
intellectual form or soul, and of a fiery or ethereal body. But it is only the
body that we are now enquiring of. Have atoms sense? does matter feel or see as
such?

Object. We say not that all matter or atoms have sense, but only some part of
it, which by motion is subtilized.

Answ. Still nihil dat quod non habet; you grant then that matter as such has
no sense at all. Else the argument would hold ad omnem. And if it have none as
matter, motion can give it none as mere motion; for motion has not sense to
give. Let motion attenuate the matter, and subtilize it, it is but matter
still; and it can be no less than atoms. Therefore show us how materia
subtilis, or atoms, should feel or see, because of the subtility or parvity,
and by its magnitude or grossness lose that sense. Tell us how and why the
change of mere magnitude and figure should make a thing feel that felt not
before. If you difference not matter by some natural difference of forms, or
properties and virtues, you will never speak sense in proving sense to be in
matter, by mere atomizing it, or moving it. The alkohol of Marble feels no
more than the solid stone; nor the air than the earth, for any proof that we
have of it. The boys that whip their tops, and the women that turn their wheels
so swiftly, that the motion shall not be discerned, Sane ignis, aer, aqua,
terra, suapte natura carent anima: and cuicunque horum adest anima, hoc vita
utitur peregrina: Alia vero praeter haec nulla sunt corpora. Plotin. Ennead. 4.
l. 7. c. 2. p. 457.
yet put no feeling into either, though the motion be swifter than that of the
heart, or lungs, or blood. What the learned Dr. Ward has said of this against
Mr. Hobs, I refer you to peruse, and excuse me for transcribing it. Scaliger,
Sennertus, and many others, have heretofore challenged these Philosophers, to
show the world how atoms by motion, or elements by mixture, can get that sense
which neither matter, motion nor mixture have; but we can meet with no account
of it yet worth the reading: not by Cartesius, not by Regius or Berigardus, not
by Gassendus, nor any other that we can get and read. How unsatisfactory is it
to tell us that facultas sentiendi and movendi, quae anima sensitiva vulgo
dicitur, est partium animalis in spiritus, nervos and alia sensoria, etc. talis
attemperatio and conformatio, qua animal ab objectis variis motibus affici
potest; as Regius, l. 4. c. 3. p. 267. This is an easy solving of the
Phenomenon indeed. But qualis est illa contemperatio? and quomodo potest
contemperantia insensibilium, sensibile constituere? Nonne dat ista
contemperatio quod non habet?

Perhaps you will say with him in Cicer. de Not. Deor. that by this argument
God must be a Fiddler, because he makes men that are such. Answ. By this
argument no fiddler, nor any other man, has more wisdom than God, or can do
that which God cannot do: but because God is above him in his skill, does it
follow that the names which signify humane imperfection must be put on God?
Can God enable a man to that which he is not able to do himself, and can he
give that which he has not to give?

Object. None of the parts of a clock can tell the hour of the day, and yet all
set together can: and none of the letters of a book are Philosophy, and yet the
whole may be a learned system: and no atoms in a Lute can make melody, as the
whole can do.

Answ. This is but to play with words. In all these instances the whole has
nothing of a higher kind in nature than the several parts, but only a
composition by the contribution of each part. The clock tells you nothing but
per modum signi; and that signum is only in the sound, or order of motion. And
sound and motion belongs to the whole, by virtue or contribution of the
parts, and is not another thing above them. And that the motion is so ordered,
and that man can by it collect the time of the day, is from the power of our
understandings, and not from the matter of the engine at all. So the book is no
otherwise Philosophy at all, but per modum signi: which signum is related to
man's understanding both as the cause and orderer, and as the receiver and
apprehender. So that the letters do nothing at all, but passively serve the
mind of man. And so it is in the other instance: the strings do but move the
air, and cause the sound which is in the ear: that this is melody, is caused
only by the mind of man, who first frames, and then orderly moves them, and
then suo modo receives the sound, and makes melody by the aptitude of his
apprehension. If you had proved that Clock, or Book, or Lute do make
themselves, and order and use themselves, and know the time, or understand or
delight in themselves, you had done something. But by the deceitful names of
Philosophy and Melody, to confound the bare natural sound and sign, with that
ordering and that reception, which is the privilege of a mind, is unfit for a
Philosopher.

Moreover I expect from Matter and Motion, Vid. Priscian. in Theophrast.
Proving that light is neither a Body nor a Quality, c. 19. But I find no
satisfaction when he comes to tell us what it is: Nor will I subscribe to
Ficinus, who ( with other Platonists) says, [Coeleste corpus primum luminis
susceptaculum incorporea vita and intelligentia regi a qua and Lumen habeat;
caeterisque tradat -- Si Lumen esse dicamus, Radios visuales coelestium
oculorum in se viventium, perque ejusmodi radios cuncta videntium agentiumque
videndo -- non errabimus.]
an account of motions great concomitants, that is, of Light and Heat. Mistake
me not, I am not undervaluing the effects of motion; I take it for a most noble
and observable cause of most that is done or existent in the corporeal world:
but must it therefore be the solitary cause? I have long observed amongst
wranglers, and erroneous zealots in Divinity, that most of their error and
misdoing lies in setting the necessary coordinate causes or parts of things
as inconsistent in opposition to one another. It would make one ashamed to hear
one plead, that Scripture must be proved by it self; and another, that it must
be proved by reason; and another, that it must be by miracles; and another, by
the Church; and another, by general History and Tradition, etc. As if every one
of these were not necessary concurrent parts in the proof. Such work have we
among poor deluded women and ignorant men, while the Romanists say, that they
are the true Church; and the Greeks say, it is they; and the Lutherans say, it
is they; and the Anabaptists say, it is they: as if my neighbors and I should
contend, which of our houses it is that is the Town. And so do these
Philosophers about the Principles and Elements. The Intellectual nature, which
is the Image of God, has notoriously three faculties, Understanding, Will and
Executive Power; and men think that they cannot understand the one, without
denying the other two: and the fiery nature which constituteth the Sun and
other Luminaries, (and is the image of the vital nature) has three notorious
powers or properties, Light, Heat and Motion; and they cannot understand
Motion, without making nothing of Light and Heat, or greatly obscuring and
abusing them. Cull out into one, and set together, but what Patricius has said
of Light, and what Telesius has said of Heat, (and Campanella after him) and
what Gassendus and Cartesius have said of Motion, and cut off all their
superfluities, and you will have a better entrance into sound Philosophy, than
any one book that I know does afford you Leg. Le Grand. Dissert. in Epicur.
Philos. ad Gassend. and de communi rerum vivendi ratione ad Campanel. and de
nominibus Dei soli attributis; In which he takes Atoms or indivisible
particles for the first real passive matter, antecedent to the distinction of
Elements: but Fire ( called also Spiritus Aethereus and Natura) to be of a
higher elevation, the Active informer, disposer and moderator of all matter:
and animated Fire, ( that is, the Sun and its emanations) to be the life and
Ruler of the material world: And that this was the sense of almost all the old
Philosophers: And that by their numerous names of God, they meant the same
thing, as diversely operating; that is, the Sun, Fire or Ether, (which they
took to be animated intellectuals) as considered in its various respects to
mortals.

Ut docet Hermes, Men's generalis habet pro corpore Ignem, and quasi Igne
stipatur and circum vestitur (...); semper enim and necessario Ignis Aethereus
and Men's Universalis sihi invicem comites assident; amboque ita affinos nihil
constituunt aliud quam spiritum Igneum, Aethereum, lucidum, coelestem, and
divinum, ten^brosam hanc and informem immanis materiei abyssum complentem,
illustrantem and animantem. Idem ad Campanel. page ^0.

Vide quae ex Mercur. Pimand. citat. page 79.


I confess, that as wisdom must lead the will, and determine its acts quoad
specificationem, Says a novel Philosopher himself, Ex speculis ustoriis certum
est, calorem a sole creari intensissimum, non acceleratione motus, sed
coalitione radiorum.
and the will must set a work the same intellect, and determine its acts quoad
exercitium; and the active power does partly work ad intra in the operations of
both these, and ad extra is excited by the imperium of the will; so that these
three faculties (as Schibler, Alsted, and many others truly number them) are
marvellously conjunct and co operative: Even so it is in the Motion, Light and
Heat of the active element, or fiery or ethereal nature. I know motion
contributeth to light and heat; Lumen species est inter omnes species
sensibiles prae caeteris intellectualem speciem repraesentans: and in
Intellectu est per causam; in coelo per formae plenitudinem; in igne per
plenitudinem participationis; hinc derivatur in portiones. Ficin. in
Theophrast. de Anim. c. 44.
but it is as true that light and heat have their proper, coequal and coordinate
properties and effects, and that heat contributeth as much to motion at least,
as motion does to heat: indeed in one essence they are three coequal virtues or
faculties, the Vis Motiva, Illuminativa and Calefactiva. And so vain is their
labor, who only from matter and motion give us an account of light and heat,
that I find no need nor willingness to be at the labor of confuting them. Call
but for their proofs, and you have confuted them all at once.

And if no better a solution be given us of the nature of Light and Heat, what
shall we expect from them about Intellection and Volition? do atoms understand
or will? or does motion understand or will? If not, (as sure they do not as
such) then tell us how that which has no participation of understanding or
will should constitute an agent that does understand and will? Set to this work
as Philosophers, and make it intelligible to us if you are in good earnest.

7. But to proceed a little further with you, I take it for granted, that you
confess that an intellectual incorporeal being there is, while you confess a
God: and that this sort of being is more excellent than that which is
corporeal, sensible and gross. I would next ask you, Do you take it for
possible or impossible that God should make any secondary Beings, which are
incorporeal and intellectual also? If you say, It is impossible, give us your
proof. If possible, I next ask you whether it be not most probable also? You
acknowledge what a spot or punctum in the world this earthly Globe is: you see
here that man, whose flesh must rot and turn to dust, has the power of
Intellection and Volition: you look up to the more vast and glorious Regions
and Globes, and I am confident you think not that only this spot of earth is
inhabited. Non ergo levitas and gravitas causae primi ^ orus sunt, sed
qualitates sunt elementorum; sed tamen ut etiam hoc detur, quomodo ratiocinari,
opinari, judicare, gravitatis and levitatis opera esse possunt; si ron sunt
gravitatis and levitatis opera, neque elementorum sunt: si non elementorum,
neque certe corporum. Nemesius de An. c. 2. p. 484.
And surely you think that the glory of the inhabitants, is like to be
answerable to the glory of their habitations. You make your Atoms to be
invisible, and so you do the Air and Winds; when yet our earth and dirt is
visible. Therefore you take not crassitude, nor visibility or sensibility, to
have the preeminence in excellency. Judge then your selves whether it be not
likely that God has innumerable more noble and excellent creatures, than we
silly men are? And will you reduce all their unknown perfections, or their
known intelligence to matter and motion only?

Moreover, when you observe the wonderful variety of things, in which God is
pleased to take his delight, what ground have we to imagine that he has no
greater variety of substances, but corporeal only? nor no other way of
causation but by motion? when no man can deny, but he could otherwise cause the
variety which we see, and fix in the creatures ab origin their differing
natures, properties and virtues; what reason then have you to say that he did
not do so?

And can you believe that the goodness of that God, who has made this
wonderful frame which we see, would not appear in making some creatures liker
and nearer to himself, than matter and motion is?

But to talk no more of probabilities to you, we have certain proof that man is
an intellectual free agent, whose soul you can never prove to be corporeal, and
whose power of intellection and volition is distinct from corporal motion. And
we have proof that there are superior Intelligences more noble than we, by the
operations which they have exercised upon things below.

And what should move you (who seem not to be overmuch Divine, and who seem to
observe the order and harmony of the creatures) to imagine, that God does
himself alone, without any instrument or second cause, move all the corporeal
matter of the world? If you are serious in believing that God himself does move
and govern all, why do you question, whether he make use of any nobler natures
next him, to move things corporeal. And why do you against your own
inclinations, make every action to be done by God alone? I doubt not but he
does all: but you see that he chooses to communicate honor and agency to his
creatures. He uses the Sun to move things on earth. Therefore if you believe
that corporeal beings stand at so infinite a distance from his perfections, you
may easily judge that he has some more noble; and that the noblest are the
most potent and active and rule the more ignoble: as you see the nobler bodies
(as the Sun) to have power upon the more ignoble. Therefore to violate the
harmony of God's works, and to deny all the steps of the ladder save the
lowest, is but an unhappy solving of Phenomenon.

Nay, mark what you grant us: you confess God to have Power, Wisdom and Will,
and that he is incorporeal, and moves all: and you confess that man has in
his kind Power, Understanding and Will; and is there any thing below that is
liker God? If not, do you not allow us to take these faculties for incorporeal?
and that those are so that are higher than we?

8. And you seem to us by your Philosophy to write of Nature, as the Atheist
writes of God; instead of explaining it, you deny it. What is Nature but the
principium motus and quietis? etc. So Lipstorpius in his Specim. Philos.
Carts. Deus in principio mundi materiam simul cum motu and quiet creavit --
Unde communissima naturae lex, etc. vid. page 37, 38. So that Nature with the
Cartesians is nothing at all, but God's first moving act at the creation: as if
he caused motion, without any moving created principle: and as if spirits and
fire had no more moving a nature or principle than clay; but only that their
matter was either in the creation more moved by God, or since by a knock from
some other mover, put into motion, by which accidental motion clay or water may
be made fire.

Leg. Petr. Mousnerii, lib. de Impetu, and lib. 2. de motu naturali: Where the
nature of Motion is more exactly handled than by the Epicureans or Cartesians;
though too little is said de vi moventis, in comparison of what is said de
impetu mobilis. Leg. l. 2. page 76, 77, etc. de causa intrinseca motus localis
naturalis. Et page 78. his seven Reasons against Gassendus his doctrine of
Gravitation by the traction of Atoms; and his confutation of all extrinsick
causes, viz. Causa prima sola, aer, terrae vis magnetica (vel per qualitatem
diffusam, vel per vim sympathicam, vel tractionem filamentorum) virtus coeli
pellens, detrusio per lucem, and generans (And as easily may the Cartesian
reason be confuted, which Lipstorpius so magnifieth:) and the Impetus innatus
is the reason which he assigns, page 80, 81, etc.

Vid. exceptiones Jo. Bap. du Hamel. contra Carts. in conciliat. page 148,
151, 170, 209, 210.


And you deny all such principia, and substitute only former motion: so that
you leave no other nature but what a stone receives from the hand that casts
it, or the childrens tops from the scourge which drives them: or rather every
turn is a nature to the next turn; and so the nature of things is mostly out of
themselves in the extrinsick mover.

And so you level all things in the world: you deny all specific forms, or
natural faculties and virtues. The Sun and a clod have no natural difference,
but only magnitude, and figure, and motion: as if so noble a creature had no
differencing peculiar nature of its own, nor any natural power or principle of
its own motion, and so it moved but as a stone is moved.

Yea, you make all motion to be violent, and deny all proper natural motion at
all: for that which has no active principle of motion in its nature, has no
proper natural motion as distinct from violent.

Hereby also you deny all vital powers: you make a living creature and a dead
to differ but in the manner of motion; (which whether you can at all explain,
we know not) why may not the arrow which I shoot, or the watch which I wind up,
be said to live as well as you? It has matter and motion; and some inanimates
(the Air and Fire) perhaps have as subtle matter and as speedy motion, as is in
you. Why does not the wind make the air alive, and the bellows the fire? In a
word, you deny all Intelligences, all Souls, all Lives, all Natures, all active
Qualities and Forms; all Powers, Faculties, Inclinations, Habits and
Dispositions, that are any principles of motion: and so all the natural
excellency and difference of any creature above the rest. A short way of
solving the Phenomenon.

Lastly, with Nature you deny the being of Morality. For if there be no
difference of Beings, but in quantity, figure, motion and site; and all motion
is Locomotion, which moves by natural necessitating force, than a man moves
as a stone, because it is irresistibly moved, and has no power to forbear any
act which it performs, or to do it otherwise than it does. For if there be no
power, habits or dispositions, antecedent to motion, but motion it self is all,
then there is one and the same account to be given of all actions, good and
bad, I did it because I was irresistibly moved to it, and could no more do
otherwise than my pen can choose to write. There is then no virtue or vice, no
place for Laws and moral Government, further than they may be tacklings in the
engine which necessitateth: whatsoever is done amiss, is as much imputable to
God the first mover, as that which is done-well. If you shoot an arrow which
kills your friend, the arrow could not hinder it: if you make or set your
watch amiss, though one motion causes another, yet the error of all is
resolved into the defect of the first cause. They that killed Henry the 3. and
Henry the 4. Kings of France, may say, that as the knife could not resist the
motion of their hand, so neither could they the motion of the superior cause
that moved them, and so on to the first. No Traitors or Rebels can resist the
power which acts them therein, any more than the dust can resist the wind
which stirs it up. And so you see what comes of all the Government of God
and Man, and of all Laws and Judgments, Justice and Injustice, Right and Wrong.
And how little cause you have to be angry with the Thief that robs you, or
the man that cudgelleth you, any more than with the staff. But of this I refer
you to the foresaid writing of Bishop Bromhal against Mr. Hobs, allowing you to
make the most you can of his Reply.

We are certain by the operations of things, that there is a difference in
their natural powers and virtues, and not only in their quantity, figure and
motion. God has not made only homogeneal undifferenced matter: there are
plainly now exceeding diversities of natural excellencies, virtues and
qualities in the things we see. And he that will say that by motion only God
made this difference at first, does but presumptuously speak without book,
without all proof to make it credible, and takes on him to know that which he
knows that he knows not. Is not the virtue and goodness of things as
laudable, as their quantity and motion? Why then should we imagine so vast a
disproportion in the image of God upon his works, as to acknowledge the
magnitude and motion incomprehensible, and to think that in virtue and goodness
of nature they are all alike, and none is more noble or more like himself than
a clod of earth? We see that the natures of all things are suited to their
several uses. Operari sequitur esse, Things act as they are. There is somewhat
in the nature of a bird, or beast, or plant, which is their fitness to their
various motions. If only motion made that fire to day, which yesterday was but
a stone, why does not the strongest wind so much as warm us? or why does it so
much cool us? Why does not the snow make us as warm as a fleece of wool? the
wool does move no more than the snow, and the matter of it appears to be no
more subtle. Indeed man can give to none of his works a nature, a life or
virtue, for the operation which he desires. He can but alter the magnitude,
and figure, and motion of things, and compound and mix them, and conjoyn them:
and these Epicureans seem to judge of the works of God by man's. But he who is
Being, Life and Intelligence, does accordingly animate his noble Engines, and
give them natures and virtues for their operations; and not only make use of
matter and weight where he finds it, as our Mechanics themselves can do.
Debasing all the noblest of Gods works, is unbeseeming a true Philosopher, who
should search out the virtues and goodness, as well as the greatness of them.

But I have been longer in answering this first Objection, than I can afford to
be about the rest, unless I would make a Book of this, which I call but the
Conclusion. I will add but this one thing more; That in case it were granted
the Epicureans, that the soul is material, it will be no disproving of its
immortality, nor invalidate any of my former arguments for a life of
retribution after this. To which purpose consider these things.

1. That where matter is simple and not compounded, it has no tendency to
corruption. Object. Matter is divisible, and therefore corruptible, how simple
soever. Answ. It is such as may be divided, if God please, and so the soul is
such as God can destroy. But we see that all parts of matter have a wonderful
tendency to unity, and have a tendency to a motus aggregativus if you separate
them. Earth inclines to earth, and water to water, and air to air, and fire to
fire. 2. All Philosophers agree to what I say, who hold that matter is eternal,
either a part ante, or a part post. For if matter be eternal, the soul's
materiality may consist with its eternity. 3. Yea all without exception do
agree, that there is no annihilation of matter when there is a dissolution.
Therefore if the soul be a simple uncompounded being, though material, it will
remain the same. This therefore is to be set down as granted us, by all the
Infidels and Atheists in the world, that man's soul, what ever it is, is not
annihilated when he dies, if it be any kind of substance material or
immaterial. And they that call his temperament his soul, do all acknowledge,
that there is in the composition some one predominant principle, more active or
noble than the rest; and of the duration of this it is that we enquire, which
no man does deny, though some deny it to be immaterial. But this will be
further opened under the rest of the Objections. The reasons of my many words
in answering this Objection, I give you in the words of a late learned
Conciliator, Philosophiae Platonicae explicationi diutius immorati sumus, quod
res maximas and cognitione dignissimas complectatur. Habet i^ quoque prae
coeteris, quod ad aeternas and primitivas rations mentem erigat, eamque a
fluxis and perituris rebus advocatam, ad eas quae sola intelligentia
percipiuntur convertat. Qua quidem in re infinitum prope momentum est: Nam
obruimur turba Philosophorum, qui nimis fidunt sensibus, and nihil praeter
corpora intelligi posse contendunt. Atque ut mihi videtur, nulla perniciosior
pestis in vitam humanam potest invadere, nihil quod magis religioni adversetur.
Joh. Bapt. du Hamel. in Conscens. veteris and novae Philos. Praefat.

OBJECTION II.
BY Sense, Imagination, Cogitation, Reason, you cannot prove the Soul to be
incorporeal, because the Bruits partake of these; whose Souls are material and
mortal.

Answ. 1. It is easy for men, that set themselves to say all they can, either
with Mr. Chamber to extol the bruits as rational, or with Gassendus to talk of
the whispers and consultations of the Ants, or with Telesius and Campanella to
say that every thing has sense; or on the other hand with Cartesius, to deny
all to a bruit which belongs not to an engine. But our converse with them
does teach all men to judge of their natures, as between both these extremes,
unless by study and learning they learn to know less than they did before, and
do but study to corrupt their understandings, and obliterate things that are
commonly known. I doubt not but the Minerals have something like life, and the
Vegetatives have something like to sense, and the Sensitives have something
like to reason: but it does not follow that therefore it is the same. But this
is so copiously written of by very many, that I supersede my further labor
about it.

2. If it were so, that the apprehensions of a bruit might be called Reason or
Intellection, yet the difference betwixt it and humane Intellection is so
great, as may easily prove to those that have their reasons in free use, that
they are several species of creatures, made for several uses and ends. And none
of the twenty Arguments which I used, are at all debilitated by this. If a bird
have reason to build her nest, and to feed her young, yet she has none to
build Cities and Castles, nor to use Navigation, nor any of the Arts: much less
to set up Government by Laws, and to write Systems of Philosophy and other
Sciences; and least of all to enquire after God, the cause of all things, or to
hope for blessedness in another life, or to escape a future misery, or to be
ruled in this life by the interest of another. Beasts think not of God, nor of
loving him, seeking him, pleasing him or enjoying him, or of being judged by
him. I know the perverse wrangler will ask me, How I know this? And I can
answer him no better than thus: As I know that a Stone does not see or feel, or
that my Paper does not talk; because they manifest no such thing: And these are
all operations which they that exercise, are apt to manifest; and things that
in their nature are unapt to be long hid. Campanella, who has written de sensu
rerum, to prove Bruits Rational, and Plants sensible, has yet in his Atheismus
Triumphatus written more for the excellency of humane nature and the Souls
immortality; than any Infidel can soundly answer.

3. And how prove you, that the Souls of Bruits exist not, after death? See Sir
W. Rawleigh Hist. l. 1. of Fire, making it certainly a thing unknown, and
probably quiddam medium between things corporeal and incorporeal.
Of their Individuation we shall say more anon. But there is no part of their
substance annihilated as you will confess: Nor any part of it abased below the
same nature which it had in the composition: Only the constituting parts are
separated, retaining their several natures still. All men that confess that
Bruits are sensible, do confess that there is some one predominant part in
their composition which is the principal cause of sense: whether it be the
finest Atoms, or the materia subtilis or globuli coelestes, or Elementary
Fire, or Aristotle's quintessence analogous to the celestial Starry substance,
or yet an incorporeal soul: whatever it is, it is not annihilated, nor the
nature of the simple essence destroyed.

4. And here let me venture to tell you once for all, that I never found cause
to believe that any mortal man, Hence it is that the wisest Philosophers differ
in this point, whether any proper matter be found in the Soul of man.
Micraelius Ethnoph. l. 1. c. 13. p. 23, 24. has instanced in many that are for
some materiality. Eam sententiam inter veteres probavit apud Macrobium,
Heraclitus Phyficus, cui anima est essentiae Stellaris scintilla: and Hip
parchus apud Plinium cui est coeli pars: Et Africanus apud Ciceronem, qui
detrahit animum ex illis sompiternis ignibus, quae sydera vocamus; quaeque
globos^e and rotundae divinis animatae mentibus circulos fuos orbesque
conficiunt celeritate mirabili: and Seneca, qui descendisse eam ex illo
coelesti Spiritu ait, and Plato ipse, qui alicubi animam vocat (...), radians
and splendidum vehiculum: Et Epicterus qui astra vocat nobis (...), amica and
cognata Elementa: ipseque cum Peripateticis Aristoteles, qui eam quinta
essentia constare and (...), in animabus inesse dicit. Inter nostrates Scaliger
quoque vocat animam naturam coelestem, and quintam essentiam alia quidem a
quatuor Elementis natura praeditum, s^d non sine omni materia. Eadem opinio
arridet Roberto de Fluctibus, etc.
is so well acquainted with the true difference between a Corporeal and an
Incorporeal substance, as to tell us certainly wherein it does consist; and to
lay the stress of this Controversy upon that difference. I know what is said
of Moles and extensio, and parts extra parts; of divisibility and
impenetrability; and so on the contrary side. But how much of this is spoken in
the dark? Are you certain that no true matter is penetrable? (If you say, that
which is so, we call not Matter, and so make the Controversy de nomine only
intelligible, I must pass it by.) And are you sure that no matter is
indivisible? And that no spiritual incorporeal substance is quantitative,
extended, or divisible? It now goes for current that Light is a Body: And
Patricius that so judges, does take it to be indivisible in longitudine
radiorum, and to be penetrable; and that it can penetrate other bodies. And
it is hard to be sure that Diaphanous bodies are not penetratrated by Light. I
know Gassendus and others think that it passes but through the pores of the
Glass or Crystal: But I have heard of no Engyscope that has perceived pores
in Glass. In Cloth they are certainly discernable, and large, and numerous,
when yet the Light does not penetrate it as it does the Glass: Gassendus says,
the reason is, because the pores of the Glass and other diaphanous bodies, are
all one way, so that the Light is not intercepted by their irregularity: And he
gives us a proof of his opinion, because that if you set white Papers on each
side the Glass, there will be umbels on one side, and light reflected on the
other. I have often tried, Lege rations Carpentarii in Dec. 1. Exerc. 7. contra
porositatem diaphanorum.

Dicit Plato universae naturae animam porrectam esse a centro orbis terrae
usque ad extremas oras coeli: Non ut locum ista notet po^ectio, sed extensionis
quendam modum, quem Men's and Ratio assequatur. Nemes. de Anim. c. 2. page 487.


and see indeed abundance of such umbels: But I as plainly see that they all
answer the Squilts or sanded faults that are in the Glass (the bigger sort of
which are all as visible as the shades). And surely all the rest of the Glass
is not pores, or nothing! And if the pores lie all one way, how comes it to
pass, that a Glass of water, or a Ball of Crystal is equally perspicuous every
way. Look which way you will it is all alike: Therefore it must be every way
equally porous. But I would know whether we have any atoms smaller than the
body of Light, which thus penetrateth the Glass and Crystal? I think they all
make it the most subtle matter: And yet Gassendus thinks that they are
Bodies (and such as have their hamuli too) which flow from the Lodestone to
the Iron: And if so, then those Bodies must be more penetrating than Light: For
they will pass through a brick wall, and operate by their attraction on the
other side, where no light can pass. And whether the Air be penetrable by
Light, is scarce well cleared or understood. They that think there is no Vacuum
I think (with G^ssendus) can never prove that there can be any motion, unless
the Air or some bodies are penetrable. Let them talk of a Circulation with
Cartesius as long as they will, some body must cedere before the next can move:
And no one can give way till the motion or cession begin at the utmost part of
the coporeal world. My understanding is past doubt that there must be an inane
or a penetration. And yet on the other side, I am satisfied that Entity is the
first excellency, and that something is better than nothing. And therefore if
Rarity be only by the multitude and greatness of interspersed Vacuities, and
the rarity and subtilty of matter be but the scantness or smallness of its
quantity in that space, then it would be but next kin to annihilation, and the
rarest and most subtle matter would be coeteris paribus the basest, as being
next to nothing. For instance, Sir Kenelme Digby tells Gassendus from two
accurate Computers, that Gold in the same space is seven thousand six hundred
times heavier than Air: so that Air is in the same space seven thousand six
hundred times nearer to nothing than Gold is; and the whole Air betwixt us and
the Heavens has interspaces that are vacuous, to the same proportion of 7600
to one: And then we may well say that datur inane! Nay quaere, whether it be
more proper to say, that all between us and Heaven is a Vacuum or not? when it
is to be denominated from the space which so far exceeds all the rest as 7600
to one? And then if the ether be something more subtle, it must be still more
near to nothing, and consequently be most vile: But I am satisfied that dung is
not so much more excellent than Light as it is more gross. And that these
terrestrial bodies are not the most noble, nor have most of Entity or
Substance, because they are more gross: I hope we shall not have Philosophiam
staticam, and judge of Essences and Excellencies by the balance.
Therefore though Gassendus put off Sir K. Digby by saying only that the said
disproportion is no inconvenience, I see not how these inconveniences will be
answered. I am satisfied, that nothing, is not so good as Entity, and yet that
the most subtle and invisible substances are the life of the World, and of
greatest excellency and force. But what will hence follow about penetrability I
know not; But I know that it is little about these things which men understand
of what they say. The fiery nature seems as Patricius says to be some middle
thing between corporal and incorporeal. And I much doubt whether Materia be a
summum genus; and whether the lowest degree of things incorporeal, and the
highest degree of things corporeal, (suppose fire, or that which is the matter
of the Sun) do differ so much more than Graduals, as that mortals can say, that
one of them is penetrable and indivisible, and the other not. There have been
some Philosophers that have thought that sensibility was as fit an attribute to
characterize Matter or Bodies by, as any other; But then they meant not by
[sensible] that which Man can perceive by sense: But that which is a fit object
for senses of the same kind as man's, supposing them elevated to the greatest
perfection that they are capable of in their kind. And so air and atoms
being of the same kind as other matter, may be visible to a sight of the same
kind as ours, if it received but the addition of enough degrees. And for ought I
know, this is as wise Philosophy as that which is more common. I am sure it is
more intelligible.

And for Divisibility they have Demonstrations on both sides that a Punctum is
divisible, and that it is not. One thinks, that if three be set together,
it is possible at least for God to divide just in the midst: Another with
Gassendus thinks, that it is unlike to be true, that every part should be as
much or more than the whole, and a point as much as all the Universe: And that
if a point may be divided into infinite parts it is infinite in magnitude, and
therefore bigger than the World: And is it any marvel, if Indivisibility then
be an unfit property to know a Spirit by, when they are not agreed about it as
to Bodies? Certain it is, that there is a true Individuation of Souls, and so a
numeral division of them. That which is your Soul, is not your Neighbors. And
it is certain, that created Spirits are not infinite as to extent. And what
Division God can make upon them, is more than I can tell.

Scotus thinks, that the subject of Physics is not Corpus natural but
substantia naturalis; and so that Angels are moved motu physico. Scaliger,
Schibler, etc. say, that Angels have extension and figure, that is, extension
entitative distinct from extension quantitative. vid. Scalig. Exercit. 359.. 4.
The termini essendi, says Schibler, being no other than are signified per
inceptionem, seu dependentiam ab alio and desitionem: and that no Creature is
immense, but has finitas adessendi according to which it is determinate to a
certain space. He says, that Angels are finite, 1. Essentia, 2. Numero, 3.
Potestate, 4. Quantitate, h. e. non esse immensos. And that they are in spatio
intelligibili. He says also Exerc. 307. Vnum primum est: alia dependent
igitur. Ergo sua natura omnia praeter unum sunt corruptibilia. Tametsi sunt
Entia absoluta a subjecto and termino, non sunt absoluta a Causa.

Damascene says, de Orthod. fid. l. 2. That God only is a Spirit by nature,
but other things may be Spirits by indulgence and grace.

The doctrine of Psellus In Ficinus his collections, lib. de daemonib.
is too gross, and largely delivered by himself.

Eugubinus, Niphus, and Vorstius, were of the same mind, that Angels were
Corporeal.

Augustine himself says, that Anima respectu incorporei Dei corporea est: de
Spir. and anim. c. 8.

Caesarius in Dialog. 1. p. 573. B.P. says, (...) And he applies to them the
Apostles words, There are Bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial.

Arnobius is a little too gross herein, and almost all the Ancients, especially
the Greeks, that speak of that subject, take Angels for more subtle purer
Bodies.

I know not what Athenagoras means to call the Devil, (...) -- Materiae
ejusque formarum Princeps, and alii ex iliis qui circa primum mundi fundamentum
erant peccarunt, etc. page 71. And hence he and others talk of their falling in
love with Virgins, etc.

And when Faustus Rhegiensis wrote a Book to prove that Angels and Souls were
but a purer subtle sort of bodies or matter, Claudianus Mammertus largely and
learnedly confuteth him (who pretended that all the Ancients were on his side):
Yet does the same Mammertus think, that though Angels quoad sormam be
incorporeal, they had Bodies also which were Fire, or of the nature of the
Stars. Which Caesarius also seems to mean, when he says that [Not only that
which is here with us below is Fire; but also those higher Powers seem to be
Fire, and kin to that which is with us, as our Souls are kin to Angels.]
Dialog. 1. Q. 58, 59. page 584. And Qu. 60. he says [ That the Shepherds when
they will boil flesh (in the Fields where they have no Fire) do use to fill a
glass Vessel with water, and hold it directly opposite to the Sun, and then
touch dried dung with it, and it will kindle Fire.] And having thus proved the
Sun to be Fire, he says, Dial. 2. Qu. 195. that Omnibus creatis levior est
ignis natura: ideoq, Angeli etiam hanc sortiti sunt: Qui facit Angelos suos
spiritus, and Ministros suos ignis flammam. And Qu. 107. he faith, that the
Star which led the Magi to Christ, was an Angel.] It would be tedious to cite
all out of Tertullian, Lactantius, and all the Ancients that was written to
assert that Angels quoad formam were corpor a tenuiora; and out of those that
came after them, and confuted them, who yet wrote that they were the Souls of
fiery bodies.

And abundance of our writers of Physics, Metaphysics and Logic, do tell us,
that Angels have Materiam metaphysicam, and in a certain sense may be called
corporeal. And the sum of all is, when they determine the questions about
their locality, extension* or quantity, that they have their ubi; their
quantity and extension (which are the properties of bodies) sou modo, vel modo
metaphysico, as bodies have them modo sou physico; being not immense or
infinite no more than bodies. (How far the name of Nature belongs to them,
see Fortunius Licetus de natura primo-movente.) And Schibler with others,
makes the difference of extension to be this, that Angels can contract their
whole substance into one part of space, and therefore have not parts extra
parts. Whereupon it is that the Schoolmen have questioned how many Angels may
sit upon the point of a Needle?

For my part I profess, that as my understanding is fully satisfied by the
operations and effects, that there are such invisible potent substances, which
we call Angels and Spirits, so it is utterly unsatisfied in the common
properties of Penetrability and Impenetrability, Extension, or discerptibility,
and indiscerptibility or indivisibility, as the Characters to know them by. And
as I think that Materia had been as fit a name as another, for that part or
notion of spiritual substances which is distinguished from their form, if
Custom had so pleased to use it; so I think that such Substances as we call
Spirits or immaterial, may be well said to be compounded of Metaphysical or
spiritual matter and form, and this in consistency with such simplicity as
belongs to a Creature. And I remember not what apt word we have instead of
matter to supply its place in Latin, which takes not in the notion of the
Form: For the word Matter signifies no real Being, but only a partial
inadequate Conception of Real Beings quoad hoc, which have all something more
which is essential to them. There is no such thing existent as matter without
form or peculiar nature. And the matter and form are such parts intelligibiles
as can neither of them exist alone. Therefore as it is not fit to make too
eager a Controversy de nomine materiae, vel materialis; so I think that it is
little that we know of any substances at all, but what their accidents and
effects reveal. Matter we know by the quantity, figure, color, heat or cold,
density or rarity, hardness or softness, levity or weight, etc. And forms, or
differencing natures we know by their operations: But that either matter or
form is known to us immediately by it self, and is the objectum sensus per se
and immediate, I cannot say by any observed experience of mine own.

Would you have me to go further yet? I shall then adventure to say, That as I
feel no satisfying notion to difference the highest simple Being called
Material, from the lowest next it called Immaterial, but what is in and from
the forms; so I think that it is too slippery a ground for any man to satisfy
himself or others by, to say only that one is material and the other
immaterial. Matter as I said being but a pars intelligi^ilis or inadequate
conception of a thing, is not to be a Genus in any predicament. And if
substance express the adequate conception, it must comprehend something
answerable to Matter, with that defferencing nature called the form. And what
name besides matter to give to that part of the conception of a substance,
which is contradistinct from the form, Philosophers are yet but little agreed
in: some name there must be when we speak of any created substances: For the
name of substance must not confound these distinct Conceptions: Therefore
materia metaphysica vel spiritualis is the term, that hitherto men are fain to
use.

Moreover, it is the form that does difference and denominate. How then can you
sufficiently difference corporeal and incorporeal from the material Cause, by
calling one Physical and the other Hyperphysical, or Metaphysical? Does any
man's understanding perceive the true positive difference by these words? Is
Matter as opposed to Nihil reale, and is Ens creatum, (or as it expresses our
half-conception both of corporeal and incorporeal substances) differenced so
discernably or toto genere, vel tota specie, without a form to make the
difference: Does mole immunis and mole praedita speak a formal difference or
not? If not, what place has it in arbore Porphyrii vel Gassendi? And if it do
not, you make the matter of substances ab origin differenced in se without any
forms to difference them; that is the Physical and the Metaphysical matter. But
if those words do express a formal difference, you should find some other to
expound them by: For sure mole praedita, expresses no form intelligibly: And
mole immunis is but a mere negation of quantity.

Differences therefore that are fetched from matter here (or the material part
of substance) are hardly made intelligible: And we have so little acquaintance
with spiritual substances in their naked matter (for unless you will take (...)
which is better than substance) I know not how else to call it) that we speak
but by rote when we talk of Indivisibility, and unextensiveness, and
impenetrability as the notifying differences; because they are things beyond
our understandings.

Is there a difference between Intellectual and Spiritual Beings among
themselves or not? Doubtless there is, as the case of Angels, Devils, and the
Souls of men declare: Is this difference among any of them specifical and
formal? It is commonly so concluded, as between Angels and men. Is there then
any agreement in substance, or in another essential part, where there is a
formal difference? I know none that notify the other essential difference of
the substance of men's Souls and Angels; but they commonly confess that both are
Spirits, not differenced materially otherwise than in degrees of purity and
dignity (which how far it belongs to the form I pretermit). But there can be
no specifical difference in the matter considered without that form which
specifieth. At least some agreement there is; and of Spirits which are of
different forms or species, there must be some one name for that in which they
still agree. If you say that it is in [substance] you must then take substance
as we do matter for an inadequate conception, or only the pars inteligibilis of
a being as without the form; But that is not the common acception of it; nor is
it then fit for the place assigned it in ordine praedicamentali.

From all this I am not about to injure any man's understanding, by building my
Conclusions upon any questionable grounds: I do but right your understandings
so far, as to remove all uncertain foundations, though they be such as seem to
be most for the advantage of my Cause, and are by most made the great reasons
of the Souls Immortality. And it is not my purpose to deny, that as Angels are
compounded ex genere and differentia, so the generical nature of Angels greatly
differs from the nature of Corporeal things: As God can make multitudes of
corporeal Creatures, formally or specifically different, of the matter of one
simple Element only (as Air, or Fire) without material mixture; so he can
either make an Element of Souls, either existent of it self, of which he will
make Individuals, yea species formally diverse, or else existent only in the
species and individuals, as he please. But then we must say, that as fire, and
air, and water, do differ formally, as several Elements, so the spiritual
Element or general Nature has a formal difference from the Corporeal (called
the Material). But hence it will follow, Po^phyry de Occasion. per Ficin. holds
that Anima quidam Medium quiddam est inter Essentiam individuam, atque
essentiam vera corpora divisibilem. Intellectus autem essentia est individua
solum: sed qualitates materialesque formae secundum corpora sunt divisibiles.
1. That Angels and humane Souls have a double form (as some use to call it)
that is, Generical as Spirits, which is presupposed as the aptitude of their
Metaphysical matter, by which they differ from bodies; and specifical by which
they are constituted what they are, and differ among themselves: (unless you
deny all such formal difference among them, and difference them only by
individuation and accidents; as several drops or bottles of water taken out of
the same Sea.) 2. And it will seem plain, that our differencing characters or
properties between Spirits and Bodies, must be sought for in their different
forms, which must be found in the noble operations which flow from the forms,
and not from uncertain Accidents. Therefore my design in all this is but to
intimate to you, how lubricous and uncertain, and beyond the reach of man's
understanding, the ordinary characters from such Accidents are, and that its
better fetch the difference from the Operations.

Says Georg. Ritschel Contempl. Metap. c. 6. page 40, and 43. Difficile est
rebus materialibus immersis substantiam immaterialem concipere. -- Et licet pro
certo non constet an Menti Angelicae omnis simpliciter Materialitas repugnet;
certum tamen est elementarem nostram ab illis abesse; atque Divinam Essentiam
ab omni esse materia secretam aeterna ejus and immutabilis habitudo convincit,
nisi per materialitatem forte substantiam intelligas. -- 15. Dubium quidem
nullum est immaterialem Mundum essentiarum varietate Intelligibilium aeque
admirabilem and augustum esse, atque Mundum corporeum videmus: sed in quo illa
consistat diversitas, bonis indicio certo non percipitur. Nimirum si praeter te
and lumbricum atque scarabaeum animal aliud nullum vidisses, audires autem esse
alia innumera genera, diversitate naturae and forma penitus discrepantia, tum
vagas quidem confusasque de diversitate volvere cogitationes posses; non posses
autem illas tot bestiarum, piscium, reptilium, avium, species suo vultu and
coloribus signare: Ita quid spiritus sit immaterialis ex te capere, qui Mentem
immaterialem habes, qualemcunque notitiam potes, non potes autem in te
perspicere in quo precise illa varietas consistat.

To come nearer to the application of what is said to the present Objection. 1.
The Souls of Men and Bruits, we see do not differ in genere entis, nor in
genere substantiae, nor in genere principii vitalis, nor in genere sentientis;
2. The matter of both, whether it differ as Metaphysical and Physical, or how,
is much beyond our knowledge. 3. The great diversity of Operations, does show
the great diversity of their Powers and forms, and inclinations. 4. This
shows the diversity of their uses and ends for which they were created. 5. It
is certain, that no substantial Principle in either of them is annihilated at
death. The Souls of Bruits have the same nature after death as they had before,
and the Souls of men have the same nature as before. They are not transformed
into other things. 6. Therefore about both of them, there is nothing left of
doubt or controversy, but only 1. About the perpetuated Individuation, 2. The
future Operations (and so the habits); viz. 1. Whether the Souls of men or
bruits, or both, do lose their individuation, and fall into some Universal
Element of their kind? 2. Whether they operate after death as now? There is
nothing else about their Immortality that common Reason can make a question of.
And for the Souls of Bruits, whether they remain Individuate, or return to a
common Element of their kind, is a thing unknown to us, because unrevealed;
and unrevealed, because it is of no use and concernment to us. Our own case
concerns us more, and therefore is more made known to us by God. As will
further appear in that which follows.

OBJECTION III.
HVmane souls are but forms: and forms are but the qualities or modes of
substances, and therefore accidents: and therefore perish when separated from
the bodies.

Answ. Lege Plotinum de Anim. En. 4. l. 3. c. 391. sect. 26.
The world of learned men do find themselves too much work, and trouble others
with controversies about names and words, and especially by confounding words
and things, and not discerning when a controversy is only de nomine, and when
it is de re. And they have done so about forms as much as any thing. The word
form is usually liable to this ambiguity: In compounded beings, it is sometime
taken for the active predominant part or principle; and sometimes for the state
which resulteth from the contemperation of all the parts. Which is the fittest
to be called the form, is but a question de nomine. Gassendus himself
confesses this ambiguity of the word, and having pleaded that all forms,
except man's intellectual soul, are but modes or qualities of bodies, and
accidents. He adds,. 1. l. 6. c. 1. Si formae nomine spiritum quendam and
quasi florem materiae intellexeris, cujusmodifere concipimus animam in equo,
tum forma dici potest substantia, immo and corpus tenuissimum, quod crassius
pervadat, perficiat and regat -- At si formae nomine intelligatur dispositio ac
modus quo tam substantia illa spirituosior quam crassior reliqua se habet, and
ad quam facultates actionesque naturales consequuntur tum posse Qualitatem
conseri ac dici. Whether the souls of bruits be only the spirits, or the flos
materiae, or not, it is granted by him, and by almost all men, that in mixed
bodies there is one part more subtle than the rest, which is the most active,
powerful, predominant part, and which does corpus pervadere, perficere, regere.
He thinks that this is but that subtle matter which others call fire; but
others think upon the reasons before given, that it is a superior nature, and
that the spirits, or fiery nature, is but its nearest instrument: Because no
subtilty will make atoms sensible or appetitive, which in their proper nature
have no such thing. But what ever becomes of the controversy, whether the
animal principle in bruits be material or immaterial, it is granted us, and is
certain, that in all mixed beings, there is a difference of the constitutive
parts: as the fiery nature (such as the Sun is of) is active in comparison of
the other three Elements, which to it are passive; so the vital principle in
bruits is active, powerful and regent, as to the rest of the compounding parts.
And it is certain, that the name of a [form] is by contenders taken, sometime
for that regent active principle or substance, (be it what it will) and
sometime for the temperament resulting from all the parts. In Engines where
there is no principle or part which is notably predominant, the name of the
[form] is given to the ordered conjunction of all the parts. So in a Watch, the
spring, though the beginning of motion, is not so fitly called the form of the
watch, as the order of the whole frame. But in living things, there is more
room for a competition between the regent part and the temperament, which of
them should be called the form. Now it is undeniable with all men, that both in
men and bruits, that regent principle is a substance, and that the
contemperation or order of the parts is but their mode, and makes no other
kind of being than Ordo Civitatis vel Reipublicae is, which cease upon the
dissolution. And the form of simple beings, corporeal or incorporeal, elements
or spirits, is neither another substance, distinct from the Physical and
Metaphysical matter, nor yet an accident or mode: but that peculiar nature,
consisting in certain powers or virtues, by which, as essential to it, that
being is specifically differenced from others: which some call an essential
quality, and some a substantial quality, and some a substantial form, because
it is the perfection and essential nature of the substance in specie, and not
another substance besides it.

Thus Burgersdicius (however in his Physics he says as others) in his
Metaphysics, l. 1. c. 25.. 6, 7, 9. says, that [Forma substantialis est quae
materiam complet eamque informat, atque it a constituit substantiam corpoream:
Forma accidentalis est additamentum completae substantiae inhaerens, and cum
illa constituens. Ens concretum atque unum per accidens.] And he adds that
[Forma substantialis non per se est substantia: substantia enim per se sul
sistit, etc. -- Quid ergo erit substantialis forma? Nihil aliud quam
substantialis modus. -- Quia formis, debetur, quod res corporales tales res
sint, iis etiam ex part debetur quod sint: Quia esse non potest concipi absque
tali aut tali esse, and tale esse est ipsius esse complementum.] And yet the
same man says, i. id. l. 2. c. 17. 13. p. 304. Resp Animas vegetativas and
sensitivas unitas quidem esse corpori ex elementis confecto, sed mediante
spiritu vituli and animali: Ideoque facultates earum animarum non esse
temperationes primarum qualitatum, sed ipsam substantiam animarum, quatenus
spiritium open elementari corpori aliigantur.

If then you take the word [form] for the order of the parts, I say that man's
soul is not his form in that sense, nor is his form a substance: but if the
regent, predominant, active, vital, intelligent principle be called the [form]
so the form is a substance, and the soul is that form.

Here we must not confound formam corporis, formam animae, and formam hominis.
1. The form of Adam's body, before it had received a soul, was but the
contemperation or order of all the parts, by which it was apt to receive a
soul, and to be actuated by it, as corpus physicum organicum. 2. The form of
the soul it self, ( e.g. in its separated state) is that vis naturalis
inteligendi, volendi and exequendi, by which it is essentially differenced from
all other kinds of being, (commonly comprehended under the name of reason
alone.) 3. The forma hominis, taken for the state of the parts contemperate and
ordered, is that said state or order, and not the soul. But taken for the
vital, intelligent, regent part or principle, it is the soul it self. So that
the soul is not the forma corporis, nor the forma hominis in the one sense; but
it is the forma hominis in the other: and its own differencing nature is its
own form.

The li^e ambiguity there is in the word Quality, used in the objection. As I
was never satisfied with the order or number of Aristotle's ten predicaments,
so especially I never understood him in the predicament of Quality it self. As
it is a very hard thing to know what those are that are by him, and commonly,
called Qualities; so I think that name too general and defective to signify
the nature of them aright. And I supposed ever that his forma and figura differ
much more from the other species of Quality, than most of the predicaments do
from one another, (of which see Bergersdicius Metaph. l. 2. cap. ult. and
Gassendus in Logic.) Judicious Mr. Pemble, de origin formarum, pleads hard
that principia constitutiva are materia (vel subjectum) and accidentia; and
principium transmutationis is contrariarum qualitatum pugna: that forma,
excepta humana, non est substantia, nec materialis, nec immaterialis, sed
accidens vel accidentium mixtura dictum temperamentum, and quod accidentia per
se and immediate agunt, and non in virtute formae substantialis. That is, Quod
qualitates immediate haerent in materia, and a Qualitatibus immediate profluunt
operationes and operandi vires. Quod Qualitates omnes primae, (which he makes
five, lux, calor, frigus, humiditas, siccitas) and aliquae secundae, tenuitas,
erassities, gravitas, levitas* fluor, consistentia, creationis die primo
existiterunt: Quod Qualitates omnes activae generant sibi simile, and ita sui
diffusivae and similium generativae sunt, ut necessario materiam sibi
proportionatam efficient. Quod animae vegetativae in plantis and sensitivae in
brutis sunt tantum temperamenta nobiliora qualitatum actuosiorum in materia
subtili, pura, spirituosiore.

Telesius makes the same principles (materia, calor and frigus) as to the
chief; but he makes calor and frigus to be substances, vel formae
substantiales, and non tantum accidentia. So that they that agree that it is
Qualities that are the active forms, are never the more agreed what they are,
nor what the word Qualities does signify. And what if by the word Quality,
Pemble do mean the very same thing as many others do that call them forms,
(when they speak of vegetatives.) And what if by substances, Telesius mean the
same that Pemble does by accidents. Is not the world then troubled with
ambiguitie of words? He that will consider them well may suspect, that they
mean as I conjecture. An active power or principle being the chief cause of
operations, alterations and discrimination, is the thing that they all mean by
all these names. And the followers of Democritus, especially Gassendus and
Cartesius, do not improbably argue that it is some substantial being which
makes that change or effect upon our senses, which as there received is a
quality. So that unless Mr. Pemble can better tell us what lux, and calor, are,
than by calling them Qualities, he has given the understanding no satisfaction
at all. Much less when he nakedly asserteth, without any proof, that sensation
does not superare naturam primarum qualitatum, that are none of them sensible
themselves. And when he has no other answer to this argument, but that non
minus miranda sunt in inanimatis, which he gives not one instance or word to
prove. When Aristotle, etc. Scaliger, Sennertus, and abundance more, have said
much to the contrary.

I conclude, that for all that is here said, and whether you call them our
forms or not, (as you may or may not, in several senses) humane souls are those
parts of man which are simple, pure, invisible, active, powerful substances;
and therefore being not annihilated, must needs subsist in their separated
state.

OBJECTION IV. Against the soul's dependence upon matter, the Platonists write
excellently. Plato himself, and Plot^nus, and Jamblicus, Proclus, etc.

THe Soul is material, and consequently mortal, because it depends upon
matter in its operations, and consequently in its essence.

Answ. 1. I have proved already, that if you did prove the soul material, you
had not thereby at all proved it mortal: (unless you mean only, that it has a
posse mori vel annihilari; Anima per essentiam est mobilis ex se^psa; sed
conjuncta corpori quodammodo evasit etiam mobilis a^unde; sicut anim ipsa sua
praesentia dedit corpori ultimum ex se movendi vestigium, sic and ipsa propter
corporeum cont^bernium conditionis notam subtit mobilis abunde. Proclus de
Anim. and Demon.
which may be said of every creature) for simple matter, which has no
repugnant parts or principles, has not only a posse nen mori, but an aptitude
in its nature, ad non moriendum. Remember your friends that make the world, or
matter, at least, to be eternal. They thought not that materiality was a proof
of either annihilation or corruption.

Object. If it be material, it must be compounded of matter and form, and
therefore is corruptible.

Answ. True, if that matter and form were two several substances, and were one
repugnant to the other. The soul and body are different substances; but the
metaphysical matter and form of the soul, being but the genus and differentia,
are not two substances, much less repugnant; and therefore have never the more
a tendency to corruption.

2. The soul uses matter, and depends no otherwise on it than its
instrument. It does not follow that a man is a horse* because he depends on
his horse in the manner of his riding, and his pace: nor that I am inanimate,
because in writing I depend on my pen, which is inanimate. If you put spirits
of wine into water or whey, as its vehicle to temper it, for a medicine, it
does not follow that the spirits are mere water, because they operate not
without the water, but conjunct, and as tempered by it. If the fire in your
Lamp do not shine or burn without the oil, but in manner and duration depends
on it, it does not follow that fire is annihilated when the candle is out, or
that it was but oil before: no nor that it cease to be fire afterward, as
Gassendus must needs confess, who holds that the Elements are not turned into
one another,. 1. l. 3. c. 2. Fire cease not to be fire, when it goes out of
our observation.

The noblest natures use and rule the inferior. God himself moves and uses
things material, and yet is not therefore material himself. Yea, if motus be in
patiente and recipitur ad modum recipientis, you may conjecture how far God's
own operations upon the creatures may be called dependent, as to the effect, as
being ad captum and modum creaturae. And the Sun does move and quicken all
passive matter here below ad modum recipientis, with great variety through the
variety of the matter; and yet it follows not that the Sun is it self such
passive matter.

3. The soul has operations, which are not upon matter at all, though matter
may possibly be an antecedent occasion or prerequisite. Such is the
apprehension of its own intellection and volitions, and all that it thence
gathers of God, and other intellectual natures and operations, of which I
must say more anon.

OBJECTION V.
NO immaterial substance moves that which is material, as a principle of its
operations: but the soul moves the body as the principle of its operations:
Ergo.

Answ. 1. I have already said, that if you proved the soul material, it would
not prove it mortal.

2. As the body has various operations, so it is moved by various principles
or powers. As to locomotion, and perhaps vegetation, the materia subtilii, or
finest atoms, as you will call it, or the fiery matter in the spirits, as I
would call it, is an active being, which has a natural power to move it self
and the rest. But whether that motion do suffice to sensation, is undecided.
But certainly there is another inward principle of motion, which guides much
of the locomotive, and over-ruleth some of the natural motion, by a peculiar
action of its own, which is called Intellection and Volition, as I have proved
before. When I go to the Church, when I write, or talk, the spirits are the
nearest sufficient principle of the motion as motion: but as it is done in this
manner, to this end, at this time, with these reasons, it is from the
intellectual principle.

3 And thus I deny the major Proposition. And I prove the contrary. 1. God is
the first principle of all motion in the world, and the first cause of material
motion, and yet is not material. 2. What the lower and baser nature can do,
that the higher and nobler has power to do, (suppositis supponendis) therefore
if a body can move a body, a soul can do it much more.

But, says Gassendus, Causis secundis primum agendi principium est Atomorum
varia mobilitas ingenita, non incorporea aliqua substantia. Answ. Angels are
causae secundae, souls are causae secundae, animated bodies of men are causae
secundae: prove it now of any of these (in your exclusion) if you can. But he
says, Capere non licet quomodo si incorporeum sit, ita applicari corpori
valeat, ut illi impulsum imprimat; quando noque ipsum contingere, carens ipsa
tactu seu mole quae tangat, non potest -- Physicae actiones corporeae cum sint,
nisi a principio physico corporeoque elici non possiut -- Quod anima autem
humana incorporea cum sit* and in ipsum tamen corpus suum agat, motumque ipsi
imprimat, dicimus animam humanam qua est intellectus seu men's, atque adeo
incorporea, non elicere actiones nisi intellectuales, seu mentales and
incorporeas. Et quum est sentiens, vegetans, praeditaque vi corporum motrice
atque adeo corporea est, elicere actiones corporeas, etc. And of Angels and
Devils he says, That it is known by faith only that they are incorporeal, and
perhaps God gave them extraordinary bodies, when he would have them move or act
on bodies.

To this I answer, 1. Who gave those atoms their ingenite mobility, and how?
You say that captum omnem fugit ut quippiam aliud moveat, si in seipso immotum
maneat. If so, then it seems, that either God was moved when he moved atoms,
or that he never moved them. How then came they to be moved first? But you
confess that God put into them their mobility. You say, De Deo alia ratio est,
quoniam infinitae virtutis cum sit, and v^ique praesens, non ullo s^i motu, sed
nutu solo agere and movere quidlibet potest. If you think not as you speak, it
is unworthy of a Philosopher; if you do, then it is strange that you should
overthrow your own reasoning, and excuse it no better than thus. If the reason
why incorporeal spirits cannot move bodies be that which you allege, (because
only a body can be applied to a body to make impression on it) then God can
less move a body than man's soul can; because his purest essence is more
distant from corporeal grossness than our souls are. At least, the reason would
be the same. And to say that God is every where, and of infinite virtues,
makes him nevertheless a Spirit: and created spirits (if that be enough) may
have power or virtue enough for such an effect. Doubtless if God move bodies,
the spirituality of an agent hinders not the motion.

2. But why should it captum omnem superare, that a nobler and more potent
nature can do that, which a more ignoble can do? Because I cannot know how a
spirit by contact can apply it self to matter, shall I dream that therefore it
is incapable of moving bodies? Clean contrary, I see that matter of it self is
an unactive thing: and were it not that the noble active element of fire,
(which as a lower soul to the passive matter, and a thing almost middle between
a spirit and a body) did move things here below, I could discern no motion in
the world, but that which spirits cause, except only that of the parts to the
whole, the aggregative motion which tends to rest. The difference of
understandings is very strange: it is much easier to me to apprehend, that
almost all motion should come from the purest, powerful, active, vital natures,
than that they should be all unable to stir a straw, or move the air, or any
body.

OBJECTION VI.
THe soul is in our sleep either unactive, See in Aristcas Histor. de 70. p.
879. the Kings Quest. 19. about Dreams, with the Answer, how far Dreams are in
our power.
(as when we do not so much as dream) or acts irregularly and irrationally,
according to the fortuitous motion of the spirits: Ergo, it is no incorporeal
immortal substance.

Answ. 1. I suppose the soul is never totally unactive. I never awaked since I
had the use of memory, but I found my self coming out of a dream. And I suppose
they that think they dream not, think so because they forget their dreams.

2. Many a time my reason has acted for a time as regularly, and much more
forcibly, than it does when I am awake: which shows what it can do, though it
be not ordinary.

3. This reason is no better than that before answered; where I told you, that
it argues not that I am a horse, or no wiser than my horse, because I ride but
according to his pace, when he halteth, or is tired. Nor does it prove that
when I alight, I cannot go on foot. He is hard of understanding that believes,
that all the glorious parts of the world above us, have no nobler intellectual
natures than man. Suppose there be Angels, and suppose one of them should be
united to a body, as our souls are: we cannot imagine but that he would actuate
it, and operate in it according to its nature; as I write amiss when my pen is
bad. The same I say of persons Lethargick, Apoplectick, Delirant, etc.

OBJECTION VII.
REason is no proof of the soul's immateriality, because sense is a clearer and
more excellent way of apprehension than Reason is; and the bruits have sense.

Answ. 1. I have said enough to the case of Bruits before.

2. The soul understands bodily things, by the inlet of the bodily senses:
Things incorporeal (as I shall show more anon) it otherwise understands. When
it understands by the help of sense, it is not the sense that understands
any thing. If Bruits themselves had not an Imagination which is an Image of
Reason, their sense would be of little use to them. We see when by business or
other thoughts the mind is diverted and alienated, how little sense it self
does for us: when we can hear as if we never heard, and see, and not observe
what we see, yet it is true, that the more sense helps us in the apprehending
of things sensible, which are then objects, the better and surely r^w perceive
them by the understanding. As the second and third Concoction will not be well
made, if there be a failing in the first; so the second and third perception,
(^n the Fantasy and Intellect) will be ill made, if the first deceive or fail
them. But this proves not either that the first Concoction or Perception is
more noble than the third; or that Sensitives without Reason have any true
understanding at all; or that Sense, Fantasy and Reason, are not better than
Sense alone. But these things need not much disputing. If Sense be nobler than
Reason, let the Horse ride the man, and let the Woman give her milk to her Cow,
and let Bruits labor men, and feed upon them, and let Beasts be your Tutors,
and Kings and Judges, commit to them the noblest works, and give them the
preeminence, if you think they have the noblest faculties.

OBJECTION VIII.
SEnsation and Intellection are both but Reception: The passiveness therefore
of the Soul does show its materiality.

Read Priscians Theophrast de Anim* with Ficinus Notes, which shows how far
the Sense is Active.
Answ. A short answer may satisfy to this Objection. 1. All created Powers are
partly passive, how active soever they be. For being in esse and operari
dependant on and subordinate to the first Cause, they must needs receive his
influence, as well as exercise their own powers. As the second wheel in the
Clock, must receive the moving force of the first, before it can move the third.

2. It is an enormous error about the operations of the Soul, to think that
Intellection yea or Sensation either, Sensus Principium mediaque and finem
sentiendae rei individuae comprehendit, and Actio est, judiciumque perfectum,
and in praesenti momento simul totus existit, etsi non absque passione aliqua
instrumenti sensus efficitur non tamen est haec passio sensus; Quo fit ut
patiamur and vigilantes and dormlentes nec tamen persentiamus. Theophrast. de
Anim. ut supr.
is mere Reception, and that the sensitive and intellective power are but
Passive. The active Soul of Man (yea of Bruits) receives not its object, as
the mark or butt receives the arrow that is shot at it. It receives it by a
similitude of nature, and by an active attendance, and embracement, yea by an
active appetite sicut foemina marem, vel potius sicut esuriens cibum: Yea, it
moves toward its object, and meets it: It actively welcometh and improveth
it: As I said even now, a Scholar that in his studies so far diverteth his
thoughts, that he knows not that the Clock has stricken at his ears, and
knows not what those say that talk by him, does show that some active
attendance is necessary to almost all perception. He that feels not that his
understanding does agere as well as pati (when he is studying, reading or
writing) is a stranger to himself. How often have I read over many lines when I
have thought of something else, and not known one word that I have read? Is
inventing, Lege Mars. Ficinum de Volupt. c. 1. and 2. and 3, etc. Platonis
dogma defendentem, scil. Voluptatem esse Actum vel Motum.
compounding, dividing, defining, etc. no action? I never felt cause from any
experience of my own, to believe that I was a mere patient in any thought that
was ever in my mind. Nay the Epicurean that supposes thoughts to be but a
dance of Atoms, called Spirits, Priscian in Theophrast. de Anim. c. 13. says,
[Anima quidem cum sit forma vivens and sensualis, agit circa illa quae sibi
offeruntur. Vitaliter atque sensualiter: and quia est in corpore, usque ad
certum spatium operatur.
does think that those atoms or spirits are notably active. Cartesius his
materia sultilis is eminent in activity. Do you think that every dead Object
which I think on with my eyes shut in the night, and so much more alive than I,
and so much more active than my mind, that it must be accounted the sole
agent, and my mind the patient. They know little of a mind that talk in this
strain.

I know Cartesius tells us, that the eye has no fire or light in it, except
perhaps the eye of a Cat or Owl. But if the study of matter and motion had left
him any room for the consideration of other things which he past over, he would
by a little search have found that the eye does close with its primary object,
Light, by mere connaturality, because it participateth of Light it self, in its
own constitution. It is fire in the eye, even in the visive Spirits, which
meets the fire or light without, and by union causes that which we call
sight. And seeing that experience forced him to confess it of Cats and Owls,
how could he think that all other eyes or sight were quite of another kind?
Some men have been able to see in the dark, and had sparkling eyes almost like
Cats. The degree here differs not the species. If this materia subtilis or
globuli aetherei be fire, he might have allowed some of that to the visive
spirits in Man as well as in Owls. Says Ficinus in Theophrast. de Anim. c. 14.
Primum luminosum est Coeleste: Secundum est Igneum: Tertium inter composita
quod quasi fulget ut Ignis. Primum luminale est Oculus, praecipue radiosus, in
animalibus, quae nocte vident; sed ^lii quoque oculi quamvis minus, sunt tamen
luminalus.

Nemesius See Alcinous de doctr. Plat. cap. 18. to the same purpose.
l. pro Immort. Anim. in Bibl. Pat. p. 505. approves Plato's Judgment, (Plato
inquit) per confusionem splendorum res aspici existimat, ut id lumen quod ex
oculis proficiscitur aliquo usque in aerem, qui ejusdem est secum genus
effluat. Quod vero a corporibus manat contraferatur, and quod in aere est, qui
interponitur, facileque diffunditur and vertitur, simul cum oculorum igne
extendatur]. Et Galenus (inquit) de visione cum Platone consentit in 70 de
consens. And he says himself, that the Sun sends its light by the Air, and
the light in the eye streameth also into it; which is to seeing as the Nerves
are to the Brain for feeling. Porphyry says, that sight is the Soul it self
discerning it self in all things. But if there were any doubt in the point of
sight (which is performed both by active spirits, and an active object, Light)
yet methinks that when I feel a stone, much more when I meditate on a Mountain,
all should confess that my sense and intellection is like to have more action
than that Stone and Mountain. And if you say only that Spirits first moved move
others, and so touch the Intellectual Organs, or Spirits, I have partly
answered that before, and shall answer it more anon. We have great reason to
ascribe the most of action to that part which is most subtle, vigorous and
active.

OBJECTION IX.
THere is nothing in the Intellect which was not first in the Sense, from which
it receives all its knowledge by the Idea's of the Fantasy; Therefore the
Soul can reach no higher than to corporeal sensible things: Therefore it is but
such it self.

Answ. The Antecedent is false, and both the Consequents. Had he limited his
assertions to corporeal objects, I should easily acknowledge to Gassendus, that
Omnis quae in mente habetur Idea ortum ducit a sensibus. Et Omnis Id^a aut per
sensum transit, aut ex iis quae transeunt per sensum formatur. Et quae Idea
propriis acquiritur sensibus persectior est ea quae ex facta ab alio
descriptione formatur. Qualis Idea rei, talis definitio. But that these things
will not hold true as he delivers them universally, I think I shall make
plain, and confute this Objection to the satisfaction of any one that knows
himself.

Ortum ducere a sensu is an ambiguous phrase: The sense may be the Occasion
sine qua non, of that whereof it never had the least participation in it self.
I desire you but to distinguish between the Intellects Object and its Act, and
those Objects which it knows by the mediation of other extrinsick objects,
and those which it knows by the mediation of its own Act. These differences
are past all doubt. When the eye sees these Lines and this Paper, the Light
and Lines and Paper are each one thing, and the sight of them is another. I see
the Light, and thereby the Paper; but I see not my sight: My sight is not the
object of my sight: It may be said, that the Object is in my sight, but not
that my sight is in my sight: Yet by seeing I perceive not only what I see, but
that I see; and I perceive much more plainly that I see, than what I see. I may
doubt of a thousand objects which I see, what matter, shape, or color they are
of; but I doubt not at all of the act of seeing; that right or wrong some fight
I have, or that I see the Light: so is it with the Intellect. This book is one
thing, and the understanding it is another thing. The book is the object of my
understanding; but (at least in primo instanti) my understanding is not the
object of my understanding; but by understanding I have an immediate perception
that I understand. And (as Cartesius truly says) the act of Intellection is
more perceived than the object: I am more certain that I think and understand,
than I am of the nature of that which I think of and understand. If any say,
that the act of Intellection is the object of another Intellection, because
intelligo me intelligere, and so that intellectio non est tantum actus
intellectus, sed etiam est in intellectu, and that the Intellect does
understand its own act intuitive as some speak, or by reflection as others
(though doubtless the first perception that I understand, is not by reflection,
but by that same act of understanding something else) (as sight does not
reflect upon it self to get a perception that I see) I will enter no
controversy about any of these notions of the manner of our understanding our
own act of Intellection, which does not concern the present business. But it is
most certain that Actus intelligendi nunquam fuit in sensu: when the object of
Intellection did pass through the sense, the Act of Intellection did not: nor
the intellection or perception of that Act of Intellection, did not: Nor the
Intellection of the common nature of an Intelligence, which from hence I
gather; nor the Intellection of particular Intelligences as Angels; nor my
Intellection of any man's Intellect or intellectual act, whose nature I gather
from mine own: Nor the conception I have of a Deity as the most perfect
intellect; nor the perception which I have of my own Volition of my own
felicity, or of the means thereto as such, nor of the pleasing of God, nor of
another man's good: Nor my perception of the nature of the will hence gathered;
nor my conception of the Volitive power in other persons; nor my conceptions of
the Volitions of God, of Angels, etc. nor my conception of Intellectual or
moral habits, nor of the Wills natural inclinations! None of all these were
ever in the Sense; nor passed through the Sense: some of them (which Gassendus
de Ideis overlooketh) are without any Idea at all properly so called (as the
first perception of the act of my own understanding and will, by understanding
and willing other things; as we perceive that we see non videndo Ipsum visum,
sed alia videndo): And that Idea which we have of all the rest, is fetched from
this perception of our own acts, and not from any thing which ever was in the
sense: The Soul by knowing it self, does gather the knowledge of all higher
intellectual beings, which is its most considerable worthy knowledge. I hope I
have given you instances enough; and plain enough, and you see now what truth
there is of nihil est intellectu quod non fuit prius in sensu.

D' Orbellis distinguishes Knowledge (largely taken) into sensitive and
intellective: and both of them into Abstractive and Intuitive. Knowledge
Intuitive is of an Object as it self present, when a thing in its present
existence, is the moving object of knowledge. Knowledge Abstractive is when the
species of the thing does move us to know the thing it self: and that whether
the thing it self be present or absent, and have existence or not. The example
of Intuitive sensitive knowledge or perception which he gives, is the Eye
seeing Colors. The instance of Abstractive sensitive knowledge is, as the
Fantasy imagines colors: The instance of Intuitive Intellective Knowledge
is, the Saints seeing the glory of God in Heaven, and he might have instanced
in many other things: The instance of Abstractive Intellective Knowledge, is
the understandings Knowledge of the Quiddity of Colors by means of the
species. To which may be added, that Abstractive Knowledge is either per
speciem propriam, or per speciem alienam: In this life the Soul knows its own
acts either Intuitively or by an act, if possible, yet nearer to its essential
power, that has no usual distinguishing name. It knows its own powers,
inclinations, and habits, neither by a knowledge, in proper and strict sense,
intuitive or abstractive: For it is not by a proper species, but it is its
natural innate power of discerning this Principle, that quicquid agit potest
agere quod agit; by arguing ab actu ad potentiam and naturam. But in the large
sense as Cartesius uses the word, this may be called, an Idea. The mind
knows God and Angels, and other men's Souls, in this large sense also by an
Idea, but not per speciem propriam, sed alienam, that is, not by a species of
God and Angels, but by an Idea borrowed from our own Intellections and
Volitions. But this is not an Idea that ever passed through the senses: and
Gassendus might have thought on it, whether it be not an Idea in the Intellect,
if not without the fantasy, at least over and above the Idea in the
Imagination, when he denies that there is any such Intellective Idea's.

2. But what if there had been nothing in the intellect, but what passed
through the sense? it would no more thence follow that the intellect is no more
noble, spiritual or immortal than the sense, than it will follow that the King
is no better than his Porter, because none comes to him till he let them in;
or that the animal spirits are no more noble than the teeth, or than the
natural heat; or the third concoction is no more excellent than the first,
because nothing comes to the third concoction, but what was masticated,
swallowed, and passed the first and second concoction. Of which, before.

3. And even by the help of things sensible, Epicurus can reach the knowledge
of insensible atoms, and Cartesius of his subtle matter, and globuli coelestes:
why then by things sensible may we not reach the knowledge of spiritual
substances and powers?

Yet after all this, I am much of their mind, who think that it is not actual
knowledge that is born with us; nor is there any true Idea or picture of any
thing innate in our understandings; and I think that if per possibile vel
impossible, you suppose a man born without any one sense, that he would have
had no actual knowledge at all, (though that is uncertain.) Because as if I had
not seen any thing objective, I should not have perceived that I could see; so
if I had never known any other object, I could not have known what it is to
know: and other objects have no way, that I know of, to the intellect, but
through the sense: (Though what the active spirits would have done upon the
fantasy, I cannot possibly understand.) But all this only concludes, that
the senses reception is the way to the intellection of things sensible; and
that it was a necessary occasion, sine qua non, to the perception of our own
intellectual act, because thus necessary to the act it self: But not that any
Idea of our own Intellection, or any of all the things fore-instanced, was
received through the senses.

OBJECTION X.
THat which things corporeal work upon, is corporeal: for it cannot be
conceived how bodies own work upon that which has no body: But things
corporeal work upon the soul: Ergo, it is it self corporeal.

Answ. 1. I largely before showed, that our uncertainty of the just consistence
of Metaphysical matter, or incorporeal substance, does make all such arguings
to sound like dreams.

2. I have showed, that spiritual powers receive not impressions as dull matter
does, by a mere passive power: but by an activity and outgoing, it works
indeed upon that which it receives, much more than any such matter can be said
to work on it: nay, matter does not properly work upon it at all, but only
afford it matter to work upon, and occasion to exercise its active power. As
the stone or tree does not work upon the sight, but the sight by the help of
light does work upon it. As the eye can see a dunghill, and yet be of a nobler
kind, and God and Angels can know beasts and worms, and yet be incorporeal. So
man can know things inanimate, and yet be animate; and things insensible, and
yet be sensible; and things irrational, and yet be rational; and things
corporeal, and yet be incorporeal. And this by the activity and extent of its
power, and not by any passive debasing defectiveness at all.

OBJECTION X^.
THat is not incorporeal, Vid. Paul. Cartesium in Sent. 1. Dis. 1. p. 7. and
Dis. 2. p. 8. That spiritual things are better known than corporeal, and of the
knowledge of God.
which neither knows it self to be incorporeal, nor has any notion but
negative of an incorporeal being: But such is man's soul.

Answ. 1. If the soul know not it self to be an immortal spirit, what makes
almost all the world to judge so of themselves? insomuch that those men that
under pretense of Philosophy deny it, are fain to study very hard, and take
many years pains to blot out this light of nature from their minds; because
they cannot be ignorant of it at easy rates: The understanding will not lose
its natural light, nor suffer such verities to be obliterated, but by a great
deal of industry, and by the engines of abundance of false notions, which are
sought after to that use. As Cicero says of the Epicureans, They learn those
things, quae cum praeclare didicerunt nihil sciant. (Piso de fin. 5. p. 204.)
They learn diligently to unlearn the truth, that when they have learned much,
they may know little.

2. Has man no notion but Negative, of an incorporeal being. I showed you
before why the notion of materiality should not be here used for a cheat or
blind. But look back on what I said even now, and you will see that as Carts
truly says, we have not only positive conceptions of a mind, but the first,
the clearest, and the surest conceptions of it, in the measure that is fit for
our present state.

Quest. 1. Have you not a positive conception of Intellection and Volition? If
not, you are unfit for any controversies about them, and cannot own your own
humanity.

Quest. 2. Have you not a clearer perception, that you think, and know or
reason (either right or wrong) than you have what that thing is that you think
or reason about?

Quest. 3. Have you not a sure and positive conception, that omnis actus est
alicujus actus, and quod nihil, nihil agit? and therefore that you are an
intelligent volitive being.

Quest. 4. Have you not a positive sure conception, that quicquid agit agere
potest, and that nothing does that which it cannot do; and therefore that your
souls are beings potentiated for Intellection, Volition and Execution?

Porphyr. de occas. inq. Anima est Essentia inextensa, immaterialis,
immortalis, in vita habente a seipsa vivere atque esse simpliciter possidente.
Quest. 5. Have you not a positive sure conception, that you have a natural
inclination to these acts, and a pleasure in them, and that they are natural
and perfective to you? and consequently that your souls are beings, that have
not only a power, but a vis and inclinatio naturalis, or a power that is
natural, and active, and inclined to these particular actings.

Quest. 6. Have you not a positive sure conception, that the end and highest
objects of these acts and inclinations, are things above sense, viz. your
selves or minds in the first place, and then the things above you, the first
Being, Cause, and Mover of all; the infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, who is
your Maker and your End? If you find no such thing, The Lord have mercy on you,
for every honest man may find it.

Quest. 7. Have you not a positive sure conception, that such as the Operations
are which flow from the essential powers or faculties, such in nobility, and
excellency, and nature is the substance thus potentiated and acting.

All these are clear, undeniable, positive conceptions of the soul; which set
together are thus much, that [The Mind or Soul of man is a noble Essence, above
the reach and nature of sense, naturally potentiated and inclined, as an active
being, to intellection, volition, and seeking after things celestial and
everlasting, especially God himself, his ultimate end.] All this is positive,
clear and sure. And you would think this enough, 1. If you did consider what
Lud. Vives says, that God has given man a soul to use, rather than accurately
to know; or to know so far as is necessary to use. As your child may have the
use of his knife, or clock, or watch, or clothes, without knowing what metal
they are made of, or how to compose and make the like, as long as he can but do
that with them which is necessary to their use. Often says Seneca, Necessaria
ignoramus, quia superflua didicimus. 2. If your minds were not by sense deluded
and captivated to such fixed idea's of things corporeal and gross, as to
overlook all other beings, and measure all substance by such gross idea's. 3.
If you well considered, that you know in any respect little more of things
corporeal, and in some respects much less. Let us see wherein it is that you
know more: either as to the sensible or insensible parts of such beings. As for
the substances as such, you confess they are but per accidens, the objects of
sense, and that as stripped of their accidents you have no positive true
conception of them. And as for the accidents, you are no whit agreed either
what they are, or how many. Of all things you are most unanimous in that of
Quantity, moles, or extensions; but what a poor kind of knowledge is it, to
know that this or that is quantum, and not to know what it is that is quantum.
What light, color, sapor, odor are, and what all the senses that perceive
them, you are as much disagreed as if this age had been the first that had
debated it. The same I may say both of Qualities in general, and of all other
in particular, except figure, which properly belongs not to the predicament.
Of all the rest there is the like disagreement; even time and place, which
truly are nothing but entia rationis, are debased by you in the first place,
and are two of Gassendus his four predicaments. About the number either of
principles or elements, there is no agreement; no nor what any one of the
elements are: Who has told us what is the form of earth, or water, or air, or
described them otherwise than by their qualities? And then differ you as much
about those qualities. Who has told us any thing of the naked matter or form
of fire (such as the Sun and Luminaries are)? any otherwise than by its acts,
and powers or virtues of Motion, Light and Heat, as we describe to you the soul
of man. And if you go to the invisible part of matter, it would make a man
rather sick than wise, to read men provincias dare atomis, as Cicero speaks;
and to think with what bold unreasonable fiction they number them, as shaped
and figured; and figure and shape them to the uses which they have feigned for
them, and then use them and conduct them, and vary their motions, as
confidently and seriously, as if they had given us any proof of any of this,
and indeed expected to be believed. Nay, we must know how the corners of atoms
(pardon the contradiction) came to be filed or worn off by motion, and so
reduced to greater subtilty. And Gassendus, after all the fabric which he
builds upon atoms, says, [That atoms have not of themselves a moving force,
but from God's first motion.. 1. c. 8. p. 280. Non quod Deo necesse fuerit
creare seorsim atomos, quas deinceps in parts grandiores, grandioresque ex
his, mundus constaret, compingerit; sed quod creans materiae massam, in
corpuscula exolubilem, atque adeo ex corpusculis tanquam minimis extremisque
particulis compositam, concreasse illi ipsa corpuscula censentur. ib. So that
they know not indeed whether God created matter first in atoms disjunct, or in
more large and bulky parts: and so whether motion did divide grosser and
greater parts into atoms, or whether it coagulated atoms into greater bodies.
But the sum is, that they only affirm, that what ever bodies God made, they are
divisible into atoms, that is, into parts by man indivisible. A great mystery
sure, that the whole is divisible into smaller parts! And what the nearer is
any man by this, for the discerning of any of their wild hypotheses? In a word,
God has given man knowledge for his benefit and use, to the ends of his being
and life: and so far as we have use for it we may know all things about us; but
to humor our wanton fancies he is not obliged. And because we have more use
for the faculties of our souls, than for fire and water, or any outward thing,
he has given us the first and surest knowledge of them; whatsoever
self-contradicting Somatists say, to depress this knowledge, and advance that
knowledge of Bodies, which their own disagreements do confute. Sure I am, if
that be a probable opinion which has diverse learned men for it, almost all
things are probable in Philosophy: and if that be improbable which has
multitudes of learned men against it, almost all things are improbable.

OBJECTION XII.
THat which is generated is corruptible: but the soul is generated: Ergo, etc.
--

Answ. 1. If by [corruptible] you mean that which has [a posse perire] or a
certainty of perishing, if God uphold it not, I grant it of the whole Creation.
But if you mean that which in its nature is so fitted to dissolution, perishing
or decay, as that God seems to intend it to such an end; or must miraculously
preserve it, or else it will perish; or that which eventually will perish, then
we must not so easily dismiss you.

2. The word [generated] is of so great ambiguity, and generation it self a
thing so little understood by mortals, that this reason does but carry the
controversy into the dark, and argue ab obscuriore and minus noto; which is
the way of a wrangler, and not of one that would reveal the truth. Either
generation is the production of some new substance, not existent before so much
as in its matter; or it is only the composition of pre-existent substances. If
it be the later, then you may prove the possibility and probability of the
dissolution of the frame, and separation of those several substances. But you
will confess your selves, that each part retains its proper nature still; and
that if one were a more noble and active element than the rest, it is not
annihilated, but remains so still without debasement. Therefore if their
opinion were true, who hold the pre-existence of that purest part of man which
we call his soul, (either in a common element, or individuate) no reason can
think that the dissolution does any more than separate the parts of man, and
return that soul to its pre-existent state; where still it will be as noble a
creature as it was here.

But if Generation do produce a substance de novo, which did no way pre-exist,
then it is either a corporeal substance, or a spiritual or incorporeal: which
soever it be, can you give any reason why this should perish at the
dissolution, any more than if it had pre-existed? If the nature of it be the
same, why should not the duration be the same? one of the two you will confess
it, either a corporeal substance or an incorporeal, if it be at all a
substance: and you confess that no substance is annihilated, or perishes,
otherwise than by dissolution of parts. If the reason of your major be, because
the thing generated has a beginning, and did oriri de novo, so did all matter
and substances that be created. Or if you suppose them all from eternity, yet
do but suppose them to be created and have had a beginning, and yet to be the
same as if they had been eternal, and you will see that there will be the same
reason to prove their continuance, as long as their nature and their dependence
on God are both the same.

But it may be you will form your objection better, and say, that Generation
produces no new substance, but only a composition, order and temperament of
pre-existent substances: But souls are generated: Ergo, They are no substances,
but the order or temperament of pre-existent substances.

Answ. I never saw any thing like a cogent proof of the major: and most
Christians think you can never prove the minor.

A substance may be called new, either because it is made of nothing, as in
creation, or because it arises to its natural state of perfection ex semine
vel natura foecunda, where it was only virtually and seminally before.

Before you can prove your major even in the first sense, you must be better
acquainted with the nature of God, and of Spirits, and of Generation, than you
are: I cannot imagine what show of proof you can bring to prove, that
universally no generation causes a substance totally new, unless you will go
to Scripture, (which you believe not) and plead from Genes. 1. that God then
ended all his works, and therefore does create no more. But, 1. He may cause
them totally de novo, without such a creation as is there spoken of: for he may
by a stablished Law of Nature adjoyn his producing influx to the act of a
creature, (ordinarily) and so difference it from that proper creation. 2. No
man can prove that God has there said one word to assure us, that he will
never create any thing hereafter. Cannot a workman look on his house, and see
that it is well done, and say, I have finished it, without obliging him never
to build another, nor to make any reparations of that as there is cause? May
not God create a new Heaven and Earth? may he not create a new Star, or a new
Plant or Animal, if he please, without the breaking of any word that he has
spoken? For my part, I never saw a word which I could discern to have any such
signification or importance. The argument from Genes. 1. is no better than
theirs, who from Christ's consummatum est do gather, that his death and burial
which followed that word, were no part of his satisfactory meritorious
humiliation.

On the contrary, there have been both Philosophers and Divines, who have
thought, that God does in omni instanti, properly create all things which he is
said to conserve: of whom the one part do mean only, that the being of the
creatures is as dependant on his continual causation, as the life of the
branches is on the tree: but that the same substance is continued, and not
another daily made. But there are others who think, that all creatures who are
in fluxu continuo, not per locomotum, but ab entitate ad nihilum, and that they
are all but a continual emanation from God, which as it passes from him
tends to nothing, and new emanations do still make such a supply, as that the
things may be called the same; as a River, whose waters pass in the same
Channel. As they think the beams or light of the Sun does in omni instanti
oriri and festinare ad nihilum, the stream being still supplied with new
emanations. Were it not for the overthrow throw of individuation, personality,
rewards and punishments that hence seems to follow, this opinion would seem
more plausible than theirs, who groundlesly prohibit God from causing any more
new beings.

But though, no doubt, there is unto all beings, a continual emanation or
influx from God, which is a continued causation, it may be either conservative
of the being first caused, or else restorative of a being continually in decay,
as he please: for both ways are possible to him, as implying no contradiction;
though both cannot be about one and the same being, in the same respect, and at
the same time. And our sense and reason tell us, that the conservative influx
is his usual way.

2. But it is commonly, and not without reason, supposed, that generation
produces things de novo in another sense: not absolutely, as creation does;
but secundum quid, by exalting the seminal virtue into act, and into
perfection. New individuals are not made of new matter now created; but the
corporeal part is only pre-existent matter, ordered, compounded and
contempered: and the incorporeal part is, both quoad materiam suam
metaphysicam, and formam vel naturam specificam, the exaltation and expurgency
of that into full and perfect existence, which did before exist in semine
virtuoso.

When God had newly created the first man and woman, he created in them a
propagating virtue and fecundity: this was, as it were, semen seminis: by this
they do first generare semen separabile: which suppositis supponendis, has a
fecundity fit to produce a new suppositum vel personam; and may be called a
person seminally or virtually, but not actually, formally and properly: and so
this person has power to produce another, and that another in the same way.
And note, that the same creating word, which said, Let there be light; and, Let
us make man; did say also to man, as well as to other creatures, Increase and
multiply: not, [ create new souls or bodies] but by generation, [Increase and
multiply] which is the bringing of many persons out of two, and so on, as out
of a seminal pre-existence or virtual, into actual formal existence.

He knows not the mysteriousness of this wonderful work of God, nor the
ignorance of mankind, who knows not that all generation of man, bruits or
plants, has much that is to us unsearchable. And they that think it a
dishonor to a Philosopher, not to undertake or pretend to render the just
causes of this and all other the Phenomenon in nature, do but say, I will hide
the dishonor of my ignorance by denying it; that is, by telling men that I am
ignorant of my ignorance, and by aggravating it by this increase, and the
addition of pride, presumption and falsity.

This much is certain, 1. That whatsoever distinct parts do constitute
individuals, which are themselves of several natures, so many several natures
in the world we may confidently assert, though we understand not whether they
all exist separatedly, or are found only in conjunction with others.

2. We certainly find in the world, The Platonists method of progression is
thus summed up in Plotinus Ennead. 4. l. 3. p. 384. and out of him by
Ficinus,[Sicut aeris summum primum omnium ignitur, ab infimo ignis, sic coelum
summum corpus primo animatur ab anima quae est ultimum Divinorum: Ipsum Bonum
est quasi Centrum: Men's, lumen inde emicans; and permanens: Anima, Lumen de
Lumine se moven^: Corpus, per se opacum illuminatur ab anima; sed Animae in
coelo, securae illuminant; sub coelo non sine cura.

Est utique aliquid velut centrum; Penes hoc autem circulus ab ipso micans:
Praeter haec and alius circulus, Lumen de lumine: ultra haec insuper non
amalius Luminis circulus, sed jam Luminis indigus alieni, propriae lucis
inopia. Inqu. Plot. ibid.


1. An intelligent nature; 2. A sensitive nature; 3. A fiery, active,
vegetative nature; 4. A passive matter, which receives the influx of active
natures; which is distributed into air, and water, and earth.

3. The most active nature is most communicative of it self, in the way of its
proper operations.

4. We certainly perceive that the Sun and fiery nature are active upon the
air, water and earth, which are the passive Elements. And by this activity in a
threefold influx, Motion, Light and Heat, do cause the sensible alterations
which are made below; and so that it is as a kind of life, or general form, or
soul to the passive matter.

5. We also find that Motion, Light and Heat, as such, are all different tota
specie from sensation; and therefore as such are not the adequate causes of it.
And also that there is a sensitive nature in every animal, besides the
vegetative.

6. Whether the vegetative nature be any other than the fiery or solar, is to
man uncertain. But it is most probable that it is the same nature, though it
always work not to actual vegetation, for want of prepared matter. But that the
Sun and fiery nature is eminenter vegetative, and therefore that vegetation is
not above the nature of fire, (or the Sun) and so may be an effect of it.

7. In the production of vegetatives by generation it is evident, that as the
fiery active nature is the nearest cause efficient, and the passive is the
matter and recipient. So that this igneous nature generateth as in three
distinguished subjects, three several ways. 1. As in Parentibus and semine,
into which God ab origin in the creation, has put not only a spark of the
active virtucus fiery nature in general, but also a certain special nature,
differencing one creature from another. 2. The Sun and superior globes of the
fiery nature, which cast a paternal, though but universal influx, upon the
foresaid semen. 3. The calor naturalis telluris, which may be called, as Dr.
Gilbert and others do, its soul or form; which is to the seed as the anima
matris is to the infant. And all these three, the fiery nature of the semen, of
the Sun, and of the calor naturalis telluris, are generally the same: and by
their agreeableness do meet in cooperation for generation.

8. Herein all three as conjunct are the cause of Life, as Life, the Sun, the
seed, and the calor telluris, communicating conjunctly what in their natures
they all contain: that is, an active nature, having a power by motion, light
and heat, to cause vegetation and its conjunct effects. But the calor and motus
solis, and the calor telluris, are but universal causes of life as life: but
the virtus seminalis is both a cause of life in genere, and a specifying cause
of this or that sort of Plants in specie: the reason why e. g. an Oak, an Elm,
a Rose-tree, and every plant is what it is in specie, being to be fetched from
the seed alone, and the Creator's will.

9. Though the seed be the chief or only specifying cause, (why this is
Adeantum, and that Betonica, and that Calendula, etc.) yet the Sun and Earth,
the universal causes, do contribute much more to the life as life, than the
seed it self.

10. This fiery, or solar active nature, is so pure, and above the full
knowledge of mortals, that we have no certainty at all, whether in all this
generative influx, it communicate to vegetatives from it self a pre-existent
matter, and so draw it back to it self again by circulation) or whether it do
only by the substantial contact of its active streams, cherish, and actuate,
and perfect the substance which it finds in semine and materia passiva; or
whether per influxum virtutis, it operate only by that which is commonly called
Quality, without any communication or contact of substance.

11. In all this operation of the Solar or fiery nature in generation, it is
quid medium, between the passive matter and the animal nature, and is plainly
an image of the animal nature and its operations: so like it, that it has
tempted many to ascribe all animal operations only to the Solar or fiery
nature, and has caused wise men to doubt whether this nature be to be numbered
with things corporeal or incorporeal; and to place it between both, as
participating in several respects of both.

12. If the sensitive nature be really above, or specifically different from
the fiery, we may, in what is said, conjecture much at the order of the
generation of things sensitive, viz. by a threefold cause cooperating, one
specifying, and two universal and cherishing. The specifying is the virtus
seminalis maris and foeminae conjunct, and of neither alone, (the same God
which blessed the single seed of a plant with the gift of multiplication,
blessed only the conjunct seeds of male and female animals with that gift:) The
superior universal cause is either some anima universalis ejusdem naturae, or
God immediately. By an Anima universalis I mean not an anima totius mundi* but
of that superior vortex or part which this earth belongs to. Either this is
the Sun, or some invisible soul. If it be the Sun, it is not by its simple
fiery nature before mentioned; because sensation seems to be somewhat tota
specie, different from motion, light and heat: and then it must prove that the
Sun is compound, and has a superior form and nature, which either formaliter
or eminenter is sensitive; and that by this it is that it animateth inferior
sensitives. But of this we mortals have no certainty: It seems very
improbable, that a worm or fly should have a nature superior to any that the
Sun has: but probabilities are not certainties: there are things highest and
things lowest in their several kinds. But remember, that if it should be the
Sun, it is by that nature superior to fire, by which it does it: The maternal
universal Cause of the sensitive life is the Mother. Whether the spirits of a
sensitive Creature have more in them than the spirits of a Plant; and do more
by nutrition, than cause Vegetation; whether they nourish sensitive Life as
such, is doubtful: But if they do so, they be but an universal and not a
specifying Cause; that is, the Cause of Life as Life, but not of the vita
bovis, equi, canis, felis, aquilae, qua talis. And therefore if the
late-discovered trick of passing all the blood of one animal into another, be
prosecuted to the utmost trial, possibly it may do much to the advantage of
Life and Sense as such; but never to the alteration of the species, to turn a
Dog into a Swine, or any other sort of Animal.

13. Whether the sensitive nature be most refined-corporeal, or totally
incorporeal, is past the reach of man to be assured of.

14. The foresaid difficulty is greater here than in the Vegetative Generation,
viz. Whether in the multiplication of sensitive souls, there be an addition of
substance communicated from the Universal Causes? or a greater quantity or
degree of matter (physical or metaphysical) propagated and produced into
existence by generation, than there was before? It seems hard to say, that a
pair of Animals in Noah's Ark, had as much matter or substance in their souls as
the millions since proceeding from them: But whether such souls have quantitive
degrees? or by what terms of gradation the souls of millions are distinct from
one? besides the number? or whether God in the blessing of multiplication, has
enabled them to increase the quantity of matter which shall serve for so many
more forms? are things which we cannot fully understand.

15. In the like manner we may rise up, and conceive of the Generation of
Mankind. We are sure that he has an intelligent nature, much nobler than the
sensitive. And we know that homo generat hominem: And we know that in his
Generation there is an Universal Cause, and a specifying Cause: (for though
there be but one species of men, yet there are more of Intelligences; and that
one may have an Universal Cause, producing that and other effects, and an
Univocal special Cause.) We know that because he is Generated, the specifying
Cause, is the fecundity or propagating power of the Parent, generating a
separable seed, which seed (in conjunction as aforesaid, and suppositis
supponendis) is semen hominis, and is man seminally and virtually, but not
actually: that is, Has both Passive and Active Power, and virtue, by reception
of the influx of the universal Cause, to become a man. The universal inferior
or feminine Cause, is the Mothers Body, and Soul, or the whole Mother, in whom
the Infant is generated and cherished. I call it Universal: For it is only the
semen that specifieth: And therefore by a false or brutish semen a woman may
produce a Monster. The Universal Paternal Cause is certainly GOD ut prima, and
it is probable also ut sola: For he made Man's Soul at first by that immediate
communication, which is called Breathing it into him: And the Intellectual
nature (though specified into Angels and Men) is the nearest to GOD that we
have any knowledge of: And therefore Reason will not teach us to look to any
intermediate universal or superior Cause; because there is no created
superior Nature to the Intellectual: And it is absurd to go to the Inferior to
be the Cause of the superior. If any will needs think, that under God, there is
some Universal Intellect (not of the whole Universe, for that is plainly
improbable, but of our Systeme or Vortex,) they must take it to be some
Angelical Intelligence, as Aristotle, or the Sun, No man can prove either of
these to have any such office. And for the Sun, it is certain that it is not
possible, unless it self be an Intelligence: And though to humane Reason it
seem very likely, that so glorious a corporeal Nature as the Sun, should not be
destitute of as noble a form, as a lump of Clay, a humane body does possess,
that so there may be a proportion in Gods works between the nobility of matter
and form; yet all this to man is utterly uncertain; nor does any man know
whether the Luminaries are animated with either sentient or intelligent Souls,
or not. He that most confidently asserteth either, and scorneth the
Contradicter, does but tell you, that he is ignorant of his ignorance. But if
it should prove true, as many of the Fathers thought, and Mammertus ubi supra
asserteth, that Angels have fiery Bodies which they animate, and so that the
Sun is animated with an Intelligence, it would not follow that as fiery or as
sensitive, but only as intellective, it were a subordinate universal Cause of
complete humane Generations, and that Sol and Homo generant hominem; (save only
quoad Corpus, which is but secundum quid.) But that God is the Universal Cause
is unquestionable, whether there be any subordinate or not.

16. And here it is no wonder if the doubts arise which were in the cases of
the forementioned Generations. Whether God as the universal cause produce
new-metaphysical matter for new forms? Whether millions of Souls since
generated, have not more such metaphysical matter, than the soul of Adam and
Eve alone? How Souls may be said to have more or less such matter or substance?
Whether he educe all Souls e virtute and foecunditate primarum, by giving them
a power without any division or diminution of themselves, to bring forth others
by multiplication? and so cause his Creature to participate of his own
foecundity, or power of causing Entities, etc. But such difficulties as these,
which arise not from uncertainties in Theology, but are the mere consequents of
the imperfection of humane Intellects, and the remoteness, depth, and
unrevealedness of these mysterious works of God, should turn no man from the
holding of other plain revealed truths. As that man generateth man; that God is
the chief specifying Cause by his first making of man, and giving him the power
and blessing of propagation, which he still maintains, and with which he does
concur: That Man is the second specifying Cause in the exercise of that power
of Generation which God gave him. That God is the chief universal Cause; and to
the production of an Intellectual nature as such, does unspeakably more than
man. That the mother as cherishing the semen utriusque Parentis, is the
maternal universal Cause, etc. We know not fully how it is that one Light
causes a thousand, without division or diminution of it self: and what it is
that is caused de novo. It is easy to say, that it is but the motion of one
part of the atoms or materia subtilis moving another, which was all
pre-existent: But few men that can see through a smoke or dust of atoms, will
believe, that the Sun and other fiery bodies, which show themselves so
wonderfully to us by Motion, Light and Heat, have no peculiar Nature, Power or
Virtues to cause all this, but mere magnitude, and figure: And that those
Corpuscles which have so many hundred degrees of magnitude, and figures, should
not fall into as many hundred such Bodies as we call Elements, rather than into
two or four.

Suppose (which we may ad verum exquirendum) that there were no more Fire in
the Universe than one Candle: It having the same nature as now it has, that
Candle would turn Cities and all combustible matter into Fire. But of the
Generation of man quoad animam, I refer the Reader to Sennertus his
Hypomnemata (to omit all others)

And now I would know what there is in Generation that should be against the
Immortality of the Soul? Nemesius de Anima ( which goes under the name of
Greg. Nyssen.) while he endeavors to prove the pre-existence of Souls, does
thus peremptorily conclude [Si animae ex ortu fiunt mutuo, ratione providentiae
fiunt, and caducae sunt ut caetera quae ex propagatione generis oriuntur: si
sunt ex nihilo, Creatio haec est, neque verum est, cessavit Deus ab omnibus
operibus suis: Non ergo nunc animae fiunt: But there is no appearance of a just
proof in any thing that he says, against either of the Opinions which he
opposes.
will you say, it is because the Soul has a Beginning? I have answered before,
that so have all Creatures: Is it because it proves the Soul material? 1. If
it did, I have showed that you your selves hold a perpetuity of matter. 2. But
it does not so. If you say, that Incorporeal Spirits generate not: I answer,
That is but a naked, unproved assertion. If you say, that Angels do not: I
answer, that 1. that is not because they are unable or unapt if God thought it
fittest for them: nor 2. can any man prove de facto whether they do or not.
Christ says, They marry not: but he says not, whether they at all propagate
their species or not: I know the negative is taken for certain; and I say not
that it is not true, but that it is not certain not at all known, and therefore
an unfit supposition to argue from, against the Immortality of the Soul. And I
must confess, that for my part, as I have often read, Formae se multiplicant, and
that the Fire can more multiply or increase it self than Earth, and as I know
that the more noble any Nature is, the more like it is to God, and therefore
more potent, more active, more fecund and productive; so I should far rather
think that the Angelical Nature can propagate it self than the Humane, if God
had not told me the later, and said nothing pro or contra of the former. And
therefore make no doubt, but if it do not, (which no man knows) it is not
because things material are more able; but for other reasons unknown to us.
Whether because God will have this lower World, to be the Nidus vel Matrix
Coelorum, and the Seminary of Heaven, and all multiplication to be here, or
what it is, we know not.

But if it be on the other side concluded, that the whole substance of a Soul
does proceed directly and immediately from God, it does make no great
alteration in this case, or any of the coincident cases about humane
propagation: if you consider, 1. That it is impossible that there should be any
substance which is not totally from God, either immediately, or mediately: And
that what is said to be mediately from Him, has in it as much of his Causation
as if there were no medium: For God is not a partial Cause, but a total in suo
genere; and he is as near to the effect as if there were no second Cause. 2.
That the Somatists themselves say, that in the Generation of Plants and Animals
(which they suppose to be totally Corporeal) there is not the least degree of
substance produced de novo, and therefore there is none, but what was totally
of God, and the Parents do but cause instrumentally the uniting of matter
prae-existent. Therefore if in the Generating of Man, the Parents do but
instrumentally cause the uniting of substance which is totally from God, though
not prae-existent, it little differenceth the Case as to the consequents. 3.
Especially considering that what God does, he does by an established Law of
Nature: As in his making of the World he made the Sun a Causa Vniversalis
constantly to send forth the emanation of Light, Heat, and moving force upon
passive matter, and thereby to produce effects diversifyed by the preparations
and reception of that matter; as to soften Wax, to harden Clay, to make a
Dunghill stink, and a Rose smell sweet, to produce a poisonous and a wholesome
Plant, a Nightingale and a Toad, etc. and this without any dishonor to the
Sun: So if God the Father of Spirits, the Central efficient of Souls, have made
it the original Law of Nature, that he will accordingly afford his
communicative Influx, and that in Humane Generations, such and such
Preparations of matter, shall be as Receptive of his emanations for such and
such Forms, or spiritual substances, and that he will be herein but an
Universal Cause of Souls as Souls, and not of Souls as clean or unclean; and
that this shall depend upon the preparation of the Recipient (whether it be the
Body, or a sensitive foregoing Principle) (still keeping at his pleasure, as a
Voluntary Agent, the suspension or dispose of the effect), this would make no
great alteration, neither as to the point of original sin, nor any other
weighty consequent.

OBJECTION XIII.
OMne quod oritur interit: That which is not eternal as to past duration, is
not eternal as to future duration: But the Soul is not eternal as to past
duration: Ergo.

Answ. I confess this argument will prove that the Soul is not mortal ex
necessitate suae naturae, without dependence on a Voluntary preserver. And
therefore Cicero after most other Philosophers, who uses the Major for a
contrary Conclusion, mistook in this, that he thought the Soul was as natural
an Emanation from God as the beams or light is from the Sun: and therefore that
it was naturally eternal both a part ante and a part post: which made
Arnobius and other Ancients argue as much against the Platonists Immortality of
the Soul, as against the Epicureans Mortality, so that (as I said before) one
would think that they were heretical in this point that does not make them
well. But it is only this natural Eternity which they confute: And when the
Philosophers say, that Omne quod oritur interit, they can mean, or at least
prove no more but this, that it is not Everlasting ex necessitate naturae. But
yet 1. It may be in its nature fitted to be perpetual. 2. And by the will of
the Creator made perpetual. Every Creature did oriri de novo: and yet every one
does not interire.

OBJECTION XIV.
Would you see Physical Arguments for the Souls Incorporeity and Immortality?
Among a multitude that have done it, I desire you to read Plotinus, En. 4. l.
7. of the Immort. of the Soul; whose arguments I pretermit, because I would not
be tedious in transcribing that which is already so well written (abateing
their peculiar Conceits.)

Vid. and Savonarol. l. 1. c. ult.


AMong all your Arguments for the Souls Immortality, there are none but Moral
ones.

Answ. Morality is grown so contemptible a thing, with some debauched persons,
that a very argument is invalidated by them or contemned, if they can but call
it Moral. But what is Morality but the modality of Naturals? And the same
argument may be Natural and Moral. Indeed we call that a Causa Moralis
oft-times which does not necessitate the effect: And yet sometimes even moral
Causes do infalibly and certainly produce the effect. But causation and
argumentation are different things, and so is an effect and a Logical
consequence. Will you call the consequents of Gods own Wisdom, Justice,
Veracity, Goodness, etc. uncertain as coming from a Morali Cause? The Soul is
an Intellectual free agent, and adapted to Moral operations; And this is its
excellency and perfection, and no disparagement to it at all. And if you will
better read them over, you will find that my Arguments are both Physical and
Moral: For I argue from the Acts or operations of the Soul to its Powers and
Nature; And from its Acts and Nature to its ends, with many such like, which
are as truly Physical media, as if I argued from the nature of Fire and Earth,
that one if not hindered will ascend, and the other descend. And other men have
given you other Arguments in their Physics and Metaphysics.

OBJECTION XV.
YOu seem to confess that you cannot prove the endless duration of the Soul by
any Argument from Nature alone; But only that it shall live another Life which
you call a Life of Retribution.

Answ. I told you, that a great probability of it, I thus prove: God has made
the Soul of a Nature not corruptible, but apt to perpetual duration: Ergo, he
thereby declares his will, that he intends it for perpetual duration:
because he makes nothing in vain, either for substance or quality. It may be
some other will think that this argument will infer not only a probability
but a certainty.

And if you go back to your objection of Materiality, I now only add, that
Aristotle and his followers, who think that the Heavens are corporeal, yet
think that they are a quinta essentia and simple, and incorruptible, and
therefore that they shall certainly be everlasting: And he takes the the souls
of Bruits to be analogous to the matter of the Stars; and so to be of that
everlasting quintessence: And can you in reason say less of Rational Souls?

2. It is sufficient, that I prove by natural evidence a Life of Retribution
after this, which shall fully make the miserable ungodly ones repent
tormentingly of their sin, and fill the righteous with such Joys as shall
fully recompense all their labor and suffering in a holy life: And that I
moreover prove that duration of this life, and all the rest, by supernatural
evidence.

OBJECTION XVI.
BOth Soul and Body are like a Candle in fluxu continuo; and we have not the
same substance this Week or Year as we had the last, there being a continual
consumption or transition and accretion: Ergo, being not the same, we are
incapable of a Life of future Retribution. Will you reward and punish the man
that is, or the man that was?

Answ. It is a foolish thing to carry great and certain Truths into the dark,
and to argue against them a minus notis, from mere uncertainties. As to your
simile, I confess that the Oil of your Candle is still wasting, so is the wick;
but not that new is added to make it another thing, unless it be a Lamp. I
confess, that the lucid fume which we call the flame is still passing away. But
whether the fiery Principle (in its essence not visible, but only in its Light)
be not still the same till all the passive matter be consumed, is more than you
know. So also if you argue from the Vegetative life of a Tree: Whether the same
Principle of Vegetation (enlarging it self) continue not to the end to
individuate the Tree, though all the passive Elements (Earth, Water, and Air)
may be in fluxu and a transient state? It is certain, that some fixed Principle
of Individuation there is, from whence it must be denominated the same. The
water of the hasty River would not be called the same River, if the Channel
which it runs in were not the same: Nor your Candle be called the same Candle,
if some of the first Wick or Oil at least did not remain, or the same fire
continue it, or the same Candlestick hold it. And what is it in the Tree which
is still the same? or what in the Bird that flies about, which is still the
same? when you have searched all, you will find nothing so likely as the vital
Principle, and yet that something there must be.

2. But does not the light of Nature, and the concurrent sense and practice of
all the World confute you? and tell you that if you cannot understand what the
Individuating Principle is, yet that certainly some such there is and does
continue. Why else will you love and provide for your own Children, if they be
not at all the same that you begat, nor the same this year as you had the last?
Why will you be revenged on the Man that did beat you, or hang the Thief that
robbed you, or do Justice on any Murderer or Male-factor, seeing that it is not
the same man that did the deed? If he transpire as much as Sanctorius says,
and his substance diminish as much in a day as Opicius says, certainly a few
days leave him not the same as to those transitory parts. Surely therefore
there is something which is still the same. Else you would deny the King his
title, and disoblige your selves from your subjection, by saying that he is not
at all the same man that you swore Allegiance to, or that was born Heir of the
Crown. And you would by the same reason forfeit your own Inheritance. Why
should uncertain Philosophical whimsies befool men into those speculations,
which the light and practice of all the world does condemn as madness. But
arguing ab ignotis will have no better success. Of the individuation of Bodies
in the Resurrection I spoke before The sum of their Reasons, who think that
Bodies at the Resurrection are Identified only by the Souls identity, you may
see in Thom. Whites Theolog. Institut. To. 2. li. 3. Lect. 4. p. 239.340.
.

OBJECTION XVII.
IF the Soul be a substance, we must confess it not annihilated: Read Plotinus
in Ennead. 4. page 374^ (Ed. Basil.) de individuatione Animarum. As also the
following pages, provin^ that our Souls are no parts of the Anim^ Mundi. Et
sect. 8^ page 377. Quomod^ animae differant: and quomodo sint immortales in
form^ propria restantes?
But it is most like to proceed from some Element of Souls, or Universal Soul,
either the Anima Mundi, or rather the Anima Solis, vel hujus systematis: And so
to be reduced to it again, and lose its individuation, and consequently to be
incapable of Retribution.

Answ. 1. That the Soul which we speak of is a substance, is past all
controversy: For though, as I have showed, there is truly an order or
temperament of the parts, which he that lists may call the form, the life,
the soul, or what he please; yet no man denies but that there is also some one
part which is more subtle, pure, active, potent, and regnant than the rest;
and this is it (whatever it is) which I call the Soul. We are agreed of the
Thing; let them wrangle de nomine who have nothing else to do.

2. That this substance (no substance else) is not annihilated, as I have said,
is past dispute.

3. Therefore there is nothing indeed in all this business which is liable to
Controversy, but this point of Individuation, which this Objection mentions;
(and that of action and operation following.) And I must confess that this is
the only particular, in which hereabouts I have found the temptation to error
to be much considerable. They that see how all waters come from the Sea, and
how Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, have a potent inclination of union, and when
the parts are separated, have a motus aggregativus, may be tempted to think it
a probable thing, that all Souls come from, and return unto a Universal Soul or
Element of which they are but particles. But concerning this, I recommend to
the sober Reader these following Considerations.

1. Read the Note in the Margin of the last Leaf.
There is in Nature more than a probability that the Universe has no Universal
Soul (whatever particular Systems or Globes may have). For we find that
Perfection lies so much in Unity, and as all things are from One, so as they
go out from One, they go into Multiplicity, that we have great cause to think,
that it is the Divine Prerogative to be Vnicus Vniversalis. He is the Vnicus
Vniversalis in Entity, Life, Intelligence, etc. As he has made no one Monarch
of all the Universe (no nor of all the Earth) nor no one Head of all the
Church, that is not God (whatever the Roman Vice-god say) nor has given any
one a sufficiency hereto; (whatever a self-Idolizer may imagine of himself;) so
he has not given away or communicated that Prerogative, which seems proper
to the Deity, to be an Universal Mind, and consequently an Universal Parent,
and King, yea more, to be Omnia in Vno. Having no sort of proof that there is
any such thing, finding it so high and Divine a Prerogative, we have little
reason to believe that there is any such thing at all in being.

2. If you mean therefore no more than an Universal Soul to a particular
Systeme, or Vortex in the World, that Universal will be it self a particular
Soul, Individuated, and distinct from other Individuals. And indeed those very
Elements that tempt you, might do much to undeceive you. There is of Fire a
specifical Unity, by which it differs from other Elements; but there is no
universal aggregation of all the parts of Fire. The Sun which seems most
likely to contend for it, will yet acknowledge, individual Stars and other
parts of Fire, which show that it is not the whole. The Water is not all in the
Sea: we know that there is much in the Clouds, whatever there is elsewhere
(above the Clouds). We have no great cause to think, that this Earth is Terra
Vniversalis: I confess, since I have looked upon the Moon through a Tube, and
since I have read what Galilaeus says of it, and of Venus, and other Planets,
I find little reason to think that other Globes are not some of them like our
Earth. And if you can believe an Individuation of Greater Souls, why not of
Lesser? The same reasons that tempt you to think that the Individuation of our
Souls will cease, by returning into the Anima Systematis vel Solis, may tempt
you to think that the animae systematum may all cease their Individuation by
returning into God (and their existence too.)

3. If this were left as an unrevealed thing, you might take some liberty for
your Conjectures. But when all the Twenty Arguments which I have given, do
prove a continued Individuation and Retribution, it is deceitful and absurd to
come in with an unproved dream against it, and to argue, ab ignoto, against so
many cogent arguments.

4. And we have proved supernatural revelation to second this, which is
evidence more than sufficient to bear down your unproved conjectures.

5. If it had been doubtful whether the souls individuation cease, (and nothing
of all the rest is doubtful) yet this would not make so great a difference in
the case as some imagine; for it would confess the perpetuity of souls, and it
would not overthrow the proof of a Retribution, if you consider these four
things.

1. That the parts are the same in union with the whole, as when they are all
separated. Their nature is the same, and as Epicurus and Democritus say of
their atoms, they are still distinguishable, and are truly parts, and may be
intellectually separated: the same individual water which you cast out of your
bottle into the sea, is somewhere in the sea still; and though contiguous to
other parts, is discernable from them all by God. The Haecceity, as they say,
remains.

2. That the love of individuation, and the fear of the ceasing of our
individuation, is partly but put into the creature from God pro tempore, for
the preservation of individuals in this present life. And partly it is
inordinate, and is in man the fruit of his fall, which consists in turning to
SELFISHNESS from GOD. And we know not how much of our recovery consists in
the cure of this selfishness; and how much of our perfection in the cessation
of our individuate affections, cares and labors. Nature teaches many men by
Societies, to unite as much as possible, as the means of their common safety,
benefit, and comfort: and earth, water, air, and all things, would be
aggregate. Birds of a feather will flock together. And love, which is the
uniting affection, especially to a friend who is fit for union with us in other
respects, is the delight of life. And if our souls were swallowed up of one
common soul, (as water cast into the sea is still moist and cold, and has all
its former properties, so) we should be still the same; and no man can give a
just reason why our sorrows or joys should be altered ever the more by this.

3. And God can either keep the ungodly from this union for a punishment, or
let them unite with the infernal spirits, which they have contracted a
connaturality with; or let them, where ever they are, retain the venom of their
sin and misery.

4. And he can make the Resurrection to be a return of all these souls, from
the Ocean of the universal nature, into a more separated individuation again. I
only say, that if it had been true, that departing souls had fallen into a
common element, yet on all these reasons, it would not have overthrown our
arguments for a life of full retribution. God, that can say at any time, [This
drop of water in the Ocean is the same, that was once in such a bottle] can
say, This particle of the universal soul, was once in such a body, and thither
can again return it. But the truth is, no man can show any proof of such a
future aggregation.

And to conclude, the Scripture here clears up all the matter to us, and
assures us of a continued Individuation yet more than Nature does, though the
natural evidences before produced are unanswerable.

And as for the similitude of Light returning to the Sun, it is still an
arguing a minus noto: we know not well what it is: we know not how it
returns: and we know not how the particles are distinguishable there. They
that confess souls to be indivisible (though the individuals are all
numerically distinct) must on the same ground think that two or many cannot by
union be turned into one, as they hold that one cannot be turned into two, or
into several parts of that one divided.

OBJECTION XVIII.
THe Platonists, and some Platonic Divines, have so many dreams and fopperies
about the soul's future state, in aerial and ethereal vehicles, and their
durations, as makes that doctrine the more to be suspected.

Answ. 1. Whether all souls hereafter be incorporate in some kind of bodies,
which they call vehicles, is a point which is not without difficulty. A sober
Christian may possibly doubt, whether there be any incorporeal simple essence
in a separated existence besides God alone. Those that doubt of it, do it on
these grounds. 1. They think, that absolute simplicity is a divine
incommunicable perfection. 2. They think that Christ is the noblest of all
creatures; and that seeing he shall be compound of a humane Soul and Body,
(though glorified and spiritual) to eternity, therefore no Angel shall excel
him in natural simplicity and perfection. Plotinus his Enn^ 4. de Anima, has
great deal of do in it, much wiser wholesome than the Epicurus and the tomists.
3. Because it is said that we shall be equal with the Angels: and yet we
shall, (at the Resurrection) be compounded of a soul and body. 4. Because it is
said, that He made his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. 5.
Because the ancient Fathers, who first thought Angels to be subtle bodies, were
confuted by those (as Mammertus forementioned) who asserted them to be fiery
bodies, animated with incorporeal souls. 6. Because they read of the Devils
dwelling in the air, as one cast down: therefore they think that he has an
aerie body, instead of an ethereal or fiery. 7. Because they see the Sun so
glorious a creature, in comparison of a body of flesh: therefore they think
that the symmetry and proportion among God's works requires, that bodies and
forms, or souls, be suitable. 8. Because they know not what else becomes of
the sensitive soul of man, when he dies; which they take to be but a subtle
body: and therefore think it goes as a body or vehicle with the rational soul.
9. Because they mistake that difficult Text, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 8. think by the 7
and 8 verses, that it speaks of the instant after death; and thinking by the
first and second verses, that (as Beza and most think) it speaks of a
celestial body as our clothing, and not of a mere state of glory to the soul.

I name their reasons, that you may be charitable in your censures; but the
truth is, they talk of unrevealed or uncertain things, which do but trouble the
heads of Christians to no purpose, who may live better, and speed better, by
following the naked precepts of Christianity, and hoping for such a glory as
Christ has plainly described, without prying into that which does less concern
them to be acquainted with.

2. And Satan knows that over-doing is one way of undoing. Thus men on all
extremes do harden one another. As in these times among us it is notorious,
that the men of one extreme in Church affairs do harden the other, and the
other harden them. And as Fanaticism rises from the disliking of sensuality
and profaneness; incautelous, and sensual and profane men run into hell to
avoid fanaticism; even so the brutish grossness of the Somatists drives some
Philosophers into Platonic dreams, and the Platonic fictions harden the
Epicureans in a far worser way. Lactantius, de ira Dei, cap. 13. thinks, that
Epicurus was moved to his opinion against Providence, by seeing the hurt that
good men and Religious endure from the wo^ser sort here in this world. But why
should you run out on one side the way, because other men run out on the other?
why do you not rather argue from the doctrine in the sober mean, that it is
true; than from the extremes that the truth is falsehood? When reason will allow
you to conclude no more than that those extremes are falsehood. But surely I had
rather hold Plato's Anima mundi, or Aristotle's Intellectus agens, and his
moving Intelligences, than Epicurus his Atoms and motion only. And I had rather
think with Alexander Arphad. that omnis actio corporis est ab incorporeo
principio; yea, or the Stoics doctrine of Intellectual Fire doing all; than
Gassendus his doctrine, that no incorporeal thing can move a corporeal, or that
Atoms and their motion only do all that we find done in nature.

When I look over and about me, I find it a thing quite past my power to think,
that the glorious parts above us are not replenished with much nobler creatures
than we. And therefore if the Platonists, and the ancient Platonic Fathers of
the Church, did all think that they lived in communion with Angels, and had
much to do with them, and that the superior intelligences were a nobler part
of their studies than mere bodies, they shall have the full approbation of my
reason in this, though I would not run with them into any of their
presumptions, and uncertain or unsound conceits.

Says Aeneas Gazaeus, page 778. when he had told us that Plato, Pythagoras,
Plotinus and Numenius were for the passing of men's souls into bruits, but
Porphyry and Jamblichus were against it, and thought that they passed only into
men, Ego quidem hac ipsa de causa filium aut famulum ob id quod commiserint
peccatum puniens, antequam de ipsis supplicium sumam, praemoneo, ut meminerint
ne posthac unquam in eadem mala recurrant. Deus autem quando ultima supplicia
decernit, non edocet eos qui poenarum causas, sed scelerum memoriam omnem
tollet? vide page 382. For this reason and many others, we assume not their
conceit of the soul's pre-existence, and think all such unproved fancies to be
but snares to trouble the world with. We think not that God punishes men for
sin in another world, while he totally obliterateth the memory of the other
world and of their sin: When he has told us that In Adam all die, and By one
man's disobedience many are made sinners, and so condemnation passed upon all,
Romans 5. Nor will we with Origin thus tempt men to look for more such changes
hereafter, which we can give them no proof of. Nor will we distribute the
Angelical Hierarchy into all the degrees, which the pseudo-Dionysius does; nor
with the Gnostics, Basilidians, Saturninians, Valentinians, and abundance of
those ancient Heretics, corrupt Christianity with the mixture of fanatic
dreams, about the unrevealed Powers and worlds above us, either worshipping
Angels, or prying into those things which he has not seen, (and are not
revealed) vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, ( or without cause puffed up by
the imagination of his own flesh, as Dr. Hammond translateth it) Col. 2.18. Nor
will we make a Religion with Paracelsus, Behmen, the Rosicrucians, or the rest,
described by Christ. Beckman, Exercit. of the Philosophical whimsies of an
over-stretch'd imagination. And yet we will not reject the saying of
Athenagoras, Apol. page 57. Magnum numerum Angelorum and Ministrorum Dei esse
fatemur; quos opifex and architectus mundi Deus Verbo suo tanquam in classes
ordinavit centuriavitque, ut elementa, coelos, mundum, and quae in mundo sunt,
vicesque and ordinem omnium moderarent. Though we may add with Junilius
Africanus, that [Whether the Angels meddle with the government of the world of
stablished creatures, is a difficult question.]

OBJECTION XIX.
See Plotin. Ennead. 4. l. 3. p 185. showing, that in separated souls Reason is
so powerful, that it ex tempore conceives all things propounded by the
Intellect; and that souls in Heaven converse without voice, but demons and
souls that are in the air converse by voice.
IF the soul do continue individuate, yet its actings will not be such as they
are now in the body, because they have not spirits to act by: And as Gassendus
thinks, that the reason of oblivion in old men, is the wearing out of the
vestigia of the former spirits, by the continual flux or transition of matter;
so we may conceive that all memory will cease to separated souls, on the same
account: and therefore they will be unfit for Rewards or Punishments, as not
remembering the cause.

Answ. 1. I^ Gassendus his opinion were true, men should forget all things once
a year, if not once a month, considering how many pounds of matter are spent
every 24 hours. And why then do we better, when we are old, remember the things
which we did between nine or ten years old, and twenty, Vid. Porphyr. de
occasion. de Passionibus Animae and corp.
than most of the later passages of our lives, (as I do for my part very
sensibly.)

2. What is man's memory (for with bruits we meddle not) but scientia
praeteritorum? Is not remembering a knowing of things past? surely we may
perceive that it is; and that it is of the same kind of action with the knowing
of things present. And therefore we may make not memory a third faculty,
because it is the same with the understanding.

3. We have little reason to think, that the surviving soul will lose any of
its essential powers, and grow by its change not only impotent, but another
thing. Therefore it will be still an intelligent power. And though remote
actions and effects (such as writing, fighting, etc.) are done by instruments,
which being removed we cannot do them without; yet essential acts are nothing
so, (which flow immediately from the essence of the agent, as light, heat and
motion of the fire:) If there be but due objects, these will be performed
without such instruments: Nor will the Creator, who continues at an active
intelligent power, continue it so in vain, by denying it necessaries for its
operations. There is like to be much difference in many respects, between the
soul's actings here and hereafter: but the acts flowing from its essence
immediately, as knowledge, volition, complacency, (called Love) and
Displacencie, etc. will be the same. Plotin. ubi supr. p. 391. sect. 26.
shows, that Memory is more pertinent to the soul than the body, and often
without the body. Et sect. 29, etc. Et c. 31, 32. the difference between the
sensitive and rational memory. Et l. 2 he shows, that the soul in heaven
forgets these trifles, not through ignorance, but contempt.
How far the soul here does act, without any idea or instrument, I have spoken
before. And the manner of our acting hereafter, no man does now fully
understand: But that which is essentially an intellectual volitive power, will
not be idle in its active essence, for want of a body to be its instrument. If
we may so far ascribe to God himself such Affections or Passions, as the
ingenious Mr. Samuel Parker, in his Teutam. Phil. l. 2. c. 8. p. 333, etc. has
notably opened, we have no reason to think that scientia praeteritorum is not
to be ascribed to a soul, when it is separated from the corporeal spirits.

Or if the soul out of the body were as liable, as it is by diseases of the
body while it is in it, to the loss of memory, yet all those arguments which
prove the Life of Retribution hereafter, do fully prove that God will provide
it a way of exercise, and prevent all those hindrances of memory, which may
make his Judgment and Retribution void. Again, therefore I say, To argue ab
ignotis against clear evidence, in matters that our own everlasting joy or
sorrow is concerned in so deeply, is a folly, that no tongue can express with
its due aggravations.

OBJECTION XX.
THe belief of the immortality of souls does fill men with fears, and draw them
to superstition, Sic ille (Strato) Deum opere magno liberat, and me timore:
Quis enim potest cum existimet a Deo se curari, non and dies and noctes divinum
numen ho^rere? and siquid adversi acciderit, (quod cui non accidit) extimescere
ne id jure evenerit. Cic. Acad. quast. l. 4. p. 44.
and trouble the peace of Kingdoms by unavoidable sects, in the prosecution of
those things which are of such transcendent weight; when otherwise men might
live in quietness to themselves and others, and in promoting of the public
good.

Answ. This is the maddest objection of all the rest; but in our days there are
men found that are no wiser than to make it. I have answered it fully in diverse
popular Treatises, as that called, A Saint, or a Bruit, etc.

1. The greatest and best things are liable to the worst abuses. Thus you may
argue against Reason, that it does but fill men's brains with knavish craft, and
enable them to do mischief, and to trouble the world, and to live themselves in
cares and fears, etc. Upon many such reasons, Cotta, in Cic. de Not. Deor. does
chide God for making man a rational creature, and says, he had been happier
without it. And were it not for this wit and reason, we should have none of
these evils which you have here now mentioned. Why then is not reason as well
as Religion on that account to be rejected?

On the same reason, Philosophy and Learning may be accused, (as it is with the
Turks and Moscovites.) What abundance of sects, and voluminous contentions, and
tired consuming studies have they caused? witness all the volumes of
Philosophers and Schoolmen.

On the same account you may cry down Kings, and Civil Government, and Riches,
and all that is valued in the world: for what wars and bloodshed has there
been in the world for Crowns and Kingdoms? what hatred and contention for
honor and wealth? If you could make all men swine, they would not stir for
gold or pearls; or if they were dogs, they would not fight for Kingdoms: and if
they be blind and impious worldlings, they will not be zealous about Religion,
unless to dis-spirit it, and to reduce it to the service of their fleshly
interest, (which is the hypocrites zeal.) No man will contend for that which he
valueth not.

But, 2. Consider, that though dogs will not fight for Crowns, they will fight
for bones, and some times need men of reason to stave them off. And though
swine fight not for gold, they will fight for draff, and burst their bellies if
they be not governed. And though unbelievers and Atheists trouble not the world
to promote Religion, they set Families, Towns, and Countries, and Kingdoms
together by the ears for their worldly pelf, and fleshly interest. Enquire
whether the wars of the world be not most for carnal interest, (even where
Religion has been pretended:) and hearken in Westminster Hall, and at the
Assizes, whether most of the contendings there are such as are caused by
Religion, or by the love of the world and of the flesh. And where Religion
seems to be a part of the cause, it is the Atheists and ungodly that are
commonly the chief contenders; who think it not enough to hope for no life to
come themselves, but they cannot endure other men that do it, because they seem
wiser, and better, and happier than they, and by their holiness gall their
consciences and condemn them.

3. The extremity of this objections impudency appears in this above all;
that it is most notorious, that there is no effectual cure for all the
villainies of the world but true Religion; and shall the cure be made the cause
of that disease? 1. Read and judge in Nature and Scripture, whether the whole
matter of Religion be not perfectly contrary to the vices of the world. Will it
trouble Kingdoms, or disquiet souls, to love God above all, and to honor and
obey him, and be thankful for his mercies, and to trust his promises, and to
rejoice in hope of endless glory: and to love our neighbors as our selves, and
to do no injustice or wrong to any: to forbear wrath and malice, lust,
adultery, theft and lying, and all the rest expressed in this treatise. 2. Is
it not for want of Religion that all the vices and contentions of the world
are? Would not men be better subjects, and better servants, and better
neighbors, if they had more Religion? Would not they lie, and deceive, and
steal, and wrong others less? Do you think he that believes a life to come, or
he that believes it not, is liker to cut your purse, or rob you by the high
way, or bear false witness against you, or be perjured, or take that which is
not his own, or any such unrighteous thing? Is he liker to live as a good
subject or servant, who looks for a reward in heaven for it, or he that
looks to die as a beast does? Is he liker to do well and avoid evil, who is
moved by the effectual hopes and fears of another life, or he that has no such
hopes and fears, but thinks that if he can escape the Gallows there is no
further danger? Had you rather your servant, that is trusted with your estate,
did believe that there is a life to come, or that there is none? Nay, why does
not your objection militate as strongly against the thief's believing, that
there will be an Assize? For if the belief of an Assize did not trouble him, he
might quietly take that which he has a mind to, and do what he list: but this
fills his heart with fears and troubles. 3. Compare those parts of the world (
Brasil and Soldania, etc.) which believe not a life to come, (...)
(if any such there be) with those that do, and see which belief has the
better effects. 4. What is there of any effectual power, to restrain that man
from any villainy which he has power to carry out, or policy to cover, who does
not believe a life to come. 5. And if you believe it not, what will you do with
Reason, or any of your faculties, or your time? How will you live in the world,
to any better purpose, than if you had slept out all your life? What talk you
of the public good, when the denying of our final true felicity, denies all
that is truly Good, both public and private.

But so sottish and malignant an objection deserves pity more than
confutation. Whatever Religious persons did ever offend these men with any
real Crimes, I can assure them, that the Cure had been to have made them more
Religious and not less; And that the true Belief of a Life to come, is the end,
the motive, the poise of all wise and regular actions, and of Love and Peace,
of right Government and obedience, and of justice, mercy, and all that is
lovely in the world.

An OBJECTION about the Worlds Eternity.
HAving said thus much about the point which I thought most considerable, I
shall answer an Objection about the Worlds Eternity, because I perceive that it
sticks with some.

Obj. We find it the harder to believe the Scripture, and the Christian
Doctrine, because it asserteth a thing which Aristotle has evinced to be so
improbable, as is the Creation of the World within less than 6000 years. When
no natural reason can be brought to prove that the World is not eternal.

Answ. 1. It is you that are the affirmers, and therefore on whom the natural
proof is incumbent. Prove if you can that the World is eternal. Were it not
tedious, I should by examining your reasons show that they have no convincing
force at all.

Vid. Paul. Carts. in a sent. d. 1. p. 30, 31.
2. There is so much written of it, that I am loath to trouble the Reader with
more. I now only again refer the Reader to Raymundus Lullius, desiring him
not to reject his arguments if some of them seem not cogent, seeing if any one
of all his multitude prove such, it is enough.

3. I now only desire that the Controversy between the Christian and the
Infidel may be but rightly stated. Some think, because they read much in Plato
of the making of the World, that his opinion was not for its eternity; but I
doubt they are quite mistaken. Alcinous in li. de doct. Plat. says too truly,
[Cum vero mundum Plato genitum inquit, haudquaquam sic eum sensisse credendum
est, ut aliquod olim temp^s ante mundum praecesserit; Verum quia semper in
generatione perdurat, indicatque substantiae suae causam praestantiorem. Animam
praeterea mundi, quae semper extitit, haud officit Deus; sed ornat: eaque
ratione eam facere nonnunquam asseritur, quod excitat eam, and ad seipsum ejus
mentem velut ex profundo quodam somno convertit, etc.
And to that end do not charge Christianity with any School-mans or other
confident persons private opinions, nor suppose Christ or Scripture to
determine any thing, which they do not determine. 1. Christianity and Scripture
do not at all determine, whether the whole Universe was created at the same
time when this our Heaven and Earth was: But only that the Systeme or World,
which we belong to, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Earth were then created.
Nay, a great part of the ancient Doctors, and of the most learned late
Expositors on Genesis 1. do expound the Heavens which God is said to create as
being only the visible Heavens, and not including the Angels at all. And others
say, that by [In the beginning] is meant ab initio rerum, and that the Heavens
there meant being the Angelical Habitations, and the Earth as without form,
were both ab initio rerum before the six days Creation, which began with the
making of Light out of the pre-existent Heavens or Chaos. I think not this
opinion true; but this liberty Christian Doctors have taken of differing from
one another in this difficult point. But they utterly differ about the time of
the creation of Angels (on Genesis 1. and on Job 1.) and consequently whether
there were not a World existent, when this World was created.

2. Or if any that sees more than I, can prove the contrary, yet it is
certainly a thing undetermined by Scripture and in the Christian Faith, whether
there were any Worlds that had begun and ended before this was made: That God
is the maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible and invisible, is
most certain: But whether this Heaven and Earth, which now is, was the first
which he has made, is a thing that our Religion does not at all meddle with.
They that with Origin affirm, that there were antecedent worlds, are justly
blamed on one side, not for speaking things false, but things uncertain and
unrevealed, and for corrupting Christianity by a mixture of things alien and
doubtful. And those who affirm that there were no antecedent worlds, are as
much culpable on the other side, if not more, on the same account and upon
further reasons. On the one side, we know that God needs nothing to his own
felicity, but is perfectly sufficient for himself; and that he creates not the
World ex necessitate naturae as an agent which acts ad ultimum posse. And on
the other side we know, that though he has a Goodness of self-perfection,
unspeakably more excellent than his Benignity as Related to man (not that one
Property in God is to be said more excellent than another in it self, but that
quoad Relationem there is an infinite difference between his Goodness in
Himself, and his Goodness only as Related to his Creatures, and measured by
their interest), yet we confess that his Fecundity, and Benignity is included
in his own Goodness; and that he delights to do Good, and is communicative;
and that he does Good ex necessitate voluntaria, ex naturae perfectione,
without coaction; it being most necessary that he do that which his Infinite
wisdom says is best: (which made Th. White de Mundo say, that God did
necessarily make the World, and necessarily make it in time, and not ab
aeterno, and yet all this most voluntarily, because he does necessarily do that
which is best in the judgment of his Wisdom.) And we deny not that if a man
will presume to give liberty to his Reason to search into unrevealed things,
that it will seem to him very improbable, that he who is Actus purus, of
Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, and who now takes pleasure in all his
works, and his delights are with the Sons of men, should from all Eternity
produce no Creature till less than 6000 years ago; when a thousand years with
him are but as a day; and that he should resolve to have Creatures to all
Eternity, who as to future duration shall be so like to Himself, when from all
Eternity he had no Creature, till, as it were, five or six days ago!
Christians are apt to have such thoughts as these as well as you, when they
look but to rational probabilities. But they hold that all these matters,
whether there were antecedent worlds, and how many, and of what sort, and of
what duration, whether this was the first, are matters unrevealed, which they
ought not to trouble the world or themselves with prying into, or contending
about: And they find that they are unfruitful speculations, Lumine naturae
non constat quod Angeli facti sint in tempore, and non fuerint ab aeterno: Nam
imprimis per lumen naturae cognoscimus, exemplo Solis and luminis, effectum
posse coaevum esse suae causae: unde nulla repugnantia est, ex part Dei vel ex
part Creaturae, ut haec sit Deo coaeva. Schibler Met. de Angel. See also
Durandus Ariminensis, Aquinas, Pererius, Suarez, etc.
which do but overwhelme the mind of him that searches after them; when God
has provided for us in the Christian Faith, more plain, and sure, and solid,
and wholesome food to live upon.

3. And if it be unrevealed in Scripture, whether before this there was any
other World, we must confess it unrevealed whether there were any emanant or
created Entity, which God did produce from all Eternity considered quoad
durationem only. For the Scripture says no more of one than of the other. And
if there were one moment (dividing Eternity only imaginarily) in which there
had been nothing but God, we must equally confess an Eternity in which there
was nothing but God: because Eternity has no beginning.

4. But Christianity assures us of these two things, 1. That certainly there
is no Being besides God but what was created, produced or totally caused by
Him: And that if any Creature were eternal as to duration, yet it is after God
in order of being as caused by Him, as the shadow is after the substance, and
as the beams and light are after the Sun; or rather as the leaves would be
after the life of the Tree, if they were conceived to be both eternal: One
would be an eternal Cause, and the other but an eternal Effect. 2. It is
certain, that this present World containing the Sun, and Moon, and Heavens, and
Earth, which are mentioned Genes. 1. is not from Eternity. And indeed Reason it
self does make that at least very probable, as Revelation makes it certain.
Which will appear when I have opened the Philosophers opinions on the other
side.

2. Among your selves there are all these differences, (and so we have several
Cases to state with you). 1. Some think that this present Systeme of compounded
beings is from Eternity. 2. Others think, that only the Elements and Heavens,
and all simple Beings are from Eternity. 3. Others think that Fire or Ether
only as the Active Element is from Eternity, or the incorruptible matter of the
Heavens. 4. Others think that matter and motion only were from Eternity. 5.
Others think, that only spiritual purer beings, Intelligences or Minds were
from Eternity, and other things produced immediately by them. 6. And there have
been those Heathen Philosophers, who held that only God was from Eternity.

Among all this variety of opinions, why should any one think the more
doubtfully of Christianity, for denying some of them, which all the other deny
themselves? Is it a likely thing that any individual mixed body should be
eternal, when we know that mixed bodies incline to dissolution? and when we see
many of them oriri and interire daily before our eyes? And if Man and Beast as
to each individual have a beginning and end, it must be so as to the beginning
of the species; for the species existeth not out of the Individuals, and some
individual must be first; (And as Bp. Ward argues against Mr. Hobs, If the
World be eternal, there have infinite days gone before, e. g. the birth of
Christ: and then the whole is no greater than the parts, or infinity must
consist of finite parts.) The Heavens and the Earth therefore which are
compounded beings, by the same reason are liable to dissolution, Read in Bib.
Pat. the dispute of Zachary Mitilene with Ammonius and a Physician about the
Worlds Eternity.
as man is; and therefore had a beginning. So that the truth is, there is no
rational probability in any of your own opinions, but those which assert the
Eternity of some Simple Beings, as Matter or Intelligences, or an Anima
Vniversalis. Now consider further, that if ever there was a moment when there
were no Individuals, or mixed Beings, How nearly the Manichees opinion agreed
with the Platonists, see in Nemesius de Anim. page 487, 488, etc.
(but only some universal Soul or Matter) then there was an Eternity when there
was nothing else: (For Eternity has no beginning): And then will it not be as
strange to your selves, to think that God should from all Eternity delight
himself in Matter unformed (if that be not a contradiction) or in an Anima
simplex and unica, without any of all the variegated matter, and beings which
we now find besides in Nature, as that he should eternally content himself
with Himself alone? If all individuals of compound beings were not from
Eternity, what was? Either the Egg or the Hen must be first: (as the old
instance is.) If you will come to it, that either Anima unica, or Atoms
unformed were eternal, why should not God as well be without these, as be
without the formed Worlds?

What shall a presumptuous mind now say to all these difficulties? why return
to modesty: Remember that as the Bird has wit given her to build her nest, and
breed her young as well as man could do it, and better, but has no wit for
things which do not concern her; so man has reason for the ends and uses of
reason, and not for things that are not profitable to him; and that such looks
into Eternity about things unrevealed, do but over-whelm us, and tell us that
they are unrevealed, and that we have not one reason for such employments.

And what is the end of all that I have said? Why to tell you that our Religion
does not only say nothing of former worlds, but, 2. that it also forbids us
to say, Yea or Nay, to such questions, and to corrupt our minds with such
presumptuous searches of unrevealed things. And therefore that you have no
reason to be against the Scripture on this account; for it does not determine
any thing against your own opinion, if you assert not the eternity of this
present world or system; but it determines against your presumption, in
meddling with things which are beyond your reach.

And withal it gives us a certainty, that as in one Sun there is the Lux,
Radii and Lumen; so in one God there is Father, Son, and holy Spirit; eternally
existent and self-sufficient; which quieteth the mind more than to think of an
eternity of an Anima or Materia, which is not God.

All this I have here annexed, because these Philosophical self-deceivers are
to be pitied, and to have their proper help: And I thought it unmeet to
interrupt the discourse with such debates, which are not necessary to more
sober Readers, but only for them who labor of this disease: and I know that
when they read the first leaf of the book, which proves that man has a Soul
or Mind, they will rise up against it with all the objections which Gassendus,
Mr. Hobs, etc. assault the like in Cartesius with, and say, You prove not this
Mind is any thing but the subtiler part of Matter, and the temperament of the
whole: To whom I now answer, 1. That it is not in that place incumbent on me,
nor seasonable to prove any more than I there assert. 2. But I have here done
it for their sakes, more seasonably, though my discourse is entire and firm
without it.

And I desire the unbelieving Reader to observe, that I am so far from an
unnecessary incroaching upon his liberty, and making him believe that
Christianity condemns all those conjectures of Philosophers which it
asserteth not it self, that I have taken the liberty of free conjecturing in
such cases my self, Nor do I here press you with the authority of a Hermes,
Zoroaster, or Orpheus, as knowing how little proof is given us, that the
writings were theirs which are fathered on them: and giving some credit to
Porphyry himself, who in the life of Plotinus tells us, that there were then
[Ex antiqua Philosophia egressi haeretici, Adelphii Acylinique sectatores, qui
Alexandri Lybici Philocomi, Demostrati, and Lydi plurimos libros
circumferebant, and revelationes quasdam Zoroastris, Zostriani, Nichotei,
Allogenis, Mesi, aliorumque ejusmodi palam ostendentes, and deceperunt multos,
and ipsi decepti jam fuerant: -- Ego vero Porphyrius argumentationibus multis
ostendi, librum Zoroastri ab illis inscriptum adulterinum novumque esse, and ab
eis confictum qui struebant haeresin: ut institutiones suae esse Zoroastris
voteris crederentur. And hereupon Plotinus wrote his Book against the Gnostics.
not going beyond the evidence of probability, or the bounds of modesty: and
that I think them betrayers of the Christian cause, or very injurious to it,
who would interess it in matters with what it medleth not; and corrupt it, by
pretending that it condemns all the opinions in Philosophy which themselves
are against. Nor am I one that believe that Christianity will allow me that
zeal, which too hastily and peremptorily condemns all, that in such points do
hold what I dislike. I do not anathematize as Heretics all those, who hold
those opinions which either Stephanus, or Guilielm. Episc. Parisienses
condemned in their Articul. Contra varios in fide errores: though I think many
of them dangerous, and most very audacious. e. g. Quod intelligentia motrix
coeli fluit in animas rationales, sicut corpus coeli influit corpus humanum:
Quod scientia intelligentiae non differt a substantia ejus. Quod intelligentia
sola voluntate movet coelum: Quod omne quod non habet materiam est aeternum.
Quod intellectus non est forma corporis nisi assistens: Quod anima separata non
patitur ab igne: Quod anima separata manet animal vivum, etc. I can more
charitably bear such opinions than those that so severely then condemned them.
Though yet I think that in this age, it is one of the devils chief designs, to
assault Christianity by false Philosophy.

Pretend not then your by-opinions to prejudice you against Christianity in the
main: much less against those natural verities, which all wise, and sober, and
honest Philosophers are agreed in. When Xenocrates, de morte, (translated by
Ficinus) had in the name of Socrates, told Axiochus what Gobrias told, of an
inferior place whither souls went at death, and of their judgment, and of the
torment, Vbi homines impii omniformibus suppliciis cruciati perpetua punitione
vexantur, he disclaimeth the imposition of the belief of so much, but selects
this certainty, Ego ratione coactus hoc solum plane firmiterque cognosco,
animam omnem immortalem existere, and eam, quae pura ex iis locis abierit, sine
tristitia vivere; Quamobrem sive sursum sive deorsum tendas, Axioche, beatum
fore te oportet, si modo pi^ sancteque vixeris. N.B. And he holds to this, [Non
in mortem, sed in ipsam immortalitatem migras: neque bonis privaberis, sed
integra bonorum possessione frueris: nec voluptates mortali corpori mixtas
percipies amplius, sed omni prorsus tristitia vacuas: Illuc inquam
proficisceris ex hoc carcere liber, ubi quieta omnia, and a tristitia
senectuteque semota. Vbi exultatio sancta, vitaque malorum nescia, and
tranquilla pace nutrita, naturam rerum speculans, and arcana Philosophiae
contemplans; haud sane ad turbae theatrive gratiam, sed ad perspicuae veritatis
objectum.]

If you are not wise enough to be Christians, why will you not be as wise and
honest as the better sort of Heathens? Must we have so much ado to reason
debauched hypocrites and apostates, to that which nature taught so many, who
yet did but in part improve it? Believe this much which a Xenocrates or
Socrates could teach you, and live accordingly, and you will not be blinded and
deceived with so many beastly lusts, which hinder your belief, and will drown
you in perdition. Or rather come to Christ, who will better cure those lusts
than Socrates or Plato, or any Philosopher could do. But alas, Epicurus had
more Court and Country disciples than the manly sort of Philosophers, however
the wise men vilified him in the Schools: And his Apostles, while they contemn
the doctrine of incorporeal spirits, do so often animate themselves with those
corporeal spirits, which the hearers of Christ's disciples thought they had
drunk in, Act. 2. That they are more foolhardy and pot-confident than their
wiser adversaries; and get that with audacity, that I say not impudency, which
others lose by humble modesty: for (says Cicero, de fin. l. 2. p. 100.) Est
tanti Philosophitamque nobilis, audacter sua decreta defendere.] And his
doctrine so befriendeth sin, that sin will befriend it; and then it is not like
to want entertainment. For as Cicero, ibid. Qualis est ista philosophia, quae
non interitum afferat pravitatis, sed sit contenta mediocritate vitiorum? -- In
magnis interdum versatur angustiis, ut hominum conscientia remota, nihil tam
turpe sit, quod voluptatis causa non videatur esse facturus. Deinde ubi erubuit
(vis enim est permagna naturae) confugit illuc ut neget accedere posse quidquam
ad voluptatem nihil dolentis. -- Luxuriam non reprehendit, modo sit vacua
infinita cupiditate and timore. Hoc loco discipulos quaerere videtur, ut qui
Asoti esse velint, Philosophi fiant.

I have cited more out of Cicero than any other in this Treatise, and yet when
I think how far our Apostates are below him, seeing they despise the words of
Christ, I will once more use the words of Cicero, to convince them, shame them
or condemn them. Tuscul. Qu. l. 1. page 229. [ Quorsum igitur haec spectat
oration? Quae sit illa vis and unde sit intelligendum puto. Non est corte nec
cordis, nec sanguinis, nec cerebri, nec atomorum: Anima sit animus, ignisve
nescio: (He doubted whether the Platonists or Stoics were in the right) nec me
pudet ut istos fateri me nescire quod nesciam: Illud, si ulla alia de re
obscura,
affirmare possem, sive anima, sive ignis, sit animus, eum jurarem esse
divinum. N.B. ( Cicero dare swear that the soul is divine, though he doubt of
the immateriality: and our Apostates deny both.) And reciting its operations,
he says, p. 239. Prorsus haec divina mihi videtur vis, quae tot res efficiat
ac tantas. -- Vigere, sapere, invenire, meminisse; ergo animus, qui, ut ego
dico, divinus, ut Euripides audet dicere, Deus est: and quidem si Deus aut
anima aut ignis est, idem est animus hominis. -- Sin autem est quinta quaedam
natura ab Aristotele inducta primum, haec and Deorum est and animorum. --
Animorum nulla in his terris origo inveniri potest: nihil enim est in animis
mistum, atque concretum, aut quod ex terra natum atque fictum esse videatur:
nihil ne aut humidum quidem, aut stabile, aut igneum: his enim in naturis nihil
inest quod vim memoriae, mentis, cogitationis habeat; quod and praeterita
teneat, and futura provideat, and complecti possit praesentia; quae sola divina
sunt: nec invenietur unquam unde ad homines venire possit, nisi a Deo.
Singularis est igitur natura quaedam, atque vis animi sejuncta ab his usitatis
notisque naturis: Itaque quicquid est illud quod sentit, quod sapit, quod vult,
quod viget, coeleste and divinum est, ob eamque rem, aeternum sit necesse est:
nec vero Deus ipse qui intelligitur a nobis, alio modo intelligi potest, nisi
Men's soluta quaedam, and libera, segregata ab omni concretione mortali, omnia
sentiens, and movens, ipsaque praedita motu sempiterno; hoc e genere atque
eadem e natura est humana men's. (So that though he suspected it to have some
pure materiality, it was but such as he thought God had, and consisted with its
eternity.) Vbi igitur aut qualis ista men's? (scil. Deus) ubi tua, aut qualis?
potesne dicere? An si omnia ad intelligendum non habeo, quae habere vellem, ne
iis quidem quae habeo, mihi per te uti licebit? Non valet tantum animus, ut
sese ipse videat: At ut oculus, sic animus sese non videns alia cernit. --

Page 226. he says of them that plead for the souls mortality, [ Praeclarum
nescio quid adepti sunt, qui didicerunt se, cum tempus mortis venisset, totos
esse perituros. -- Quid habet ista res aut laetabile aut gloriosum? sed plurimi
contra nituntur, animosque quasi capite damnatos morte mulctant: neque aliud
est quidquam cur incredibilis his animorum videatur aeternitas, nisi quod
nequeunt qualis animus sit vacans corpore intelligere, and cogitatione
comprehendere: Quasi vero intelligant qualis sit in ipso corpore! quae
confirmatio! quae magnitudo! qui locus. -- Haec reputent isti qui negant animum
sine corpore se intelligere posse: videbunt, quem in ipso corpore intelligant!
Mihi quidem naturam animi intuenti, multo difficilior occurrit cogitatio,
multoque obscurior, qualis animus in corpore sit, tanquam alienae domi, quam
qualis cum exierit, and in liberum coelum, quasi in domum suam venerit. Si enim
quod nunquam vidimus, id quale sit intelligere non possumus. Certe and Deum
ipsum, and divinum animum corpore liberatum, ^ogitatione complecti non
possumus. --

Page 225. Atque ea profecto tum multo puriora, and dilucidiora cernentur, cum,
quo natura fert, liber animus pervenerit -- Cum nihil erit praeter animum,
nulla res objecta, impediet, quo minus percipiat, quale quidque sit; Quamvis
copiose haec diceremus, si res postularet, quam multa, quam varia spectacula,
animus in locis coelestibus esset habiturus. --

Page 210, 211. Ipsi majorum gentium dii qui habentur, hinc a nobis prosecti in
coelum reperientur: -- multi de diis prava sentiunt: id enim vitioso more
effici solet: omnes tamen esse vim and naturam divinam arbitrantur: nec vero id
collocutio hominum, aut consensus efficit: non institutis opinio est
confirmata; non legibus; omni autem in re consensio omnium gentium lex naturae
putanda est. -- Haec ita sentimus natura du^e, nulla ratione, nullaque
doctrina: Maximum vero argumentum est naturam ipsam de Immortalitate animorum
tacitam judicare, quod omnibus curae sunt, and maxim quidem, quae post mortem
futura sint. N.B. -- Abiit ad deos Hercules: Nunquam abiisset nisi cum inter
homines esset, eam sibi viam munivisset. Quid in hac Republica tot tantosque
viros ad Rempublicam interfectos cogitasse arbitramur? Iisdemne ut finibus
nomen suum quibus vita terminaretur? Nemo unquam sine magna spe immortalitatis
se pro patria offerret ad mortem. -- Nescio quomodo inhaeret in mentibus quasi
saeculorum quoddam augurium futurorum; idque maximis ingeniis, altissimisque
animis and existit maxim and apparet facillime: Quo quidem dempto quis tam
esset amens, qui semper in laboribus and periculis viveret?

This makes me think of Augustines saying, Si anima mortalis est, Epicurus in
animo meo palmam habet. Confess. l. 6. c. ult.

Quod si omnium Consensus ( inquit Cic. ib.) naturae vox est, Omnesque qui
ubique sunt consentiunt esse aliquid quod ad eos pertineat qui e vita
cesserunt, nobis quoque idem existimandum: Etsi, quorum aut ingenio aut virtute
animus excellit, eos arbitramur quia natura optima sint, cernere naturae vim
maxim; verisimile est cum optimus quisque maxim posteritati serviat, esse
aliquid cujus is post mortem sensum sit habiturus. Sed, ut deos esse natura
opinamur, qualesque sint ratione cognoscimus: sic permanere animos arbitramur
consensu omnium nationam. N.B. Qua in sede, qualesque sint; ratione discendum
est.

Page 232. Haec igitur and alia innumerabilia cum cernimus, possumusne
dubitare, quin his praesit aliquis vel Effector, si haec nata sunt ut Platoni
videtur, vel si semper fuerint ut Aristoteli placet, moderator tanti operis and
muneris? sic mentem hominis, quamvis eam non videas, ut Deum non vides, tamen
ut Deum agnoscis ex operibus ejus, sic ex memoria rerum and inventione and
celeritate motus, omnique pulchritudine virtutis vim divinam mentis agnoscito.
In quo igitur est loco? -- Vbi ubi sit animus, certe quidem in te est. Quae est
ei natura? Propria puto and sua. Sed fac igneam, fac spirabilem! Nihil ad id de
quo agimus: Illud modo videto: ut Deum noris, etsi ejus ignores and locum and
faciem: sic Animum tibi tuum notum esse oportere, etiamsi ejus ignores and
locum and formam: In animi autem cognitione dubitare non possumus, nisi plane
in physicis plumbei sumus, quin nihil sit animis admistum, nihil concretum,
nihil copulatum, nihil coagmentatum, nihil duplex. Quod cum it a sit, certe nec
secerni, nec dividi, nec descerpi, nec distrahi potest; nec interire igitur.
Est enim interitus quasi discessus and secretio, ac direptus earum partium,
quae ante interitum junctione aliqua tenebantur. His and talibus adductus
Socrates, nec patronum quaesivit ad judicium capitis, nec judicibus
supplexfuit, adhibuitque liberam contumaciam, a magnitudine animi ductam, non a
superbia: and supremo vitae die de hoc ipso multa disseruit, and paucis ante
diebus, cum facile posset educi e custodia, noluit: Et cum pene in manu jam
mortiferum illud teneret poculum, locutus ita est, ut non ad mortem trudi,
verum in Coelum videretur ascendere. Ita enim censebat, itaque disseruit; Duas
esse vias, duplicesque cursus animorum e corpore excedentium: Nam qui se
humanis vitiis contaminassent, and se ^otos libidinibus dedissent -- iis devium
quoddam iter esse, seclusum a Concilio deorum. Qui autem se integros castosque
servavissent, quibusque fuisset minima cum corporis contagio, seseque ab his
semper sevocassent, essentque in corporibus humanis, vitam imitati deorum, his
ad illos a quibus essent profecti reditum facilem patere. -- Cato autem sic
abiit e vita, ut causam moriendi nactum se esse gauderet. Vetat enim Dominus
ille in nobis Deus missu hinc nos suo demigrare. Cum vero causam justam Deus
ipse dederit, ut tunc Socrati, nunc Catoni, saepe multis; ne ille medi^s fidius
vir sapiens laetus ex his tenebris in lucem illam excesserit: nec tamen illa
vincula carceris ruperit; leges enim vetant.

Page 227. Licet concurrant Plebeii omnes philosophi (sic enim ii qui a Platone
and Socrate, and ab illa familia dissident, appellandi videntur) non modo nihil
unquam tam eleganter explicabunt, sed ne hoc quidem ipsum quam subtiliter
conclusum sit, intelligent. Sentit animus se moveri: quod cum sentit, illud una
sentit, se vi sua, non aliena moveri: nec accidere posse, ut ipse unquam a se
deseratur: Ex quo efficitur aeternitas.

I have been tedious, and will therefore only add his application, Page 233,
234. Tota Philosophorum vita, commentatio mortis. Nam quid aliud agimus cum a
voluptate, id est a corpore, cum a re familiari, quae est ministra and famula
corporis, cum a Repub. Cum a negotio omni sevocamus animum? Quid inquam tum
agimus, nisi animum ad seipsum, aduocamus? secum esse cogimus? maximeque a
corpore abducimus: secernere autem a corpore animum, nec quidquam aliud est
quam emori discere. Quare hoc commentemur, mihi creed; disjungamusque nos a
corporibus, id est, consuescamus mori. Hoc and dum erimus in terris erit illi
coelesti vitae simile. Et cum illuc ex his vinculis emissi feremur, minus
tardabitur cursus animorum: Quo cum venerimus, tum denique vivemus: Nam haec
quidem vita, mors est, quam lamentari possem, si liberet.

And how the Somatists were then esteemed, he adds, [ Catervae veniunt
contradicentium, non solum Epicureorum, quos equidem, non despicio; sed nescio
quomodo, doctissimus quisque contemnit. And among Christians they will never
recover their reputation.

I know that some doubting Christians are ready to say as Cicero's Auditor, who
says, that he had often read Plato; sed nescio quomodo dum lego assentior; cum
posui librum, and mecum ipse de Immortalitate Animorum caepi cogitare, assensio
omnis illa elabitur. But this is because the truth is not sufficiently
concocted, nor the conjoined Frame of Evidences entirely and deeply printed on
the mind; and so diversions alienate the mind from the just apprehension of
some of those Evidences which it had formerly had a glimpse of, and leave it
open to the contrary suggestions. He that is surprised when his Prospective
Glass or Telescope is not with him, will not see those things which by their
help he saw before. And the remembrance of former convictions in the general,
will hardly satisfy a man against his present different apprehension, though
he be conscious that he had then more help than now. I have found my self a far
clearer apprehension of the certainty of the Life to come, and of the truth of
the Gospel, when I have come newly from the serious view of the entire frame of
convincing Evidences, than I can have at other times, when many particulars are
out of the way, or much worn off my apprehensions.

These passages I have cited out of Heathens, to convince or confound those
that under the Gospel, with their hearts, tongues or lives, deny those truths
which the light of Nature has so far made clear. Remembering both those Symbols
of Pythagoras, De rebus divinis a^sque lumine ne loquaris, and de Dis^rebusque
divinis, nihil tam minabile dicitur, quod non debeas credere: and his Verse
(translated by Ficinus), Corpore deposito cum liber ad aethera perges,
Evades hominem factus deus aetheris almi.


Alcinous reciting Plato's reasons for the Immortality of the Soul, cap. 25.
mentions seven reasons, 1. Anima cuicunque adest, Vitam affert, ^tpote illi
naturaliter insitam: Quod vero vitam praestat, mortem minime suscipit: Ergo
immortale existit, 2. Anima cum per corporis sensus ad illa quae sensibilia
sunt descendit, angitur and turbatur; nec similis esse potest illius cujus
praesentia turbatur. 3. Anima ipsa natura corpori dominatur. Quod autem natura
sua regit, and imperat, divinitati cognatum: Ergo anima Deo proxima immortalis
est, etc. And because it may be objected, that by the first reason, the Souls
of Bruits would be immortal, he answers that, but so doubtfully and darkly
as is not worth the reciting. But though Alcinous incline to the negative (of
the Immortality of the Animae brutorum) Porphyrius is peremptory for the
affirmative, upon the supposition of their rationality.

The Stoic Philosophers bear also as full a testimony against the Athiest and
the denyers of humanity, as the rest: For though Cicero thank them for nothing,
and rebuke them for denying the Souls eternity, and giving us but Vsuram, ut
cornicibus, a longer and not an everlasting life, yet some of them seem to be
of another mind, and the rest rather think that the Souls of men will
participate in the Worlds periodical revolutions, than be at all annihilated or
deprived of felicity. The paucity of their writings which have come down to us,
and the malice of the Epicureans with whom they were at the greatest odds, did
make them represented as if they had held more unreasonable opinions, and been
more sour and inhumane than indeed they were. And some who of late times
condemn them for that in which they agree with the doctrine of Christ, do seem
to mean Christianity, while they exclaim against the severities of Stoicisme,
and mean the Church while they name but the Porch. Certainly, if Cicero
himself, who is offended with their schism, do represent their opinions
aright, and if we may judge of the rest by his speeches of Cato, and by the
writings of Seneca, Epictetus and Antonine, and if Barlaam has truly
collected their Ethics, there were no men that spoke and lived so like
Christians, who were strangers to Christ. He that would see the difference
between them and the Epicureans, let him but read the Praeloquium before his
Antoninus of Mr. Gataker (that man of admirable Learning, Humility, and Piety,
not to be named without love and honor, nor in this Age without tears): Of
Antoninus himself he says, [Certe quaecunque Dominus ipse Christus in
concionilus collationibusque suis Historiae Evangelicae insertis [de mali
cogitatione etiam abstinenda, de affectibus vitiosis supprimendis, de sermon
otioso non insuper habendo, de animo cum primis excolendo, and ad imaginem
divinam effingendo, de beneficentia simplicissime exhibenda, de injuriis
aequanimiter ferendis, de admonitione and increpatione cum moderatione
cautioneque accurata exercendi^, de relus quibi slibet, adeoque vita ipsa, uli
res ratioque poscit nihili habendis, de aliis denique plerisque pietatis,
charitatis, aequitatis, humanitatis, officiis quam exquitissime obeundis
exequendisque] praecepta dedit; apud nostrum hunc eadem, perinde acsi illa
lectitasset ipse, in dissertationum commentationumque harum congerie inspersa
passim, nec sine vehementia et vivacitate insigni quae in praecordia ipsa
penitus penetret. -- Lector quivis sedulus advertet, ingenuus agnoscet.

The sum of their doctrine, different from the Epicureans, he thus recites,
(and by citations copiously proves) [Numen coeleste rerum humanarum curam
gerere; nec universi tantummodo, sed hominum etiam singulorum, and rerum quoque
singularum; rebus humanis praesto esse, generique humano, non ad bona vere sic
dicta duntaxat, sed and ad vitae hujus commoda, and adminicula suppetitias
far. Deum itaque ante omnia colendum; ad omnia invocandum, per omnia
cogitandum, in omnilus agnoscendum and comprobandum, de omnibus laudandum and
celebrandum; huic uni in omni negotio simpliciter obsequendum; ab ipso quicquid
obvenerit animo prompto ac lubenti excipiendum atque amplexandum, nihil mellus,
nihil convenientius, nihil conducibilius, nihil opportunius, aut tempestivius,
quam id, quicquid existat, quodipse voluerit, existimandum: qu^cunque ducere
visum fuerit, citra tergiversationem aut murmurationem, sponte sequendum; locum
stationemque quemcunque is assignaverit, strenue tuendum, enixe tenendum,
etiamsi mortem millies oppetere oporteret.] Haec de Numine Stoici and erga
numen affectu.

De homine and officiis -- [Hunc and corditus diligere and curare and
sustinere, injuriaque omni (ut quae impietatis etiam notam inurat) abstinere;
and beneficentia prosequi, nec sibi soli genitum censere se, aut vivere, sed in
commune bonum ac beneficium, cunciis pro facultate viribusque semet exhibere,
re ipsa, reique been gestae conscientia, (nec hac etiam ipsa quadantenus
reputata) citra vestem, aut mercedis spem commodive proprii intuitum, contentum
agere; a beneficio uno praestito ad aliud transire, nec unquam benefaciendo
defatisci; sed vitae telam, tanquam vivendi fructus hic sit; benefactis si^i
invicem continenter annexis, ita totum pertexere, ut nusquam interveniat hiatus
ullus vel minimus; beneficii loco, quod benefecerit habentem; sibique profuisse
existimantem; si alii cuiquam usui esse poterit; nec extra se proinde quicquam
vel laudis humanae, vel lucelli, aut aucupantem aut expetentem: Ad haec nihil
mentis cultu antiquius, nihil honesti studio petius aut pretiosius habere: ab
eo denique quod officii sui esse norit, nulla vel vitae, nedum alius rei
cujuspiam, cupidine abducendum, nulla mortis cruciatusve illius, ne dum damni
aut detrimenti formidine abigendum se permittere.] Haec Stoicorum praecepta
sunt -- *

When will the whole tribe of the Epicureans ever give the world such a Prince
as Antonine? who taught the world, that a Prince should be a Philosopher, and
that self-government, and a well-ordered mind and life, is the first point in
the government and well-ordering of the Commonwealth; and that Monarchy may be
so used, as to consist as well with the peoples interest and liberty, as the
most accurate Venetian Democraty: The only hurt that ever he was charged to do
being this, that he lived so well, that he seemed somewhat to hinder the
succeeding luster of Christianity, even in Constantine and Theodosius
themselves.

And as for the Stoics great doctrine of Virtues self-sufficiency to felicity,
which Plato and Aristotle also own against the Epicurean felicity of Pleasure,
it is undoubtedly a very great and sacred. Theological verity: But it implies
a higher truth, Whether God or our selves, Virtue or Pleasure be chiefly to be
loved?
which I have vindicated in this Treatise, viz. That man has an ultimate end
above himself, and that God (for all that he is perfect, and can receive no
addition of felicity) is both his own and our end,
(though intendere finem is not spoken univocally of God and man) and that his
Goodness as essential in himself, Even in Friendship with Men, it is commonly
said, that we must have more respect to our friend than to our selves. And
therefore Cicero pleads, that Epicurus's opinion is inconsistent with true
Friendship. However that stand, I am sure in our Love to God, we must love him
more for himself, than for our own ends and benefit. Therefore it is, that I
distinguished Love before, from Obedience as such, as being somewhat more
excellent, and the final grace. And Proclus (de Anim. and Daemone) discerned
this distinction, when he says, [ Belli finis est justitia: pacis autem aliud
quiddam excellentius bonum, Amicitia, scil. atque unio Finis enim universae
virtutis est ut tradunt Pythagorici. Aristotelesque confirmat; ^t omnibus jam
factis amicis, justitia non ulterius egeamus, quando, viz. sublatum fuerit,
M^um, and Non-meum] And if this be true of the Love of man, Much more of the
Love of God. Which they also may do well to consider of* who most fear the
cessation of that Individuation of souls, which consists in the distance that
now we are at: For though doubtless there will continue an Individuation, yet
Union is so much of the felicity, perfection and delight of souls, union, I
say, with God, as we are capable, and with one another, that we should rather
be afraid lest we shall not be near enough, than lest too much ^earness should
confound us.
and as his own perfection, is, in the order of our conceptions, much higher
than his Benignity or Goodness, as related to the good of man. I have read some
late self-esteeming Writers, (who love not to be named by way of opposition)
who have undertaken the defense of the Epicurean heresy, that Pleasure is
formally both man's felicity, and his ultimate end: but their reasonings for it
are not half so handsome and adapted to deceive, as the discourse of Torquatus
in Cicero, de finib. is; which indeed may seem very plausible, till Cicero's
excellent Answer is compared with it. It is a fair pretense to say, That a good
man is pleased with nothing but that which is good, and that true pleasure is
to be found especially in virtue, and that temperance and chastity should be
more pleasant, than excess and luxury; and yet that the best men, when they do
any great and excellent work, do therefore do it because it pleases them. But
the truth is, that Bonum qua bonum est objectum voluntatis; good and appetibile
are the same: it is first good because it pleases us, but it pleases us,
because it is esteemed by us to be good. And the greatest good should greathest
please us, because it is first the greatest good: And as God in himself is
infinitely better than any delight or felicity of ours, so is he therefore to
be more the object of our delight. And as the good of the world, or of
Kingdoms, or of thousands, is better than the pleasure of one individual
person, so should it be better loved, and more delighted in. For if Good as
Good be appetible and delectable, then the greatest Good must have the greatest
love and pleasure. And nature it self tells us, that he that would not rather
be annihilated than the world should be annihilated, or would not lose his life
and honor, to save the life, and honor, and felicity of King and Kingdom, is
no good member of Civil Society, but a person blinded by selfishness and
sensuality. Therefore man has something above himself, and his own pleasure,
to seek and to take pleasure in. How far you can congruously say, that you take
pleasure in your pleasure, and so make your own pleasure the object, yea, the
only ultimate object of it self, I shall not now stay to enquire. But certain I
am, that though our love, which is our complacency in the beloved object, is
our actus finalis, yet is it not the objectum finale to it self; but God
himself, the infinite Good, is that final Object; and the Public Good is a
more noble and excellent object than our own. And though it be truly our
felicity to love God, yet we love him not chiefly because it is our felicity to
love him, but because he is chiefly Good and Lovely; and then in the second
instant, we love our own love, and delight even in our own delights. Indeed the
sensitive life, as such, can seek nothing higher than its own delight: but the
rational life is made to intend and prosecute that end, which reason tells us
is best, and to prefer that before our selves, which is better than our selves.
And therefore the Epicurean opinion, which makes Pleasure our highest end,
does show that the Sect is sensual and brutish, and have brought their reason
into servitude to their appetites and lusts. And nature it self does abhor the
notion, when it is brought into the light; and will hear him with some horror
who shall speak out and say, [God is not to be chiefly loved for himself, nor
as he is best in himself, nor as my ultimate objective end, but only to be
loved next my self, as a means to my felicity or pleasure, as meat, drink,
ease, and sport, and lust are. And virtue or holiness is not to be loved
chiefly for it self, that is, as it is the Image of God, and pleasing to him,
but as it conduces to my pleasure.] As Cicero excellently notes, there is a
great deal of difference between these two; [ To love virtue as virtue, and so
to take pleasure in it because it is virtue;] and [To love virtue for pleasures
sake, more than for its own:] For he that does so, must say as Cicero charge
Epicurus plainly to say, that Luxury is not to be discommended if it be not
unpleasant: for the end is the measure and rule to judge of all the means. If
pleasure as pleasure be best, then to him that so continues it, to live more
pleasedly in whoredom, and drunkenness, and theft, and murder, than in
godliness and honesty, it will be better so to do: And virtue, and lust or
wickedness, will stand in competition only in the point of pleasure. And then,
which think you will have the greater party, and what a case would mankind be
in? I am persuaded, that the well studying the excellent discourse of Cicero on
this point, and the reasons which the Stoics and the rest of the Philosophers
give against the Plebeian Philosophers, (as Cicero calls them) may much
conduce to help many Divines themselves to a righter understanding of the same
controversy, as in Theology they have otherwise worded it, Whether God or our
own felicity be most to be loved? (And yet without running into the fanatic
extreme, of separating the love of God and our selves, and calling men to try
whether for his glory they can be willing to be damned.) Only when you read the
Philosopher saying, that virtue in and for it self is to be loved as our
felicity; elucidate it by remembering, that this is, because that virtue in it
self is the Image of God, and by our felicity they mean the perfection of our
natures, in respect of the end for which we were made. And that as the
excellency of my knife or pen (yea, or my horse) is not to be measured by their
own pleasure but their usefulness to me, because I am their end; so is it, as
to man's perfection, as he is made for God, and related to him, (for all that
he has no need of us, seeing he can be pleased in us.) Thus this Philosophical
controversy is coincident with one of the greatest in Theology.

Though I have displeased many Readers, by making this Treatise swell so big,
by answering so many objections as I have done, yet I know that many will
expect that I should have made it much greater, by answering, 1. Abundance of
particular objections from Scripture-difficulties: 2. And many discourses of
several sorts of persons, who contradict some things which I have said. But I
supersede any further labor of that kind, for these following reasons.

1. It would fill many volumes to do it, as the number and quality of the
Objections do require. 2. Those that require it are yet so lazy, that they
will not read this much which I have already written, as esteeming it too long.
3. They may find it done already by Commentators, if they will have but the
patience to peruse them. 4. I have laid down that evidence for the main cause
of GODLINESS and CHRISTIANITY, by which he that well digesteth it, will be
enabled himself to defend it against abundance of cavils, which I cannot have
time to enumerate and answer. 5. The scribles of self-conceited men are so
tedious, and every one so confident that his reasons are considerable, and yet
every one so impatient to be contradicted and confuted, that it is endless to
write against them, and it is unprofitable to sober Readers, as well as tedious
to me, and ungrateful to themselves. To instance but in the last that came to
my hands, an Inquisitio in fidem Christianoram hujus seculi, (the name prefixed
I so much honor, that I will not mention it.) Page 3. he calls confidence in
error by the name of certainty, as if every man were certain that has but
ignorance enough to overlook all cause of doubting. Page 13. He will not
contend if you say, that it is by divine faith, that we believe the words to be
true which are Gods; and by humane faith by which we believe them to be the
words of God. He says, that Faith has no degrees: but is always equal to it
self: to believe is to assent, and to doubt is to suspend assent; Ergo, where
there is the least doubt, there is no faith; and where there is no doubt, there
is the highest faith; Ergo, Faith is always in the highest, and is never more
or less: And yet it may be called small when it is quasi nulla, (that quasi is
to make up a gap) in respect of the subject, or at least hardly yielded; and in
regard of the object, when few things are believed. Page 26. He makes the
Calvinists to be Enthusiasts, (that is, Fanatics) because they say, that they
know the Scripture by the Spirit: (as if subjectively we had no need of the
Spirit, to teach us the things of God; and objectively the spirit of miracles
and sanctification were not the notifying evidence or testimony of the truth of
Christ.) The same name he vouchsafes them that hold, That the Scripture is
known by universal tradition to be God's word, and every man's own reason must
tell him (or discern) the meaning of it. And he concludes, that if every one
may expound the Scripture, even in fundamentals, then every man may plead
against all Magistrates, in defense of murder or any other crime, as a rational
plea; and say, Why should you punish me for that which God has bid me do. As
if God would have no reasonable creature, but bruits only to be his subjects.
As if a man could knowingly obey a Law, which he neither knows, nor must know
the meaning of; and is bound to do he knows not what. And as if the Kings
subjects must not understand the meaning of the fifth Commandment, nor of Romans
13. Honor thy father and mother; and, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, and not resist. Or as if Kings must govern only dogs and swine, or
might make murder, adultery, idolatry and perjury, the duty of all their
subjects when they pleased, because none must judge of the meaning of God's Law
by which they are forbidden: or as if it were the only way to make men obedient
to Kings and Parents, to have no understanding that God commands any man to
obey them, nor to know any Law of God that does require it: or as if all our
Pastors and Teachers were not to be so useful to us as a sign-post; nor we were
not to learn of them or of our Parents any thing, that God either by nature or
Scripture ever taught us: or as if a child or subject, who is required to learn
the meaning of his Ruler's Laws, to judge of them judicio privatae
discretionis, were thereby allowed to mis-understand them, and to say that they
command us that which they forbid us; and because the King forbids us to
murder, he allows us to say, You proposed it to my understanding, and I
understand it that you bid me murder, and therefore you may not punish me. As
if he that is bound to judge by a bare discerning what is commanded him, and
what forbidden, were allowed to judge, in partem utramlibet, that it is or it
is not, as please himself. As if when the King has printed his Statutes, he
had forfeited all his authority by so doing, and his subjects might say, Why do
you punish us for disobeying your Laws, when you promulgated them to us as
rational creatures to discern their sense? Will it profit the world to write
confutations of such stuff as this? or must a man that is not condemned to
Stage-playing or Ballad-making, thus waste his time? Do the people need to be
saved from such stuff as this? If so, what remedy, but to pity them, and say,
Quos perdere vult Jupiter hos dementat, and si populus vult decipi, decipiatur.

And yet to do no more wrong to the Scriptures, than to Councils, and Bulls,
and Statutes, and Testaments, and Deeds, and Bonds, he concludes, Of all
writings whatsoever, that by the mere words of the writer you cannot be certain
of his sense; though they be common words, and you take them in the common
sense. So that if any doubt arise about my words, if I resolve it by writing I
cannot be understood; but if I spoke the same syllables by word of mouth, it
would serve the turn. As if no man could be sure of the sense of any Law, or
Testament, or Bond, or Covenant, which is committed to writing, nor of any
exposition of them, if once it fall under Pen or Press. As if God's writing the
Ten Commandments had left them unintelligible, in comparison of his speaking
them. Then farewell all Historical certainty. Has every single Priest himself
any assurance of the sense of the Council, the Canons, the Popes Decreetals and
Bulls, but by the way of writing? And so the poor people must, instead of the
Church, believe only that Priest that orally speaks to them, though he have
no certainty of the matter himself. If this doctrine be made good once, it will
spoil the Printers trade, and the Clarks, and Courts of Record, and the
Post Office too.

But, page 51. he makes the consent of the universal Church to be the only
sure communication of Christian Doctrine in the Articles of Faith; yea, the
consent of the present age concerning the former: (But how the consent of the
whole Church shall be certainly known to every man and woman, when no writing
can certainly make known any man's mind, is hard to tell a man that expects
reason.) And that you may see how much the subject of this Treatise is
concerned in such discourses, he adds, that If the Church had at any time
been small, its testimony had been doubtful; but (says he) it testifies of it
self that Christians were never few, and therefore it is to be believed. But we
will have no such prevaricating defenses of Christianity. The major is the
Infidels erroneous cavil; the minor is a false defense of the faith. The Church
never said that Christians were never few: it has ever confessed the contrary,
that once they were few; and yet it has proved against the Infidel, that its
testimony was not doubtful, having better evidence of their veracity than
numbers.

You may perceive by these strictures upon this one discourse, what an endless
task it would be to write confutations, of every man that has leisure to
publish to the world his opinions, which are injurious to the Christian verity.
And therefore no sober Reader will expect, that I or he must be so tired,
before he can be satisfied and settled in the Truth.

FINIS.

