BONDUCA: OR, The British Heroine, A TRAGEDY.

Acted at the Theater Royal. BY His MAJESTY's SERVANTS. With a New
Entertainment of MUSIC, Vocal and Instrumental

Never Printed or Acted before.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Bentley, in Russel Street near Covent Garden, 1696.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The LORD JEFFEREYS, BARON of WEM, etc.
My Lord,
THE fairest Excuse I can find for this Presumption, is, That the Modern
Publications of Plays, are like the Roman Buildings, under the Umbrage of some
Household Deity, Erected over some Portico, to Fence and keep all safe within.
And indeed, as Plays are but Piles of Wit, the Structure of Ingenuity, a Noble
Name in the Frontispiece, is much the same Domestic Guardian; at least, for my
own part, I have made the most proper Choice of such a Tutelar Power in your
Lordship. For where should the Muses seek Covert and Protection, but there,
where both Apollo and Minerva are Your Lordships Hereditaries; whilst you
spring from those Veins that so entirely Entitle and Quality You for a Mecoenas?

And whilst Bonduca stands so shelterd under Your Lordships Protection, I must
say, it is a Fabric of Antiquity; a Foundation of that Celebrated Poetical
Architect, the Famous Fletcher: But with several Alterations, besides the two
First Acts New Writ.

But whilst I make this bold Address to Your Lordship, there are two
Considerations requisite to an Epistle Dedicatory: The Present, and the Hand
that makes it. For the First of these, it is the Offspring of Beaumont and
Fletcher, I lay at Your Lordships Feet; and under that Name, the very Parentage
stamps that Merit upon it, as should carry its own Safety; for methinks when
Great Authors revive, they should have no Ordeal to pass either to the Stage or
the Press. Both Censure and Malice should stand Awed and Silenced there;
insomuch that instead of Supplications, either to the Audience, or Readers good
Humor and Smiles; on the contrary, they should enjoy all the Benefits of the
Great Dead, be past any Danger of the Critics Purgatory, in an immediate state
of Felicity: And consequently by the Canons of the Muses, as well as the
Churches Rubric, to be above the want of Prayers.

Besides, as the Present I make Your Lordship, is all our own Native Growth;
the History of a British Heroine; it carries some more favorable
Recommendation to your Lordships Acceptance: For where can our Noblest English
Memoirs be more gracefully or more suitably lodged, than in the Hands of the
Noblest English Honor? And it has this further Advantage, as being an English
Story; That the Glory of Worthies and Heroes sounds sweetest, where the Music
is Tuned at Home.

But for the Unworthy Hand that makes the Present (my other Dedicatory
Consideration) There even Poetry it self is at aloss for an Apology; nay the
very Player almost Blushes too. It Is true, my Lord, Your Lordship has
vouchsafed to Grace and Encourage our willing Endeavors with Extraordinary
Smiles, being that Condescension and Goodness in You, that show Your Lordship
is resolved not to suffer the Gemms of your Nobleman's Coronet, to outdazle the
Sparks of the Gentleman, that Shines through your whole Conversation.

And to tell the Truth, my Lord, You have so Exalted and wrapped us up with Your
Lordships Generous Favors; that as Pride is naturally its own Trumpet; my,
very Vanity alone is Argument and Encouragement sufficient to make this
Publication to the whole World, of the Infinite Obligations due to Your
Lordship, from,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant GEO. POWELL.

TO THE READER.
I Must make room for one Page more, to tell you how our Bonduca set Foot upon
the Stage. The Value of the Original is not unknown to those who have read it
in Fletcher: A Value that has often times been prized so high, that the whole
Brotherhood of the Quill have for many Years been blamed for letting so
Ingenious a Relick of the Last Age, as Bonduca, lie dormant, when so
inconsiderable an Additional Touch of the Pen was wanting, to make it fit for
an Honorable Reception in This.

This Consideration prompted a Friend of mine, a much abler Hand than my own,
to attempt it; not that his Leisure, Attendance or Inclinations, would permit
him to make any long Toil of it. For to tell the Truth, the whole Play was
revised quite through, and likewise studied up in one Fortnight.

This Undertaker, who beslow'd but Four Days Labor upon it, being above the
Interest Part of an Author; and likewise a Person of that Modesty, as to affect
no Plumes from Poetry, he was generously pleased to put it into my Hands to
usher it into the World.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. POWEL.
WEll, Gallants of the Pit, first to be just
To the great Dead, the sleeping Fletcher's Dust,
His proud Bonduca, in this fighting Age,
That English Heroine wakes to tread our Stage,
That Bard -- But let him sleep in the Laurel Bed,
We Have business with the Living, not the Dead.
Between us and the other Theater
There is proclaimed, and still maintained a War,
And all, but knocking out of Brains, is fair.
We Are blamed for raising in one Night, what they
In thirty tedious days can scarce display;
But that to our Advantage sure, is spoke;
So Heusler by swift Marches, gained his Work:
And Cut off the Provision of the Turk.
And therefore, if the Truth you would declare;
Say Gallants, to your Smiles, who bids most fair;
Our Growing Spring, or Fading Autumn there?
Besides, though our weak Merit shincs less Bright,
Yet we'ave the Advantage, a Fairer Light,
Our Nobler Theatre's. Nay we are bringing
Machines, Scenes, Opera's, Music, Dancing, Singing;
Translated from the Chiller, Bleaker Strand,
To your Sweet Covent-Garden's Warmer Land.
To us, Young Players, then let some Smiles fall:
Let not their dear Antiquities sweep all.
Antiquity on a Stage? Oh Fie! it is Idle:
Age in Good Wine is well, or in a Fiddle.
Ay then it has a little Music there;
But in an Old, Decrepid, Withered Player;
It looks like a stale Maid at her last Prayer.
Yet if you think it better, we can play
Like whining Zanger, or stiff Mustapha:
Or else, Gad mend me Rustan, you shall see;
But who can make a Figure such as he?
Therefore divide your Favors the right way,
To the Young your Love, to the old your Reverence pay.
Personae Dramatis.
MEN. Suetonius, General of the Romans. Mr. Verbruggen. Petilius, a Roman
Officer. Mr. Harland. Junius, another Roman Officer. Mr. Hill. Decius, a Roman
Officer. Mr. Eldred. Macer, a Hungry Roman Soldier. Mr. Mic. Lee. Caratach,
General of the Britains. Mr. Powel, Jun. Venutius, in Love with Claudia. Mr.
Horden. Hengo, Nephew to Bonduca. Miss. Allison. Nennius, a British Officer.
Mr. Mills. Macquaire, a Pict, in Love with Claudia. Mr. Simpson. WOMEN.
Bonduca, Queen of Britain. Mrs. Knight. Claudia, Daughters to Bonduca.
Bonvica,
Mrs. Rogers. Miss Cross.


Roman and British Guards and Attendants, Druids, etc.

The Tragedy OF BONDUCA
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Nennius and another Captain. Nenn. SVETONIVS will Repent his Landing
here:
Conquest has already Enriched our Soil;
Our British Fields fatten with Roman slaughter*
So much stale Carrion lies in every Ditch,
That the Rank Steams rise from the rotting Heaps,
And Choke up all the Air.

Capt. They have scarce Men enough
To try the Fortune of another Battle.

Nenn. And those not worth our Conquest:
A Famine Rages in their pining Troops;
The Mighty Roman Spirit sickens in 'em,
And the poor starved Remains of all their Forces,
Can scarce Advance to make a Feeble War.

Capt. What may not our Victorious Queen expect,
That thus has shook the Daring Power of Rome?
Our mighty Queen! the Warlike Bonduca,
That greatly Towers above the humble Sex,
Aspires to more than Man, and Soars to Hero.

Nenn. Our Hardy Britains ne re will stoop to Rome:
What Courage can oppose our numerous Forces,
Whilst that Great Female Spirit bears against it,
And the Rough Caratach appears himself,
^ on
^

Capt. He is indeed,
Our Guard in Peace, and Father of the War.
The True, Blunt, Honest Britain's stamped upon him:
His hard, Old Weathered Trunk; his Scarrs and Wounds,
And all the Noble Ruins of his Body
She (...) him a Soldier, Nu^^t, and Bred in Danger;
His strength, his Vigor, and Majestic look
Seem to deny his Age, and bear him up
To perfect Youth.

Nenn. The Hero's finished in him.
Oh Caratach!
The Everlasting Scourge to wondering Rome,
Whilst thou art here, to lead us on to Conquest,
Britain will never droop; never submit,
Though Caesar Raging for his present loss,
Should start with Fury from the lazy Throne;
Draw all his Distant Troops to one vast Body,
And come himself to head the Crowded War.
But see! the Mighty Caratach appears,
And Bonduca with her Royal Offspring;
The Partners of her Blood and Spirit.

Capt. I must retire.

Nenn. I Will stay.

Enter Caratach, Bonduca, Claudia, Bonvica, Hengo, the Women in an Amazon
Dress. Bond. Are these the Hero's that Inherit Conquest?
These hardy Romans? O ye Gods of Britain!
Are these the Fortune Makers? these the Julians,
That with the Sun, measure the end of Nature!
Shame, how they Fly! Caesar's soft Soul Inspires
Their Fainting Limbs; their Fathers got 'em sleeping,
In lazy Lukewarm Fills, and Pleasure Nursed 'em:
Dare they send these, these smooth Faced Roman Boys,
To Conquer our well tempered Manly Britains?
Twice have they felt the Fury of our Arms;
A Woman Beat 'em, Caratach, a weak Woman,
A Woman beat these Romans!

Car. So it seems!
A Man would blush to talk so.

Bond. What Caratach, do you grieve at my Success?

Car. No, Bonduca.
It Is at your bearing it, I grieve: Discretion
And hardy Valor are the Twins of Honor,
And must together make a Conqueror,
Divided, but a Talker: It Is a Truth,
That Rome has fled before us twice, and Routed;
A Noble Truth, we ought to Crown the Gods for.
But when we meanly would Insult, our Tongues
Forfeit the Honors which our Swords have won.

Nenn. Is this Insulting, is it mean to say
What Fortune and the Gods allow us?

Car. No;
So what we say, exceeds not what we do.
What, call the Romans fearful, smooth-faced Boys?
Does this commend our Conquest? Are they Boys?

Bond. Forgive me Soldier, it is a Woman's Frailty;
I must, and will Reproach 'em: Caesar sent 'em
To Conquer us, and make us Slaves to Rome:
Now he may send his Vultures too, to feed
And Riot on 'em, here they lie on heaps;
And once more Britain, I pronounce 'em Boys.

Car. Are Boys the Hero's that must Grace your Triumphs?
Where Is then the glory of your Victory?
Why are your Altars Crowned with Wreaths of Flowers?
Why are your Oxen Lowing by the Priest,
Adorned and Gilded for the Pomp of Death?
Is this for frighting a poor Herd of Children?
Is it no more? Shut up your Temples Britains;
Put out your Holy Fires; forbear to tune
Your Hymns of Joy; let all go home and sleep:
For such a Conquest, such a shameful Conquest,
A Candle burns too bright a Sacrifice.

Bond. Sure, Caratach, thou doat'st upon these Romans.

Sar. Witness these Wounds, I do: A Roman gave 'em.
I love an Enemy. I was Born a Soldier;
And he that at the head of's Men, desies me,
Bending my Manly Body with his Sword;
I make a Mistress.

Bon. Were I of that Mind too,
My Heart would be wonderfully Engaged
The next Battle. [Aside.]

Car. Ten Years of bitter Nights and heavy Marches,
Have I wrought through to try these Noble Romans;
On the hard Ground I Have weathered out ten Winters,
All Chopped with Cold, and stiffning in my Arms,
When Frozen Storms sung through my battered Helmet;
And all to try the Romans. Ten times a Night
I Have swom the Rivers, when pursuing Rome
Shot at me as I floated; when these Arms
Stemmed the rough Tide, and broke the Rolling Billows;
And still to try these Romans: It Is dishonor,
And followed will be worse, to taint 'em thus,
Have not I seen the Britains --

Bond. What?

Car. Run, Bonduca, basely screaming out
Mercy and Quarter from their trembling Lips:
I Have seen these Britains that you magnify,
Fly like a Shadow scowring over the Plains:
I Have seen thee run, courageous Nennius,
And you too, Bonduca, run like Winds,
When that great Chief, the Roman Boy, pursued ye,
Cut through your armed Carts, and drove 'em headlong.
Why, I ran too;
But not so fast. Your Jewel had been lost then,
Young Hengo there; for when your Fears out-ran him,
I in the Head of all the Roman Fury
Took him, and girding him in my tough Belt,
Buckl'd this Bud of Britain to my Back,
And placed my Shield as a Defense behind him:
Five times in vain I fought to bear him off;
We had perished, had not their gallant General
Cried like a Roman, like a noble Roman,
Go Britain, bear thy Lion's Whelp off safely;
Thy manly Sword has ransomed thee; grow strong,
And let me meet thee once again in Arms.
Then if thou standst you are mine; I took his Offer,
And here I am to honor him.

Bond. Well then,
Let 'em be Boys or Hero's, still we have conquered;
And I am proud to think the richest Blood
Of all the Martial World, now only serves
To dung my Fields.

Car. And I am proud on it too:
But where we have found Virtue, though in those
That came to make us Slaves, let us cherish it:
There Is not a Blow we gave, since Julius landed,
That was of Strength or Worth; but like Records,
They File to After-Ages. The Romans are
Our Registers for noble Deeds of Honor;
And shall we burn their Mentions with Upbraidings?

Bond. My Fortune wound my Female Soul too high,
And lifted me above my self; but thou
Have kindly worked down all my Towering Thoughts:
Shall we have Peace? For now I love these Romans.

Car. Peace! Rather rail on, than think of Peace.

Nenn. Why did we fight? Is'nt Peace the end of War?

Car. Not where the Cause implies a General Conquest.
Had we a Difference with some petty Isle,
Or with some peevish Neighbor for our Landmarks,
We'd think of Peace:
But where we grapple for the Ground we live on,
The Liberty we hold as dear as Life;
And with these Swords, that know no end of Battle,
That where they march, but measure out more Ground
To add to Rome, and here in the Bowels of us:
It must not be, whilst there is an Eagle waved
In British Air, we'll never think of Peace.

Bond. O Caratach!
As thou have nobly spoken shall be done.
The Romans shall have worthy* Wars to thee:
I give in Charge this little Royal Graft,
The tender Care and future Price of Britain:
With thee he is safe, as in his Mother's Arms.

Car. And little Sir, when your young Bones grow stiffer,
And when I see you able in a Morning
To beat a dozen Boys, and then to Breakfast,
I Will tie ye to a Sword.

Heng. And what then, Uncle?

Car. Then you must kill, Sir, the next valiant Roman
That calls you Knave.

Heng. And must I kill but one?

Car. A Hundred, Boy, I hope.

Heng. I hope Five Hundred.

Car. That Is a Noble Boy. Come, Madam,
Let Us to our several Charges. Is Venutius
Returned from viewing the Roman Camp?

Bond. Where Is your Venutius, Girl? You best can tell.
Is he come back, my Claudia?

Car. Nay, blush not Lady; for with Pride I speak it.
A braver Britain never shone in Armor:
Nature has polished every part so smoothly,
As if she only meant him for a Lover,
But when (as I have often with Pleasure seen him)
He calls up all the Man to rush to War,
Then Fury sparkles from Majestic Beauty;
The Soldier kindles, and I lose the Lover,
Only to wonder at the Godlike Hero.

Clau. You Have nobly recompensed his Service,
Greatly returned that Praise, that loud as Fame
Has often sounded of the Mighty Caratach.

Bond. Venutius has deserved your Love, my Daughter,
And here he comes to claim it.
Enter Venutius. Venutius, welcome: Have ye viewed the Romans?

Ven. Yes; they are few, and meanly sculk'd behind
Their labored Trenches.

Ben. Where thy Courage drove'em.
Go my Venutius to thy Mistress Arms:
Thus I reward thy Toil, and crown thy Wishes.

Ven. Thus then I Will thank ye:
By the mighty Joys that fill my Soul,
You Are dearer, dearer to me,
Than all the Triumphs that the War could promise*

Bond. To morrow let us push the Conquest home,
And drive the unwilling Romans from our Isle,
And then we'll solemnize your Loves in Peace;
The Holy Priest shall join your Souls for ever.

Ven. Speak that again! I Am lost in Ecstasy!
The Trumpet that alarmed my Soul to War
Never raised me half so high.

Car. Spoke like a Soldier.
I Have always been thy Leader, but to morrow
I Will follow thee; Love leads us on to Conquest.
Methinks I see the Toils of Battle cease,
And weary Britain hushed once more in Peace,
And thee presented to thy Claudia's Arms,
Free from the Midnight Terror of Allarms:
For who, what Roman can our Rage oppose,
When Love and Courage shoot us on our Foes?

[Exeunt Car. Bond. Bonvica, Hengo: manet Ven. and Claudia. Ven. Now I am truly
happy. Oh my Claudia!
With this Reward, the great Reward of Beauty,
The battered Soldier crowns his glorious Labors,
And softens all the rugged Toils of Danger.
To morrow! Oh! Wou't thou not joy, my Claudia,
When from a bloody Field of slaughtered Romans,
Thy weary Soldier comes with full Desire,
And brings thee Love and Conquest?

Clau. Yes, and with these soft Arms I Will hold you fast,
Till Honor calls you from me:
And when fresh Dangers court you to new Wars,
When your Soul springs to follow dreadful Glory,
Like a true Britain, like Bonduca's Daughter,
I Will dress my Hero, bring his Shining Armor;
Admire my Soldier, while with Pride I view
The graceful Horrors graven on his Shield,
And Terror sitting on his haughty Crest;
Then praise, embrace, and urge him to the War,
And then --

Ven. And then,
When the rough business of the day is over,
When all my glittering Arms are red with Slaughter,
And shouting Britains bring me home in Triumph,
Let these dear Arms be open to receive me,
To lull my Cares, and soften 'em to Rest;
To make me lose the Hero in the Lover,
And all the Soldier melt to Love and Peace.

Clau. Yes, and I Will torture you a thousand ways,
With thousand thousand Questions of the War;
With trembling pleasure I will hear it all,
Heal every Wound you name with balmy Love,
Clasp my Victorious Hero in my Arms,
Praise him in every little tender way,
And bless kind Heaven for all the danger past.

Ven. Ye Gods! Is there such Excellence in Woman?
By all the Promises of glorious Love,
I Am so impatient till thou art all my own,
I dare not lose a moment, though with thee;
New dawning Glory breaks upon my Soul,
And all my Spirits up to rush to Battle,
To launch with Fury on the wondering Romans,
Drive 'em to Fate, then big with Love and Conquest
Fly to the Altar with a Bridegroom's Joy,
Perform the hasty Rites of Holy Marriage,
And seize the noble Prize of all my Labors.

Claud. Then sure I shall be free from odious Love.

Ven. What means my Blessing?

Claud Oh my Venutius, that grim Royal Pict,
That joins his Troops with us against the Romans,
That we have so often doubted for a Traitor;
That Fiend still troubles all my softer hours,
And haunts me with his saucy Brutal Passion.

Ven. Gods! what, that finished piece of perfect Monster?
Durst he blaspheme the Sacred Name of Love? [Comes peeps.
I pity him; use him, my Claudia, use him
For thy Diversion; he is beneath thy Scorn:
It Is but a Day, and then with envious Eyes
He Will see me triumph in my Claudia's Beauty,
And never dare to own his Passion more.
Farewell my Love, and though it is Death to part,
Yet for a while my Glory calls me from thee.

Claud. And will you go so soon? One moment longer.

Ven. Oh, I could stay an Age, and still complain
Of leaving thee too soon. But my Charge waits me,
And I must see my Troops prepared for Battle.
Farewell: We part to meet in Peace to join
For ever; join, and give an Age to Love. [Exit Venutius.

Enter Comes and meets Claudia as she is going out. Com. What! my brightest
Amazon in Arms again?
The Toil and Danger of the War is over.

Claud. Have I not cause to wear a stronger Guard,
When a worse Foe comes on?

Com. The Romans sure will tempt your Rage no more.

Claud. But I fear thou will.

Com. Ha! then am I
The Foe you meant? I come, my Beauteous Claudia,
To talk of Friendly things, of Peace and Love.

Claud. O think again, Sir; for they both disown thee;
There is no Peace and Love, where thou art present,
To mix thy self and spoil, the God-like Compound.

Com. Why do thou dart at me those scornful Beams
Of Angry Beauty? Oh! Look milder on me.
'Twas Love that made me first a Foe to Rome;
To Fight and Conquer with my Beauteous Claudia.
It Is over, and that great Love that first began 'em,
Should Crown our Labors, sweeten all our Toils;
Spring like our Souls in the first heat of Battle;
And shoot with fury to each others Arms;
To Clasp and Grapple midst Triumphant Joys.

Claud. Ha, this to me, the Virgin Pride of all Britain?
Shall I be treated like a Common Prostitute?
Am I thought mean enough for Beastly Passion,
The Recreation of his Ranker Hours?

Com. Forgive my hasty Zeal; I love with Honor.
The Sacred Innocence that atton'd the Gods,
Before we drew our Swords against the Romans,
Burnt not a purer Flame.

Claud. Urge me no more: Thou talk of sacred Love!
Have thou a Nook in all that hudled Frame,
Fit for so soft a Guest? It cannot be.
Fly from my sight, thou bungl'd Botch of Nature;
Thou Snuff of Life, and Ruins of a Man.

Com. Once I was worthy your Imperious Beauty:
Curse o'that British Boy, that charmed you from me.
Am I despised for him?

Claud. Rather Curse Nature, thou blaspheming Fiend,
That never reformed thy Dross: Curse thy own Fate,
That warmed that uncocted Lump to Life,
Half finished into Man. Art thou still here?
Be gone: I would not tell thee --

Com. More you cannot;
The Proudest of your Sex, though scorned and loathed,
Could not have vented more true Woman's spite
Than you, for being Loved; Loved by a Prince;
And since you urge me thus, a Prince above you.

Claud. Above me!
This Insolence has given me leave to tell thee,
And I will speak:
Have ye forgot the time, when like a Slave,
Thou wentst prepared to gorge thy rank Desire,
Where a lewd Strumpet kept her Midnight Court?
Do thou remember, how she loathed thy Person?
Even she, a Prostitute to all beside,
Started at this Appearance: I must laugh,
And tell thee what the public Voice confirms,
That thou did force, force even that common Jilt,
And in the very Stews commit a Rape;
And dare thou own thy monstrous Love to me,
Scorned by a Whore that every Swain has sullied?

Com. Gods! Can I bear all this, and still desire?
All the rank Malice of your haughty Sex
Is surely lodged in thee, to make me hate thee
More than I ever loved; to make thy Soul
Ugly and loathsome as that ghastly Terror
Your Impious Fancy drew for me. Go then,
Go to your Lovers Arms, and wanton there:
I Will court Disdain no more, no longer feast
My hungry Eyes on that proud Beauty.

Claud. Then I Am your Friend again; and now let us part,
Part in this very pleasing careless Mood,
And never from this kind Resolution move:
I will forget my Scorn, and you your Love. [Exit Claudia, Manet Comus solas.

Com. And I my Love? Gods! Can she think I loved her?
I Am unacquainted with that Boyish Passion;
My Soul's inspired with a nobler Flame,
A mighty Governing Lust shoots through my Veins;
I Will fawn no more, but force her to the Bliss,
And glut at once my Vengeance and Desire:
I Will ravish her; my old experienced way:
And generally too, it is the Consequence
Of all my awkard Wooing; the Thought warms me.
Ye Gods! ye Gods! How it would (...) my Soul,
To clasp this lovely F^ry in my Arms!
Whil^t scorning to be pleased, she would curse the Pleasure;
Till with a sudden Rapture seized she would m^lt away,
And springing give a Loose to lusty Joy.
[Exit.
The End of the First Act.
ACT. II. SCENE I.
Enter Petillius and Decius, two Roman Captains. Pet. WEll, Captain; what
Commands from our General Suetonius?
Are we all drawn yet? All prepared and ordered,
Fit to be slaughtered?

Dec. Brave News, Captain; our General has sent
To have a Treaty to day with Caratach.

Pet. And fight with him to morrow: For, my Life on it,
They Will never conclude a Peace. They may make Treaties,
But all they agree on will be, to knock one another of the Head.
Where do they meet?

Dec. Here on this Eminence, between the two Camps:
And for my part I think it no Scandal
For the bravest Roman amongst us to wish
They may come to Articles: For what can our
Shattered Troops do against a Hundred thousand Britains?

Pet. Between no Bread and pitched Battles we have not
Men left enough to storm a Village.
Suetonius is a Noble General; but I see no reason
Why we should be all sliced and slaughtered,
And Dung Land here, because he loves fighting.
Enter Junius. Stay, Stay, here comes the languishing Captain Junius:
Poor Gentleman, he is drawing on --

Dec. Not to his End I hope,

Pet. The end of all Flesh, Woman: His Thoughts ramble
After the Grecian Captive he left behind at Rome.

Jun. Why, what a Wretch am I? This Grecian Beauty
Has softened all that is Great and Roman in me:
I shall be hooted at by all the Camp.
There Is not a Slave that calls himself a Soldier,
But's brave enough to storm a Whining Lover.
Leave me, Petillius, my Thoughts are busy.

Pet. Thou want Drink: For what Affliction
Can light so heavy on a Soldier, and dry him up
As thou art; but no Drink? Thou shall have Drink.

Jun. Prithee Petillius --

Pet. By my Honor, much Drink, valiant Drink:
I see like a true Friend into thy Wants, it is Drink.
And when I leave thee to a Dissolution,
Especially of that dry Nature; hang me.

Jun. Your Fooling's Nauseous: Why this Drink?
Drink to me --

Pet. Did I not find thee gaping like an Oyster,
For a New Tide? Why, thy very Thoughts lie bare
Like a Low Ebb. Thy Soul, that rid in Sack,
Lies Moored for want of Liquor: I say still,
Thou want Drink.

Jun. You have too much on it; therefore leave me, Sir:
Belch not your Drunken Jests on me;
I Am not disposed for Mirth.

Pet. May be thou want a Whore too? Thou shall have both?
A pretty Valiant Fellow; dye for a little Lap and Leachery!
Hear, thou Son of Her
That loves a Soldier; hear what I promised for thee:
Thus I said, Madam, I take your Son for my Companion:
Madam, I Love your Son; your Son loves War:
War loves Danger; Danger, Drink; Drink, Discipline,
Which is Society and Leachery; these two beget Commanders.
Fear not, Madam, your Son shall lead with Honor.

Jun. Does so Ridiculous and loose a Mirth,
Become a Man of Arms?

Pet. Any Mirth, or any Subject is better
Than Unmanly Mustiness: What harm's in Drink?
In a good wholesome Wench? It cannot out
Of my Head yet, handsomely: But thou would
Feign be Drunk; come, no more Fooling:
The General has new Wine come over.

Jun. He must have New Acquaintance for it too,
For I will a' none, I thank ye.

Pet. None, I thank ye; a short and pithy Answer.
No Company, no Drink, no Wench, I thank ye:
A decent and modest Resolution.
Enter Corporal, Macer, and Soldiers. What do these Hungry Rascals here?

Mac. A Bean, a Bean; a Princely Diet;
A full Banquet, to what we compass.

1 Sold. Fight like Hogs for Acorns.

2 Sold. If this hold, Corporal Macer, we are starved.

Mac. For my part l'm starved already;
Not worth another Bean:
A hard saying for an Officer, and a Man of Action:
Look ye Gentlemen, my Belly's run away
From my Coat; and my Doublet hangs so loose,
That I can pull him over my Head, like
A Shirt: Who'd guess by the sharpness of my Fiz,
That I had any Jaws! and truly they are so
Very weak for want of Chewing, that they
Can scarce keep open my Face, so that the
Two Flapps of my Countenance are in danger
Of meeting; and so for my part, I Will Fight no more.
How stand the rest of your Stomachs affected?

All. No Bits, no Blows.

Pet. Do You Mutiny, you Eating Rascals?
You Fight no more? No Bits, no Blows?
Does Rome depend on your Resolution,
For Eating Bief and Brewis?

Mac. Would we had it.

Pet. Avaunt, ye Slaves, or I Will have ye all hanged:
A Sovereign help for Hunger.

Mac. I may do Service, Captain.

Pet. Yes, in a Butcher-row. Come hither, Corporal:
Thou art the Ringleader of them, and I Will take
Care to get a particular Reward for thee.

Mac. How much Bief?

Pet. Bief! The Forks, Sirrah:
Where thou shall be taught the true Virtue
Of Temperance, by a Lictor, and Cat of Nine Tails
This you have deserved: But Bief, Sirrah!
How dare thou expect Bief?
Have thou done any thing to deserve Eating?

Mac. Done Miracles Captain, Miracles!
Enough to deserve Feasting a Twelvemonth.

Pet. What Miracles, Sirrah?

Mac. What Miracles have I done? Let me see;
Done? Why I have fasted a Fortnight, which
Is a greater Miracle than any Hero of ye all
Can boast of; and enough to Merit a Banquet for Life.

Pet. A Fortnight! What do thou call Fasting?
How long is it since thou Eat'st last?
Tell the Truth.

Mac. I have not Eat to the Purpose --

Pet. To the Purpose? Ye Rogues, my Company Eat Turf,
And never Grumble: They can Digest Timber,
And Fight upon it: Dare ye Cry out for Hunger,
And wear Shoes? Suck your Sword Hilts, ye Slaves,
If ye be Valiant to the purpose. A grievous penance!
Do thou see that Melancholy Gentleman?

[Pointing to Junius. Jun. For shame, what mean ye Petillius?

Pet. He has not Eat these three Weeks.

Mac. He has Drank the more then, and that is all one.

Pet. Nor Drank, nor Eat, nor slept these two Months.

Jun. No more of this on your Life, Petillius,

Pet. Go to him, Corporal; it is common Profit:
Urge him to the Point; he will find you out
A strange Food, that needs neither Teeth, nor Stomach;
That will feed ye as Fat as a Crammed Capon,
And make ye Fight like Devils: To him Corporal;
I Will warrant thee, he will teach thee a new way
Of Getting Dinners.

Mac. Captain, we do beseech you as poor Soldiers, [Bowing to Jun.
Men that have seen good days;
Whose Mortal Stomachs may some times
Feel Afflictions --

Jun. Do You long to have your Throats Cut?

Pet. See what Mettle it makes in him:
Two more Meals of this, and there lies Caratach.

Mac. We do beseech you but to render in way
Of general Good, in Preservation -- [to Junius.

Jun. Out of my Thoughts, ye Scoundrels.

Mac. Out of your Pity, to give us your Warlike Remedy
Against the Maw-Morms; or Notable Receipt,
To Live by Nothing.

Pet. Out with your Table Books.

Jun. Am I become your sport, Petillius?
Stand from my Swords Point, Slaves;
Your Poor starved Spirits can make me no Oblation
For my Love; Else I would Sacrifice ye all. [Exit Junius.

Mac. Alas! he lives by Love, Sir!

Pet. So he does, Sir, and cannot you do so too?
All my Company are now in Love; never think of Meat,
Ah-mee's, and good hearty Heigh-hoes, are Sallets
Fit for Soldiers: Live by Meat, by Larding up
Your Bodies? It Is Lewd and Lazy, and shows ye
Merely Mortal, Dull; and drives ye to Fight
Like Cammels, with Baskets at your Noses.
Get ye in Love; ye can Whore well enough,
Though ye Fast till ye are Famisht, yet still
Ye can Crawl like Crabbs to Wenches.
Away, the General's coming; get ye in love all,
Up to the Ears in Love, That I may hear no more
Of these Rude Murmerings, and discreetly carry
Your Stomachs.

Mac. Food must be had: Jog Boys, keep your Files.

[Exuent Macr. and Companions Enter Suetonius Attended. Suet. This is the fatal
Field, the very place
Where Caratach has led his Troops to face us;
And with Rude Fury, and unskilful Conduct,
Broke through the Force of all our Noble Order:
Where e're we set a Foot in all this place,
We trample on a Romans Tomb; but now old Caratach,
Now we shall meet thee here
On milder Terms, to Treat of Peace.

Pet. Well then; I shall meet him once at least,
Without the Hazard of my Person:
Now I may possibly retreat without that
Honorable comfort to a Soldier, of good substantial
Hacks, and Wounds; the gracefulness of half a Face;
An Arm dangling by my side, and three parts of me
Groaning for a Surgeon.

Suet. Their Valor and Success are pefect Miracles.
How strange 'twas to behold their First Encounter!
Ten thousand Carts, and all with Scythes and Hooks,
In full Career, they drove amidst our Army,
And mowed whole Troops: Here half a Roman
Lay ghastly sprawling on the bearded Hooks,
His other half left starving on the Bloody Plain.
There Ranks of Veteranes, the Pride of Rome,
We snatched up whole, and mixed their hideous Cries.

Pet. Two or three of their Carts were very Decently
Hung Round with my Company.

Enter Caratach and 4 Gentlemen. Suet. But see, Petillius, Caratach appears;
The only Man that dares be Foe to Rome.

Car. The only Man that dares be Friend to Rome:
Never a Foe, but when my Sword is drawn,
For honorable Slaughter: Now it is sheathed,
And here I Am come to make a League with Caesar.
What are the Terms that Great Suetonius offers?

Suet. I offer Peace, the Greatest, Noblest Gift,
And such a one, as Romans rarely offer,
Or stoop to grant.

Car. And such an one as Britains too,
Will always scorn to take, without such Terms
We can accept with Honor.

Suet. What the Success
Of the last Battle gave ye, keep secure.
We give you back too, all the Towns, the Wealth,
And Captives taken in the last Campaign.

Car. I will not Bargain like a sly shroud Trader:
But hear a Soldier speak. There Is not one Inch
Of Ground you have got since the First Caesar Landed,
But must be ours; or let the War decide it:
For by Your Heaven, and Great Andates's Power,
Whilst there is one Eagle waved in British Air,
I Will never hear of Peace, but War, eternal War.

Suet. Then War, eternal War, I echo back.
Shall I now Sacrifice my whole Life's Honor?
I that never marched, but to increase our Empire:
And shall I now for a Weeks ill Success
Resign at once the Conquest of an Age?
I that so often have entered Rome, when placed
On high amidst a Crowd of Captive Princes,
I sat like one enthroned, and careless viewd
A Nation shouting by my loaded Chariot,
That slowly wheeled along the Royal Pomp,
And cracked beneath the Burden of the Triumph:
And shall I now at last return the Scorn,
And everlasting Scandal of a Roman?
Could I do this, not only pointing Rome,
But thou too, Caratach, thou would call me Coward.

Car. By Heaven I should. Now by the Blood that warms thee,
By that true rigid Temper that has forged
Our Tempers so alike: I swear, O Roman,
Thou'st fired my Soul to Arms; I long to meet thee
Dressed in my dinted Armor, hew my Passage,
To reach Suetonius in the midst of Havoc,
And grapple with thee for this spot of Earth,
Till one of us fall dead.

Suet. O more than Britain!

Car. O truly Equal
To the great Spirits that informed Old Rome!
Were thou a God, I could not call thee more.
Why are we Foes? Sure Nature means us Friends,
And hand in hand, when the loud Signal sounds,
To start out jointly in the Race of Fame,
To pant along the rough unbeaten way
At our full Stretch, and touch the Goal together.

Suet. Whatever Nature meant, in spite of War,
And all the Roman Blood thou'st bravely spilt,
We will be Friends to day.

Car. Thus I advance
To meet thee then, and once without a Wound.

Suet. Come on, my Friend, I will not be outdone [Both come to one another.
In Kindness. What, so near, and not embrace?

Car. Yes firmly, close, as if we never meant
To hew each other down, and end the Scene
In Blood. Should Caesar see us linkt together,
Rivetted thus like the first furious Clasps
Of Lovers in the heat of stolen Delight,
Think thou his boding Soul could yet look forward,
And see us in the Field, where clashing Swords,
Chopped Arms, ^left Helmets, and the dying Groans
Of slaughtered ^roops shall drown our Warlike Trum pets,
And show a thousand ways our Rage in Battle?

Suet. No; he, even he, might study here the Hero,
And learn with us to change Revenge for Honor.

Car. Honor does nothing; all the World's at Peace
Till some stale Malice hurries them to War;
And then the fretful Hero's rail abroad
Worse than their Wives at home insult when Victors;
As if their only business was Revenge.
But let them that are truly valiant, know
From us, what it is to be a Friendly Foe.
We'll part in all the Laws of Love and Peace,
The Crush of Death must be our next Embrace. [Exit Caratach.

Suet. Now by the Gods of Rome, one single Valor,
The Courage of the mighty Caratach,
More doubts me than all the Britains. He Is a Soldier,
So forged out and so tempered for great Fortunes,
So much Man thrust into him, that his mere Name
Fights in a thousand Men. Besure you hearten
Your shattered Troops, to give the Onset briskly.
Since we must fight, Fury must be our Fortune.
Look to those eating Rogues that baul for Victuals;
Tell'em, if now they push the Conquest home,
The Fat of all the Kingdom lies before 'em.

Pet. That Is the best Argument. The generous Soldiers
Spare begging conquered Foes, but when they Dine
They give no Quarter to a lusty Chine.
Thus the well-booted Greeks before Troy Town
Still prayed for Beef enough to swallow down;
And ^at as well as fought to get Renown. [Exeunt.

Enter Corporal, Macer, and other Soldiers as a Foraging. CATCH, Sung by the
Soldiers. JAck, you are a Toper, let us have the other Quart:
Ring, we are so sober, 'twere a shame to part.
None but a Cuckold, Bully'd by his Wife
For coming late, fears a Domestic Strife.
I Am free, and so are you, to call and knock boldly,
Though Watchmen cry, Past Two a Clock.
Ma^er. Keep your Files, keep your Files,
I begin to have a st^ange Aversion for
This side of the Camp.

1 Sold. If we venture any further, our Throats are in Danger.

Mac. Not of swallowing any thing, I fear. We Are just ^p^n the Out Guards of
the Britains, but one Comfort is, they'il have but a poor Booty of us, if we
are taken: For my part, I have'nt Flesh enough left to dine a Lowse. If we
could but meet some good ^at straggling Britains now.


2 Sold. What then, Corporal?

Mac. What then, you Rog^^? A good fat corpulent well-cramm'd Britain is
Provision for a Prince. I am a Soldier of Prey, and will kill all I meet, and
devour all I kill.


1 Sold. You Would let us have some share in the eating, as well as the killing;
Corporal; woud'nt ye?


Mac. We'd make a Dividend on 'em; I woud'nt cheat ye of one single
Chitterling; all the Garbage should be your own; good substantial Tripe; where,
for ought I know, you might find Beef ready chewed, and Capers, happily not
digested.


3 Sold. Shall we venture on? There Is no great difference between Hanging and
Starving.


Mac. On, on; there is a comfortable thing called a Head of Cattle hard by:
March, keep your Files. If I could but meet some good fat Britains, as I said
before, I Would so maul 'em.


[Exeunt, and after a little while re-enter, running over the Stage, the
Britains after them. Mac. Fly, fly, fly; the Enemy, the Enemy;
A whole Troop of 'em.

Britains. Are you so bold, Sirs? have at ye.

[Exeunt Britains pursuing Macer and the rest, after a little time re-enter
Britains dragging in Macer and his Companions. Britains. Learn to keep your
Quarters, Scoundrel.
What make ye here? Do You long to be trust up?

Mac. You are such lean Rogues, I Have no Stomach to ye;
You are'nt worth a fighting for.

Brit. You're scarce worth a hanging. But because you are R^mans, you shall have
the Honor conferred on you in due time. Come on, Cowards.


Mac. O all ye Mortals that are wise,
Abstain from fasting, I advise.
'Twas fasting brought these honest Fellows,
And Corporal Macer, to the Gallows. [Speaking in a lamentable Bellman's tone.

[Exeunt Britains, dragging Macer out, and his Confederates. The End of the
Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Nennius, Soldiers with Macer, and other Soldiers with Halters about
their Necks. Nenn. COme, hang 'em presently. What made your Rogueships
Harrying for Victuals here? Are we your Friends?
Or do you come for Spies? Tell me directly,
Would you not willingly be hanged now?
Do You not long for it?

Mac. No, not much: I Will ask my Fellow Skeletons
How they approve of it. What say you?
Shall we hang in this vein? Hang we must;
And it is as good to dispatch it merrily,
As hang an Arse to it.

1 Sold. Any way, so it be handsome.

Mac. I Would as leave 'twere toothsom too.

Sold. Nay faith, since we must hang,
Let Us hang pleasantly.

Mac. Then pleasantly be it, Captain. The Truth on it is,
We had as live hang with Meat in our Mouths,
As ask your Pardon empty.

Nenn. What say you to a Chine of Beef now, Sirrah?

Mac. Bring me acquainted with it, and i will tell you.

Nenn. Or what think you of a Wench, Sirrah?

Mac. 'Twou'd be excellent if she were well boiled,
Or Roasted; but I am somewhat too low kept
To make use of her any way but with my Teeth. Enter Caratach.

Car. Now what is the matter?
What are these Fellows? What Is the Crime committed,
That they wear Necklaces?

Nenn. They are Roman Rogues, taken a Foraging.

Car. Is that all, Nennius?

Mac. Would I were fairly hanged! This is that Devil,
That Kill-crow Caratach.

Car. And would you hang 'em?

Nenn. Are they not our Enemies?

Car. (...)ies! Flea-traps.
Pl^^k off your Halters, Fellows.

Nenn. Take heed, Caratach: Taint not your Wisdom.

Car. Wisdom, Nennius?
Why, who shall fight against us? make our Honors,

And give a glorious Day into our Hands,
If we dispatch our Foes thus? What Is their Offense?
Stealing a Loaf or two to keep out Hunger?
Does this deserve the Gallows? Poor Hungry Knaves,
That have no Meat at home: Are you not hungry?

Mac. Monstrous Hungry.

Car. That Fellow wears the very Face of Hunger:
Get 'em some Meat and Wine, to cheer their Hearts.
Make have I say.

1. Sold. What does he mean by this, Captain?

Mac. To let us alone, because we are not worth Hanging.

Car. Sit down poor Knaves: Why where is this Wine,
And Meat? Who waits there?

Enter Servants with Wine and Meat, and Hengo with 'em. Serve. It Is here Sir.

Heng. Who are these Uncle?

Car. They are Romans, Boy.

Heng. Are these they
That vex my Aunt so? Can these Fight?
They look like Men of Clouts, set to keep Crows
From Orchards: Why I dare Fight with these.

Car. That Is my good Chicken.
Well Gentlemen, how do you feel your Stomachs?

Mac. Mightily coming, Sir.

Car. I find a little Grace will serve your turns.
Give 'em some Wine.

Mac. Not yet, we are very Busy.

Heng. Hark'e Fellow, Can ye do any thing but Eat?

Mac. Yes, I can Drink too; prithee hold thy Peace,
Little Boy, I Am busy.

Car. Here Famine, here is to thy General.

Mac. Thank you; now I believe I have time
To Pledge you.

Car. Fill 'em more Wine, give 'em full Bowls.
Now which of you all, in Recompense
Of this Favor, dare give me a home Thrust,
In the next Battle?

Mac. Why Faith Sir, to do you a sufficient Recompense,
I don'^ m^^h care, If I knock Your Brains out.

C^^. (...), Faith I Will forgive thee.

Hen. ^hou dare as well be hanged:
(...) his Brains out? Thou Skin of Man!
(...) not (...) ^his.

(...) (...)* don't s(...) my (...)*
^
When I can get it.

Hengo. You kill my Uncle?

Car. He shall not Child.

Hengo. He cannot, he is a Rogue;
An Eating Rog^e: Oh that I wear a Man!

Mac. By this Wine, the Youth's brim-ful of Provocation;
But it is no matter: Here Noble Caratach,
Thy Health.

1. Sold. Hark ye, Macer, if he should hang us now
After all?

Mac. Let him, I Will hang like a Gentleman and a Roman.
Capt. your humble Servant: We thank you heartily
For your good Cheer; and shall be glad to meet you
As well provided as we meet you now.

Car. Go, see 'em to their Tents, their Wine
Has over-Master'd them.

[Exeunt Caratach, Hengo, and Nennius. Mac. Well; Bless the Founder, I say: A
Pox of
These Britains, I say, how many pound of Beef
Do they Devour to our one pound of Horseflesh? [Exeunt.

SCENE the Temple.
Enter Druids Singing; Bonduca, Claudia 2d. Daughter, Venutius, Nennius, Comes,
Hengo, etc. 1 Dr. HEAR us, Great Ruguith, hear our Prayers:

2 Defend, defend thy British Isle.
Revive our Hopes.
D(...) our Fears.

3 Nor Let (...) Altars be the Roman Spoil.

Chor. Des^^^d, (...) Powers Divine, Descend

4 In Chariots of (...)ial Flame,
And touch (...)s you Defend.

Chor. O Save our Nation, (...) our Name.

5 H(...), ye Gods of (...); ^^ar us this Day:
Let us ^^t fali the (...) (...)' s Prey.
Clip, Clip their Wings, (...)n home;
And Check the Towering (...) Rome.

Oracle. -- -- First l^arn (...). [Thunder here.

Bond. You Powerful Gods of Britain, (...)our Prayers.
Hear us, you Gre^^ Revengers: (...)ay
Take Pity from our (...)s; Dou(...) Valors:
Double the sad Remembrance of our Wrongs
In every Breast: The Vengeance due to those
Make Infinite and Endless.
Rise from the Dust, the Relics of the Dead;
Whose Noble Deeds our Holy Druids Sing.
O Rise, ye Valiant Bones; let not Base Earth
Oppress your Honor, whilst the Pride of Rome
Treads on your Stocks, and wipes out all your Stories.

Ven. Thou great Tyranes, whom your Sacred Priests,
Armed with their Dreadful Thunder, played on high;
Above the rest of the Immortal Gods.
Send thy Consuming Fires, and deadly Bolts,
And shoot 'em home: Stick in each Roman Heart,
A Fear fit for Confusion. Blast their Spirits:
Dwell in 'em to Destruction: Through their Phalanx,
Strike as thou strik'st a proud Tree;
Shake their Bodies; make their Strengths totter,
And their hopless Fortunes Unroot:
And Reel to Rome.

Claud. O thou God! If ever to thy Justice,
Insulting Wrongs and Ravishments of Women,
With Virgin Innocence have Access: Now hear me;
Now snatch that Thunder up: Now on these Romans,
Despisers of thy Power, and of thy Altars,
Revenge thy self: Take to thy Killing Anger,
To make thy great Work full; thy Justice spoken:
And Utter Rooting from this Blessed Isle,
Of what Rome is or has been.

Bond. Give more Incense;
The Gods ^re D^af or Drowsy. No happy Flame
Rises to raise our Thoughts: Pour on.

2d Daugh. See Heaven, and all you Powers that guide us:
See, and shame we kneel so long for Pity
At your ^lters; since it is no light Oblation,
That you look for* No Incense Offering;
We will (...) our Eyes* And as we wear
These Sto(...) Hourly Weeping;
So will we m(...)ur Powers into Compassion.

Hengo. This Te^r for Prosutagus. My brave Father,
Ye God's! Now think on Rome: This for my Mother,
And all her Miseries: O see and Save us.

[A Smo^^ from the Al^^r. Bond. The first takes!

Car. It does so: But no Flame Rises.
Cease your Fe^^ful Prayers;
Your W(...)ings, and your Lame Petitions:
The Gods Love Courage Armed with Innocence*
And Prayers fit to pull 'em down; weak Tears
And Troubled Hearts, the Dull Twins of Cold Spirits,
They sit and Smile at. Hear how I salute them;
Divine Andate: Thou who hold'st the Reins
Of Furious Battles, and Disordered War,
And Proudly Rowl'st thy swarthy Chariot Wheels,
Over the Heaps and Wounds of Carcasses:
Sailing through Seas of Blood: Thou sure Steeled,
Give us this Day good Hearts; good Enemies,
Good Blows of both sides: Wounds that Fear or Flight
Can claim no share in: Steel us both with Angers,
And Warlike Executions, fit thy Viewing.
Let Rome put on her best strength: And thy Britain,
Thy little Britain; but as great in Fortune,
Meet her as strong as she; as proud as daring:
And then look on, thou Red Eyed God, who does
Reward with Honor: Who Despair makes fly;
Unarm for ever, and Brand with Infancy.
Grant this Divine Andate; it is but Justice,
And my first Blow, Thus on this Holy Altar,
I sacrifice unto thee. [A Flame arises.

Bon. It flames out.

Car. Now sing ye Druids:
Sing, Sing ye Druids! All your Voices Raise,
To Celebrate Divine Andate's Praise.
Sing, Sing Divine Andate's Praise.
Divine Andate! President of War,
The Fortune of the Day Declare.
Shall we to the Romans yield:
Or shall each arm that wields a Spear,
Strike it through a Massy Shield;
And Dye with Roman Blood the Field? [Thunder here.

Oracle. -- -- Much will be spilled.

and 4 Dr. TO Arms, to Arms: Your Ensigns strait display:
Now, now, now, set the Battle in Array.
The Oracle of War Declares,
Success Depends upon our Hearts and Spears.

Verse. and Cho. Britains, Strike Home: Revenge your Country's Wrongs:
Fight and Record your selves in Druids Songs.

Bond. It Is out again.

Car. They Have given us leave to Fight yet:
We ask no more; the rest hangs on our Resolutions.
Tempt Her no more.

Bond. I would know further, Cousin.

Car. Her hidden meaning dwells in our Endeavors;
Our Valors are our best Gods. Come, let us march.
This Day the Romans gain no more Ground here
Than what his Body lies in.

Bond. On then my Soldiers;
Thy Words have made me certain of Success.
For when brave Caratach does lead the way,
The Britains cannot fail to win the Day. [Exeunt omnes praeter Comus and
Venutius.

Com. They must not then have Boys to fight their Battles.

Ven. What says Comus?

Com. I said,
Whilst Women Rule, and Boys Command in War,
We Have asked the Gods what they will never grant us.
Nor need Rome triumph for a Victory
(O my Prophetic Fears) so cheaply purchased.

Ven. A Victory, and by the Romans gotten?
Where Is then the Courage of our generous Britains,
So lately tried in the successful Battles?
O all ye Gods! Can there be more in Men?
More daring Spirits? Still they make good their Fortunes,
And let the Romans know, this little Isle
It self a World is, more than that they have conquered.

Com. And let the bold Venutius know, and tell it
His proud vainglorious Heart, e're the Sun sets
Poor Britain veils her Glories in everlasting Darkness.

Ven. O no, she will yet raise her victorious Head,
Look over the Rugged Alps, and make Rome tremble,
Methinks I see the big War moving forwards:
Hark how they shout to the Battle! how the Air
Totters and reels, and rends apieces
With the huge vollied Clamours! Hear the Romans
Tearing the Earth in the the bitter Pangs of Death.
The Britains there (Comus, methinks I see it)
In The face of Danger pressing on to Conquest.

Com. Here the unhappy Queen
(Hard Chance of War) by common Hands
Stripped of her Majesty, and to the Roman General
Led a Captive; there her two beauteous
Daughters made the Slaves of Lust and Scorn,
Methinks I do behold that Heavenly Form,
An Abstract of all Goodness,
The poor much pitied Claudia.

Ven. Ha! what say thou?
By Heaven, I fear thou art about to utter
Something the basest Roman Slave would start at*
Shall she, my Claudia, say thou? But we trifle;
And sure thou did it only to whet my Courage,
Of its self apt and prone to execute.

Com. Be it so then. See who dares most to day
For Love and for thy Claudia, Thou or I.

Ven. Now you are brave, and I shall truly love thee:
Sound all your dreadful Instruments of War,
Till Romans best Sons start at the Warlike Noise.
Come on, and whilst we thus together move,
I Will show Rome how to fight, Thee how to love. [Exeunt.

Enter Suetonius, Petillius, and Roman-Officers. Suet. Now my brave
Countrymen, the time is come*
To gain a Conquest, or a Grave, in Britain.
The Enemy, my Fellow Soldiers, wait us.
Are ye all ready?

Pet. All our Troops attend, Sir.

Suet. To bid you fight is needless, you are Romans,
The Name will fight it self. To tell you
Who you go to fight against, his Power and Nature,
But loss of Time: Go on in full Assurance;
Draw your Swords as daring
And as confident as Justice.
Go on, I say, valiant and wise; rule Heaven;
And all ye great Aspects attend 'em.
Do but blow upon this Enemy, who but that
We want Foes, cannot deserve that Name;
And like a Mist, a lazy Fog before your burning
Valors, you will find him fly to nothing. This is all;
We have Swords, and are the Sons of Ancient Romans,
Heirs to their endless Valors; fight and conquer.

Pet. That Man who loves not this day,
And hugs not in his Arms the Noble Danger,
May he die fameless and forgot!

Suet. Sufficient.
Up to your Troops, and let your Drums beat Thunder;
March close, and sudden as a Tempest; keep your Phalanx
Sure lined and piec'd together; your Spears forward,
And so march like a moving Fort; e'^^ Night shall come
Britain shall give us Graves, or yield to Rome. [Exeunt omnes.

Enter Caratach, Nennius, and Soldiers. Nen. The Romans are advanced; from
yonder Hills
We may behold them, Caratach.

Car. Let Us thither. [Moves forward.
I see the Dust fly; now I see the Body:
Observe 'em, Nennius; by Heaven a handsome Body!
And of a few, strongly and wisely jointed.
Suetonius is a Soldier.

Nen. As I take it,
That Is he that Gallops by their Regiments,
Viewing their Preparation.

Car. Very likely.
He shows no less than General; see how bravely
The Body moves; and in the Head, how proudly
The Captains stick like Plumes! He comes on apace:
Good Nennius, go hasten my Brave Lieutenant;
Bring on the first square Body to oppose 'em;
The Queen move next with hers, and wheel about,
So gain their Backs, in which I Will Lead
The Van Guard. We shall have bloody Crowns
This day, I see by it; haste thee, good Nennius,
I Will follow instantly. How close they March,
As if they grew together: no place but lined alike,
Sure from Oppression.
They will not change this Figure.
We must Charge 'em, and Charge 'em home,
They Will never totter else.
Hark! I hear our Music, and must attend it.
Hold, good Sword, but this day, and hereafter
I Will make a Relick of thee for young Soldiers
To come like Pilgrims to, and kiss for Conquests.
Oh, Great Andate, on thy Soldier smile,
And drive these Romans from thy British Isle.

Enter Suetonius, Petilius, etc. Suet. O bravely fought! Honor till now, never
showed
Her Glorious Face in the Field. Like Lion Soldi'rs,
You Have held your Heads up this day.
Where Is young Junius?

Pet. Gone to Heaven, I think, Sir; I saw him fall.

Suet. His worth go with him, for he was a Soldier.
See he has all the Noble Rites of Funeral.
Bravely he fought, my Friends, bravely he fell.
And since in the bloody Field, he sought a Grave,
Let Warlike Instruments attend him thither.
Hark, They come on again! Charge, Charge my Soldiers.

Enter Caratach, Bonduca, Claudia, Venutius, Bonvica, and Hengo. Car. (...) 'em
in the Flank: Oh, you have played the Fool,
The (...)ly!

Bond. (...) Cousin?

Car. The (...) Fool: Why did you give the word
Unto the Carts to (...) down, and our People
In gro(...) before the Enemy? We pay for it: our own
Swords cut our Throats.
Why do you offer to Command?
Why do ye meddle in Men's Affairs?

Bond. (...) help all yet, my Soldier.

[Exeunt. Car. Go home and Spin.
Now comes the Tempest on: [A shout within.
Oh Woman! Woman! At the first designed
A Plague, and sure Destruction to Mankind. [Exeunt.

An Alarm. Enter Suetonius, Petilius, etc. Suet. Close my brave Fellows;
Honorable Romans:
The World cannot Redeem 'em, they are ours.
Charge close, Petilius haste, one sudden blow
Must be the Britains certain overthrow. [Exeunt.

Enter Bonduca, Venutius, Claudia, Bonvica, etc. Bond. Whither fly you? Stay
you shames of Britain:
Back, back ye Cowards; Oh ye fearful Hares!
Doves in your Anger? Will you leave your Queen?
Leave her thus desolate with her hapless Children,
To Roman Rape and Fury?

Enter Caratach, and Hengo. Car. Fly ye Buzzards, ye have Wings enough I find.
(...)* Woman, Woman, thou have lost all!

Bond. Forgive me, Noble Caratach.

Car. May Heaven forgive you; hasten to your Castle,
(...) Refuge; farewell, wretched Queen.
(...), how the Romans ring [(...)
(...) Away. [Exeunt Bonduca, etc.

Hengo. Good Uncle, let me go too;
I Am frighted at this noise; it sounds, methinks,
Like Thunder.

Car. No, my Boy:
Thy Fortune's mine, and I will never leave thee:
Thou might have been an Heir to Britain's
Crown; but that the ill Conduct of thy Mother lost that.
But hark, the Enemy approaches near;
We must be gone, my Boy; but Heaven knows where:
For Britain now submits to Roman Powers,
And nothing but our lengths of Earth are ours. [Exeunt.

ACT IV.
Enter Venutius and Claudia. Ven. All Is lost! All Is lost! And our British Soil
So often fed with dying Roman's Blood,
Is now all covered over with slaughtered Britains;
Whose yet warm Gore lies reeking on the Plains,
As if our Mother Earth refused a draught
So horrid and unnatural.

Claud. Wherever
Our Fears Conduct us, still we may behold
The Dead, or Dying, whose louder Cries overcome
The Exclamations of the Conquering Romans.

Ven. Let 'em cry on, till their wild Voices reach
You Auzure-Mansion of the Partial Gods;
But they are Deaf, or sure we might have hoped for
A happier Harvest of our well-tuned Prayers.

Claud. Injurious Heaven, where is now our Promised Bliss?
The good old Priest that should have joined our Loves!
The Virgin Hands to lead us to the Temple,
And Hymen's Lamp to smile upon our Joys!
No Priests! No Virgins Hands, or Lamp of Hymen!
Or if there is, it is blown into a Flame:
The Flame of War, that with devoaring haste,
Bounds over the Land.

Ven. O Claudia! Thou Beauties Excellence!
Thou Glorious Prize of my yet fruitless Labors!
The Cause, and the Reward of all my Toyls!
Did I for thee, and Honor draw my Sword,
And must I, must I sheath it in Dishonor?

Claud. No more my Hero! For in spite of Fortune,
(Fortune, a Coward-Slave, t'a Soul like thine)
Thou still art Great, far greater in thy self,
Than all the Conquests of Insulting Rome.
Let me gaze on thee, fly into thy Arms;
Drown all my Cares in Ecstacies of Joy!
For though the World is lost, I Will Triumph here.

Ven. Hear this, ye Gods! Hear this! And from the Crowd
Of all the Darling Romans, bring a Faith
That dares to match with Hers.

Claud. No. Though Conquered, I Am still a Princess; Daughter
To a Queen, the Great Bonduca: Her
Whose powerful Arms have lasht the Fury
Of those stubborn Tyrants: these Sons of the Empire;
Thunderbolts of War; whose wild Ambition
Seems t'out brave the Stars.

Ven. O thou Great Soul! Thou Generous Heir to all
Thy Mother's Beauty, and thy Father's Virtue!
How often in times to come, when Fame shall ripen
The Stories of thy Fortune, will the Virgins
Bow to thy Name, and in the height of Wonder,
Change all their Woman's Fears for Manly Courage;
And the young Hero sledg'd with dear-bought Conquest
Melt into Love; with to have lived like me,
Thus to admire, thus close to press thee ever.

Enter Comes. Claud No more, my Love; see where the Pict appears!
Good Heaven! Does he still live? And could not Fate,
Armed with so many Weapons, find his Head,
And (...) the Earth that Groans beneath the Monster?
I could not sight, my itching ^lesh opposed
The Dictates of my Soul: Truth is, I never knew
A wh(...) Lover, but he was a Coward;
And yet they say, that Woman's ^oy, Venutius,
That Youth, who has the Hero and the Lover
Blended together, did work Miracles;
And in the foremost Ranks sustain, the Battle.
Why be it so, had she encouraged me,
Like him, perhaps I might have dared beyond him.

Ven. How gloomy, and distracted he appears!

Claud. His Looks wear Horror, and his Thoughts Destruction.

Com. She Is but a Woman, proud and obstinate:
And when I know a thousand may be had,
Why should I vilely lose one thought on her,
And to her Folly, Sacrifice my Quiet?
Ha! She Is here, and her proud Mignion with her:
It Is fixed within, and Fate waits ready for him.
Hail wondrous Youth! Thou Glory of this Isle;
Blessed Britain's Hopes, and Terror of the Romans,
Whose Eagles that once led 'em on to Conquest,
Now hide their Heads, and flag their trembling Wings.

Claud. What means this Sycophant?

Com. Whose very Name
Can do the work of twenty thousand Soldiers;
The Nobl'st Tempers ever drew Sword for Slaughter,
Are proud to be compared to thee, thou Hero,
Whose yet Green Youth has done the work of Ages.

Ven. Come, no more; I know thy Pride, and scorn it:
But if thou art wise don't urge me beyond bearing.
This Sword, still warm with the bold Romans Blood,
Never yet unsheathed, but in bright Honor's Field,
Shall do a Murder on thee, if thou do.

Com. Yes, now thou talk, stay, let me view him nearer:
Is this Venutius? This the Youth that basely
Whistled his Honor off to the Wind, and coldly
Shrunk his inglorious Head, whilst the tough Soldier
Sweat Blood and Spirit for a Glorious Harvest?
Thou Popingjay? Thou ten de^^ees beyond
A Coward! What, fly to a Woman's Arms!
Forsake the Field so basely! Out upon it!
Thou fit to fight with Romans! Thou a Soldier!
Go home and hang thy Arms up; le(...)ot 'em:
Go take a Distaff, Fool; for what brave Soldier,
What Man that loves to fight for Britain,
Will ever follow thee?

Ven. Did I do this? Did I forsake the Field?
Did I, when Courted by loud Fame and Fortune,
Shrink back my Head, or in a Woman's Arms
Melt down my Manly Courage? O all ye Gods!
Must I bear this? Must I with Patience hear it?
Nay, then I am that Fool, that Thing he called me.
Follow thou, Friend, follow me if thou dare.
Come to the Field, there thou shall see this Coward,
This Woman's Toy, this Popingjay, do Wonders;
And what before the Admiring Army saw,
Thou shal't behold again.
Ha! Laugh'st thou, Hell hound?

Com. Yes, to see thee Rave.
Where Is now thy Wisdom, and that Manly temper
Thou have so often bragged of? Behold now
That Object Pict, as thou have proudly called me,
Can move thy Soul, and work it beyond Madness.

Claud. Out, thou infernal Monster,
Half Man, half Devil; but ten times worse than both.

Com. Good Lady Variety, are all my Actions
So poor and lost, my Services so barren,
That I Am remembered in no Nobler Language?

Claud. Remember! I Would blot thee from my Thoughts;
Thy Person is so foul, thy Name so loathsome,
It blisters every Tongue dares mention it.
Come, my Venutius, let us to the Fort
Whither the lost Bonduca is retired
With my unhappy Sister, and leave him
To the worst of Torments, his own Conscience. [Exeunt.

Com. Farewell, proud Fool, next time we meet,
Your Tongue shall move in softer Terms,
And your stiff heart bow down in Prayers
To this loathsome Monster,
This hated Pict; for ere tomorrow's Light
Your Sun shall set in Everlasting Night. [Exit.

Enter Caratach and Hengo. Car. How does my Boy?

Hen. I would do well; my Heart's well;
I been't afraid, Uncle.

Car. My good Boy.

Hen. I know, Uncle, we must all die:
My little Brother died, I saw him die;
And he died smilingly; sure there is no
Great Pain in it, Uncle: But pray tell me
Whither must we go when we are dead, Uncle?

Car. Strange Questions!
Why, to the blessed'st Place, Boy: Eternal Sweetness
And Happiness dwells there.

Hen. Will you come to me?

Car. Yes, my sweet Boy.

Hen. My Aunt too, and my Cousins?

Car. All, my good Child.

Hen. No Romans, Uncle.

Car. No, Boy.

Hen. I should be loath to meet them there.

Car. No ill Men,
That live by Violence and strong Oppression
Come thither; it is for those the Gods love, good Men.

Hen. Why then, I care not when I go; for surely
I am persuaded they love me: I never did any thing
To vex my Mother in my Life; and indeed, Uncle,
Every Night, before I went to Bed, I said my Prayers.

Car. Thou shall go there then,
Indeed thou shall.

Heng. When they please, Uncle.

Car. That Is my good Boy:
Art thou not weary, Hengo?

Heng. Weary, Uncle!
I Have heard you say, you have marched all day in Armor.

Car. I have, Boy.

Hen. Am I not of your Blood?

Car. Yes, my Child.

Heng. Then, 'pray', why cannot I do so too?

Car. Thou art too tender.

Heng. What, to go upon my Legs, why they were
Made to bear me; I can play Twenty Mile a day.
I see no reason but to preserve my Country
And my self, I should walk forty.

Car. What would thou be? Living to wear a Man's strength?

Heng. Why, a Caratach:
A Roman-Hater; a Scourge sent from Heaven,
To whip these proud Thieves from our Kingdom.
Hark! Hark, Uncle! I hear a Drum!
Enter Macer, and Soldiers.
Mac. Beat softly; softly, I say. They are here.
Who dares Charge,?

1. Sold. He that dares be knocked of the Head.
I Will not come near him.

Mac. Retire again, and watch then: how he stares!
He has Eyes would kill a Dragon.
Mark the Boy well; if we could take, or kill him:
A pox upon you, how fierce you look!
Back, on's Back I say; he has found us. [Retire.

Car. Do you hunt us?

Heng. Uncle, good Uncle; see the thin starved Rascal!
The eating Roman! Kill him, dear Uncle, kill him.

Car. Do you make us Foxes?
Here, hold my Spear, and keep the place, Boy:
I am at Bay, and like a Bull I Will bear him.
Stand, stand ye Rogues; ye Squerrils. [Exeunt.

Heng. Look, how he pays 'em! O, that I had a Man's strength!

Enter Macer. Mac. A plague of your heavy Hands; I Am glad
I Have cleap'd you: (...) Here Is the Boy! My own,
I thank my Fortune.

Heng. O Lord! Uncle! Uncle! Famine is fallen upon me, Uncle.

Mac. Come, Sir; yield willingly: your Uncle's out of hearing.
Hark ye, Sirrah, give me the Spear; I shall
Tickle your young Tail else.

Heng. I defy thee, than Mock-made-Man of Mat.
Heark'y, Sirrah; Charge home, or I shall tickle
Your lean Carcass for you.

Mac. As I live, the Boy will beat me.
How it looks! Lookee, lookee; how the little Toad swells!
Ye little Rogue, you; yield, or I Will cut your Head off.

Heng. You cut my Head off, Sirrah? If I thought you
Had any Brains, I Would dash 'em out with the wrong end
Of my Uncle's Staff: Come on, I have twenty ways
To Charge thee; twenty Deaths attend my bloody Hand.

Mac. Sure, it is the Devil, a Dwarf-Devil in a Doublet.

Enter Soldiers running. Sold. Fly! Fly Corporal! He comes, he comes.

Mac. The Devil take the hindmost. [Exeunt running.

Heng. Ah you Rogues; you runaway Rogues.
He comes, he comes, he comes: That Is he, Boys.
What a brave Cry they make.

Enter Caratach with a Head. Car. How does my Chicken?

Heng. Faith Uncle, grown a Soldier, a great Soldier:
For by the Virtue of your Spear, and a strange
Fighting Face I put upon it, I have out-brav'd
Hunger.

Car. That Is my Boy, my sweet Boy: Here, here is
A Roman's Head for thee.

Heng. And very good Provision, Uncle. Before I starve,
My pretty Gentleman, I shall make bold to taste
The sweetness of your Calves Head.

Car. A right complete Soldier; come Chicken,
Let Us go seek some place of strength,
(The Countrey's full of Scouts) to rest a while in;
Thou will not not else be able to endure
The Journey to my Country: Fruits and Water
Must be your Food awhile Boy.

Heng. Any thing.
(...) Moss! I can live on Anger,
To vex these Romans: Let Us be wary, Uncle.

Car. (...) you.
Since you (...) ^all of Britain have decreed;
And that your Votaries must by Romans bleed.
O Ruggish! O Andate! Oh ye Powers!
Since you the Fall of Britain have decreed,
Let then your Votaries by these Romans bleed.
Rather than make us to the Conqueror Slaves,
Give them our Kingdom, and give us our Graves.

ACT V. SCENE, 1.
Enter Suetonius, Comes Dragging in Claudia. Claud. O Whither, whither would
thou drag me, Villain?

Com. To do a Deed thou wilt thank me for, when done,
Why all this vain resistance? Can you move
The Rocks or Trees to pity your Complaints?
I am as firm, and resolute in my purpose:
Nor would I quit my Purchase for a Kingdom.
Where now is all the Pride? That Woman's pride,
With which you melt the Endearments of my Love?

Claud. It Is here; it is fixed for ever in my Soul:
I always scorned, but now I hate thee too.
And sure --
If there are Gods, and Virtue be their Care,
I Am still secure from thy abhorred Attempts.
Some unseen Power will strike thee in the Act;
And Impotence blast all thy Expectations.

Comes. Why, be it so? I Will put it to the Trial,
But Madam, you shall find, and find with Pleasure,
Not all the Powers of Heaven can disarm me.
Come on; your Tears are now as vain and fruitless,
As were my Prayers, when I asked your Love.

Claud. Love! And to thee! Thou art a thing so Loathsome,
Nature has shut thee quite from that thou art:
Made like the Bird of Night, to be Pursued,
Abhorred, and Loathed, by all thy fellow Creatures.

Com. Woman! Woman! Oh how I love this Pride!
Thou now art fit to be beloved by me;
Not made to fill our Arms the Vulgar way.

Claud. Oh, I have been to blame; my foolish Tongue
Betrayed the weakness of my unwary Heart!
Thou Art Fair as Light, and Innocent as Truth:
Royal by Birth, by Nature Excellent.

Com. This is far more than my Revenge ever hoped for:
Not only to enjoy thy Body, but
Bent down thy Soul in Fear and Flattery;
Which feeds both my Anger, and my Love.
Nay, come, your Mignion's safely laid:
His Sword, proud Beauty, will never more
Be drawn in your Defense.

Enter Venutius. Ven. Oh where! Where is this proud Imperious Villain?

Claud. He Is here; he is here. Ye Gods, poor Claudia thanks you.

Ven. Have at thee Prince; thus I salute.

[Draws. Com. Are you so hot, Sir? I have that
Shall cool you
[Fight here, and Comes falls. Curse of your Sword! You are too sure a
Marks-Man.

Ven Farewell; and tell thy fellow Devils below,
It Is to Venutius's Sword, thou ow'st thy Death.
A Fate too Noble, for a Wretch like thee.

Com. I Am going, but leave my Curse behind me.
May thou still Love, and be like me Rewarded.
Death, Horror, and Despair! Where am I now?

[Dies Claud. Come to my Arms, my Hero, born for Conquest:
Dearer and Greater in the single Combat,
Than all the Labors of the busy day!
Ha! But he bleeds! O all ye Gods! He bleeds!
Those precious drops that might redeem a Kingdom;
In silent pace, bear his dear life away.
O fatal Conquest! dear bought Victory!
O wondrous proof of unexampl'd Love!

Ven. Love! Yes, I call the unknowing Gods to witness,
How much I love thee; through what Seas of Danger
I have ventured for thee: Thou art that precious
Diamond, that glorious Prize, which seated on a Rock;
From far have drawn the Eyes of the Beholders!
I the bold Lover, who in spite of Fortune,
By Heaven encouraged, and Guided by my ^^ve,
Rode over the raging Waves, and bore thee off.
Ha! Have I not? What Pict shall now oppose us?
What Roman Sword shall interrupt our Peace?
The Winds are still; Heaven gently smiles upon us:
It Is all Serene, and I am thine for ever.

Claud. Alas! Thou Rav'st! It Is Madness all thou ut terst*
Help, help! Where now are all those Gods,
The Poets in their wild fancies Dreamt
Were in the Woods? No kinder Power to hear
A Virgins Prayer? No Aesculapius near, or
Great Apollo?

Ven No, it is too late: I find Death's Hand upon me;
And feel my Soul, just ready for the sally.
Weep not, my Claudia: there are Joys in store,
For thee and me, though I am now no more.

[Dies. Claud. He Is dead, he is dead; and in my Cause! Oh thou dear
Youth! Winged like a Perseus for his rescued Andromeda,
Thou flew'st all Soul, all Love, to my Deliverance:
And this is thy Reward! Oh, where is your Justice,
Heaven; when Virtue, that should be the Charge of
God's, must thus neglected; thus untimely bleed;
And all that most deserved to live, must die.
But why do I live, ye Powers!
Why gave ye us poor Lovers, one Soul,
And not one twisted Thread of life, to break and
Die toget her? No Venutius! The Gods are Partial.
I Will mend the work of Heaven: But can Tears mend it?
Tears, the April-shower of Girls! No, I Will weep Blood!

Enter Nennius, with Soldiers. Nen. Cease Madam, cease; by your untimely fall,
You Will add to Royal Sorrow.
The unhappy Queen, with your much Mourning Sister,
Are in the Fort, by Roman Powr's immured; nothing
Remains but Death, or an Ignoble Flight, or Bondage.

Claud. Death, Nennius; Death! Look here, then talk of Life;
Lead on, I Will show the way; and in my fall,
Be great as any Roman of 'em all.

Enter Bonvica and Julia. Bonv. Where shall the wretched Off spring of Bonduca
fly.
To escape those dismal Screams of Horror,
That fill the Britains Ears? Oh whetched Mother!
Unhappy Sister! More unhappy I!
Their Courage makes the appoach of Death
Seem pleasing: But I have the true fearful
Soul of Woman; and would not quit the World.
Julia, call Lucius, and bid him bring his Lute;
Fain would I leave this dire consuming Melancholy.

Enter Lucius with a Lute. Luc. I Would have the Song you taught me last.
I fear, I do resemble now the Swan,
That Sings before its Death.
Second SONG, by Miss Cross.
OH! Lead me to some Peaceful Gloom,
Where none but sighing Lovers come.
Where the shrill Trumpets never sound,
But one Eternal Hush goes round.
There let me sooth my pleasing Pain,
And never think of War again.
What Glory can a Lover have,
To Conquer, yet be still a Slave?

After the Song, enter Messenger. Mess. Madam, the Queen expects you on the
Walls;
Your Sister with you: the Roman Powers
Are all come down with Fury against the Castle.

Bonv. Then, then farewell to this World.
I see, I see my Fate direct before me;
My Mothers Fury greater than the Romans,
Presents me Death in a thousand various forms.
Oh all ye Britain Powers! Oh great Andate,
Pity my Youth! Oh Mercy! Mercy! Mercy!

[Exit. Appear Bonduca, Claudia, Nennius and Bonvica above. Bond. Now Claudia,
now Bonvica, O my Children!
Is the time come to show your constant Valors?
Think not, my Girls, we will be Slaves to Rome;
No, we will show these Lords of the World, these Romans,
How they should die with Honor: Hark!
They come, since we must fall, fall bravely.

Enter Suetonius, Junius, Decius, Demetrius, Curious and Soldiers. Suet. Bring
up the Catapults, and shake the Walls;
We will not be out-brav'd thus.

Bond. Shake the Earth;
You cannot shake our Souls: Bring up your Rams,
And with their Armed Heads make the Fort totter.
You do but rock us into Death.

Dec. Yield Noble Queen.

Bond. I Am unacquainted with that Language, Romans.

Suet. Yield Honored Lady, and expect our Mercy;
We love thy Nobleness.

[Exit Decius. Bond. I thank ye, you say well,
But Mercy and Love, are sins in Rome and Hell.

Suet. You cannot escape our Strength, you must
Yield, Lady, you must adore, and fear the Power of Rome.

Bond If Rome be Earthly, why should any Knee
With Bending Adoration Worship her?
She Is Vicious, and your partial selves confess,
Aspires the height of all Impiety;
Therefore it is fitter I should Reverence
The Thatcht Houses where the Britains dwell
In careless Mirth; where the best Household Gods
See naught but chaste and simple Purity,
It Is not high Power that makes a place Divine;
But sacred Thoughts in holy Bosoms stored,
Make People Noble and the place Adored.

[Exit Decius. Suet. Beat the Wall deeper.

Bond. Beat it to the Center,
We will not sink one Thought.

Bonv. O Mother! These are fearful Hours: Speak gently
To these fierce Men, they will afford us pity.

Bond. Pity thou fearful Girl? It Is for those Wretches
That Misery makes tame: Would thou live less?
Wast thou not Born a Princess? Can my Blood
And thy brave Father's Spirit, suffer in thee
So base a Separation from thy self,
As Mercy from these Tyrants?
Say they had Mercy.
The Devil! A Releuting Conscience!
The Lives of Kings rest in their Diadems,
Which to their Bodies, lively Souls do give,
And ceasing to be Kings, they cease to Live.

Enter Decius. Decius. There Is a Breach made, is it your Will
We Charge, Sir?

Suet. Once more Mercy, Mercy to all that yield.

Bond. Hear me, mark me well, and look upon me
Directly in my Face, my Woman's Face,
Whose only Beauty, is the hate it bears you.
See with thy narrowest Eyes, thy sharpest Wishes
Into my Soul, and see what there inhabits;
See if one fear, one shadow of a terror,
One paleness dare appear, but from my Anger,
To lay hold on your Mercies. No, ye Fools,
Poor Fortune's Fools, we were not born for Triumphs
To follow your gay sports, and fill your Slaves
With ^oo^s and ^cc^amations.

Pet. Brave Behavior!

Claud. The Children of as great as Rome; as Noble
Our Names before her, and her Deeds our Envy;
Must we gild over your Conquest, make your State
That is not fairly strong but fortunate.
No, no, ye Romans, we have ways to escape you
To make you poor again, indeed our Prisoners,
And stick our Triumphs full.

Bond. Do You wonder we'll make our Monuments
In spite of Fortune, in spite of all
Your Eagles Wings? We'll work a pitch above ye.

Suet. Decius, go Charge the Breach.

Bond. Stick in thy Body, and make it good but half an hour.

Nenn. I Will do it.

Claud. And then be sure to Die.

Nenn. It shall go hard else.

Bond. Farewell, brave Nennius, we shall meet yonder,
Where few of those must come.
[Exit. Bring up the Poison.

Bonv. O my Fortune!

Bond. Hah! What said you?

Bonv. Good Mother, nothing to offend you.

Bond. Here, Girl: behold us, Romans.

Suet. Mercy yet.

Bond. No Talking, come, short Prayers, and let us dispatch
The Business. You begin, shrink not.
I Will see you do it.

Bonv. O Gentle Mother!
O Romans! O my Heart! I dare not.

Suet. Woman! Woman! Unnatural Woman!

Bonv. O! persuade her Romans: Alas I am Young,
And would Live, Noble Mother. Can you kill
That you gave Life to? Are my Years
Fit for Destruction?

Suet. Yield, and be a Queen still, a Mother and a Friend.

Bond. Ye talk in vain, come Drink it.

Claud. Fie, Sister, fie! What would you live to be?

Bonv. Mercy. O Mercy!

Suet. Hear her, thou wretched Woman.

Bonv. Mercy, Mother! O whither will ye send me?
I was once your Darling. Your Delight.

Bond. O Gods! Fear in my Family? Do it, and Nobly.

Bonv. O! Do not frown then.

Claud. Do it, Worthy Sister.
It Is nothing; it is but a Pleasure; we'll go with you.

Bonv. O! If I knew but whither!

Claud. To the Blessed above, where we shall meet our Father,
Where nothing but true Joy is.

Bonv. O! Comfort me still for Heavens sake.

Claud. No Wars, no Lustful Slaves to Ravish us.

Bonv. That steals me along; farewell to this World.

[Drinks. Bond. That Is my Good Girl.

Claud. The next is mine.
Show me a Roman Lady in all your Stories
Dare do this for her Honor?

Bond. Make haste.

Claud. I will. Would you learn how to Die bravely, Romans;
To fling off this Case of Flesh, lose all your Cares
For ever, hunt Honor and not Nations with your Sword:
Keep your Minds humble, your Devotions high,
So shall you learn the Noblest part, to Die.

[Dies. Bond. I come, my Noble Children, here,
Here Is the Draught would ask no less than Caesar's self
To pledge it for the Glories sake.

Suet. Madam, make up your own Conditions.

Bond. So we will.

Suet. Stay, be any thing.

Bond. A Saint, Suetonius, when thou shall fear and Die
Like a Slave; ye Fools, you should have tied
Up Death first when ye Conquered.
You sweat for us in vain else, see him here,
He Is ours still, and our Friend Laughs at your Pities;
And we command him with as easy Reins
As do our Enemies. I feel the Poison.
Poor Vanquished Romans, with what matchless
Tortures could I now Rack you, but I pity ye,
Desiring to Die quiet; nay, so much
I hate to prosecute my Victory,
That I will give you Counsel e're I Die,
If you will keep your Laws and Empire whole,
Place in your Romans Flesh, a British Soul.

[Dies. Suet. Desperate and Strange!
Give her fair Funeral, she was Noble, and a Queen.
Petilius haste, draw out three Companies,
And make up instantly to Caratach.
What means this Ceremony?

Pet. The Body of Young Junius, that was
Slain in the last Battle.

Suet. Go then Petilius, do as I commanded.
After due Ceremony done to the Dead,
The Noble Dead, we'll follow you.

[Exeunt. Enter Caratach upon a Rock, and Hengo by him Sleeping. Cara. Thus we
Afflicted Britains climb for Safeties,
And to avoid our Dangers seek Destructions.
Thus we awake to Sorrows, O thou Woman!
Thou Agent for Adversities! What Curses
This Day belong to thy Improvidence?
To Britans, by thy means? What sad Millions
Of Widows weeping Eyes? The Strong Man's Valor
Thou have betrayed to Fury; the Child's Fortune
To fear and want of Friends, whose Pieties
Might wipe his Mournings off, and build his Sorrows
A House of Rest by his Blessed Ancestors.
The Virgins thou have robbed of all their Wishes,
Blasted their blowing hopes, turned their Songs,
Their Mirthful Marriage Songs, to Funerals,
The Land thou have left a Wilderness of Wretches.
The Boy begins to stir, thy safety made,
Would my Soul were in Heaven.

Heng. O Noble Uncle! Look out, I dreamt we were betrayed.

Cara. No harm Boy, it is but thy Emptiness, that breeds
These Fancies, thou shall have Meat anon.

Hen. A little, Uncle, and I shall hold out bravely.

Enter Macer and Soldiers with Meat and a Bottle. Macer. Hang it of the side
of the Rock, as though the Britains
Stole hither to Relieve him: who first ventures
To fetch it off is ours; I cannot see him,
He lies close in a hole above, I know it,
Gnawing upon his Anger: Ha! No, it is not he.

1 Sol. It Is but the shaking of the Boughs.

Macer. Plague shake 'em, I Am sure they shake me soundly.
There.

1 Sol. It Is nothing.

Macer. Make no noise, if he stir, a deadly Tempest
Of huge Stones fall upon us: It Is done, close, close.

Cara Sleep still, sleep sweetly Child, it is all thou feed'st on;
No Gentle Britain near, no Valiant Charity
To bring thee Food; poor K(...) thou art Sick,
Extreme Sick, almost grown wild for Meat,
And yet thy Goodness will not confess, nor show it;
All the Woods are double loin'd with Soldiers,
No way left us to make a Noble Escape;
I Will si^down by thee, and when thou wak'st,
Either get Meat to save thee, or lose my Life
In The Purchase: Good Gods comfort thee, Ha!
Courage my Boy, I have found Meat; look Hengo,
Where some Blessed Britain to preserve thee,
Has hung a little Food and Drink: Cheer up Boy,
Do not for sake me now.

Heng. O Uncle! Uncle! I feel I cannot stay long,
Yet I Will fetch it to keep your Noble Life.
Uncle I am heart-whole, and would live.

Cara. Thou shall long, I hope.

Heng. But my Head, Uncle!
Methinks the Rock goes round.
Don't you hear the noise of Bells?

Cara. Of Bells Boy! It Is thy fancy,
Alas, thy Body's full of Wind.

Heng. Methinks, Sir, they ring a strange sad Knell,
A Preparation to some near Funeral of State.
Nay, weep not, my own sweet Uncle,
You will kill me sooner.

Car. O my poor Chicken!

Heng. Fie, faint-hearted Uncle!
Come tie me in your Belt, and let me down.

Car. I Will go my self, Boy.

Heng. No, as you love me, Uncle.
I will not eat if I do not fetch it,
The danger only I desire, pray tie me.

Cara. I will, and all my Care hang over thee;
Come Child, my Valiant Child.

Heng. Let me down apace, Uncle,
And you shall see how like a Daw I Will whip it
From all their Policies; for it is most certain
A Roman Train, and you must hold me sure too,
You Will spoil all else; when I have got it Uncle,
We'll be as merry --

Cara. Go in the Name of Heaven, Boy.

Heng. Quick, quick Uncle, I have it. Oh!

Cara. What ail'st thou?

Heng. O my best Uncle, I am slain!

Cara. I see ye, and Heaven direct my Hand.
Destruction go with thy Coward Soul.
How do thou Boy? O Villain! Villain! Villain!

Heng. O Uncle, Uncle! How it pricks me!
Am I preserved for this? Extremely pricks me.

Cara. Coward, Rascal, Coward, Dogs eat thy Flesh.

Heng. O! I bleed hard, I faint too upon it.
How sick I am; the Lean Rogue, Uncle --

Cara. Look Boy, I have laid him sure enough.

Heng. Have ye knocked his Brains out?

Cara. I warrant thee, from stirring more;
Cheer up Child.

Heng. Hold my Sides hard, stop, stop, O wretched Fortune!
Must we part thus? Still I grow sicker, Uncle.

Cara. Heaven look upon this Noble Child!

Heng. I once hoped
I should have lived to have met these bloody Romans
At my Swords point, to have Revenged my Father's,
To have beaten 'em. O hold me hard Uncle --

Cara. Thou shall live still I hope, Boy.

Heng. I would live a little longer;
Spare me Heavens, but only to thank you
For your tender Love. Good Uncle,
Good Noble Uncle weep not.

Cara. O my Chicken! My Dear Boy! What shall I loose --

Hen. Why a Child that must have Died however,
Had this escaped me, Fever, or Famine:
I was Born to Die, Sir.

Cara. But thus unblown, my Boy.

Hen. I shall go the streighter my Journey to the Gods:
Sure I shall know when you come, Uncle?

Cara. Yes, Boy.

Heng. And I hope we shall enjoy together
That Great Blessedness you told me of?

Cara. Most certain, Child.

Heng. I grow Cold, my Eyes are going.

Cara. Lift 'em up.

Heng. Pray for me, and, Noble Uncle, when my
Bones are Ashes, think of your little Nephew. Mercy.

Cara. Mercy, you Blessed Angels take him.

Heng. Kiss me, so farewell, farewell.

[Dies Cara. Farewell the Hopes of Britain,
Thou Royal Graft, farewell, farewell:
Time, and Death, you have done your worst.
Fortune, now see, now proudly pluck off this Veil
And view thy Triumph: Look, look
What thou have brought this Land to;
O Fair Flower! How lovely yet thy Ruins show!
How sweetly, even Death embraces thee.
The Peace of Heaven; the Followship of all.
Great Souls be with thee.

Enter Suetonius, Petilius, with Roman Soldiers, Suet. Yield thee, bold
Caratach; by all the Gods, I swear,
As I Am a Soldier, as I envy thee,
I Will use thee like thy self, the Valliant Britain.

Petil. Brave Soldier, yield:
Thou Stock of Arms and Honor!
Thou filler of the World with Fame and Glory!

Suet. Excellent Britain, do me but that honor;
That more to me than Conquest, that true happiness
To be my Friend.

Car. O Romans! See what here is! (...) Boy lived! --

Suet. For Fame's sake, forthy Sw(...)
As thou desir'st to build thy Virtues(...) --

Car. No Roman! No! I wear (...) Soul:
A Soul too great for Slavery. -- (...) Boy!
My dear loved Hengo! From thy (...) down!
Behold the last of thy great Race (...)ing!
Suetonius, view this little Cas(...),
By Roman Rapine Robbed of all his Wealth.
A fair rich Soil; that Precious Royal Gem,
By Fate's too Barbarous Hand, untimely snatched!
These Tears. I sacrifice to thee, my Boy!
But to my Queen, and my unhappy Country,
This richer Purple Stream, my Blood I give.

Suet. O thou too envied Miracles of Worth!
What bast thou done? Nas Rome, too poor a Mistress,
To Wed thee to her Arms? Not one Charm
In all her Courting Smiles, and Proffered Laurels?

Car. Rome, Sir. ah, no! She bids a Price too small,
To Bribe me into Life: my bleeding Country
Calls me to Nobler. Wreaths; and in her Fall,
To mount a Star in Albion's long, long Night:
And when her Caratach dies in such a Cause,
A British Tomb, outshines a Roman Triumph.

Suet. Prodigious Virtue!

Car. Outlive my Country's Liberty!
Shall Caratach dare but to think that Thought!
Now Britain is all yours; but as my Blood,
From this small Fountain flows, grant me one Favor:
Lay this Young British Rose, Cropped in the Bud,
Close by my side; and since the World* your own,
Spare us but Earth enough to cover over
These small Remains, and I shall ask no more.

[Dies. Suet. That Hollowed Relick! Thou Rich Diamond!
Cut with the own Dust! Thou, for whose wide Fame,
The would appears too narrow all Man's thought,
Had they all Tongues too silent! Thus I bow
To thy most Honored Ashes, though an Enemy,
Yet Friend to all thy Worths: Sleep peaceably.
Happiness Crown thy Soul, and in thy Earth
Some* Laurel fix his Seat; there grow and Flourish:
And make thy Grave an Everlasting Triumph
Farewell all Glorious Wars, now thou art gone.
All Noble Battles!
Maintained in Thirs(...) and not of Blood.
Farewell for ever. No (...) please,
Bear off the Noble (...) a File
High as Olimpus, that may (...) wonder,
To see a Star on Earth, o(...)
O ever Loved, and ever L(...)
Thy Honored, and most (...) Memory!

EPILOGUE
Spoken by Miss. DENNY CHOCK, But Six Years Old.
WELL, now to speak a Good Word for the Play,
Dear Gallants, but alas, What can I say?
I am too Young for your kind Smiles to pray.
When we ask Favors, Naughty Men, from you,
We must be Old enough to grant 'em too.
Old! Pray how Old! O Yes, our Cupid's Darts
Must first be Feathered, e're we shoot at Hearts;
But these weak Eyes, too feeble Charms; it is true,
You may look Babies there, but that will not do;
We must be able to make Babies too.
Who knows what Charms I have? I hear
A Gentle Story whispered in your Ear,
Has that strange power, nay, Sirs, if that will get ye,
You Will find that I can prattle very pretty,
You heard me the other Day in Young Queen Betty.
Such Honey-words, such dear soft words I Will call,
Say such fine things, if saying will do all:
Ah no, the soft white Birds that sing to you,
Must be grown up to Bill as well as Cooe,
And I Am too small to win your Hearts that way,
But though I Am yet too Young for Turtles play,
By your warm Suns a Blooming Flower I Will grow,
And keep my Rose-bud, for your Smiles to Blow.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Plays Printed for (...). (...)tley in Russel Street in
Covent Garden.
BEaumont and Fletcher s Plays: In all 51. in large Fol. Mr. Shakespeare's
Plays: In one large Fol. Volume, containing 43 Plays Mr. Nathaniel Lee's Plays:
In one Volume. Mr. Otway's Plays: In one Volume. Mr. Shadwel's Plays: In one
Volume. Mr. Dryden's Plays: In two Volumes. His other Poems: One Volume more.
A.
1 All mistaken, or the mad Couple. 2 Alexander the Great. 3 Andromache. 4
Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 5 Virtue Betrayed, or Anna-Bullen.
6 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 7 Amorous Prince. 8 Amends for Ladies. 9
Albumazor. 10 Amboyna, a Tragedy. 11 All for Love, or the World well lost. 12
Aurinzeb, or the Great Mogul. 13 Assignation, or Love in a Nunnery.
B.
14 Brutus of Alba. 15 Byron's Conspiracy, 1st. Part. 16 Byron's Conspiracy,
2d. Part. 17 Banditti, or the Lady in distress. 18 Busey d'Ambois.
C.
19 Cambyses King of Persia, a Tragedy. 20 Chances, a Comedy, altered by the
Duke of Buckingham. 21 Cleomenes, or the Spartan Hero. 22 Caesar Borgia. 23
Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 25 Country Wife. 26 City
Politics. 27 Constantive. 28 Commonwealth of Women. 29 Counterf(...). 30
Caius Marius.
D.
31 Darius King of Persia, a Tragedy 32 Dramatick (...), by Mr. Dryden 33
Destruction of Jerusalem, in two Parts. 34 Duke of G^ise. 35 Dutch Lovers. 36
Duke of (...). 37 Disappointment.
E.
38 Epsome-Wells: 39 English Monsieur. 40 Esquire Old Sap, or the Night
Adventures. 41 Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 42 Empress of
Morocco. 43 Evening Love, or, Mock Astrologer.
F.
44 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom. 45 The Fond Husband, or,
Plotting Sisters. 46 Fool turned Critic. 47 The Fatal Wager. 48 Fatal
Jealousy. 49 False Count.
G.
50 Gentleman Dancing Master. 51 Generous Enemies, or the Rediculous Lovers. 52
Gloriana, or the Court of Augustus Caesar. 53 Grateful Servant.

