I Do Own my Self to be the Author of this Discourse concerning Popish
Perjuries, and that it is every Syllable Penned by my Self, and Written with my
own Hand,

Ric. Bean.
Mar. 19. 1680.
A DISCOURSE Concerning Popish Perjurers IN AN ADDRESS To the Honorable the
COMMONS of England, In PARLIAMENT Assembled AT OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1681.

YOu have so well begun this Session of Parliament, with Resolutions to
preserve his Majesty, the Protestant Religion and Government, and to Search to
the bottom, the Plot lately laid, to overthrow all that the Friends to England,
and the Protestant Cause, rejoice all over Europe, and the Enemies of both
despair of accomplishing their evil purposes, which only the expectation of
Divisions amongst us gave them hopes to effect.

The Address of both Houses and his Majesty's ready Condescension for
Encouragement of further discoveries will questionless have the desired end,
and lay open new Mysteries of Iniquity, which hitherto have been hidden and
concealed in darkness.

But one thing I will request this great Assembly to remember, that when
Lucifer fell from Heaven, he drew the Third part of the Stars along with him;
And who can imagine that the Pope, the Earthly Lucifer, and his Train will
suffer here a Total Extirpation, without vigorous attempts of like nature? I
think it not Impossible, that the Kings Proclamation, how well soever it was
drawn and designed, may be so managed by them, as to afford them a fair
opportunity of doing mischief.

It is but Lately they endeavored to place their own Vizors upon others faces,
of which practice none of this House, nor scarce any Intelligent Man in
England, can have been ignorant, or so soon have forgotten.

The Plot put upon the Protestants, under the distinguishing Character of
Presbyterians was too barefaced to gain the belief which they vainly hoped and
expected.

But what if they should turn the Dice, and make some of you, who are
Protestants, appear as if you were Papists? though the Plot will not be
believed against you as Protestants, Yet as Papists it will easily be believed
if it be Sworn to by Persons who have been of the same profession? and such
persons it is probable may be sent in by them on pretense of new Converts and
fresh Discoverers. In such a Case as this, I would fain know, which way it is
possible for you so accused to be Safe. There is just Cause to fear your
Innocence will not be able to protect you; for your best Friends will become
your bitterest Enemies, when once (besides Treason against the King and the
Government) you shall have the Brand of Popery, that Mark of the Beast, fixed
on you.

Nay, who knows, but some such new Discoverers, may accuse the King himself to
his People, as well as the People to the King, or to the Parliament? and
endeavor the opening of such a breach, as can never be stopped without
horrible Confusion and Destruction?

And although it would be the highest Nonsense in the World, to imagine the
King consenting to a Conspiracy against his own Life, and the highest Treason
as well as nonsense to tax his Majesty with designs of overturning the
Government, wherein he is safe, and whereof he is Supreme; at the cost of the
Lives of his best Subjects; to introduce another kind of Government and
Religion, wherein he can neither be Safe nor Supreme, nor have his own Subjects
at his Command, any longer then it shall please a Foreign and an Arbitrary
Power.

Yet what Nonsense will not down with them whose Religion is composed of little
else? who teach and embrace an impossible piece of Nonsense as the most exalted
part of their Devotion? And what Treason will those men decline who account all
Kings Usurpers whom they have pronounced Heritical? and so the Act of
destroying them at any rate, is no longer Treason, but a Zealous, Religious,
and Meritorious Duty, for which they are confident to be rewarded with happy
Mansions in Heaven.

Such men, amongst us, whose avowed Principles, or Practices, are Destructive
to Society, and Government, our Established Government: (whether they Privately
swear to a Catholic League; or publicly declare for a Scotch Covenant) ought
by no means to be endured, but Suppressed, or rather rooted out; yet in the
grubbing up these ill weeds, great care should be taken, that the tender Corn
receive no prejudice.

There is nothing restrains men who are ill inclined, from putting into Action
their evil Intentions, but fear of Punishment, either Here or Hereafter.

Suppose now, any Jesuit or Priest, or any of their, or other, blind and
zealous Votaries, or any Hackney Rogues provided by them, (so as they be not
publicly known) should be secured ten thousand pound, or other great Reward,
to Swear Popery, and High Treason against any of the Lords or Commons, (whom
they think fittest to point out for Destruction) and come in, as new
Discoverers, and swear positively upon Trials, in open Court, according to the
Laws of this Land: If such Discoverers should happen to be detected of Perjury
at the Trial, they know the utmost of their punishment extends not to Life; but
if they be not detected, the Parties so accused, forfeit at once their Lives
and Reputation, their Children or next Kindred lose the Estate; and besides,
there is intailed, on the Names and Families, of such Unfortunate Persons, a
lasting, a perpetual Mark of Shame and Infamy.

Pillory, and Fine, and Imprisonment, are small pains, for this more then
barbarous Way of Murdering men, and beggering as well as blasting whole
Families.

They who have lost their ears once in the Pillory, have no more to lose, and
disgrace touches not where all care of credit is banished, and native modesty
has given place to Insolence and Impudence it self; A few rotten eggs, and
turnips, and dirt, are the only punishment they are liable to suffer, and that
never more then three times repeated, and two hours a time at the most.

The Fine is never due, so long as the Offenders stay in Prison, and if they
have money, they may live as plentifully in Prison as out of it. The Company is
such, as lewd persons are likely to be best pleased with, and so a Prison
cannot be any punishment at all, where the Prisoners live in plenty and
pleasant Society.

As for the punishment hereafter; if the Perjurers be common Rogues, and
Villains, their Consciences, as well as their hands, are seared with a hot
Iron; and they never trouble their heads, with things which seem so far off as
Eternity. If Bigoted Papists, they are so far from fearing punishment, that
they expect Rewards for such meritorious Service; and so these two sorts of
persons, make no difficulty of swearing any thing, which carries along with it
the Face of a probability; and the assurance of a present, or hopes of a future
Advantage.

Thus then, it appearing, that where Conscience of Oaths binds not at all, the
fear of future Punishment is nothing, and while the punishment here, of
wilful Perjury in Capital Cases, is so disproportionable to the greatness of
the Crime, I appeal to your selves, whether you can believe your selves safe,
any longer then your mortal Enemies are willing to let you be so.

Our Laws are defective, in the point of punishing Perjury; and the Lives of
Honest Men are too slenderly guarded against it, (if they be guarded at all)
lying exposed to the Rapine or Revenge of any two Rogues or Villains, who have
wicked Wit enough to make a Combination, and to lay their Lies close together.

I speak this in relation only to the future, for let them be never so Honest
Men, who are come in already, yet if a Door be set open, it may let in another
sort of men among them.

Therefore as you value the Preservation of the King, and the Government, and
the Protestant Religion, As you value your own Lives, and the Conservation of
your Families, and the Perpetuating your Good Names and Fames to Posterity; If
you would be Esteemed through the Christian World (as doubtless you deserve) a
Wise, Just, and a Loyal Parliament, let me beseech you to find out a present
Way, to prevent wilful Perjury in Capital Cases; and to take care, that it
be punished, in such an exquisit manner, as the greatness of the Occasion, and
the heinousness of the Offense does deserve. Otherwise you are never likely to
know, who are real Traitors, nor how soon some of you that are Innocent, may
be brought into the number. I pray God Almighty bless his Majesty with long
Life, and bless your Proceedings with as much Success as you desire; the same
tending allways to the Glory of God, and the lasting Peace, and Prosperity of
the King and his Kingdoms.

FINIS.
Postscript, March 15. 1680/1.
THis Paper was Prepared in November last, and Intended then to be Presented to
the Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, but having slipped That
Occasion, I have Now Exposed it to the Public, as a Seasonable Discharge of
my Conscience and Duty.


