Certamen Religiosum: OR, A CONFERENCE BETWEEN The late King of ENGLAND, and
the late Lord Marquess of Worcester, concerning RELIGION.

TOGETHER WITH A VINDICATION OF THE PROTESTANT CAUSE, From the Pretenses of the
Marquess his Last Papers; which the necessity of the KING's Affairs denied
him Opportunity to Answer.

LONDON, Printed for W. Lee, at the Turks Head in Fleet Street, and R. Royston
at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1651.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
I Do not desire by way of Preface to trouble Thee with many words, but
something I must crave leave to say, that thou may the better understand the
reason and nature of this ensuing work. It may be thou art not unacquainted
with a Book, which now has been extant some It was published Anno 1649.
years. The title of it is Certamen Religiosum, and it contains in it a
Conference, which was held partly by word of mouth, but chiefly by Writing,
betwixt the late King and the Marquess of Worcester, a stiff defender of the
Romish Religion. To the Marquesses first Plea (I speak of that, which passed
betwixt them in writing) the King returned Answer; but the Marquess replying,
the Kings occasions (it seems) would not permit him to rejoyne, especially the
Reply being so large, and so thick lined with quotations, that the perusal and
examination of it would require no little time. I know there are See the
Advertisement to the Reader perfixed to the late Kings works set forth
together in one volume.
some, who account this Conference no better then supposititious; which
reflecting upon the Publisher of it, Doctor Baily, he has lately in a Preface
to a It is entitled (as I remember) Herba Parietis, or The Wall-flower.
Book, which he has set forth of his own, vindicated himself, and asserted
the Conference. For my part, I know no cause to question the truth of the
Relation, neither, as to my purpose, is it much material, whether there were
any such Conference; or if there were, whether it were so managed, as is
related. This I see, that in the Book before mentioned (to wit, Certamen
Religiosum) the Romish cause is set out in great pomp, both Scriptures and
Fathers being produced as asserting most of those opinions, which they of the
Church of Rome maintain, and we impugn, and the Reader is left naked, and
unfurnished with any Arms and Weapons, wherewith either to defend himself, or
to offend his adversary save only as he shall be able to provide for himself,
and bring with him. The first time that I heard the Book mentioned, (which was
about the last Spring it was spoken of as a Book of no little danger, and so
(I understand since) diverse judge of it. Yea, I have heard that some have
said, that the Marquess in this Reply has done more for the Church of Rome,
then any have done before him. When I got the Book, and looked a while into
it, though I saw no reason to conceive so highly of it, as (it seems) some
have done, yet I found in it I confess) much more then I expected, so much as
that I thought it operae pretium no mis-pent time to answer it. This I have
endeavored; how I have performed it, is left to Thee (Reader) to judge. The
great difficulty in the undertaking did arise from the multitude of Authors
that are alleged (whether the Marquess himself did peruse these authors, or
took them upon trust from others, I will not inquire, much less determine)
especially considering how lax and loose the quotations are, the words of the
Authors being scarce once in a hundred times cited, and sometimes only the
Author named, many times only the Book, but no Chapter or Section mentioned.
In this respect it could not be expected, that every allegation should receive
a punctual answer, besides that (as in the Rejoinder it self upon occasion I
acknowledge) sometimes for want of the Author I had not liberty to examine
what is alleged; but this (I presume) will not be found so frequent, nor yet at
all prejudicial to the maine, so much still being said as may suffice to take
off the force of that which is objected. There is an answer already come forth
to the Marquesses last Paper, with which I have to deal. The Hamon L'Estrange
Esquire.
author of it is a gentleman of much reading, well versed in Greek and Latin
writers, both Ecclesiastical and others, as appears by this work, which is all
that I have seen of his, though I hear of something else that he has
published not without great commendation. I had undertaken this task before I
had any intimation that another was about it: and I think this of mine was at
the Press before the foresaid Answer came from it. I could not confine my
self to such narrow bounds as that Gentleman has done in answer to the
Marquess, (for he has others also besides him to deal with) the reason of his
concisenes is best known unto himself. I have launched further into the
deep, and have exspatiated more in the discussion of those points, which are
handled by the Marquess; yet so, as that the Reader (I hope) will have no
cause to complain of proxility, or to think me tedious. I have divided the
work into two parts; in the former part I have endeavored to show the
ungroundednes of the Romish doctrine in those points, which the Marquess
propounds, and the repugnancy of it both to Scriptures and Fathers,
notwithstanding any thing he has alleged in defense of it. In the latter part
I have labored to wipe off those aspersions, which the Marquess does cast
upon diverse of our most eminent Divines, and chief instruments in the work
of Reformation, as Luther, Calvin, Zuing lius, Melancthon and Beza, partly in
respect of their Doctrine, and partly in respect of their conversation. This
the learned answerer before mentioned has not attempted; but I did not think
it meet to wave it, calumnies and reproaches being more apt to prevail with
some then any other argument whatsoever. Some points of controversy also,
which the Marquess takes occasion to bring in, having not mentioned them
before, are insisted on in this second Part. Some perhaps may say, Quorsum
perditio haec? What needed all this? these controversies having bin
sufficiently handled by our writers, both at home and abroad, long ago. I
answer, It Is true, they have bin so: yet if the Marquess thought it not enough
that Bellarmine and many others of the Romish party have written largely in
that behalf, but judged it meet to produce his own Plea; I think there is as
much reason why we should consider what he says, and that some answer should
be given him, that so none may boast, as some are apt to do in such a case,
that because he is unanswered, therefore he is unanswerable. And besides,
though (Nil dictum, quod non dictum prius) the matter be not new, yet there may
be ((...)) a handling of the same things in another manner: yea, and diverse
treating of the same subject, something may be found in one, which is not in
another. But (may some say) there are many other great and gross errors of
late sprung up among us, and these do rather call for our care and diligence
to suppress them. For answer unto this, I grant that the prevailing errors of
the times are mainly to be opposed; yet (as our Savior said in another case)
this ought to be done, and the other not to be left undone. Yea, Popery is the
grand evil that does infest the Church; and by how much it is the more
inveterate, and the more diffused, by so much the danger of it is the greater,
and it requires the more opposition. There is also a special warning to come
out of Babylon, Revel. 18. 4. and certainly it will avail us little to come
out, except we also keep out of it. And if we would keep our selves out of
Babylon, we must keep the Babylonish Doctrine from finding entertainment with
us. This will ask no little care, no humane policy in the world (I think)
being greater then that which is used either for the supporting of that
doctrine where it is, or the introducing of it where it is not embraced. Shall
we think that the Romanists are idle in these busy times? Though few do show
themselves, as the Marquess did, ((...)) with open face; yet we may well
suspect that many are working so, as that by how much they are the less
conspicuous, by so much they are the more dangerous. And as David in a certain
case said to the woman of Tekoah, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all
this? So in respect of that heap of heterodox opinions that is among us, may
it not be said, Is not the hand of a Jesuit in all this? Diverse Pamphlets in
these times have admonished us to beware, and among the rest one entitled
Mutatus Polemo (what ever the Authors design were) does speak not a little to
this purpose. Before these trouble some times began, some have either expressed
(as Mr. Archer) or intimated (as Mr. Mede) that (in their Arch. of Christ's
personal reign on Earth, Page 50. and 55. Mede on Revel. 11. 7.
opinion) Popery shall yet again for a while universally prevail in those
Countries and Nations, out of which it has bin expelled. If this be so (as for
any thing I see, I may hope the contrary) may it not be feared, that, as those
many Antichrists (as they are called 1 John 2. 18.) that is, those many
heretics, that were in the primitive times, did make way for the rise of that
great Antichrist; so these in our times may make way for the restoration of
him? And whereas we have heard long since of Romes Masterpiece, I see not how
any Romish design can better deserve this title, then so to debase the
Ministry, and to decry learning, as the practice of many is in these times.
Hoc Ithacus velit, hoc magno mercentur Atreidae, The Chieftaines of the Church
of Rome can desire nothing more, then that among their adversaries the
Ministry should be cast down, and learning overthrown. For then why should
they doubt but that they may soon reduce all unto them, none being now of any
competent ability to oppose them? It is observed by those that are acquainted
with Ecclesiastical History, Qui in historiarum Ecclesiasticarum lectione
versati sunt, Christiani populi ignorantiam, and Romanae sedis authoritatem
simul auctam facile animadvertere potuerunt. -- Vicissimque ut bonarum
literarum instauratione facessere caepit ignorantia, ita and Pontificis
autoritas paulatim im ninui and labascere visa est. Gentillet, Exam. Council.
Trident. lib. 1. Sect. 7 and 8. vide plura.
that when Learning was the lowest, then Popery got to be highest; as the one
decayed, so the other was advanced: and on the otherside, that the restoration
of good literature did make way for the Reformation of Religion. Surely, if
Popery overspread again, barbarism and illiteratenesse is a most likely means
to effect it. Neither are the Papists (I suppose) less politic, and wise in
their generation then Julian the Apostate was, who could see no fairer way,
whereby to re establish Gentilisme, then by endeavoring to divest Christians
of Learning, a thing so vile and odious, that Ammianus Marcellinus himself,
though a Pagan, and a great admirer of Illud autem inclemens obruendum perenni
silentio, quod arcebat docere Magistros Rhetoricos and Grammaticos ritus
Christiani cultores. Am. Marcell. de Julia. lib. 22.
Julian, was ashamed of it, and showed great dislike of Julian for it, calling
it a cruel part, and a thing to be buried in perpetual silence. But I have
held Thee (Reader) longer then I did intend; I will preface no further, but
praying unto the Lord to preserve his Church from errors without, and to purge
it from errors within, I rest

Thy Friend and lover in the truth. C C.

The CONTENTS of the FIRST PART OF THE REIOYNDER.
1 OF the marks of the true Church, which they of the Church of Rome assign,
as Universality, Antiquity, Visibility, Succession of Pastors, unity in
Doctrine, and the Coversion of Nations, Page 107, to 114 2 Of having recourse
unto the Scriptures in matters that concern Religion, 114, 115, 116 3 Of
relying either on Fathers singly and severally considered, or on a general
Council, 116, 117, 118, 119 4 That the Apostles, as Penmen of the Holy Ghost,
could not err, 120 5 Of the easiness and plainness of the Scriptures, 120, 121
6 Of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 122, to 140 7
Whether the Church has any infallible rule besides the Scripture for the
understanding of Scripture, 140, to 147 8 Again of the Scriptures being easy
to be understood, 147, 148 9 Whether the Church can err, or not, 148, to 152
10 Again of the Visibility of the Church, 152, 153 11 Of the Universality of
the Church, 153, to 158 12 Of the unity of the Church in matters of faith, 158,
159 13 Of Kings and Queens being Heads or Governors and Governesses of the
Church within their Dominions, 159, 160 14 Of the Ministers power to forgive
sins, 159 (as it is misprinted) to 162 15 Of confessing sins to a ghostly
Father, 162, to 172 16 Of works of Superogation, 172, to 176 17 Of Free Will,
176, to 195 18 Of the possibility of keeping the Commandments, 196, to 201 19
Of Justification by faith alone, 201, to 211 20 Of Merits, 211 to 216 21
Whether justifying faith may be lost, 216 to 221 22 Of Reprobation, 221 to 239
23 Of assurance of Salvation, 239 to 251 24 Whether every Believer has a
peculiar Angel to be his guardian, 251 to 254 25 Of the Angels praying for us,
and knowing our thoughts, 254, 255, 256 26 Of praying to the Angels, 256 to 261
27 Whether the Saints deceased know our affairs here below, 261, to 266 28 Of
the Saints deceased praying for us, 266, to 269 29 Of praying to the Saints
deceased, 269, to 276 30 Of Confirmation, whether it be a Sacrament properly so
called, 276, to 281 31 Of communicating in one kind, 281, to 287 32 Of the
sacrifice of the Mass, as they call it: or whether Christ be truly and
properly offered up and sacrificed in the Eucharist, or Lords Supper, 287, to
296 33 Whether Orders (or rather Ordination) be a Sacrament of like nature with
Baptism and the Lord Supper, 296, to 301 34 Of Vows of chastity, and of the
Marriage of Ecclesiastical persons, 301, to 318 35 Of Christ's descending into
Hell, 319, to 340 36 Of Purgatory, 340, to 355 37 Of extreme Unction, 355, to
363 38 Of the saying of Austine, Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae
Authoritas commoveret, I should not believe (or should not have believed,
crederem for credidissem) the Gospel, except the authority of the Church did
move (or had moved, comoveret for commovisset) me to it. 364, 365, etc.
The Contents of the Second Part of the Rejoinder.
1 OF the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, Page 1, 2 2 Of
Luthers Doctrine, 3, to 20 3 Zuinglius vindicated from that which by the way is
charged upon him, 19 4 Of Calvines Doctrine, 20, to 35 5 Of Zuinglius his
Doctrine, 35, to 40 6 Of Melancthons Doctrine, 40, 41, 42. 7 Of Andreas
Musculus his Doctrine, 42. and in the addition. 8 Of the divisons that are
among Protestants, 42 9 Of that Unity which is among them of the Church of
Rome, 42, to 46 10 Of Crimes charged upon Protestants, and the testimonies
alleged for proof of them, 46 11 Of Luthers conference with the Devil, 46, 47,
48 12 Whether Zuinglius were an Author of war, and a disturber of peace, etc.
48, 49 13 Beza cleared of a foul aspersion cast upon him, 49, 50 14 Of Luthers
writing against King Henry 8. 50, 51 15 Of the people of the reformed Churches,
whether they be so vicious and corrupt, as they are censured, 51, 52 16 A
vindication of Calvin in respect of vild aspersions cast upon him, 53, 54 17
Mantuans testimony concerning Rome, and the corrupt estate of it, 54, 55 18
Whether the Doctrine of the Church of Rome be the the same still that it was at
first, 55 19 Of Prayers for the Dead, 55, 56, 57 20 Of Lent-Fast, 57, 58 21 Of
mingling Water with Wine in the Lords Supper, 58, 59, 60 22 Of diverse
ceremonies, which the Church of Rome uses in Baptism, 60, 61 23 Of the
necessity of Infants Baptism, and whether they may be saved without it, 61,
62, 63 24 Of the several Ecclesiastical Orders which they have in the Church of
Rome, 63, 64, 65 25 Of the Pope and his supremacy, 65, 66, 67 26 Of service in
an unknown tongue, 67, 68, 69 27 Of Festivals, 69, 70 28 Of Relics, 70, 71 29
Of Pictures and Images, 71, to 77 30 Of the sign of the Cross, 77 31 Of
Luther, Husse, and Wickliffe holding some errors, and so others that oppose
the Church of Rome, 78 32 That some before Berengarius, as namely Bertram, did
professedly impugn that real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which they
of the Church of Rome maintain, 79, 80
CERTAMEN RELI GIOSUM: OR, A CONFERENCE BETWEEN The late King of England, and
the late Lord Marquess of Worcester, concerning Religion, at His Majesty's
being at Ragland-Castle, 1646.
Marquess. SIr, I hope if they catch us in the act, it will not be deemed in
me an act of so high conspiracy, in regard that I enter the lists, leaning upon
a Doctor of your own Church.

To whom the King replied as merrily, My Lord, I know not whether I should have
a better opinion of your Lordship for the Doctors sake, or a worse opinion of
the Doctor for your Lordships sake; for though you lean much upon his arm,
yet he may lean more upon your judgment.


Marq. Sir, it conduces a little to the purpose we have in hand, to be a
little serious in the thing you speak of: your Majesty knows the grounds of my
acquaintance with the Doctor, and my obligation to him, which difference in
opinion shall never mitigate in point of affection; but I protest unto you, I
could never gain the least ground of him yet, in persuading him from his
principles.


King. It may be your Lordship hopes to meet with a weaker Disputant of me.


Marq. Not so, and if it please your Majesty, but I think thus: That if it
should please God to make me so happy an instrument of his Churches good, as to
be a means to incline your royal heart to embrace the truth, I believe that
he, and thousands such as he, would be soon brought to follow your Majesty in
the right way, who are so constant followers of your steps whilst you are in a
wrong path: the Oaths which they have taken, the relation which their Hierarchy
have to the Crown, which must be no longer so, but whilst the government of the
Church and souls, stand as a reserve to the regiment of lives and fortunes,
the preferment which they expect from your Majesty, and the enjoyment of those
preferments which they have already, which they must no longer enjoy, then
whilst they are, or seem to be of your opinion, causes them to smother their
own knowledge, whilst their mouths are stopped with interest; whereas if the
strong Tide of your Majesty's opinion were but once turned, all the ships in
the river would soon turn head. Hereupon the Marquess fell abruptly from his
subject, and asked the King, Sir, I pray tell me what is it that you want? The
King smiled a little at his sudden breaking off, and making such preposterous
haste to ask that question, answered,


King. My Lord, I want an Army, can you help me to one?


Marq. Yes, that I can; and to such a one, as should your Majesty commit your
self to their fidelity, you should be a Conqueror, fight as often as you
please.


King. My Lord, such an Army would do the business: I pray let me have it.


Marq. What if your Majesty would not confide in it, when it should be
presented unto you?


King. My Lord, I would fain see it, and as fain confide in that, of which I
had reason to be confident.


Marq. Take Gedeons three hundred men, and let the rest be gone.


King. Your Lordship speaks mystically, will it please you to be plain a little?


Marq. Come, I see I must come nearer to you: Sir, it is thus: God expected a
work to be done by your hands, but you have not answered his expectation, nor
his mercy toward you: when your enemies had more Cities and Garrisons, then
you had private families to take your part; when they had more Cannons then you
had Muskets; when the people crowded to heap treasures against you, whilst your
Majesty's friends were fain here and there to make a gathering for you; when
they had Navies at Sea, whilst your Majesty had not so much as a Boat upon the
River; whilst the odds in number against you was like a full crop against a
gleaning; then God wrought his miracle, in making your gleaning bigger then
their vintage; he put the power into your hand, and made you able to declare
your self a true man to God, and grateful to your friends: but like the man
whom the Prophet makes mention of, who bestowed great cost and pains upon his
vincyard, and at last it brought forth nothing but wild grapes; so when God
had done all these things for You, and expected that You should have given his
Church some respit to their oppressions, I heard say, You made vows that if God
blessed You but Naseby Fight.
that day with Victory, You would not leave a Catholic in Your Army; for which
I fear the Lord is so angry with You, that (I am afraid) he will not give you
another day wherein you may so much as try your fortune: Your Majesty had
forgot the moneys which came unto you from unknown hands, and were brought unto
you by unknown faces, when you promised you would never forsake your unknown
friends; you have forgotten the miraculous blessings of the Almighty upon those
beginnings, and how have you discountenanced, distrusted, dis-regarded, I, and
disgraced the Catholics all along, and at last vowed an extirpation of them:
Does not your Majesty see clearly, how that in the two great Battles, the
North and Naseby, God showed signs of his displeasure, when in the first your
Enemies were even at your mercy, confusion fell upon you, and you lost the day,
like a man that should so wound his Enemies, that he could scarce stand, and
afterward his own sword should fly out of the hilt, and leave the strong and
skillful to the mercy of his falling Enemies; and in the second (and I fear me
the last Battle that e're you will fight) whilst your men were crying victory,
as I hear they had reason so to do, your sword broke in the air, which made
you a fugitive to your flying Enemies: Sir, I pray pardon my boldness, for it
is Gods cause that makes me so bold, and no inclination of my own to be so,
and give me leave to tell you, that God is angry with you, and will never be
pleased, until you have taken new resolutions concerning your Religion: which
I pray God direct you, or else you will fall from naught to worse, from thence to
nothing.


King. My Lord, I cannot so much blame as pity your zeal; the soundness of
Religion is not to be tried by dint of sword, nor must we judge of her truths
by the prosperity of events, for then of all men Christians would be most
miserable; we are not to be thought no followers of Christ, by observations
drawn from what is cross or otherwise, but by taking up our cross and
following Christ. Neither do I remember my Lord, that I made any such vow
before the Battle of Naseby concerning Catholics, but some satisfaction I
did give my Protestant Subjects, who on the other side were persuaded that God
blessed us the worse for having so many Papists in our Army.


Marq. The difference is not great, I pray God forgive you, who have most
reason to ask it.


King. I think not so my Lord.


Marq. Who shall be judge?


King. I pray my Lord, let us sit down, and let reason take her seat.


Marq. Reason is no judge.


King. But she may take her place.


Marq. Not above our Faith.


King. But in our arguments.


Marq. I beseech your Majesty to give me a reason why you are so much offended
with our Church?


King. Truly my Lord, I am much offended with your Church, if you mean the
Church of Rome, if it were for no other reason, but this, for that she has
foisted into her legend, so many ridiculous stories, as are able to make (as
much as in them lies) Christianity it self a fable, whereas if they had not
done this wrong unto the tradition of the primitive Church, we then had left
unto us such rare and unquestionable verities, as would have adorned, and not
daubed the Gospel, whereas now we know not, what is true, or false.


Marq. Sir, if it be allowed to question, what the Catholic Church holds out
for truth, because that which they hold forth unto us seems ridiculous, and to
pick and choose verities according to our own fancy, and reject as novelties
and forgeries what we please, as impossibilites and fabulous; the Scriptures
themselves may as well suffer by this kind of tolleration: for what more
ridiculous then the Dialogue between Balaam and his Ass, or that Sampsons
strength should be in his hair, or that he should slay a thousand men with the
Jaw Bone of an Ass, the Disputation between Saint Michael and the Devil about
the body of Moses; Philip's being taken up in the air, and found at Azotus,
with a thousand the like strange, and to our apprehension (if we look upon
them with carnal eyes) vain and ridiculous: but being they are recorded in
Scripture, which Scripture we hold for truth, we admire, but never question
them: so the fault may not be in the tradition of the Church, but in the
liberty which men assume to themselves to question the tradition. And I
beseech Your Majesty, to consider the streaks that are drawn over the Divine
writ, as so many delenda's, by such bold hands as those: the Testaments were
not like the two Tables, delivered into the hands of any Moses, by the
immediate hand of God, neither by the Ministration of Angels, but men inspired
with the holy Ghost writ, whose writings by the Church were approved to be by
inspiration, which inspirations were called Scripture, which Scriptures, most
of them, as they are now received into our hands, were not received into the
Canon of the Church, all, within three hundred years after Christ; why may not
some bold spirits call all those Scriptures (which were afterward acknowledged
to be Scripture, and were not before) forgeries. Nay have not some such (as
blind as bold) done it already? Saint Hierom was the first that ever picked a
hole in the Scriptures, and cut out so many books out of the word of God, with
the penknife of Apocrypha; Ruffinus challenges him for so doing, and tells him
of the gap, that he has opened for wild beasts to enter into this field of the
Church, and tread down all ill corn. Jerome gives his reasons, because they
were not found in the Original Copy, (as if the same spirit which gave to
those, whom it did inspire, the diversities of tongues, should it self be tied
to one language) but withal he acknowledges thus much of those books, which
he had thus marked in the forehead, Canonici sunt ad informandos mores, sed non
ad confirmandam fidem: how poor a Distinction this is, and how pernicious a
president this was, I leave it to Your Majesty to judge: for after him Luther
takes the like boldness, and at once takes away the three Gospels, of Mark,
Luke, and John; Others take away the epistle to the Hebrews, others the epistle
of Saint Jude, others the second and third epistles of Saint Peter, others the
epistle of Saint James, others the whole book of the Revelation. Wherefore to
permit what the Church proposes to be questionable by particular men, is to
bring down the Church, the Scriptures, and the Heavens upon our heads. There
was a Church, before there was a Scripture, which Scripture (as to us) had not
been the Word of God, if the Church had not made it so, by teaching us to
believe it. The preaching of the Gospel was before the writing of the Gospel,
the Divine Truth that dispersed it self over the face of the whole earth,
before it is Divinity was comprised within the Canon of the Scripture, was like
that Primaeva Lux, which the world received before the light was gathered into
the body of the Sun: this body so glorious and comfortable is but the same
light, which was before, we cannot make it another, though it be otherwise: And
therefore though the Church and the Scripture, like the light that is
concomitant and precedent to the Sun, be distinct in terms, yet they are but
one and the same; no man can see the Sun, but by it is own light; shut your eyes
from this light, and you cannot behold the body of the Sun: Shut your eyes
against one, and you are blind in both: he never had God to be his Father, who
had not the Church to be his Mother. If you admit Sillogismes a priori, you
will meet with many paralogismes a posteriori cry down the Churches,
Authority, and pull out the Scriptures efficacy, give but the Church the lie
now and then, and you shall have enough will tell you the Scripture is false
here and there; they who have set so little by the tradition of the Church,
have set by half the Scriptures, and will at last throw all away: wherefore in
a word, as to deny any part of the Scripture, were to open a vein, so to
question any thing which the Church proposes, is to tear the seamelesse Coat
of Christ, and to pierce his body.


King. My Lord, I see you are better provided with Arguments then I am with
memory, to run through the series of your Discourse; satisfy me but in one
thing, and I shall soon yield to all that you have said, and that is
concerning this Catholic Church you talk of, I know the creed tells us, that
we must believe it, and Christ tells us, that we must hear it, but neither tell
us, that that is the Church of Rome.


Marq. Gracious Sir, the creed tells us, that it is the Catholic Church, and
Saint Paul tells us in his epistle to the Romans, that their faith was spread
abroad through the whole world.


King. That was the Faith, which the Romans then believed, which is nothing to
the Roman Faith which is now believed.


Marq. The Roman Faith then and now are the same.


King. I deny that my Lord.


Marq. When did they alter their Faith?


King. That requires a library: Neither is it requisite, that I tell you the
time when, if the envious man sowes his tares, whilst the husbandman was
asleep, and afterward he awakes and sees the tares, are they not tares,
because the husbandman knows not when they were sown?


Marq. And if it please Your Majesty; in a thing that is so apparent, your
similitude holds good, but the differences between us and the Protestants are
not so without dispute, as that it is yet granted by the major part of
Christians, that they are errors which we believe contrary to your Tenants;
and therefore the similitude holds not, but I shall humbly entreat Your
Majesty, to consider the proofs, which the learned Cardinal Peroone has made
concerning this particular, in his answer to your Royal Father his Apology to
all Christian Princes, where he proves, how that all the Tenants which are in
controversy now between you and us, were practiced in the Church of Christ,
within the first three hundred years; wherefore I think, it would be no injury
to reason to require belief, that that which has been so long continued in the
Church, and so universally received, and no time can be set down, when those
Tenants or Ceremonies did arise, must needs be Catholic for time and place,
and Apostolical for institution, though we have no warrant from the
Scriptures, to believe them to be such. For the Apostle Saint Paul commanded
Timothy to keep fast the things which he had delivered unto him, as well by
word as by writ. Wherefore if we will believe no tradition, we may come at last
to believe no writings.


King. That was your own fault, wherefore I blame your Church, for the way to
make the Scriptures not believed, were to add unto them new inventions, and
say they were Scriptures.


Marq. If the Church of Christ had so mean esteem then, as amongst some she
has now, certainly the former books received into her Canon, would have been
much prejudiced by the admittance of the latter; wherefore if the Church be
questionable, then all is brought in question.


King. My Lord, you have not satisfied me, where this Church is: and as
concerning the Cardinals book, I have seen it, and have read a part of it, but
do not remember, neither do I believe, that he has proved that which you say.


Marq. It may be the proofs were in that part of the book, which Your Majesty
did not read: and as for my proving the Roman Church to be this Church, by
which we should be all guided, I thus shall do my endeavor: That Church whose
Doctrine is most Catholic and universal, must be the Catholic Church: but
the Roman Church is such. Ergo.


King. My Lord, I deny your Minor, the Roman Church is not most universal;
the Grecian Church is far more spreading; and if it were not, it were no
Argument, for the Church of the Mahumetanes, is larger then both.


Marq. First, This is no Argument, either for an English Man, or a Protestant,
but for a Grecian, or Mahumetane: not for an English Man, because he received
his Conversion from Rome, and therefore he in Reason should not look beyond
Rome, or the Doctrine that Rome practiced then, when they converted England:
nor for a Protestant, because he is as far distant from the Grecian Church in
matter of opinion, as from the Roman; and therefore he need not look for that
which he has no desire to find: besides, the Greek Church has long ago
submitted to the Church of Rome, and there is no reason, that others should
make Arguments for her, who are not of her, when she stands in no competition
her self; besides, there is not in any place wherever the Greek Church is, or
has been planted, where there are not Roman Catholics; but there are diverse
Countries in Christendom, where there is not one Professor of the Greek
Church; neither is there a place in all the Turks Dominions, where there are
not Roman Catholics, nor in any part of the world, where there are not
multitudes of Romans; neither is there a Protestant Country in Christendom,
where there are not Roman Catholics numberless, but not a Protestant amongst
the Natives, neither of Spain or Italy. Show me but one Protestant Country in
the world, who ever deserted the Roman Faith, but they did it by Rebellion,
except England, and there the King and the Bishops were the principal
reformers: (I pray God, they do not both suffer for it.) Show me but one
reformed Church, that is of the opinion of another: ask an English Protestant,
where was your Religion before Luther? and he will tell you of Hus and Jerome of
Prague: search for their Tenants, and you shall find them as far different from
the English Protestant, as they are from one another; run to the Waldenses for
your Religions antiquity, and you shall find as much difference in their
Articles, and ours, as can be between Churches that are most opposite. Come
home to your own Country, and derive your descent from Wickliffe, and search
for his Tenants in the book of Martyrs, and you shall find them quite contrary
to ours, neither amongst any of your modern Protestants shall you find any
other agreement, but in this one thing, that they all protest against the Pope.
Show me but any Protestant Country in the world, where Reformation, as you
call it, ever set her foot, where she was not as well attended with sacrilege,
as ushered by Rebellion, and I shall lay my hand upon my mouth for ever.


King. My Lord, my Lord, you are gone beyond the scope of your Argument, which
required you to prove the Roman Church more Catholic then the Greek, which
you have not done; you put me off with my being English, and not a Grecian,
whereas when we speak of the universality of a Church, I think that any man who
is belonging to the universe, is objectum rationis. And if that be the manner
of your Election, then I am sure most voices must carry it: for your alleged
submission of the Greek Church unto the Roman, I believe it cannot be proved,
but it may be the Patriarch of Constantinople, may submit unto the Pope of
Rome, and yet the Greek Church may not submit unto the Roman.


Marq. Sir, it is no dishonor for the Sun to make its progress from East to
West, it is still the same Sun, and the difference is only in the shadows,
which are made to differ according to the varieties of shapes, that the
several substances are of; East and West are two divisions, but the same day:
neither can they be said or imagined to be greater, or more extending one or
other, and the one may have the benefit of the Suns light, though the other may
have its glory; and I believe, no man of sober judgment can say, that any
Church in the world is more generally spread over the face of the whole world,
or that her glory shines in any place more conspicuously, then at this day in
Rome.


King. My Lord, if external glory be the Sunshine of the Gospel, then the
Church is there indeed; but if internal sanctity, and inward holiness be the
Essences of a Church, then we may be as much to seek for such a Church within
the Walls of Rome, as any where else.


Marq. Who shall be Judge of that? I pray observe the Injustice and Errors
that will arise, if every man may be admitted to be his own judge; you of the
Church of England left your Mother the Church of Rome, and Mother to all the
Churches round about; You forsook her, and set up a new Church of your own,
Independent to her: there comes a new generation, and does the like to you; and
a third generation, that is likely to do the like to that; and the Church falls
and falls, until it falls to all the pieces of Independencie. It is a hard
case for a part to fall away from the whole, and to be their own judges. Why
should not Kent fall away from England, and be their own judges, as well as
England fall away from Christendom, and be their own judges? why should not a
Parish in Kent fall away from the whole County, and be their own judges? why
should not one Family fall away from the whole Parish, and be their own
judges? why should not one man fall away in his opinion from that Family, and
be his own judge? If you grant one, you must grant all; and I fear me in
doing one, you have done all. So that every man despises the Church, whilst he
is a Church in himself; rayles against Popery, and is the greatest Pope
himself, despises the Fathers, and will enthrone his own judgment above the
wisdom of the ancient; refuses Expositours, that he may have his own sense;
and if he can start up but some new opinions, he thinks himself as worthy a
member of Christianity, as if he were an Apostle to some new found land. Now
Sir, though some do take the Church to be the Scriptures, yet the Scriptures
cannot be the Church, because the Scriptures send us to the Church, audi
Ecclesiam, dic Ecclesiae: others take the Elect to be the Church, yet this
cannot be, for we know not who are elect, and who are not, that which must be
the Church, must be a visible, an eminent society of men, to whose Authority
in cases of appeal and matter of judgment, we are to acquiesce and subscribe.
And I appeal to Your Royal heart, whether there be a Church in the world,
whom in these respects we ought to reverence and esteem more then the Church
of Rome; and that the Church of Rome is externally glorious, it does not
follow, that therefore she is not internally holy; for the Kings daughters
clothing was of wrought gold, as well as she was all glorious within; and
though she had never so many Divine graces within her, yet she had honorable
women without her, as her attendants: and for the question, whether this inward
glory is to be so much sought for within the gates of Rome, is the question,
and not yet decided.


King. My Lord, I Will deal as ingenuously with you as I can. When the Roman
Monarch stretched forth his arms from East to West, he might make the Bishops
of Romes oecumenacy as large as was his Empire, and all the Churches in the
world were bound to follow her Laws and decretalls, because God has made such
Emperors nursing Fathers of his Church, as it was prophesied by the Divine
Esaias; always provided, that the child be not pourtractured greater then the
Nurse, (as has been observed by the pride of your Bishops of Rome,) but when
the several Kingdoms of Christendom shook off the Roman Yoke; I see no
reason why the Bishop of Rome should expect obedience from the Clergy of other
Countries, any more then the Archbishop of Canterbury should expect obedience
from the Clergy of other Kingdoms. And for your deriving your Authority from
Saint Peter; I know no reason, why we may not as well derive our Authority from
Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea, or from Philip, of whose planting the
Gospel we have as good warrant, as you have for Saint Peter his planting the
Gospel in Rome. But, my Lord, I must tell you, that there are other Objections
to be made against your Church, which more condemns her, if these were answered.


Marq. May it please Your Majesty, to give me leave to speak a word or two, to
what I have said, and then I shall humbly beg Your further Objections. As to
that of the Christian Kingdoms shaking off the Roman Yoke, and falling to
pieces, which was so prophesied it should, yet the Church should not do so,
because it is said it shall remain in unity: and for Your Majesty's objection
concerning Simon Zelotes, Joseph of Arimathea, etc. It is answered, that there
were two conversions, the first of the Britains, the second of the Saxons; we
only require this justice from you, as you are English, not Welch-men, for the
Church of England, involves all the Britains within her Communion: for the
Britains have not now any distinct Church from the Church of England. Now if
Your Majesty please, I expect your further Objections.


King. My Lord, I have not done with you yet: though particular Churches may
fall away in their several respects of obedience to one supreme Authority, yet
it follows not, that the Church should be thereby divided, for as long as they
agree in the unity of the same spirit, and the bond of peace, the Church is
still at unity, as so many sheaves of corn are not unbound, because they are
severed. Many sheaves may belong to one field, to one man, and may be carried
to one barn, and be servient to the same table. Unity may consist in this, as
well as in being hudled up together in a rick with one cock-sheave above the
rest. I have an hundred pieces in my pocket, I find them something heavy, I
divide the sum, half in one pocket, and half in another: and subdivide them
afterward in two several lesser pockets; The moneys, is divided, but the
sum is not broke, the hundred pounds is as whole as when it was together,
because it belongs to the same man, and is in the same possession; so though we
divide our selves from Rome, if neither of us divide our selves from Christ, we
agree in him, who is the Center of all unity, though we differ in matter of
depending upon one another. But my Lord of Worcester, we are got into such a
large field of discourse, that the greatest Scholars of them all can sooner
show us the way in, then out of it; therefore, before we go too far, let us
retire, lest we lose our selves; and therefore, I pray my Lord, satisfy me in
these particulars: Why do you leave out the second Commandment, and cut
another in two? why do you withold the Cup from the Laytie? why have you
seven Sacraments, when Christ instituted but two? why do you abuse the World
with such a fable as Purgatory, and make ignorant fools believe, you can fish
souls from thence with silver hooks? why do you pray to Saints, and worship
Images? Those are the offenses which are given by your Church of Rome unto the
Church of Christ; of these things I would be satisfied.


Marq. Sir, although the Church be undefiled, yet she may not be spotless, to
several apprehensions: For the Church is compared to the Moon, that is full of
spots; but they are but spots of our fancying; though the Church be never so
comely, yet she is described unto us to have black eyebrowes, which may to some
be as great an occasion of dislike, as they are to others foyles, which set her
off more lovely. We must not make our fancies, judgments of condemnation to
her, with whom Christ so much was ravished. For Your Majesty's Objections, and
first, as to that of leaving out the second Commandment, and cutting another in
two; I beseech Your Majesty, who called them Commandments? who told you they
were ten? who told you which were first, and second? etc. The Scripture only
called them words: those words, but these: and these words were never divided
in the Scriptures into ten Commandments, but two Tables; the Church did all
this, and might as well have named them twenty as ten Commandments; that which
Your Majesty calls the second Commandment, is but the explanation of the
first, and is not razed out of the Bible, but for brevitie sake in the manualls
it is left out, as the rest of the Commandment is left out concerning the
Sabbath, and others: wherefore the same Church which gave them their Name,
their Number, and their Distinction, may in their breviats, leave out what she
deems to be but exposition; and deliver what she thinks for substance, without
any such heavy charge as being blottable out of the book of life, for
diminishing the word of God.

For withholding the Cup from the Laytie, where did Christ either give, or
command to be given, either the Bread or the Wine to any such? Drink ye all of
this: but they were all Apostles to whom he said so, there were neither Laymen
or women there: If the Church allowed them afterward to receive it, either in
one, or both kinds, they ought to be satisfied therewith accordingly, but not
question the Churches Actions. She that could alter the Sabbath into the Lords
day, and change the dipping of the Baptized over head and ears in water, to a
little sprinkling upon the face, (by reason of some emergencies, and
inconveniences, occasioned by the difference of Seasons, and Countries) may,
upon the like occasion, accordingly dispose of the manner of her Administration
of her Sacraments. Neither was this done without great reason, the world had
not wine in all her Countries, but it had bread. Wherefore it was thought for
uniformity sake (that they might not be unlike to one another, but all receive
alike) that they should only receive the Bread, which was to be had in every
place, and not the Cup, in regard that Wine was not every where to be had. I
wonder that any body should be so much offended at any such thing, for Bread
and Wine do signify Christ crucified; I appeal to common reason, if a dead
body does not represent a passion as much as if we saw the blood lie by it. If
you grant the Churches Power in other matters, and rest satisfied therein, why
do you boggle at this, especially when any Priest, (where Wine is to be had) if
you desire it, he will give it you? But if upon every man's call the Church
should fall to reforming upon every seeming fault, which may be but supposed to
be found, the people would never stop until they had made such a through
Reformation in all parts, as they have done in the greatest part of Germany,
where there is not a man to Preach, or hear the Gospel, to eat the Bread, or
drink the Wine: you never picked so many holes in our Coats, as this
licentiousness has done in yours.

For our seven Sacraments, she that called the Articles of our Faith 12, the
Beatitudes 8, the Graces 3, the Virtues 4, called these 7, and might have
called them 17 if she had thought it meet. A Sacrament is nothing else but what
is done with a holy mind, and why Sacrament, either in Name, or Number, should
be confined to Christ's only Institution, I see no cause for it; If I can prove
that God did institute such a thing in Paradise, (as he did Marriage) shall not
I call that a Sacrament as well as what was instituted by Christ, when he was
upon the Earth? If Christ institutes the Order of giving, and receiving the
holy Ghost, shall not I call this the Sacrament of Orders? If Christ injoynes
us all repentance, shall we not say repentance is a Sacrament? If Christ
blesses little children, and says, Suffer them to come unto me, and forbid
them not; shall we not say that such confirmation is a Sacrament? Truly I do
not understand their meaning; They have taken away five, which five, either by
God, or Christ, or the holy Ghost, (who are all one) were instituted; and yet
they say they are not Sacraments, because they were not instituted by Christ:
And the two that are left, viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper; for the first,
you hold it necessary to Salvation; and for the second, you do not admit the
real presence: so that of the two remaining, you have taken away the necessity
of the one, and the reality of the other, so farewell all.

Now for Purgatory, I do believe, we have as good ground for it out of this
place of Scripture, viz. He shall be purged, yet so as if it were by fire: as
you can prove a Hell out of this place of Scripture, He shall be cast into
utter darkness, and into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Neither can you make more exceptions to
our inference out of this place of Scripture, to prove Purgatory, then the
Atheist (if wits may be permitted to roame in such things, as these once
settled, and believed generally) will find ground enough to quarrel at your
burning lake; and the vain Philosopher, Contradictions enough, in the
description of the effects of those hellish Torments, viz. weeping and gnashing
of teeth: the one having its procedure from heat, the other from cold, which
are mere Contradictions, and therefore fabulous; take heed we do not take away
Hell, in removing of Purgatory. You see not, how your laughing at Purgatory
has caused such laughing at Hell, and Devils; until at last, you shall see
them bid the Heavens come down, and pluck the Almighty out of his Throne: If a
Text of Scripture with the Churches Exposition be not sufficient for a man to
rest, both his Science and Conscience upon: I know not where it will find a
resting place, it may shoot at Random, but never take so right an aim; and
for the silver hook you talked of, I do not justify the abuse of any, I know
there is a great difference between the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome;
and if these Errors were in the Church it self, yet the tares must not be
hastily plucked out of the field of the Church, lest the wheat be plucked up with
it.

Now for our praying to Saints, there is no body that prays to any Saints,
otherwise then as we on earth desire the benefit of one another prayers. We do
not believe that they can help us (of themselves) or that they have power to
forgive sin, but we believe that they are nearer to God his favor, and more
dear unto him: and therefore we believe, that he will hear them with, or for
us, sooner then he will hear us when we pray upon our own account: as we desire
the prayers of some good and holy man, (whom we believe to be so) hoping it
will be a benefit unto us. All that can be said against it, is, that they do
not hear us. I will not trouble Your Majesty with the Schoolmens Speculum
Creatoris, but I shall desire to be plain: When there is joy in heaven over
every sinner that repents; do you think that the Saints which are there, are
ignorant of the occasion of that joy? or do they rejoice at they know not what?
If the Saints in heaven do cry, How long Lord, how long, holy and just, do
thou not avenge our blood upon them, which dwell upon the earth: if they know
that their blood is not yet avenged, do they not know when a sinner is
converted? and if they know the time of conversion, do they not know, the time
of prayer? If Abraham knew that there were such men as Moses and the Prophets,
who was dead so many hundreds of years before their time, can we say, that they
are ignorant? think ye, that those ministering Angels who are called
Intelligencers, give them no intelligence? or that they gather nothing of
intelligence by looking him in the face, who is the fullness of knowledge, and
to all these the practice and opinion of so Catholic a Church; God can only
forgive sins, Christ can only mediate, but Saints, whether in heaven, or on
the earth, may intercede for one another.

Lastly, for our worshipping of Images: confounded be all they that worshipped
them, for me, God is only worthy to be worshipped; but if I kneel before the
Picture of my Savior, I worship him kneeling before his Picture; the worship
is in the heart, and not in the knee, and where the true God is in the
intention, there can be no Idolatry.

O Sir, Christian Religion is not a Protestation, but a Gospel: it would better
consist with unity, then opposition: we hold it a piece of popery to knock our
own breasts with the fists of constitution, whilst we hold it most
Evangelicall, to knock at our neighbors with a Cunstables staff: a pious care
in a Mother Church, labors to educate her own daughter, and having fed her at
her own breasts, all the gratitude she returns her mother, is to call her
whore, Antichrist, Babylon, and all the spiteful and vile names that can be
imagined; they forget that saying of the Apostle St. James: If any man among
you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, that man's Religion is in vain; Pure Religion, and undefiled before God,
and the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and widows, in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. What should I say
more, the Scriptures are made a nose of wax, for every bold hand to wring it
which way he pleases, they are rejected by private men, by whole books, The
Articles of our Creed are said not to be of the Apostles framing, the
Commandments not belonging to Christians, impossible to be kept, the Sacraments
denied; Charity not only grown cold, but quite starved, and they will be saved
by means quite contrary to what the Gospel (which they seem to profess) sets
down, viz. by Faith without good works, only believe and that's enough, whereas
the holy Apostle St. James tells us, that faith profits nothing without good
works -- Here the Marquess was going on, and His Majesty interrupted him.


King. My Lord, you let a flood-gate of Arguments out, against my naked breast,
yet it does not bear me any thing backwards; you have spoken a great many
things, that no way concerns Us, but such as we find fault with as much as you;
and other things, to which I could easily give answer, If I could take but some
of that time and leisure that you have taken to compose your Arguments. It is
not only the Picture of our Savior, but the Pictures of Saints which you both
worship and adore, and maintain it to be lawful; and not only so, but the
Picture of God the Father, like an old man, and many other things which I
forbear, because I fear, you have done your self more hurt then me good, in
depriving your self of the rest, to which you are accustomed; for whilst our
Arguments do multiply our time lessens: to that of Saint James, where it is
said, that faith profits nothing without good works; I hope the Doctor here
can tell you, that Saint Paul says, that we are justified by Faith, and not by
the works of the Law.


Marq. Sir, I believe the Doctor will neither tell Your Majesty, nor me, that
Faith can justify without works.


King. That question the Doctor can soon decide, what say you to it Doctor?
you must speak now.


Doctor. If it may please Your Majesty, it would be as great a disobedience to
hold my peace, now I am commanded to speak, as it would have been a presumption
in me to speak before I was commanded; I am so far from thinking that either
Faith, without good works, or that good works without Faith, can justify: that
I cannot believe that there is such a thing as either. No more then I can
imagine, that there may be a tree bearing fruit, without a root: or that the
Sun can be up, before it be day: or that a fire can have no heat; for although
it be possible, that a man may do some good without Faith, yet he cannot do
good works without it; for though we may naturally incline to some goodness,
as flowers and plants naturally grow to perfection; Yet this good cannot be
said to be wrought by us, but by the hand of Faith; and Faith her self (where
she is truly so) can no more stand still, then can the Sun in the Firmament, or
refuse to let her light so shine before men, that they may see her good works,
then the same Sun can appear in the same Firmament, and dart no beams. And
whilst Faith and good works strive for the propriety of Justification; I do
believe, they both exclude a third, which has more right to our Justification
then either. For that which we call Justification by Faith, is not properly
Justification; but only an apprehension of it: as that which we call
Justification, by good works, is not properly Justification, but only a
Declaration of it, to be so: exempli gratia: I receive a pardon, my hand that
receiv's it, does not justify; it is put in execution, and read in open Court,
all this did not procure it me. Doubtless there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth, wherefore upon this ground of
belief, I work out my Salvation as well as I can: and do all the good that
lies in my power. I do good works. Doubtless this man has some reason for
what he does: it is because he has store of Faith, which believes, there is a
God, and that that God will accept of his endeavors, wherefore to him alone
who has given us Faith, and has wrought all our good works in us can we
properly attribute the term of Justification: Iustificatio apprehensiva, we
may conceive and bear in our hearts: Iustificatio declarativa, we may show
with our hands: but Iustificatio Effectiva, proper and effectual Justification
none can lay claim unto, but Christ alone, that as our sins were imputed unto
Christ, so his righteousness might be ours by imputation.


King. Doctor, I thank you, in this point I believe you have reconciled us both.


Doctor. May it please Your Majesty, if the venom were taken out, there is no
wound in the Churches body, but might soon be healed.


Marq. Hereat the Marquess somewhat earnestly cried, Hold Sir, You have said
well in one respect, but there are two ways of Justification in us: and two
without us: Christ is a cause of Justification by his grace and merits without
us; and so we are justified by Baptism, and we are justified by the gifts of
God in us, viz. Faith, Hope, and Charity. Whereupon the King spoke as quickly.


King. But my Lord, both Justifications come from Christ, according to your
own saying: That without us, by his grace and merit: that within us, by his
gifts and favor; therefore Christ is all in all, in the matter of
Justification; and therefore though there were a thousand ways, and means to
our Justification, yet there is but one effectual cause, and that is Christ.


Marq. How is it then, that we are called by the Apostle, Cooperarii Christo,
Fellow-workers together with Christ?


King. The Doctor has told you how already: If you lie wallowing in sin, and
Christ helps you out, your reaching of him your hand is a working together with
Christ; Yet for all that, it cannot be said, that you helped yourselfe out of
the ditch: for then there had been no need of Christ. Your apprehending the
succor that came unto you, no way attributes the God have mercy to your
self: no more then the declaring your self to be alive by action; is the
cause of setting you upon your legs, so that we may divide this threefold
Justification, as Peter divided his three Tabernacles, here is one for Moses,
and one for Elias: I pray let us have one for Christ, and let that be the
chief.


Marq. And Reason good.


King. I wish that all Controversies betwixt you and Us, were as well decided:
I am fully satisfied in this point.


Doctor. May it please Your Majesty: A great many Controversies between us and
the Papists might be soon decided, if the Churches revenues (which were every
where taken away, more or less, where differences in Religion in several
parts of the world, did arise in the Church) were not an obstacle of the
reunion; like the stone, which the Crab cast into the Oyster, which hindered it
from ever shutting it self again; like the division, which happened between
the Greek and Latin Church. Photinus intrudes himself into the Patriarch-ship
of Constantinople over the head of Ignatius, the lawful Patriarch thereof;
whom the Pope preserved in his Communion, and then the difference of the
Procession of the holy Ghost, between those two Churches, was fomented by the
said Photinus, lest the wound should heal too soon, and the patient should not
be held long enough in cure, for the benefit of the Chyrurgion. Sacrilege has
brought more divisions then the nature of their causes have required: and the
Universities play with edged tools, whilst hungry stomachs run away with their
meat; wherefore since Your Majesty was pleased to discharge the watch, that I
had set before the door of my lips: I shall make bold to put Your Majesty in
mind of holding my Lord to the demand which Your Majesty once made unto his
Lordship, concerning the true Church; for if once that Question were thoroughly
determined, all Controversies not only between Your Majesty and his Lordship,
but also all the Controversies that ever were started, would soon be decided at
a short race end; and without this, we take away the means of reconciliation.
For I must confess ingenuously (yet under the highest correction) that there
is not a thing that I ever understood less, then that assertion, of the
Scriptures being judge of Controversies, though in some sense I must, and will
acknowledge it: but not as it is a book consisting of papers, words, and
letters; for as we commonly say in matters of civil differences, the Law shall
be the judge between us, we do not mean, that every man shall run unto the Law
books, or that any Lawyer himself shall search his Law-cases, and thereupon
possess himself of any thing that is in question between him and another,
without a legal trial and determination by lawful Judges, constituted to
that same purpose: In like manner, saving knowledge and Divine Truths are the
portion, that all Gods children lay fast claim unto: yet they must not be
their own carvers, though it is their own meat that is before them, whilst they
have a mother at the table; They must not slight all Orders, Constitutions,
Appeals, and Rules of Faith; saving knowledge, and Divine Truths, are not to
be wrested from the Scripture by private hands, for then the Scripture were of
private interpretation: which is against the Apostles Rule. Neither are those
undefiled, incorruptible and immaculate inheritances, which are reserved for us
in heaven, to be conveyed unto us by any Privy-seales. For there is nothing
more absurd, to my understanding, then to say, that the thing contested (which
is the true meaning of the Scriptures) shall be Judge of the Contestation: no
way inferior to that absurdity, which would follow, which would be this, if
we should leave the deciding of the sense of the words of the Law, to the
preoccupated understanding of one of the Advocates; neither is this all the
absurdity that does arise upon this supposition: for if you grant this to one,
you must grant it to any one, and to every one: if there were but two, how will
you reconcile them both? If you grant that this judicature must be in many,
there are many manyes, which of the manyes will you have? decide but that, and
you satisfy all. For if you make the Scripture the Judge of Controversy, you
make the reader Judge of the Scripture: as a man consists of a soul and body,
so the Scripture consists of the letter and the sense; if I make the dead
letter my Judge, I am the greatest, and simplest idolater in the world: it will
tell me no more, then it told the Indian Emperor Powhaton, who asking the
Jesuit, how he knew all that to be true which he had told him, and the Jesuit
answering him, that Gods word did tell him so. The Emperor asked him, where it
was? he showed him his Bible. The Emperor, after that he had held it in his
hands a pretty while, answered, It tells me nothing. But you will say, you can
read, and so you will find the meaning out of the significant Character; and
when you have done, as you apprehend it, so it must be; and so the Scripture is
nothing else but your meaning: wherefore necessity requires an external
Judge, for determination of differences, besides the Scriptures. And we can
have no better recourses to any, then to such as the Scripture it self calls
upon us to hear, which is the Church, which Church would be found out.


King. Doctor, Saint John in his first Epistle tells us, that the holy
Scripture is that, to whose truth the Spirit bears witness. And John the
Evangelist tells us, that the Scripture is that which gives a greater
Testimony of Christ, then John the Baptist. Saint Luke tells us, that if we
believe not the Scripture, we would not believe though one were risen from the
dead: and Christ himself, who raised men from death to life, tells us; they
cannot believe his words, if they believe not in Moses writings: Saint Peter
tells us, that the holy Scripture is surer then a voice from heaven: Saint Paul
tells us; that it is lively in operation, and whereby the Spirits demonstrates
his power; and that, it is able to make a man wise to salvation; able to save
our souls; and that it is sufficient too) to make us believe in Christ, to
life everlasting, John 20. As in every seed, there is a Spirit, which meeting
with earth, heat, and moisture, grows to perfection: so the seed of the word,
wherein Gods holy Spirit being sown in the heart, inlivened by the heart of
faith, and watered with the tears of repentance) soon fructifies without any
further Circumstance.


Doctor. It does so, but Your Majesty presupposes all this while, husbandmen,
and husbandry, barnes and threshing floors, winnowing and uniting these several
grains into one loaf, before it can become childrens bread. All that Your
Majesty has said concerning the Scriptures sufficiency, is true, provided,
that those Scriptures be duly handled; for as the Law is sufficient to
determine right, and keep all in peace and quietness, yet the execution of
that sufficiency, cannot he performed without Courts and Judges: so when we
have granted the Scriptures to be all that the most reverend estimation can
attribute unto them, yet Religion cannot be exercised, nor differences in
Religion reconciled, without a Judge; For as Saint Ierom tells us, who was no
great friend to Popes or Bishops: Si non una, exors quaedam, and imminens detur
potestas, tot efficerentur in Ecclesia schismata quot Sacerdotes. Wherefore I
would feign find out that which the Scripture bids me hear, Audi Ecclesiam: I
would feign refer my self to that to which the Scripture commands me to
appeal, and tells me, that if I do not, I shall be a Heathen and a Publican,
Dic Ecclesiae: which Church Saint Paul in his first Epistle calls the pillar
and foundation of Truth, of which the Prophet Ezekiel says: I will place my
Sanctification in the midst of her for ever: and the Prophet Esaias, that the
Lord would never forsake her, in whose light the people should walk, and Kings
in the brightness of her Orient; Against which our Savior says: The gates of
Hell shall not prevail: with whom our Savior says, He would be always unto
the end of the world. And from whom the Spirit of Truth should never depart.
For although the Psalmist tells us, that the word of the Lord is clear,
inlightning the eyes, yet the same Prophet said to God: Enlighten mine eyes,
that I may see the marvels of thy Law: And Saint John tells us, that the book
of God has seven Seals, and it was not every one that was thought worthy to
open it, only the lamb. The Disciples had been ignorant, if Jesus had not
opened the Scriptures unto them. The Eunuch could not understand them without
an Interpreter; and Saint Peter tells us, that the Scripture is not of private
Interpretation: and that in his brother Paul's Epistles there are many things
hard to be understood, which ignorant and lightheaded-men wrest to their own
perdition. Wherefore though as Saint Chrysostom says: Omnia clara sunt and
plana ex scriptur is divinis: quaecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt: yet
no man ever has yet defined what are necessary, and what not. What points are
fundamental, and what are not fundamental. Necessary to Salvation is one
thing, and necessary for knowledge, as an improvement of our faith, is another
thing: for the first, if a man keeps the Commandments, and believes all the
Articles of the Creed, he may be saved, though he never read a word of
Scripture; but much more assuredly if he meditates upon Gods word with the
Psalmist day and night. But if he means to walk by the rule of Gods word, and
to search the Scriptures, he must lay hold upon the means that God has
ordained, whereby he may attain unto the true understanding of them; for as
Saint Paul says: God has placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, to the end we should be no more little
children, blown about with every wind of Doctrine; therefore it is not for
babes in understanding to take upon them to understand those things, wherein so
great a Prophet as the Prophet David confessed the darkness of his own
ignorance. And though it be true, the Scripture is a river through which a
lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim, yet it is to be supposed and
understood, that the lamb must wade but only through, where the river is
foordable; It does not suppose the river to be all alike in depth, for such a
river was never heard of; but there may be places in the river, where the lamb
may swim as well as the Elephant, otherwise it is impossible that an Elephant
should swim in the same depth, where a lamb may wade, though in the same river
he may; neither is it the meaning of that place, that the child of God may wade
through the Scripture without directions, help, or Judges, but that the
meannest capacity, qualified with a harmless innocence, and desirous to wade
through that river of living waters to eternal life, may find so much of
Comfort, and heavenly knowledge there, easily to be obtained, that he may
easily wade through to his eternal Salvation; and that there are also places
in the same river, wherein the highest speculations may plunge themselves, in
the deep mysteries of God. Wherefore with pardon craved for my presumption, in
holding Your Majesty in so tedious a discourse, as also, for my boldness in
obtruding my opinion, which is except (as incomparable Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical policy has well observed) the Churches Authority be required
herein, as necessary hereunto we shall be so far from agreeing upon the true
meaning of the Scripture, that the outward letter sealed with the inward
witness of the Spirit (being all heretics have quoted Scripture and pretended
Spirit) will not be a warrant sufficient enough, for any private man to judge
so much as the Scripture to be Scripture: or the Gospel it self, to be the
Gospel of Christ: This Church being found out, and her Authority allowed of,
all controversies would be soon decided, and although we allow the Scripture
to be the lock upon the door, which is Christ, yet we must allow the Church to
be the Key, that must open it; as Saint Ambrose in his 38. Sermons calls the
agreement of the Apostles in the Articles of our belief, Clavis Scripturae,
one of whose Articles is, I believe the holy Catholic Church. As the Lion
wants neither strength, nor courage, nor power, nor weapons, to seize upon his
prey, yet he wants a nose to find it out: wherefore by natural instinct, he
takes to his assistance, the little Jack-call, a quick sented beast, who runs
before the Lion, and having found out the prey, in his language gives the Lion
notice of it, who soberly (until such time as he fixes his eyes upon the
booty) makes his advance, but once coming within view of it, with a more
speed then the swiftest running can make, he jumps upon it, and seizes it. Now
to apply this to our purpose.

Christ crucified is the main substance of the Gospel, according to the
Apostles saying, I desire to know nothing, but Jesus, and him crucified; This
crucified Christ is the nourishment of our souls, according to our Saviors
own words: Ubi Cadaver, ibi aquilae; Thereby drawing his Disciples from the
curious speculation of his body glorified, to the profitable meditation of his
body crucified: It is the prey of the Elect: the dead Carcass feeds the
Eagles, Christ crucified nourishes his Saints: according to Saint John's
saying, except we eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, we have
no life in us; him we must mastigate, and chew by faith: traject, and convey
him into our hearts as nutriment, by meditation: and digest him by Coalition,
whereby we grow one with Christ, and Christ becomes one with us, according to
that saying of Tertullian, Auditu devorandus est, intellectu ruminandus, fide
digerendus.

Now for the true understanding of the Scriptures, which is no other thing,
then the finding out of Jesus, and him crucified, who is the very life of the
Scriptures; which body of Divinity, is nourished with no other food, and all
its veins filled with no other blood: though this heavenly food (the Scripture)
have neither force nor power to seize upon its prey, but is endued with a
lively spirit, able to overcome the greatest ignorance, yet there is a quick
sented assistant called Ecclesia, or Church, which is derived from a verb,
which signifies to call, which must be the Jack-call, to which this powerful
seeker after this prey must join it self, or else it will never be able to
find it out; and when we are called, we must go soberly to work, until by this
means we have attained unto the true understanding and sight thereof, and then,
let the Lion, like the Eagle, Maher-shalal hashbaz (as the Prophet Esaias cap. 8.
v. 3. tells us,) make have to the prey, make speed to the spoil. Saint Paul
confirms the use of this Etymology writing to the Corinthians, viz. To the
Saints called: and the Ephesians cap. 4. he tells us, if ye would be in one
body, and in one spirit, and of one mind, you must be as you are called in our
hope of your vocation: and in his Epistle of the Colossians cap. 3. he tells
us, that if we will have the peace of Christ to rule in our hearts, that is it
by which we are called in one self body, where we must allow a constitution or
Society of men called to that purpose, and whose calling it is to procure unto
us this peace and unity in the Church, or we shall never find it. Thus when
dissension arose between Paul and Barnabas concerning Circumcision, their
disputations could effect nothing but heat, until the Apostles and Elders met
together, and determined the matter: there must be a society of men that can
say, Been visum fuit nobis and Spiritui sancto, or else matters of that nature
will never be determined: which society is there called the Church, which
Church we are to find.


King. I pray, my Lord, what do you mean by the holy Catholic Church, do
you mean the Church of Rome?


Marq. I do so.


King. My thinks it should be inconsistent with it, to be both universal, and
particular.


Marq. No more then it is inconsistent, for the General of Your Army to be
General of all Your Officers and Soldiers, and yet a particular man. By the
word Roman, we intend not the particular Church of Rome, but all the Churches
which adhere and are joined in Communion with the Roman Church, as by the
Jewish Church, was not only meant the Church of Judah only, but of all the
other Tribes which had Communion with her; the word Catholic is taken in three
several senses, formally, casually, and participatively: In the first sense,
the Society of all the true particular Churches, united in one selfsame
Communion, is called Catholic; Casually, the Roman Church is called Catholic,
for as much as she infuseth universalitie into all the whole body of the
Catholic Church; wherefore being a Center and beginning of Ecclesiastical
Communion, infusing unity, which is the form of universalitie, into the
Catholic Church, she may be called Catholic: Participatively, because
particular Churches agree, and participate in Doctrine and Communion with the
Catholic.


King. You have satisfied me why the Church of Rome (in your sense) may be
called Catholic, but you have not yet satisfied me, why other Churches may not
be called (casually) as much Catholic as she: being the Greek Church has
infused as much universalitie into the whole body of the Catholic Church as
she did, and was both center and circumference, as much as ever she was.


Marq. Sir, as to this point, I shall refer your Majesty to the learned reply,
that the profound Card. Peroon, so respectfully and learnedly made to Your
royal Father his Apology, wherein this point is largely and (to my
apprehension) fully answered. But will Your Majesty either give or take,
either let me show you this Church, or else do Your Majesty show it me.


King. My Lord, if you can show it me, I shall not shut mine eyes against it;
But at this time, truly my Lord, I can hardly hold them open. My Lord, I pray
will you set down your mind in writing, and I will promise you it shall want
no animadversion, and that I will give you my clear opinion concerning it.


Marq. O Sir! Literae scriptae manent; I do not like, that what I speak here
to your Majesty, I can promise my self, so much from your goodness, that no
bad Construction shall be made of what I speak. But if my writing should come
into other folks hands, I may justly fear their comments: wherefore I desire to
be excused.


King. My Lord, I hold it more convenient so to do: I will promise you, that I
will let no eyes but mine own view your Paper: and I will return it to you
again by the Doctor.


Marq. Upon that Condition I am contented: I have one request more unto your
Majesty: that You would make one Prayer to God, to direct You in the right
way: and that You would lay aside all prejudice, and selfeinterest, and that
You will not so much fear the Subject, as the Superior, who is over all, and
then You cannot do amiss.


King. My Lord, all this shall be done, by the Grace of God.

Whereupon the Marquess called upon me to help him, so that he might kneel:
and being upon his knees, he desired to kiss His Majesty's hand, which he did,
saying:

Sir, I have not a thought in my heart, that tends not to the service of my
God, and you: and if I could have resisted this motion of his Spirit, I had
desisted long ago, but I could not: wherefore on both my knees, I pray to his
Divine Majesty, that he will not be wanting to his own Ordinance, but will
direct Your understanding to those things, which shall make You a happy King
upon Earth, and a Saint in Heaven; And thereupon he fell a weeping, bidding me
to light His Majesty to His Chamber. As the King was going, he said unto the
Marquess: My Lord, it is great pity, that you should be in the wrong:
Whereat the Marquess soon replied: It is greater pity, that You should not
be in the right. The King said:God direct us both: The Marquess said: Amen,
Amen, I pray God. Thus they both parted: and (as I was lighting His Majesty to
His Chamber,) His Majesty told me, that he did not think to have found the old
man so ready at it, and that he believed, he was a long time putting on his
armor: yet it was hardly proof. To which I made answer, that I believe, his
Lordship had more reason to wonder, how His Majesty (so unprepared) could
withstand the onset. The King (being brought to His door,) commanded me, that
before I brought him his Lordspips Paper, I should peruse it, and give him my
opinion of it. Which I promised to obey, and so returned to the Marquess, whom
I found in the dark upon his knees, whom I did not disturb; but when he rose,
he said unto me: Doctor, I will tell you what I was doing, I was giving God
thanks, that he had preserved the use of my memory for so good a work, and
imploring a blessing upon my endeavors. To which I made answer: My Lord, no
question but you think it a good work, or else you would not implore Gods
blessing upon it. Whereupon my Lord said: Ah! Doctor, I would to God you
thought so too: And waiting upon him into his Chamber, he further said unto me:
Doctor Bailey, you know I am obliged not to speak unto you in this nature, yet I
hope I may say thus much unto you, without any breach of promise, you may be an
Instrument of the greatest good that ever befell this Nation. I say no more:
Good night to you.

The third day after, he gave me this Paper to deliver unto His Majesty, which
I did.


The Marquess his Paper to the King.
IT must be granted by all, that there must be (always) in the world, one
holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church: one, that it may be uniforme: holy,
that it may be certain: Catholic, that it may be known: and Apostolic, that
it may succeed: this Church must be either the Roman, or the Protestant, or
else some other that is opposite to both. It cannot be any Church which is
opposite to both: because the Church of England did not (when she separated
from the Roman) join her self to any: not to the Grecian: for that holds as
many Doctrines contrary to the Church of England, as does the Roman; nor to any
else, because she agrees with none, no reformed Church under the Sun, that is,
or ever was, has the same articles of belief, as has the Church of England.
And from any other Church, besides the Roman, she never had a being: and with
any other Church besides the Roman, she never had Communion; She cannot be
that one, because she is but one: nor Catholic, because she agrees not with
any: nor Apostolic, because she has acknowledged such a fine and recovery,
that has quite cut off the entaile which would have (otherwise) descended unto
her from the Apostles; neither can she be holy, because she is none of all the
other three. Now if these Attributes cannot belong unto the Protestant
Religion, and do (clearly) belong unto the Roman, then is the Church of Rome,
the Catholic Church. And that it does, I shall prove it by the marks, which
God Almighty has given us, whereby we should know her.

And the first is Universality: All Nations shall flow unto her, Esa. 2. 2. And
the Psalmist: The heathen shall be thine inheritance, and the uttermost part of
the Earth for thy possession, Psalm. 2. 2. And our Savior Matthew. 20. 14. This
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, as a witness to
all Nations, etc. Now I confess, that this glory is belonging to all
Professors of the Christian Religion: yet amongst all those, who do profess
the name of Christ, I believe, Your Majesty will consent with me herein, that
the Roman Church has this form of universality, not only above all
different and distinct Professors of Religion, but also beyond all Religions of
the world, Turks or Heathens: and that there is no place in the world, where
there are not Romance Catholics; which is manifestly wanting to all other
Religions, whatsoever: Now I hope Your Majesty cannot say so of any Protestant
Religion: neither that Your Majesty will call all those who protest against
the Church of Rome, otherwise then Protestants: but not Protestant Catholics,
or Catholics of the Protestant Religion, being they are not religated within
the same Communion, and fellowships: for then Religion would consist in
protestation rather then unity; in Nations falling off from one another, rather
then all Nations flowing to one another: neither is it a Consideration
altogether invalid, that the Church of Rome has kept possession of the name;
all along other reformed Churches, leaving her in possession of the name, and
taking unto themselves new names according to their several founders: except
the Church of England, (who is now her self become like a Chapter that is full
of nothing else) whose founder was such a one, whose name it may be they were
unwilling to own.

For antiquity, if we should inquire after the old paths, which is the good
way, and walk therein; as the Prophet Jeremiah advises us: if we should take
our Saviors rule, Ab initio autem, non fuit sic: if we should observe his
saying, how the good seed was first sowed, and then the tares: If we should
consider the pit from whence we were dug, and the rock from whence we were
hewn, we shall find antiquity more applicatory to the Church of Rome, then any
Protestant Church. But you will say, your Religion is as ancient as ours;
having its procedure from Christ, and his Apostles: so say the Lutheran
Protestants, with their Doctrine of Consubstantiation: and many other sorts of
Protestants, having other Tenants, altogether contrary to what you hold: how
shall we reconcile you? so say all heretics that ever were, how shall we
confute them? a part to set up themselmes against the whole, and by the power
of the sword, to make themselves Judges in their own causes, is dealing, that
were it your case, I am sure you would think it very hard, I wish you may never
find it so.

For Visibility: Our Savior compares his Church to a City placed on a hill,
according unto the Prophet David's Prophecy, a Tabernacle in the Sun: It is
likewise compared unto a candle in a candle-stick: not under a bushel: and
says our Savior, If they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the desert, go
ye not forth; Behold, he is in secret places, believe it not; forewarning us
against obscure and invisible Congregations: Now I beseech Your Majesty,
whether should I betake my self, to a Church that was always visible, and
gloriously eminent; or to a Protestant Church that was never eminent, and for
the most part invisible; shrowding their defection, under an Apostolical
Expression, of a woman in the Revelation, who fled into the wilderness for a
thousand years? as if an allegory, could wipe out so many clear texts of
Scripture, as are set down by our Savior, and the Prophets, concerning the
Churches invisibility? And I could not find any Church in the world to whom
that Prophecy of Esaias might more fitly appertain, then to the Church of Rome:
I have set watchmen upon the walls, which shall never hold their peace day nor
night, which I am sure no Protestant Church can apply to her self.

It is not enough to say, I maintain the same Faith and Religion which the
Apostles taught, and therefore, I am of the true Church, ancient, and visible
enough; because (as I have said before) every heretic will say as much: but if
you cannot by these marks of the Church, (set down in Scripture) clear your
selves to be the true Church, you vainly appeal to the Scriptures siding with
you in any particular point: for what can be more absurd, then to appeal from
Scripture, (setting things down clearly) unto Scripture setting down things
more obscurely? There is no particular point of Doctrine in the holy Scripture
so manifestly set down, as that concerning the Church, and the Marks thereof:
nothing set down more copious and perspicuous then the visibility, perpetuity,
and amplitude of the Church.

So that Saint Augustine did not stick to say, that the Scriptures were more
clear about the Church, then they were about Christ. Let him answer for it. He
said so in his book, de unitate Ecclesiae, and this (he said) was the reason:
because, God (in his wisdom) would have the Church to be described without any
ambiguity, that all Controversies about the Church may be clearly decided:
whereby questions about particular Doctrines, may find determinations in her
judgment: and that Visibility might show the way unto the most rude and
ignorant: and I know not any Church, to whom it may more justly be attributed,
then to the Church of Rome: whose Faith (as in the beginning was spread through
the whole world) so (all along) and at this day, it is generally known among
all nations. Next to this, I prove the Catholic Church to be the Roman;
because, a lawful succession of Pastors is required in every true Church,
according to the Prophet Esaias his Prophecy concerning her, viz. My Spirit
which is upon thee, and the words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, from henceforth, for ever; This succession I can find only
in the Church of Rome: This succession they only can prove; nons else offering
to go about it. This succession Saint Augustine says, kept him in that Church,
viz. a succession of Priests, from the very seat of Peter the Apostle, to the
present Bishop of his time. And Optatus Milevitanus reckons all the Roman
Bishops from Saint Peter to Syricius, who then was Pope: and by this, he showed
and made it his Argument, that the true Church was not with the Donatists:
bidding them, to show the original of their Chair; this no Protestant did, or
ever can do: The Roman Church gave the English Bishops Commission to preach
the Doctrine of Christ, as they have delivered it unto them; but they never
gave them any Commission to preach against her Religion: which Bishops being
turned out, for observing the depositum (wherewith they were instructed) and
new Bishops chosen in their room (by her, who not contenting her self with
being a nursing mother thereof, must needs be head of the child: and moderatrix
in the same Church, wherein by the Apostles precept she is forbidden to speak)
the succession was broke off: the branch cut off from the body, becoming no
part of the tree, fit for nothing but to be chopped into smaller pieces, and so
fitted for the fire; this proof of succession the Bishops of England, thought
so necessary, for proving their Church to be the true Church, that they
affirmed themselves to be consecrated by Catholic Bishops, their Predecessors,
which (never proved) argues the interruption, and affirming it, shows how that
(in their own opinion the succession could not hold in the inferior Ministers
(as indeed it cannot) for as there is a continued supply of Ambassadors in all
places, yet the succession is in the royal race: so though all vacancies are
replenished by Ministers of the Gospel, yet the succession of the Authority was
in the Bishops, as descended (to them) from the Apostles, according to our
Saviors rule: I will be with you always unto the end of the world; Which
Affirmation of theirs, argues that their calling is sufficient without it: and
in that they would feign derive it from the Church of Rome, it argues, that
that is the true Church: and yet they would forsake her, supposing her to have
errors, when that Reformation it self was but a supposition; for seeing they
hold that their Church may err, they can be certain of nothing: and whilst
(for errors sake) they forsake the Church of Rome, the Church of England (in
forsaking her) may be in the greatest error of all: where there is neither
Succession, nor assurance, I must leave her to her self, and your Majesty to
judge.

Next: I prove the Roman Church, to be the true Church, by her unity in
Doctrine: for so the Apostle Paul requires all the Churches children to be of
one mind. viz. I beseech you, that all speak one thing; Be ye knit together in
one mind, and one Judgment, 1 Cor. 1. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. The multitude of them that believed,
were of one heart, and of one soul, Act. 4. 32. Continue in one Spirit and one
mind, of one accord and one judgment, Phil. 1. 27. Phil. 2. 2. So our Savior
prays that they may be one; So Joseph forewarned his brethren, that they
should not fall out by the way, knowing that whilst they were with him, he
could order them: when they came to their father, he could order them: but
having no head, they should be apt to be dissentious. This Unity I find no
where but in the Church of Rome: agreeing in all things, which the Church of
Rome has determined for Doctrine, whereas the Protestant Doctrine, like the
heresy of Simon Magus, divided it self into several Sects, and to that of
the Donatists which were cut into small threads, in so much, that among the many
Religions which are lately sprung up, and the sub, sub, sub-divisions under
them: each one (pretending to be the true Protestant) excluding the other: and
all of them together, no more likely to be bound up in the bond of peace, then
a bundle of thorns, can expect binding with a rope of sand; In vain is their
excuse, if non-disagreement in fundameatalls: for they dis-agree amongst
themselves about the Sacrament: for the Lutherans hold Consubstantiation: but
the Church of England no such matter.

Some, that Christ descended into hell: others not. The Church of England
maintain their King to be the head of the Church: The Helvetians will
acknowledge no such matter: the Presbyterians will acknowledge no such matter;
the Independent will acknowledge no such matter: Concerning the Government of
the Church by Bishops, some Protestants maintain it to be Jure Divino: others,
to be Jure Ecclesiastico, others no such matter. Some think that the English
translations of the Bible in some places takes away, in other places adds, and
other some places changes the meaning of the holy Ghost, and some think it no
such matter, or else the Bishops would not have recommended Lincol. min. to K.
James, page 11. 13.
it unto the people. Lastly, they are so far from agreeing about the true
meaning of the word of God, that they cannot agree upon what is the word of
God: For Lutherans, Chem. Ex. Contr. Trid. part. 1. page 55. Also; Eucher. p.
63.
deny the second Epistle of Saint Peter, the second and third Epistle of Saint
John: the Epistle to the Hebr. the Epistle of Saint James, and Saint Jude, and
the Revelation; The Calvinists and the Church of England, no such matter, they
allow them. And I believe that these are fundamentalls; If they cannot agree
upon their Principalls, how shall they agree upon the deductions thence? If
these be not fundamental points, how come Protestants, to fight against
Protestants, for the Protestants Religion?

The disagreement is not so amongst the Roman Catholics: for all points of
the Roman Religion, that have been defined by the Church, in a general
Council, are agreed upon exactly, by all nations, tongues and people,
uibicunque terrarum: but in those points which are not determined by the
Church, the Church leaves every man to abound in his own sense; and therefore
all the heat that is either between the Thomists and the Scolists: the
Dominicans, and the Jesuits: either concerning the Conception of our blessed
Lady, or the concurrence of Grace, and free will, etc. being points, wherein
the Church has not interposed her decrees, is no more prejudicall or
objectionall against the Church of Romes Unity, then the disputations in the
Schools of our Universities are prejudicial to the 39. Articles of the Church
of England. But in each several Protestant Dominion there are certain several
Articles of belief, belonging to several Protestant Dominions, in which
several agreements, not any one, agrees with any of all the rest; neither is
there any possibility they should: being there is no means acknowledged, nor
power ordained, whereby they should be gathered together in one council,
whereby they might be of one heart, and of one soul: neither is there this
Unity in any one particular Dominion: as is in the Dominion of the Roman
Church; for they are all in pieces amongst themselves, even in their own
several Dominions, practicing disobedience to their Superiors, they teach it
to their Inferiors.

The greatest Unity the Protestants have, is not in believing, but in not
believing: in knowing, rather what they are against, then what they are for;
not so much in knowing what they would have, as in knowing what they would not
have. But let these negative Religions take heed they meet not with a negative
Salvation.

Neither can the Conversion of Nations be attributed to any other Church then
to the Roman, which is another mark of the true Church, according to the
Prophesies of Esaias cap. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens
thy nursing mothers. And Esaias 60. 16. Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles,
and the breasts of Kings shall minister unto thee: And Esaias 60. 10. And thy
Gates shall be continually open, that men may bring to thee the riches of the
Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought. And the Isles shall do thee
service. And the Prophet David, I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, etc. Now
no Protestant Church ever converted any one Nation, Kingdom or People. Many
Protestant people have fallen away from the Church of Rome, but this cannot be
called conversion, but rather perversion: for the Roman Church may justly say
of such, these have not converted Nations from paganism to Christianity, which
is the mark of the true Church: These are they, which went forth from us, 1 John 2. 19. Certain that went forth from us, Act. 15. 14. These are certain
men who rise out of our selves, speaking perverse things, Act. 20. 30. These
were they who separated themselves, Jude 19. which are marks of false and
heretical Churches. But the Roman Church I find stretching forth her arms,
from East to West, receiving and embracing all within her Communion; For the
first three hundred years, the Church grew down-ward, like a strong building,
whose foundations are first laid in the earth, whose stones are knit together
in Unity by the mortar that was tempered with the blood of her ten
Persecutions. Afterward this building, hasting upwards, Constantine the great
Emperor, submitting his neek unto the yoke of Christ, subdued all Christian
Churches to Pope Sylvester, then Pope of Rome, from which time to these our
days the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward and visible Church as
is confessed by Napier, a learned Protestant in his treatise upon the
Revelation page 145. and all along has added Kingdoms upon Kingdoms to her
Communion: until she had incorporated into her self, not only Europe, but
Asia, Africa and America: as Simon Lythus, a Protestant writer, affirms, viz.
The Jesuits have filled Asia, Africa and America with their Idols (as he calls
them) for the late Conversions of the East and West Indies by the Romans, if
you read Joan. Petrus Maffeus Hist. Indicarum, Jos. Acosta de nature. novi
orbis: You shall find that no Church in the world has ever spread so far and
wide, as the Church of Rome. Wherefore I hope in this respect (also) I may
safely conclude that the Church of Rome most justly deserves to be called the
Catholic Church.

Neither is it a vainer thing, to say, that the Pope of Rome cannot be head of
the Church, because Christ himself is head thereof; then it is for a man to
say, that the King of England cannot be King of England, because God is King of
all the earth, Psalm. 46. 8. As if the King could not be Gods Vicegerent, and
the peoples visible God: so the Pope Christ's Vicar or Deputy, and the Churches
visible head. And let Kings beware how they give way to such Arguments as
these, lest at the last such inferences be made upon themselves.

As strange an inference is that, how that the Church was not built upon Peter,
because it was built upon his Confession; as if it might not be built casually
upon the one, and formally upon the other: as if both these could not stand
together. As if the Confession of Peter's Faith might not be the cause why
Christ built his Church upon his Person; as if Christ did not as well
(personally) tell him, Tu es Petrus: as (significantly) super hanc Petram (id
est, super istam Confessionem) aedificabo Ecclesiam.

No less invalid is that Objection of Protestants against the oeconomacy of
the Bishop of Rome, viz. that saying of Greg. sometimes Bishop of that sea,
viz. He that entitled himself universal Bishop, exalted himself like Lucifer,
above his brethren, and was a forerunner of Antichrist: As if there were no
more meanings in the word Universality than one: as if there were not a
Metaphorical as well as a Literal and Grammatical sense: as if Saint Gregory
might not censure this title of Universality in the Grammatical, and exclusive
meaning, (which being so taken, would have excluded all other Bishops from
their Offices, Essences, and Proprieties which they held under Christ) thereby
depriving them of the Key of orders, and yet still keep the Superiority, (viz.
of one Bishop over another, and himself over all in a Metaphorical and
transferent sense) thereby still keeping the Key of Jurisdiction in his own
hands; and this not only is, but must be the meaning of Saint Gregory; for he
thus explicates the matter himself, lib. 4. ind. 13. cp. 32. viz. The care of
the Church has been committed to the Prince of all the Apostles, Saint Peter:
and yet had Saint Peter called himself the Universal Apostle; in the first
sense (seeing that Christ Jesus made other Apostles as well as him) he had been
no Apostle himself, but Antichrist; and yet this hindered not, but that the care
and principality was committed unto Peter: Whereby you may plainly see, how he
ascribes a head-ship over the Church, whilst he denies the Universality of
Episcopacy. Wherefore, having showed Your Majesty my Church, I humble beg, that
You will be pleased either to give me a few lines in answer hereunto, or else
to show me Yours.

The KINGS Paper in Answer to the Marquess.
MY Lord: I have perused your Paper, whereby I find, that it is no strange
thing to see Error triumph in Antiquity, and flourish all those Ensigns of
Universality, Succession, Unity, Conversion of Nations, etc. in the face of
Truth: and nothing was so familiar either with the Jews, or Gentiles, as to
besmear the face of Truth with spots of novelty: For this was Ieremiahs case,
Ier. 44. 16. viz. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the Name of
the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever
thing goes forth out of our own mouths: to burn incense unto the Queen of
heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her as we have done, we, and our
fathers, our Kings and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem as we have done: there is Antiquity, we and our Fathers: there is
Succession, In the Cities of Judah and Jerusalem: There is Universalitie: so
Demetrius, urged Antiquity and Universality for his godde (...): viz. That her
Temple should not be despised, (...) Magnificence destroyed, whom all Asia and
the world worshipped. So Symachus that wise Senator, though a bitter enemy to
the Christians: Servanda est inquit tot seculis fides, and sequendi sunt nobis
parents qui feliciter sequuti sunt suos: we must defend that Religion which
has worn out so many ages, and follow our Fathers steps, who have so happily
followed theirs. So Prudentius would have put back Christianity it self, viz.
Nunc dogma nobis Christianum nascitur post evolutos mill demum Consules: Now
the Christian Doctrine begins to spring up after the revolution of a thousand
Consul-ships: But Ezekiel reads us another lecture. Ne obdurate cervices
vestras ut patres vestri, cedite manum Iehovae, ingredimini sanctuarium ejus,
quod sanctificavit in seculum, and colite Iehovam Deum vestrum: Be not
stiff-necked as your fore fathers were, resist not the mighty God, enter into
his Sactuary which he has consecrated for ever, and worship ye the Lord your
God.

Radbodus, King of Phrygia, (being about to be baptized) asked the Bishop, what
was become of all his ancestors, who were dead without being baptized? The
Bishop answered: that they were all in hell; whereupon the King suddenly
withdrew himself from the font, (saying) Ibi profecto me illis Comitem
adjungam: Thither will I go unto them: no less wise are they, who had rather
err with fathers and Councels, then rectify their understanding by the word
of God, and square their faith according to its rules.

Our Savior Christ says, we must not so much hearken to what has been said by
them of old time, Mat. 21. 12. as to that which he shall tell you, where
Auditis dictum esse antiquis is exploded: and Ego dico vobis is come in its
place, which of them all can attribute that credit to be given unto him, as is
to be given to Saint Paul. Yet he would not have us to be followers of him
more, then he is a follower of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Wherefore if you cry never
so loud, Sancta matter Ecclesia, sancta matter Ecclesia, the holy mother Church,
holy mother Church as of old, they had nothing to say for themselves, but
Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord,
we will cry as loud again with the Prophet: Quomodo facta est meretrix Urbs
fidelis? how is the faith full City become a harlot? if you vaunt never so much
of your Roman Catholic Church: we can tell you out of Saint John, that she is
become the Synagogue of Satan: neither is it impossible, but that the house of
prayers may be made a Den of thieves: you call us heretics; we answer you with
Saint Paul, Act. 24. 14. After the way which you call heresy, so worship we
the God of our fathers, believing all things which were written in the Law and
the Prophets.

I will grant you, that all those marks which you have set down, are marks of
the true Church; and I will grant you more, that they were belonging to the
Church of Rome: but then you must grant me thus much, that they are as well
belonging to any other Chucch, who hold and maintain that Doctrine which the
Church of Rome then maintained, when she wrought those conversions: and not at
all to her, if she have changed her first love, and fallen from her old
principles; for it will do her no good to keep possession of the keys, when
the lock is changed: now to try whether she has done so or no, there can be no
better way, then by searching the Scriptures; for though I grant you that the
Catholic Church is the White in that Butt of earth at which we all must aim;
yet the Scripture is the heart center, or peg in the midst of that white that
holds it up, from whence we must measure, especially when we are all in the
white. We are all of us in gremio Ecclesiae; so that controversies cannot be
decided by the Catholic Church, but by the Scriptures, which is the thing by
which the nearenesse unto truth must be decided; for that which must determine
truth must not be fallible: but whether you mean the consent of Fathers, or the
decrees of general Counsels, they both have erred; I discover no Fathers
nakedness; but deplore their infirmities, that we should not trust in arms of
flesh: Tertullian was a montanist; Cyprian a rebaptist; Origin, an
Anthropomorphist; Heirom, a Monoganist; Nazianzen, an Angelist; Eusebius, an
Arrian; Saint Augustine had written so many errors, as occasioned the writing
of a whole book of retractations: they have often times contradicted one
another, and sometimes themselves.

Now for general Counsels: Did not that Concilium Ariminense, conclude for the
Arrian heresy? Did not that Concilium Ephesinum, conclude for the Eutichian
heresy? Did not that Concilium Carthaginense, conclude it not lawful for
Priests to marry? Was not Athanasius condemned In concilio Tyrioi? Was not
Eiconolatria established In concilio Nicaeno secundo?

What should I say more? when the Apostles themselves, less obnoxious to
error, either in life or doctrine, more to be preferred then any, or all the
world besides; one of them betraies his Savior, another denies him; all
forsake him. They thought Christ's Kingdom to have been of this world; and a
promise only unto the Jews, and not unto the Gentiles; and this after the
resurrection.

They wondered that the holy Ghost should fall upon the Gentiles. Saint John
twice worshipped the Angel, and was rebuked for it, Apoc. 22. 8. Saint Paul saw
how Peter walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.
14. Not only Peter, but other of the Apostles, were ignorant, how the word of
God was to be preached unto the Gentiles.

But who then shall roll away the stone from the mouth of the monument? Who
shall expound the Scriptures to us? one pulls one way, and another another: by
whom shall we be directed?

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. You that cry up the Fathers,
the Fathers so much; shall hear how the Fathers do tell us that the Scriptures
are their own interpreters.

Irenaeus, who was scholar to Policarpus, that was scholar to Saint John,
lib. 3. cap. 12. thus says, Ostentiones quae sunt in Scriptur is non possunt
ostendi nisi ex ipsis Scriptur is, the evidences which are in Scripture cannot
be manifested but out of the same Scripture.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Nos ex ipsis de ipsis Scriptur is, perfect
demonstrantes ex fide persuademus demonstrative: Strom. li. 7. Out of the
Scriptures themselves, from the same Scriptures perfectly demonstrating, do we
draw demonstrative persuasions from faith.

Crysost. Sacra Scriptura seipsam exponit, and auditorem errare non sinit.
Basilius Magnus, Quae ambigue and quae obscure, videntur dici in quibusdam
locis sacrae Scripturae, ab i is quae in aliis locis aperta and perspicua sunt
explicantur, Hom: 13. in Genesis Those things which may seem to be ambiguous and
obscure in certain places of the holy Scripture, must be explicated from those
places which elsewhere are plain and manifest.

Augustinus, Ille qui cor habet quod precisum est iungat Questionum asceticarum
secundum eptt regula trecentissima sexagessima.
Scripturae, and legate superiora vel inferiora and inveniet sensum. Let him who
has a precise heart join it unto the Scriptures: and let him observe what
goes before, and that which follows after, and he shall find out the sense.

Gregorius says (Ser. 49. De verbis Domini.) Per Scripturam loquitur Deus omne
quod vult: and voluntas dei sicut in testamento, sic in evangelio inquiratur.
By Scripture God speaks his whole mind; and the will of God, as in the old
Testament so in the new, is to be found out.

Optatus contra Parmenonem, lib. 5. Number quis aequior arbiter veritatis divinae
quam Deus, aut ubi deus manifestius loquitur quam in verbo suo: Is there a
better judge of the divine verity then God himself? or where does God more
manifestly declare himself then in his own word?

What breath shall we believe then, but that which is the breath of God; the
holy Scriptures? for it seems all one to Saint Paul to say, dicit Scriptura,
the Scripture says: Romans 4. 3. and dicit Deus the Lord says: Romans 9. 17. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3. 22. for that which Romans 11. 32.
he says, God has concluded all, etc. how shall we otherwise conclude then but
with the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 12. have received not the spirit of the world, but
the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given
unto us of God.

They who know not this spirit, do deride it: but this spirit is hidden Manna,
Apo. 2. 17. which God gives them to eat who shall overcome; it is the white
stone wherein the new name is written, which no man knows but he that
received it. Wherefore we see the Scripture is the rule by which all
differences may be composed: it is the light wherein we must walk: the food of
our souls: an antidote that expels any infection: the only sword that kills the
enemy: the only plaster that can cure our wounds: and the only documents that
can be given toward the attainment of everlasting salvation.

The Marquesses reply to the Kings Paper.
May it please your most excellent Majesty.

YOur Majesty is pleased to wave all the marks of the true Church; and to make
recourse unto the Scriptures.

I humbly take leave to ask your Majesty what heretic that ever was did not
do so? How shall the greatest heretic in the world, be confuted or censured;
if any man may be permitted to appeal to Scriptures: margind with his own
notes, senc'd with his own meaning, and enlivened with his own private
spirit? to what end were those marks so fully, both by the Prophets, the
Apostles, and our Savior himself set down, if we make no use of them? To
what use are landmarks set up, if Mariners will not believe them to be such?

Yet notwithstanding after that I have said, what I have to say in removal of
certain obstacles that lie in the way, I shall lead your Majesty to my Church,
through the full body of the Scriptures, or not at all, and then I shall leave
it to your royal heart to judge (when you shall see that we have Scripture on
our side) whether or no the interpretation thereof be likelier to be true, that
has been adjudged so by Councels, renowned Fathers, famous for sanctity and
holiness of life; continued for the space of a thousand or twelve hundred
years, by your own confession, universally acknowledged; or that such a one as
Luther (his word shall be taken, either without Scripture, or against it, with
sic volo, and sic jubeo; a man who confessed himself, that he received his
doctrine from the Devil; or such a one as Calvin and their associates,
notoriously infamous in their lives and conversations, plain Rebels to their
Moses and Aaron, united to the same person) should counter balance all the
worthies determinations of Councels, and the continued practice, which so many
ages produced.

If your Majesty means by the Church all the professors of the Gospel; all
that are Christians, are so the true Church; then we are so in your own sense,
and you in ours: then none who believe in the blessed Trinity, the Articles of
the Creed; none, who deny the Scriptures to be the word of God, let them
construe them as they please, can be heretical, or of a wrong Religion;
therefore we must contradistinguish them thus: and by the Protestant Church and
Religion, we must understand those opinions which the Protestants hold contrary
to the Church of Rome; and by the Roman, the opinions which they hold
dissenting from the Protestant; and then we will see whether we have Scripture
for our Religion or not; and whether you have Scripture for what you maintain;
and whose opinions are most approved of by the Primitive times, and Fathers;
and what ground your late Divines have built their new opinions upon; and then
I shall give you Majesty an answer to the objection which you make against our
Church: viz. That she has forsaken her first love, and fallen from the
principles which she held, when she converted us to Christianity.

But first to the removal of those rubs in our way; and then I shall show as
much reverence to the Scripture as any Protestant in the world; and shall
endeavor to show your Majesty that the Scriptures are the Basis or foundation
upon which our Church is built.

Your Majesty was pleased to urge the errors of certain Fathers, to the
prejudice of their authority; which I conceive would have been so, had they
been all Montanists, Rebaptists, all Anthropomorphists, and all of them
generally guilty of the faults, wherewith they were severally charged in the
particulars: seeing that when we produce a Father, we do not intend to produce
a man in whose mouth was never found guile: the infallibility being never
attributed by us, otherwise then unto the Church, not unto particular
Churchmen: as Your Majesty has most excellently observed, in the failings of
the holy Apostles, who erred after they had received the holy Ghost, in so
ample manner: but when they were all gathered together in Council, and could
send about their edicts, with these capital letters in the front, Visum est
spiritui sancto and nobis, Acts 15. 28. then I hope your Majesty cannot say,
that it was possible for them to err.

So, though the Fathers might err in particulars, yet those particular errors
would be swallowed up in a general Council, and be no more considerable in
respect of the whole, then so many heat-drops of error, can stand in
competition with a cloud of witnesses, to the divine truth; and be no more
prejudicicall to their general determinations, then so many exceptions, are
prejudicial to a general rule. Neither is a particular defection in any man
any exception against his testimony, except it be in the thing wherein he is
deficient; for otherwise we should be of the nature of the flies, who only
prey upon corruption, leaving all the rest of the body that is whole unregarded.

Secondly, Your Majesty taxes general Councels for committing errors. If Your
Majesty would be pleased to search into the times wherein those Councels were
called, Your Majesty shall find, that the Church was then under persecution,
and how that Arrian Emperors, rather made Assemblies of Divines, then called
any General Councels; and if we should suppose them to be general and free
Councels, yet they could not be erroneous in any particular man's judgment,
until a like general Council should have concluded the former to be
erroneous; (except you will allow particulars to condemn generals, and
private men the whole Church) all general Councels, from the first unto the
last that ever were, or shall be, makes but one Church: and though in their
intervals, there be no session of persons, yet there is perpetual virtue in
their decretals, to which every man ought to appeal for judgment, in point of
controversy. Now as it is a maxim in our law, Nullum tempus occurrit regi: so
it is a maxim in divinity, Nullum tempus occurrit deo: Ubi deus est, as he
promised, I will be with you always unto the end of the world; that is with
his Church, in directing her chief Officers, in all their consultations,
relating either to the truth of her doctrine, or the manner of her discipline:
wherefore if it should be granted, that the Church had at any time determined
amiss; the Church cannot be said to have erred, because you must not take the
particular time for the Catholic Church; because the Church is as well
Catholic for time as territory; except that you will make rectification an
error.

For as in civil affairs, if that we should take advantage of the Parliaments
nulling former acts; and thereupon conclude, that we will be no more regulated
by its laws, we should breed confusion in the Commonwealth; for as they alter
their laws, upon experience of present inconveniences; so the Councels change
their decrees according to that further knowledge which the holy writ assures
us, shall increase in the latter days; provided that this knowledge be
improved by means approved of, and not by every enthusiastic, that shall
oppose himself against the whole Church.

If I recall my own words, it is no error, but an avoidance of error: so where
the same power rectifies it self, though some things formerly have been
decreed amiss, yet that cannot render the decrees of general Councels not
binding, or incident to error, quoad ad nos; though in themselves, and pro
tempore, they may be so.

As to Your Majesty's objecting the errors of the holy Apostles, and penmen of
the holy Ghost; and Your inference thereupon, viz. That truth is no where to be
found but in holy Scripture; under Your Majesty's correction, I take this to be
the greatest argument against the private spirit (urged by your Majesty) its
leading us into all truth, that could possibly be found out. For if such men
(as they) endued with the holy Ghost, enabled with the power of working
miracles; so sanctified in their callings, and enlightened in their
understandings could err: how can any man (less qualified) assume to himself
a freedom from not erring, by the assistance of a private spirit?

Lastly, as to Your Majesty's quotations of so many Fathers, for the Scriptures
easiness and plainness to be understood. If the Scriptures themselves do
tell us, that they are hard to be understood, so that the unlearned and
unstable wrest them to their own destruction: 2 Peter 3. 16. and if the
Scripture tells us, that the Eunuch could not understand them except some man
should guide him: as Acts 8. 13. and if the Scripture tells us, that Christ's
own Disciples could not understand them, until Christ himself expounds them
unto them, as Luke 24, 25. and if the Scriptures tell us, how the Angel wept
much, because no man was able either in heaven or earth to open the Book sealed
with seven seals, nor to look upon it: as Apoc. 5. 1. then certainly all these
sayings of theirs are either to be set to the errata's that are behind their
books, or else we must look out some other meaning of their words, then what
Your Majesty has inferred from thence; as thus, they were easy, id est, in
aliquibus, but not in omnibus locis; or thus, they were easy as to the
attainment of particular salvation, but not as to the general cognizance of
all the divine mystery therein contained, requisite for the Churches
understanding, and by her alone, and her consultations and discusments (guided
by an extraordinary and promised assistance) only to be found out; of which as
to every ordinary man, this knowledge is not necessary, so hereof he is not
capable.

First, we hold the real presence; you deny it: we say his body is there: you
say there is nothing but bare bread: we have Scripture for it, Mat. 20. 26.
Take, eat, this is my body, so Luke 22. 19. This is my body which is given for
you.

You say that the bread which we must eat in the Sacrament, is but dead bread;
Christ says that that bread is living bread: you say how can this man give us
his flesh to eat? we say that that was the objection of Jews, and Infidels, (1
John 6. 25.) not of Christians and believers: you say it was spoken
figuratively; we say it was spoken really, re vera, or as we translate it
indeed, John 6. 55. But as the Jews did, so do ye, First, murmur that Christ
should be bread, John. 6. 41. Secondly, that that bread should be flesh, John
6. 52. And thirdly, that that flesh should be meat indeed, John 6. 55. until
at last you cry out with the unbelievers, this is a hard saying, who can hear
it? John 6. 60. had this been but a figure, certainly Christ would have removed
the doubt, when he saw them so offended at the reality, John. 6. 61. He would
not have confirmed his saying, in terminis, with promise of a greater wonder,
John 6. 62. you may as well deny his incarnation, his ascension, and ask, how
could the man come down from heaven and go up again? (if incomprehensibility
should be sufficient to occasion such scruples in your breasts) and that which
is worse then naught, you have made our Saviors conclusion an argument against
the premises; for where our Savior tells them thus to argue according unto
flesh and blood, in these words, the flesh profits nothing; and that if they
will be enlivened in their understanding, they must have faith to believe it in
these words, it is the Spirit that quickneth, John 6. 63. They pervert our
Saviors meaning into a contrary sense, of their own imagination: viz. the
flesh profits nothing, that is to say, Christ's body is not in the Sacrament:
but in the Spirit that quickneth, that is to say, we must only believe that
Christ dyed for us, but not that his body is there: as if there were any need
of so many inculcations, pressures, offenses, mis-believings, of and in a thing
that were no more but a bare memorial of a thing; being a thing nothing more
usual with the Israelites: as the twelve stones which were erected as a sign
of the children of Isreal's passing over Jordan: That when your children shall
ask their Fathers what is meant thereby, then ye shall answer them, etc. Josh.
4. there would not have been so much difficulty in the belief, if there had not
been more in the mystery; there would not have been so much offense taken at a
memorandum, nor so much stumbling at a figure.

The Fathers are of this opinion, Saint Ignat. in Ep. ad Smir. Saint Justin.
Apol: 2. ad Antonium: Saint Cyprian Ser. 4. de lapsis. Saint Ambr. lib. 4. de
Sacram. Saint Remigius, etc. affirm the flesh of Christ to be in the
Sacrament, and the same flesh which the word of God took in the Virgins womb.

Secondly, We hold that there is in the Church an infallible rule for
understanding of Scripture, besides the Scripture it self, this you deny: this
we have Scripture for, as Romans 12. 16. we must prophecy according to the rule
of faith: we are bid to walk according to this rule: Gal. 6. 16. we must
increase our faith, and preach the Gospel, according to this rule: 1 Cor. 10.
15. this rule of faith, the holy Scriptures call a form of doctrine: Romans 6.
17. a thing made ready to our hands: 2. Cor. 10. 16. that we may not measure
our selves by our selves: 2 Cor. 10. 12. the depositions committed to the
Churches trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. for avoiding of profane and vain bablings and
oppositions of sciences, and by this rule of faith, is not meant the holy
Scriptures; for that cannot do it, as the Apostle tells us, whilst there are
unstable men who wrest this way and that way, to their own destruction; but it
is the tradition of the Church and her exposition, as it is delivered from hand
to hand as most plainly appears, 2. Tim. 2. 2. viz. The things which thou have
heard of us (not received in writing from me or others) among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach it to others
also.

Of this opinion are the Fathers; Saint Irenaeus 4. chap. 45. Tertul: de
praescr. and Vincent. lir. in suo commentario says, It is very needful in
regard of so many errors proceeding from misinterpretations of Scripture, that
the line of prophetical and Apostolical exposition, should be directed
according to the rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense; and says
Tertullian prae. script. advers. haeres. chap. 11. We do not admit our
adversaries to dispute out of Scripture till they can show who their Ancestors
were, and from whom they received the Scriptures: for the ordinary course of
Doctrine, requires that the first question should be, from whom, and by whom,
and to whom, the form of Christian Religion was delivered; otherwise
prescribing against him as a stranger: for otherwise if a heathen should come
by the Bible, as the Eunuch came by the Prophecy of Esaias, and have no Philip
to interpret it unto him, he would find out a Religion rather according to his
own fancy, then divine verity.

In matters of faith, Christ bids us to observe and do whatsoever they bid us
who sit in Moses seat, Mat. 22. 2. therefore surely there is something more to
be observed then only Scripture; will you not as well believe what you hear
Christ say, as what ye hear his Ministers write? you hear Christ when you hear
them, as well as you read Christ when you read his word: He that hears you
hears me: Luke 10. 16.

We say the Scriptures are not easy to be understood; you say they are: we
have Scripture for it, as is before manifested at large: the Fathers say as
much: Saint Irenaeus lib. 2. chap. 47. Origin: contr. Cells: and Saint Ambr.
Epist. 44. ad Constant. calls the Scripture a Sea and depth of prophetical
riddles: and Saint Hier. in praefat: comment. in Ephesians: and Saint Aug: Epist:
119. chap. 21. says: The things of holy Scripture which I know not, are more
then those that I know: and Saint Denis, Bishop of Corinth, cited by Eusebius,
lib. 7. hist. Eccless. 20. says of the Scriptures, that the matter thereof was
far more profound then his wit could reach.

We say that this Church cannot err: you say it can: we have Scripture for
what we say; such Scripture that will tell you that fools cannot err therein:
Esaiah 35. 8. such Scripture as will tell you, if you neglect to hear it, you
shall be a heathen and a publican: Mat. 18. 17. such Scripture as will tell
you, that this Church shall be unto Christ a glorious Church, a Church that
shall be without spot or wrinkle: Ephesians 5. 27. such a Church as shall be
enlivened for ever with his Spirit: Isaiah 59. 21. The Fathers affirm the
samme, Saint Aug: contra Crescon: lib. 1. cap. 3. Saint Cypr: Epist. 55. ad
Cornel. number: 3. Saint Irenaeus lib. 3. chap. 4. Cum multis aliis.

We say the Church has been always visible; you deny it: we have the
Scripture for it, Mat. 5. 14, 15. The light of the world; a City upon a hill
cannot be hid: 2 Cor. 4. 3. Isaiah 22.

The Fathers unanimously affirm the same; Origin: Hom: 30. in Math: That the
Church is full of light even from the East to the West: Saint Chrisost: Hom: 4.
in 6. of Isaiah, That it is easier for the Sun to be extinguished, then the
Church to be darkened: Saint Aug: tract: in Joan: calls them blind, who do not
see so great a mountain: and Saint Cypr: de Unitate Ecclesiae.

We held the perpetual universality of the Church, and that the Church of Rome
is such a Church: you deny it: we have Scripture for it, Psalm. 2. 8. Romans 1. 8.
the Fathers affirm as much, Saint Cypr: ep. 57. writing to Cornelius Pope of
Rome, says, whilst with you there is one mind and one voice, the whole Church
is confessed to be the Roman Church. Saint Aug: de unitate Eccles. chap. 4.
says, who so communicates not with the whole corpse of Christendom, certain
it is that they are not in the holy Catholic Church. Saint Hier. in Apol. ad
Ruffin. says, that it is all one to say the Roman faith, and the Catholic.

We hold the unity of the Church to be necessary in all points of faith: you
deny it: the several articles of your Protestant Churches deny it: we have
Scripture for it, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. Acts 4. 35. 1
Cor. 1. 10. The Fathers are of that opinion, Saint Aug: cont. ep. Par. l. 3.
chap. 5. Saint Cyp. lib. de unitate ecclesiae nu. 3. Saint Hyl. lib. ad
Constantium Augustum.

We hold that every Minister of the Church, especially the supreme Ministers or
head thereof, should be in a capacity of fungifying his office in preaching the
Gospel, administering the Sacraments, baptizing, marrying, and not otherwise,
this we have Scripture for, Heb. No man takes this honor unto himself but he
that is called of God, as Aaron was: this you deny: and not only so, but you
so deny it, as that your Church has maintained and practiced it a long time,
for a woman to be head or supreme moderatrix in the Church; when you know that
according to the word of God (in this respect) a woman is not only forbid to
be the head of the man, but to have a tongue in her head. 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. 1
Cor. 14. 34. yet so has this been denied by you, that many have been hanged,
drawn, and quartered, for not acknowledging it: the Fathers are of our opinion
herein, Saint Damascen. ser. 1. Theod. hist. Eccles. lib. 4. chap. 28. Saint
Ignat. Epist. ad Philodolph. Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 5. de verbis Isaiae.

We say that Christ gave commission to his Disciples to forgive sins, you deny
it; and say, that God only can forgive sins: we have Scripture for it, John 20.
23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whosesoever sins ye
retain, they are retained: and John 20. 21. As my Father has sent me, even so
send I you: and how was that? viz. with so great power, as to forgive sins:
Mat. 9. 3. 8. where note, that Saint Matthew does not set down, how that the
people glorified God the Father, who had given so great power unto God the Son;
but that he had given so great power unto men, loco citato. The Fathers are of
our opinion, S. Aug. tract. 49. in Joan. Saint Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio. l. 3.
Saint Ambros. l. 3. de penitentia. St. Cyril. l. 12. c. 50. says, it is not
absurd to say, That they should remit sins, who have in them the Holy Ghost:
and Saint Basil. l. 5. cont. Eunom. proved the Holy Ghost to be God, (and so
confuted his heresy) because the Holy Ghost forgave sins by the Apostles:
and S. Irenaeus, l. 5. c. 13. so S. Greg. Hom. 6. Evang.

We hold, that we ought to confess our sins unto our Ghostly Father: this ye
deny, saying, that ye ought not to confess your sins but unto God alone,
this we prove out of Scripture: Mat. 3. 5, 6. Then went out Jerusalem, and all
Judah, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins: this
confession was no general confession, but in particular; as appears, Acts 19.
18, 19. And many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their deeds.

The Fathers affirm the same; S. Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 9. Tert. lib. de
Poenitentia: where he reprehendeth some, who for humane shamefac'dnesse,
neglected to go to confession. Saint Ambr. sat to hear confession: Amb. ex
Paulsino: S. Clem. Ep. de fratr. Dom. Origin l. 3. Chrysostom. l. 3. de sacerd. S.
Ambr. orat. in muliere peccatrice, says, confess freely to the Priest the
hidden sins of thy soul.

We hold, that men may do works of supererogation, this you deny: This we
prove by Scripture, Mat. 19. 12. viz. There be Eunuchs which have made
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven: he that is able to receive it,
let him receive it. This is more then a Commandment, as Saint Aug: observes
upon the place, ser. lib. de temp: for of precepts it is not said, keep them,
who is able, but keep them absolutely.

The Fathers are of this opinion: Saint Amb: lib. de viduis. Orig: in c. 15. ad
Romans Eusebius. 1. demonstrat. c. 8. Saint Chry: hom. 8. de act. paenit. Saint
Greg. nicen. 15. Moral: c. 5.

We say, we have free will, you deny it, we prove we have out of Scripture,
viz. 1 Cor. 17. He that stands steadfast in his heart, having no necessity,
but has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart that he will
keep his virgin, does well.

Deuteronomy. 30. 11. I have have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing,
choose life, that thou and thy seed may live: And Christ himself said, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a
Hen gathers her Chickens, and ye would not? where Christ would, and they would
not: there might have been a willingness as well as a willing, or else Christ
had wept in vain; and to think that he did so, were to make him an impostor.

The ancient Fathers are of our opinion: Eusebius: Caesar: de praep. l. 1. c. 7.
Saint Hilde: Trin: Saint Aug: l. 1. ad Simp: q. 4. Saint Ambr: in Luc: c. 12.
Saint Chrysostom: hom: 19. in Gen: Irenaeus l. 4. c. 72. S. Cyril: l. 4. in Joan: in
c. 7. etc.

We hold it possible to keep the Commandments; you say it is impossible: we
have Scripture for it, Luke 1. 6. And they were both righteous before God:
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless: and 1
John 5. 3. His Commandments are not grievous.

The Fathers are for us: Orig: Hom: 9. in Josue: Saint Cyril: lib. 4. cont:
Julian: Saint Hyl: in Psalm. 118. Saint Hier: lib. 3. cont: Pelag: Saint Basil:

We say, faith cannot justify without works: ye say good works are not
absolutely necessary to salvation: we have Scripture for what we say, 1 Cor.
13. 2. Though I have all faith, and have no charity, I am nothing: and James 2.
24. By works a man is justified and not by faith only.

This opinion of yours Saint Aug: lib. de fide and oper: cap. 14. says, was an
old heresy, in the Apostles time; and in the preface of his Comment: upon the
32. Psalm. he calls it the right way to hell and damnation: See Orig: in 5. to
the Rom: S. Hillar. chap. 7. in Mat: S. Amb: 4. ad Heb: etc.

We hold, good works to be meritorious; you deny it: we have Scripture for it,
Mat. 6. 27. He shall reward every man according to his works. Mat. 5. 12. Great
is your reward in heaven. Reward at the end, presupposes merit in the work:
the distinction of secundum, and propter opera; is too nice to make such a
division in the Church.

The Fathers were of our opinion. S. Amb: de Apolog: David. cap. 6. S. Hier:
lib. 3. Cont: Pelag: S. Aug: de Spiritu and lit. cap. ult. and diverse others.

We hold, that faith once had, may be lost, if we have not care to preserve it:
You say it cannot; we have Scripture for it, viz. Luke 8. 13. They on the rock,
are they, which when they hear, receive the word with joy: which, for a while
believe, and in time of temptation fall away. So 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. Which some
having put away, have made shipwreck of their faith.

This is frequently affirmed amongst the Fathers, see S. Aug: de gratia, and
lib. arbit. de correp. and gratia, and ad articulos.

We hold, that God did never inevitably damn any man before he was born: or as
you say, from all eternity; you say, he did: we have Scripture for what we say,
Wis: 1. 13. God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of
the living. 1 Timothy 2. 34. God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved. 2
Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not willing that any should die, but that all should
come to repentance: and if you will not believe, when he says so, believe him
when he swears it: As I live, says the Lord, I do not delight in the death of
a sinner.

The Fathers are of our opinion, S. Aug. lib. 1. Civit. Dei. Tertul. Orat. cap.
8. Saint Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 2. and Saint Amb. lib. 2. de Cani and Abel.

We hold, that no man ought, infallibly, to assure himself of his salvation:
you say he ought, the Scripture says we ought not, 1 Cor. 9. 27. S. Paul was
not assured, but that whilst he preached unto others, he himself might become
a castaway.

Romans 11. 20. Thou stand in the faith: be not highminded, but fear, etc.
least thou also may be cut off. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling.

The Fathers are of our opinion: Amb: Ser. 5. in Psalm. 118. S. Basil. in
Constil. Monast. chap. 2. S. Hier: lib. 2. Advers. Pelagian: S. Crysost. Hom.
87. in Joan. S. Aug: in Psalm. 40. S. Bernard Ser. 3. de Advent. and Ser. 1. de
Sept. says, Who can say I am of the Elect?

We say that every man has an Angel guardian; you say he has not; we have
Scripture for it, viz. Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven, their Angels do always
behold the face of my Father. Acts 12. 13. S. Peter knocking at the door, they
say, it is his Angel; they believed this in the Apostles time: the Fathers
believed it along. S. Greg. Dial. lib. 4. cap. 58. S. Athanas. de Communi
Essentia. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in ep. ad Colos. lib. 6. de Sacer. Greg. Turonens.
lib. de gloria Martyr. S. Aug. ep. ad Probam cap. 19. and S. Jer. upon these
words, Their Angels, Mat 17. 10. calls it a great dignity, which every one has
from his Nativity.

We say, the Angels pray for us, knowing our thoughts, and deeds; you deny it:
we have Scripture for it, Zach. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. Then the Angel of the Lord,
answered, and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against whom thou have had indignation,
these threescore and ten years? Apoc. 8. 4. And the smoke of the incense of
the prayers of the Saints, ascended from the hand of the Angel before the Lord.

This place was so understood by Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 34. and S. Hillary in
Psalm. 129. tells us, This intercession of Angels, Gods nature needs not, but
our infirmities do: So S. Amb. lib. de viduis, Victor. utic. lib. 3. de
persecutione Vandalorum.

We hold it lawful to pray unto them; you not: we have Scripture for it, Genesis
48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless these lads, etc.
Hosea 12. 4. He had power over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and made
supplications unto them.

Saint Augustine expounding these words of Job 19. 21. Have pity upon me, O ye
my friends, for the hand of the Lord is upon me, says, that holy Job addressed
himself to the Angels.

We hold, that the Saints deceased, know what passes here on earth; you say
they know not: we have Scripture for it, Luke 16. 29. where Abraham knew that
there were Moses and the Prophets Books here on earth, which he himself had
never seen when he was alive.

The Fathers say as much, Eusebius. Ser. de Ann. S. Hier. in Epit. Paulae. S.
Maxim. Ser. de S. Agnete.

We say, they pray for us; you not: we have Scripture for it, Apoc. 5. 8. The
twenty four Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them
Harpes, and golden Viols, full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.
Baruch 3. 4. O Lord Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers of the
dead Israelites.

The Fathers were of this opinion, S. Aug. Ser. 15. de verbis Apost. S. Hilar.
in Psalm. 129. S. Damas. lib. 4. de fide cap. 16.

We hold that we may pray to them; you not: we have Scripture for it, Luke 16.
24. Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, etc. You bid us show one
proof, for the lawfulness hereof, when here are two Saints prayed unto in one
verse: and though Dives were in Hell, yet Abraham in Heaven would not have
expostulated with him so much, without a non nobis Domine, if it had been in it
self, a thing not lawful: You will say it is a parable; yet a jury of ten
Fathers, of the grand inquest, as Theophil. Tertul. Clem. Alex. S. Chrysostom. S.
Jer. S. Amb. S. Aug. S. Greg. Euthem. and Ven. Beda, give their verdict, that
it was a true History: but suppose it were a parable; yet every parable is
either true in the persons named, or else may be true in some others: The Holy
Ghost tells no lies, nor fables, nor speaks not to us in parables, consisting
either of impossibilities, or things improbable, Job 5. 1. Call now, if there
be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? It
had been a frivolous thing in Eliphaz, to have asked Job the question; if
invocation of Saints had not been the practice of that time.

The Fathers affirm the same, S. Diony. c. 7. S. Athan. Ser. de Anunt. S.
Basil. Orat. 44. in Mat. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad Popul. S. Hier. prayed to S.
Paula in Epitaph. S. Paulae. S. Maximus to S. Agnes, Ser. de S. Agnete. S.
Bern. to our blessed Lady.

We hold, Confirmation necessary; you not: we have Scripture for it, Acts 8.
14. Peter and John prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost (for
as yet he was fallen upon none of them; only they were baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus) Then laid they their hands on them; and they received the holy
Ghost: Where we see the holy Ghost was given in Confirmation, which was not
given in Baptism: also Heb. 6. 1. Therefore leaving the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith, toward God, of
Baptism, and of Laying on of hands.

The Fathers affirm the same. Tert. lib. de Resurrect. Carn. S. Pacian. lib.
de Bapt. S. Amb. lib. de Sac. S. Hier. Cont. Lucif. S. Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 1.
speaking both of Baptism, and Confirmation, says, Then they may be sanctified
and be the sons of God, if they be borne in both Sacraments.

We hold it sufficient to communicate in one kind; you not: we have Scripture
for it, John 6. 15. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. If
everlasting life be sufficient, then is it also sufficient to communicate under
one kind: So Acts 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine, and fellowship (or communion) and in breaking of bread and prayer:
where is no mention of the cup, and yet they remained steadfast in the Apostles
doctrine, Luke 24. 30. 8. 35. where Christ communicated his two Disciples under
one kind.

Saint Augustine and Theophylact, lib. de Consens. Evang. cap. 25. expound this
place of the blessed Sacrament, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. oper. imperfecti.

We hold, that Christ offered up unto his Father, in the Sacrifice of the Mass
(as an expiation for the sins of the people) is a true and proper Sacrifice;
this you deny: this we prove by Scripture, viz. Malach. 1. 11. From the rising
of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles: and in every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure
offering: This could not be meant of the figurative offerings of the Jews,
because it was spoken of the Gentiles; neither can it be understood, of the
real Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; because that was done but in one
place, and at one time, and then, and there, not among the Gentiles neither:
which could be no other, but the daily Sacrifice of the Mass; which is, and
ever was, from East to West, a pure and daily Sacrifice, Luke 22. 19. This is
my body, which is given for you: not to you; therefore a Sacrifice.

The Fathers are of this opinion: S. Clem. Apost. Constable. lib. 6. cap. 23. who
calls it a reasonable, unbloudy, and Mystical Sacrament, S. Aug. lib. 1.
Cont. advers. leg. and proph. cap. 18. 19. calls it a singular, and most
excellent Sacrifice. S. Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 95. calls it a pure and unbloudy
host, a heavenly, and most reverend Sacrifice. S. Greg. Nicen. Orat. 4. de
Resurrect.

We say that the Sacrament of Orders, confers grace upon those, on whom the
hands of the Presbytery are imposed; you both deny it to be a Sacrament,
notwithstanding the holy Ghost is given unto them thereby; and also you deny,
that it confers any inferior grace at all upon them: we have Scripture for
what we hold, viz. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which
was given thee by Prophecy, and with the laying on the hands of the
Presbytery, So 1 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the
putting on my hands.

S. Aug. lib. 4. Quaest. super Number. S. Cyp. Ep. ad Magnum. Optatus Milevit. the
place begins, ne quis miretur. Tertul. in prescript. The place begins
Edant Origines.

We hold, that the Priest, and other Religious persons who have vowed chastity
to God, may not Marry afterward; you deny, first, that it is lawful to make
any such vows: and secondly, That those who have made any such vows, are not
bound to keep them; we have Scripture for what we hold, Deuteronomie 23. 22.
When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay
it: for the Lord thy God will require it of thee. So 1 Timothy 5. 11, 12. But the
younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton, against the
Lord, they will marry, having damnation; because they have cast off their first
faith. What can be meant hereby, but the vow of Chastity? or by their first
faith, but some promise made to Christ, in that behalf? otherwise, Marriage
could not be damnable: so all the ancient Fathers have expounded it. Saint Aug.
lib. de bona viduit. cap. 9. Saint Athanas. lib. de Virginitat. Saint Epiph:
Here Is. 48. Saint Hier. cont. Jovin. lib. cap. 7.

We say, Christ descended into Hell, and delivered thence the Souls of the
Fathers; ye deny it: we have Scripture for it, viz. Ephesians. 4. 8. When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, etc. Descending first, into the
lower part of the Earth. This lower part of the Earth, could not be a Grave;
for that was the upper part: nor could it have been the place of the damned;
for the Devils would have been brought again into heaven: more clearly, Acts
2. 27. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine
holy one to see corruption: there is hell for his soul for a time; and the
grave for his body, for a while: plainer yet, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. Being put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison: this prison cannot be heaven, nor hell, as
it is the place of the damned; nor the grave, as it is the place of rest;
therefore it must be (as Saint Aug. Epist. 99. ad Evod. says) some third
place; which third place, the Fathers have called Limbus patrum: also Zachary
9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit wherein is water: by this pit, could not be meant the
place of the damned; for they have no share in the Covenant; neither are they
Christ's prisoners, but the devils; neither could this pit be the grave; because
Christ's grave was a new pit, where never any was laid before.

The Fathers affirm as much; Saint Hier. in 4. ad Ephesians. Saint Greg. lib. 13.
Moral. cap. 20. Saint Aug: in Psalm. 3. 7. ver. 1.

We hold purgatory fire, where satisfaction shall be made for sins after
death; you deny it: we have Scripture for it, 1 Cor. 3. 13. 15. The fire shall
try every man's work of what sort it is, if any man's work shall be burnt he
shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Saint
Aug. so interprets this place upon the 37. Psalm. also S. Amb. upon 1 Cor. 3.
and Ser. 20. in Psalm. 118. S. Hier. l. 2. cap. 13. ad verse. Joan. S. Greg. lib.
4. dialog. c. 39. Orig. hom. 9. in c. 15. Exodus


Lastly, We hold extreme Unction to be a Sacrament; you neither hold it to be a
Sacrament, neither do you practice it, as a duty: we have Scripture for it,
James 5. 13. Is any sick among you? let him call the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the Lord; and
the prayer of faith shall save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up; and
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him: Neither any, nor all the
Sacraments, were or could be more effectual, men's good, nor more substantial
in matter, nor more exquisite in form; nor more punctual in designation of
its ministry: other Sacraments being bounded within the limits of the souls
only good; this extends it self to the good both of soul and body: he shall
recover from his sickness, and his sins shall be forgiven him: and yet it is
both left out in your practice, and acknowledgment.

The Fathers are on our side, Orig. Hom. 2. in Levit. S. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de
Sacerd. S. Aug. in speculo and Ser. 215. de temp. Vener. Bed. in 6. Mark, and
S. James, and many others.

Thus most Sacred SIR, we have no reason to wave the Scriptures umpirage; so
that you will hear it speak in the mother language, and not produce it, as a
witness on your side, when the producers tell us nothing, but their own
meaning, in a language unknown to all the former ages, and then tell us, that
she says so, and they will have it so; because, he that has a Bible and a
sword, shall carry away the meaning from him that has a Bible, and never a
sword: nor is it more blasphemy, to say, that the Scripture is the Churches off
spring, because it is the word of God, then it is for me to say, I am the son
of such a man, because God made me instrumentally; I am so, and so was she;
for as says Saint Aug: Evangelio non crederum, nisi me Ecclesiae anthoritas
commoveret. I should not believe the Gospel it self, unless I were moved by
the authority of the Church. There was a Church, before there was a Scripture,
take which Testament you please.

We grant you, that the Scripture is the Original of all light: yet we see
light, before we see the Sun; and we know there was a light, when there was no
Sun: the one is but the body of the other. We grant you the Scriptures to be
the Celestial globe, but we must not grant you that every one knows how to use
it; or that it is necessary or possible they should. We grant that the
Scripture is a light to our feet, and a lantern to our paths: then you must
grant me that it is requisite that we have a guide, or else we may lose our way
in the light, as well as in the dark. We grant you that it is the food of our
souls, yet there must be some body that must divide, or break the bread. We
grant you that it is the only antidote against the infection of the Devil, yet
it is not every ones profession to be a compounder of the ingredients. We grant
your Majesty the Scripture to be the only sword and buckler to defend a Church
from her Ghostly enemies: yet I hope you will not have the glorious company of
the Apostles, and the goodly fellow ship of the Prophets to exclude the noble
Army of Martyrs, and the holy Church, which through all the world does
acknowledge Christ; wherefore having shown Your Majesty how much the
Scriptures are ours: I shall now consider your opinions apart from us, and see
how they are yours; and who sides with You, in Your opinion, besides Your
selves: and first, I shall crave the boldness to begin with the Protestants of
the Church of England.

The Church of England.
WHose Religion, as it is in opposition to ours, consists altogether in denying
(for what she affirms, we affirm the same) as the Real presence; the
infallibility, visibility, universality, and unity of the Church; confession
and remission of sins; free will, and possibility of keeping the Commandments,
etc. All these things you deny, and you may as well deny the blessed Trinity
(for we have no such word in Scripture, only inference) then that which ye
have already denied; and for which we have plain Scripture, Fathers, Councels,
practice of the Church: that which ye hold positive in your Discipline, is more
erroneous, then that which is negative in your Doctrine: as your maintaining a
woman to be head, Supreme, or Moderatrix in the Church, who by the Apostles
rule is not to speak in the Church (or that a Layman may be so) what
Scripture, or Fathers, or custom have ye for this? or that a Layman (as your
Lay-Chancellour) should excommunicate and deliver up souls to Satan? Whereas
matters of so weighty concernment, as delivering of men's souls into the Devils
hands should not be executed, and upon mature deliberation, and immergent
occasions, and not by any, but those who have the undoubted Authority; lest
otherwise, you make the Authority it self to be doubted of. A strange
Religion, whose Ministers are denied the power of remitting sins; whilst
Laymen are admitted to the power of retaining them: and that upon every
ordinary occasion, as non-payment of fees, and the like: Whereas such practices
as these have rendered the rod of Aaron, no more formidable then a reed shaken
with the wind; so that you have brought it to this, that whilst such men as
these were permitted to excommunicate for a threepeny matter, the people made
not a threepeny matter of their Excommunication.

The Church of Saxony.
NOw for the Church of Saxony, you shall find Luther, Ad Argent. An. 1525.
a man not only obtruding new Doctrine upon his Disciples, without Scripture,
or contrary to Scripture; but also Doctrine denying Scripture, to be Scripture,
and vilipending those books of Scripture, which were received into the Canon,
and acknowledged to be the word of God, in all ages. As,

The book of Eccles. saying, That it has never a perfect sentence in it, and
that the Author thereof had neither boots nor spurs, but rid upon a long stick,
or begging shoes, as he did when he was a Friar. Luther anvival. tit. de lib.
novi and ver. testam. Rebenstock, lib. 2. Colloq. laet. Luth. c. de vet. test.


And the book of Job, that the argument thereof, is a mere fiction; invented
only, for the setting down of a true and lively example of patience. Luth.
Ser. convinal tit. ut supra. and tit. de Patrick. and Prophet.


That it is a false opinion, and to be abolished, that there are four Gospels;
and that the Gospel of S. John is only true. Luth. praefat. in nov. test. and
lib. de descript. and Eccles. auth. c. 3.


That the Epistle of S. James is contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and
unworthy an Apostolical spirit. Luth. praef. in Epist. Tac. edit. Jenensi.


And that Moses in his writings, shows unpleasant, stopped and angry lips; in
which the word of grace is not, but of wrath, death and sin. Luth. Tom. 3. Wit.
fol. 422.


He calls him a Jailer, Executioner, and a cruel Sergeant. Fol. 421. 422.


For his doctrine: He holds, a threefold Divinity: or three kinds; as there are
three persons whereupon Zwinglius taxes him for maning three Gods, or three
Natures in the Divinity. Zwingl. part. 2. fol. 474.


He himself is angry with the word Trinity, calling it a humane invention, and
a thing that sounds very coldly. Luth. postill. majore Basil apud Harv g.
enarr Evang. dom. Trinit.


He justifies the Arrians, and says, they did very well in expelling the word
(Homousion) being a word that his soul hated. Luth. l. cont. latom. tom. wit.
imp. an. 1551.


He affirmed that Christ was from all eternity, even according to his humane
nature: taxed for it by Zwing. in these words, how can Christ then be said to
be borne of a woman? Zwingl. Part. 2. fol. 402.


He affirms that, as Christ dyed with great pain, so he seeems to have
sustained pains in Hell after death. Luth. tom. 3. fol. 219.


That the divinity of Christ suffered, or else he were none of his Christ.
Luth. lib. de Council. part. 2. and Hosp. Hist. Sac. part. 2 fol. 76.


That if the humane nature should only suffer for him, that Christ were but a
Savior of a vile account, and had need himself of another Savior. Luth.
Confess. ma. de caena. tom. 3. ten. fol. 454.


Luther held not only consubstantiation, but also (says Hospinian) that the
body and blood of Christ both is, and may be found, according to the substance,
not only in the bread and wine of the Eucharist: or in the hearts of the
faithful, but also in all Creatures, in fire, water, or in the rope and halter
wherewith desperate persons hang themselves. Hospin. v. 61. supra. fol. 44.
Luth. ser. de Mose.


He averreth, that the Ten Commandments belong not unto us, for God did not
lead us, but the Jews forth of Egypt. See epist. ad Galat. c. 4. etc. 20.
Exodus


That faith, except it be without (even the least) good works, does not
justify, and is no faith: Whereof you may see him condemned and cited by
Covel. def. of M. Hooker. page 42.


That we are equal in dignity and honor with Saint Paul, Saint Peter, or the
blessed Virgin Mary, or all the Saints. Luth. tom. 5. fol. 442.


That all the holiness which they have used in fasting, and prayer, enduring
labors, chastising their bodies, austerity and hardness of life, may be daily
performed by a hog or a dog. Luth. praef. in Alex. lib. de Eccles.


That in absence of a Priest, a woman or a boy, or any Christian may absolve.
Luth. tom. 2. fol. 103.


That they only communicate worthily, who have confused and erroneous
consciences. Ibid. fol. 73.


That a Priest, especially in the new Testament, is not made, but borne; not
consecrated, but created. Ibid fol. 367.


That the Sacrament were true, though it were administered by the Devil: See him
baited for it by two of his fellow Protestants. Hosp. Hist. Sac. part 2. fol.
14. Covel. def. of Hooker, page 101.


That among Christians no man can, or ought to be a Magistrate; but each one is
to other equally subject: and that among Christian men, none is superior save
one, and only Christ: Luth. tom. 6. Ger. de saecul. potest.
That the husband, in case the wife refuse his bed; may say unto her, if thou will not, another will; if the Mistress will not, let the maid come. Luth.
tom. 5. fol. 123.
That the Magistrates duty is to put such a wife to death: and that if that the
Magistrate omit to do so, the husband may imagine that his wife is stolen away
by thieves, and slain, and consider how to marry another. Ibid. fol. 123. See
also 111.


That the adulterer may fly into another Country; and if he cannot contain,
marry again. Luth. Ibid. fol. 123.


That Polygamy is no more abrogated then the rest of Moses Law; and that it is
free, as being neither commanded, nor forbidden. Luth. propos. de Bigam. Epist.
An. 1528. propos. 62. 65, 66. See in c. 16. Genesis edit. An. 525.


That it is no more in his power to be without a woman, then it is in his power
to be no man: and that it is more necessary then to eat, drink, purge, or blow
his nose. Luth. tom. 5. fol. 119.


I will give you the latin of another opinion of his, because they are his
own words; but not any of my english shall be accessory to the transportation
of such a blast into my native language: Perinde faciunt qui continenter vivere
instituunt, acsi qui excrementa vel lotium contra naturae impetum retinere
velit: Luth. in suo glossem. in decret. Noreberg.
Luther says, How can man prepare himself to good? seeing it is not in his
power to make his ways evil; for God works the wicked work in the wicked.
Luth. tom. 2. Wit. An. 1551. assert. art. 36. also de servo. arbit. edit. 1603.
fol. 195.


But I pray you where have you this, or any of all this in Scripture, nay what
Scripture have you for it? that Scripture should be no Scripture, as hitherto
he has made a great part of it; and Zwingl. almost all the rest, denying all
Paul's Epist: to be sacred: Zwing. tom. 2. fol. 10. What Council, what Fathers,
what primitive, or sequent Church (Usque ad) ever taught or approved such
doctrine as this? and how are we cried out upon for errors, notwithstanding we
have all for our Justification? and yet this is the man that boasted, that
Christ was first published by him; Luth. Ep. ad Argent. An. 1525.
and by all of you that he was the first reformer: this is he who calls
himself a more excellent Doctor then all those who are in the papacy. Epist.
ad Anonymum. tom. 5.


This is he who thus brags of himself, viz. Dr. Martin Luther will have it so,
a Papist and an Ass are directly the same; so is my will, such is my command;
my will is my reason. Luth. tom. 5. Germ. fol. from 141, to 144.


This is he that tells you, I will have you to know, that I will not
(hereafter) vouchsafe you the honor, as that I will suffer either you, or the
very Angels of heaven, to judge of my doctrine, etc. Nor will I have my
doctrine judged by any, no not by the Angels themselves: for I being certain
thereof, will (by it) be judge both of you and the Angels. Luth. advers. falso
nomin. Eccles. stat. prope init.


And lastly, this is he that gave the alarm to all Christendom, of the
errors, idolatries, superstitions and profaneness of the Church of Rome: but
what Scriptures have you for it, that you should not belive the Scriptures?
what Fathers have you, that you should not believe the Church? what custom
have you, that you should not believe the Fathers, rather then any private
interpretation? the promised holy Ghost, always ruling in the Church, rather
then the presumed private Spirit in any particular man.

The Church of Geneva.
NOw for the Church of Geneva: Calvin coming after him, is not contented to
stop himself at Luthers bounds; but he goes further, and detracts not only
from the Scripture, but from Christ and God himself. For first,

He maintains, that three essences do arise out of the holy Trinity. Tract.
theol. p. 793.


That the Son has his substance distinct from the Father; and that he is a
distinct God, from the Father. Act. Serve. p. 249, 250. 871, 872.


He teaches that the Father can neither wholly, nor by parts, communicate his
nature to Christ; but must withal be deprived thereof himself. Tract. theol.
p. 771, 772.


He denies that the Son is begotten of the Fathers substance and essence;
affirming that he is God of himself, not God of God: 1 Instit. c. 13. Sect.
23. 29.
He says, that that dream of the absolute power of God, which the Schoolmen
have brought in, is execrable blasphemy. Calv. ad c. 23. Ezech. gal. script.
also Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 2.


He says, that where it is said, that the Father is greater then I, it has
been restrained to the humane nature of Christ; but I do not doubt to extend
it to him as God and man. Tract. theol. p. 794. see p. 792. and 2. Instit. cap.
14. Sect. 3. and cap. 17. Jo. v. 12. and c. 22. Math.


He severeth the person of the Mediator from Christ's divine person; maintaining
with Nestorius two persons in Christ, the one humane, and the other divine.
Lib. 1. Instit. cap. 13. Sect 9. 23, 24.


That Christ's soul was subject to ignorance; and that this was the only
difference betwixt us, and him: that our infirmities are of necessity, and this
was voluntary. In cap. 2. Luke v. 40.


That it is evident that ignorance was common to Christ, with the Angels. In
cap. 24. Mat. v. 36.


And particulariseth wherein, viz. that he knew not the day of Judgment; In
cap. 24. Mat. v. 36.
Nor that the Fig Tree was barren which he cursed, till he came near it. In c.
21. Mat. ver. 19. also ib. c. 9. v. 2.


He is not afraid to censure, certain words of Christ to be but a weak
confutation, of what he sought to refute. In c. 12. Mat. v. 25.


And says, Christ seems here not to reason solidly. Id. in c. 9. Mat. v. 5.


He tells us that this similitude of Christ seems to be harsh, and far
fetched, and (a little after) the similitude of sitting does not hang together.
Calv. in c. 16. and 22. Luke.


Where Christ inferred All things, therefore whatsoever you will, etc. Calvin
gives it this gloss: It is a superfluous or vain illation. In c. 7. Mat. v.
12.


This Metaphor of Christ is somewhat harsh: In. c. 9. Mat. v. 49.
He says, insomuch as Christ should promise from God a reward to fasting, it
was an improper speech. In Mat. c. 9. v. 16, 17, 18.


He writes of a saying of Christ, that it seems to be spoken improperly, and
absurdly, in French sans raison. In. c. 3. Joan. v. 21.


He says, that Christ refused, and denied, as much as lay in him, to perform
the office of a Mediator. In c. 26. Mat. v. 39.


That he manifested his own effeminatenesse, by his shunning of death. Cap.
12. Jo. v. 27.


He says, that Thieves, and malefactors, hasten to death with obstinate
resolution; despising it with haughty courage, others mildly suffer it: but
what constancy, stoutnesse, or courage was there in the Son of God, who was
astonished, and in a manner, stricken dead with fear of death? how shameful a
tenderness was it, to be so far tormented with fear of common death, as to
melt in bloody sweat, and not to be able to be comforted but by the sight of
Angels? Lib. 2. Instit. c. 16. Ser. 22.


And that the same vehemence took him from the present memory of the heavenly
decree; so that he forgot at that instant, that he was sent hither to be our
redeemer. In c. 26. Mat. v. 39.


This prayer of Christ was not premeditate: but the force, and extremity of
grief, wringed from him this hasty speech; to which a correction was presently
added, and a little before, he chastises, and recalleth that vow of his, which
he had let suddenly slip. Id. 16.


Thus do we see Christ to be on all sides so vexed, as being overwhelmed with
desparation, he ceased to call upon God: which was as much as to renounce his
salvation, and this (says he) a little before, was not fained, or as a thing
only acted upon a stage. In c. 27. Mat. v 46, 47.


That Christ in his soul suffered the terrible torments of a damned and
forsaken man. Lib. 2 Instit. c. 16. Sect. 10.


In the death of Christ occurs a spectacle full of desperation. In c. 27. Mat
v. 57.


In this spectacle there was nothing but matter of extreme despair. In c. 14.
Joan. v. 6.


It is no marvel if it be said that Christ went down into Hell, since he
suffered that death wherewith God in wrath strikes wicked doers. Lib. 2.
Instit. c. 6. Sect. 10.


That Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father, holds but a second degree
with him in honor, and rule, and is but his Vicar. In c. 26. Mat. v. 64.


Lastly, Calvin holds it to be absurd, that Christ should challenge to
himself, the glory of his own resurrection; when the Scripture, says he,
every where teaches it to be the work of God the Father. In. c. 2. Joan. also
in c. 8. ad Romans


That God is the Author of all those things, which these Popish Judges would
have to happen only by his idle sufferance, Instit. lib. cap. 18. Sect. 3.

That our sins are not only by his commission, but decree, and will: 16. Sect.
1, 2. and lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 3, 4. Which blasphemy is condemned by his
famous brethren: Fleming. lib. de univers. great. p. 109. Osiander Euchir.
Controvers. p. 104. Schaffm. de peccat. causis. p. 155. 27. Sitzlinus disput.
Theol. de providentia Dei, Sect. 141. Insomuch that the Magistrates of Berne,
made it penal by their Laws, for any man to preach, or read any of his books
or doctrine: Vide literas Senate. Bern. ad ministros, An. 1555.

This man strikes neither at the right hand, nor on the left, but at the King
of Israel himself; who can think this man's mouth any slander, or his
invections, a depravement, when he belches forth such blasphemies against the
Son of God, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily? or who could
think this man fit to reform a Church, when nothing more required reformation
then his own errors? But what Scriptures or Fathers is there for all this?

The Doctrine of the Zwinglians.
ZWinglius confesses himself to have been instructed against the Mass, by a
certain admonisher, which he knew not, whether it was black or white. Zwingl.
tom. 2. fol. 249.


The same derided, as illusion by the learned Protestants. Andr. confut.
Grinae. p. 128. 254. 304. Schlus. Theol. Calv. 6. 1. in Proaem.


The same as Luther's Devil, largely set down by himself. In tom. 7. wit.
fol. 228. and tom. 6. Germ. tenen. fol. 28. Calv. theol. l. 2. Act. 1. Zwingl.
tom. 2. fol. 210.


He is taxed by Calvin for depraving the Scripture, for changing the word est,
and putting in significat in his Translation of the New Testament: He says,
that these sayings, and the like, viz. If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments, etc. are but superfluous and hyperbolicall. Zwingl. tom. 1. 137.


He denies, that Original sin can damn us; calling it but a disease or
contagion. Zwingl. tom. 2. fol. 90. See fol. 89. 115, 116. and in Epist. Oecol.
and Zwingl. l. 1. p. 252. 258.


He makes Baptizing of Infants, a thing indifferent; which may be used or left
off. Tom 2. fol. 96.


That Princes may be deposed by the godly, if they be wicked, or go contrary
to the rule of Christ. Tom. 1 fol. 84, 85. and lib. 4. Epist. Swingl: and
Oecol. p. 868, 869.


He says, that when we commit adultery, or murder, it is the work of God:
being the mover, the Author, or inciter, etc. God moves the thief to kill,
etc. he is forced to sin, etc. God hardened Pharaoh, not speaking
hyperbolically, but he truly, hardened him, though he had resisted. Zwing. to.
10. de provid. Dei, fo: 365, 366, 367.


For which he is particularly reprehended by the learned Protestant, Grawerus.
Absurda: Absurd: c. 5. de praedest. fo. 3, 4
But where is there any Scripture, or Fathers or Doctors of the Church, that
ever taught this Doctrine before?

Melancthons Doctrine.
FOr Melancthon he taught that there are three Divinities, as there are three
Persons. Melanct. loc. com. An. 1545. c. de Christo.


For which he is reprehended by Stancarus. l. 4. de Trin.


He affirms polygamy, not to be against Jus Divinum: and advises Hen. 8. unto
it. Melanc. Council. Theol. page 134.


He teaches peremptory resistance against Magistrates. Ep. ad Romans cap. 13.


He inableth the inferior Magistrate, to alter Religion against the contrary
Edicts of the Superior. Con. Theol. part 1. p. 314.


So Calvin, so Beza, so Goodman, so Danaeus, so Knox, so Buch: so Bancroft, so
Fenners, so Scutcliff, so Hottomanus, so Ficlerus, so Renekerus, all hold it
lawful, to depose, murder, or to arraigne their Prince. Call in foreign aid
to assist them. Bestow the Crown at their pleasure. Destroy them, either by
peaceable practices, or open War. Propose rewards to such: but where have they
Scriptures, or Fathers, or times, that showed the practice of such doings,
before these latter times, and latter practices?

The Doctrine of Andreas Musculus.
AS for Andreas Musculus, he was not afraid openly to teach, that the Divine
Nature of Christ, (which is God) died upon the cross with his humane Nature.
Neither did he desist (publicly) to profess and spread abroad this Doctrine
of the death of Christ's Divinity. And that by the help of Johannes Islebius.
Thus far. Sylvest. Ezecanorius. Dial. de corrupt. mor. art. 3. fol. 5. See
Andr. Muscul. and Isleb. in refut. Simleri.


It is manifest, (says Simlerus) forth of the writings of Brentius, Myricus,
and Andreas Musculus, that they make nothing of the ascension of Christ, but a
vanishing, or disappearing. What is this but making way for Mahomet? but what
Scriptures, or Fathers, or times has he wherein this Doctrine was ever taught
before? In vita Bulling. fol. 55.


The Divisions of Protestants.
IF Ye would but consider, how the Lutherans are divided into Antinomians,
Osiandrians, Majorists, Synergists, Stancarians, Amsdorfians, Flaccians,
Substantiarians, Accidentarians, Adjaphorists, Musculans of Effingereans,
Vibiquilists, etc. So dissenting from, and persecuting one another, that they
will not permit one another to live in the same Town, in so much, that
Oecolampadius reckons up seventy seven changes, not only in their explanations
of Scripture, but also in certain imaginary phantsies. Lin. germ. aequa. resp.
ad Luth. Prefat.
Or if we should consider the Divisions that are between the old and new
Sacramentaries, the old, called Zwinglians: the new, Calvinists; with us,
Puritans: in France, Hugonots: in other places Formalists, elsewhere Familists:
somewhere Brownists: every where Arminians, Seekers, Dippers, Shakers, Adamists.

Luther complaining of seven Sects risen in two years; Tom. 16. fol. 335.
And we of new Sects rising every day; If we should consider the several
species of Independency, how it has brought Religion to nothing, but
Confusion, we would conclude with Saint Angustine, That it is necessary, that
(rent and divided into small pieces) we perish, who have preferred the swelling
pride of our haughty Stomachs, before the most holy band of Catholic peace and
Unity. Aug. cont. Parm. l. 1. c. 4.


Whilst the Catholics have no jars undecided, no differences uncomposed;
having one common Father, one Conductor and Adviser; as Sir Edward Sands
confesses. In his Relat. of Religion Sect. 47. fol. 5. 2, 8.
None contend about the Scripture, all Consent and Credit the Fathers, adhere
to the Councels, submit to the holy Sea of Rome. And the Divisions that are,
are but humane dissentions, as is confessed by Luther, Tom. fol. 380.
Beza, Beza Epist. 1
Whitaker, Whit. de Eccles. cont. Bell. cont. 2. q. 5. p. 327.
Fulk Fulk ag. Hesk. Sand. etc. p. 293.
etc.

Thus Religion, being at Unity with it self, is the true Speculum Creatoris,
or looking glass of the Creator: wherein the full proportion of a Deity may
be seen: but once broken into pieces, it may represent diverse faces, but no
true proportion: and loses at once both its value, and its virtue.

I have thus presented Your Majesty, with a view of the Cotholick Religion,
asserted by the Fathers; and the Protestant Religion asserted by their
founders. I shall humbly desire Your Majesty's further patience, that Your
Majesty will be pleased to consider the lives and Conversations of the one,
and of the other: First the rare Sanctity, and admired holiness, which all
ages and writers have ascribed unto these holy Fathers. And the strange and
unheard of blasphemies, vileness and wickedness that are cast upon the other,
not by any of their Adversaries, but by themselves upon one another: If these
testimonies had been by any of our side, I could not have expected credit, but
being by Protestants themselves, I cannot see how it should be denied.

Luther confesses, says the learned Protestant Hospinian, that he was taught
by the devil, that the Mass was naught, and overcome with the devils reasons,
he abolisht it: Hist. Sacr. part. ult. f. 131.


The same confessed by himself: Tom. 7. Wit. fol. 228.
I ingeniously confess (says Luther) that I cannot (henceforth) place
Zwinglius in the number of Christians, Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 190.
and further he affirms that he had lost whole Christ. In fol. 182.
Zwinglius (says Schlusselburg) after the manner of all Heretics was stricken
with the spirit of giddiness, and blindness; deriving it from the etimologie
of his name, in dutch, von them Schwindel. Lin. 2 act. 1.


Gualterus calls Zwinglius, the Author of War, the disturber of peace, proud
and cruel; and instances in his strange attempt against the Tygurines, his
fellows, whom he forced by want, and famine, to follow his doctrine; and that
he dyed in armor, and in the War. In apolog. pro Zwing. 1 tom. fol. 30, 31.
and Osiander Epist. Cent. 16. p. 203.


And Luther says, he dyed like a thief, because he would compel others to
his error. Luther collog. lat. tom. 2. c. de Advers.


And he says further, that he denied Christ and is damned. Luth. col. lat.
tom. 1. c. de dam. and inferno.


He tells us also, that the devil or the devils dam, used to appear to
Carolose, and taught him the exposition of, this is my body. Tom. 3. Jen. Germ.
f. 68. so Chemnitius de caena p. 214.
As also that he possessed him corporally; and that he was possessed with more
devils then one. Luther loc. com. class. 5. c. 15. p. 47.
Neither would he have any man wonder that he calls him devil: for he says he
has nothing to do with him: but has only relation to him, by whom he is
obsest, who speaks by him. Luth. tom. 3. Jen. fol. 61.
The last apparition of the devil to him, which was three days before his
death, is recorded by Albert. Cont. Carlost. fol. 6. See Jo. Schutzl. 50 cause.
c. 50.


If you look into Bezas Epigrams, printed at Paris, An. 1548. you will find
pretty passages concerning his boy Andebers, and his wench Candida; and the
business debated at large, concerning which sin is to be preferred; and his
choosing the boy at last.

Sclusselberg said, that Peter Martyr was a heretic, and dyed so. Theol. Calv.
l. 2. act. 1.


Nicolaus Selneverus said, that Oecolampadius, in his doctrine built upon the
sand. Seln. part. c. Enarrat. ger. in Psalm. f. 215.
And

(Says Luther) Emser: and Oecolampadius, and such like, were hiddenly slain by
those horrible blows and shakings of the devil. Luth. tom. 7. fol. 30.


Simlerus says, that Brentius Miricus, and Andrew Musculus, in their writings,
did nothing else but make way for the devil. Siml. in vita Bulling. fol. 55.


Luther (says Calvin) was infected with many vices; I would he had been more
careful in correcting his vices. Calv. alleged by Schlusselb. theol. call.
lib. 2. fol. 126.


God, for the sin of pride, (wherewith Luther exalted himself) took away his
true spirit. Cont. Rheg. l. Germ. cont. Jo. Hess. de coena domini.


We have found (says Oecalompadius) in the faith and confession of Luthers 12.
Articles, whereof some are more vain then is fitting; some less faithful,
and over-guilefully expounded; others again are false, and reprobate; but some
there are which plainly dissent from the Word of God, and the Articles of
Christian faith. Oecol. resp. ad. Luth. confess. See Zuenckfeld. praef. super
praecept. fidei. artic. and Hospin. hist. Sacra part 2. fol. 5.


Thou O Luther, says Zwinglius, corruptest and adulterest the Scriptures,
imitating therein the Marcionists, and the Arians. Zwing. tom. 2. fol. 412.


In translating and expounding of Scripture, Luthers errors are many, and
manifest. Bucer dial. Cont. Melanct.


Zwinglius tells us, that Luther affirms sometimes this, and sometimes that, of
one and the same thing, that he is never at one with himself; taxing him with
inconstancy, and lightness in the word of God. Zwing. tom. 2. fol. 458.


That he cares not what he says, though he be found contradicting the Oracles
of God. Zwing. tom. 2. resp. ad confess. Luth.


As sure as God is God, so sure, and devilish a liar is Luther. Jo. Camp.
colloq. lat. Luth. Tom. 2. c. de adv. f. 354.


Luthers writings contain nothing, but railing and reproaches: insomuch that
it makes the Protestant Religion suspected, and hated. Tigur. confess. Orthod.
fol. 122, 123.


He calls an anointed King, Hen. 8. of England, a furious dolt, endued with an
impudent and whorish face, without a vein of princely blood in his whole body;
a lying Sophist; a damnable rotten worm, a basilisk, the progeny of an Adder;
scurrilous liar, covered with a title of a King; a clown, a block-head;
foolish, wicked, and impudent Henry: and says, that he lies like a scurrilous
knave: and thou lie in thy throat, foolish and sacrilegious King. Luth. Tom.
2. fol. 333, 334, 335. 338. 340.


Nor did he less rail at other Princes; as at the Duke of Brunswick, in his
Book called Wider hans worst, written purposely against him, as also against
the Bishop of Mentz, one of the Princes Electors. Tom. 3. Germ. fol. 533. 339.
360.
And against the Princes of Germany. Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 190. 200.


No marvel that he says, that he had eaten a peck or two of Salt with the
Devil; and that he knew the Devil very well, and that the Devil knew him
again. Luth. conc. de turb. sedant.


No marvel that he confessed of himself, that the Devil sometimes passed
through his brains. Tom. 3. Jen. Germ. fol. 485.


No marvel that he said, the Devil did more frequently sleep with him, and
cling to him closer, then his Catharine. Luth. Colloq. men's Germ. fol. 281.


No marvel that he said that the Devil walked with him in his bed chamber;
and that he had one or two wonderful Devils, by whom he was diligently and
carefully served: and they no small Devils, but great ones; yea, Doctors of
divinity, amongst the Devils. Luth. 16. fol. 275.


No marvel that his fellow Prot. could wonder how marvelously he bewrayed
himself with his Devils; and that he could use such filthy words, so
replenished with all the Devils in Hell. Tigur. tract. 3. cont. supra. Luth.
confessio.


No marvel that they said that, never any man writ more filthily, more
uncivilly, more lewdly, and beyond all bounds of Christian modesty, then did
Luther. Tigur. theol. Orthod. confess. fol. 10.


No marvel that he is so taxed for his obscenity in his Henzius Anglicus,
against King Hen. the eight, for his beastliness in his Hans worst against the
Jews: for his filthy mentioning of Hogs; for his stinking repetition of turds
and dunghils, in his Schemhamphorise: But if you will hear of his Masterpiece,
you mast read the Book which he writ against the Pope; where he asks him, out
of what mouth (O Pope) do thou speak, is it out of that from whence thy farts
do burst? If it come thence, keep it to thy self: if it comes from that
wherein thou powrest thy Corisca wine, let the Dog fill that with his
excrements; good Ass do not kick; kick not my little Pope: O my dear Ass,
do not so: fie how this little Pope has bewrayed himself. Luth. cont.
pontif. Romans adiab. fund. in tom. 8. Jen. p. 207, 208.


Is this the way to win to his side? or to gain souls to Christ? or to reform
Churches? or to confute heresies? It is observed, that Saint Paul in his
Epistles repeated the sacred name of Jesus 500 times, and it is the observation
of the learned Tygurin Divines, that so many times Luther has used the name of
Devil in his Books: and it is no marvel that they burst out into this
admiration; How wonderful is Luther here, with his Devils! what impure words
he uses, with how many Devils does he burst? Theol. Tigur. confess. Germ. fol.
3. and part 3. fol. 114.


Nor marvail that Zwinglius says to him, we fill not our Books with so many
Devils, nor do we bring so many armies of Devils against thee. Zwing. tom. 2.
fol. 381.


If you can expect to gather figgs from thorns, or grapes from thistles, then
ye may expect words from a sanctified spirit, to proceed from such a mouth,
else not.

What should I say more? Melancthon tells us, that Carolostadius was a
barbarous fellow; without wit, without learning, without common sense; in whom
was no sign of the holy Ghost: but manifest tokens of impiety. Melanct. Epist.
ad Freder. micon. Hosp. hist. Sac.


Lastly, Hutterus Beza's own fellow Protestant, thus says of him, and casts
this dirt in his face, which is so shameless a testimony, that you must give
me leave to throw a latin vail over it, viz. Beza in fine libri, de absentia
corporis Christi in coena scribit; Candidae, sive Amascae suae, culum, imo
partem diversam, magis adhuc pudendam, mundiora esse, quam illorum ora, qui
simpliciter verbis Christi inherentes, credant se praesens Christi Corpus in
coena sacra, ore suo accipere. Hut. explic. lib. concord. art. 7. p. 703.


And another: Beza, by his most filthy manners, was a disgrace to honest
Discipline; who in sacrilegious verse published to the world, his detestable
loves, his unlawful carnal acts, whoredoms, and fowl adulteries: not content
that himself only should like a hog wallow in the dirt of wicked lusts, but
he must also pollute the ears of studious youth with his filth. Tilm. Heshus.
Ver. and Sanc. Conf.


I could enlarge my Paper to a volume of like instances in others, but these
are the prime reformers of the Protestant Churches: and how the people edified
under their Doctrine; these Narratives from their own mouths shall tell you.

When we were seduced by the Pope (says Luther) every man did willingly follow
good works: and now every man neither says, nor knows any thing, but how to
get all to himself, by exactions, pillage, theft, lying, usury. Luth. Dom. 26.
post Trin. See Mr. Stubs motive to good works. p. 44, 45.


Certainly, to speak the truth, there is many times found Conscionable, and
plainer dealing amongst most Papists, then among many Protestants. And if we
look narrowly to the ages past, we shall find more godliness, devotion and
zeal, (though blind) more love, one toward another, more fidelity and
faithfulness, every way in them, then is now to be found in us. Master Stubs
motive, page 43.


If any man be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons turbulent,
deceitful, Cosoners, Usureis, let him go to any City, where the Gospel is
purely preached, and he shall find them there by multitudes. For it is more
manifest then the day light, that there were never among the Ethnicks, Turks,
or infidels more unbridled, and unruly persons, with whom all virtue and
honesty is quite extinct, then are amongst the Professonrs of the Gospel. Andr.
Muscul. Domin. 1. Adv. See him also lib. de Prophet. and Sim. Paulus in Sermon.
Dom. 13. post Trinit.


The children of them of the reformed Gospel grow every day worse, more
untractable, and dare commit such crimes, as men of former times were never
subject to. Jo. Wygand. l. de bon. and mal. Germ.


If you cast your eyes upon Protestant Doctors, you shall find that some of
them moved through vain glory, envious zeal, and a prejudicate opinion,
disorder the true Doctrine, disperse, and earnestly defend the false; some of
them without cause stir up contentions, and with inconsiderate spite defend
them: many wrest their Doctrines every way, of purpose to please their Princes,
and the people: by whose grace and favor they are maintained: they overthrow
with their wicked life, all that they had formerly built with their true
doctrine. Paul Eber. praefat. comm. Philippi. in Epist. ad Cor.


How could the people be better, when their Ministers were so bad? like lips,
like lettice. I will conclude all with the learned Protestant, Zanchius, and
then you will neither wonder at one or other; I have read (says he) the Latin
copy of the Apology, and diligently read it over, not without choler, when I
perceived what manner of writing, very many (let me not say for the most part,
but all) do use, in the Churches of the reformed Gospel, who would seem
(notwithstanding) to be Pastors, Doctors, and Pillars of the Church.

The state of the question, that it may not be understood, we often, (of set
purpose) over-cloud with darkness: things which are manifest, we impudently
deny: things false, we (without shame) avouch: things plainly impious, we
propose as the first principles of faith: things orthodoxall, we condemn of
heresy: Scripture at our pleasure, we detort to our own dreams: we boast of
Fathers, when we will follow nothing less then their doctrine: to deceive, to
calumniate, to rail, is familiar with us: so as we may defend our cause, good
or bad, by right or by wrong; all other things we turn upside down: Oh times,
Oh manners! Zanch. epist. ad Jo. Sturm. this in fine, l. 7. and 8. Misccllan.


It is no marvel that M. Sutcliff, says, that the Protestant writers offered
great violence to the Scriptures, expounding them contrary both to ancient
Fathers, History, and common reason. Sutclif. answ. Call. pet. p. 141.


It is no marvel that Cambden tells us, that Holland is a fruitful province of
heretics: Elizab. p. 300


It is no marvel that Your royal Father tells us, that both Hungary, and
Bohemia, abound with infinite varieties of sects. K. James his Works, p. 371


It is no marvel, that he said he could never see a Bible well translated into
English; and that the worst of all was the Geneva, whereunto were added notes,
untrue, seditious, and savouring too much of dangerous, and traitorous
conceits. Page 45, 46.


It is no marvel that He protested before the great God, that you should never
find among the Highland, or Border-theeves, greater ingratitude, more lies, and
vile perjuries, then with those phanatick spirits. K. James his Works, p. 161.


It is no marvel that M. Bancroft said that the Puritans of Scotland, were
published in a Declaration by his Majesty, to be unnatural Subjects,
seditious, troublesome, and unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies to the
King, and the Commonwealth of their own native Country. Dang. posit. 22.


And lastly, because your Church of England most followed Calvin's doctrine of
any of the rest, I shall show you what end he made, answerable to his
beginning, and course of life, written by two known and approved Protestant
Authors, viz. God in the rod of his fury, visiting Calvin, did horribly punish
him, before the fearful hour of his unhappy death; for he so struck this
heretic with his mighty hand, that being in despair, and calling, upon the
Devil, he gave up his wicked soul, swearing cursing, and blaspheming, dying
upon the disease of lyce and worms, increasing in a most loathsome ulcer about
his privy parts, so as none present could endure the stentch; these things are
objected unto Calvin in public writing, in which also horrible things are
declared concerning his lasciviousness, his sundry abominable vices, and
Sodomiticall lusts, for which last he was by the Magistrate (at Nayon) under
whom he lived branded on the shoulder with a hot borning iron; And this is said
of him by Schlusberg. Theolog Calvinist. lib. 2. fol. 72.
She which is likewise confirmed by Jo. Herennius. li. de vita Calvini.


It may be your Majesty may taxt me of bitterness, or for the discovery of
nakedness. But I hope you will give me leave to look what staff I lean upon
when I am to look down upon so great and terrible a precipice as Hell, and to
consider the rottenness of the several rounds of that ladder, which is
proposed to me for my ascent unto heaven, and to forewarne others of the
dangers I epsy; their own words can be none of my railing: nor their own
accusations, my error: except it be a fault, to take notice, of what is
published, and make use of what I see: Ex ore tuo was our Saviors rule, and
shall be mine. There has not been used one Catholic Author throughout the
accusation, and I take it to be the providenee of God, that they should be thus
infatuated, as to accuse one another, that good men may take heed how they rely
upon such men's Judgments, in order to their eternal Salvation.

As to Your Majesty's Objection, that we of the Church of Rome fell away from
our selves, and that you did not fall away from us, as also to the common
saying of all Protestants, bidding us to return to our selves, and they will
return to us, we accept of their offer, we will do so; that is to say, we
will hold our selves to the same Doctrine, which the Church of Rome held,
before she converted this Nation to Christianity, and then they cannot say, we
fell away from them, or from our selves, whilst we maintain the same Doctrine
we held before you were of us: that is to say, whilst we maintained the same
Doctrine that we maintained during the four first Councels, acknowledged by
most Protestants, and during Saint August, time concerning whom Luther himself
acknowledged, That after the sacred Scriptures, there is no Doctor of the
Church to be compared, Luth. loc. com. Class. 4. p. 45.
thereby excluding himself and all his associates from being preferred before
him, concerning whom Master Field of the Church writes, that Saint Aug. was the
greatest Father since the Apostles. lib. 3. fol. 170.
Concerning whom Covel writes, that he did shine in learning above all that
ever did, or will appear. Covel. in his answ. to Jo. Burges.
Concerning whom Jewel appeals, as to a true and Orthodox Doctor. In his
challenge at Paul's Cross.
Concerning whom Mr. Forrester. Non. Tessagraph. calls him the Fathers Monarch.
In proem. p. 3.
And

Concerning whom Gomer acknowledges his opinion to be most pure. Gom. spec.
verae Eccles.


Concerning whom Master Whitaker doubts not, but that he was a Protestant.
Whit. answ. to f. Camp. in the cont. fol. a. 2. parag. 28.
And lastly, concerning whom your royal Father seemed to appeal, when he
objected unto Card. Peron, That the face and exterior form of the Church was
changed since his time, and far different to what it was in his days,
wherefore we will take a view of what it was then, and see whether we lose or
keep our ground, and whether it be the same which you acknowledged then to be
so firm.

Our Church believed then a true and real presence, and the orall manducation
of the body of Christ, in the Sacrament, as the prince of the Sacramentarians
acknowledged Zwingl. lib. de vera and falsa relig. cap. de Eucharist.
in these words from the time of S. Augustine, which was for the space of twelve
hundred years, the opinion of corporal flesh, had already got the mastery.
And in this quality she adored the Eucarist, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Hom. 24.
with outward gestures and adoration, as the true and proper body of Christ.
Then the Church believed the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament Cyrill.
Alex. Ep. and Caesar. pat.
; even besides the time that it was in use: And for this cause kept it after
Consecration, for Domestical Communions Cypr. de lapsu.
, to give to the sick Eusebius. hist. lib. 7.
, to carry upon the Sea Ambr. de obiit Sayer.
, to send into far Provinces Eusebius. hist. lib. 1.
.

Then she believed that Communion under both kinds was not necessary for the
sufficiency of participation, but that all the body, and all the blood was
taken in either kind: And for this cause, in Domestical Communions, in
Communions for children, for sick persons by Sea, and at the hour of death it
was distributed under one kind, only. Paulin. in vita Ambr. Tertul. ad ux. c.
55. Basil. Epist. ad Caesar. pat.


Then the Church believed Cypr. ad Caecil. ep. 63.
, that the Eucharist was a true, full, and entire sacrifice; not only
Eucharisticall, but Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 4.
propitiatory; and offered it as well for the living Chryss. in 1 Cor. hom 41.
as the dead. The faithful and devout people of the Church then made
pilgrimages to Basil. in 40. Martyrs.
the bodies of the Martyrs Ambr. de vid.
; prayed to the Martyrs to pray to God for them Aug. in Psalm. 63. and 88.
: Celebrated their Feasts Hier. and Marcell. ep. 17.
, reverenced their Relics in all honorable forms. And when they had received
help from God, by the intercession of the said Martyrs Theod. de Gr. aff. l. 8.
, they hung up in the Temples, and upon the Altars, erected to their memory,
images of those parts of their bodies that had been healed.

The Church then held Basil. de Sanct. Spirit.
the Apostolical traditions, to be equal to the Apostolical writings; and
held for Apostolical traditions, all that the Church of Rome now embraces
under that Title: She then offered prayers for the dead Tertul. de mon. Aug. de
verb. Ap.
, both public and private, to the end to procure for them, ease and rest: And
held this custom as a thing Aug. de cura pro mort.
necessary for the refreshment of their souls. The Church then held the fast
Hier. ad Marcell. ep. 54.
of the forty days of Lent for a custom, not free, but necessary, and of
Apostolical tradition. And out of the time of Pentecost fasted all the
Frydayes in the year in memory of the death of Christ, except Christmay-Day
fell on a Friday Epiph. in Compen.
, which she then excepted as an Apostolical tradition: The Church then held
Epiph. Cont. Apost. Haeres. 51.
marriage after the vow of Virginity to be a sin: and reputed Chrysostom. ad Theod.
Hier. Cont. Jov. l. 1.
those, who married together after their vows, not only for adulterers, but
also for incestuous persons.

The Church held then Cypr. Caecil. epist. 63.
mingling of water with wine in the sacrifice of the Eucharist, for a thing
necessary, and of Divine, and Apostolical tradition. She held then Aug. de
pec. orig. cap. 40.
exorcismes, exsufflations, and renunciations, which are made in Batisme, for
sacred Ceremonies, and of Apostolical tradition: She held then Aug. Cont. Pet.
l. 3. c. 4.
, besides Batisme and the Eucharist, Confirmation Aug. de nupt. and Conc. c. 17.
, Marriage Ambr. de paenit. c. 7.
, Orders, and extreme Unction, Leo 1. epist.
for true and proper Sacraments which the Church Aug Cont. Parm. l. 2. c. 13.
of Rome now acknowledges: The Church, in the Ceremonies of Baptism, used
then Cyp. epist. 70.
oil, Conc. Carth. 3. cap. 5.
salt, Greg. Naz. de bapt.
waxlights, Aug. ep. 10.
exorcismes, Aug. Cont. Jul. l. 6. c. 8.
the sign of the Cross, Ambr. de sacr. l. 1.
the word Ephata, and other that accompany it, none of them without reason, and
excellent signification. The Church held then Aug. de an. and evis orig. l. 3.
c. 15.
Baptism for infants of absolute necessity: and for this cause then permitted,
Tert. de bapt.
lay men to baptize in danger of death, the Church used then holy water,
consecrated by certain words and Ceremonies: and made use of it both for
Baptism, Basil. de S. Spirit. c. 17.
and Epiph. haer. 30.
against enchantments, and to make Theod. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 3.
exorcismes, and conjurations against evil spirits.

The Church held then diverse degrees in the Ecclesiastical Regiment, to wit,
Council. Laod. c. 24. Council. Carth. 4. 6. 2.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, the Acolite, Exorcist, Reader and
Porter consesecrated and blessed them with diverse Forms and Ceremonies: And in
the Episcopal Order acknowledged, diverse seats of Jurisdiction of positive
right; to wit, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs, and Hier. ad Damasc. Ep. 57.
Council. Chal. ep. ad Leon.
one Supereminent (by Divine law) which was the Pope, without whom nothing
could be decided, appertaining to the universal Hier. praef. in paralip.
Church; and the want of whose presence, either by himself, or his Legates, or
his Confirmation, made all Councels (pretended to be universal) unlawful.

In the Church then the service was said throughout the East, in Greek, and
throughout the West Aug. Epist. 57. de Doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 13.
, as well in Africa, as in Europe, in Latin: although that in none of the
provinces (except in Italy, and the Cities, where the Roman Colonies resided)
the Latin tongue, was understood by the common people. She observed then the
distinction of feasts Aug. Epist. 118. and Psalm. 63. and 38.
and ordinary days, the Distinction of He. ad He. Ep. 3. Theod. Hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 27.
Ecclesiastical and lay habits: the Op. l. I. p. 19.
reverence of sacred vessels, the custom of Theod. Hist. l. 5. c. 8. l sid. de
Div off. l. I. c. 4.
shaming and Greg. Naz. de pac. or. I.
unction for the collation of orders; the Ceremony of the Cyril. Hier. Cat.
Mat. 5.
Priest, washing his hands at the Altar, before the consecration of the
Mysteries. She then Co. Laod. c. 9.
pronounced a part of the service, at the Altar with a low voice, made Aug. de
Civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 8.
processions with the relics of Martyrs Hier co. Vigil.
kissed them Hier. co. Vigil.
, carried them in clothes of silk, and vessels of gold Hier. c. Vigil.
, took and esteemed the dust from under their reliquaries: accompanied the dead
to their sepulchers, with Greg. Naz. in Jul. orat. 2.
wax tapers in sign of joy, for the certainty of their future resurrection. The
Church then had the picture of Christ, and of his Saints, both Eusebius. de Vita
Constable.
out of Churches, Paulin Epist. 12. Basil. in Martyr. Bar.
and in them: and upon the very Prudent. in. S. Cassian.
Altars, (not to adore them with God like worship) but by them, to reverence
the Soldiers and Champions of Christ.

The faithful then used the Tert. de coron. milit.
sign of the Cross, in all their Conversations Cyril. Cont. Jul. l. 6.
, painted it on the portal of all the houses of the faithful Hier. in Vit. Hill.
; gave their blessing to the people with their hand, by the sign of the Cross
Athan. cont. Idol.
, employed it to drive away evil spirits, Paul Ep. II.
proposed in Jerusalem the very Cross to be adored on good Friday: Finally,
the Church held then Tert. de praescript. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 4. c. 32.
that to the Catholic Church only belongs the keeping of the Apostolical
tradition, the Authority of interpretation of Scripture; and the decision of
Controversies of faith; and that out of the succession Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
Conc. Car. 4. c. I.
of her communion, of Hier. Cont. Lucif. Aug. de util. cred. c. 8.
her Doctrine Cypr. ad pub. Ep. 63. ad mag. Ep. 67. Hier. ad Tit. c. 3.
and her ministry, there was neither Church, nor Salvation.

Neither will I insist with you only upon the word, then, but before, and
before, and before that, even to the first age of all, will I show you our
doctrine of the real presence, and holy Sacrifice of the Mass; Invocation of
Saints; Veneration of Relics and Images, Confession, and Priestly absolution;
Purgatory and prayer for the dead; Traditions, etc.

In the fifth Age, or hundred of years, Saint Augustine was for the real and
corporal presence. Aug. Conc. I. in Psalm. 33.


In the fourth Age, Saint Ambrose. Lib. 4. de Sacra. c. 5. and l. de iis, qui
misteriis initiantur, c. 9.


In the third Age Saint Cyprian. Sermon. de Coena Dom. prope init.


In the second Age, or hundred of years, S. Irenaeus. l. 4. c. 32. infin.


And in the first Age Ep. ad smirnum. ut cit. a Theod. Dial. 3.
Saint Ignatius, Martyr, and Disciple of Saint John the Evangelist.

Concerning the honor and invocation of Saints, In the fifth Age we find Saint
Augustine, Sermon. de Verb. Apost. prope init. and medit. c. 40. and l. de
loquutionibus in genesis prope fine^.
praying to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints.

In the fourth Age, we find Greg. Naz. praying to S. Basil the great. In Orat.
20. quae est in laudem. in Basil. mag. and Saint Hier. Cont Vigil. 13. initio.


In the third Age, we find S. Origin, praying to Father Abraham. Initio sui
lamenti.


In the second Age, Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. ad Anton. pium. Imper. non long ab
initio.


And in the first age, in the Liturgy of S. James the less. Ante Med.


For the use and veneration of holy Relics and Images, and chiefly of the
Holy Cross; in the fifth age, Saint Augustine. Tract. 118. in Joan fine.


In the fourth Age Athanasius. Ad Antiochum princip.


In the third Age Origin. Hom. 8. in diversos Evangelii locos.


In the second Age St. Justin Martyr. Ad quaest. 28. Gentilium.


And in the first Age S. Ignatius. Epist. ad Phil. ante Med.


Concerning Confession and Absolutions: In the fifth Age S. August. Hom. 49.
ante Med.


In the fourth Age S. Basil. the Great. Sui regulis brevior. interr. 288.


In the third Age S. Cypr. Ser. de lapsis.


In the second Age Tertull. l. de poen. c. 10


And in the first Age S. Clement. Clement Romans Epist. 1.


Now concerning Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead in the fifth Age S.
Augustine. De Civ. Dei, l. 26. c. 24. and also Ser. 41. de sanct. prope init.
also Ser. 22. de Verb. Apost.


In the fourth Age S. Ambrose. Ambr. in 1 Cor. 3. S. Hier. in Com. in c. 11.
proverb.


In the third Age S. Cypr. Ep. 5. ad Ant. post. med.


In the second Age Tertull. l. de animae c. 58. de Corona milit. c. 3. 4. l
Clem. Romans Ep. 1. de S. Petr. prope fin.


And in the first Age S. Clement. e.

Concerning Traditions in the fifth Age S. Aug. l 4. de bapt. Con. Donat. c. 24.


In the fourth Age S. Basil. lib. de Sp. Sancto. c. 27.


In the third Age S. Epiphanins. Here Is. 61.


In the second Age S. Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 4.


And in the first Age S. Dennis. Areopag. c. 1. Eccles. Hierar.


Now suppose that all these quotations be right. The saving of a soul, of your
own soul, of the soul of a King, of the souls of so many Kingdoms: and the
gaining of that Kingdom for a reward, (which in comparison of these Earthly
ones (for which you so often fight, so much strive, and labor so much for to
obtain) your tetrarchate would be a gain for you to lose it, so that you might
but obtain that) would be worth the search; and when you have found them to be
truly cited, I dare trust your judgment, that it will tell you, that we have
not changed our Countenance, nor fled our Colors, nor fallen away, nor altered
our Religion, nor forsaken our first Love, nor denied our Principles, nor
brought Novelties into the Church, (but that we do antiquum obtinere) whereby
we should be forsaken of you, for forsaking our selves: but rather that we
should win you unto us, by being still the same, we were when we won you first
unto us, and were at the beginning. And is it for the honor of the English
Nation, famous for the first Christian King, and the first Christian Emperor,
to forsake her Mother Church, so renowned for antiquity, and to annex their
Religion as a codicell to an appeal of a company of Protesters, against a
decree at Spira? and to forsake so glorious a name as Catholic, and to take a
name upon them, wherein they had neither right nor interest; and then to take
measure of the Scottish Discipline for the new fashion of their souls, and to
make to themselves posies of the weedings of that Garden, into which Christ
himself came down Cant. 6. 1.
, upon which both the north and south-winds do blow Cant. 4. 16.
, in which is a well of living waters and streams from Lebanon Cant. 4. 15.
: about which is an enclosure of brotherly affection Cant. 4. 12. Cant. 2. 1.
. Will you forsake the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys for such a
Nose-gay? For I shall make it apparent unto your Majesty, that the Doctrines
which Protestants now hold, as in opposition unto us, were but so many
condemned heresies, by the Ancient and Orthodoxall Fathers of the Church, and
never opposed by any of them: As for example, Protestants hold that the Church
may Err; this they had from the Donatists, for which they were frequently
reproved by St. Augustine. Passim. cont. Donat.


Protestants deny unwritten traditions, and urge Scripture only. This they had
from the Arrians, who were condemned for it by St. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine,
both Epiph. Her. 75. Aug. cont. maxim. l. 1. c. 2. and ult.
.

Protestants teach, that Priests may Marry; this they had from Vigilantius, who
is condemned for it by St. Hieronimus Con. Vigilan. c. 1.
.

Protestants deny prayer for the dead: this they had from Arrius, for which he
is condemned by Saint August: and Epiphanius both. Aug. haer. 53. Epiph. haer.
75.


Protestants deny Invocation of Saints: this they had from Vigilantius, for
which he was condemned by Saint Hieron. Hier. Cont. Vigil. c. 3.


Protestants deny Reverence to Images: this they had from Xenias, for which he
is reproved by Nicephorus. Hist. l. 16. c. 27 and 55.


Protestants deny the real Presence: this they had from the Carpenaites, who
were, says Saint Augustine, the first Heretics, that denied the real
Presence: and that Judas was the first Suborner and Maintainer of this heresy.
Aug. in Psalm.


Protestants deny Confession of sins to a Priest: so did the Novatian
Heretics, and the Montanists, for which they are reproved by Saint Ambrose and
Saint Hieron. Ambr. li. de poenit. c. 7. Hier. Epist. ad Marcel. 54.


Protestants say that they are justified by Faith only: this they had from the
pseudo-Apostles, for which they are comdemned by St. Augustine. Aug. de fide and
oper. c. 14.


Lastly, as I have showed Your Majesty, that Your Church, as it stands in
opposition to ours, is but a congeries of so many heresies, to which I could
easily make an enlargement: but that I fear, I have been too tedious already;
So I shall make it appear, that our Church as she stands in opposition unto
yours, is true and right, even your selves being witnesses, and you shall find
our Doctrine among your own Doctors. First the Greek Church, whom you court to
your side, as indeed they are Protestants according to your vulgar reception,
being you call all those Protestants, who are or were in any Opposition to the
Church of Rome, though in their Tenants otherwise, they never so much do
disagree. For the Greek Church with which you so often hit us in the teeth and
take to be of your faction, she holds Invocation of Saints, Adoration of
Images, Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind for the sick, and many others.

Master Parker confesses, that Luther crossed himself morning and evening,
and is never seen to be painted praying, but before a Crucifix. Against Simb.
part. 1. c. 2. sect. 30. p. 105. See Jo. Crevel. refut. Cerem. miss. p. 188.
Jo. Manl. Loc. Com. p. 636.


As touching the Invocation of Saints (says Luther) I think with the whole
Christian Church, and hold, that Saints are to be honored by us, and invocated
Purgat. quorund. art. and in Ep. ad Georg. Spal.
. I never denied Purgatory (says Luther) and yet I believe it, as I have often
written and confessed Tom. 7. fol. 132. adversus bullam. See him also in disp.
Lips. c. de purgat. and resolut. de indulg. Conclus. 16. See likewise Zwingl.
Tom. 2. fol. 378.
. If it is lawful, (says Luther,) for the Jews to have the picture of Caesar
upon their Coins; much more is it lawful for Christians to have in their
Churches Crosses and Images of Mary Luth. in Consolat. prolab. l. 6 See this
cited forth of Luth. by Hasp. Hist. Sac. p. 2. f. 33.
; and lastly he maintained the real Presence. See Zwingl. Tom. 2. f. 375.


But let us go a little further, and consider what they held, whom ye call
your Predecessors, under whom ye shroud your Visibility, and on whom you look
beyond Luther, for your Doctrines Patronage, viz. First upon the Hussites, who
brake forth about the year 1400. they held seven Sacraments p. 2. 16.
. Transubstantiation Page 209.
, the Popes primacy Page 217. art. 7, 8.
, and the Mass Luth, in Colloq. Germ. e. de missa.
, as Fox in his acts and monuments acknowledges.

Let us go further, and consider Wickliffe, (our own Countryman,) who
appeared about the year 1370. he maintained holy water Wick. de blasphem. cap.
17.
, worship of Relics, and Images Idem de Eucharist. c. 9.
, Intercession of the blessed Virgin Mary Idem in Sermon. de Assump. Mariae.
, the rites and Ceremonies of the Mass Idem de apostasia c. 18.
, all the seven Sacraments Idem in postill. sup. c. 15. Marci.
. Moreover, he held Opinions contrary, and condemned both by Catholic and
Protestants, as that if a Bishop or Priest be in any mortal sin, his Ordaining,
Consecrating, or Baptizing is of no effect Acts and mon. p. 96. art. 4.
. He condemned lawful Oaths with the Anabaptists Osi and. Epist. Hist. Eccles.
p. 459. art. 43.
. Lastly he maintained that any Ecclesiastical Ministers were not to have any
temporal possessions Act. and mon. p. 96.
. This last Opinion was such savory Doctrine, that rather then some of those
times would not hearken to that, they would listen to all; as the greedy
appetites to Bishops Lands, make some now adays to hearken unto any thing,
that Cryers down of Bishops shall foment.

To go further yet to the Waldenses, descended from the race of one Waldo, a
Merchant of Lions, who brake out about the year 1220. These men held the real
Presence In Epist. 244. p. 450.
, for which they were reproved by Calvin. These men extolled the merit of
voluntary poverty; they held Transubstantiation Illyricus Catalog. Test. p.
1498.
, and many other opinions which most Protestants no way allow. Idem Catalog.
Test. page 1502.


And lastly, I shall run your pedigree to the radix, and utmost Derivation,
that the best read Herald in the Protestant Genealogy, can run its linc, and
that is to the Waldenses, and to Berengarius, who broacht his heresy in the
year 1048. and he held all the points of Doctrine that we held, only he
differed from us in the point of Transubstantiation. And for this cause they
took him into the name and number of Protestants and Reformers, notwithstanding
he presently afterward recanted and died a Catholic. So it ends, where it
never had beginning.

Finally: if neither prescription of 1600 years possession, and continuance of
our Churches Doctrine, nor our evidence out of the word of God, nor the Fathers
witnessings to that evidence: nor the Decrees of Councels: nor your own
acknowledgments, be sufficient to mollify and turn your royal heart, there
is no more means left for truth, or me, but I must leave it to God, in whose
hand are the hearts of Kings.

AN ANSWER TO THE Marquess of WORCESTER His Reply to the KINGS Paper.
YOur MAJESTY is pleased to wave all the Marks of the true Church, and to make
recourse unto the Scriptures.

Ans. 1. His MAJESTY did not wave all Marquess page 52.
the Marks of the true Church, assigned by the Marquess, but showed them to
be such as may (without distinction and further explication) belong to a false
Church. From Ier. 44. 16. His MAJESTY showed that Antiquity, Succession and
Universality was alleged in defense of Idolatry. That Demetrius (Acts 19.)
alleged Antiquity and Universality for the worship of Diana; and that What is
there also in His Majesty's Paper cited out of Prudentius, is through some
mistake ascribed to Prudentius, whereas it was only the objectio^ of Symmachus,
and answered by Prudentius, who wrote against Symmachus, as also did Amb.
Symmachus alleged Antiquity as a plea for all heathenish Idolatry and
Superstition, page 47. That Ezechiel bids, Be not stiff-necked as your
forefathers were, page Ibid. These words (the place being not cited) I
confess, I cannot find, but there are those which are equivalent, Ez. 20. 30.
Are ye polluted after the manner of your Fathers? and commit you whoredom
after their abominations? So the Prophet Zachary cries, Be ye not as your
Fathers, Zach. 1. 4. The like may be seen in other places. His Majesty likewise
alleges our Savior telling us, that we must not so much hearken to what was
said by them of old time, as to that which he shall tell us, Mat. 5. 21. etc.
(not as it is cited, 21. 12.) page 48. It is strange therefore that the
Marquess should say, that all the marks of the true Church were waved by His
Majesty. As for the marks set down by the Marquess, our learned writers have
over and over showed the insufficiency of them, so that there is Hac defensio
communis furoris est furentium multitudo, Minutius Felix.
no need now to say much. First for Universality, it is certain that error may
spread for a while more universally then truth. So did Gentilisme for many
ages, it overspread in a manner the whole World. Only in Judah was God known,
Psalm. 76. 1. Only the people of the Jews had Gods saving truth among them,
all the World besides did lie in gross ignorance, and damnable error, Psalm.
147. 19, 20. Ioh. 4. 22. Romans 3. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Acts 14.
16. and 17. 30. So for a while Arrianisme did bear all the sway, in so much
that as Hierome observed, The World groaned, and wondered to see it Ingemuit
orbis, and Arrianum se esse miratus est. Hierom. advers. Luciferian.
self become an Arrian. So also did Pelagianisme, as Bradwardine sometimes
Archbishop of Canterbury complained. As in times past (says he) against one
true Prophet there were 850 Prophets of Baal, and the like, to whom an
innumerable company of people did adhere: So also now in this cause, how many,
O Lord, do with Pelagius fight for Free will against Thy Free Grace? The whole
World almost is gone into error after Pelagius. And again, The whole World
Sicut olim contra unicum Dei Prophetam 850. Prophetae Baal, and similes sunt
reperti, quibus and innumerabilis populus adhaerebat: ita and hodie in hac
causa quot, Domine, cum Pelagio pro libero arbitrio contra gratuitam gratiam
tuam pugnant? Bradward: de causa Dei in Praefat.

Totus pene mundus post hunc abit, and erroribus ejus favet, dum fere omnes
communiter aestimant solius liberi arbitrii viribus se posse declinare a malo,
facere bonum, etc. Bradw. de cause. Dei lib. 2. cap. 31.


almost goes after him, and favors his errors, whiles all almost think
that by the strength of Free Will alone, they can eschew evil, and do good.
The Scripture also has foretold us that all the World should wonder after the
beast. Revel. 13. 3. And that the whore of Babylon (whereby that Rome is meant,
the Scripture is so clear, that even the Romanists themselves are forced to
confess it) should sit upon many waters, Revel. 17. 1. and that by those
waters Bellar. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 2. Ril. in Apoc. 14. and 17.
are meant Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, v. 15. This note
therefore, viz. Universality, is far from proving the Church of Rome to be
the true Church. As for the Scriptures which the Marquess cites, viz. Esaias 2.
2. Psalm. 2. 8. (not as it is mis-printed 2.) and Mat. 24. (not 20) 14. these
and the like places only show that in the time of the Gospel the Church should
not (as before it was) be confined to one Nation, but should be extended unto
all so that Gentiles as well as Jews, as well one Nation as another should
have admittance into it, the middle wall of partition being now broken down,
Ephesians. 2. 14. So that there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in
all. Col. 3. 11.

2. For Antiquity, it is true, the Prophet Jeremy bids, Ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein. Ier. 6. 16. And so we grant that
primary antiquity is a sure note of Id verum quodcunque primum; id adulterum
quodcunque posterius. Tert. advers. Prax. c. 4
truth, for error being a deviation and swerving from truth, it must needs be
that truth is more ancient then error. But there is a secondary antiquity which
is no argument of truth. For there is vetustas erroris, as Cyprian observed
long ago, an antiquity of error. The woman of Samaria could say, Our Fathers
worshipped in this Mountain; yet our Savior answered her, Ye worship ye
know not what. Ioh. 4. 20. 22. And Symmachus Cypr. Epist. 74. Edit. Pamel.
(whom His Majesty cited) could bring in heathenish Rome thus pleading
antiquity, Let me use those ceremonies, which mine Utar ceremoniis avitis, sera
and contumeliosa est emendatio senectutis. Sym.
ancestors have used. It Is too late, and too great an injury to reform me now
I am old. This plea, I dare say our adversaries themselves will not allow as
used by Symmachus; and why then should we allow it, as they use it?

Thirdly, for Visibility, it is granted that ordinarily the Church is visible,
i. e. that there is a visible company of such as profess the truth, though the
places cited by the Marquess do not evince so much. He says, David compares
the Church to a Tabernacle in the Sun. He means Psalm. 19. 4. where indeed
according to the vulgar Latin translation it is, He has set his Tabernacle in
the Sun: but In sole posuit Tabernaculum suum. Solemn posuit in Tabernaculo suo,
i. e. in coelis: unde Hebr. Soli posuit tentorium in eis. Genebr.
Genebrard is forced to expound it by an Hypallage thus, He has set the Sun in
his Tabernacle, that is, in the heavens. For (as he confesses) the Hebrew runs
thus, He has set a Tabernacle for the Sun in them. Now what is this to the
Visibility of the Church? or how does it concern the Church at all? Neither do
I see, that (as the Marquess alleges) our Savior compares the Church to a
candle in a candlestick, not under a bushel, Mat. 5. 15. But either (as
Iansenius a Romish Writer does expound it) our Savior there spoke of his
Apostles, who as a candle in a candlestick were to give light unto the dark
world by the preaching of the Gospel. Or else in general he showed the duty of
all, viz. That in their places and callings they ought to be a means to
in-lighten others, especially by their good example. This sense is agreeable to
that which follows immediately ver. 16. Let your light so shine forth before
men, etc. So when our Savior says Mat. 24. 26. If they shall say unto you,
Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth: Behold, he is in the secret
chambers, believe it not. It is nothing to the Churches visibility, but only
he foreshews that many should come in his name, pretending themselves to be
Christ, and forewarnes to beware of them. These places alleged by the
Marquess, are but little to the purpose, though (as I said) it is granted,
that ordinarily the Church (i. e. the company of such as profess the truth) is
visible. Yet nevertheless we hold that sometimes through persecution, and
prevalencie of error, the Church may be so obscured, as to be scarcely visible.
Thus it was in Elias his time, when he complained unto God, saying, The
children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and
slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I, even I am I am left alone, Romans 11.
3.
left, and they seek my life to take it away. 1 King. 19. 10. And what great
visibility was there of the Church, when both Priests, and People, were
conspired together against Christ, to put him to death, and his Disciples also
generally forsook him, and fled from him. So when the heresy of Arrius
overspread all, so that such as were orthodox and sound in the faith, could
scarce appear; Hilar. contra Auxent: Montes mihi, and silvae, and lacus, and
carceres, and voragines, sunt tutiores, etc.
Hilarious, who lived in those times, says, that mountains, and woods, and
lakes, and Prisons, and deep pits, were more safe then Churches, and public
places of Gods worship, these being all possessed by the Arrians, and the true
believing Christians having only the other to lurk and lie hid in. How
visible also was the Church like to be, when that should be fulfilled which is
written Revel. 13. 15, 16, 17. that as many as would not worship the Beast,
should be killed. And that all both great and small should be forced to receive
a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads. And that none should buy,
or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of
his name. Bellarmine himself says, It is certain that the persecution by
Antichrist shall be most grievous, Certu^ est Antichristi persecutionem fore
gravissimam, and notissimam, ita ut cessent omnes publicae religionis
ceremoniae, and sacrificia. Bell. de Pont. Romans l. 3. c. 7.
and most notorious, so that all public ceremonies of Religion and Sacrifices
shall cease. Denique quod Antichristi tempore propter atrocitatem persecutionis
cessare debeat publicum, and quotidianum Ecclesiae officium, etc. Antichristum
interdicturum omnem divinum cultum. Ibid.
And again, that in the time of Antichrist the public service of the Church
shall cease through the grievousnesse of persecution, and that Antichrist shall
interdict all divine worship, etc.

4. For Succession of Pastors, which the Marquess says is required in a true
Church, and is only to be found in the Church of Rome. We must distinguish of
Succession: There is a succession of Persons, and a succession of Doctrine; the
former succession without the latter is to no purpose. The Priests that
condemned Christ had a personal succession, but that was worth nothing, they
wanting doctrinall succession. They did personally succeed those that were
before them, and they others, and so on till they came to Aaron: but they could
not show the like succession of their doctrine. So neither can they of the
Church of Rome show that they hold the same faith which was delivered by the
Apostles; and therefore though they can show that their Popes do personally
succeed one another from the very times of the Apostles, it availes nothing.
Bell. de Eccles. l. 4. c. 8. Non colligitur necessario, ibi esse Ecclesiam, ubi
est successio. Omnes Ecclesiae illae Patriarchales habuerunt per longa tempora
Episcopos manifestos haereticos, and proinde interrupta est veterum Pastorum
successio.
Bellarmine, though he struggle a little about it, yet cannot deny but that a
succession of persons is to be found is the Greek Church, and therefore grants
that it does not necessarily follow, that where such succession is, there is
also a true Church. Yea, he says, that all those Patriarchall Churches had for
a long time Bishops, that were manifest Heretics, and that therefore the
succession of ancient Pastors was interrupted. What is this else but to
confess that a succession of Pastors without a succession of the true
doctrine is no mark of a true Church. The ancient Doctors of the Church, it is
true, have sometimes used this argument drawn from succession, to convince
Heretics, but so as to show that a succession of doctrine did concur with a
succession of persons. Yea they plainly show, that it was succession of
doctrine, which they did stand upon, and that without this they made no account
of the other. Oportet adhaetere his, qui Apostolorum doctrinam custodiunt.
Iren. l. 4. c. 44. And c. 43. he calls this Principalem successionem.
We must adhere unto those (says Ireneus) who keep the doctrine of the
Apostles. This succession of doctrine he calls the principal succession. So
Non habent Petri haereditatem, qui fidem Petri non habent. Amb. de poeu. l. 1.
c. 6.
Ambrose, They do not succeed Peter, who have not the faith of Peter. And Ipsa
doctrina eorum cum Apostolica comparata, ex diversitate and contrarietate sua
pronuntiabit, neque Apostoli alicujus authoris esse, neque Apostoli. Tertul de
praescrip. c. 32.
Tertullian speaking of Heretics, says, Their doctrine being compared with
the Apostles doctrine, shows that it was not received from the Apostles, nor
from any Apostolical teachers. And speaking of Churches planted since the
Apostles times, he says, That In eadem fide conspirantes, non minus
Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae. Ibid.
they agreeing in the same faith, are nevertheless accounted Apostolical for
the consanguinity of doctrine.

5. For Unity in doctrine; by which the Marquess proves the Roman Church to be
the true Church: I answer, that Unity without Verity will not prove it, and the
one is not always necessarily accompanied with the other. The words of the
Prophets declare good unto the King with one mouth, said the messenger to
Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 13. They were about four hundred Prophets, ver. 6. and
all of them did agree in one; yet they prophesied falsely for all that, there
was a lying spirit in the mouth of all those Prophets, how unanimous soever
they were, ver. 22. Neither is there such unity in the Church of Rome as is
pretended. The difference betwixt the Dominicans and the Jesuits about Gods
decrees, the concurrence of his grace, and the determination of man's will; this
difference (I say) betwixt them is as great, and as important as any (I think)
that is amongst Protestants. Neither does it suffice to say (as the Marquess
does) that the Church has not determined any thing in these points, and
therefore such difference about them is not against the Churches unity. For if
the Popes authority be so great, and his judgment so infallible, as they
pretend, why has he not decided the controversy, and so put an end to the
difference long ere this? Besides (which the Marquess took no notice of) they
of the Roman Church differ much about the very head of it, the Pope himself.
For some will have him to be above a general council and others hold the
council to be above the Pope: and this also was the determination both of the
council of Constance, and of the council of Basil. Finally, I grant, that
unity in the truth is much to be desired, and so much the places cited by the
Marquess do prove, viz. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4. 3. Acts 2. 42. Phil. 1. 27. and
2. 2. yet we see that the Apostle does acknowledge the Church of Corinth a true
Church notwithstanding the differences and divisions that were in it, so that
all disunion of people is not enough to dischurch them. Neither if the
confessions of the reformed Churches be considered, as they ought to be, will
the differences that are among them (however particular persons be exorbitant)
be found so many, and so great (though too many, and too great; I grant) as our
adversaries of Rome would make them.

6. And lastly, for the conversion of Nations, which the Marquess also will
have to be a mark of the true Church, and thereby prove that the Church of
Rome is it, and not the Church of Protestants; I answer, that the Scriptures
which he alleges, viz. Esaias 49. 23. and 60. 16. and Psalm. 2. 8. do show
indeed, that in the time of the Gospel the Gentiles should be converted, and
joined to the Church, which the Scripture of the New Testament, and experience
also shows to have been accomplished. But they do not show either that every
true Church must necessarily evidence it self to be a true Church by working a
conversion in infidels, or that every Church that does work any conversion in
that kind, must therefore be acknowledged to be a true Church. The Scribes and
Pharisees did make Proselytes, and were very zealous in it, yet nevertheless
were guilty of gross errors, which all were to beware of as most pernicious,
Mat. 23. 15. Besides, there is a conversion as from unbelief to faith, so from
misbeliefe to a right and found faith. And though Protestants have done little
or nothing it may be in the former kind of conversion, so as to convert mere
Infidels, yet in the other kind, viz. in converting mis-believers, they have
done much. This the Marquess (page 44.) is pleased to call perversion rather
then conversion; but that must be judged by the consideration of the Doctrines
held by Protestants. As for those conversions wrought in the Indies by the
Romanists, we may well conceive that it was not so much the word preached by
the Jesuits, as the sword brandished by the Spaniards, that did work them. Non
satis liquet mihi an fides Christiana fuerit barbaris hactenus ita proposita,
and annuntiata, ut teneantur credere sub novo peccato. -- Miracula and signa
nulla audio, nec exempla vitae adeo religiosa: contra multa scandala, seu
facinora, and multas impietates; unde non videtur, quod religio Christiana
satis commode and pie sit illis praedicata, ut illi teneantur acquiescere;
quanquam videntur multi religiosi, and alii Ecclesiastici viri, and vita, and
exemplo, and diligenti praedicatione sufficienter operam and industriam
adhibuisse in hoc negotio, nisi ab aliis, quibus alia cura est, impediti
essent. Francise de Victor. Relect. 4. Sect. 38.
Franciscus de Victoria (a learned Writer among the Papists) writing of the
Indians, says he did not see, that the Christian faith was so propounded and
declared to them, as that under the guilt of a new sin they were bound to
embrace it. He heard (he says) of no Miracles, and Signs that were wrought,
nor of very good examples of life that were given, but on the contrary of many
scandalous acts, and many impieties. Whereupon he conceives, that Christian
religion was not so conveniently and properly preached to that barbarous
people, as that they were bound to acquiesce in it, though he grants, that
there were many religious, and other Ecclesiastical men, who both by life and
example, and also by diligent preaching did sufficiently do their endeavor,
but that they were hindered by others, who minded other matters. Thus I have as
briefly as I could gone over the marks, which the Marquess assigns of the
true Church, and that because he says that his Majesty did wave them all,
whereas indeed his Majesty did not wholly wave them, though as his occasions
would not suffer him to return any answer at all to the Marquesses reply, so
neither would they (it is likely) permit him to answer the former Paper so fully
as otherwise he would have done. Whereas the Marquess says, that His Majesty
is pleased to make recourse unto the Scriptures, This is surely the course that
all ought to follow, that will discuss matters of Religion, they ought to have
recourse to the Scriptures, by which all such matters are to be tried and
determined. To the Law, and to the testimony (says the Prophet Esaias) if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
Esaias 8. 20.
Utrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non ni si divinarum Scripturarum Canonicis
libris ostendant: quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credi oportere, quod in
Ecclesia Christi sumus, quia ipsam quam tenemus, commendavit Milevitanits
Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosious, vel alii innumerabilis nostrae
communions Episcopi. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16. Non audiamus, Haec dico,
haec dicis, sed audiamus, Haec dicit Dominus. -- Auferantur illa de medio, quae
adversus nos invicem non ex divinis Canonicis libris, sed aliunde recit amus.
-- Nolo humanis documentis, sed divinie oracula sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari.
Aug. ibid. cap. 3.
Augustine speaking of the Donatists, bade let them show their Church only by
the Canonical books of the Scriptures, professing that he would not have any
to believe that he was in the true Church, because of the commendation that
Optatus, Ambrose, and many others did give of it. And again, Let us not hear
(says he) Thus say I, thus say thou, but let us hear, Thus says the Lord.
-- Let those things be removed out of the way, which we allege one against
another, otherwise then from the Books of Canonical Scripture. -- I will not
have the holy Church demonstrated by humane tokens, but by divine Oracles. But
says the Marquess.

What Heretic that ever was, did not do so? How shall the greatest Page 52.
Heretic in the World be confuted or censured, if any man may be permitted to
appeal to Scriptures, margin'd with his own notes, sens'd with his own
meaning, and enlivened with his own private spirit? to what end were those
marks so fully, both by the Prophets, the Apostles, and our Savior himself
set down, if we make no use of them?

Answ. 1. Though Heretics make recourse unto Scripture, it follows not that
therefore this is not the course which ought to be followed, or that therefore
they are Heretics that do it. The Marquess himself did make recourse unto
Scripture in setting down the marks of the true Church, and so also does he in
handling sundry points in controversy betwixt Papists, and Protestants. This
course therefore, himself being Judge, is not to be condemned: neither
certainly is it, however Heretics may abuse it. Though Heretics will allege
Scripture in defense of their Heresics, yet are they nevertheless to be
confuted by Scripture. The Sadduces thought by Scripture to overthrow the
resurrection, yet by Scripture did our Savior convince them. Mat. 22. 23. 32.
Yea when the Devil himself did cite Scripture, our Savior did not therefore
dislike it, but made use of it for the resisting of Satan, and the repelling of
his temptation, Mat. 4. 6, 7.

2. It Is true, none may appeal to Scriptures margin'd with their own Notes,
sens'd with their own meaning, and enlivened with their own private spirit.
It Is to no purpose to allege Scripture, except that sense, in which it is
alleged, may be made good by Scripture. The Jewish Rabbin (as Master Seldom
cites him) says (...)
well, All interpretation (of Scripture) which is not grounded upon the
Scripture, is vain. But what this makes against his Majesty's making recourse
unto the Scriptures, or against any man's taking that course in disputes of this
nature, I do not see. For that his Majesty did so make recourse unto
Scripture, the Marquess does Eliah Ben Mosis apud Seldom: de Anno Civili
Hebraeorum, cap. 2.
not say, neither ought any man to be charged in this kind, except it can be
proved that he is indeed guilty.

3. It does not yet appear that the particulars before mentioned, viz.
Universality, Antiquity, Visibility, Succession of Pastors, Unity in Doctrine,
and Conversion of Nations; that these (I say) were set down either by our
Savior, or his Apostles, or the Prophets, as marks of the True Church, at
least so as to make any thing for the Marquesses purpose, viz. to prove the
Church of Rome to be the True Church.

Your Majesty was pleased to urge the Errors of certain Fathers, Marq: page 54.
to the prejudice of their Authority. Which I conceive would have been so, had
they been all Montanists, Rebaptists, all Anthropomorphists, and all of them
generally guilty of the faults, wherewith they were soverally charged in the
particulars: seeing that when we produce a Father, we do not intend to produce
a man in whose mouth was never found guile; the infallibility being never
attributed by us otherwise then unto the Church, not unto particular Church
men. As your Majesty has most excellently observed in the failings of the holy
Apostles, who erred after they had received the Holy Ghost in so ample manner.
But when they were all gathered together in Council, and could send about
their Edicts with these Capital Letters in the Front, Visum est Sipritui
Sancto, and nobis, Act. 15. 28. then I hope your Majesty cannot say, that it
was possible for them to Err. So though the Fathers might err in particulars;
yet those particular Errors would be swallowed up in a General Council, etc.

Here the Marquess grants, that the Fathers singly and severally Answ.
considered, may err, but not if gathered together in a general Council. But
first, does not this invalidate the authority of the Fathers, when they are
severally cited, as they are in this Reply frequently by the Marquess? Indeed,
here presently after he adds, Neither is a particular defection in any man any
exception against his testimony, except it be in the thing wherein he is
deficient. But certainly if a man be liable to error in one thing, he is so in
another thing; and therefore his bare testimony, except it have something to
support it, is not sufficient to rely upon. The testimony of the Lord is sure,
says David, Psalm. 19. 7. because he can neither deceive, nor be deceived. But
man may, and therefore his testimony, as his, is not sure. No, Let God be true,
and every man a liar, says the Apostle, Romans 3. 4.

2. For a general Council, why it should necessarily be exempt from Error, I
see nothing here alleged by the Marquess, except it be, that Acts 15. 28. It
seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us. But the inference made from that
Council, wherein the Apostles themselves did sit, and give sentence, to prove
that no general Council can Err, is no better than if one should argue, that
a particular Father or Doctor is infallible, because a particular Apostle was
so in that which he either wrote or preached. For we must take heed of
entertaining such a thought (although the Marquesses words do seem to imply so
much) as that each particular Apostle might fall into Error, though all of
them together could not. For how then should we be able to build our faith upon
those Scriptures, which were composed by particular Apostles, and not by a
whole Council of them? It Is true, (as his Majesty observed, page 50.) the
Apostles were ignorant, and erroneous in some things, but not in any thing that
they delivered unto People to believe, and obey, either by word, or writing;
for then (as I said) we could have no certainty of the Scriptures, we could not
be built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, as Believers are,
Ephesians. 2. 20. But that general Counsels may err, Austin made no question;
Quis nesciat ipsa concilia, quae per singulas regiones, vel provincias fiunt,
plenariorum conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt ex universo orb Christiano,
sine ullis ambagibus cedere: ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus
emendari, cum aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum erat. Aug. de
baptis. contra Donatist. lib. 5: cap. 3.
Who knows not (says he) that Provincial and National Counsels do yield
to the authority of General Counsels; and that General Counsels are often
amended, the former by the latter, that being after found out, which before lay
hid? It is well known that the Romanists reject the authority of the Councels
of Constance, and Basil, (two General Councels) when they determine the Pope
to be inferior, and subject to a General Council. Indeed, generally the
Pontificians make little account of a Council, though otherwise never so
general, except it be confirmed by the Pope. Bellarmine makes it a clear case,
and without all difficulty, that Bellarm. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 11.
General Counsels may Err, if the Fathers of the Council define any thing,
when as the Legates of the Pope dissent from them: or if the Legates themselves
do consent, but so as to go against the instructions which the Pope gave them.
And he further holds, that in case the Legates had no certain instructions from
the Pope, the Council may Err, and that before the Popes Confirmation of it,
the judgment of a General Ego existimo tale concilium posse errare, neque esse
infallibile ejus judicium ante confirmationem Pontificis. Bellarm. ibid.
Council is not infallible. The Marquess himself (page 55. etc.) does seem
to assent unto His Majesty, taxing General Counsels for committing Errors,
but some passages he has, which to me seem very strange. If (says he) we
should suppose them to be General, and free Councels, yet they could not be
Erroneous in any particular man's judgment, until a like General Council
should have concluded the former to be Erroneous. By this Assertion Arrianisme
being confirmed by the Council of Ariminum, Athanasius, and every particular
man should have assented to it, until another General Council had determined
against it; but this is such a position, as (I dare say) our Romish adversaries
themselves will not allow. Again, If it should be granted (says the Marquess)
that Page 56.
the Church had at any time determined amiss, the Church cannot be said to
have erred, because you must not take the particular time for the Catholic
Church, because the Church is as well Catholic for time, as territory; except
you will make rectification an error. But when our adversaries of Rome speak
of the Churches freedom from error, they understand it of the Church
representative, a general Council. Idem est ecclesiam non posse errare in
definiendis rebus fidei, and Episcopos non posse errare; atqui singuli seorsim
errare possunt: igitur congregati in unum errare non poterunt. Bellarm. de
council. l. 2. c. 2.
It is one and the same thing, (says Bellarmine) that the Church cannot err
in determining matters of faith, and that Bishops cannot err. But severally
they may err, therefore being gathered together they shall be free from
error. So then, if a General Council may err at any one time, it is
sufficient to overthrow their Tenet, that the Church cannot err. That the
Church (represented in a General Council) may after rectify what before was
amiss, and that also by the determination of a General Council, is so far
from proving, that the Church (as they take it) cannot Err, that on the
contrary it proves, that it may Err. For though rectification be not error,
yet it does presuppose Error. Again, If I recall mine own words (says the
Page 56.
Marquess) it is no Error, but an avoidance of Error. So where the same
power Rectifies it self, though some things formerly have been Decreed amiss,
yet that cannot render the Decrees of General Councels not binding, or
incident to Error, quoad nos, though in themselves, and pro tempore, they may
be so. I answer, it is without all doubt, that for one to recall his words,
being Erroneous, is no Error, but a correcting of Error, yet this does
clearly show a man to be subject to Error. And so if the Church at one time in
a General Council may Rectify what at another time in a General Council it
had Decreed amiss, it evidently appears, that the Church in a General
Council may Err. For otherwise, what need of Rectification were there, if
there had been no Error? And certainly, if the Decrees of General Counsels
be Erroneous (as the Marquess denies not but they may be) they are not binding
Quoad nos, we are not bound to assent unto them, but rather to dissent from
them: For we are not bound to embrace Error, but to embrace Truth. Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good, says the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 21. By the
Marquesses reason the Decree of the Council of Ariminum, confirming the
Heresy of Arrius, should for the time have been binding; so that neither
Athanasius, nor any other, should have presumed to oppose it, or to dissent
from it, until another General Council had declared against it.

As to your Majesty's objecting the Errors of the Holy Apostles, Marq: page 56.
and Penmen of the Holy Ghost, and your inference thereupon, viz. that Truth
is no where to be found but in holy Scripture: under your Majesty's correction
I take this to be the greatest argument against the private Spirit (urged by
your Majesty) its leading us into all Truth, that could possibly be found out.
For if such men (as they) endued with the Holy Ghost, innobled with the power
of working Miracles, so sanctified in their callings, and enlightened in their
understandings, could Err: how can any man (less qualified) assume to
himself a freedom from Erring, by the assistance of a private Spirit?

1. His Majesty was far from thinking, that the Apostles, as Answ.
Penmen of the Holy Ghost, could Err. For then there were no room for that
inference, That Truth is no where to be found but in Holy Scripture. 2. His
Majesty spoke not of any private Spirit, but of the Spirit of God leading us
into all Truth, alleging that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given unto us of God. It Is true, if any under
pretense of the Spirit go contrary to the Word, (as too many do) whether they
be particular Persons, or general Counsels that do so, it is a private
Spirit, viz. their own Spirit that they are guided by. Therefore Saint John
bids, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God,
because many false Prophets, (many that falsely pretend the Spirit) are gone out
into the world, 1 John 4. 1. But whoever they be that go according to the
Word, though they be particular and private persons, yet it is not their own
particular and private Spirit, but the Spirit of God that does guide them. The
Scripture was given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Therefore it is Gods
Spirit, and not Man's, that does speak in, and by the Scriptures.

Lastly, as to your Majesty's quotation of so many Fathers, for the Marq. page
57.
Scriptures easiness, and plainness to be understand, If the Scriptures
themselves do tell us, that they are hard to be understood, etc.

1. His Majesty did not quote many Fathers, nor any at all to Answ.
prove that the Scriptures are every where plain, and easy to be understood,
but to show that the Scriptures are their own interpreters, which are His
Majesty's words, page 50. To prove this, (which is a most certain truth) His
Majesty quoted indeed many Fathers, as Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Crysostome, Basil, Austine, Gregory and Optatus. The Scriptures quoted by the
Marquess make nothing against this, viz. 2 Pet. 3. 16. Act. 8. 31. (not, as it
is mis-printed, 13.) Luke 24. 25. (rather 45.) Apoc. 5. 4. where, not the
Angel, (as the Marquess says) but John wept, because none was found worthy to
open, and to read the Book. Neither does it appear, that by the Book there
mentioned, is meant the Scripture, as the Marquess seems to suppose. And so
indeed many have thought, as the Jesuit Ribera tells us, who yet
nevertheless professes that he At ego non video, quo modo historice liber, de
quo loquitur Joannes, sit S. Scriptura. Ribera in Apoc. 5. 1.
did not see how historically this could be. For this Book was shut and sealed
(as he observes) until that time that John had this Revelation, when as all
the other Apostles were deceived: so that the Scripture (if it were the Book
there spoken of) was always shut to Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles.
The other places (I grant) do show that in the Scriptures there are some things
obscure and difficult, at least to some; but this is nothing against the
Scriptures being their own interpreters. What is obscure in one place, must be
cleared by some other place, or else without extraordinary revelation I see not
how we should attain to the understanding of it. No need therefore to put those
sayings of the Fathers, cited by His Majesty, among the Errata's that are
behind their Books, as the Marquess speaks, page 57. where he adds, Or else
we must look out some other meaning of their words than what your Maj: has
inferred from thence; as thus, they were easy in aliquibus locis, but not in
omnibus locis: or thus, they were easy as to the attainment of particular
salvation, but not as to the general cognizance of all the Divine Mystery
therein contained, etc. But this is nothing contrary to his Majesty's
inference, which was only this, That the Scriptures are their own Interpreters,
i. e. that Scripture is to be interpreted by Scripture, not that the Scriptures
are clear in all points, and in all places; it suffices that (which the
Marquess himself does seem to yield) they are clear in those things which
concern Salvation: And this was Austines determination, In those things (says
he) which are plainly set down in the In iis, que aperte posita sunt in
Scriptura, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem moresque vivendi. Aug.
de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Scriptures, are found all those things, which concern faith, and good life.
Yea, so much the Scripture does testimony of it self, The testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple. Psalm. 19. 7. The entrance of thy words gives
light, it gives understanding to the simple, Psalm. 119. 130. From a child thou
have known the Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation,
etc. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

First, we hold the real presence, you deny it; we say his Body is there, you
say there is nothing but bare Bread: we have Scripture Marq: p. 57, 58.
for it, Mat. 20. (for 26.) 26. Take eat, this is my Body. So Luke 22. 19. This
is my Body which is given for you.

Here the Marquess comes to perform that which before he promised (page 53,
and 54.) viz. to show that in those points Answ.
wherein they and we differ, the Scriptures are on their side, and not on ours:
And he begins with the controversy about the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, alleging those words, This is my Body, as a
clear proof of their opinion, viz. that after Consecration there is no longer
the substance of Bread, but that the Bread is transubstantiated, and turned
into the substance of Christ's Body. But does it appear that those words, This
is my Body, are to be understood properly any more than those, Genesis 17. 10.
This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after
thee, every man-child among you shall be circumcised? There Circumcision is
called Gods Covenant, whereas properly it was not the Covenant it self, but the
token of the Covenant, as it is called immediately after, ver. 11. So Exodus 12.
13. and in other places the Lamb is called the Lords. Passover, whereas
properly it was not the Passover, but a Token of the Passover, being slain,
and eaten in remembrance of the Lords passing over the houses of the
Israelites, when he saw the Firstborn of the Egyptians, Exodus 12. 13. And
thus also it is said, 1 Cor. 10. 4. that the Rock was Christ. How could that be?
Not in respect of Substance, but in respect of Signification; the Rock
signified Christ, was a Type and a Figure of Christ. Bellarmine (I know) does
endeavor to elude all these instances, as if the speeches were not Figurative,
but Proper. To that place concerning Circumcision he answers, that both
Speeches are proper, viz. Circumcision is the Covenant, and Circumcision is the
Token of the Covenant. Circumcision (he says) was the Token Bell. de Euchar.
l. 1. c. 11. Sect. Secundo vocatum est.
of the Covenant, as the Covenant is taken for Gods Promise: and it was also
the Covenant it self, as the Covenant is taken for the Instrument whereby the
Promise is applied. But here Bellarmine is contrary both to himself, and to
Reason. He is contrary to himself, for a little before he says, that these
words, Ibid. Sect. Quarto peccat.
Circumcision is the Token of the Covenant, Genesis 17. 11. are an Explication of
that which went before, ver. 10. viz. that Circumcision is the Covenant. Now if
the one be an Explication of the other, then needs must the word Covenant be
taken alike in both. He is also contrary unto Reason, for it is absurd to say,
that a Covenant does properly signify both a Promise, and also an Instrument,
whereby the Promise is applied. As well may one say, that Christ's Body does
properly signify both his Body, and also the Sacrament of his Body. A
Covenant, in the very nature of it, being properly taken, does signify a
Promise: and therefore the instrument, whereby it is applied, cannot properly
be the Covenant, but only the Token, Pledge, and Assurance of it. It may as
well be said, that a Covenant may have two diverse and distinct natures, as
that a Covenant can be taken two diverse and distinct ways, and yet be taken
properly both the one way, and the other.

To those words, It (viz. the Lamb) is the Lords passover, Exodus 12. 11.
Bellarmine answers, that the Speech is not Figurative, Bellarm. Ibid. Quaedam
citantur.
but Proper. The Lamb he says was properly the Lords Passover: and mark his
Reason, Quia agnus immolabatur in memoriam illius transitus; that is, Because
the Lamb was slain (or sacrificed) in memory of that passover, or passing
over. Now what greater absurdity can there be, then this, which here Bellarmine
does fall into? He alleges that as a Reason of his assertion, which indeed
does quite overthrow it. For if the Lamb were slain, and sacrificed in memory
of the Lords Passover, or passing over, then was it not properly the Passover
it self, but only a Sign and Memorial of it.

As for those words, 1 Cor. 10. 4. The Rock was Christ; Bellarmine Bellarm. ubi
supra, Sect. Illud etiam.
says, that not a Material, but a Spiritual work is there meant; and that
therefore, though the word Rock be taken Figuratively, yet the proposition it
self, The Spiritual Rock was Christ, is not figuratively, but properly taken.
But it is evident, that the Rock spoken of by the Apostle, was a material
Rock, a Rock of Stone: For the Apostle speaks of a Rock which the Israelites
drank of; They drank of that Rock, says he. Now that Rock which the Israelites
drank of, was a material Rock, a Rock of Stone, as Moses does show, Exodus 17.
and Numb. 20. Austin never questioned this to be the meaning of the Apostles
words, After a sort (says he) Quodammodo omnia significantia videntur earum
rerum, quas significant, sustinere personas: sicut dictum est ab Apostolo,
petra erat Christus, quoniam Petra illa, de qua hoc dictum est, significabat
utique Christum. Aug. de civit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 48.
all things signifying, seem to be instead of those things, which they
signify: as it is said by the Apostle, The Rock was Christ, because that
Rock, of which that is spoken, did indeed signify Christ.

These words of that learned Father are very remarkable, that only for the
understanding of that particular place of Scripture, but also for the
determining of the maine Controversy betwixt us, and our Roman Adversaries.
For he not only says, that the Rock is said to have been Christ, because it
did signify Christ, supposing and taking it as granted, that the Apostle spoke
of a material Rock; but also he says, that after a sort all things signifying
are instead of the things signified by them, and therefore are called by the
same names. If our adversaries would mind this rule, they would soon see, that
they have no cause to insist upon those words, This is my Body, and to urge the
proper sense of them. But for these words, The Rock was Christ, Bellarmine
argues that a material Rock is not there meant, because the Apostle calls
it a spiritual Rock. I answer, so the Apostle there calls Manna spiritual
meat, yet was Manna a material thing, only it had a spiritual signification.
And so also was the Rock a material Rock, only it is called spiritual for the
same reason. Bellarmine objects, that a material Rock did not follow the
Israelites, as the Apostle says that the Rock did, which he speaks of; for
they drank (says he) of that spiritual Rock that followed them. I answer 1.
The material Rock may be said to have followed them, that is, to have
satisfied their desire of water. Thus (as Beza observes) (...). Photius apud
Oecumen: though I confess, he understands it of Christ as meant by the
spiritual Rock there mentioned.
Photius a Greek Author does expound it, and so also (as Pareus testifies) Lyra
and Dionysius, two Romish expositors. Bellarmine notes Peter Martyr, as thus
expounding it, neither has he any thing against this exposition, but only that
the Greek Fathers, and Erasmus interpret the word used by the Apostle
comitante, i. e. accompanying. But this is nothing, for they might mean
accompanying in a metaphorical sense, viz. in respect of satisfying the
desire. Again, the Rock may be said to have followed the Israelites, in that
the water flowing forth of the Rock, did follow them. Genebrard, a great man of
the Romish party, commenting upon those words, Psalm. 78. 15. He clave the Rocks
in the Wilderness, etc. says that the Septuagint, and the vulgar Latin
interpreter have it in the singular number, Rock, because by the Hebrew
traditions there was but one Rock, which was smitten, and so sent forth water,
at several times, and in several places: and that this Rock did remove with
the Israelites, and follow them in their travells through the Wilderness. And
this, he says, is agreeable to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 4. But this is
over Rabbinicall, and therefore he adds, that the Rock may be said to have
followed the Israelites, that is, that Nisi malis consecutam petram, id est,
petrae fluxum, per derivationem, viz. and deductionem aquae a populo ad loca
castrorum procuratam, sive per ipsius Dei transmissionem and directionem.
Genebr loc. citat.

Paulo post indiguerunt rursus aqua. Bell. ubi supra, Sect. Calvinus.


the water which flowed out of the Rock did follow them, either in that they
themselves by their own art, and industry did derive and bring it to the
place, where they camped; or that it was effected by Gods transmission and
direction. Bellarmine objects, that a little after the Israelites did want
water again, as as we read Number. 20. and therefore the water did not follow
them. But that want of water spoken of Number. 20. was not a little after, but a
long time after the other mentioned Exodus 17. For that in Exodus was the
Israelites camped in Rephidim, not long after they came out of Egypt; and the
other was when they camped in Kadesh, in the fourtieth year after they left
Egypt, as is noted in the Hebrew Chronicle called Seder Olam cap. 9. Compare
Numbers. 33. 14. with 36. Nec obstat, quod in deserto excitatum sit alterum
murmur ob aquae penuriam, ut secundo educeretur aqua ex altera rupe post annos
38. Nam de hac ipsa rupe, nempe de priore hac Rabbini veteres, and recentiores
intelligunt, cujus aquam tradunt defecisse propter Mariae mortem, donec secundo
educeretur ex eadem ad secundu^ de aqua murmur. Genebr. ubi supra.
Genebrard in the place before cited, meets with this Objection, that
Bellarmine makes, and answers, that according to the Rabbis both ancient, and
modern, that which is recorded Number. 20. is meant of the same Rock that is
spoken of Exodus 17. the water whereof (they say) did fail because of Miriams
death (which happened there in Kadesh) until upon the peoples murmuring again
it was drawn out of the same Rock the second time.

This conceit of the Rabbines is far from pleasing me, only I note how little
force Bellarmines objection was of with his own copartner Genebrard. Indeed
this is enough to show the vanity of the objection, that (as Genebrard notes)
the want of water in Kadesh was 38. years after that in Rephidim, and therefore
was not (as Bellarmine says) a little after. But though it had not been one
half quarter of that time before the Israelites wanted water again, yet that
is no argument why the Apostle speaking of the Rock that followed them, should
not mean a material and visible Rock; for the material and visible Rock,
that is, the water that flowed from it, might follow the Israelites, though but
for while, even so long as they encamped in Rephidim: neither does the Apostle
say, that it followed them either perpetually, or for any long time, but only
that it followed them. But howsoever it be understood, that the Rock followed
them (which I confess is somewhat obscure) how by the Rock there should be
meant Christ, as the efficient cause giving them water to drink? For to drink
of (...).
the Rock, is there expressed in the same phrase, as to drink of the Cup, 1
Cor. 11. 28. Neither (I think) can one in any congruity be said to drink of a
man, that gives him either water, or any thing else to drink; but only to
drink either of the liquour, or (metonymically) of that wherein the liquour is
contained. Finally Bellarmine himself does acknowledge, that the material
Rock, which afforded the Israelites water to Bell. ubi supra, Sect. est tamen.
drink, was a figure of Christ, and that the water proceeding from that Rock,
was a figure of Christ's Blood; only he denies, that so much is meant by the
Apostle in those words, they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ. But, I demand then, from what place of Scripture, if
not from those words of the Apostle, can so much be gathered? Est hic ponitur
pro significare, quemadmodum and ibi, Petra autem erat Christus, Iansen.
concord. cap. 51.
Iansenius a learned Romanist, is more candid and free then Bellarmine; for
expounding the Parable of the sower he says that the word is (as when it is
said, The seed is the word of God, etc. Luke 8. 11.) is put for signifies, as
also there where it is said, And the Rock was Christ.

And so also (say we) when it is said, This is my Body, the meaning is, This
does signify my Body, or, This is a Sign, a Token, a Seal, a Pledge of my
Body.

The Lord (says Non dubitavit Dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meus, cum signum
daret corporis sui. Aug. coutra Adimant. cap. 12.
Austine) doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his
Body. And again, speaking of those words, Facinus vel Flagitium videtur jubere.
Figura ergo est, praecipiens passionibus Domini esse communicandum, and
suaviter atque utiliter recondendum esse in memoria, quod pro nobis caro ejus
crucisixa, and vulnerata est. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib 3. cap. 16.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
life in you, Ioh. 6. 53. he says, That Christ seems to command some heinous
act, or some gross wickedness: And that therefore it is a figurative speech,
requiring us to communicate with the Lords sufferings, and sweetly and
profitably to keep in memory that his flesh was Crucified, and wounded for us.
And yet again, Qui discordat a Christo, nec carnem ejus manducat, nec sangninem
bibit, etiamsi tantae rei sacramentum ad judicium suae praesumptionis quotidie
indifferenter accipiat. Prosper in Sentent. ex Augustino, sent. 341.
He that is at enmity with Christ (says he) does neither eat his Flesh, nor
drink his Blood, although to the condemnation of his presumption, he daily
receive: the Sacrament of so great a thing as well as others.

These saying of Austin do sufficiently show how he understood those words,
This is my Body, and how far he was from being of the now-Romane Faith
concerning the presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Indeed, these very words,
This is my Body, which our Adversaries pretend to make so much for them, are
most strong against them, and enough to throw down Transubstantiation. For
Christ saying, This is my Body, what is meant by the word This? They of the
Church of Rome cannot agree about it, but some say one thing, some another,
only by no means they will have Bread to be meant by it. For they very well
know that so their Transubstantiation were quite overthrown. But look into the
Scripture, and mind it well, and see if any thing else but Bread can be meant
by the word This. It Is said, Mat. 26. 26. Jesus took Bread and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, This is my Body.
What is here meant by the word This? What is it that Christ calls his Body?
That which he bade the Disciples take and eat. And what was that? That which
he gave unto them. And what was that? That which he brake. And what was that?
That which he blessed. And what was that? That which he took. And what was
that? Bread. For so expressly the Evangelist tells us, that Jesus took Bread. So
then it was Bread that Christ took, and Bread that he blessed, and Bread that
he brake, and Bread that he gave to the Disciples, and Bread that he bade them
take and eat, and Bread of which he spoke, saying, This is my Body. As if he
should say, This Bread which I have taken, and blessed, and broken, and given
unto you to eat, even this Bread is my Body. Now the word This relating unto
Bread, the speech must needs be Figurative, and cannot be Proper. For properly
Bread cannot be Christ's Body, Bread and Christ's Body, being things of diverse
and different natures, and so it being impossible that properly one should be
the other. As Disparatum de disparato non potest univoce praedicari.
when Christ called Herod a Fox, and the Pharisees Serpents and Vipers, the
speeches are not Proper, but Figurative; so is it when he called Bread his
Body, it being no more possible that Bread should be the Body of Christ in
propriety of speech, then that a man should properly be a Fox, a Serpent, a
Viper. Besides, does not the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. speaking of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, continually call it Bread, even after Consecration? Indeed,
to distinguish it from ordinary and common Bread, he calls it This Bread; but
yet still Bread, the same in substance, though not the same in use, as before.
And (which is worthy to be observed) thus the Apostle calls it, viz. Bread,
when he sharply reproves the Corinthians for their unworthy receiving of the
Sacrament, setting before them the grievousnesse of the sin, and the greatness
of the danger that they did incur by it. Now what had been more forcible and
effectual to this end, than for the Apostle, if he had been of the Romish
Faith, to have told them, that now it was not Bread, though it seemed unto them
to be so, but that the substance of the Bread was gone, and instead thereof was
come the very substance of Christ's Body? He says indeed, That whosoever eat that
Bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, are guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord: But that is, because that Bread, and that Cup, (i. e. the
Wine in the Cup) are by the Lords own institution Signs and Seals of the
Lords Body and Blood; so that the unworthy receiving of them is an indignity
done to the things signified by them. But to return to the Marquess, he cites
sundry passages in John 6. where our Savior speaks of eating his flesh, and
drinking his blood, calling himself Bread, living Bread, and affirming that
his Flesh is meat indeed, and his Blood drink indeed. But all this is far
from proving that real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which the
Marquess does contend for. For, 1. as Iansenius (not to name other of the
Marquesses own party) has unanswerably Iansen. Concord. cap. 59.
proved, Christ in John 6. did not treat of the Sacrament, but only of the
spiritual eating of his Flesh, and the spiritual drinking of his Blood by
faith. 2. The words of our Savior John 6. if they must prove any
transubstantiation at all, will sooner prove the transubstantiation of Christ's
body into Bread, then the transubstantiation of Bread into Christ's body. I am
the Bread of life, says he, John 6. 35. and 48. I am the living Bread, etc.
ver. 51. My flesh is meat indeed, etc. ver. 55. If these sayings be taken
properly, and without a figure, they will prove a conversion, not of Bread into
the body of Christ, but of the Body of Christ into Bread. And the argument that
Forsitan respondetur quod idolum mateiale post consecrationem rite factam totum
transubstantiatur convertiturque in Deum. -- Haec conversio refellitur, quia
videtur cuilibet sensui, omni experimento testante, quod ibi sit idem idolum
materiale quod prius. Quare si aliqua conversio ibi siat, magis videtur Deum
converti in idolum, quam e contra. Bradward: de causa Dei l. 1. c. 1.
Bradwardine uses against the Idols of the Pagans, is by full proportion of as
much force against our adversaries transubstantiation. Perhaps (says he) it is
answered, that a material Idol after consecration rightly performed, is
transubstantiated and turned into God. -- This conversion (viz. of the Idol
into God) is refelled, because it appears to every sense, all experience
bearing witness, that there is the same material Idol that was before.
Therefore if there be any conversion made, it seems rather that God is
converted into the Idol, then that the Idol is converted into God. This
argument, I say, does as strongly militate against the opinion of the Romanists
concerning the real presence. For it no less appears, to every sense, all
experience bearing witness, that there is the same material Bread that was
before. Therefore if there be any conversion made, it seems rather that
Christ's Body is converted into the Bread, then that the Bread is converted into
Christ's Body.

The Marquess says that we with the Jews and Infidells say, Page 58.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Ioh. 6. 52. But we say no such
thing. How should we, if we believe Christ saying, except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, you have no life in you? verse. 53. We
know and acknowledge, that we must eat the flesh of Christ, but yet
spiritually, not (as those unbelieving Jews imagined, being therein more like
unto our Adversaries) carnally. For so our Adversaries hold, that the wicked
may eat the flesh of Christ, and yet be never the better, but receive it to
their condemnation: whereas the eating of Christ's Flesh spoken of Ioh. 6. is a
thing that does accompany salvation. See Iansen. upon those words, Concord.
cap. 59.
Who so eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal life, etc. v. 54.

But says the Marquess, Had this been but a figure, certainly Christ would
have removed the doubt, when he saw them so offended Page 58.
at the reality. Joh. 6. 61. He would not have confirmed his saying in
terminis, with promise of a greater wonder, Joh. 6. 62. You may as well deny
his Incarnation, his Ascension, and ask, How could the man come down from
Heaven, and go up again?

I answer, 1. A figure, viz. in speech, is not properly opposed to reality, but
to propriety. The spiritual eating of Christ's Flesh, is a real, yet not a
proper, but a figurative, a metaphorical eating of it: when Christ says, I am
the true Vine, Joh. 15. 1. there is a reality implied, as well as when he
says, My flesh is meat indeed, Joh. 6. 55. yet no Romanist (I presume) but
will grant, that Christ is a Vine, not properly, but figuratively so called.
True Vine, that is, excellent, incorruptible and spiritual Vine, as Vitis
vera, id est, eximia, incorruptibilis, and spiritualis. Iansen. ex Eutbymio
Concord. cap. 135.
Iansenius out of Euthymius does expound it. So meat indeed, that is,
excellent, incomparable and spiritual meat.

2. For those words of our Savior, John 6. 62. What and if ye shall see the
Son of man ascend up where he was before? they make nothing for our
Adversaries, but rather against them. For our Savior in those words most
probably intended to let the Jews see, that he did not speak of a Carnal
eating of his Flesh, as they supposed, but of a Spiritual eating of it. So
Austine understood those words, as Iansenius notes, and judges that exposition
Jansen. Concord. cap. 59.
most probable. And so the Jesuit Maldonate, who cites Beda and Rupertus as
following Non nego me hujus interpretationis authorem habere neminem (scil.
Quid facietis cum videritis me ascendentem in coelum? quanto magis
scandalizabimini? quanto minus credetis?) sed hanc eo magis probo, quam illam
alteram Augustini, caeterarum alioqui probabilissimam, quod haec cum
Calvinistarum sensu magis pugnet, quod mihi magnum est probabilitatis
argumentum. Maldon. ad Joh. 6. 62.
the same exposition, confesses that exposition more probable than any other
that he met with. Yea, that he had no Author of that Interpretation which he
embraced, viz. What will ye do when ye shall see me ascend into Heaven? How
much more then will ye be offended? How much less will ye then believe? Yet he
says that he did approve this rather then that of Austine, though of all the
rest most probable, because this did more oppose the sense of the Calvinists,
which to him (he says) was a great argument of the probability of it. Here
see, and observe the disposition of a Jesuit, what little reckoning he made of
Fathers, so he might but oppose Calvinists. Bellarmine also thinks this a very
literal exposition, that Christ's meaning was to show that they should have
greater cause to Bell. de Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 6.
doubt after his Ascension then they had before. And this exposition he says
seems to be Chrysostomes; yet Iansenius attributes another exposition unto
Chrysostom, and Maldonate confesses that he found none to expound it in that
manner. Neither is this exposition agreeable to the letter. For it is equally
inconceiveable, that Christ being on Earth, should give his Flesh to many
thousands to eat, if it be meant of Carnal eating, as that he should do it
being in Heaven. But Bellarmine first has another Bell. Ibid.
exposition of those words of our Savior, which here the Marquess seems to
follow, viz. that our Savior would confirm one wonderful thing by another no
less wonderful, if not more, he means the wonderful eating of his Flesh (in
their sense) by his wonderful Ascension into Heaven. And this exposition, he
says, does confirm their opinion; for that, if Christ had not promised to give
his true Flesh in the Sacrament, he needed not to prove his power by his
Ascension. I answer, it does argue an extraordinary power in Christ to give his
Flesh to eat, though there be no turning of the substance of the Bread in the
Sacrament into the substance of his Flesh. Bellarmine indeed says, it Bell.
Ibid.
is no miracle (such as the Jews required of Christ, Ioh: 6. 30, 31.) that
common Bread should signify Christ's Body, or that Christ's Body should be eaten
by Faith. But is this so ordinary and easy a matter, that common Bread (common
for substance, though not for use) should so signify the Body of Christ, that
by the due receiving of it, the very Body of Christ should be received, and so
Christ and the Receiver be united together Spiritually, even as Bread, and he
that eats it, are united together Corporally? Is all this nothing, except the
Bread be substantially changed and turned into Christ's Body? Why then does
Bellarmine Bell. de effect. Sacram. l. 2. c. 7. Sect. Calvinus.
elsewhere tell us, that the Fathers refer the wonderful effects of Baptism
(for of that Sacrament particularly do almost all the Fathers speak, which are
cited by him) to Gods Almighty power? I am sure Bellarmine would not have us
believe for all this, that the substance of the water in Baptism is changed
into any other substance.

Where our Savior tells them (says the Marquess) thus to argue Page 58, 59.
according to flesh and blood, in these words, The flesh profits nothing, and
that if they will be enlivened in their understanding, they must have Faith to
believe it in these words, It is the Spirit that quickneth, John 6. 63. They
pervert our Saviors meaning into a contrary sense of their own imagination,
viz. The flesh profits nothing, that is to say, Christ's Body is not in the
Sacrament: but it is the Spirit that quickneth, that is to say, we must only
believe that Christ dyed for us, but not that his Body is there. As if there
were any need of so many inculcations, pressures, offenses, mis-believings of,
and in a thing that were no more but a bare memorial of a thing, being a thing
nothing more usual with the Israelites, as the 12. stones which were erected
as a sign of the children of Isreal's passing over Jordan, etc. Josh. 4.

Those words of our Savior, The Flesh profits nothing, It is Answ.
the Spirit that quickneth, make also rather against our Adversaries opinion,
than for it. For as Iansenius comments upon them, our Savior in those words
Significat modum, quo caro ejus esset edenda, spiritualem esse, and spiritu
edendam esse, non carnaliter. Jansen. Concord. cap. 59.
signifies, That his flesh is to be eaten in spiritual manner, and not
carnally: which is that which we hold and maintain against them of the Church
of Rome.

This exposition (as the same Iansenius observes) does both answer the
murmuring Et scut haec explicatio optime respondet murmurantium verbis, ita and
sequenti sententiae congruit, Verba quae locutus sum vobis-spiritus and vita
sunt, hoc est, sunt spiritualia, and spiritualiter intelligenda, ac sic
auditori conferunt vitam. Sic enim hanc sententiam etiam Augustinus enarrat.
Jausen. Ibid.
of the Jews, and also agree with the sentence following, The words which I
have spoken unto you, they are spirit, and they are life, that is, they are
spiritual, and to be understood spiritually, and so they give life to those
that hear them. Thus (he says) Austine does interpret this sentence; and a
little before he cites Chrysostom, Theophylact, and others, as understanding
Christ's words in this sense. 2. To remove those offenses, and mis-beleevings
which the Jews had about the eating of Christ's Flesh, which he spoke of (they
understanding his words in a carnal sense) there was need enough of so many
inculcations and pressures, for we see, that after all those inculcations and
pressures yet our Adversaries will not be taken off from the like Carnal
conceit, as the offended and mis-beleeving Jews had. Our Adversaries would
seem indeed to be far from compliance with those Jews, because they do not
hold that Christ's Flesh is to be eaten by bits, so as to be divided one piece
from another (as those Jews seem to have imagined) but that it is to be
eaten, though corporally, yet in an invisible, and indivisible manner. But Pope
Nicolas caused Berengarius to recant his opinion, and to confess, That not Ore
and cord confiteor, etc. panem and vinum, quae in altari ponuntur, post
consecrationem non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum corpus and sanquinem D.
N. Jesu Christi esse, and sensualiter non solum sacramentum, sed in veritate
manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, fidelium dentibus atteri. De Consecr.
did. 2. cap. Ego Berengar.
only the Sacrament of Christ's Body, but the very body it self is sensually
held in the Priests hands, and torn by the Teeth of the Faithful. Which
expressions are as harsh as our Adversaries can use, when they would set forth
the grosnesse of that conceit which the Jews had about eating Christ's Flesh.

And indeed so harsh are those expressions in Berengarius his recantation
prescribed by the Pope, that the Gloss upon it is forced to say, Except you
rightly understand the words of Berengarius, (he might Nisi sane intelligas
verba Berengarii, in majorem incides haeresin, quam ipse habuit: and ideo omnia
referas ad species ipsas: nam de Christi corpore parts non facimus, Gloss.
have said of Pope Nicolas, who did prescribe them) you will fall into a
greater Heresy, then he was in. And therefore you must refer all to the
species (or shows) themselves; for we do not make any parts of Christ's Body.
So then to free themselves from a Capernaiticall manner of eating Christ's
Flesh, our adversaries hold, that neither Christ's body, nor bread, but only
the species, or shows of bread, as quantity, color, savor, and the like,
mere accidents without a substance, are torn with the teeth, divided and
broken. And is this properly to eat Christ's Body? or is not this eating of
Christ's Flesh as immaginable as that of the Jews? whereas the Marquess
speaks of a bare memorial; 1. Christ himself has plainly taught us, that
the Sacrament is a memorial of him, saying, Do this in remembrance of me. 2.
We do not say, that Christ is barely remembered in the Sacrament, but so
remembered; as also to be received, viz. by such as have faith whereby to
receive him. For to receive Christ, is to believe in him, as is clear Ioh. 1.
12. So that this receiving of Christ, though it be a real, yet it is not a
corporal, but a spiritual receiving of him.

After the Scriptures, the Marquess cites some Fathers, as Ignatius Epist. ad
Smyr. Iustine Apol. 2. Cyprian Ser. 4. de Laps. Ambros. Page 67.
l. 4. de Sacram. and Remigius (the place where not noted) who (he says)
affirm the flesh of Christ to be in the Sacrament, and the same flesh, which
the Word of God took in the Virgins Womb.

Answ. The question is not whether Christ's Flesh be in the Sacrament, but how
it is in it, concerning which these Fathers, so far as the Marquess does
show, speak nothing: To say, that they speak of the same flesh, which the
Word of God took in the Womb of the Virgin, is only to show that they speak
of Christ's flesh properly so called, but it does not show that they speak of
that flesh being properly in the Sacrament. I know no flesh of Christ properly
so called, but that, which the Word made Flesh (Ioh. 1. 14) took of the Virgin
Mary: but though it be granted (as it is) that this flesh of Christ is in the
Sacrament, yet still the question remains whether this flesh of Christ be
properly, substantially, and corporally in the Sacrament, viz. under the
species, or shows of bread, as our Adversaries hold; and to this question the
Marquess does not say that the Fathers alleged by him, do speak any thing:
and therefore I might well let them pass without any further answer.

But to consider them, and their testimonies more particularly. First, Ignatius
his words (as they are cited by Bellarmine) are to this effect, They (meaning
certain Heretics) do not admit Eucharists, and oblations, because they do
not confess the Eucharist Bell. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 2.
to be the flesh of our Savior, which did suffer for our sins, and which the
Father of his goodness did raise up. This testimony is nothing against us, who
do not deny the Eucharist, that is, the bread in the Eucharist to be the flesh
of Christ, only we say that it is not his flesh in a proper, but in a
figurative sense, viz. (as Austine in the words before cited observes) the
thing signifying being called by the name of the thing signified. And this must
be the meaning of Ignatius; for he speaks, not of Christ's flesh being in the
Eucharist, but of the Eucharist being Christ's Flesh. Whereby the Eucharist can
be meant nothing but the Sacramental bread, and that (as I have before
demonstrated) by the confession of all cannot properly, but only figuratively
be Christ's Flesh. Bellarmine objects, that the Heretics Bell. Ibid.
spoken of by Ignatius, denied Christ to have true flesh, holding that he was
but seemingly borne, crucified, and raised again. And therefore (he says)
they did not deny the Eucharist to signify the flesh of Christ, but only to
be the Flesh of Christ, lest they should be forced to admit that Christ had
true flesh. But (say I) how could those Heretics yield that Eucharist does
signify the flesh of Christ, and yet deny that Christ has flesh? For a thing
must needs first be, before there can be truly any signification of it. Men
(says Bellarmine) may paint bodies, which indeed are not. But who will say
that these Pictures are representations of bodies, and not mere Pictures? And
this is all that Bellarmine could make out of Ignatius. The next Father is
(...). Justin. Apol. 2.
Iustine Martyr, who says that the Bread in the Sacrament, is not common
Bread, nor the Cup a common Cup. We say the same, they are not common, being
sanctified, and set apart for a holy use. But does this prove any
transubstantiation? our adversaries hold no substantial change of the water in
Baptism, and yet they will not say, that it is common water; I am sure it is
far more justly to be accounted Holy, than that which they use to call Holy
Water.

Iustine also says, That we are taught, that the food in the Eucharist, by
which being changed, (...). Justin. Ibid.
our flesh and blood is nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus that
was incarnate. But this was so far from proving Transubstantiation, that indeed
it overthrowes it: For in saying that we are nourished by the food, the Bread
and the Wine in the Sacrament, he says in effect that the substance of that
food, that Bread and Wine, does still remain; for otherwise how should we be
nourished by it? Christ's Body and Blood are not for our corporal nourishment,
of which Iustine speaks; neither can the bare Species, or shows of Bread and
Wine afford any such nourishment.

But (says Bellarmine) Iustine writing an Apology for Christians, and their
Religion, was a prevaricatour, and made the Christian Faith most odious, by
expressing himself so as he did, Bell. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 4.
whereas he might have avoided all superstition, if he had believed that Christ
is not so in the Sacrament, as that the Bread is substantially changed, and
turned into his Body. I answer, that Iustines expressions are agreeable to our
Saviors: 1. This is my Body, and therefore no more apt to render the Faith of
Christians odious than the other. Neither was it much to be feared, that the
Heathens, to whom he wrote his Apology, should not be able to understand the
Figure, whereby the sign is called that which it signifies; there was no need
(as Bellarmine scoffingly speaks) that for Opinatur fortasse Petrus Martyr
Imperatorem illum versatum fuisse in Schola Calvinistarum, ut statim ad tropos
omnia revocaret. Bellar. Ibid.
the understanding of this Figure they should be conversant in the School of
the Calvinists.

The next Father cited by the Marquess is Cyprian, who speaking of some, that
in time of Persecution denied the Faith, and yet presumed to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; to let them see the heinousness of their
presumption, he first alleged some places of Scripture, as Levit. 7. 19, 20.
and 1 Cor. 10. 21. and 11. 27. And then he adds, All these things Spretis his
omnibus, atque contemptis vis infertur corpori ejus, and sanguini; and plus
modo in Dominum manibus atque ore delinquunt, quam cum Dominum negaverunt.
Cypr. de Laps.
being despised and contemned, violence is offered to Christ's Body and Blood;
and they now sin against the Lord more by their hands and mouth, then they
did before when that they denied him. But what is there in all this to show
Cyprian held any such presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as they of the
Romish Church maintain? Yes (says Bellarmine, Bell. de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 9.
for the Marquess only points at places, but cites no words, much less
draws any argument from them) Cyprian did certainly believe Christ to be so in
the Sacrament, or else he would never have so aggravated the unworthy receiving
of the Sacrament, as to make it a greater sin than to deny Christ before a
persecutor. But this reason is over-weak. For first, Cyprian being very
Rhetorical, might a little hyperbolize in his expression. And 2. without any
Hyperbole at all the words may be made good, and yet no Transubstantiation, nor
any corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament be supposed. For the sin of
denying Christ under Persecution might be (and most probably was) of infirmity;
and the sin of receiving the Sacrament unworthily might be of presumption,
and so more heinous in that respect than the other. In the same place Cyprian
also relates some miraculous punishments which were inflicted on some that
unworthily received the Sacrament: and hence also Bellarmine infers Bell. Ibid.
that Christ is corporally present in the Sacrament, for that we do not read
(he says) of any such miracles showed upon those who have unworthily meddled
with other Signs. I answer, yes, we do; we read of Nadab and Abihu slain with
fire from Heaven, for offering Incense with strange Fire, Levit. 10. and yet
that Incense, and the Altar on which it was offered, were but Types and
Figures. So the Arc was but a Sign of Gods Presence, and yet many thousands
of the Bethshemites were destroyed for looking into it, 1 Samuel 6. 4. so also
was Uzza for presuming to touch it, 2 Samuel 6.

Next to Cyprian, the Marquess cites, Ambrose Lib. 4. de Sacram. but no
Chapter is cited by him. Bellarmine cites Accipe que dico, anteriora esse
mysteria Christianorum quam Judeorum, and diviniora esse Sacramenta. Ambros. de
Sacram. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Chap. 3, 4, and 5. Now all that Ambrose says, chap. 3. as looking that way,
is but this, That the Sacraments of Christians are more Divine then those of
the Jews. Which we grant, not in respect of the thing signified, For Jesus
Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13. the same Christ
was signified by the Jewish Sacraments as by ours: but in respect of the manner
of signifying, Christ being more clearly signified by our Sacraments, than he
was by those which the Jews had. See 2 Cor. 3. 12. etc.

But chap. 4. Ambrose has something that may seem to make more against us,
viz. That Sed panis iste, panis est ante verba Sacramentoru^; ubiaccesserit
consecratio, de pane fit caro Christi. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
before Consecration it is Bread, but when Consecration comes, then of Bread
it is made the Flesh of Christ.

To this I answer, that these words do not infer any Transubstantiation. By
Consecration, of Bread is made Christ's Flesh, but Sacramentally, not
Substantially; Figuratively, not Properly. And that Ambrose in those words did
intend no substantial change of the Bread, appears by his own words in the
same Chapter. If (says he) Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon Domini Jesu, ut
inciperent esse, quae non erant; quanto magis operatorius est, ut sint quae
erant, and in aliud commutentur? Ambros. Ibid.
there was such force in the speech of the Lord Jesus, that things should begin
to be that were not: how much more operative is it, that those things should
be, which were, and should withal be changed into another thing? Therefore in
the judgment of Ambrose, the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, are what they
were, viz. in respect of substance, yet by virtue of Christ's institution are
changed, viz. in respect of signification.

Bellarmine, to evade this testimony, first says, that Lanfrancus Bell. ubi
supra.
in his book against Berengarius speaks of some Copies of Ambrose his Works,
wherein those words were not, Ut sint quae erant, that is, That those things
should be which were. But no such Copies either Printed, or Manuscript, it
seems did Bellarmine meet with; for otherwise (I doubt not) he would have given
us notice of them. Again, with the same Lanfrancus he answers, that those words
are thus to be understood, that in respect of outward show, the things which
were, still are, but are changed in respect of inward substance. But how can a
thing be said to be what it was, when as there is no substance of the thing
remaining, but only a show and appearance of it? In the last place Bellarmine.
adds of his own, that Ambrose meant, If Christ could make a thing of nothing,
why can he not make a thing of something, not by annihilating the thing, but by
changing it into that which is better? But if a thing be changed substantially
into another thing, how does it remain what it was before? But so the things
do, that Ambrose speaks of. For Bellarmines criticisme is poor in
distinguishing betwixt, Ut sint id, quod erant, That they should be that which
they were, and Ut sint quae erant, That the things should be that were, as if
these words did not import that the same substances still remain, as well as
the other when Christ turned Water into Wine, can we say, that his Word was
operative, and powerful, Ut esset quod erat, and in aliud mutaretur, That that
should be which was, and that withal, it should be changed into another thing?
I confess I cannot see how the thing may be said truly and properly to be,
which was, if it be substantially changed into some other thing. Ambrose there
a little after says, Tu ipse eras, sed eras vetus creatura: posteaquam
consecratus es, nova creatura esse coepisti. Thou thy self wast, but thou wast
an old creature: after thou art consecrated, thou beginnest to be a new
creature: which cannot be meant of any substantial change in us. Chap. 5. the
same Ambrose, (if it were Ambrose, for Bellarmine is not very confident that
Ambrose was the Author of those Books, De Sacramentis) says indeed, That
before it is Consecrated, it is Bread, but when the words of Antequam
consecretur, panis est: ubi autem verba Christi accesserint, corpus est
Christi. Ambr. de Sacr l. 4. c. 5.
Christ are come, it is the Body of Christ. But that it is so the Body of
Christ, as to be no longer Bread he does not affirm. That he was of another
mind, appears by the words before alleged. And so much also may be gathered
from that which he says in this same Chapter, viz. He that did eat Manna,
Manna qui manducavit, mortuus est; qui mauducaverit hoc corpus, fiet ei
remissio peccatorum, and non morietur in aeternum. Ambros. Ibid.
dyed: but whose eats this Body, shall have remission of sins, and shall live
for ever. Which cannot be understood of a Corporal eating of Christ's Body, but
of a Spiritual eating of it. Bellarmine cites some other sayings of Ambrose
out of another Work of his, viz. De iis, qui mysteriis initiantur, but they
prove no more than these already cited, neither does the Marquess refer us to
them. Yea, in that same work Ambrose does sufficiently declare himself against
Transubstantiation. For there he says, It is truly the Sacrament of Christ's
Vere ergo carnis illius Sacramentum est. -- post consccrationem corpus
significatur. Ambros. de iis qui myster. init. cap. 6.
Flesh. And, after Consecration, the Body (of Christ) is signified. And again,
It is not therefore Corporali food, but Spiritual. Whence also the Apostle
says of the Type of it, that our Fathers Non ergo corporalis esca, sed
spiritualis est. Unde and Apostolus de typo ejus ait, Quia patres nostri escam
spiritualem manducaverunt, and potum spiritualem biberunt. Ibid.
did eat Spiritual meat, and did drink Spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10. The last
Author Remigius, is only cited by the Marquess at large, neither do I find
him cited by Bellarmine at all, and therefore until we have some particular
place cited out of him, it is in vain to trouble our selves about him; besides,
that his Antiquity is not such, as that his Authority should much be stood
upon, being 890 years after Christ, as Bellarmine shows in his book of
Ecclesiastical Writers.

Secondly, (says the Marquess) We hold that there is in the Page 59, and 60.
Church an infallible Rule for understanding of Scripture, besides the
Scripture it self. This you deny, this we have Scripture for, as Romans 12. 6. We
must prophecy according to the Rule of Faith. We are bid to walk according to
this Rule, Gal. 6. 16. We must increase our Faith, and preach the Gospel
according to this Rule, 2 Cor. 10. 15. This rule of Faith the Holy Scriptures
call a form of Doctrine, Romans 6. 17. a thing made ready to our hands, 2 Cor.
10. 16. that we may not measure our selves by our selves, 2 Cor. 10. 12. the
depositions committed to the Churches trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. for avoiding of
profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of sciences, And by this rule of
faith is not meant the Holy Scriptures; for that cannot do it, as the Apostle
tells us, whilst there are unstable men, who wrest this way and that way to
their own destruction; but it is the tradition of the Church, as it is
delivered from hand to hand, as most plainly appears, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things
which thou have heard of us (not received in writing from me or others) among
many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to
teach it to others also.

That there is any infallible Rule for understanding of Scripture, Answ.
or any other rule of Faith, besides the Scripture, we do deny, and that by
authority of the Scripture it self. To the law, and to the testimony, if they
speak not according to this Word, it is because they have no light in them.
Isai. 8. 20. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they that testify of me. Joh. 5. 39. These were more noble
then they of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so. Acts 17.
11. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, That
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Neither do those places alleged by the Marquess make for the
contrary.

We must prophecy according to the rule of Faith, says the Apostle Romans 12.
6. as the Marquess has it, following therein the Rhemists translation, as
also their comment upon the place. But the word in the original signifies
rather proportion, (...).
then rule. And I see not but that by the proportion of says may be understood
the measure of says, which is spoken of verse. 3.

But be it granted, that proportion of faith is as much as rule of faith, where
does the Apostle say, that this rule of faith is any other then the Scripture
it self? The places before cited show, that we are referred to the Scripture,
as the rule, whereby all doctrines are to be tried; but no where do I find,
that we are referred to any unwritten tradition. Sure I am our Adversaries can
evince no such thing from the words of the Apostle, Romans 12. 6. Except we must
(to use the Marquesses expressions) Page 53.
take them margin'd with their own notes, sens'd with their own meaning, and
enlivened with their own private spirit. As for the rule mentioned, Gal. 6. 16.
it is no general rule of faith, or of interpreting Scripture, but a special
rule, that in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature; as is clear by the context, ver. 15. As
many as walk according to this rule, that is, (as (...). Oecum. ad loc.
Oecumenius expounds it) as many as are content with this rule, and this
doctrine, that all things are made a new creature, and do not subject
themselves to the Law. Neither is the place, 2 Cor. 10. 15. to the purpose. For
the Apostle there speaks of a ruleby way of similitude (as Cardinal Loquitur
Paulus ad similitudinem filotum, quibus artifices utuntut proregulis operum
efficiendorum. Archimagister siquidem praesidens universo operi fabricae, vel
colendae terrae, vel efficiendorum aggerum, filis (quae regulae vocantur)
distinguit parts operis, and juxta regulam cuique datam mensura est operis
cujusque. Hac metaphora utitur Paulus, ad significandum quod materia
gloriationis suae est mensurarum terrarum spatium, in quo hactenus
praedicaverat secundum regulam, non a seipso, non ab apostolis, sed a Deo; quod
terrarum spatium pertingebat usque ad Corinthios. Cajetan. in 2. Cor. 10.
Cajetan does well expound it) viz. that as an Architect, or the like chief
workman, does by rule divide the work that is to be done, and appoint
under-workemen where they shall employ themselves, and how far they shall
reach: so God did as it were by rule appoint Paul, where he should preach the
Gospel, and how far his employment should extend in that kind. This plainly
appears to be the Apostles meaning by the two verses immediately preceding,
But we will not boast of things without our measure, but according to the
measure of the rule, which God has distributed unto us, a measure to reach
even unto you. For we stretch not our selves beyond our measure, as though we
reached not unto you; for we are come as far as you also in preaching the
Gospel of Christ. Then he adds, Not boasting of things without our measure,
that is, of other men's labors, but having hope, when your faith is increased,
that we shall be enlarged by you, according to our rule abundantly, To preach
the Gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to boast in another man's line,
of things made ready to our hand. All may plainly see, that here is nothing
spoken of a rule of faith, or a rule for the understanding of the Scripture.
And therefore most impertinently is 2 Cor. 10. 16. cited, as if the Apostle
there did speak of a rule of faith made ready to their hands. And so also is
that of not measuring our selves by our selves. 2 Cor. 10. 12.

Neither can our Adversaries ever be able to prove that by the form of
Doctrine mentioned Romans 6. 17. the Apostle did mean any other Doctrine, then
what is contained in the Scripture: or that any Doctrine, but the Doctrine of
the Scripture is meant by that which was committed to Timotheus trust, 1 Timothy
6. 20. which the Apostle there bids him keep, avoiding profane, and vain
bablings, etc. Though such as are unlearned, and unstable wrest the Scriptures,
etc. 2 Pet. 3. 16. yet the same Apostle in the same Epistle does teach us to
take heed to the Scripture, as to a light shining in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1.
19.

That the Apostle spoke of any unwritten tradition, as a rule whereby to
interpret Scriptures, 2 Timothy 2. 2. can never be made good: by the things, which
Timothy heard him, and was to commit to faithful men, etc. he meant nothing
but the Doctrine of the Gospel, as the forementioned Evangelicos siquidem
sermones intelligit dicendo, and quae audisti a me. Cajet. in 2 Timothy 2.
Cajetan does truly interpret: and that Doctrine, I presume, is no where to be
found, but in the Scripture. Surely the Apostle in the next Chapter after tells
Timothy, that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures, which were able
to make him wise unto salvation, thorough faith, which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

After the Scriptures, the Marquess cites the Fathers as being Page 60 and 61.
of this opinion, viz. Ireneus l. 4. c. 45. Tertull. de Praescript. and
Vincent. Lirin. in suo Commentario (perhaps it should be Commonitorio) But it
will not appear, that the Fathers held any rule of faith, and of interpreting
the Scripture, besides the Scripture it self. His Majesty (as I noted before)
cited above twice as many Fathers, as the Marquess here alleges, plainly
Page 50.
testifying that the Scriptures are their own interpreters, and that matters of
faith are to be decided by them. I will add a few more testimonies of the
Fathers to this purpose. Ut haec, quae scripta sunt, non negamus, it a ea, quae
non sunt scripta, renuimus, Hieron. advers. Helvid.
As we do not deny (says Hierome) those things which are written, so we
refuse those things, which are not written. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem.
Tertull. contra Hermog. cap. 22.
I adore (says Tertullian) the fullness of the Scripture. And again, Scriptum
esse doceat Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud
adjicientibus, aut detrahentibus destinatum. Tertull. Ibid.
Let Hermogenes (says he) show that it is written. If it be not written, let
him fear that woe appointed for those that either add to the Scripture, or
detract from it. Nos nullam Cypriano facimus injuriam, cum ejus quaslibet
literas a canonica divin trum Scripturarum authoritate distinguimus. Neque enim
sine causa tam saluber vigilantiae canon Ecclesiasticus constitutus est, adquem
certi Prophetarum and Apostolorum libri pertineant, quos omninojudicare non
audeamus, and secundum quos de caeteris literis vel fidelium, vel in fidelium
libere judicemus. Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31.
We do Cyprian no wrong (says Austine) when we distinguish any of his
writings from the canonical authority of the Divine Scriptures. For not
without cause is such a wholesome Ecclesiastical rule of vigilance
constituted, to which certain Books of the Prophets and the Apostles belong,
which we may not at all dare to judge, and according to which we may freely
judge of other writings, whether they be of Believers, or of unbelievers. And
again, I am not Ego Epistolae hujus authoritate non teneor, quia literas
Cypriani non ut Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex Canonicis considero, and quod in
eis divinarum Scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum laud ejus accipio, quod
autem non congruit, cum pace ejus respuo. Aug. ibid.
bound (says he) by the authority of this Epistle (viz. of Cyprian) because I
do not account Cyprians writings as Canonical, but I examine them by those
that are Canonical, and that which is in them agreeable to the authority of
the Divine Scriptures, I receive with his praise, and what is not agreeable, I
refuse with his leave. For the Fathers here cited by the Marquess, Ubi igitur
charismata Domini posita sunt, ibi discere oportet veritatem, apud quos est ea,
quae est ab Apostolis, Ecclesiae successio, and id, quod est sanum,
irreprobabile sermonis constat. Hi enim and eam, quae est in unum Deum, qui
omnia fecit, fidem nostram custodiunt, and eam, quae est in filium Dei,
dilectionem adaugent, qui tantas dispositiones propter nos fecit, and
Scripturas sine periculo nobis exponunt, neque Deum blasphemantes, neque
Patriarchas exhonorantes, neque prophetas contemnentes. Ircn. lib. 4. cap. 45.
Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 45. has nothing that may seem to make that way except
this, Where (says he) the gifts of the Lord are placed, there we ought to
learn truth, of those with whom is that succession of the Church, which is
from the Apostles, and that sound speech not to be reproved. For they keep
that faith of ours, which is in one God, that made all things, and increase
that love, which is toward the Son of God, who did such great things for us,
and they without danger expound unto us the Scriptures, neither blaspheming
God, nor dishonoring the Patriarcks, nor contemning the Prophets. Here Irenaeus
speaks of some, of whom truth was to be learnt, who kept the faith, and did
expound the Scriptures without danger: but he does not say, that they had any
unwritten rule of faith, or any such rule, whereby to expound the Scriptures.
No; for so Irenaeus should not agree with himself, who says (as His Majesty
observed) that the evidences, Ostensiones, quae sunt in Scripturis, non possunt
ostendi nisi ex ipsis Scripturis. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 12.
which are in the Scriptures, cannot be manifested but by the Scriptures
themselves. Add hereunto another saying of the Father very pertinent to the
purpose. We have not known (says he) the dspensation of our salvation but by
Non per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae, quam per eos, per quos Evangelium
pervenit ad nos; quod quidem praeconiaverunt, postea vero per Dei voluntatem in
Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum.
Ien. lib. 3. cap. 1.
those, by whom the Gospel came unto us: which Gospel they preached, aad
afterward by the Will of God delivered unto us in the Scriptures, as that which
should be for the foundation and pillar of our Faith. So much for Irenaeus; The
Marquess cites the words of Tertullian, and so of Vincentius: Tertullians
words (as he cites them) are these, we do not admit our adversaries to
dispute out of Scripture, till they can show, who their ancestors were, and
from whom they received the Scriptures. For the ordinary course of Doctrine
requires, that the first question should be, from whom, and by whom, and to
whom the form of Christian Religion was delivered, otherwise prescribing
against him as a stranger. These words I cannot find, nor any like unto them
in the place cited, viz. de Praescrip. cap. 11. elsewhere indeed in that book
I find words like unto these, though not the same. However if we should be
tried by these words, I see not how they will conclude against us. For though
the Heretics, with whom Tertullian had to do, might be convinced otherwise
then by Scripture, it follows not, that therefore this is not the ordinary way
whereby to convince Heretics. Thus Christ convinced the Sadduces that denied
the Resurrection, Mat. 22. 29. etc. thus Apollos convinced the Jews, who
denied Jesus to be the Christ: Acts 18. 28. And thus the Apostles convinced
those that urged Circumcision, and the observing of the Jewish Law, Acts 15.
15. etc. And thus both other Fathers, and even Tertullian himself does usually
dispute against Heretics, and confute them by the Scriptures.

But (says the Marquess) If a Heathen should come by the Bible, as the Eunuch
came by the prophecy of Esaias, and have no Philip to interpret it unto him, he
would find out a Religion rather according to his own fancy, then Divine
verity. Be it so, yet here is nothing to prove, that this Philip, that is to
interpret the Bible, is not to fetch his interpretation from the Bible it
self, but from some unwritten tradition. I come to Vincentius Lirinensis,
whose words produced by the Marquess, run thus, It is very needful in regard
of so many errors proceeding from misinterpretations of Scriptures, that the
line of prophetical and Apostolical exposition should be directed according
to the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. But I see not, that in
the opinion of Vincentius, the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense
is any other then the Scripture. He insists much (I am sure) upon those words
of the Apostle, If we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto
you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8.
Now, as was noted before out of Irenaeus, the Gospel, which the Apostles
preached, they delivered unto us in the Scriptures, and that is the foundation
and pillar of our Faith.

Indeed, all that Vincentius in his Commonitory against Heresies, aims at, is
this, That the Faith once delivered to the Saints (as Saint Jude speaks) might
be preserved. To which end he descants Jude, ver. 3.
well upon those words of the Apostle: O Timothy, keep that which is committed
to thy trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. That which is committed to thee, not that which is
Id quod tibi creditum est, non quod a te inventum; quod accepisti, non quod
excogitasti; rem non ingenii, sed doctrinae; non usurpationis privatae, sed
publicae traditionis: rem ad te perductam, non a te prolatam; in qua non author
debes esse, sed custos; non institutor, sed sectator; non ducens, sed sequens.
Vincent. loc. citat.
invented by thee; that which thou have received, not that which thou have
devised; a matter no^t of wit, but of doctrine; not of private usurpation, but
of public tradition; a thing brought unto thee, not brought forth by thee, in
which thou art not to be an author, but a keeper; not an ordainer, but an
observer; not a leader, but a follower. That this Depositum, or thing committed
to Timothy, was any unwritten Tradition, and not the doctrine of the Gospel
contained in the Scripture; neither does Vincentius say, neither can it be
proved. Bellarmine himself is forced to confess, That all things necessary
Dico illa omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis, quae sunt omnibus necessaria, etc.
Bellarm. de Verbo non scripto lib. 4. c. 11.
for all, are written by the Apostles: Yea, and that those things which have
the testimony of Tradition (he means unwritten tradition) received Loquitur
Origenes de obscurissim is quaestionibus, quales ut plurimum non sunt illae,
quae testimonium habent traditionis in tota Ecclesia receptae. Bellar. Ibid.
in the whole Church, are not usually such as concern most obscure questions.
And how then should such Tradition be the Rule of Faith, and of Expounding the
Scriptures? The Marquess says, that in matters of Faith Christ bids us to
observe, and do whatsoever they bid us, who sit in Moses Seat, Page 60, and 61,
Mat. 23. 2, 3. whence he infers, Therefore surely there is something more to
be observed then only Scripture: Will you not as well believe what you hear
Christ say, as what you hear his Ministers write? You hear Christ when you hear
them, as well as you read Christ when you read his Word. He that hears you
hears me, Luke 10. 16.

Thus the Marquess, but it was from our Saviors meaning, that the people
should do simply, and absolutely, whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees, who
sat in Moses Seat, should enjoin. Our Savior meant nothing less, for
expressly he bade beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, Mat. 16. 6. that is, of
the Doctrine of the Pharisees, v. 12. Our Saviors meaning therefore was only
this, that whiles the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses Seat, did deliver
the Law and Doctrine of Moses, people should hear and obey, though otherwise
they were most corrupt both in life and Doctrine.

The Jesuit Maldonate does thus expound the place, as indeed it cannot with
any probability be otherwise expounded. When Christ (says he) bids observe,
and do Cum jubet servare, and facere, quae Scribae and Pharisaei, dum in
Cathedra Mosis sedent, dicunt, non de ipsoru^, sed de Legis, ac Mosis doctrina
loquitur. Perinde enim est, acsi dicat, Omnia, quae Lex, and Mosesvobis
dixerint, Scribis and Pharisaeis recitantibus, servate and facite; secundu^
aute^ opera, etc. Mald. ad Mat. 23. 23.
what the Scribes and Pharisees say, whiles they sit in Moses seat, he speaks
not of their Doctrine, but of the Doctrine of the Law, and of Moses. For it is
as if he should say, All things, that the Law, and Moses shall say unto you,
the Scribes and Pharisees rehearsing it, observe, and do; but after their
works do not. It Is true, Christ does tells us, that they that hear his
Ministers, hear him, but that is, when they speak as his Ministers, when they
speak his Word, not their own. As God said to the Prophet Ezekiel, Thou shall
speak my Words unto them, Ezekiel. 2. 7. And to the Prophet Jeremy, Speak unto
them all that I command thee, Ier. 1. 17. And so Christ to his Apostles,
Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you, Mat. 28. 20. So
then, we hear Christ indeed, when we hear his Word spoken by his Ministers, as
well as we read Christ, when we read his Word written in the Scriptures. But
that which we hear, must be tried by that which we read; that which is spoken
by Ministers, by that which is written in the Scriptures, as has been showed
before by Isai. 8. 20. Ioh. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11.

We say (says the Marquess) the Scriptures are not easy to be Page 61.
understood, you say they are: we have Scripture for it, as is before
manifested at large. The Fathers say as much, etc.

We do not say that the Scriptures throughout in every part Answ.
of them are easy to be understood, but that they are so in things necessary
unto Salvation. This has been showed before by the testimony both of the
Scripture it self, and of Austine, as likewise that the places of Scripture
objected by the Marquess, do make nothing against the easiness of the
Scripture, either at all, or at least in this sense. Neither are the Fathers,
here alleged by the Marquess, against it.

Irenaeus (whose words the Marquess produces not, but Bellarmine Bell. de
Verbi Dei Interpret. l. 3. c. 1.
does) says only that of those things which are contained in the Scriptures,
quaedam, some are such that we must commend unto God, meaning that we cannot
perfectly know them. Iren. l. 2. c. 47.
This is nothing repugnant to what we say. Nor that which is said by Origin
(whom the Marquess only cites at large, contra Origin. l. 7. contra Cells.
apud Bell. ubi supra.
Cells. but I find both the book and the words in Bellarmine) viz. that the
Scripture is Multis locis obscura, in many places obscure; of which, what
Protestant (I marvel) does make any question? So when Ambrose, Epist. 44.
calls the Scripture a Sea, and a depth of prophetical Riddles: And Hierom,
Praefat. comment. in Ephesians. says, that he took great pains to understand the
Scripture: And Austine, Epist. 119. cap. 21. says, that the things of Holy
Scripture, which he knew not, were more than those he knew: And Dionysius, B.
of Corinth, (cited by Eusebius, Hist. l. 7. c. 20) says, that the matter of
the Scriptures was far more profound then his Wit could reach; what is all
this against Protestants, who only hold that the Scriptures, in things that
concern Faith, and Manners, are not so obscure, but that they ought to be read,
or heard by all, and that all may profit by the reading or hearing of them? And
in this sense Bellarmine yeildeth that Chrysostom in Chrysostomus ad
excutiendum torporem multoru^, qui possent, si vellent, magno cum fructu
Scripturas legere, illis amplificationibus uti solet. Bell. de verbi Dei
Interpret. l 3. c. 2.
diverse places does affirm the Scriptures to be plain and easy, viz. to
shake off the laziness of many, who might, if they would, read the Scriptures
with much benefit. And besides, we hold, that where the Scripture is obscure,
the interpretation of it is to be fetched from the Scripture it self, against
which these Fathers say nothing, but both diverse of these, and also diverse
others (as has been showed) do plainly avouch it. The Marquess proceeds,
saying, We say that this Church cannot Page 61.
Err, you say it can: we have Scripture for what we say, such Scripture that
will tell you that fools cannot err therein, Esaias 35. 8. Such Scripture that
will tell you, If you neglect to hear it, you shall be a heathen, and a
publican, Mat. 18. 17. Such Scripture as will tell you, that this Church shall
be unto Christ a glorious Church, that shall be without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians.
5. 27. Such a Church as shall be enlivened for ever with his Spirit, Esaias 59.
21. The Fathers affirm the same, etc.

Concerning the Churches erring, or not erring, we must distinguish Answ.
of the Church, and of Error. The Church is either visible, which consists
both of good and bad, which therefore is compared to a Net, etc. Mat. 13. 47.
etc. or invisible, which consists only of the Elect, and true Believers, The
Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Men may know who profess themselves to
be his, but who are indeed, only God knows. All the Elect, they are the
Church, Electi omnes, ipsi Ecclesia sunt. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 78.
says Bernard. And to the same effect Austine, The Church consists of those
that are In bonis est ecclesia, in his, qui aedificant super petram, non in
his, qui aedificant super arenam. Aug. de Unit. Eccles.
good, who build upon the Rock, not of those that build upon the Sand. As for
Error, it is either damnable, or not damnable. Now it is granted, that the
invisible Church cannot err damnably. For this is that Church which Christ
speaks of, and says, That the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it,
Mat. 16. 18. But for the Church Visible, whether our Adversaries mean the
Church Virtuall, whereby they understand the Pope, or the Church
Representative, that is, a General Council, we hold that it may Err, and
that damnably. The Scriptures alleged are not against this assertion. That
Esai. 35. 8. speaks not of the Church, but of a Way, called there, The Way of
Holiness; so sure and safe, that Wayfaring men, though fools, shall not Err
therein. That Mat. 18. 17. only shows that a member of the Church, being
justly admonished by the Church, ought to submit to the Admonition of it, or
else is to be accounted as a Publican or Heathen. But this is far from
proving the Churches infallibility. That Ephesians. 5. 27. shows, not what the
Church is here in this world, but what it shall be hereafter in the world to
come; Non est ita intelligendum quasi Ecclesia ita jam sit, sed quia
praeparatur ut sit. Aug. in Retractat.
It is not so to be understood (says Austine) as if the Church were now so,
but that it is prepared that it may be so. And accordingly In regno coelorum
Ecclesia plene and perfect erit non habens maculam, aut rugam, etc. Cum enim
non tantum dixit, ut exhiberet tibi ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam,
sed addidit, gloriosam, satis significavit, quando erit sine macula and ruga.
Beda ad loc.
Bid, In the Kingdom of Heaven the Church shall be fully and perfectly
without spot or wrinkle, etc. For when as the Apostle did not only say that he
might present it to himself, a Church not having spot or wrinkle, but also
added Glorious; he sufficiently signified when it shall be without Spot or
Wrinkle. That Esai. 59. 21. shows that God will give both his Word and his
Spirit for ever unto his Church, but it speaks of the invisible Church, the
Elect and Godly, Such as turn from Transgression, ver. 20. not of any outward
visible Church, which has no such privilege, but that it may Err, and so
Err as to cease to be a Church, as the example of the Churches of Asia,
mentioned Revel. 2. and 3. does make manifest.

For the Fathers, the first, whom the Marquess cites is Austine, whom (as
before is showed) holds General Counsels liable to Error, and such, as
that the former may be corrected by the latter. That therefore which he says,
That place is objected by Bellarmine to prove that the Church cannot Err.
Contra Crescon. l. 1. c. 33. (so, I presume it should be, not cap. 3. as it is
in the Marquess his Paper) viz. That we hold the truth of the Scriptures, when
we do that, which has pleased the whole Church, which the authority of the
same Scriptures does commend: That (I say) must be understood, so far forth
as the Scriptures do commend the Church, we do well, and conformably to the
Scriptures, in conforming to it. But I see not how Austine himself could hold
the Church to be so commended in the Scriptures, as that we must simply and
absolutely do what the Church pleases. For then, what need of having one
General Council to be corrected and amended by another? Our Adversaries
themselves, when they please, make no scruple of waving and altering that which
was generally held and practiced in the Church. I let pass (says Maldonate)
the opinion of Missam facio Augustini and Innocentii sententiam, quae 600.
circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam infantibus esse
necessariam. Res jam ab Ecclasia, and multorum seculorum usu, and decreto
concilii Tridentini explicata est, non solum non necessariam illis esse, sed ne
decere quidem dari. Maldou. ad Joh. 6. 53.
Austine, and of Innocentius, which about 600. years did prevail in the
Church that the Eucharist is necessary even for Infants. The thing is now
declared by the Church, both by the Custom of many Ages, and also by the
decree of the Council of Trent, that it is not only not necessary for them,
but also that it is not meet to be given unto them. Cyprian, Epist. 55. (who is
the next that the Marquess cites) speaks indeed of the Authority of the
Church, but how? so as to censure and excommunicate those that deserve it,
about that he writes unto Cornelius Bishop of Rome. But this is much short of
proving the Church to be infallible, and that it cannot err.

Cyprian was far from ascribing so much to the Church, when (as it is well
known) contrary to what the Bishop of Rome, and the Church generally did hold,
he held the re-baptizing of such as had been baptized by Heretics. Though
Cyprian in this did err, yet his very erring in this, shows that he thought
the Church, the generality of the visible Church, not only subject to error,
but indeed to have erred.

The last Father, whom the Marquess here mentions (for though he say cum
multis aliis, yet he names no more) is Non oportet adhuc quaerere aqud alios
veritatem, quam facile est ab Ecclesia sumere, cum Apostoli quasi in
depositorium dives, plenissime in ea contulerint omnia, quae sint veritatis,
uti omnis quicunque velit, sumat ex ea potum vitae. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4. where he says, It is not meet to seek the truth among
others, which it is easy to take of the Church, seeing the Apostles did lay in
it, as in a rich depository, all things that concern truth, that every one
that will, may out of it receive the drink of life.

This indeed is gloriously spoken of the Church, and not Hyperbolically
neither; yet does it not amount to this, that the Church cannot err. The holy
Scriptures, wherein all saving truth is contained, are committed to the Church,
and the Doctine of salvation is ordinarily held forth in, and by the Church;
but hence it does not follow, that the Church, that is, such as bear sway in
it, is not subject to error. All that Irenaeus says of the Church is no more,
if so much as that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 15. that the Church is the pillar
and ground of truth; which place it may seem strange that the Marquess
pretermitteth. Bellarmine disputing this point, brings in those words in the
very first place, to prove that the Church cannot Bell. de Eccles. mili. 4. li.
3. cap. 4.
err. And whereas Calvin answers, that the Church is so styled by the Apostle,
because in it the Scriptures are preserved and preached, he replies, that thus
the Church should rather be compared to a Chest, then to a Pillar. But this is
a frivolous objection; for the Church does not keep the truth close and
secret, as a thing is kept in a chest; but so as to profess and publish it,
and therefore is compared to a Pillar, to which a thing is fastened, and so
hangs, that all may see it. But that those words of the Apostle do not infer
an infallibility of the Church, and an exemption from error, is clear by
this, that he speaks of a particular visible Church, namely the Church of
Ephesus: now that a particular visible Church may err, our Adversaries will
not deny, and that very Church of Ephesus there spoken of does sufficiently
demonstrate. The Apostle therefore in those words does rather show the duty of
the Church then the dignity of it; rather what it should be, then what it
always is. As when it is said Mal. 2. 7. Labia sacerdotis custodient
scientiam, The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, that is (as our translations
rightly render it) should keep. So the Jesuit Ribera does expound Custodient,
id est, custodire debent. Rib. ad Mal. 2.
it, shall keep, that is (says he) ought to keep.

The Marquess here comes again to the visibility of the Church, and some
other particulars before handled. That the Church is always visible, he proves
by Mat. 5. 14, 15. The light of the World; a City upon a Hill cannot be hid.
But I have showed before these words, Ye are the light of the world, to be
meant of the Apostles, who (as their own Iansenius expounds it) were a light
unto the World by their preaching. So also (...). Theophyl. ad. loc.
Theophylact, They did not enlighten (says he) one Nation, but the whole
world. And the words following, A City set upon a Hill cannot be hid, he shows
to have been spoken by way of instruction. Christ (says (...). Theophyl. ibid.
he) does instruct them to be careful and accurate in the ordering of their
life, as being to be seen of all. As if he should say, Do not think, that
you shall lie hid in a corner; no, you shall be conspicuous. And therefore see
that ye live unblameably, that so you may not give offense to others. This
exposition suits well with the admonition given verse. 16. Let your light so
shine forth before men, that they seeing your good works may glorify your
Father which is in Heaven.

The Marquess here further adds, 2 Cor. 4. 3. and Isai. 22. I suppose it
should be, Isai. 2. 2. Now the former of these two places is not to the
purpose, viz. to prove a perpetual visibility of the Church. For how can that
be inferred from those words of the Apostle, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost? The Apostle having said verse. 2. by manifestation of the
truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God,
because (as (...). Oecumen. ad. 2. Cor. 4. 3.
Oecumenius notes) it might be objected, that the truth was not made manifest
unto all, for that all did not believe, to prevent this Objection the Apostle
adds, If our Gospel be hid, etc. As if he should say, It is not our fault,
as if the Gospel were not plainly enough preached by us, but it is their own
fault, who perish through their own blindness. That Isai. 2. 2. is more to
the purpose, though not enough neither. It is said that in the last days the
Mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the top of the Mountains,
and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. The
Prophet there shows, (by metaphorical expressions taken from Mount Sion,
where the Temple stood) that by the preaching of the Gospel, the Church should
be increased and exalted far above what it was before. This prophecy was
fulfilled by the bringing in of the Gentiles: but the Prophet does not say,
that in the times of the Gospel the Church should always be so conspicuous
and visible. Neither do the Fathers here alleged by the Marquess, viz.
Origin, Chrysostom, Austine and Cyprian, speak of the perpetual condition of
the Church, but only as it was in their time. I have proved before by
Scriptures, and Fathers, and even by the acknowledgement of our Adversaries,
that the Church is not perpetually visible.

After the Visibility of the Church, the Marquess speaks of Page 62.
the Universality of it, saying that the universality of the Church is
perpetual, and that the Church of Rome is such a Church. For proof hereof he
cites, Psalm. 2. 8. Romans 1. 8. Now the former place shows that Christ should
have the heathen for his inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for his
possession; and consequently that the Church should not be confined (as it was
in the time of the Law) to one Country, but should be extended far and wide
throughout the World. This also has been fulfilled, and yet shall be: but
hence it does not follow, that the Church is always so universally extended
throughout the World, but that sometimes errors and heresies do so prevail
and overspread all, that the truth in comparison can find no room. See before
page 2. The other place, viz. Romans 1. 8. testifies indeed that the Church of
Rome was a true Church, and famous throughout the World: but neither does the
Apostle there say, neither (so far as I see) can it in any congruity be said,
that the Church of Rome either is, or was a Church universally spread thorough
the World. A part, and an eminent part of the Church so universal it might be,
but the whole universal Church it could not be. The Apostle there says no
more of the Romans, then he does of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. yet (I
presume) our Adversaries will not therefore admit either the Church of
Thessalonica to be universal, or ever since the Apostles time to have
continued sound and Orthodox. And why then will they think to enforce so much
from the Apostles words for the Church of Rome? To these two places of
Scripture the Marquess adds the testimonies of three Fathers, viz. Cyprian,
Austine, and Hierome. But for the first of these, his words are pitifully
mistaken. They are these, Dum apud vos Cyprian. ad Cornel. Epist. 57.
una animus, and unae vox est, Ecclesia omnis Romana confessa est; the
Marquess renders it thus, whilst with you there is one mind, and one voice,
the whole Church is confessed to be the Roman Church: whereas any that can
understand Latin, and will mind the words, may see that they are to be rendered
thus, whilst with you there is one mind, and one voice, the whole Roman
Church has confessed. Cyprian here wrote to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, who
together with others had before heathen persecutors confessed the faith. For
this Cyprian commends them, and says that they so confessing as they did, and
all being of one mind, and one voice, the whole Roman Church did confess.
This makes indeed for the soundness of the Roman Church, as it was in Cyprians
time, but for the universality of it, as if it were the universal Church, or a
Church universally diffused, it makes nothing. For Austines words de unit.
Eccles. cap. 4. Who so does not communicate with the whole corpse of
Christendom, certain it is, that they are not in the holy Catholic Church, I
see not what they are to the purpose. They cannot be so understood, as that all
must necessarily communicate with all that are of the corpse of Christendom,
that is, that profess themselves Christians. For so all should be tied to
communion with gross and notorious Heretics. They must then be understood of
communicating with all Christians so far forth as they are indeed Christians:
but what is this to prove either the perpetual universality of the Church, or
that the Church of Rome is such a Church? Austine wrote against the Donatists,
who confined the Church to Affrike, excluding all the World besides from being
of the Church. This is nothing against us, who do not confine the Church to
any place whatsoever.

The last Father here cited is Hierom, who (as the Marquess tells us) says,
That it is all one to say the Roman Faith, and the Catholic Faith. But the
Marquesses quotation of the place where this is to be found in Hierome, is too
laxe, viz. in Apol. ad Ruffin. it should be adversus Ruffin. But there are two
Apologies which Hierome wrote against Ruffin, and one of them divided into
several Books; it was meet therefore that the place should have been cited
more particularly then it is. Yet I think I have met with the place which the
Marquess means, which yet does not speak so much as the Marquess
supposes. Nihil, inquit, in illis, quod a fide nostra discrepet, Latinus
Lector inveniet. Fidem suam quam vocat? eamne, qua Romana pollet Ecclesia? an
illam, quae in Origenis voluminibus continetur? Si Romanam responderit, ergo
Catholici sumus, qui nihil de Origenis errore transtulimus: sin autem Origenis
blasphemia fides illius est, dum mihi inconstantiae crimen impingit, se
haereticum probat. Hieron. apol. 1. advers. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Ruffinus translating Origens works (which had many gross errors in them)
into Latin, to justify himself said, the Latin Reader shall find nothing,
that differs from our faith.

Hereupon Hierome asked, what faith he meant by our faith? whether that faith,
which did flourish in the Church of Rome, or that, which was contained in the
works of Origin? If (says he) he shall answer, The Roman faith then are we
Catholics, who have translated nothing of Origens error: but if Origens
blasphemy be his faith, whilst he charge me with inconstancy he proves
himself an Heretic. Here indeed Hierome implies the Roman faith, and the
Catholic faith, to have been then when he wrote one and the same, yet not
simply, but so far forth as did concern the errors of Origin. But how can
any justly hence conclude, that in Hieromes Dialect it is all one to say the
Roman faith, and the Catholic faith? as if in Hieromes opinion the Roman
faith, and the Catholic faith, in all points, and at all times must needs be
the same.

That Hierome did not overvalue the Church of Rome is evident. For when the
custom of that Church was objected against something that he Si authoritas
quaeritur, orbis major est urbe. -- Quidmihi profers unius consuetudinem?
Hieron. ad Euagr.
held, he rejected the authority of it with some disdain, saying, If we seek
authority, the World is greater then the City. And again, what do you
bringing the custom of one City?

From Universality, the Marquess passes to Unity, saying that Page 62.
the unity of the Church is necessary in all points of faith, and proving it
first by Scriptures, as Ephesians. 4. 5. Acts 4. 35. and 1 Cor. 1. 10. then by
fathers, as Austine contra Par. l. 3. c. 5. Cypr. de unit. Eccles. and Hilar.
ad Constant. Now this unity of the Church has been spoken of before, and it
has been showed how far it is requisite, as also how little cause they of the
Church of Rome have either to applaud themselves for it, or to upbraide the
Reformed Churches for want of it. There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
faith the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5. well, suppose they of the Roman-church have one
faith, yet except they have the one faith, this, of which the Apostle speaks,
what are they the better? But indeed neither is their faith so one, as they
pretend, there being many great and weighty points, wherein they differ one
from another. See Gerard loc. com. de Eccles. Sect. 240 etc.

On the other side (as I have said before) if the confessions of the reformed
churches be looked upon rather then particular men's opinions, or perhaps
expressions, there will no great difference in points of faith be found amongst
them. Acts 4. 35. here cited by the Marquess, is not to the purpose, as not
speakking of unity of faith, but rather of affection, 1 Cor. 1. 10. the Apostle
exhorts them to unity, and that there might be no divisions among them; but
because there was not such unity, as was meet, but there were divisions among
them, he does not therefore say, that they were no true Church: In a word, both
the Scriptures and the Fathers are for the unity of the Church in points of
Faith, and so are we; that the several Articles of Protestant Churches deny
this Unity, the Marquess affirms, but does not prove it.

We hold (faith the Marquess) that every Minister of the Church, Page 62, and
63.
especially the supreme Minister, or Head thereof, should be in a capacity of
fungifying his Office in Preaching the Gospel, Administering the Sacrament,
Baptizing, Marrying, and not otherwise. This we have Scripture for, Heb. No man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was.
This you deny; and not only so, but you so deny it, as that your Church has
maintained and practiced it a long time, for a woman to be head, or supreme
Moderatrix in the Church; when you know that according to the Word of God (in
this respect) a woman is not only forbidden to be the head of the man, but to
have a tongue in her head, 1 Timothy 2. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 34. Yet so has this been
denied by you, that many have been hanged, drawn and quartered for not
acknowledging it. The Fathers are of our opinion, etc.

All this is but to strike at the Title which has been given to Answ.
our Kings and Queens, viz. Supreme Heads, or Governors, and Governesses of
the Church within their Dominions. We know our Adversaries have much stomack'd,
and opposed this Title, but we know no just cause that they have had for it. We
never made Kings or Queens Ministers of the Church, so as to dispense the Word,
and Sacraments, only we have attributed unto them this Power, to look to, and
have a care of the Church, that the Word be Preached, and the Sacraments
Administered by fit persons, and in a right manner. This is no more then belongs
unto Kings and Queens, as both Scriptures and Fathers do inform us. We see in
the Scriptures, that the good Kings of Judah, as Asia, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah
and Josiah, (not to speak of David and Solomon, who were Prophets as well as
Kings, and so may be excepted against as extraordinary persons) did put forth
their power in ordering the Affairs of the Church, as well as of the Civil
State. Asa put down Idolatry, and caused the People to enter into Covenant to
serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 15. Iehoshaphat took away the High Places, and the
Groves, and made the Priests and Levites to go and teach the People, 2 Chronicles.
17. Hezekiah reformed what had been amiss in matter of Gods Worship, caused
the Priests and Levites to do their Duty, and the Passover to be solemnly
kept, 2 Chronicles. 29. and 30, and 31. So Josiah also destroyed Idolatry, repaired
the Temple, and kept a most solemn Passover, causing both Priests and People
to perform their Duty.

Austine acknowledges this power to belong unto Kings. In this (says he)
Kings, In hoc reges, sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt, in quantum
reges sunt, si in suo regno, bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae
pertinent ad humanam societatem, verumetiam quae ad divinam religionem. Aug.
contra Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 51.
as they are commanded of God, do serve God as Kings, if in their Kingdom
they command good things, and forbid evil things, not only which belong unto
humane Society, but also which concern Divine Religion. And the same Father
speaking of Christian Princes, makes their happiness to lie in this, That they
Si suam potestatem ad Dei cultum maxim dilatandum, majestati ejus famulam
faciunt. Aug. de Civil. Deil. 5. c. 24.
make their power serviceable to Gods majesty, in enlarging his worship, as
much as they are able.

This power also Christian Princes have exercised, and have not been taxed for
it, as Constantine, Theodosius, etc. See Mason de Minist. Anglic. lib. 3. cap.
4. The exercising therefore of this power which we ascribe to Kings and
Queens, is no taking that Honor to themselves, which is spoken of Heb. 5. 4.
Neither is it any teaching, or speaking in the Church, which the Apostle will
not allow unto a woman, 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. and 1 Cor. 14. 34. Neither is this
cross to what the Fathers, whom the Marquess cites, say, which amounts to
this, that Ministers are to do those things which belong unto Ministers, and
that in those things which concern their Ministry, all, even Kings and Queens,
are subject unto them. All this is nothing against Kings and Queens having a
power over Ministers, so as to see them perform the Offices which belong unto
them. And it may seem strange that the Marquess should now so lately with so
much eagerness inveigh against that Title, and Power, given to that Queen of
happy memory, Q. Elizabeth, as most unmeet for her, when as See Doctor Rainolds
his Conference with Heart in the end.
Heart, a Papist, stiff enough, living in the Queens time, by his Conference
with Doctor Rainolds, and Doctor Nowels Book against Dorman, was so convinced,
that he confessed himself satisfied in this point, and acknowledged that we
ascribe no more unto Princes, then Austine does in the words before cited.

We say, that Christ gave commission to his Disciples to forgive Page 63.
Sins; you deny it, and say, that God only can forgive sins, we have
Scripture for it, Joh. 20. 23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted:
and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. And Joh. 20. 21. As my
Father has sent me, even so send I you. And how was that? viz. with so great
power as to forgive sins, Mat. 9. 3. 8. where note, that S. Matthew does not
set down, how that the people glorified God the Father, who had given so great
power unto God the Son; but that he had given so great power unto men, loc.
cit. The Fathers are of this opinion, etc.

It is strange that the Marquess should say, that we deny that Answ.
Christ gave Commission to his Disciples to forgive Sins: We confess that
the Scripture is clear for it, that he did give them such a Commission; only
the question is, how the Commission is to be understood, and what power it is
that the Disciples had, and so other Ministers have to forgive Sins? It Is
true, we hold that God only can forgive sins, and yet withal, that men may
forgive sins. These are not contradictory, the one to the other, because (as
all Logitians know) except the propositions be understood of one and the same
thing, in one and the same respect; there is no contradiction. Now when we say,
that only God can forgive sins, it is meant in one respect; and when we say,
that men may forgive sins, it is meant in another respect. As the sin is
against God, so properly and authoritatively God alone can forgive it. And this
God does challenge unto himself as his prerogative, I, even I am he, that
blotteth out thy transgressions, etc. Isai. 43. 25. And therefore the Scribes
were right in this, Who can forgive sins, but God only? Mar. 2. 7. They were
right in the Doctrine, though wrong in the Application: their position was
good, that God only can forgive Sins; but their supposition was naught, that
Christ was but a mere Man, and had not power to forgive Sins, as he did. This
(says Movet Scribas remissu^ ab homine peccatum: homine^ enim tantum in Jesu
Christo contuebantur. -- Verum enim, nemo potest dimittere peccata, nisi solus
Deus: Ergo qui remittit Deus est, quia nemo remittit nisi Deus. Hilar. in Mat.
Can. 8.
Hilary) troubles the Scribes, that a man does forgive sin; for they took
Christ for a mere Man. -- It is true none can forgive sin but God only: and
therefore he that forgiveth, is God, because none forgiveth but God. The same
also is clearly and fully acknowledged by Gregory. whom amongst other Fathers
the Marquess alleges against us. He writing upon the second Penitential Tu
qui solus parcis, qui solus peccata dimittis. Quis enim potest peccata
dimittere, nisi solus Deus? Greg. in 2 poenitent. Psalm.
Psalm, that is, the 32. Psalm, upon those words, Thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin, he says thus, Thou, who alone sparest, who alone do forgive
sins. For who can forgive sins, but God only? And with these agrees
Irenaeus, whom also the Marquess brings in as a witness on his side. He
speaking of Christ's forgiving of sins, says, That thereby he did declare who
he was: For if none Peccata igitur remittens, hominem quidem curavit,
semetipsum autem manifest ostendit quis esset. Si enim nemo potest remittere
peccata nisi solus Deus, remittebat autem haec Dominus, and curabat homines,
manifestum est, quod ipse erat Verbum Dei, filius hominis factus, etc. tanquam
Deus misereatur nostri, and remittat nobis debita nostra, quae factori nostro
debemus Deo. Iren. lib. 5. page 583. edict. in 80.
can forgive sins but only God, and the Lord (Christ) did forgive them, then
it is manifest, that he was the Word of God, made the Son of Man, etc. and that
as God he has mercy on us, and does forgive us our debts, which we owe unto
God our Maker. Accordingly also Ambrose, (another of those Fathers, whom the
Marquess makes to be of their opinion) Whereas (says he) Jews say that
only God can forgive sins, they do indeed confess Quae cum Judaei asserunt
a solo Deo posse concedi, Deu^ utique confitentur, suoque judicio perfidiam
suam produnt, etc. Itaque testimonium non deest divinitati, fides deest saluti.
-- Magna itaque infidae plebis amentia, ut cum confessa fuerit solius Dei esse
donare peccata, non credat peccata donanti. Ambros. in Luc. 5.
Christ to be God, and by their judgment bewray their perfidiousnesse, etc.
They have a testimony for Christ's Divinity, they have no Faith for their own
Salvation: Therefore great is the madness of the unbelieving people, that when
as they confess that it belongs only unto God to forgive sins, yet they do
not believe God, when he forgiveth sins. So by this Deus enim ex eo
cognoscitur, etc. quia peccata condonat. -- Peccata nemo condonat, nisi unus
Deus; quia scriptum est, Quis potest peccata donare, nisi solus Dens? Ambros.
de Spiritu Sancto lib. 3. cap. 19.
Argument the same Father proves the Holy Ghost to be God, because he forgiveth
Sins. For that none can forgive sins but only God, as it is written, Who can
forgive sins, but only God? Thus Ambrose cites that saying of the Scribes as
a most undoubted truth. To this purpose likewise is Austine, (another of the
Marquesses Fathers) cited by Lombard, lib. 4. did. 18. lit. c.
How then have Ministers power to forgive Sins? In that the word of
reconciliation is committed unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. in that they are to preach
remission of sins in Christ's name, Luke 24. 47. Be it known unto you, that
through this man (viz. Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of sins,
said Paul, Act. 13. 38. Ambrose observes, that Christ first said to his
Apostles, Receive ye the holy Ghost, and then, Whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted. Nunc videamus utrum peccata donet Spiritus. Sed hinc dubitari non
potest, cum ipse Dominus dixerit, Accipite Spiritum S. quorum remiseritis
peccata, remissa erunt. Ecce quia per Spiritum S. peccata donantur. Homines
autem in remissionem peccatorum ministeriu^ suum exhibent, non jus alicujas
potestatis exercent. Neque enim in suo, sed in Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus
S. nomine peccata dimittuntur. Ambr. de Spir. S. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Whence he gathers, that it is the holy Ghost that does indeed forgive Sins.
Men (says he) do only afford their Ministry for the forgiveness of sins,
they do not exercise the authority of any power. Neither do they forgive sins
in their Name, but in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Lombard, called the Master of the Sentences, and of School Divinity,
disputing Ecce quam varia a doctoribus traduntur super his, and in hac tanta
varietate quid erit tenendum? Hoc sane dicere ac sentire possumus, quod solus
Deus dimittit peccata, and retinet; and tamen ecclesiae contulit potestatem
ligandi, and solvendi. Sed aliter ipse solvit, and ligat, aliter ecclesia. Ipse
enim per se tantum ita dimittit peccatum, quod and animam mundat ab interiori
macula, and a debito aeternae mortis solvit. Non autem hoc sacerdotibus
concessit, quibus tamen tribuit potestatem solvendi, and ligandi, i. ostendendi
homines ligatos vel solutos. Unde Dominus leprosum sanitati prius per se
restituit; deinde ad sacerdotes misit, quorum judicio ostenderetur mundatus.
Lombard. lib. 4. did. 18. lit. d. and e.
this Question, and showing diverse Opinions about it, determines thus, That
God only does remit, and retain sins, and that yet God has given power to the
Church to bind and loose. But that God himself does bind and loose one way, and
the Church another way. That God by himself alone does forgive sin, so as to
cleanse the soul from stain, and to free it from the guilt of eternal death.
That he has not given this power to Priests, to whom yet he has given power
to loose and bind, that is, to declare men to be loosed, or bound. Whence our
Lord first by himself made the Leper sound, and then sent him to the Priests,
that they might declare him to be clean. And hence he inferres, that a Minister
of the Gospel has such In solvendis ergo culpis, vel retinendis ita operatur
sacerdos Evangelicus, sicut olim legalis in illis, qui contaminati erant Lepra,
quae peccatum signat. -- Et in remittendis, vel in retinendis culpis id juris
atque officii habent Ecclesiastici sacerdotes, quod olim habebant sub lege
legales in curan dis leprosis. Hi ergo peccata dimittunt, vel retinent, dum
dimissa a Deo, vel retenta judicant and ostendunt. Lomb. Ibid.
power in remitting or retaining sins, as the Priest in the Law had in clensing
a Leper. The Priest was said to make the Leper clean, or unclean, (so the words
are in the Original, Levit. 13.) when he did pronounce and declare him to be
clean or unclean. So Ministers remit, or retain sins, when they pronounce and
declare that sins are remitted, or retained of God. And in this Lombard
followed Hierome, who (as his words cited by Lombard do show) by this very
similitude of the Leviticall Priest, dealing with a Leper, illustrates and sets
forth the manner how a Minister does now remit, or retain sins. Thus then I
hope it may sufficiently appear, that in this point both Scriptures and Fathers
are for us, and not against us, as the Marquess would have it.

We hold, that we ought to confess our sins unto our ghostly Father; Marq:
page 63. and 64.
this ye deny, saying, that ye ought not to confess your sins but unto God
alone. This we prove by Scripture, Mat. 3. 5, 6. Then went out Jerusalem, and
all Judea, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. This
confession was no general confession, but in particular, as appears, Acts 19.
18, 19. And many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their deeds. The
Fathers affirm the same, etc.

For Confession of Sins, Protestants do not say, that they Answ.
ought not to confess to any but God only, though they hold that ordinarily
it suffices to confess only unto God, and that there is no necessity of
confessing to any other; whereas they of the Church of Rome will have it
necessary for every one man to confess unto a Priest all his deadly sins,
(and such indeed are all sins whatsoever without the mercy of God in Christ,
Romans 6. 23. Gal. 3. 10.) which by diligent examination he can find out,
together with all the several circumstances, whereby they are aggravated.
Council. Trident. Sess. 14 cap. 5. Et can. 6, 7, 8. Bell. de Poenit. l. 3. c. 20.
Thus has the Council of Trent decreed it. And nothing will suffice to
procure one, that is Baptized, remission of Sins, without this Confession
either in Re, actually performed, or in Voto, in desire, as Bellarmine does
expound it. Who also sticks not to say, that in all Promissio de remittendis
peccatis, iis qui confitentur Deo peccata sua, non videtur ulla extare in
divinis literis. Bell. de poenit. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sect. At Selutio.
the Scripture there seems not to be any promise of for givenesse of sins,
made to those that confess their sins unto God. Which is a most impudent
Assertion. For David having said, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confess my transgressions unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: he adds immediately, for
this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee, etc. Psalm. 32. 5,
6. Besides Aquin. in suppl. quaest. 6. art. 2 ad. 3. Bonav. lib. 4. did. 17.
art. 1. qu. 2.
. Aquinas and Bonaventure, two prime Schoolmen, hold that under the Law it was
not (ordinarily) required of people to confess in particular unto a Priest.
Bonaventure also cites Austine, saying, Oblatio sacrificiorum fuit confessio
peccatorum, The offering of sacrifices, was the confession Ergo videtur quod
non fuerit ibi alia confessio, quam oblatio. Bonav. ibid.
of sins; whence he infers, that therefore it seems there was no other
confessing of sins, but the offering of Sacrifices.

For those two places of Scripture cited by the Marquess, neither they, nor
any other do speak of such a confession as they of the Church of Rome do
contend for. Bellarmine holds that their Sacramental confession (as they call
it, viz. that Bell. de Poeuitent. lib. 3. cap. 20.
confession which they make a part of the Sacrament of penance) was not
instituted till after Christ's Resurrection; and therefore he says, it is no
marvel, if (as Ambrose observes) we read of Peter's tears, but not of his
confession. That the Jews therefore, when they were baptized of John,
confessed their sins, Mat. 3. 5, 6. is not enough to prove that confession,
which we now dispute of, although it did appear that the confession there
spoken of, was a particular confession, which yet appears not. Cardinal
Cajetane says it was but a general confession. Neither indeed in probability
could it be any Cajet. in Act. 19. 18.
more; for how should John have been able to hear such multitudes, as came
unto him to be baptized (Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan, Mat. 3. 5.) confess all their sins in particular? That it was
no general confession, but in particular, the Marquess says appears by Acts
19. 18, 19. But if this confession spoken of Acts 19. were in particular, does
it follow, that therefore the other mentioned, Mat. 3. was so also? I see no
force at all in this consequence, the confessions being made by several
persons, at several times, and upon several occasions. Quemadmodum ad
Baptismum Joannis concurrebant confitentes peccata sua, ita modo describuntur
confitentes factasua, procul dubio in genere, aut publica; neutra enim fuit
confessio Sacramentalis, sed professio poenitentiae vitae praeteritae. Cajet.
in Act. 19.
Cajetan indeed does parallel these two places together, but so as that he
makes them both to speak of a general confession, or a confession only of
such sins as were public and notorious. Neither of them (he says) was a
sacramental confession, but only a profession that they did repent of their
life past. However, these places of Scripture can make nothing for Popish
confession, which is enjoined, and forced, as without which (they say)
salvation is not to be expected; but this which the Scriptures here speak of,
was voluntary and free, the persons that confessed, did it of their own accord.
The Popish confession is auricular (as it is called) secret, in the ear of a
Priest; this appears to have been open and public. The Popish confession is a
particular enumeration of all known sins; this if it were of any particular
sins at all (as that mentioned Acts 19. may seem to have been) yet only of
such as more especially did trouble their conscience, as may be collected from
Acts 19. 20. and in such a case to confess not only unto God, but also unto
men, and especially unto Ministers, Protestants do not condemn, but hold
requisite; only they condemn that manner of confession, which in the Church
of Rome is maintained and practiced. And no marvel, seeing some of the Roman
Church themselves have showed a great dislike of it. Beatus Rhenanus, a man
Caeterum Thomas ab Aquino, and Scotus, homines nimium arguti, confessionem
hodie talem reddiderunt, ut Joannes ille Grilerius gravis ac sanctus theologus,
qui tot annis Argentorati concionatus est, apud amicos suos saepe testatus sit,
juxta illorum deuteroses impossible esse confiteri. -- Proinde motus fuit ut
libellum ederet in lingua Germanica, cui titulum fecit, De morbo confessionis,
quo negabant esse tristiorem, qui eo tenebantur: B. Rhen. in Tertull. de
Poenitent.
of great learning, and never (that I know) withdrawing from the communion of
the Church of Rome, speaks of the Romish confession as a thing but of late
devised, and by himself little observed. He cites also one Grilerius, whom he
calls a grave and holy Divine, that was a long time Preacher at Strasburg, who
(he says) did often testify among his friends, that according to the late
Roman dictates, it is impossible to confess, and thereupon did write a Book
in the German tongue, which he entitled, Of the disease of confession, then
which disease (says Rhenanus) they that are troubled with it, deny that any is
more grievous.

For the Fathers cited by the Marquess, the supposed Clemens, whatsoever he
say, need not much trouble us; the Epistles going under his name, are
suspected, and scrupled at by Bellarmine himself in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Writers: and therefore (it seems) he thought it not meet to
allege his authority in this point, as the Marquess does. Origin also is
cited li. 3. a strange citation; I suppose it should be in Levit. Hom. 3. for
Bell. de Poen. lib. 3. cap. 7.
thence Bellarmine does fetch a testimony to prove their confession. But when
as Chemnitius alleged something out of those Homilies upon Leviticus against
Popish Traditions, ascribing them unto Cyrill (as also the Rhemists do, adding
that some say they are Origens) Bellarmine answers with disdain, Rhem. in Job.
20. 23.
that those Homilies are not Cyrils, but Origens, or some others he could not
Respondeo, Homilias illas in Leviticum non esse B. Cyrilli, sed Origenis, vel
nesciocujus alterius, qui passim literam destruit, ut mysticos sensus e capite
suo statuat. Proinde Homilias istas non esse magnae authoritatis. Bell. de
verb. Dei lib. 4. cap. 11.
tell whose, who did destroy the Letter of the Scripture, that he might
establish mystical senses out of his own head: and that therefore those
Homilies are of no great authority. But were the authority of those Homilies
never so great, and unquestionable, I see not how they make any thing for that
confession, which our adversaries maintain, and we impugn. Hom. 3. Si ergo
in vita praeveniamus eis, and ipsi nostri accusatores simus, nequitiam diaboli
inimici nostri, and accusatoris effugiemus. Sic enim and alibi Propheta dicit,
Dic tu iniquitates tuas prior, ut justificeris. Orig. in Levit. Hom. 3.
Origin (or who ever was the author) says that if we prevent Satan, and
accuse our selves, we shall escape the malice of Satan, who is our adversary,
and our accuser. But to whom we should accuse our selves, by confessing our
sins, this Author shows not. Bellarmin indeed says, that he speaks of
confessing unto a Priest; but in the words (as Bellarmine himself does cite
them) there is neither Priest, nor any other, to whom confession of sin
should be made, expressed. And far more congruous it is to understand it so,
that as Satan does accuse us unto God (as he accused Job, though falsely, Job 1.
and 2. And see Revel. 12. 10.) So we should prevent him by accusing our selves,
and confessing our sins unto God also. Indeed Hom. 2. that author does speak
of confessing sin unto a Priest, but that is only in some special case,
when sin does lie so sore upon the conscience, That Cum lavat peccator in
lachrymis stratum suum, and fiunt ei lachrymae suae panes die ac nocte, etc.
Orig. Hom. 2. in Levit.
a sinner does wash his bed with his tears, and his tears are his meat day
and night. In which case, no Protestants (that I know) but hold it good and
requisite to lay open the malady to such as are most likely to apply a remedy.
Thus also seems that to be understood, which the Marquess brings out of
Paulinus writing the life of Ambrose, (for that is meant by the quotation,
which Erat enim gaudens cum gaudentibus, and flens cum flentibus. Siquidem
quotiescunque illi aliquis ob percipiendam poenitentiam lapsus suos confessus
esset, ita flebat, ut and illum flere compelleret., Paul in. in vita Ambros.
is mis-printed, Amb. Ex Paulsino) viz. that Ambrose sat to hear confession.
Paulinus says of Ambrose, that he would rejoice with those that did rejoice,
and weep with those that wept. And that whenever any came to confess their
sins unto him, he would so weep, as to constrain the party confessing to
weep also. The Marquess further cites Ambr. Orat. in muliere peccatrice; it
should be, I presume, in mulierem peccdtricem; but I find no such piece among
Ambrose his works. However, if Ambrose any where does say (as he is cited)
confess freely to the Priest the hidden sins of thy soul, yet it does not
appear that he does require this otherwise then in the case before mentioned.
Irenaeus also is cited lib. 1. cap. 9. and Tertull. lib. de Poenitent. Now
these speak of public confession, and so speak not to our Adversaries
purpose: the very word which they use for confession, viz. Exomologesis, is
commonly so used for that confession, Agit de poenitentia publica, quam
exomologesin vocat. Pamel. in Tertull. de Poen.
which is public. Irenaeus speaks of some Women, who had followed Marcus an
Heretic, but when they were converted to the Church, they confessed their
wickedness; their sin being open and scandalous, they made open and public
confession of it. It Is true, Irenaeus says that those women confessed how they
had been defiled by Marcus, and how much they had loved him, which was more
then any could have known but by their own confession. Yet this hinders not,
but that the confession was public; they first confessing publicly that which
was publicly known, to show the sincerity of their Repentance the more, might
proceed to confess also that which was secret, yet was a concomitant of that
which was public, viz. their adhering unto the Heretic. Tertullian also
clearly Tertull. de Poen. cap. 10.
speaks of public confession, that which was made inter Patres atque
conservos, amongst Brethren and fellow servants, so that the whole body would
grieve for the pain of one member. Non potest corpus de unius membri vexatione
laetum agere. Condoleat universum, and ad remedium conlaboret necesse est.
Tertull Ibid.
The body (says he) cannot rejoice at the pain of one member. It must needs,
all sorrow with it, and labor together for a remedy. Tertullian makes no
mention of secret confession of sins, as Non aliam ob causam compluriu^ hic
testimoniis usi sumus, quam ne quis admiretur Tertullianum de clancularia ista
admissorum confessione nihil locutu^; quae quantum conjicimus, nata est exista
exomologesi per ultroneam hominum pietatem, ut occultorum criminum esset and
exomologesis occulta. Rhen. in Tert. de Poenit. Ubi addit, Nec enim usquam
praeceptam esse legimus.
Rhenanus observes, who conceives that secret confession did arise from
public confession, people of their own accord confessing secret sins
secretly, as they used to confess open sins openly. For (says he) We no where
read that this (secret confession) was enjoined; he means by the Ancients.

One Father more there is, whom the Marquess here cites, namely Chrysostom,
lib. 3. de Sacerdot. So Bellarmine having alleged Bell. de Poenit. l. 3. c. 9.
Vide etiam lib. 3. de Sacerdotio.
something out of the former book of Chrysostom, bids see also the third book.
But (no doubt) if there had been any thing more for Bellarmines purpose in the
third book then in the second, he would have been so good, as to have set it
before us. Now the very words of Chrysostom, as Bellarm: cites out of lib. 2.
de sacerd. do show that he speaks not of a necessity lying upon all to confess
all their sins to a Minister, but only that Christiani qui laborant,
Christians that are in a perplexed estate have need of this remedy. Having thus
showed that the Fathers testify nothing for Popish confession, I shall show
how they testify against it.

And to begin with him that was last mentioned, Chrysostom is most copious in
this kind. Why art thou ashamed (says he) and Chrysostom. con. 4. de Lazar.
do blush to confess thy sins? Do thou speak to a man, that he may
upbraid thee? Do thou confess to thy fellow servant, that he may Or traduce
thee (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm 50.
insult over thee? To thy Lord, to him that has a care of thee: to him that is
kind, to the Physician thou do show thy wound. Here he takes it for granted,
that there is (ordinarily) no necessity of confessing to any but to God only.
So again, Art thou ashamed (says he) to say that thou have sinned? Confess
then daily in thy (...): some read (...), in thy soul.
prayr. For do I say, confess to thy fellow servant, who may reproach thee?
No, confess unto God, who does cure thee. Diverse such sayings has this
Father, most plain and pregnant for our purpose; Bellarmine with all his art
and all his industry Bell de Poen. l. 3. c. 15.
was not able to give a satisfactory answer to them. He says that Chrysostom
spoke only of public Confession, not of private; only of that which is made
in the open Congregation, not of that which is made to a Priest in secret. But
it is evident that Chrysostom speaks against the necessity of confessing to
any but only unto God. He bids Confess Dicito quotidie in anima tua.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. uti legit Bellarminus.
in thy soul. Make confession in thy thought. Let God only see thee
confessing. Such confession Cogitatione fiat delictorum exquisitio -- Solus te
Deus confitentem videat. Chrysostom. hom. de Poen. and Confess.
as this, man has nothing to do with either in public or in private.
Bellarmine answers, that in these places Chrysostom does speak of confession,
not as it has reference to the Priests absolution, but as it has reference to
shame and confusion: and in this latter respect he says Chrysostom does well
admonish, that it is not necessary to confess unto man either in public or
in private, but that it suffices to confess with sorrow and tears unto God
only. But here Bellarmine (a thing not unusual with him) does contradict
himself. For here he grants that to confess only unto God is enough to work
shame; yet in another place he says, That Confusio timeri non solet in
confessione, quae soli Deo fit. Bell. de Poen. lib. 3. cap. 3.
shame uses not to be feared in that confession, which is made only unto God.
And again, Shamefac'dnesse has no place in that confession which is made
only unto God. These assertitions, Verecundia non habet locum in confessione,
quae soli Deo fit. Bell. de Poen. lib. 3. cap. 6.
as they agree not with the truth, see Ezr. 9. 6. so neither do they agree with
the answer that here Bellarmine gives unto Chrysostom: Where as Bellarm: says,
that Chrysostom: speaks not of confession, as having reference to the Priests
absolution, it is easily granted, there being (ordinarily) no necessity of any
such absolution. Chrysostme wills a man to confess, though but in his heart,
unto God, assuring him that thereby he shall obtain Gods absolution: and what
need then of any others absolution? Except in some special case, viz. for the
quieting of a troubled conscience, and that one may the better enjoy the
comfort of Gods absolution. Thus for Chrysostme: Austine also does show the
no-necessity of confessing unto men, which still must be understood excepting
some particular case, wherein it may be requisite. What have I to do (says
he) with Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus, ut audiant confessiones meas, quasi
ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos? Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3.
men, that they should hear my confessions, as if they could heal all my
diseases? Bellarmine takes it in disdain, that these words of Austine should
be alleged against their confession. This (he says) is nothing else but to
Hoc nihil est aliud nisi simplicibus imponere. Nemo enim libros illos legit,
qui nesciat, Confessionem, de qua loquitur Augustinus, non esse Sacramentalem,
sed confessionum peccatorum praeteritorum, and per baptismum dimissorum, etc.
Bellarm. de Poenit. lib. 3. cap. 20.
delude the simple: For that whosoever reads Austines Confessions cannot but
know, that he speaks not of Sacramental Confession, but of the Confession of
sins past, and forgiven by Baptism; which Confession was made to that end,
that thereby the mercy of God might be seen, and praised. But Austines words
are of more force then thus to be evaded. We willingly grant that Austine
speaks not of Sacramental Confession, there being indeed no such Confession to
be spoken of, as they call Sacramental; no such, I say, truly so called; and
so much these very words of Austine do sufficiently testify. For Sacramental
Confession (as they call it) is a Confession necessarily to be made unto a
Priest, or else no remission of sin (they say) committed after Baptism can be
obtained, but Austine shows that ordinarily Confessing unto men is not
necessary. Neither is it so, that Austine in his book of Confessions does only
speak of his sins which he had committed before he was Baptized. For in that
tenth Book, where he has the words before cited, he speaks of sins, which
he was guilty of long after his Baptism, yea even then when he was writing his
Confessions. As namely, Adhuc vivunt in memoria mea talium rerum imagines, and
occursant mihi vigilanti quidem carentes viribus, in somnis autem non solum
usque ad delectationem, sed etiam usque ad consensionem, factumque simillimum.
Et tantum valet imaginis illusio in anima mea, and in carne mea, ut dormienti
falsa visa persuadeant, quod vigilanti vera non possunt. -- Quid adhuc sim in
hoc genere mali mei, dixi bono Domino meo, etc. Aug. Confess lib. 10. cap. 30.
Crapula non nunquam surrepit servo tuo, etc. Ibid. c. 31. Et talibus vita mea
plena est, and una spes mea in magna valde misericordia tua. Ibid. c 35.
impure Dreams, and nocturnall pollutions; as also excess in Eating. Diverse
other particulars does he also confess, saying that his life was full of such
failings, and that all his hope was only in Gods exceeding great mercy. To
this purpose also, Non invenio quid dixerit, invenio quod fleverit. -- Lavant
lachrymae delictum, quod voce pudor est confiteri. Ambr. in Luc. 22.
Ambrose, who speaking of Peter, says, I find not what he spoke, I find that
he wept. And hence he infers, that tears may procure pardon of sin, though no
verbal Confession be made of it.

To this testimony of Ambrose, Bellarmine answers, that as Bell. de Poenit. l.
3. c. 20.
then Sacramental Confession was not instituted, and therefore it is no
marvel, if we do not read of Peter's confession. And it is very true that
Sacramental Confession neither then had, nor at all has any divine
institution. Again Bellarmine says, that Tears (of which Ambrose speaks)
contain a kind of Confession in them. This indeed is true in respect of God,
who knows the heart and affection from whence Tears proceed: and therefore
David says that the Lord had heard the voice of his weeping, Psalm. 6. 8. which
shows, that as the Tongue by speaking, so the Eyes by weeping have a voice,
which God does hear. But what is this unto men, who by tears alone, without
words, can understand little? Bellarmine grants that Tears are sufficient in
that Bell. Ibid.
Confession, which is made unto God, who knows all things. Well, and Ambrose
says that Tears may suffice to procure pardon; and therefore no necessity of
any other Confession then what is made unto God only.

Thus also Hilary is clear for the sufficiency Confessionis autem causam
addidit, dicens quia fecisti: autorem sc: hujus universitatis Dominum esse
confessus, nulli alii docens confitendum, quam qui fecit olivam fructiferam,
etc. Hilar. in Psalm. 51. v. ult.
of Confession made only unto God, saying that David teaches us to confess
only unto him, who has made the Olive fruitful. It Is true, the Confession
that David there (viz. Psalm. 52. 9.) speaks of, is the Confession of Praise and
of Thanksgiving; but Hilary In seculum, and in seculum seculi misericordiaespes
est, sed confessio tantum in seculum, non etiam in seculum seculi. Non enim
confessio peccatorum nisi in hujus seculi tempore est. Hilar. Ibid.
understands it of the confession of sins, saying, that David does not say, I
will confess unto thee for ever and ever, as immediately before he said, I
trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever; but I will confess unto thee for
ever, or whiles he lived, in seculum, because only in the time of this life
here are sins to be confessed. So that however Hilary did mistake David's
meaning, through the Ambiguity of the word Confitebor, i. e. I will confess,
or I will give thanks, yet he clearly expresses his own opinion, that it is
sufficient to confess unto God only.

And this opinion was maintained by some in the Roman Church above a thousand
years after Christ. For Peter Lombard (who was above 1100 years after Christ)
disputing this point touching Confession, confesses, That Quibusdam visum est
sufficere, si soli Deo fiat confessio. Lomb. lib. 4. did. 17. lit. d.
some thought it sufficient to confess only unto God. This Opinion was not
accounted a Heresy by the Church of Rome it self until the time of Pope
Innocent the third, about 1200 years after Christ, when in the Council of
Lateran it was decreed necessary to confess unto a Priest, and not unto God
only. And therefore Bonaventure, who lived a little after Si quis esset modo
hujus opinionis, esset haereticus judicandus, quoniam in concilio generasi hoc
determinatum est sub Innocentio tertio; sed ante hanc determinationem hoc non
erat haeresis. Bonav. in Sent. lib. 4. did. 17. number. 50.
that Council, speaking of those who held it sufficient to confess only unto
God, says, that if any now were of that opinion, he were an Heretic, because
the contrary was determined in a General Council, but before that
determination that Opinion was no Heresy. Thus then we see by the
acknowledgment of the Romish Doctors themselves, that the necessity of
Sacramental Confession (as they call it) is not fetched either from
Scriptures, or Fathers, but from Pope Innocent the Third, and the Council that
was in his time.

To conclude this point touching Confession, I will only add one Argument for
Confutation of the Romish Doctrine in this particular. Such Confession as they
of the Church of Rome require, viz. a particular enumeration of all mortal
sins, with all their several aggravating circumstances, is not possible. And
therefore neither is it of divine institution. Bellarmine answers, that by this
Bell. de Poenit. lib. 3. cap. 16.
reason it is impossible to confess unto God; for that we hold, that
Confession made unto God must be entire, not of some sins only, but of all.
And if we say, that it is sufficient to confess unto God all, so far forth
as we can come to the knowledge of them, adding that of David, Psalm. 19. 13.
Who can understand his errors? Lord cleanse me from my secret faults:
Bellarmine says, that to confess thus to a Priest does suffice also. But, I
say, this answer will not satisfy; for there is not the same reason of
confessing unto God, and of confessing to a Priest, as they require it. God
knows all our sins before we confess, far better then we our selves do;
only we are to confess unto him, to show our selves humble and penitent. But
our Adversaries say, that particular Confession must be made unto a Priest,
because otherwise Bell. de Poenit. lib. 3. cap. 2.
he cannot tell how to judge, so as either to remit sins, or to retain them.
Now to this end it is not enough to confess unto a Priest all that one can
find out, but it is necessary to confess absolutely all that one is guilty of.
For otherwise how shall the Priest be able to judge of those sins which he
knows not? If he cannot judge of those sins which are confessed, except they
be confessed; then neither can he judge of those sins which are not confessed,
because they are not confessed: there is the same reason for the one as for the
other. If the Priest can judge of those sins, that are not confessed, by those
that are confessed, then may he also, by hearing the confession of one or two
sins, judge of all the rest, though no Confession be made of them. Thus the
Confession which our Adversaries contend for, is either not possible, or at
least not necessary.

After Confession the Marquess comes to works of Supererogation, Page 64.
which they say a man may do, viz. good works, more excellent then those,
which the Law of God does require. And that a man may do such works, the
Marquess proves, by Mat. 19. 12. There be eunuchs, that have made themselves
eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven: he that is able to receive it, let him
receive it.

This (the Marquess says) is more then a Commandment, as S. Aug. observes
upon the place, Ser. lib. de temp. (it should be Sermon. 61. de temp.) for of
precepts it is not said, Keep them who is able, but keep them absolutely. I
answer, it is true of general precepts, such as concern all, they are to be
kept absolutely by all; but for special precepts, which concern only some,
they are only to be kept by those whom they do concern. And so those words, He
that is able to receive it, let him receive it, are a precept, but limited and
restrained, viz. unto some certain persons, who otherwise can, without
inconvenience, live a single life; they are required to do it, not as a thing
simply necessary, but as necessary for them; not as a thing wherein perfection
does consist, but as a means whereby the better to draw toward perfection,
viz. To serve the Lord without distraction, 1 Cor. 7. 35. Neither do the
Fathers (whom the Marquess cites) hold any such works of Supererogation, as
the Romanists plead for, viz. works more excellent and perfect then those which
the Law of God prescribes. Qui praeceptum impleverint, dicere possunt, Servi
inutiles sumus, quod debuimus facere, fecimus. Hoc virgo non dicit; non dicit
ille, qui bona sua vendidit. Ambr. de viduis.
Ambrose seems to speak more then the rest, and therefore it may be he is
put in the first place, though some that are cited, are more ancient then he.
They that have fulfilled the precept (he says) may say, We are unprofitable
servants, we have done what our duty was to do. This the Virgin says not,
nor he that sold his Goods, viz. to give to the poor.

Thus Ambrose; but have not these words need of a favorable interpretation?
For will our adversaries themselves say, that there are any absolutely so
perfect, as that they need not confess unto God, that they are unprofitable
servants? what they will say I cannot tell, but sure I am that Christ's
Disciples, who were as perfect as any others, were not so perfect. For even to
them did Christ speak those words, When ye shall have done all these things,
which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done but
what was our duty to do. Luke 17. 10. It may be our Adversaries will say,
true, when they had done all things commanded them, they were to say, we are
unprofitable servants, etc. but not when they had done more then was commanded
them. But did they so? They left all indeed, and followed Christ; but did not
Christ call them to it, and command them to do it? In this therefore they did
no more then their duty was to do. We must distinguish therefore betwixt
general duties, and special duties. All were not bound to forsake all
actually, as the Apostles did, and to follow Christ, because there was no
general precept for it; but the Apostles were bound to do it, because they had
a special call and command from Christ, that did oblige them to it. Thus then
Ambroses words must be understood, that in respect of a general precept
obliging all to the thing done, some may be said to do more then their duty
was to do, though simply and absolutely they did not more. For if it were more
for Gods glory to do what they did, then not to do it, they were bound to do
it. For else how did they love God with all their heart, and with all their
soul, and with all their might? as all are commanded to do, Deuteronomy. 5. 6.
Virginitas non ex debito solviour: neque enim per praeceptum expetitur, sed
supra debitum offertur. Origin. in cap. 15. ad Romans
Origon is next cited, who says that such as live in virginity, do not that
which is commanded, but above what is due. But the meaning is, that virginity
is not a thing generally commanded, not a duty required of all; yet to some,
who have the gift, and are called of God to improve it to the greater
advancement of his glory, it is a duty; every one is bound to do that, which
does make most for Gods glory, that being the end for which we ought do
whatsoever we do. 1 Cor. 10. 31.

After Origin follows Eusebius, who says, that in the Eusebius. demonstr. Evang.
l. 1. c. 8.
Church of God two kinds of life are instituted; one exceeding our nature, and
the common course of life, not seeking marriage, nor offspring, nor substance,
but addicted wholly to Gods worship. And this is the manner of a perfect life
in Christianity. The other kind of life is more remiss, and humane, which is
entangled in modest wedlock, and procreation of children, etc. To such
belongs the second degree of piety. Thus Eusebius, who yet is far from
asserting such works of supererogation as are now disputed of. We grant, that
to live unmarried so as thereby the better and the more freely to serve God, is
a life of more perfection then to live married, and so to be entangled with the
affairs of the world. But we deny, that they who so live unmarried, do
supererogate, i. e. that they not only do all that is commanded, but also over
and above what is commanded. This neither does Eusebius say, neither can it be
proved.

Next comes Chrysostom, who may seem to speak much, but indeed it is not
much to the purpose. He says that many Multi and ipsa superant man-data.
Chrysostom. hom. 8. de poenit.
do exceed the Commandments. But how is that? Not in respect of the whole
latitude of the Commandments; for (as David testifies) they are exceeding
broad. Psalm. 119. 96. It is therefore only in respect of some outward act,
which is not directly and precisely commanded. And thus, Chrysostom says that
the Heathens, many of them, did exceed the Commandments; and yet (I presume)
our Adversaries will not ascribe Nonue praecepta Dei adeo levia sunt, ut multi
philosophica tantum ratione illa excesserint? Chrysostom. Hom. 3 dn 1. ad Corinth.
any extraordinary perfection to the Heathens. The testimony then of
Chrysostom makes but little for their works of superetogation, except they
will acknowledge such works to have been done by Heathens, many of which might
forbear marriage; so the vestall Virgins did; and this was according to
Chrysostomes manner of speech, to exceed the Commandments, namely to go
beyond that, Thou shall not commit adultery. But consider this (and so any
other) Commandment in the full extent of it, as forbidding all wanton looks,
and all unchaste thoughts, Mat. 5. 28. Job. 31. 1. and so neither the Vestall
nor the Popall Virgins will find any great cause of boasting.

The last Father here cited, is Gregory (Nicen. in the Marquesses paper is to
be blotted out, as superfluous, this here cited being not Gregory Nissen. but
Gregory surnamed the great, Bishop of Rome) who says, The elect sometimes do
more then God has vouchsafed to command. For bodily virginity is not
commanded, but only commended; Greg Moral. lib. 15. cap. 9. Electi nonnunquam
plus student agere quam eis dignatus est Dominus jubere. Carnis enim Virginitas
nequaquam jussa est, sed laudata; nam si illa juberetur, conjugium jam culpa
crederetur, and tamen multi virtute virginitatis pollent, ut plus impendant
obsequio, quam acceperunt praecepto.
for if it were commanded, then marriage would be a fault. And yet many live in
virginity, and so perform more then the Commandment does require of them. It
is true, there is no precept directly commanding virginity, and in that respect
they that live in virginity may be said to do more then the Commandment does
require of them. Yet if any have the special gift given of God, and see it a
means whereby the more to glorify God, then by consequence the precept of
loving God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our might,
Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and of doing all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. these precepts
(I say) in such a case do require virginity. But (alas!) what is all this that
has been alleged both from Scriptures and Fathers, to prove works of
supererogation? to prove that men may not only do all that is commanded, but
also more then is commanded? How will this consist with the Scriptures, which
tell us, There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not.
Eccles. 7. 20. In many things we offend all. Jam. 3. 2. If God shall contend
with us, we cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job 9. 3. And do not the
Fathers concur with the Scriptures in this? Then are we righteous (says
Tunc justi sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur. Hierou dial. advers. Pelag.
lib. 1.
Hierome) when we confess our selves to be sinners. And again, Haec
hominibus sola perfectio, si imperfectos esse se noverint. Hieron. advers.
Pelag. ad Ctesiphont.
So Haec est perfectorum vera justitia, ut nunquam praesumant se esse
perfectos. Leo ser. 2. de Quadrag.
Leo, This is the true righteousness of those that are perfect, that they
never presume themselves to be perfect. Thus also Si de his divinitus districte
discutimur, quis inter haec remanet salutis locus? quando and mala nostra pura
mala sunt, and bona, quae nos habere credimus, pura bona esse nequaquam
possunt. Greg Moral. lib. 35. cap. 16.
Gregory the great, If God shall strictly examine us, what hope of salvation is
there for us? when as our evil deeds, are simply evil, but the good deeds,
which we suppose we have, cannot be simply good. And again, Sciunt quippe
(Sancti) quia omnis humana justitia injustitia esse deprehenditur, si divinitus
districte judicetur. Greg. Moral. l. 21. c. 15.
The Saints know that all man's righteousness is found to be unrighteousness,
if God do strictly judge it.

After works of Supererogation, the Marquess passes to Page 64.
Free Will, saying that they hold that we have Free Will, and that we deny it.
But a question should be stated, before it be disputed; we do not deny, that
we have Free Will, though we deny that our will is so free, now in the estate
of corrupt nature, as that we have of our selves, any ability to that which is
truly good. Ego vero quantum ad vocempertinet, adhuc profiteor, quod in mea
institut o^e testatus sum, non adeo me superstitiosum esse in verbis, ut ejus
causa velim contetionem aliquam movere, modo rei intelligentia sana maneat. Si
coactioni opponitur libertas, liberum esse arbitrium, and fateor, and
constanter assevero; ac pro haeretico habeo, quisquis secus sentiat. -- Sed cum
aliud prorsus vulgo concipiant, dum hoc epitheto^ hominis voluntati attributum
vel legunt, vel audiunt, haec causa est, cur mihi displiceat. Siquidem ad
facultatem viresque referunt, nec impedire possis, quin simulac libera suerit
voluntas dicta, haec pluribus imaginatio protinus in mentem veniat, habere
igitur sub potestate sua bonum and malum, ut alterutrum eligere suapte virtute
queat. Calv. contra Pigh. de lib. arbit. page 215. Semper autem testatus sum,
me de nomine pugnare nolle, si hoc semel constitueretur, libertatem non ad
potentiam, vel facultatem boni aeque ac mali eligendi, sed ad spontaneum motum
and consensum referri debere. Ibid. p. 229. Causam mihi justam habere videor,
cur voculam op e^ sublatam e medio, ad qua^ major prope mundi pars tanto
periculo impingit. Ibid. p. 215.
Calvin allows both the name of Free Will, and also the thing it self, so it
be rightly understood, viz. that the will of man is free, as freedom is
opposed to coaction, the will is so free, as that it cannot be compelled or
constrained. But that the will is free as to be able of it self to choose
either good or evil, this is it that he contends against; and because many
when they hear or read of Free Will, understand it in this sense, this made
him wish that the very word were abandoned, many being so apt to stumble at it.

Quia vix alia notione nominabatur lib. arbitrium, hinc nostrorum plurimae
contrariae disputationes, visae negare funditus lib. arbitrium. Cum tamen
certum sit omnino non negari nisi hoc sensu. Quod satis apparet ex earum
disputationum serie, quibus hic scopus propositus est, ut hanc unam in bonum
malumque aequam propensionem sive indifferentiam perpetuo impugnent. Cham. tom.
3. lib. 3. ca. 1. Sect. 7. Nostra nulla quaestio est, utrum sua sit arbitrio
libertas, quod saepe testatum saepius repetendum est propter adversariorum
importunitatem. Quid ergo e Nempe quid quantumque ea valeat ad bonum voluntas,
anquirimus. Ibib. c. 14. Sect. 6.

Nos protestati sumus tenere liberum arbitrium, and si non quale statuerunt
Pelagiaui; non etiam quale statuunt Papistae. Ibid. cap. 17. Sect. 5.


Chamier a famous Protestant Writer, shows that our Divines disputing against
Free Will, do not simply deny it, but in this sense, that the will is equally
propense and indifferent to good and evil.

This is that, which they deny, and against which they bend their disputations.
We do not make a question (says he also) whether the will be free; this we
have often testified, and must still repeat it, because of the importunity of
our adversaries. This then is that which we question, what and how much that
liberty of the will can avail in respect of that which is good. And again,
We have protested (says he) that we hold Free Will, though not such as the
Pelagians held, nor as the Papists hold.

Thus then we hold, that since the fall of Adam, man's will is free to that
which is evil, but to that which is good, it is not free, until by the grace
of Christ it be made free. If the Son shall make you free (says our Savior)
then ye shall be free indeed. Joh. 8. 36. But not till then. How should they
be free to that which is good, who are dead in trespasses and sins? as by
nature all are. Ephesians. 2. 1. who are sold unto sin; as the Apostle confesses
he was so far forth as he was unregenerate, Romans 7. 14. and that in him,
that is, in his flesh (his corrupt nature) no good dwelled. verse. 18. who are
the servants of sin, as all are before their conversion, Romans 6. 17. In
this respect Luther might well entitle his book (as he did) of servile will,
rather then De servo arbitrio.

Indicans disputari in eo, illud Liberum arbitrium vere esse peccati servum.
Cham. tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 9.


of Free Will, to show that this Free Will is by nature the servant of sin.

S. Augustine in many places is as clear, Quid enim boni operari potest
perditus, nisi quantum fuerit a perditione liberatus? Nunquid libero voluntatis
arbitrio? Et hoc absit. Nam libero arbitrio male utens homo and se perdidit,
and ipsum. Sicut enim qui se occidit, utique vivendo se occidit, sed se
occidendo non vivit, nec seipsum resuscitare potest cum occiderit: ita cum
libero peccaretur arbitrio, victore peccato amissum est liberum arbitrium. A
quo enim quis devictus est, huic and servus addictus est. -- Qualis, quaeque
potest servi addicti esse libertas, nisi quando peccare eum delectat? Ac per
hoc ad-peceandum liber est, qui peccati servus est. Unde ad just faciendum
liber non erit, nisi a peccato liberatus esse justitiae coeperit servus. Aug.
Enchir. cap. 30.
and express for this which we hold, as can be imagined. For what good (says
he) can lost man work, but so far forth as he is freed from that lost
condition? can he by Free Will? No such matter. For man using Free Will
amiss, lost both himself and it. For as he that killes himself, does by
living kill himself, but by killing himself he cease to live: So when by
Free Will man did sin, sin getting the victory, Free Will was lost. For of
whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage. (2 Pet. 2. 19.)
What, I pray, can be the freedom of one that is brought into bondage, except
when it does delight him to sin? And by this he is free to sin, who is the
servant of sin. Wherefore he shall not be free to do righteously, unless
being made free from sin he shall become the servant of righteousness. And
presently after, But that freedom, which is to do well, how shall man being
in bondage, Sed ista libertas ad benefaciendum unde erit homini addicto, and
vendito, nisi redimat ille, cujus illa vox est; Si vos Filius liberaverit, tunc
vere liberi eritis? Quod antequam fieri in homine incipiat, quomodo quisquam de
libero arbitrio in bono gloriatur opere, qui nondum liber est ad operandum
been? Ibid.
and sold under sin have, except he redeem him, who has said, If the Son
shall make you free, then you shall be free indeed? Before this begin to be
done in man, how can any glory of Free Will in a good work, seeing he is not
yet free to do well?

Bellarmine brings in the first piece of this Amittitur liberum arbitrium, non
cum perit, quod fieri non potest, sed cum a diabolo captivatur; quomodo
dicuntur amissa, quae tempore belli in potestatem hostium venerunt. Bell. de
great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 30.
saying of Austine, and answers, that Free Will is lost, not in that it is
quite abolished, but in that it is held captive by the Devil; as things are
said to be lost, which in time of war are in the power of the enemy. But what
is this but even to yield us that which we contend for? For if Free Will be
so lost, as to be held captive by Satan, then surely the will, until it be
set free by Christ, is not free in respect of that which is truly good, and
accompanying salvation.

This will (says Austine) which is free in Sed haec voluntas, quae libera est
in malis, quia delectatur malis, ideo libera in bonis non est, quia liberata
non est. Aug. ad Bonifac. contra duas epist. Pelagian. cap. 3.
things that are evil, because it is delighted in things that are evil, is
therefore not free in things that are good, because it is not made free.

And again, Without the Grace of God the will cannot be free, seeing it is
subject to lusts Sine gratia Dei non potest esse libera voluntas, cum
cupiditatibus vincentibus and vincientibus subdita sit. Aug. epist. 144.
that do overcome it, and bring it into bondage.

And again, How dare miserable men be proud of Free Will, before they are made
free? Ut quid miseri homines audent superbire de libero arbitrio, antequam
liberentur? Aug. de Spir. and lit. c. 30. Hinc illa, quam uni Augustino, prae
aliis tribuo, verae sanaeque doctrinae perspicua, certa, exactaque explicatio:
hinc and ille consensus, quem illi nobiscum esse glorior. Calv. contra Pigh.
page 225.
These, and many other Sentences of this Father, are so full for our purpose,
that our Divines might well profess (as they do) that in this point they
fully accord with Austine. But I will add the testimonies of some other
Fathers besides him. Augustinum asservi prorsus esse nostrum. Ibid. page 227.
Totam de libero arbitrio doctrinam Augustini Calvinus probavit, nos etiam
probamus, dummodo aestimetur ex ejus disputationibus contra Pelagianos. Cham.
Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 18. sect. 5.


While sin reigns (says Fulgentius) a man Regnante peccato habet liberum
arbitrium, sed liberum sine Deo, non liberum sub Deo, i e. liberum justitiae,
non liberum sub gratia, and ab hoc pessime atque serviliter liberum, quia non
gratuito miserentis Dei munere liberatu^. (Probat ex Romans 6. 22. atque addit)
Servire igitur justitiae non potest, quia justitiae liber est; quia quamdiu est
peccati servus, non nisi ad serviendum peccato reperitur idoneus. Fulgent. ad
Pet. Diacon. cap. 19.
has Free Will, but free without God, not free under God, that is, free from
Righteousness, not free under Grace, and so most ill, and slavishly free,
because not made free by the free gift of God showing mercy. This he proves by
Romans 6. 22. and adds, Therefore he cannot serve Righteousness, who is free
from Righteousness; because so long as he is the servant of sin, he is only
able to serve him. To the same effect also speaks Bernard, By I know Nescio quo
pravo and mito modo ipsa sibi voluntas peccato quidem in deterius mutata,
necessitatem facit, ut nec necessitas, cum sit voluntaria, excusare valeat
voluntatem, nec voluntas, cum sit illecta, excludere necessitatem. Est n^
necessitas haec quodammodo voluntaria. -- Voluntas enim est, quae se cum esset
libera, servam fecit peccati, peccato assentiendo: voluntas nihilominus est,
quae se sub peccato tenet voluntary serviendo. Bernard. Sermon. 81. in Cant.
not what evil and wonderful means (says he) the will being changed by
sin, and made worse, does bring a necessity upon it self, so that neither
necessity, being voluntary, can excuse the will, nor the will, being enticed,
can exclude necessity. For it is after a sort a voluntary necessity. -- For it
is the will, which when it was free, made it self the servant of sin, by
consenting unto sin; nevertheless it is the will, which keeps it self under
sin, by serving it willingly. He shows how the will is free, being captivated
by sin, so free as that it sins willingly, yet not so free, as that it can
refrain from sin, seeing it has made it self the servant of sin, and has
brought upon it self a necessity of sinning. Thus (says he) the Ita anima miro
quodam and malo modo sub hac voluntaria quadam ac male libera necessitate and
ancilla tenetur, and libera; ancilla propter necessitatem, libera propter
voluntatem: and quod magis mirum magisque miserum est, eo rea quo libera, eoque
ancilla quo rea, ac per hoc eo ancilla quo libera. Bern. Ibid.
soul, after a wonderful, and evil manner, under this voluntary and ill free
necessity is both held in bondage, and also is free: in bondage, because of
necessity, free, because of will. And which is more wonderful, and more
miserable, it is therefore guilty, because it is free, and therefore in
bondage, because guilty, and so consequently therefore in bondage because free.
He adds a little after, Now there is no escape Nunc vero nusquam exitus misero
patet, quem and voluntas (ut dixi) inexcusabilem, and incorrigibilem necessitas
facit Bern. Ibid.
for miserable man, (by his own free will, or any power in himself) whom (as I
have said) both the will does make inexcusable, and also necessity does make
incorrigible. Elsewhere indeed Bernard seems to make the will perpetually, Est
vero quam magis ei congruere arbitror libertatem, quam dicere possumus a
necessitate, eo quod necessarium voluntario contrarium esse videatur. Bern. de
great. and lib. arb.
and of its own nature free from necessity, for that necessary and voluntary
seem to be contrary one to the other. But by necessity he means co-action and
compulsion: For speaking of consent, he says, It is not Siquidem non cogitur,
non extorquetur. Est quippe voluntatis, non necessitatis. Nec negat se, nec
praebet cuiquam nisi ex voluntate. Alioqui si compelli valet invitus, violentus
est, non voluntarius. Ubi autem voluntas non est, nec consensus. Non est enim
consensus nisi voluntarius. Ubi ergo consensus, ibi voluntas. Porro ubi
voluntas, ibi libertas. Et hoc est quod dici puto liberum arbitrium. Bern. Ibid.
compelled, it is not extorted; for it is of will, not of necessity. It neither
denies it self, nor affords it self to any, but willingly. For if it could be
compelled against its will, it were violent, and not voluntary. But where there
is no will, there is no consent. For there is no consent, but voluntary.
Therefore where there is consent, there is will: and where there is will, there
is freedom: and this is that which I think is called Free Will.

And again, Freedom from necessity Verum libertas a necessitate aeque and
indifferenter Deo universaeque tam malae quam bonae rationali convenit
creaturae. Nec peccato nec miseria amittitur, vel minuitur, nec major in justo
est quam in peccatore, nec plenior in angelo quam in homin. Quomodo namque ad
bonum conversus per gratiam humanae voluntatis consensus, eo libere bonum, and
in bono liberum hominem facit, quo voluntarius efficitur, non invitus
pertrahitur: sic sponte devolutus in malum, in malo nihilominus tam liberum
quam spontaneum constituit sua utique voluntate ductum, non aliunde coactum ut
malus sit. Bern. Ibid.
(says he) does equally belong unto God, and to every reasonable creature, as
well bad as good. It is not lost, nor diminished, either by sin, or misery,
it is not greater in the Righteous, then in the Sinner; not more full in an
Angel, then in Man. For as the consent of man's will, being by Grace turned
unto good, therefore makes a man freely good, and free in that which is good,
because he is made voluntary, and not drawn against his will: So being freely
devolved into evil, it makes a man nevertheless free, and spontaneous in
evil, being led by his own will, and not compelled and enforced by any other
to be evil.

Thus we see how Bernard does agree with Calvin in making the freedom of man's
will to consist in a spontaneity, and a freedom from coaction; and in holding
that otherwise the will of man (until it be made free by Grace) is not free to
that which is good, but necessitated unto sin, and enslaved by it. The freedom
of the will then does not consist in this, that it is free and indifferent to
choose either good or evil. For so God and the good Angels should not be free,
seeing they cannot will any thing but that which is good: neither should the
devils, and damned souls be free, seeing they cannot will any thing but that
which is evil.

It is not therefore called Free Will (says Bradwardine) because it can freely
will, and Non ideo dicitur liberum arbitrium quia libere potest velle and nolle
quodcunque; sed quia libere potest velle quodcunque objectum suum volubile, and
nolle quodcunque objectum suum nolubile. Bradw. de Cause. Dei l. 2. c. 2.
nill any thing whatsoever; but because it can freely will any thing that is
its object to be willed, and nill any thing that is its object to be nilled. In
vain therefore does Bellarmine pretend that our Divines make man altogether
Affirmant praesente auxilio gratiae non posse hominem male facere, eo vero
absente non posse been facere, ac per hoc nunquam habere liberum voluntatis
arbitrium. Bell. de great. and lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 28.
void of Free Will, for that they hold, that if he have the help of Grace he
cannot do ill; and if he want it, he cannot do well. But it does not follow,
that therefore they wholly deny Free Will, it being rightly understood. For
though man having the help of Grace cannot do ill, and wanting it cannot do
well; yet both, in doing well, by the help of Grace, and in doing ill, for want
of it, his will is free, so as that he is not constrained, and forced either
the one way or the other: even as both the good Angels and the bad are free in
that which they do, though the one cannot do ill, nor the other well. Our
Adversaries make the will of man so free, as being incited by Grace, to be able
to act, or not to act, as he pleases. But how does Bell. de great. and lib.
art. l. 6. c. 9.
this agree with Scripture? Who makes thee to differ, and what have thou, that
thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. If a man could of himself, by the power of
his free will, embrace a good motion, and consent unto it, as well as refuse
and reject it, then he may make himself to differ from another, and may have
something that he has not received. No man comes unto me, except my Father
draw him, says our Savior, Ioh. 6. 44. Magna gratiae commendatio, nemo venit
nisi tractus; quem trahat, and quem non trahat, quare illum trahat, and illum
non trahat, noli velle judicare, si non vis errare. Aug. homil. 26. citat. a
Bradw. de Cause. Dei l. 1. c. 35.
Here is a great commendation of Grace, (says Austine) none comes except he be
drawn; whom he draws, and whom he draws not, why he draws this man, and
draws not that, do not judge if thou would not err.

The Apostle tells us, That we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. By
which words of the Apostle Bernard proves that it is not in the power Non
equidem quod vel ipse consensus, in quo omne meritum consistit, ab ipso sit,
cum nec cogitare (quod minus est quam consentire) aliquid a nobis quasi ex
nobis sufficientes simus. Bern. de great. and lib. arbit.
of man's free will without the Grace of God to consent unto a good motion,
seeing he cannot of himself so much as think a good thought, which yet is less
then to consent unto it. So by the same words Bradwardine confutes those who
hold, that if God prevent a Sunt qui dicunt Deum semper praevenire pulsando,
and excitando, etc. and hominem subsequi aperiendo, and consentiendo, idque ex
propriis viribus, etc.
man by knocking and inciting, then man of himself does follow, by opening and
consenting. But (says he, having cited the words of the Apostle) it is less
to think, then -- Minus est cogitare, quam credere. Bradward. de Cause. lib. 1.
cap. 38.
to believe. And he does well observe, That this doctrine ascribes that which
is the better, Haec positio tribuit nobis quod melius est, and majus; Deo vero
quod deterius, and minus. Quis enim dubitaverit aperire melius, and utilius
nobis esse quam pulsare? cum pulsare sine apertione non profit, sed obsit.
Bradward: Ibid.
and the greater unto man, and that which is the worse and the less unto God.
For that without doubt it is better and more for our profit to open, then to
knock, seeing that knocking without opening availes nothing, but is rather
hurtful. And citing a saying of Aug. de bono perseverantiae cap. 9. Tutiores
vivimus, si totum Deo damus, non nos illi ex part, and nobis ex part
committimus. Ipsi ergo me totum tota devotione committo, ac ejus gratissimae
gratiae totaliter me submitto. Bradw. Ibid.
S. Austine. viz. We live more safe if we give all to God, and do not commit
our selves in part to him, and in part to our selves; he adds, Therefore to
him do I wholly commit my self with my whole devotion, and to his most
acceptable grace do I wholly submit my self. Surely David, when he prayed,
Unite my heart to fear thy Name, Psalm. 85. 11. was far So when the Church
prays Lam. 5. 21. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned,
were it not ridiculous to expound it, we shall be turned, if we will?
from meaning thus, that God should so move him to obedience as that he might
either obey, or not obey, as he pleased. So when he prayed, Let me not
wander from thy Commandments. Psalm. 119. 10. And, make me to go in the path
of thy Commandments. v. 35. were it not most absurd to understand it thus, Let
me not wander, except I will; and make me to go, if I will? So when God
promises, I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, etc. Ezekiel. 36. 27. And, I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. Ier. 32. 40. it were most ridiculous to interpret it
thus, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, if you will, and that you shall
not depart from me, except you will.

God promises Ezekiel. 36. 26. to take away the stony heart, that is, the
contumacy, stubbornness and disobedience of the heart; and to give a heart of
flesh, that is, to make the heart soft, pliable and obedient. By this and other
places of Scripture Bradwardine confutes those, who say, that God by his Grace
will convert a man, if he do not put a bar in the way. Quicquid obex
dicitur; nullus potest hunc obicem tollere nisi Deus: and si ipse eum voluerit
tollere, irresistibiliter tollitur. Unde and ipsemet Dominus, Miserebor cui
voluero, etc. Exodus 33. Et iterum, Auferam cor lapideum, etc. Exodus 36. Et
Apostolus, Cujus vult, miseretur, etc. Romans 9. Bradw. de cause Dei lib. 2. cap.
32.
Whatsoever (says he) this bar is said to be, none can take it away, but
God; and if he will take it away, it is irresistibly taken away. Whence the
Lord himself says, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. Exodus 33.
And again, I will take away the stony Heart. Ezekiel. 36. So the Apostle, He has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, etc. Romans 9. After these Scriptures he
brings in that of Austine, worthy to be written in Letters of Et Aug. de
Praedest. SS c. 9. Haec gratia, quae occulte humanis cordibus divina largitate
tribuitur, a nullo duro cord respuitur: ideo quippe tribuitur, ut cordis
duritia primitus auferatur. Bradw. Ibid.
gold, This grace (says he) which by the bounty of God is secretly infused
into the hearts of men, is refused by no hard heart. For therefore it is
infused, that in the first place the hardness of the heart may be taken away.
I Will only add one Scripture more, with Austines gloss upon it, to show that
man being stirred up by preventing grace, has not by his own Free will power
to consent unto, and to do that which is good, but it is God, who by his grace
does work this in him. So the Apostle plainly tells us. It is God, (says he)
that works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13.
Therefore (says Nos ergo volumus, sed Deus in nobis operatur and velle: nos
ergo operamur, sed Deus in nobis operatur and operari pro bona voluntate. Hoc
nobis expedit and credere, and dicere: hoc est pium, hoc verum, ut sit humilis
and submissa confessio, and totum Deo detur. Aug. de bono persever. cap. 13.
Austine) we will, but God does work this will in us: therefore we work, but
God does work this work in us of his good pleasure. This is expedient for us
both to believe, and to speak: this is pious, this is true; that so confession
may be humble, and submisse, and that all may be ascribed unto God. And thus I
hope it may sufficiently appear, that we have no cause to decline either the
authority of the Scriptures, or the testimonies of Fathers, in this point
concerning Free Will.

I come now to those Scriptures, and Fathers, which the Marquess does allege
against us. Three places of Scripture are cited for proof of Free Will, such
as our Adversaries maintain, and we impugn. First, that 1 Cor. 7. 37. (it is
misprinted, 1 Cor. 17.) He that stands steadfast in his heart, having no
necessity, but has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart,
that he will keep his virgin, does well. But what is there here to prove
Free Will? Perhaps those words, has power over his own will. But the Apostle
there speaks of a man, that has a daughter marriageable, yet determines to
keep her unmarried: which the Apostle approves, so that the man have no
necessity, that is, no necessary cause of giving his daughter in marriage, but
has power over his own will, that is, has power to effect and accomplish
that which he wills, so as no inconvenience to ensue upon it. After this
manner does Potestatem habens voluntatis suae perficiendae, h. c. quod virgo
consentiat abstinentiae a conjugio. Si enim virgo dissentiret, non haberet
pater potestatem voluntatis propriae perficiendae. Cajetan: ad loc.
Cajetan himself in his Commentaries upon the place expound these words but
has power over his own will, viz. to accomplish it, in that the Virgin does
consent to abstain from marriage. For if she should dissent, then the Father
should not have power of accomplishing his own will. Thus Cajetan; now what is
this to the controversy about free will? though (I know) Bellarmine Bell de
great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 23.
also brings it in, as also another place as little to the purpose, namely
that, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let
him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver.
Men must give alms willingly and cheerfully, therefore men have free will. It
does not follow; no more then that because men must serve God with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. therefore of themselves by the
power of Free Will they are able to do it. The Rhemists tacitly confess these
places to be impertinent to the point in hand, passing them over in their
Annotations, and making no use of them, as they are ready enough to do, when
they meet with any thing, which they think does make for them. The next place
is Deuteronomy. 30. 19. (not as it is printed 11.) I have set before you life and
death, blessing and cursing; choose life, that thou and thy seed may live. This
place Bellarmine presumes much upon, saying that Non video quid ad hunc locum
responderi possit. Bell. de great. et lib. arb. lib. 5. ca. 23.
he sees not what can be answered to it. And so the English Papists, who
translated the old Testament at Doway, in their notes upon the place say, what
Doctor can more plainly teach Free Will in man, then this Text of holy
Scripture? But what is the reason of all this confidence? because man is bidden
to choose life, does it therefore follow, that of himself he is free and able
to do it? why? So man is bidden to work out his own salvation, Phil. 2. 12.
yet (as the Apostle adds immediately v. 13.) it is God that does work in him
both the Will and the Deed. Man is bidden to come unto Christ, Isai. 53. 3. yet
can he not come, except the Father draw him. Ioh. 6. 44. Man is bidden to
arise from the dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. Can he therefore being dead quicken himself?
Surely the same Apostle tells us in the same Epistle, that it is God that does
quicken those that are dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2. 5. There is no
more force in that place of Deuteronomie, for proof of Free Will, then in any
other place of Scripture, which contains in it precept, or exhortation. And
indeed our adversaries do pretend, that all such places are for them. And
Bell. de great. and lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 18. and lib. 6. cap. 10.
so did the Pelagians of old object such places: but Austine answers them, that
though it is true, God does not command man to do that which cannot be done by
him, yet he commands us to do what we are not able to Magnum aliquid
Pelagiani se scire putant, quan do dicunt, non juberet Deus, quod sciret non
posse ab homine fieri. Quis hoc nesciat? Sed ideo jubet aliqua, quae non
possumus, ut noverimus quid ab illo petere debeamus. Aug. de great. and lib.
arb. cap. 16.
do (viz. of our selves,) that we may seek unto him to make us able. Thus
the people of God do; Turn unto me, says God, Joel 2. 12. Turn thou us unto
thee, say the people of God, Lam. 5. 21. And by comparing places of Scripture
together we may find, that what God does require of his people, the same he
does promise unto them. Wash ye, make ye clean, says he, Isai. 1. 16. But
Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you (says he) and you shall
be clean. So Ezekiel. 18. 31. God commands saying, Make you a new heart, and a
new spirit: But Ezekiel. 36. 26. he promises this very thing, A new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put with in you. And accordingly David
prayed unto God to work this in him, Create in me a clean heart O Lord, and
renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. 51. 10. And that of Austine is well
known, Give Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis.
O Lord what thou do command, and then command what thou willest. Besides,
as Bradwardine observed long ago, impotency and inability to perform Quis
nesciat secundum omnia jura, Divina pariter and humana, impotentiam
descendentem ex culpa nullatenus excusare, sed forsan potius aggravare, etc.
Bradw. de Causa Dei lib. 1. cap. 43.
a duty, proceeding from a man's own fault, does nothing excuse him either by
the Law of God, or man. A bankrupt may justly be required to pay his debt,
though he be not able to pay it. Again, Gods Precepts and Exhortations are
not in vain, though man by the power of his own Free Will be not able to do
what is required; because God does make those very Precepts and Exhortations
means whereby to work that in his elect, which he does require of them. When
Christ spoke to Lazarus being dead and buried, saying, Lazarus come forth, Joh.
11. this was not in vain, though its certain, a man that is dead, and laid in
the grave, has no power of himself to come forth; yet (I say) it was not in
vain, that Christ spoke so unto Lazarus; for together with his word he sent
forth his Divine power, and so enabled Lazarus to come forth, as he required.
So neither is it in vain, that God does command men to do things, which of
themselves they cannot do, because he accompanying his word with his spirit,
inables them to do what he commands. Verily, verily, I say unto you (says
Christ) the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God; and they that hear, shall live. Joh. 5. 25. Our Savior
there speaks of such as are spiritually dead, as appears those words and now
is, and he shows, that his word is a powerful and effectual means (viz. by
the concurrence of his spirit) to work the life of grace in them.

The third and last place of Scripture, which the Marquess cites for
Free Will, is that Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem; how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, and ye would not. But what does this place prove? That men have
Free Will so far forth, as of themselves to resist and reject the offers of
grace; which we nothing doubt of. But the question is, whether men have such a
Free Will, as that of themselves they can receive grace when it is offered.
This is that which we deny, neither does the place alleged, make any thing
for proof of it.

The Marquess says, There might have been a willingness, as well as an
unwillingnesse, (so it should be, though it be printed, as well as a willing)
or else Christ had wept in vain: and to think that he did so, were to make
him an impostor. I grant that there might have been a willingness, but not by
the power of Free Will, except made free by grace, it being God that does work
both the will and the deed. Phil. 2. 13. So the Jews, of whom Christ
complained, that they would not come unto him, Ioh. 5. 40. might have come; but
yet of themselves they could not come, not except it were given unto them of
God, Ioh. 6. 65. not except he did draw them. Ioh. 6. 44. Whereas the
Marquess speaks of Christ's weeping, his mind was (it seems) upon another
place, viz. that Luke 19. 41, 42. where it is said, that Christ drawing nigh to
Jerusalem, beheld it, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou,
at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace: but now they
are hid from thine eyes. But that Christ wept, when he said, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children, etc. this we do not
find, though the words be recorded both Mat. 27. 37. and also Luke 13. 34.

But suppose that Christ had wept, when he said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc.
yet had not his weeping been in vain, though Jerusalem had no power of her
self to do that which there Christ speaks of. For yet nevertheless Christ
showed his affection toward Jerusalem, even as he did toward Lazarus, when he
wept over him as he lay over the grave. Behold how he loved him, said the
Jews, John 11. 36. yet it is without all question, that Lazarus of himself
could not have come out of the grave, except Christ by his Almighty power had
raised him up. Some perhaps may say, But why did Christ complain of Jerusalem
for her unwillingnesse, if it were not in her power to be willing? I answer,
because both her unwillingnesse, and also her want of power to be willing was
from her self; it was her own fault, and therefore she was justly complained
of, and reproved for it.

But again, some may say, Jerusalem had sufficient grace whereby she might
have been willing, or else Christ would not have complained that she was
unwilling. I answer, Jerusalem had a sufficiency of the means of Grace, which
she ought to have made use of, and to have been wrought upon by, but would not,
and therefore did Christ complain of her. But Jerusalem had not a sufficiency
of the Spirit of Grace, without which she could not improve the means, as she
should have done; and yet nevertheless, the complaint made of her was just:
For God having given unto man, at first, Grace sufficient to do whatsoever he
should require, and this Grace being lost by man's own fault, Eccles. 7. 29. God
is not bound to restore it but when, and where he pleases; and yet may justly
require the obedience that is due unto him, and complain for want of it, as a
man may justly demand his debt of a bankrupt, and complain of him for not
paying it, though he be not able to pay it. Homo non potest solvere, nec
reddere Deo, quod debet Deo: quia non potest Deo reddere totum amorem suum, nec
timorem, nec honorem, nec obedientiam, nec voluntatem Dei facere, quia
corruptus est, and mutatus in contrarium suae naturae; and ipsemet fecit se
talem, ut non possit Deo facere quod debet: and tamen semper debet: and si
debitum semper manet, nec excusatur, quia tenetur: and si non potest, ipsemet
est in causa, and in culpa quare non potest, Raimund, de Sabund. Theolog.
Nature. tit. 250.
Raimundus de Sabunde, a Popish Author, is large in his expressions to this
purpose, That man being now corrupt, and made quite contrary to what he was at
first, cannot pay that which he owes unto God; cannot love, fear, honor, and
obey God as he ought: and that yet nevertheless the debt still remains, this
is still due unto God, and man is not excused, because though he be not able,
yet he himself is the cause of his inability, and it is his own fault that he
is not able.

After the allegation of these places of Scriptures, the Marquess adds, that
the Ancient Fathers are of their Opinion, viz. in point of Free Will, and he
cites Eusebius. Caesar. de praep. l. 1. c. 7. Hill. de Trinit. Aug. l. 1. ad Simpl.
q. 4. Ambr. in Luke 12. Chrysostom. hom. 19. in Genesis Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 72. Cyrill.
in Ioh. l. 4. c. 7.

Now for diverse of the Ancient Fathers, and namely for Austine, (whom the
Marquess alleges against us, and who indeed is chiefly to be looked at in
this Controversy, as having most occasion to declare himself in it, by reason
of the Pelagian Heresy which arose in his time) I have sufficiently showed
before how far they are from compliance with our Adversaries.

But to come to a particular examination of the Authors and places that are
cited. First Eusebius, in the place mentioned, has nothing at all (that I can
find) about Free Will, the whole Chapter being de Phoenicum Theologia, about
the Divinity of the Phoenicians.

Hilary is so cited, that there is no looking after him; for he wrote twelve
books of the Trinity, and here he is only cited, de Trin. 1. of the Trinity,
but in which of the twelve Books he says any thing to this purpose, is not
mentioned.

As for Austine, that which the Marquess (I presume) intended, is, lib. 1. ad
Simplic. quaest. 2. not q. 4. for there are but two Questions answered in the
first Book; in the second Book indeed there are more then four Questions, but
nothing about Free Will. In the first Book, and second Question, there is
something that may seem to make for the Opinion of the Marquess, but much
more is there, which does indeed make against it; indeed, so much, that though
Bellarmine cite diverse passages out of Austine for proof of Free Will, yet he
was more cautious (it seems) then to cite any thing out of that which Austine
wrote about it to Simplicianus.

Let us hear what Austine himself, in his Retractations (wherein he did review
all his Works) says concerning his books written to Simplicianus, and
concerning that very Question; in answer whereunto he has much about
Free Will: In the solution of which question (says In cujus quaestionis
solutione laboratum est quidem pro libero arbitrio voluntatis humanae, sed
vicit Dei gratia. Aug. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 1.
he) man's Free Will was much labored for, but the Grace of God did overcome.
And this will clearly appear by perusing the Book it self, and the question
handled in it. The question is about the meaning of those words, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated, and the rest that follow, Romans 9.

Now among other things that Austine says, there is this, which (as I
conceive) the Marquess Noluit ergo Esau, and non cucurrrit, sed and si
voluisset, and cucurrisset, Dei adjutorio perveniflet, qui ei etiam velle, and
currere praestaret, nisi vocatione contempta reprobus fieret. Aliter enim Deus
praestat ut velimus, aliter quod voluerimus. Ut velimus enim, and suum esse
voluit, and nostrum; suum vocando, nostrum sequendo. Quod autem voluerimus,
solus praestat, id est, posse been agere, and semper beat vivere. Aug. ad
Simplic. lib. 1. quaest. 2.
aimed at, Esau was not willing, and did not run; but if he had been willing,
and had run, by the help of God he had obtained; God would have given him both
to will, and to run, except by contemning Gods Call he would be a Reprobate.
For God does otherwise give us, that we may will, then he does give us that
which we have willed. For that we may will, God would have both to be his work,
and ours: his by Calling, ours by Following when we are called. But that which
we have willed, God alone does give, that is, to be able to do well, and for
ever to live happily.

Here, I confess, Austine does seem to show himself a patron of Free Will,
and we could not easily judge otherwise of him, if we should look merely upon
these words, and take them as his positive sentence. But if we consider what
Austine says both before, and after, we shall see that he spoke thus rather by
way of objection, then by way of determination. Before these words he says
thus, A wheel does not therefore run Non ideo been currit rota ut rotunda sit,
sed quia rotunda est: sic nemo propterea been operatur, ut accipiat gratiam,
sed quia accepit. Ang. Ibid.
well, that it may be round, but because it is round. So no man does therefore
work well, that he may receive grace, but because he has received it. Austine
therefore was not of that mind, that Esau of himself, by his free will, could
have been willing, and have run; or that any, when he is called, and incited by
Grace, can by the power of Free Will follow, and obey, but it is grace that
must work this in him.

To this purpose again before the words objected, If (says Austine) Jacob did
therefore Si ergo Jacob ideo crededit, quia voluit, non ei Deus donavit fidem,
sed eam sibi ipse volendo praestitit, and habuit aliquid, quod non accepit.
Aug. Ibid.
believe, because he would, then God did not bestow faith on him, but he by
willing did afford it unto himself, and so he had something which he received
not. Which is contrary to the words of the Apostle, What have thou, that thou
have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. But a little after those words that seem to
make for Free Will, Austine expresses himself more fully: For having cited
that of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that works in you, both to will, and to do of his
good pleasure, he adds, The Apostle there sufficiently shows, that a Ubi
satis ostendit etiam ipsam bonam voluntatem in nobis operante Deo fieri. Nam si
propterea solum dictum est, Non volentis, neque currentis, sed miserentis est
Dei, quia voluntas hominis sola non sufficit, ut just recteque vivatur, nisi
adjuvetur misericordia Dei; potest and hoc modo dici, Igitur non miserentis est
Dei, sed volentis est hominis, quia misericordia Dei sola non sufficit, nisi
consensus nostrae voluntatis addatur. At illud manifestum est, frustra nos
velle, nisi Deus misereatur. Illud nescio quomodo dicatur, frustra Deum
misereri, nisi nos velimus. Si enim Deus misereatur, etiam volumus: ad eandem
quippe misericordiam pertinet, ut velimus. Deus enim est, qui operatur in nobis
and velle, and operari pro bona voluntate. Aug. Ibid.
good will it self is wrought in us by God. For if therefore only it be said,
(Romans 9.) It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy, because the will of man alone is not sufficient, that he
may justly, and rightly, except it be helped by the mercy of God; then by this
reason it may be said. It is not of God that shows mercy, but of man that
wills, because the mercy of God alone is not sufficient, unless the consent
of our will be ad ded. But that is manifest, that we will in vain, except God
show mercy. This I know not how it can be said, that God does show mercy in
vain, except we be willing. For if God show mercy, then we are willing; seeing
it belongs to that same mercy to make us willing. For it is God that works in
us both to will, and to do of his good pleasure.

Again a little after, having said by way of objection, Free Will avails
much; he Liberum voluntatis arbitrium plurimum valet: imo vero, est quidem, sed
in venundatis sub peccato quid valet? Aug Ibid.
answers, Nay, it is indeed, but in those, that are sold under sin (as all
are till they be fred by Grace) what does it avail?

And again, when those things delight us, Cum ergo nos ea delectant, quibus
proficiamus ad Deum, inspiratur hoc, and praebetur gratia Dei, non nutu nostro,
and industria, aut operum meritis comparatur; quia ut sit nutus voluntatis, ut
sit industria studii, ut sint opera charitate ferventia, ille tribuit, ille
largitur. Aug. Ibid.
whereby we profit toward God, this is inspired, and given unto us by the
grace of God, it is not gotten by our consent, industry, or the merits of our
works: because the consent of the will, the industry of endeavor, and works
fervent with charity, are all the gift of God. Thus then it is most manifest,
that in the place pointed at by the Marquess, Austine was most far from
maintaining such a Free Will, as we oppose. There is also a passage in Austines
* Quamvis sit in cujusque potestate quid velit, non est tamen in cujusquam
potestate quid possit. Aug. lib. 2 ad Simpli, quaest. 1.
second book to Simplicianus, quaest. 1. which may seem to make against us,
viz. That to will any thing, is in the power of every one, but to be able to
do any thing, is not in the power of any. But let Austine explain himself, and
show his own meaning; and that he does Quod ideo dictum est, quia non dicimus
esse in potestate nostra, nisi quod cum volumus, fit, ubi prius, and maxim est
ipsum velle. Sine ullo quippe intervallo temporis praesto est voluntas ipsa cum
volumus: sed hanc quoque ad been vivendum desuper accipimus potestatem, cum
praeparatur voluntas a Domino. Aug. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 1.
in his Retractations; That (says he) was spoken, because we do not say,
that any thing is in our power, but that which is done when we will. Where
first, and chiefly is to will it self. For immediately without any distance of
time the will it self is present, when we will. But this power also to live
well, we receive from above, when the will is prepared of the Lord. Thus
careful was that good Father to prevent the mistaking of his words, lest any
should think that he did ascribe any thing to the power of Free Will, in that
which is good.

So much for Austine; the next Father alleged is Ambrose, who in the place
cited, viz. in Luke 12. has nothing above Free Will, that I can find. After
him follows Chrysostom, who indeed in the place, that is alleged, goes far
in his expressions concerning Free Will, as Quia ergo liberi arbitrii esse
nostram naturam fecit omnium Dominus, ipse quidem, quae sua sunt, omnia pro sua
misericordia semper exhibet. -- Et necessitatem utique non imponit, sed
congruis remediis appositis totum jacere in aegrotantis sententia dimittit.
Chrysostom. Hom. 19. in Genesis
if God only did afford means, and so leave it in the power of man to use
them, or not, as he pleases.

If therefore I except against his testimony in this point, I have no mean men
of the Church of Rome to bear me out. I know Hunc patrem nobis Calvinus
libenter concedit, quod ei iminus visus sit in liberi arbitrii viribus
praedicandis. At imperitiam suam operte prodit, etc. Bell. de great. et lib.
arb. l. 5. c. 25.
Bellarmine seems to take it as a matter of great advantage, that Calvin
stands not here so much upon Chrysostom, as one that did too much extol the
power of Free Will. But was this only Calvines judgment of Chrysostom? Did
not some of the Romanists themselves also think thus of him? S. Chrysostomus
nonnunquam vires nostri liberi arbitrii mirum in modum extollit, loquendo quasi
iper hyperbolen ex contentione impugnandi Manicheorum, and gentilium errores
etc. Alvar. de auxil. disp. 22. Sect. 33.
S. Chrysostom (says Alvarez a Romish Archbishop, and a great Schoole-man)
sometimes does wonderfully extol the power of our Free Will, speaking as it
were hyperbolically, whiles he strives to impugn the errors of the Manichees,
and of the Gentiles, who held that Man is still by nature (as he was first
created of God) or that by the violence of fate he is compelled to sin. So
also Iansenius (a Romish Bishop, to whom also Alvarez does refer us) having
mentioned something of Euthymius, and Quae dicta a Chrysostomi locutione in
variis locis fere desumpta, nisi caute legantur, and intelligantur, praebere
possunt occasionem erroris Pelagii, qui asseruit initium fidei, and
justificationis esse ex nobis, consummationem vero ex Deo, etc. Chrysostomus
sane optim e sentiens de Dei gratia, etc. tamen multa scripsit contra
Manichaeum in commendationem liberi arbitrii, pleraque illi tribuens sine
commemoratione gratiae Divinae, quae non sic scripsisset, si praevidere
potuisset exorituram Pelagii haeresin, quae tum adhuc non erat exorta, vel illi
cognita. Iansen. Concord. cap. 59.
Theophylact, he says, that those passages were taken from Chrysostom, and
that except they be warily read, and understood, they may give occasion of
falling into the error of Pelagius, who held that the beginning of faith, and
justification is from our selves, and the consummation from God, etc.
Chrysostom (he says) meant well concerning the grace of God, yet he wrote
many things against the Manichees in commendation of Free Will, attributing
most things unto it without making any mention of Gods Grace; which things he
would not have written in that manner, if he could have foreseen that
Pelagius his heresy would arise, which as then was not risen, or not known
unto men. Thus were see how these Authors, though they excuse Chrysostomes
meaning, yet dislike his expression. But some amongst those of the Roman Church
have gone further in their censure of Chrysostom, as Quid am respondent, etc.
Chrysostomum, cum intelligere non valeret, quanam ratione libertas arbitrii
nostri salva posset consistere, si Deus sua gratia nostram praeveniret
electionem, credidisse, electionem, qua primo acceptamus bona, eaque facere
decernimus, esse priorem ipsa Dei gratia, postea vero subsequi gratiam, qua
adjuvamur, and nobis coaperatur Deus. Alvar. loc. citat.
Alvarez relates, viz. that he held, that election, whereby we first accept
those things, that are good, and resolve to do them, is before the grace of
God, and that then grace does follow after, whereby we are helped, and God does
cooperate with us. To this pur-pose I find Tolet, a Jesuit first, and
afterward Toletus in Joh. 6. agnoscit Chrysostomi hanc esse sententiam,
hominem per liberum arbitrium seipsum facere dignum gratia; eandem esse
Cyrilli, aliorum etiam doctorum, maxim Graecorum. Cbam. tom. 3. l. 3. c. 16.
Sect. 11.
a Cardinal, cited by Chamier, though I have not his Book now at hand to
peruse. And this may suffice for answer to Chrysostom, yea and to those other
two Fathers also, that follow, viz. Irenaeus and Cyrill, the latter of these
being by name, and both of them implicitly excepted against by some of the
Romanists themselves, as appears by what is cited in the margent, as also by
the reasons alleged by Alvarez, and Iansenius, why Chrysostom did exceed at
least in his expressions, viz. because he was so earnest against the Manichees
and others, and knew nothing of the contrary error of the Pelagians, which
reasons might transport the other Fathers also. It is true (says Alvarez) that
S. Chrysostom, and other Fathers, that wrote before the Heresy of Pelagius
was risen up, did speak Verum est, quod S. Chrysostomus, and alii Patres qui
ante exortam haeresin Pelagii scripserunt, pauca de gratia Christi, and plurima
pro confirmanda arbitrii liberate contra haeresin Manichaeorum docuerunt, quod
and S. Augustinus advertit, etc. Alvar. disp. 22. Sect. 22.
little of the grace of Christ, and much for the confirming of the liberty of
the will against the heresy of the Manichees. He adds that Austine also in
his writings against the Pelagians did observe this, and he cites his words to
this purpose. Yea, he shows that Austine in his Retractations was feign to
answer in like manner for himself, when as the Pelagians did make use of his
former writings against the Manichees, thereby to maintain their opinion
concerning the power of Free Will in opposition to the necessity and efficacy
of Gods Grace. Thus likewise Iansenius says, that after the Pelagian heresy
was risen, Itaque Augustinus exorta jam haeresi Pelagiana, exactius and
expressius locutus est de Dei gratia, etc. Jansen. concord. cap. 59.
then Austine spoke more exactly, and more expressly of the Grace of God. The
Jesuit Ammonius, Cyrillus, Theophylactus, and Euthymius, respondent non omnes
trahi, quia non omnes digni sunt. Quod nimis affine est Pelagianorum errori.
Quasi vero homo antequam per gratiam ad gratiam trahatur, mereri possit
gratia^, quod est dignum fieri, qui trahatur. Maldon. in Job. 6. 44.
Maldonate does tell us, that Ammonius, and Cyrill, Theophylact, and Euthymius
so expound that, No man comes unto me except the Father draw him, that they
come too nigh the error of Pelagius, viz. that all are not drawn, because all
are not worthy, as if (says he) before a man be drawn by grace unto grace, he
could deserve grace, which is to be worthy to be drawn.

But though Irenaeus, and Cyrill be liable to these exceptions, yet I see
nothing in the Si igitur non in nobis esset facere haec, aut non facere, quam
causam habebat Apostolus, and multo prius ipse Dominus consilium dare, quaedam
quidem facere, a quibusdam vero abstinere? Iren. lib. 4. cap. 72.
places cited by the Marquess, wherein they make against us. Irenaeus says
thus, If it were not in us to do these things, or not to do them, why did the
Apostle, and before him the Lord himself counsel us to do some things, and to
abstain from other things? Here Irenaeus indeed shows that it is in us to
do, or not to do, but he does not say that it is in nobis ex nobis, in us of
our selves, by the power of our Free Will to do things truly good. He adds
immediately, that man from the beginning is free, as God, after whose likeness
he was made, is free. Now this Sed quoniam liberae sententiae ab initio est
homo, and liberae sententiae est Deus, ad cujus similitudinem factus est,
semper consilium datur ei continere bonum, etc. Ibid.
does rather make against our adversaries then for them; for it shows, that
the freedom of man's will does not consist in this, that he is free either to
do good, or to do evil, seeing that God is not free in that manner, he
being only free to do good, but altogether incapable of doing evil. So man
being determined by grace to that, which is good, yet is free, because not
constrained nor forced against his will, in the doing of it: and so on the
other side he is free in doing evil, though of himself without grace he can
do nothing but evil. As for the other Fathers, viz. Cyrill, that which he
says in the place alleged, is this, we cannot according to the doctrine of
the Church, Non possumus secundum Ecclesiae veritatisque dogmata, liberam
potestatem hominis, quod liberum arbitrium appellatur, ullo modo negare. Cyr.
in Job. l. 4. c. 7.
and of the truth, by any means deny the free power of man, which is called
Free Will. This is nothing against us, who do not (as has been showed
before) simply deny Free Will, but only so as our adversaries of the Church of
Rome do maintain it. To that which is in controversy betwixt us, and our
adversaries, Cyrill here says nothing, and therefore his testimony is not to
the purpose. And so much for Free Will.

In the next place, we hold it possible (says the Marquess) to Page 65.
keep the Commandments; you say it is impossible. We have Scripture for it.
Luke 1. 6. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless. And 1 John 5. 3. His
Commandments are not grievous.

For keeping the Commandments we hold, not that it is simply impossible, but
that according to that measure of grace, which God does ordinarily bestow upon
men here in this life, it is not possible to keep them, viz. so as not to be
guilty of the breach of them. If a man could fully and perfectly keep the
Commandments, then he should be without sin; for sin is nothing else but a
transgression of the Law, as Saint John defines it, 1 John 3. 4. But the
Scripture shows that no man in this life is so perfect as to be without sin.
There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not, says
Solomon, Eccles. 7. 20. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us, says Saint John, 1 John 1. 8. In many things we
offend all, says Saint James, Iam. 3. 2. And Christ has taught all to pray
for forgiveness of sins, Mat. 6. 12. which supposes that all, even the best
that live upon earth, have need of it, that they are guilty of sins, and so
consequently come short of the full, and perfect keeping of Gods Commandments.
Bellarmine thinks to elude these Solida responsio est, peccata venialia, sine
quibus non vivimus, non esle peccata simpliciter, sed imperfecte, and secundum
quid, neque esse contra legem, sed praeter legem, etc. Bell. de Iustif. lib. 4
cap. 14.
places, by saying, That we cannot indeed live without Venial sins, but that
Venial sins are not sins simply, but only imperfectly, and in some
respect; and that they are not against the Law, but only besides it.

But first, Venial sins are against the Law, as being transgressions of it;
for else they are no sins at all, that being the very nature of sin, to be
a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.

2. There are no sins so venial, but that without the mercy of God in Christ
they are damnable. It being written, Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things, that are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10.

And thirdly, no man living upon earth is free from such sins, as that he is
able to stand, if God shall enter into judgment with him. If thou Lord
should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? Psalm. 130. 3. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant; for in thy fight shall no man living be justified,
Psalm. 143. 2.

The Fathers here are on our side; Hierome having cited that of our Savior,
Out of the hearts of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, thefts, covetousness, etc. adds, Let him come forth, that Procedat,
qui in cord suo haec non esse testetur, and plenam in corpore isto mortali
justitiam confitebor. Hier. dial. advers. Pelag. l. 2.
can testify that these things are not in his heart, and I will confess that
full and perfect righteousness may be in this mortal body. Who is there
(says Leo) so free from fault, that there Quis invenitur ita immunis a culpa,
ut in co non habeat vel justitia quod arguat, vel misericordia quod remittat?
Leo Ser. 7. de solen. Epiphan. Nihil peccare, solius est Dei. -- Qui carnem
gerit, culpae obnoxious est. Ambros. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
is not in him that, which either justice may condemn, or mercy may pardon? In
no thing to sin, is proper unto God, says Ambrose. He means that no man in
this life can attain unto that perfection; for so he adds presently after, He
that bears about him flesh (a mortal body) is subject unto sin.

Thus also Austine, Who is there (says he) Quis est in hac vita sic mundus, ut
non sit magis magisque mundandus? Aug. tract. 80. in Ioh.
in this life so clean, but that he has need to be made yet more and more
clean? And again, The Church (says he) in this life is so cleansed, not that
they that are justified have no mainders of sin in them, but that they Sic
mundatur Ecclesia in hac vita, non ut justificati nullas in se habeant peccati
reliquias, sed ut maculam criminis, and rugam non habeant falsitatis. Aug.
contra Iul. l. 4. c. 3.
have not any spot of criminal offense, nor any wrinkle of falsehood.
Accordingly speaks Gregory, In this life (says he) many are without criminal
offenses, but none In hac vita multi sine crimine, nullus vero esse sine
peccato valet. -- Nonnulla peccata animam polluunt, quam crimina extinguunt.
Greg iu Job. lib. 21. cap. 10.
can be without sin. And presently after he says, that these sins, which
none can be without, do pollute the soul, though they do not destroy it.
Bernard interprets that of Saint John, He that is born of God Non peccat, id
est, non permanet in peccato. -- Sive non peccat, id est, tantundem est, ac si
non peccet, pro eo scilicet quod non imputatur ei peccatum. Bern. in Septuag^s.
Ser. 1.
sins not, 1 John 3. 9. thus, He sins not, that is, he does not continue
in sin. Or thus, He sins not, that is, it is as much as if he did not
sin, because sin is not imputed unto him. And elsewhere he expressly
yields Nec latuit praeceptorem, praecepti pondus hominum excedere vires, sed
judicavit utile ex hoc ipso suae illos insufficientiae admoneri, and ut scirent
sane ad quem justitiae finem niti pro viribus oporteret. Ergo mandando
impossibilia non praevaricatores homines fecit, sed humiles, ut omne os
obstruatur, and subditus fiat omnis mundus Deo, quia ex operibus legis non
justificabitur omnis caro coram illo. Accipientes quippe mandatum, and
sentientes defectum clamabimus in coelum, and miserebitur nostri Deus; and
sciemus in illo die, quia non ex operibus justitiae quae fecimus nos, sed
secundum suam misericordiam salvos nos fecit. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 50.
that Gods Commandments are more then any can fully and perfectly observe. The
Commander (says he) was not ignorant, that the command did exceed men's
strength, but he judged it profitable, that they should be admonished of their
insufficiency, and that they should know, to what perfection of righteousness
they ought to endeavor as they are able; Therefore by commanding things
impossible, he did not make men prevaricatours, but humble, that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may be subject unto God: because by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified before him. For receiving the
Commanment, and feeling a defect, we shall cry toward Heaven, and God will
have mercy on us; and we shall know in that day, that not by the works of
righteousness that we have done, but according to his mercy he has saved us.

Thus also some of the Church of Rome, that have written since Luthers time,
have acknowledged, that none in this life are free from sin, nor able to
abide the judgment of God by their own righteousness, which is in effect to
acknowledge that none do perfectly keep Gods Commandments. Thus Multum
quidem peccatorum habent adhuc, sed nihil damnationis, quia apud Deum mundi
reputantur propter fidem in Christum. Ferus in Ioh. 13 10.
Ferus speaking of such as are justified, says that they have indeed yet many
sins, but no condemnation, because they are reputed clean for their faith in
Christ. Nemo enim quantumvis sanctus, immunis est a peccato, quamdiu vivit in
hoc seculo. -- Opus igitur habent quotidiana purgatione. Ferus in Ioh. 5. 2.
And again, No man (says he) how holy soever, is free from sin, so long as
he lives in this World. Therefore all have need to be purged daily. So also
Quare cum nemo sit perfect justus apud Deum, justi and puri judicii metus
omnes terrere debet. Genebr. in Psa. 142. (vel. 143) 2.
Genebrard, Seeing (says he) that none is perfectly righteous before God, the
fear of his just and pure judgment ought to affright all. That is his comment
upon the words of David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 143. 2. Now for those two places of Scripture, which the Marquess
alleges, they come far short of proving that possibility of keeping Gods
Commandments, which we deny. As for that Luke 1. 6. it shows indeed that
Zacharias and Elizabeth had respect unto all Gods Commandments as all ought to
have, Psalm. 119. 6. but it does not show, that they did perfectly keep all
Gods Commandments. Hierome long ago answered the Pelagians objecting Justi
appellantur, non quod omni vitio careant, sed quod majori patte virtutum
commendentur. Hieron. adv. Pelagiau. ad Ctesiphont.
these very persons, and others spoken of in Scripture as righteous, that they
are called righteous, not that they were without fault, but because they were
for most part virtuous. And I marvel how any can allege the example of
Zacharias, as one that did perfectly keep the Commandments, (though I know
Bellarmine Bell. de Iustific. lib. 4. cap. 11.
to this purpose does allege it) when as in that very Chapter, viz. Luke 1. is
related how he sinned in not believing the message, which by an Angel God
sent unto him, and how he was punished, and became dumb a long time for it.
The other place, viz. 1 Ioh. 5. 3. only shows that the Children of God do
willingly and cheerfully obey the will of God, not that they do fully and
perfectly obey it. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, says David,
Psalm. 119. 14. I will delight my self in thy statutes. v. 1. 6. The Law of thy
mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver. v. 72. How sweet are
thy words unto my taste? yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. v. 103. More to be
desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold; sweeter also then Honey,
and the Honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. yet presently he adds, who can understand
his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. verse. 12. And elsewhere he
complains, saying, Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up: they are more then the hairs of my head. Psalm. 40. 12. And
again, Iniquities prevail against me. Psalm. 65. 3. And (as before noted) he
cries out, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, etc. Psalm. 143. 2. The
History of his life recorded in Scriptures evidently shows, that though Gods
Commandments were as little grievous unto him, as to any, yet he came short
of a full and perfect observance of them.

The Marquess adds, The Fathers are for us. Orig. Hom. 9. in Ios. S. Cyrill
lib. 4. contra Julian. S. Hill. in Psalm. 1 18. S. Hieron. lib. 3. contra Pelag.
S. Basil. But I have showed already what little cause our adversaries have in
this point to boast of the Fathers, and that both Hierome, whom the Marquess
here cites, and also diverse others assert the same that we do. To those
before mentioned I may add another of these here alleged against us, viz.
Propheta in corpore positus loquitur, and neminem viventium scit sine peccato
esse posse. Unum meminisle, qui peccatum non fecit, neque dolus inventus est in
ore ejus. Hill. in Ps. 118. vel 119. v. 39.
Hilarie, who in Psalm. 118. says that none living is without sin, only one
(viz. Christ) did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

Therefore when as Latum igitur mandatum Dei est, etc. ut non difficile sit, si
voluntas adsit, praecepto Dei obtemperare, Hill. in Psalm. 118. (vel. 119.) 96.
Hilarie says upon those words Psalm 119. 96. thy Commandment is exceeding
broad, that it is no hard matter, if will be present, to obey Gods
Commandment: he speaks of such an obedience, not which is every way complete
and perfect, (for then it should be easy to live without sin) but which God
will accept, as he will that which is sincere, though it be imperfect.
Otherwise even upon those very words Latum plane est (mandatum) quod in
infinitum cognitionem humanae ignorantiae excedit. Hill. Ibid.
Hilarie shows that man cannot perfectly obey Gods Commanments, saying, that
they are so broad, that they infinitely exceed the shallowness of man's
knowledge. If man's knowledge cannot reach to the full extent of Gods
Commandments, much less can his practice do it. So that which Hierome says,
though it may seem to be against us, yet indeed it is not. God (says he) has
commanded things possible. (So the Pelagian Deus possibilia mandavit; hoc nulli
dubium est. Hier. advers. Pelag. l. 3.
objected, he answers) this none doubts of. He grants it; but how? No
otherwise, for any thing I can see, then as we do grant it, viz. that God, if
he please can give such a measure of grace unto men, as to enable them
perfectly to do all that is commanded.

But Sed quia homines possibilia non faciunt, iccirco omnis mundus subditus est
Deo, and indiget misericordia ejus; aut certe si ostendere potueris, qui
universa compleverit, tunc poteris demonstrare esse hominem, qui non indiget
misericordia Dei. -- Monstra factum esse de praeterito, aut certe nunc fieri.
Hier. Ibid.
Hierome immediately after shows, that none either does, or ever did so, and
that therefore all are guilty before God, and stand in need of his mercy. If
(says he) thou can show any, that has fulfilled all things required then
thou can show one that does not needs Gods merey, show that this has been,
or that it now is. So when Cyrill says that even that precept, Thou shall not
covet, may be fulfilled by grace, he does not oppose us, nor we him. For we
doubt not but God is able to give grace whereby to fulfill it; but we deny
that any (only Christ excepted) ever had such grace as whereby to fulfill it.
Basil is cited at large, no place being noted where he says any thing about
this point; only in Bellarmine I find that upon those words Bell. de Justifi.
lib. 4. cap. 12.
Take heed to thy self he says, that it is a wicked thing to say that the
precepts of the Spirit are impossible. Which we yield; so far forth as any
have the Spirit, they may perform them: but none have the Spirit in such full
measure as to be able fully to perform whatsoever is commanded. Origin in the
place cited, compares them to Women, who say that they cannot keep Gods
Commandments. Which must be understood of keeping them so as to have respect
unto them, and to study and endeavor to keep them. For otherwise if we speak
of an exact and perfect keeping of the Commandments, both men and women, even
the best upon Earth, are far from it. For the flesh lusts against the
spirit, (says the Apostle) and the spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that you cannot do the things that you would.
Gal. 5. 17.

We hold (says the Marquess) faith cannot justify without Page 65.
works. Ye say, good works are not absolutely necessary unto salvation. We
have Scripture for what we say. 1 Cor. 13. 2. Though I have all Faith, and
have no Charity, I am nothing. And James 2. 24. By Works a Man is justified,
and not by Faith only.

Answ. Protestants in opposition to them of the Church of Rome hold that Faith
alone does justify, and that Works do not concur with Faith unto
justification. Yet withal they hold that Faith which does justify, is not
alone without works. Jo. Calvinus in Antidoto Concilii ad can. 11. Sess 6.
Sola, inquit, sides est quae justificat, sed sides tamen quae justificat, non
est sola. Sicut calor solis solus est, qui terram calefacit, ipse tamen calor
non est solus in sole, sed cum splendore. Idem docent Philippus tum in locis,
tum in Apologia confess. Brentius in Catechismo, Chemnitius in Exam. Concilii,
and alii. Bell de justif. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Bellarmine confesses that Calvin has these very words, It is Faith alone
that does justify, but yet Faith which does justify, is not alone. As the
heat of the Sun alone is that which does heat the Earth, yet heat is not
alone in the Sun, but there is light also joined with it. And he adds that
Melancthon, Brentius, Chemnitius, and other Protestants teach the same thing.

Therefore by Bellarmines own confession Protestants are no enemies unto good
works. Neither are they any whit injurious unto them in excluding them from
having a share in justification, as the Romanists are injurious unto Faith in
making works copartners with it in that respect. We conclude (says S. Paul)
That a Man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law. Romans 3. 28. And
in the next Chapter the Apostle proves by the example of Abraham that
justification is by Faith without Works. For what says the Scripture, Abraham
believed God and it was counted unto him for righteousness. Romans 4. 3. He
confirms it also by the words of David; Even as David also describes the
blessedness of the man, to whom God imputes righteousness without Works,
saying, blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. Romans 4. 6, 7, 8.
Men's works are imperfect, and so is all that righteousness of man, that is
inherent in him, as has been showed before: and therefore by his own works,
and his own righteousness can none be justified. By the deeds of the Law shall
no flesh be justified. Romans 3. 20. Bellarmine would have the Bell. de Iustif.
lib. 1. cap. 19.
Apostle, when he excludes Works from justification, only to understand such
works as are done by the mere knowledge of the Law without grace. But this
cannot be his meaning.

For, 1. when David cried out, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O
Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143. 2. he
shows that works, whatsoever they be, are unable to justify a man in the
sight of God. For it were most absurd and irrational to imagine that David
then does only deprecate Gods entering into judgment with him in respect of
the Works, which he did without the assistance of Gods grace.

2. The Apostle proves that justification is by Faith without Works, by that
of David, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Romans 4.
6, 7, 8. Now the best man that is upon Earth, has need of this; that his
iniquities may be forgiven, his sins covered, and his transgressions not
imputed unto him, seeing there is no man (as I have showed before) but
iniquities, sins and transgressions are found in him. Therefore though a man
be regenerate and sanctified, yet his works are not such, as that he can be
justified by them.

3. The Apostle Gal. 3. 10. proves that none can be justified by the deeds of
the Law, because it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Now no man though
endued with grace, and that in great measure, does continue in all things that
the Law requires, as has also been showed before. Therefore Works as well
with grace, as without grace are unable to justify. But when our adversaries
speak of justification, they equivocate, making it indeed the same with
sanctification. Nova haec, Whitakere, theologia est, nos per gratiam infusam,
vitae novitatem, ac sanctitatem adipisci, minime tamen justificari. At quae te,
obsecro, Scriptura docuit justificationem a sanctificatione distinguere* Dur.
coutra Whitak.
Dureus the Jesuit calls this new Divinity, to say, that by grace infused
into us, we get newness of life, and sanctification, but yet are not thereby
justified. And he asks what Scripture does teach us to distinguish
justification from sanctification. Truly, I think that these two, viz,
justification and sanctification, are sufficiently distinguished, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
But you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified, in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. There the Apostle shows that
they were washed, viz. both from the stain of sin by sanctification, which
was wrought in them by the Spirit of God infusing grace into them, and also
from the guilt of sin by justification, which they obtained by faith in the
Lord Jesus.

Besides, the Scripture opposes justification to condemnation, and shows
that to justify is as much as to absolve and acquit from guilt, to account and
pronounce righteous. Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just; even they both are an abomination to the Lord. There to
justify and to condemn are opposed-one to the other; and to justify is to
repute just, not to make just; for so it should be no abomination to justify
the wicked, but a very good work. For he which converteth a sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, etc. James 5. 20. So Isai. 5.
23. They are taxed, who justify the wicked for a reward. Thus also God is said
to justify, Isai. 50. 8. He is near that justifies me, who will contend
with me? And Romans 8. 33, 34. who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
died, etc. But (says Quando Deus justificat impium, declarando justum, facit
etiam justum, quoniam judicium Dei secundum veritatem est. Bell. de Iustif. l.
2. c. 3.
Bellarmine) when God does justify the wicked, by declaring him just, he does
also make him just: because the judgment of God is according to truth. I
answer, true it is, whom God does justify them also he does sanctify, yet it
does not follow that these two, viz. to justify, and to sanctify are one and
the same. David was a man truly sanctified, yet he knew and acknowledged that
his righteousness, whereby he was sanctified, was not such, as that he could
be justified by it, and therefore cried, Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, etc. Psalm. 143. 2. And, Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven,
etc. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. yet is Gods judgment nevertheless according to truth,
when he accounts those righteous, and imputes no sin unto them, who still
have sin in them, and so cannot be justified by their own righteousness,
because they whom God justifies, by faith are united unto Christ, as members
of his Body, and so Christ's righteousness is their righteousness, and though
not in themselves, yet in Christ they are completely righteous. He is called
The Lord our righteousness. Ier. 23. 6. And says the Apostle, In him ye are
complete. Col. 2. 10. wherefore he desired to be found in him, not having his
own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness, which is of God by faith. Phil. 3. 9. And thus we
hold that faith does justify, not formally, but instrumentally, not because of
it self, but because of its object, viz. Christ and his righteousness, which
faith apprehends and applies. For by faith we receive Christ. Ioh. 1. 12.
And Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3. 17. Diverse of the
Church of Rome since the beginning of Reformation, in this great point touching
justification have inclined to us. Ferus I cited before, saying Page 136.
that Believers have yet much sin, but no condemnation, because thorough
faith in Christ they are reputed clean. Cardinal Contarenus his works I have
not, neither can I allege him of mine own knowledge, but his words as I find
them cited by Amesius against Bellarmine lib. 6. de Iustif. cap. 1 Thessalonians. 1.
another, are very full for our purpose. Because (says he) we come unto a
twofold righteousness by faith, a righteousness inherent in us, etc. and the
righteousness of Christ given, and imputed to us, in that we are ingraffed
into Christ, and put on Christ, it remains to inquire, whether of these we
must rely upon, that we may be justified before God, that is accounted holy
and just. I do altogether hold, that it is piously and Christianly said, that
we ought to reply, as on a thing that is stable, and does surely support us,
on the righteousness of Christ given unto us, and not on that holiness and
grace, which is inherent in us. For this righteousness of ours is but
inchoated and imperfect; which cannot preserve us so, but that in many things
we offend, and sin continually. Therefore for this righteousness of ours we
cannot be accounted righteous and good in the sight of God, so as it should
become the sons of God to be good and holy. But the righteousness of Christ
given unto us is true and perfect righteousness, which does altogether please
the eyes of God, in which there is nothing that may offend God, nothing which
cannot fully please him. On this therefore alone, as sure and stable, must we
rely, and for it alone must we believe that we are justified before God, that
is, accounted and called just. I see not why we should desire more in point of
justification then this amounts to. Pighius also a stout Champion of the Church
of Rome, is as full and express for that, which we make the formal cause of
justification, as any can Constat plane quae de nobis omnibus foret sententia,
si Deus voluisset districto nobiscum judicio agere: si non misericordissime
nobis succurrisset in filio, and nostra justitia vacuos ejus involvisset
justitia. Pigh. de fide and justifi. controv. 2.
be. It is clear (says he) what sentence we should all have, if God would
have dealt with us in strict judgment: if he had not most mercifully
succored us in his Son, and had not involved and wrapped us in his
righteousness, we having none of our own that will serve our turn. And
again, In him therefore are we justified, not in our selves; not In illo ergo
justificamur coram Deo, non in nobis; non nostra, sed illius justitia, quae
nobis cum illo communicantibus imputatur. Propriae justitiae inopes, extra nos
in illo docemur justitiam quaerere. Pigh. Ibid.
with our own, but with his righteousness, which by reason of our communion
with Him is imputed unto us. Being empty of our own righteousness we are
taught to seek righteousness out of our selves in him. In Christi autem
obedientia, quod nostra collocatur justitia, inde est, quod nobis illi
incorporatis, ac si nostra esset, accepta ea fertur, ita ut ca ipsa etiam nos
justi habeamur. Et velut ille quondam Jacob, quum nativitate primogenitus non
esset, sub habitu fratris occultatus, atque ejus vest indutus, quae odorem
optimum spirabat, seipsum insinuavit patri, ut sub aliena persona benedictionem
primo geniturae acciperet: Ita and nos sub Christi primo geniti fratris nostri
pretiosa puritate delitescere, bono ejus odore fragrare, ejus perfectione vitia
nostra sepeliri, and obtegi, atque ita nos piissimo patri ingerere, ut
justitiae benedictionem ab eodem assequamur necesse est. Pigh. ibid.
And again, That our righteousness is placed in Christ's obedience, it is from
hence, that we being incorporated into Him, it is reckoned as if it were ours,
so that because of it we are accounted righteous. And immediately he adds, that
as Jacob being clothed with the robes of his elder brother, obtained the
blessing of his Father: so we must be clothed with the righteousness of Christ
our elder brother, that God may bestow the blessing of justification upon us.

Justificat ergo nos Deus pater bonitate sua gratuita, qua nos in Christo
complectitur, dum eidem insertos innocentia and justitia Christi nos induit:
quae una ut vera, and perfecta est, quae Dei sustinere conspectum potest, ita
unam pro nobis sisti oportet tribunali Divini judicii, etc. Pigh. Ibid.
And again, God does justify us (says he) of his free-goodnes, whereby he
does embrace us in Christ, whiles that he clothes us being ingraffed into him
with Christ's innocence and righteousness; which as it is alone true and
perfect, able to endure the sight of God, so it alone must be presented for us
at the tribunal of Gods Judgment.

This, and much more to this purpose has Quoniam dissimulare non possumus,
hanc primam Doctrinae Christianae partem, obscuratam, quam illustratam magis, a
scholasticis, spinosis plerisque quaestionibus, and definitionibus, secundum
quas nonnulli primam in omnibus authoritatem sibi arrogantes, and de omnibus
facile pronuntiantes, fortassis etiam nostram hanc damnarent sententiam, qua
propriam, and quae ex suis operibus esset, coram Deo justitiam, derogamus
omnibus Adae filiis, and docuimus una Dei in Christo niti nos posse justitia,
una illa justos esse coram Deo, destitutos propria, nisi hoc ipsum
astruxissemus aliquanto diligentius, Pigh. Ibid.
Pighius, and he says that he could not dissemble that this prime part of
Christian Doctrine was rather obscured, then illustrated by the Schoolmen,
with thorny questions and definitions, and therefore he was the more diligent
in the handling of this point, showing that none of the sons of Adam can be
justified before God by their own righteousness, and their own works, but
that all must rely only on the righteousness of God in Christ, and that by it
alone they being destitute of a righteousness of their own, are righteous
before God. Pighius is so plain, and home in this point, that Bellarmine Bell.
de Iustif. l. 2. c. 1.
does censure him as erroneous in it. And yet so powerful and prevalent it
truth, that it extorted even from Bellarmine himself this confession, That
because of the uncertainty of a man's own righteousness, and Propter
incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae tutissimum est
fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere. Bell. de
Iustif, lib. 5. cap. 7.
the danger of vain glory it is most safe to repose all confidence only in
Gods Mercy and Goodness. By his own confession then it is most safe in matter
of justification to renounce Works, and to fly only to Faith in the Lord
Jesus. The ancient Fathers also give testimony to this truth. Hilarie has
these Hill. in Mat. can. 8.
very words, Fides sola iustificat, i. e. Faith alone does justify. Tanta est
justitia nostra in hac vita, ut potius remissione peccatorum constet, quam
perfectione virtutum. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 19. cap. 22.

Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam. Aug.
Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.

Quantumlibet rectus mihi videar, producis tu de thesauro tuo regulam, and
coaptas me ad eam, and pravus invenior. Aug in Psalm. 142. (vel 143.) 2.


Austine in effect says the same, when he says, Our righteousness in this
life is so great, that it consists rather in forgiveness of sins, then in
perfection of virtues. And so when he says, Woe even to the landable life of
men, if thou (O Lord) laying aside mercy shall enter into the examination of
it. To this purpose also is that which he says upon those words of David,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, etc. How right soever (says
he) I think my self, thou bring forth a rule out of thy treasure, and
triest me by it, and I am found crooked. Thus also Domine memorabor justitiae
tuae solius; ipsa enim est and mea. Nempe factus es mihi tu justitia a Deo.
Numquid mihi verendum, ne non una ambobus sufficiat? Non est pallium breve,
quod non possit operire duos. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 61.
Bernard, Lord (says he) I will make mention of thy righteousness only; for
it also is mine, seeing that thou of God art made unto me righteousness. Must
I fear lest this one righteousness will not suffice us both? No, it is not a
short cloak, that cannot cover two. And again, It is sufficient for me unto
all righteousness, to have him only propitious, Sufficit mihi ad omnem
justitiam solum habere propitium, cui soli peccavi, Non peccare Dei justitia
est, hominis justitia, indulgentia Dei. Ber. in Cant. Ser. 23.
against whom only I have sinned. Not to sin is Gods righteousness, man's
righteousness is Gods indulgence. Thus then in the point of justification we
have both Scriptures and Fathers: yea and diverse Papists also concurring with
us. As for the two places of Scripture alleged by the Marquess; the former,
viz. that 1 Corin. 13. 2. speaks not of justifying Faith, but of a Faith of
working miracles, as is clear by the words themselves being fully cited. which
run thus, Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have
not charity, I am nothing. (...), etc. Oecumen. 1 Cor. 13.
Oecumenius upon the place notes that by Faith there is not meant that Faith,
which is common to all Believers, but a Faith peculiar to such as had the gift
of working miracles. And though Recte Graeci eam intelligunt fidem, de qua cap.
13. Si habuere omnem fidem, etc. Graeci fidem signorum, and miraculorum
appellant. Et haec fides secundum se, tantum est gratia gratis data, hoc est,
ad aliorum utilitatem proprie concessa, etc. Estius ad 1 Cor. 12. 9.
Estius (a learned Romanist) in his Commentary upon the place seek to draw it
another way, yet commenting upon 1 Cor. 12. 9. he says that the Greek
Expositors do rightly understand it of that Faith, which is spoken of Chap.
13. If I have all Faith, etc. that is, of the Faith of signs, and miracles, as
they call it, which Faith (he says) is not properly a sanctifying grace, but
only such a grace as is given for the benefit of others.

The other place, viz. Jam. 2. 24. does seem to make against us, but indeed it
does not. For S. James saying that a man is justified by Works, and not by
Faith only, means only thus, as Non fide sterili, sed faecunda operibus
justificamur. Cajetan: in Iac. 2.
Cajetan himself does expound it, that we are not justified by a barren Faith,
but by a Faith, which is fruitful in good Works.

This appears to be his meaning by his whole discourse from verse. 14. to the
end of the Chapter, wherein he bends himself against those, who presume of
such a faith as is without works: and more specially, it may appear by the
verses immediately preceding, wherein he says, that Abraham was justified by
works, when he offered up Isaac; and that Faith wrought with his works, and
by works was Faith made perfect: and the Scripture was fulfilled, which says,
Abraham believed God, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. Now
this clearly shows that Abraham was justified by Faith, and not by works,
only his works did show, that his Faith was a true justifying Faith indeed,
and not, as it is in many that pretend and profess Faith, a vain show of
Faith, and a mere shadow of it. For that, which S. James cites, Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness, was, as
appears by the story in the book of Genesis, long before that Abraham offered
up Isaac; and by those very words Saint Paul proves, Romans 4. that we are
justified by Faith, and not by Works. Therefore when S. James says that by
Abraham's offering up of Isaac that Scripture was fulfilled, the meaning is,
that thereby it did appear that it was truly said of Abraham, that he
believed God, and it was counted unto him For righteousness, his readiness in
that work to obey God, did demonstrate that he believed God indeed, and that
his faith was of a right stamp. Thus also is it said, that by works faith was
made perfect, viz. even as the Lord said unto Paul, My strength is made perfect
in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9. that is, Gods strength does exercise it self, and
show how great it is, in man's weakness. So Abraham's works did show how great
his faith was; in this sense his works did make his faith perfect, not that
they did add any thing unto it, no more then man's weakness does add unto
Gods strength.

This opinion of yours (says the Marquess) S. Aug. de fide and oper. cap. 14.
says was an old heresy, in the Apostles time: and in the Preface of his
comment upon the 32. Psalm. he calls it the right way to hell, and damnation.
See Origan 5. to the Romans S. Hilar. chap. 7. in Mat. S. Ambr. 4. ad Heb.

Answ. Quare jam illud videamus, quod excutiendum est a cordibus religiosis, ne
mala securitate salutem suam perdant, si ad eam obtinendam sufficere solam
fidem putaverint, been autem vivere, and bonis operibus viam Dei tenere
neglexerint. Aug. de fid. and oper. c. 14.
Austine de fid. and oper. c. 14. speaks nothing against our Opinion, but
something for it. That which he speaks by way of reproof is against those,
who so think that Faith alone will suffice, as that they heed not to do good
works, nor to order their life and conversation aright. But this is nothing to
us, who are far from holding such a Faith as that sufficient. But in the same
place Austine has this for our purpose, that when the Apostle says that a Man
is justified by Faith without the Works of the Law, he did not intend that
the Works of Righteousness should be contemned, but Cum ergo dicit Apostolus,
arbitrari se justificari hominem per fidem sine operibus legis, non hoc agit,
ut praecepta and professa fide opera justitiae contemnantur, sed ut sciat se
quisque per fidem posse justificari, etiamsi legis opera non praecesserint.
Sequuntur enim justificatum, non praecedunt justificandum, Aug. Ibid.
that every one should know, that he may be justified by faith, though the
works of the Law did not go before. For (says he) they follow a man being
justified, they do not go before a man being to be justified. If (as this
Father affirms) a man must first be justified, before he can do good
works; then good works are no cause of justification, but an effect of it.
For the other place of Austine, which the Marquess alleges, there is none
such, that I can find, viz. no preface of his comment upon Psalm. 32. but in
the comment it self I find this, which makes for us. Do thou not hear the
Apostle, The just shall live Non audisti Apostolum, Justus ex fide vivet? Fides
tua, justitia tua. Aug. in Psalm. 32.
by Faith? Thy faith is thy righteousness. What Origin says on Romans 5. having
not his works now at hand, I cannot tell; but I see what Bellarmine cites out
of him on Romans 4. and perhaps so it should have been in the Marquess his
writing. However there is no doubt but Bellarmine would have made use of it, if
there had been any thing more for his purpose on Romans 5. Now on Romans 4. Origin
says, that whose believe Christ, but do not put off the old man with his
deeds, their faith Credentibus quidem Christo, nec tamen deponentibus veterem
hominem cum actibus suis, fides reputari non potest ad justitiam. Ori. in Romans
4. citat. a Bell. de Iustif. lib. 1. cap. 25.
cannot be imputed unto them for righteousness. This we do easily assent
unto, it being our professed opinion (as has been showed before by
Bellarmines own confession) that though faith alone do justify, yet if it be
such a faith as is alone, and is not accompanied with good works, it is not
that faith, which does justify. As little is that of Hilarie against us, The
safety of the Nations is all in faith; and the life of all is in Gods Precepts.
Salus gentium omnis in fide est, and in praeceptis Domini vita est universorum.
Hill. cap. 7. in Mat.
That faith, which alone does justify, is not so alone, but that there is
joined with it a care and endeavor to observe all Gods Precepts. Of the same
nature is that of Sola fides non sufficit, operari per dilectione^ fidem
necessarium est, and conversari digne Deo. -- Non sufficit fides, sed debet
addi and vita condigna, and multum studium debet adhiberi, ne fides sit otiosa.
Ambros. in. Heb. 4.
Ambrose (if Ambrose were the Author of those commentaries) Faith alone is not
sufficient; it is necessary that faith work by love, and that men walk worthy
of God. Faith is not sufficient, but there must also be added a life
answerable, and much care must be had, that faith be not idle. All this we
hold, that faith must not be idle, but operative, and working through love; and
such is the nature of true justifying faith, as the Apostle teaches, Gal. 5.
6. But all this is nothing against justification by faith alone without works,
viz. as concurring unto justification.

In the next place the Marquess pleades for the merit of good Page 65.
works; and that from Mat. 6. 27. (so it is printed, but it should be Mat. 16.
27.) He shall reward every man according to his works. And Mat. 5. 12. Great
is your reward in Heaven. Reward at the end (says he) presupposes merit in the
work: the distinction of secun dum, and propter opera, is too nice to make
such a division in the Church.

Answ. But that men's good works do not merit any reward at the hands of God,
our Savior has sufficiently showed, saying, When ye have done all things,
that are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done but
what our duty was to do, Luke 17. 10. If (as (...); Theophyl. ad Luc. 17. 10.
Theophylact notes upon the place) when we have done all things that are
commanded us, we must take heed of thinking highly of our selves: how much
more ought we to be far from such presumption, when as we are so far from
obeying all Gods Commandments! Besides, if we do any thing that is good, we
do it not of our selves, by our own strength, but it is God that does enable
us, and make us to do it: and therefore properly we cannot merit by it; for
we are beholding unto God, and not God beholding unto us for it. I have
labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God, that
was with me, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Again, the reward which the
godly receive in Heaven, does infinitely exceed their works, and therefore
cannot be merited by them. The most that we can do, is to suffer for the
Name of Christ; yet the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8. 18. Both these
reasons does Bernard allege against merits. The merits of men (says he) are
not such as that because of them life eternal should be due unto them of
right, or that God should do them wrong if he should Neque enim talia sunt
hominum merita, ut propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex jure, aut Deus injuriam
aliquam faceret, nisi eam donaret. Nam ut taceam quod merita omnia sunt dona
Dei, and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor est, quam Deus homini; quid
sunt merita omnia ad tantam gloriam? Bern. in Annunt. B. Mariae Sermon. 1.
not give it. For to say nothing of this, that all merits are Gods gifts, and
so man is rather indebted unto God for them, then God unto man; what are all
merits unto so great glory? Here Bernard uses indeed the word merits, but so
as that he plainly denies the thing, which our adversaries understand by it,
and by a double argument confuteth their opinion. Both these arguments also to
this purpose, before Bernard did Fulgentius Gratia autem etiam ipsa (sc vita
aeterna) non injuste dicitur, quia non solum donis suis Deus dona sua reddit,
sed quia tantum etiam ibi gratia Divinae retributionis exuberat, ut
incomparabiliter, atque ineffabiliter omne meritum quamvis bonae, and ex Deo
datae humanae voluntatis, atque operationis excedat. Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1.
use, who speaking of eternal life, says, It is not unjustly called grace,
because not only God does recompense his gifts with his gifts, but because the
grace of Gods retribution does so abound, that it incomparably and ineffably
exceedes all the merit of man's will and works, though it be good; and such as
God has given. To this purpose he cites Romans 8. 18. and 2 Cor. 4. 17. And
Gregorius Magnus not only uses these Quod si illa sanctorum faelicitas
misericordia est; and non meritis acquiritur, ubi erit quod scriptum est, Et tu
reddes, unicuique secundumopera sua? Si secundum opera redditur, quomodo
misericordia aestimabitur? Sed aliud est secundum opera reddere, and aliud
propter ipsa opera reddere. In eo. n. quod secundum opera dicitur, ipsa operum
qualitas intelligitur, ut cujus apparuerint bona opera, ejus sit and retributio
gloriosa. Illi namque, beatae vitae, in qua cum Deo, and de Deo vivitur, nullus
potest aequari labor, nulla opera comparari, praesertim cum Apostolus dicat,
Non sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae
revelabitur in nobis. Quanquam and ex hoc quoque misericordia jure possit
nominari, quia pro illis operibus datur, quae sine praeventu misericordiae Dei
nemo assequitur. Greg. in 7. poenitem. Psalm sive in Ps. 143. 8.
same Arguments against the Merits of good works, but also has that very
distinction of secundum opera, and propter opera, which the Marqnesse so much
disdaineth. If (says Gregory) the happiness of the Saints be mercy, and be
not acquired by Merits, where is that which is written, Thou will render to
every one according to his works? If it be rendered according to works, how
shall it be accounted mercy? But it is one thing to render according to works,
and another thing to render, because of the works themselves. In that there is
a rendering according to works, the quality of works is considered, so as that
whose works are found to be good, his reward also shall be glorious. For unto
that blessed life, in which we live with God, and of God, no labor can be
equal, no works comparable, especially when as the Apostle says, The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy of that glory, which shall be
revealed in us. Besides also in this respect it may be justly called mercy,
because it is given for those works, which none can attain unto without the
prevention of Gods mercy. Thus Gregory, who above a thousand years ago was
Bishop of Rome, both argues for us, and also by a distinction answers that
which is objected against us, viz. that God does render to all according to
their works. And for the word reward, which the Scripture often uses, it does
not presuppose merit; for a reward may proceed from the bounty of the giver,
not from the merit of the receiver. They that wrought but one hour in the
Vineyard, though they received a penny, as much as they that labored all the
day, though (I say) they received this as the reward of their labor, yet did
they not merit it by their labor. This very parable does Prosper (or who ever
was the Author of the Book de vocatione gentium,) apply in this manner;
without doubt (says he) they that were sent into the Vineyard at the eleventh
hour, and were Sine dubio hora undecima intromissi in vineam, and totius diei
operariis exaequati, istorum praeferunt sortem, quos ad commendandam gratiae
excellentiam in defectu diei, and conclusione vitae divina indulgentia
muneratur, non labori pretium solvens, sed divitias bonitatis suae in eos, quos
sine laboribus elegit, effundens; ut etiam hi, qui in multo labor sudarunt,
nec amplius quam novissimi, acceperunt, intelligant donum se gratiae, non
operum accepisse mercedem. De vocat. gent. lib. 1. 17.
made equal with those that wrought the whole day, represent the condition of
those whom to commend the excellency of grace Gods goodness does reward in the
end of the day, and in the conclusion of life, not paying the price of labor,
but pouring out the riches of his bounty upon them, whom he has chosen
without labor; that so they also, who have endured much labor, and yet have
received no more then they that were last, may understand, that they have
received the gift of grace, not the reward (viz. the deserved reward) of their
works. Thus both Scriptures and Fathers are against the opinion of the Church
of Rome as touching Merits. I will add to what has been already alleged,
that of Meritum proinde meum miseratio Domini. Non plane sum meriti inops,
quamdiu miserationum ille non fuerit. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 61.
Bernard, Thy merit is Gods mercy. I am not altogether without merit, so long
as he is not without mercy. See what merit it is that he builds upon, no
merit of his own, but merely Gods mercy. And this was it that Nehemiah did fly
unto, even when he recorded the good that he had done, Remember me O Lord
(said he) concerning this, and (what? reward me according to the greatness
of my merit? no, but) spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy. Neh.
13. 22. Sufficit ad meritum scire quod non sufficiant merita. Bern. in Cant.
Sermon. 68.
Bernard to this purpose again, It is enough unto merit, to know that merits
are not sufficient. The Romish Doctrine of merits die not please Ferus, a late
member of that Church, If thou would keep (says Si Dei gratiam and favorem
conservare cupis, nullam tuorum meritorum fac mentionem: ex misericordia enim
cuncta donare vult. Ferus in Mat. 20. 1.
he) the grace and favor of God, make no mention of thy Merits: for God will
give all things out of mercy.

Bellarmine also says that Bernard, prudenter non confidebat in meritis suis,
sed in sola misericordia Domini, did wisely not trust in his merits, but only
in Gods mercy. Bell. de Justif. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Bellarmine himself, though he disputed eagerly for Merits, yet (it seems)
durst not rely on them, confessing (as was showed before) that it is the safest
course to put our whole trust merely in Gods Mercy. But the Marquess says
that the Fathers were of their opinion, citing Ambr. de apol. David. cap. 6.
Hieron. lib. 3. contra Pelag. Aug. de Spir. and lit. cap. ult.

And first for Ambrose in the place cited, it is true, he speaks merits; but
here we must remember what one of their own writers does tell us, namely Quam
vis ip sa justitia, and peccatorum remissio non possint proprie merces vocari
respectu fidei, poenitentiae, etc. attamen veteres theologi meriti nomen
memoratis operibus respectu justificationis, ac peccatorum remissionis passim
ascribunt, extenso viz. meriti nomen ad illud quod recentiores congruum vocant,
id est, ad impetrationem Estius ad Hob. 11. 6.
Estius, that the ancient Divines did often use the word Merit very largely,
and not properly. And thus did Ambrose use the word, saying, Habet quis bona
Merita, one has good Merits, that is, good works, which he calls Merits,
because they do impetrate or obtain a reward, though not properly merit it,
the ancients (as Estius observes) using merit for impetration. But that Ambrose
there did not make good works to be truly and properly meritorious, appears
by the words immediately following, habet and vitia, atque peccata; he has
also vices and sins. Now surely those good works, which have vices and sins
mixed with them, cannot be properly meritorious: in that case there is great
need to crave mercy, but no cause to plead merit. For Hierome. lib. 3. contra
Pelag. I find nothing at all, that does so much as seem to assert merits,
except perhaps those words, here (in this life) is labor, and striving; there
(in the life to come) is the reward of labor, Ut hic labor sit, atque
contentio, ibi laboris virtutisque praemium. Hieron. contra Pelag. lib. 3. cap.
5.
and virtue. But reward does not always presuppose merit, as I have showed
before. Mercy, I am sure, and merit are inconsistent, and Quia homines
possibilia non faciunt, idcirco omins mundus subditus est Deo, and indiget
misericordia ejus. Aut certe si ostendere potueris, qui univers^ compleverit,
tunc poteris demonstrare esse hominem, qui non indiget misericordia Dei.
Hieron. Ibid. cap. 1.
Hierome in that very Book, which the Marquess cites, plainly testifies that
there is no man, whose works are so good, and his obedience so perfect, but
that still he has need of Gods mercy. And he taxes his adversary (Pelagius
I think) as proud and Pharisaicall for saying, that he does worthily lift up
his hands to God, and Ille, inquis, merito ad Deum extollit manus, ille preces
bona conscientia fundit, qui potest dicere, Tu enim nosti, Domine, quam
sanctae, quam innocents, quam purae sint ab omni fraud, and injuria, and
rapina, quas ad te expando, manus; quam justa, quam immaculata labia, and ab
omni mendacio libera, quibus tibi, ut mihi miserearis, preces fundo. Christiani
est haec, an Pharisaei superbientis oration? Hieron. ibid. cap. 5. David
loquitur, etc. Ibid.
does pray with a good conscience, who can say, Thou, O Lord, know, how
holy, how innocent, how pure from all fraud, injury and rapine the hands are,
that I spread forth unto thee; how just, immaculate, and free from all lying
the lips are, with which I power forth prayers unto thee, that thou may have
mercy on me. He tells him that David sung another Song, saying, My wounds
stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness, Psalm. 38. 5. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
Psalm. 143. 2. Esaias plangit. etc. Ibid.


And that Esaias lamented saying, Woe is me, for I am undone; because I am a man
of unclean lips, etc. Isal. 6. 5. Et post tantu^ tumorem, orantisque
jactantiam, and confidentiam sanctitatis, quasi stultus stultis persuadere
conaris, ut in extremo dicas, quibus tibi, ut mihi miserearis, preces fundo. Si
sanctus es, si innocens, si ab omni sorde purgatus, si nec sermon, nec opere
peccasti, discente Iacobo, Qui in verbo non peccat, iste perfectus est vir; and
nemo potest refraenare linguam suam; quomodo misericordiam deprecaris, etc.
Ibid.
And he asks him, how after all this swelling and boasting of himself, after
all this confidence of his holiness, he could pretend to desire Gods mercy?
For if he were so holy, and innocent, so pure and perfect, then he had no
need to pray in that manner, viz. that God should have mercy on him. This and
more to this purpose has Hierome in the place alleged, but whether this be
for Merits, or against them, is easy to judge.

Neither has Consequens esse video, ut omni homini fit necessarium dare, ut
detur illi, dimittere, ut dimittatur illi; and si quid habet justitiae, non de
suo sibi esse praesumere, sed de gratia justificantis Dei; and adhuc tamen ab
illo esurire and sitire justitiam, qui est panis v vus, and apud quem fons
vitae, qui sic operatur justificationem in sanctis suis, in hujus vitae
tentatione laborantibus, ut tamen sit, and quod petentibus largiter adjiciat,
and quod confitentibus clementer ignoscat. Sed inveniant isti, si possunt,
aliquem sub onere corruptionis hujus viventem, cui jam non habeat Deus quod
ignoscat. Aug. de Spir. and lit. cap. ult.
Austine in the place, which the Marquess cites, any thing (that I can see)
to prove good works meritorious, but something to prove the contrary. For
having cited many places of Scripture, which show that none is so righteous as
to be without sin, he says, Hence it follows, that it is necessary for
every one to forgive, that he may be forgiven: and if he have any
righteousness, not to presume that he has it of his own, but to ascribe it to
Gods grace; and still to hunger and thirst for righteousness from God, who does
so work in his Saints, whiles they are in this life, as that he has still
something to add to them that ask, and to pardon them that confess. For that
none living in this mortal body can be found so holy, but that still he has
need of pardon. And elsewhere he Dona sua coronat Deus, non merita tua. Aug.
de great. and lib. arb. c. 6.
says, God does crown his own gifts, not thy merits.

The Marquess goes on, saying, we hold that Faith once had may Page 66.
be lost, if we have not care to preserve it, you say it cannot, we have
Scripture for it, viz. Luke 8. 13. They on the Rock are they, which when they
hear, receive the Word with joy, which for a while believe, and in time of
temptation fall away. So 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. which some having put away have made
shipwracks of their Faith.

Answ. We do not hold that Faith cannot be lost, though a man have no care to
preserve it; but that God will work such a care in those, in whom he has
wrought true justifying Faith, that they shall never lose it. I will put my
fear (says he) in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Jer. 32.
40. Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith might not fail, Luke 22. 32. And
so he prayed both for him and others, even for all that belong unto him. I pray
for them (says he) I pray not for the World, but for them, which thou have
given me: for they are thine. Joh. 17. 9. And verse. 11. Holy Father, keep
through thine own name, those whom thou have given me. So the Apostle tells
us, that whom God did predestinate, them he also called (viz. according to his
purpose, verse. 28.) and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Romans 8. 30. This clearly shows, that all
that are once justified, shall certainly be glorified, and consequently that
justifying faith once had cannot be quite lost. Again, They that truly
believe, are the sons of God. Gal. 3. 26. Now the servant abides not in the
house for ever: but the son abides ever. Joh. 8. 35. Therefore true Faith
cannot be lost; the children of God cannot fall away. And to this do the
Fathers accord. Cyprian is much to this purpose; The strength of such as are
Manet vere fidelium robur immobile, and apud timentes ac diligentes toto cordet
Deum stabilis, and fortis perseverar integritas. Cypr. Epist. 52.
truly faithful, does remain unmovable, and the integrity of those that
fear God, and love him with the whole heart, does continue stable and strong.
And again, The Lord, who is the protector Non patitur Dominus populi sui
protector and tutor, triticum de area sua diripi, sed solae possunt paleae de
ecclesia separari. Cypr. Epist. 69.
and defender of his people, does not suffer wheat to be taken away out of his
floor: only chafe can be separated from the Church.

And again, Let none think that the good Nemo existimet bonos de ecclesia
posse discedere. Triticum non rapit ventus; nec arborem solida radice fundatam
procella subvertit. Inanes paleae tempestate jactantur; invalidae arbores
turbinis incursione evertuntur. Hoc execratur and percutit Joannes Apostolus
dicens, Ex nobis exierunt, etc. Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
can depart out of the Church. The wind does not carry away the wheat; neither
does the storm overthrow the Tree, that has taken solid root. The empty
chafe is tossed with the tempest: the weak Trees are thrown down with the
whirlewinde. This the Apostle John does curse, and smite, saying, They went out
from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us, 1 John 2. 19. And to add one testimony
of his more, Peter (says he) speaking for all, and answering in the name of
the Church, says, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have Petrus cum pro omnibus
loquens, and Ecclesiae voce respondens, ait, Domine, ad quem ibimus? verba
vitae, etc. signifians scil. qui a Christo recesserint, culpa sua perire:
Ecclesiam tamen, quae in Christum credit, and quae semel id, quod cognoverit,
teneat, nunquam omnino ab eo discedere: and eos esse Ecclesiam, qui in domo Dei
permanent, plantationem vero a Deo Patre non esse, quos videmus non frumenti
stabilitate solidari, sed tanquam paleas dissipandas inimici spiritu ventilari.
De quibus ait Joannes in Epistola, Ex nobis exierunt, etc. Cypr. Epist. 55.
the words of eternal life, (Joh. 6. 68.) signifying that they who depart from
Christ, perish through their own fault: but that the Church, which believes in
Christ, and once holds that, which it has known, does never altogether
depart from him; and that they are the Church, who do abide in the house of
God: but that they are not the planting of God the Father, whom we see not to
be strengthened with the stability of wheat, but to be blown away with the
breath of the enemy like chafe, that is to be dissipated. Of whom John says
They went out from us, but they were not of us, etc. Non ait quod excundo
alieni facti sunt, sed quod alieni erant, propter hoc eos exiisse declaravit.
Aug. de baptiss. contra Donatist. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Austine also citing those words of S. John, says, He does not say, that by
going out they were made Aliens, but that therefore they went out because they
were Aliens. Again, In that (says he) thou departest, Eo ipso quod discedis,
and volas, paleam te esse indicas: qui triticum sunt, ferunt trituram. Aug. in
Ps. 140.
and fliest away, thou show thy self to be chafe: they that are wheat,
endure threshing. And upon those words of our Savior, If ye continue in my
word, then you are my Disciples indeed; Joh. 8. 31. he says thus, Then they
are indeed that which they Tunc vere sunt quod appellantur, si manserint in eo,
propter quod lic appellantur. Aug.
are called, if they continue in that, for which they are so called.

So again, That is not indeed the Body of Non est revera Domini corpus, quod
cum illo non erit in aeternum. Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 32.
Christ (says he) which shall not be with him for ever.

So Neque fideles, quos haereses potuerint demutare. -- Nemo Christianus, nisi
qui ad finem usque perseveraverit. Tu ut homo extrinsecus unumquenque nosti;
putas quod vides; vides autem quousque oculos habes. Sed oculi Domini alti.
Homo in faciem, Deus in praecordia contemplatur. Et ideo cognoscit Dominus qui
sunt ejus: and plantam, quam non plantavit Pater eradicat. -- Avolent quantum
volent paleae levis fidei quo cunque afflatu tentationum, eo purior massa
frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. Nonne ab ipso Domino quidam discentium
scandalizati diverterunt? Noc tamen propterea caeteri quoque discedendum a
vestigiis ejus putaverunt: sed qui scierunt illum vitae esse verbum, and a Deo
venisse, perseveraverunt in comitatu ejus usque ad finem. -- Minus est si
Apostolum ejus aliqui, Phygellus, and Hermogenes, and Philetus, and Hymenaeus
reliquer unt. -- Ex nobis, inquit, prodierunt, sed non fuerunt ex nobis, etc.
Tertull. de Praescript. cap. 3.
Tertullian says that such as fall away were never true Believers, and true
Christians. He says, man sees the outside of every one, and thinks what he
sees; but God sees into the heart, and therefore knows who are his; and roots
out every Plant, that he has not planted. And let the chafe of light faith
(says he) fly away as much as it will with every blast of temptations, by so
much will the heap of Corn be the more clean to be laid up in the Lords
Garners. Did not some of Christ's Disciples, being offended, turn away? yet the
rest would not therefore leave him: but they that knew him to be the word of
life, and sent of God, did continue with him to the end. -- It is a less
matter, if some did forsake his Apostle, as Phygellus, and Hermogenes, and
Philetus, and Hymenaeus. Then he cites that of S. John, They went out from us,
but they were not of us, etc.

Thus also In sanctorum quippe cordibus juxta quasdam virtutes semper
permanent, juxta quasdam vero recess^rus venit. and venturus recedit. In fide
etenim, spe, atque charitate, and in bonis alils, sine quibus ad caelestem
patriam non potest veniri, sicut est humilitas, castitas, justitia atque
misericordia, perfectorum corda non deserit. In prophetiae vero virtute,
doctrinae facundia, miraculorum exhibitione, electis suis aliquando adest,
aliquando se subtrahit. Greg. hom. 5 in Ezech.
Gregory speaking of the holy Ghost says, that in respect of some virtues he
always abides in the hearts of the Saints, but in respect of some he comes so
as to go away, and goes away so as to come again. For in respect of Faith,
Hope and Charity, and other good things, without which there is no coming to
Heaven, as Humility, Chastity, Justice and Mercy, in respect of these he never
forsakes the hearts of the upright. But in respect of Prophecy, Eloquence, and
working of miracles sometimes he is with the Elect, sometimes he withdrawes
himself from them. This testimony of Gregory is also cited by Gratian, Ex
praemissis itaque apparet quod Charitas semel habita ulterius non amittitur.
Great. de poenit. did 2.
who from thence, and other testimonies of the Fathers inferrs thus much, that
Charity once had (and it is as true of Faith; for Charity cannot be without it,
but does proceed from it, 1 Timothy 1. 5.) cannot be lost. Thus we have not
only the Scriptures, and Fathers, but also the Canon Law it self for us.
Those places, which the Marquess alleges to prove that faith may be lost,
do not speak of justifying Faith, whereby one is ingraffed into Christ, and
made a member of his Body, but either of an outward profession of the Faith,
that is, of the Doctrine of Faith, as that 1 Timothy 1. 19. where the Apostle bids
Timothy hold faith (i. e. the Doctrine of Faith) and a good conscience; and
adds that some having put away a good conscience, concerning Faith did make
shipwreck that is, did forsake the Doctrine of Faith, and fall into Heresy.
Such were Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom he mentions verse. 20. and says that
he delivered them unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. And that
which he there calls Faith, he calls Truth, 2 Timothy 2. 18. where speaking
of Hymenaeus and Philetus, he says, who concerning the truth have erred,
saying, that the Resurrection is past already. He adds that hereby they did
overthrow the Faith of some, that is, they did draw them from the Faith, making
them to embrace Heresy. But that these seducers or seduced ones, were ever
such believers, as that they were endued with justifying Faith, the Apostle
does not say, neither can it be proved; Tertullian was of another mind, as
appears by his words before cited. Yea, so was S. John, whose words to this
purpose both Tertullian and other Fathers (as I have showed) have made use of,
when he says, speaking of such as those, They went out from us, but they were
not of us, etc. 1 John 2. 19. Or they speak of an Historical Faith, whereby
one does assent unto the truth of the Gospel, and is somewhat affected with
it, but it does not take root in the heart, as it is said Mat. 13. 21. yet
has he not root in himself: and therefore this is not such a Faith, as we
speak of, when we say, that Faith cannot be lost, viz. a Faith, whereby
Christ is received, and does dwell in the heart. Ioh. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 17. For
all that Faith, which is spoken of Luke 8. 13. a man is but chafe still, and
not true wheat whatsoever he seem either to himself or others. They compared
to the thorny ground, who for a while believe, are distinguished from such as
have a good and honest heart, Luke 8. 13. 15. Therefore those temporary
believers are no sound and sincere Believers: their heart is not right with
God, and therefore they are not steadfast in his Covenant. Psalm. 78. 37.

The Marquess adds, This is frequently affirmed by the Fathers, viz. that
Faith may be lost; but he cites only Austine de great. and lib. arb. de
corrept. and great. and ad articulos. Now I have produced many testimonies of
Austine to the contrary, as also of diverse other Fathers, who speak very home
to our purpose. As for these places of Austine alleged against us, the two
first are justly to be waved. For only the books are cited, but no Chapters,
whereas in the one book there are 24. and 16. in the other. For the third
place, it is true that Austine does oftentimes in answer to the Articles imposed
upon him, deny that Gods predestination is the cause of man's non-perseverance,
as some did charge him to hold; why any fall away he, shows the cause to be
in themselves, not in God; that it is not from Gods work, but from their own
will: that they are not thrust, that they may fall; nor cast out, that they may
depart. But that true Quod si per generalitatem vocationis, and per abundantiam
bonitatis Dei, eiam non perseveraturi perseveraturis admixti sunt, hi cum a
pietate deficiunt, non ex Dei opere, sed ex sua voluntate deficiunt, nec
impelluntur ut cadant, nec eijciuntur ut deserant. Aug. ad art. 16. Similiter
etiam ad alios articulos.
justifying Faith once had may be lost, he says not any thing that way, but
much against it in other places, as before is showed.

In the next place, We hold (says the Marquess) that God Page 66.
did never inevitably damn any man before he was borne, or as you say from
all eternity. You say he did: we have Scripture for what we say, Wisd. 1.
13. God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
living. 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, 2
Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not willing that any should die, but that all should
come to repentance. And if you will not believe when he says so, believe him
when he swears it, As I live, says the Lord, I do not delight in the death
of a sinner.

Ans. I do not know any Protestant, who says that God did damn any man
before he was borne, or from all eternity. For how should that be? damning
being taken (as usually it is) for inflicting eternal punishment. For how can
a man before he has any being, have eternal punishment inflicted upon him?
yet Secundum exteriorem hominem de parentibus illisvenio, qui me art fecerunt
damnatum, quam natum. Bern. meditat. cap. 2.
Bernard speaks of his being damnatus antequam natus, damned before he was
borne. I suppose he meant that before he came out of the womb he was in the
estate of damnation by reason of the guilt of Adams sin imputed to him, and
the corruption of nature inherent in him. How ever this is certain, that (as
Praedestinatio non duo ab exortu Ecclesiae sed ne a mundi principio quidem
principium habuit, non denique a tempore illo, vel illo; ante tempora est. Ber.
in Cant. ser. 78.
Bernard also says) predestination is before all times, even from all eternity.

And Bellarmine observes, that though the use of the Schools Bell de great. and
lib. arbit. lib. 2. cap. 16.
has so prevailed, that they only are said to be predestinate; who are
elected unto glory, and so in the Scriptures predestination is not used but in
that sense, yet Austine does call reprobation predestination to destruction.
Neither is there any question So say the Translators of the old Testament at
Doway after Exodus in, The continuance of the Church.
betwixt us, and them of the Church of Rome, but that reprobation as well as
election is from all eternity. And therefore as we do not say any more then
they, that God does damn any man from eternity; so they as well as we do
say, that God does reprobate many from eternity, even as many as he does not
elect; now the elect are but few in comparison, as our Savior tells us,
saying, Many are called, but few are chosen. Mat. 22. 14. But some may, and
indeed do say, Gods reprobation is not the cause of any man's damnation, but
man's own sin is the proper cause both of reprobation and damnation. But
though this be asserted by some of our adversaries, yet others of that party
will not approve of it. For Reprobation (says Bellarmine) does comprehend
Dicimus deinde Reprobationem duos actus comprehendere, etc. Primum enim non
habet Deus voluntatem illos salvandi. Deinde habet voluntatem eos damnandi: and
quidem quod attinet ad priorem actum, nulla datur ejus causa ex part hominum,
etc. Bell. de great. and lib arb. lib. 2. cap. 16.
two acts, and c. For first God has not a will of saving them (viz. the
Reprobate) And then he has a will of damning them. And in respect of the
former act there is no cause (of Reprobation) on man's part. Therefore man's
sin in Bellarmines judgementi is not the cause of Reprobation in respect of
that act. Now if God have not a will to save a man, it is not possible that he
should be saved: and if he be not saved, he must be being Viz. if ever he
have any being.
damned. And therefore from that act of Gods Reprobation, which Bellarmine
confesses to have no cause on man's part, there inevitable follows man's
damnation, though damnation be neither inflicted on man, nor intended to be
inflicted on him but for sin. Yet Bellarmine in that which he says, is not
so accurate as he might be; For non habere voluntatem salvandi, not to have a
will to save a man, or not to will a man's salvation, is properly no act, but
rather a negation of an act, and therefore indeed Bellarmine calls it actum
negativum a Bellar. Ibid.
negative act; but that (as I said) is indeed no act at all, but a mere
negation of it. And therefore Alvarez makes the first act of Reprobation
Reprobatio Dei aeterna includit actum positivum, quo voluit quosdam non
admittere ad vitam aeternam -- Deus n. vere non reprobavit homines vel angelos
possibiles, qui nunquam erunt; and tamen circa illos se habuit negative, non
ordinando eos ad vitam aeternam. Ergo Reprobatio includit actum positivum.
Alvar, de Auxil. lib. 11. disput. 109. number. 5.
to be a positive act, whereby Gods Will is not to admit some unto life
eternal. It Is one thing not to have a will to save; and another thing to have
a will not to save; the former is merely negative, but the latter is positive.
And he proves that Reprobation does include a positive act, because the mere
negative of not ordaining unto life eternal is even in respect of men and
angels that only may be, but never shall be. Those God does not will to save,
and to glorify, yet properly they are not the objects of Gods Reprobation.

The same Actus positivus, quo Deus ab aeterno voluit non admittere quosdam in
suum regnum, non suit conditionatus, sed absolutus, antecedens in signo
rationis praescientiam mali usus liberi arbitrii, etc. -- Probatur conclusio;
nam Apostolus ad Romans 9. postquam intulit ex his, quae dixerat in eodem cap. de
praedestinatione and Reprobatione, Ergo cujus vult miseretur, and quem vult
indurat; statim proponit eorum querimoniam, quibus dura videtur Praedestinatio,
and Reprobatio, antecedens praescentiam meritorum, and ait, Quid adhuc
queritur? voluntari enim ejus quis resistit? Et huic objectioni occurit
subdens, O homo tu quis es, etc. Annon habet potestatem figulus, etc. Haec
autem responsio and objurgatio non haberet locum, si Deus antecedenter ad
praescientiam mali usus liberi arbitrii neminem reprobasset absoluta and
efficaci voluntate. Posset enim facile respondere Apost. quod ex bono, vel malo
usu liberi arbitrii creati, praecognito a Deo tanquam ex condition sine qua
non, dependet quod providentia supernaturalis Dei circa unum habet formaliter
rationem Reprobationis, and non circa alium. Alvar. disput. 109. number. 6.
Alvarez says that this positive act of Reprobation, whereby Gods Will and
Pleasure from eternity was, not to admit some into his Kingdom, was not
conditional, but absolute, and in order of nature before the foreknowledge of
the ill use of free will. And this he proves from hence, that the Apostle Romans
9. having inferred from what he had said of Predestination and Reprobation,
Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he
hardens, presently brings in the complaint of those, who think it hard, that
God should predestinate, and reprobate without having respect to merits, Why
then does he yet complain? for who has resisted his Will? And he answers, O
man who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor? Now this answer and reproof (says he) should have no place, if
God did not before the foreknowledge of the ill use of Free Will reprobate
some by an absolute and efficacious will. For the Apostle might easily answer,
that it depends upon the good or ill use of man's free will, which God did
foreknow, that some are reprobated, and not others. And he cites Multi salvi
non fiunt, non quia ipsi nolunt, sed quia Deus non vult; quod absque ulla
caligiue monstratur in parvulis. Aug. Epist. 107. citat. ab Alvar Ibid.
Austine saying, Many are not saved, not because they will not, but because God
will not, which most clearly appears in young infants.

This same Author also again lays down this conclusion, Reprobatio, qua Deus
statuit non dare aliquibus vitam aeternam, and permittere peccatu eorum, non
est conditionata, sed absoluta, nec praesupponit in Deo praescientiam, vel
praevisionem demeritorum ipsius reprobi, aut perseverantiae in peccato usque ad
ultimum vitae Alvar. disp. 110. number. 8.
Reprobation, whereby God determines, not to give eternal life to some, and to
suffer them to sin, is not conditional, but absolute; neither does it
presuppose in God the foreknowledge, or foresight of the ill deserts of the
Reprobate, or of his perseverance in sin unto the end of his life.

Neque peccatum actuale, neque originale, neque utrumque simul praevisum a Deo,
fuit de facto causa meritoria, vel motiva Reprobationis alicujus, quantum ad
omnes illus effectus. Alv. ib. n. 11.
And again, Neither actual sin, nor original, nor both together,
foreseen of God, were the meritorious cause, or motive of any ones
Reprobation, in respect of all the effects of it.

Existimo S. Thomam resolutorie eandem docuisse sententiam; etenim art. 3.
citat. in corp. ait, Sicut praedestinatlo includit voluntatem conferendi
gratiam and gloriam; ita Reprobatio includit voluntatem permittendi aliquem
cadere in culpam, and ferendi damnationis poenam pro culpa. Alvar. Ibid.
And he takes Aquinas to be resolute in this point, and he cites him, saying,
As predestination does include a will to confer grace, and glory, so
Reprobation does include a will to suffer one to fall into sin, and to
inslict the punishment of damnation for sin.

Hence Alvarez inferres, that according to Ergo secundum S. Thomam permissio
primi peccati, propter quod reprobus damnatur, est effectus Reprobationis: sed
illius permissionis nulla datur causa ex part reprobi: nam ante permissionem
primi peccati, and ante primum peccatum non datur aliud peccatum praecedens:
alias illud non esset simpliciter primum, vel in homine praecederet aliud
peccatum commissum, Deo non permittente, etc. Alvar. Ibib.
Aquinas the permission of the first sin for which a Reprobate is damned, is
the effect of Reprobation. And he adds that of this permission there is no
cause in the Reprobate. Because before the permission of the first sin, and
before the first sin, there is no other sin; for if there were, then it
were not simply the first sin; or man should commit some other sin before,
which God did not permit, whereas no sin can be committed but by Gods
permission. He cites also Aquinas again speaking thus, Quare hos eligat ad
gloriam, and illos reprobet, non habet rationem nisi divinam voluntatem. Aquin.
apud Alvar. Ibid.

In quo testimonio, ut disp. 37. number. 9. ex doctrina S. Augustini, and S.
Thomae ostendimus, aperte significatur in electione absoluta, and reprobatione
hominum Deum non respexisse ad merita, vel demerita praevisa, sed pro suo
beneplacito istum elegisse, and praedestinasse ad gloriam, illum non
praedestinasse, sed voluntate absoluta statuisse permittere peccatum illius,
and obdurationem, sive perseverantiam in eodem peccato usque ad ultimumvitae,
and poenam aeternam infligere propter idem peccatum. etc. Ibid. number. 12.


why God does choose some to glory, and reprobate others, there is no reason but
only Gods Will. And having cited that of the Apostle Romans 9. The children
being not yet borne, neither having done any good, or evil, that the purpose
of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calls, it was said unto her, The elder should serve the younger, As it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated; having cited this (I say)
he adds that the Apostle here (both Austine and Aquinas avouching as much)
plainly signifies, that in the absolute Election and Reprobation of Men, God
did not look at Men's merits, or demerits, but of his own pleasure did choose,
and predestinate one to glory, and not predestinate another, but by an absolute
will did determine to suffer him to sin, and to be hardened, or to persevere
in sin to the end of his life, and to inflict eternal punishment upon him
for sin.

He brings in also Austine confuting Ideo, inquiunt, nondum natorum aliu^
oderat, alium diligebat, quia eorum futura opera previdebat. Quis istum
acutissimum sensum defuisse Apostolo non miretur? Hoc quippe ille non vidit.
etc. Aug. Epist. 105. apud. Alvar. Ibid. number. 13.
those, who say, that Esau and Jacob being not yet borne, God did therefore
hate the one, and love the other, because he did foresee the works that they
would do. Who (said Austine) can but wonder, that the Apostle should not find
out this acute reason; for he did not see it, etc. No, but flies to this, he
says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, etc. So then, it
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy.

And that none of our Romish adversaries may slight Austine in this point,
Alvarez about the beginning of his Work has Alvar. de Auxil. l. 1. disp. 5.
a Disputation to show what authority this Fathers judgment is of in the point
of Grace, and Predestination. He shows that not only Prosper, but also many
Bishops of Rome did approve of Austines Nec solus Prosper, sed plures etiam
summi Pontifices Doctrinam ejusdem Augustini approbaverunt, and Catholicam esse
decreverunt. Alvar. Ibid. number. 3.
Doctrine concerning these points, and did determine it to be sound and good.

And therefore in the testimony of Austine, we have many testimonies, and such
as are irrefragable with those, with whom now we have to do. But let us hear
what some other late Writers of the Church of Rome do say as to this point
concerning Reprobation. God from eternity (says Cardinal Deus ab aeterno vere
quosdam eligit, and quosdam reprobat, quosdam diligit and quosdam odio habet,
pro quato quibusdam ab aeterno vult confer opem gratiae suae, and adjuvare
illos usque ad gloriam aeternam; quosdam autem ab aeterno quoque vult
permittere sibi ipsis, nec adjuvare eos gratuito auxilio, quod electis decrevit
confer, Et hoc est Deum illos odio habere, hoc est Deum illos reprobare non
ex operibus. Cum quo tamen stat quod nullus damnatur nisi ex propriis open ibus,
nec sententia siquidem, nec executio damnationis fit antequam hujusmodi reprobi
peccent. Cajet. in Romans 9. 13.
Cajetan) does truly choose some, and reprobate others, does love some, and hate
others, in that from eternity his will is to vouchsafe some the help of his
grace, whereby to bring them to eternal glory; and from eternity also his will
is to leave some to themselves, and not to afford them that gracious help,
which he has decreed to afford the Elect. And this is for God to hate, and to
reprobate them; with which yet it does well stand, that none is damned but by
his own works, because neither the Sentence, nor Execution of damnation is
before that such Reprobates do sin.

So also Estius says that the Apostle Romans 9. does teach, that Jam hinc
colligendum relinquit Apostolus argumento a figura ad rem significatam, neque
electionem hominu, neque Reprobationem esse ex ullis operum meritis, sed Deum
ex solo voluntatis arbitrio alios eligere, alios autem reprobare. Est. ad Romans
9. 13.
neither men's Election nor their Reprobation is from the Merits of works, but
that God by the mere pleasure of his will does choose some, and Reprobate others.

And again upon those words, O man, who are thou that reply Studium fuit
Apostoli non tam ad directionem respondere, quam ad causam objiciendi.
Concluserat enim, Ergo cujus vult, miseretur, etc. unde nata erat illa
objectio, Quid adhuc queritur, etc. Respondet itaque de voluntate Dei eligente,
and re Probante, negans ejus rationem ab homine, qui creatura, and figmentum
Dei est, scrutandam esse, imo ab exemplo figuli ostendens Deum hoc facere pro
liberate suae voluntatis absque alia ratione, ut rect e locum hunc Thomas
exposuit. Est. ad. Romans 9. 20.
against God, etc. he says that the Apostles intent was to answer not so much
the objection, as the cause of objecting. And that therefore he answers
concerning the Will of God Electing, and Reprobating, and denies that the
reason of it is to be inquired by man, who is Gods creature, and made by him:
yea that by the example of a potter the Apostle shows, that God does this out
of the liberty of his Will without any other reason. And he adds that Thomas
Aquinas did also thus rightly expound the words of the Apostle.

Verum est, quod Deus aeternaliter nullum punit sine culpa sua temporaliter
praecedente, and aeternaliter permanente; non tamen proprer culpam, tanquam
propter causam antecedenter moventem voluntatem divinam, Deus quenquam
aeternaliter reprobavit. Bradward. de Cause. Dei lib. 1. cap. ult.
Bradwardine, who entitled the book which he wrote, of the cause of God, is
not to be omitted; He says, It Is true, God does not eternally punish any
without his fault going before temporally, and abiding eternally: yet God did
not eternally reprobate any, because of sin, as a cause antecedently moving
Gods will. What do our Divines say, even such as are of the more rigid sort,
as concerning this high and abstruse point of Reprobation, what (I say) do
they lay more then is said by these great and eminent Doctors of the Church of
Rome, and before them by Austine, and before both him and them (as both he and
they conceived) by the Apostle Paul himself? The Decree of Reprobation (says
Bishop Davenant) is not thus to be conceived, I will damn Judas, whether he
believe, or not believe, repent B. Daven. Animadvers. p. 352.
or not repent; for this were contrary to the truth of the Evangelicall
promises: but thus, I am absolutely determined not to give unto Judas that
special grace, which would cause him to believe, and repent: and I am
absolutely purposed to permit him to incur his own demnation by his voluntary
obstinacy, and final impenitency. And again, It must here first of all be
considered, that Reprobatio aeterna nihil ponit in reprobato (that is, That
eternal reprobation Ibid. page 356.
does put nothing in the person that is reprobated) It puts only in God a
firm Decree of permitting such persons to fall into final sin, and for it a
firm decree of condemning them unto eternal punishment. So both he and
diverse other of our Eng. lish Divines that were at the Synod of Dort, being
sent thither by King James, as they hold that Reprobatio, quae est electionis
negatio, ponit immutabilem Dei voluntatem de non miseratione talis
personaepraeteritae, quoad ipsam donationem vitae aeternae. Suffr. Britan. in
1. artic. Praevisam infidelitatem esse causam non electionis fal-sum est. Ibid.
Deus neminem damnat, aut damnationi destinat, nisi ex consideratione peccati.
Ibid. Thesi. 5.


Reprobation, which is the denying of election, does put in God an immutable
will not to have mercy on such a person as is passed by, in respect of giving
eternal life. And that foreseen unbelief is not the cause of non election.
So withal they lay down this position, God does damn none, nor appoint unto
Damnation, but in respect of sin. So Doctor Cur simplex appellent hoc
decretum, non intelligimus, nisi velint Deum (ex nostra sententia) immediate
decrevisse damnationem hominum, sive peccatores fuerint, sive non; quod est
nimis simpliciter calumniari. Ames. Animad. de Pradest. cap. 11. Sect. 6.
Nostra sententia est, Deum quosdam homines non elegisse (sicut alios elegit)
sed decrevisse permittere, ut in peccatis suis manerent, and propter illa
peccata just ae damnationis poenam subirent hujusmodi decreti nullam causam in
non electis reperiri, quae non similiter in electis reperitur. Ames. Ibid.
Ames says that it is too great a slander to say that according to our opinion
God did immediately decree men's damnation, whether they be sinners, or no. Our
opinion (says he) is this, that God did not choose some (as he did choose
others) but did determine to let them abide in their sins, and for those
sins to suffer the punishment of just damnation; and that of this decree
there is no cause to be found in those that are not elected, which is not as
much to be found in those that are elected.

Thus also Doctor Twisse, We say, and say Dicimus, and vere, destinatos esse
damnationi non paucos antequam nascantur. -- Veruntamen non dicimus quenquam ad
mortem subeundam destinatum esse nisi propter peccatum, nec ullo momento
dicimus destinationem ipsam quoad actum destinantis praecedere praevisionem
peccati. D. Twiss. de Scient. med. lib. 1. digress. 5.
truly (says he) that many are appointed unto damnation before they are
borne. -- Yet we do not say, that any is appointed to suffer death but for
sin, nor that the decree it self in respect of the act of him that decrees,
does any one moment go before the foresight of sin. I see nothing in these
Assertions of our Divines, that has any thing more horrid in it, then that is,
which they of the Church of Rome before cited, do assert, and yet some of
these go as high in the point of Predestination (I think) as any others. Ergo
si non possumus rationem assignare cur suos miseri-cordia dignetur, nisi
quoniam ita illi placet: neque etiam in aliis reprobandis aliud habebimus quam
ejus voluntatem. Calv. Insti. lib. 3. c. 22. Sect. 11.
Calvin himself, as he says, If we cannot give a reason why God has mercy
on his own, but because so it pleases him: neither have we any cause why
others are Reprobated, but his Will. Quod si judicio mortis obnoxii sunt omnes
naturali condition, quos ad morte^ Dominus praedestinat, dequa, obsecro, ejus
iniquitate erga se conquerantur? Veniant omnes filii Adam, cum suo creatore
conte^dant, ac disceptent, quod aeterna illius providentia, ante suam
generationem, perpetuae calamitati addicti fuerint; quid obstrepere adversus
defensionem poterunt, ubi Deus illos ad sui recognitionem contra vocabit^? Ex
corrupta massa si desumpti sunt omnes, non mirum si damnationi subjacent. Ne
ergo Deum iniquitatis insimulent, si aeterno ejus judicio morti destinati sint,
ad quam a sua ipsorum natura sponte se perduci, velint nolint, ipsi sentient.
Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 23. Sect. 3.
So he says withal, If all by their condition be subject to condemnation, how
can they, whom God does predestinate unto destruction, complain that he does
deal unjustly with them? Let all the sons of Adam come, let them contend and
dispute with their Creator, because by his eternal providence, before they
were borne, they were appointed to eternal misery. What will they be able to
object against this plea, when God shall on the other side call them to areview
of themselves? If all be taken out of the corrupt Mass, it is no wonder if
they be subject to damnation. Let them not therefore accuse God of iniquity, if
by his Eternal judgment they be appointed unto death, to which, whether they
will or no, themselves do see that they are led by their own nature of its own
accord. Tametsi aeterna Dei providentia ni eam, cui subjacet, calamitatem
conditus est homo; a seipso tamen ejus materiam, non a Deo sumpsit, quando
nulla alia ratione sic perditus est, nisi quia a pura Dei creatione in vitiosam
and impuram perversitatem degeneravit. Calv. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 23. Sect. 9.
and Sect. 12.
And again, Although by Gods eternal Providence man is cast into that
calamity, which does befall him, yet he takes the matter of it from himself,
and not from God, seeing for no other reason is he so undone, but because he
did degenerate from that purity wherein God created him, and made himself
vicious, impure and perverse. Asserimus nullos perire immerentes. Et de eter.
Dei proedest. page 976. Damnationis nostrae culpa in nobis residet.
And again, we affirm that none do perish but by their own desert. e And
again, The cause of our damnation is in our selves. Thus Calvin being heard
speak for himself, it plainly appears that he by the decree of Reprobation
makes God the author of man's damnation no otherwise then diverse Romanists
themselves do.

And thus also Beza, Caeterum haec summa est responsionis Pauli, Quamvis Deus
absque ullo qualitatum respectu, amori destinet, and odio destinet, quoscunque
ipsi libuit, tamen procul eum abesse ab omni injustitia, quoniam inter aeternum
Dei decretum, and ejus decreti executionem sunt causae subordinatae, quibus
electos ad salutem adducit, and reprobos just damnat. Electos n. servat per
misericordiam, reprobos damnat per indurationem, ut prorsus inepte faciant, qui
Reprobationis decretum cum damnatione confundunt; quum hujus causa manifesta
sit, nempe peccatum, illius vero sola Dei voluntas. Neutris igitur facit
injuriam, quoniam ut^ique digni sunt exitio. Misericordia enim miseros electos
fuisse ostendit, ac proinde dignos, qui propter peccatum perderentu: induratio
vero perversitatem praesupponit, in qua just indurantur reprobi. Beza ad Romans
9. 15. Similia etiam habet ad v. 17.
This (says he) is the sum of Paul's answer, although God appoint either to
love, or to hatred whom he will, without any respect of their qualifications,
yet he is free from all injustice, because betwixt Gods eternal decree, and
the execution of it, there are subordinate causes, whereby God does bring the
elect unto salvation, and does justly damn the Reprobate. For he saves the
elect by mercy, and damnes the Reprobate by induration; so that they do most
foolishly, who confouned the decree of Reprobation with damnation, seeing that
the cause of damnation is manifest, to wit, sin, but the Will of God is the
only cause of Reprobation. Therefore God does wrong to neither, because both
deserve destruction. For mercy shows that the Elect were miserable, and
therefore worthy because of sin to be destroyed; and induration presupposes
perverseness, in which the Reprobate are justly hardened. The like he has also
again a little after.

And whereas Qui massae nomine humanum genus corruptum intelligunt, mihi non
satisfaciunt in hujus loci explicatione. Primum enim mihi videtur nomen illud
informis materiae, ne condito quidem humano generi, nedum jam corrupto, satis
convenire. Deinde si genus humanum ut corruptum consider asset Apostolus, non
dixidet quaedam vasa ad decus, quaedam ad dedecus facta; sed potius quum omnia
vasa ad dedecus esset comparata, alia in illo dedecore relicta, alia vero ab
hoc dedecore ad decus translata. Postremo nisi Paulus ad ultimum usque gradum
conscendat, non satisfecerit objectae quaestioni. Semper enim quaeritur, ista
corruption temerene evenerit, an vero secundum Dei propositum, ac proinde
difficultas eadem recurret. Dico igitur Paulum elegantissima ista similitudine
adhibita ad ipsius Adami creationem alludere, and aeternum usque propositum Dei
conscendere, qui antequam humanum genus conderet, jam tum and in quibusdam,
quos novit, per misericordiam servandis, and in quibusdam, quos etiam novit,
justo judicio perdendis, gloriam suam illustrare, prosuo jure, and mera
voluntate decreverit. Beza. ad Romans 3. 21.
Beza says that they do not satisfy him, who by the lump which the Apostle
speaks of Romans 9. 12. do understand mankind being corrupt; because. 1. That
term he thinks does not well agree to man being created, much less to him
being already corrupted. And again, if the Apostle had some Vessels were made
unto honor, and some unto dishonor; but seeing all Vessels were fitted for
dishonor (all mankind being corrupted) the Apostle would rather have said
that some were left in that dishonor, and some translated from it unto honor.
Finally, except Paul go up to the highest step, the objection (he thinks) is
not satisfied. For that still it will be demanded, whether that corruption came
as it happened, or according to Gods purpose; and so the same difficulty will
remain still. Therefore Paul (he says) by that most elegant similitude did
allude unto Adams Creation, and did ascend up even to Gods eternal purpose,
who before he did create mankind, did of his mere will and pleasure determine
to show forth his glory in saving some through his mercy, and in destroying
some by his just judgment.

This is no more then Non igitur in hac disputatione supponit Apostolus massam
corruptam, licet etiam de ea secundum Augustini sententiam, habet veritatem
Apostoli sententia. Nam Scriptura passim adhibens comparatione^ luti, quod pro
suo libitu format figulus, de luto loquitur absolute, nullum ejus vitium
supponens, sed solam ejus naturam considerans, qua formabile est ad omne opus
figulinum. Unde nec ait Apostolus figulum ex eadem massa aliud vas facere in
honorem, aliud in ignominia relinquere, sed ex eadem massa facere in
ignominiam. Neque dixit, figmentum ei qui se finxit non dicere, Cur me
reliquisti in massa corrupta? Sed, Cur me fecisti sic? id est, vas
ignominiosum, and reprobum. Estius ad Romans 9. 21.
Estius on Romans 9. does subscribe unto. In this disputation (says he) the
Apostle does not suppose the lump corrupt, although that which the Apostle
says is true also of it according to Austines opinion. For the Scriptures
often using the comparison of a lump, which the Potter does fasten as he
pleases, speaks of the lump absolutely, not supposing any fault in it, but
only considering the nature of it, whereby it is fit to be fastened into any
work of the Potter. And therefore the Apostle does not say, that the Potter of
the same lump does make one Vessel unto honor, and leave another in
dishonor: but that of the same lump he does make unto dishonor. Neither does
he say, that the thing formed does not say to him that formed it, Why have thou
left me in the corrupt lump? but, Why have thou made me so? that is, a
dishonorable, and reprobate vessel.

Here we see Estius both approves of Bezaes interpretation, and also makes use
of his reason for the confirming of it. And he adds that the Apostle in that
similitude of a lump, and a Potter does not allude to Ier. 18. 6, Nee verum
est, Paulum ad locum Jeremiae (Jer. 18. 6.) alludere, quin potius manifesta est
allusio ad Isai. 45. Vae qui contradicit fictori suo, etc. Numquid dicit lutum,
etc. Quae sane verba significant ita Deum pro mero suo beneplacito statuere de
rebus humanis in utramlibet partem, quomodo figulus ex luto facit opus
quodcunque voluerit. Quo etiam pertinet quod sequitur, Vae qui dicit, etc. Quod
enim meritum hominis, ut parents eum talem, vel tamen gignant? Estius. Ibid.
but that rather there is a manifest allusion to Isai. 45. 9. Woe unto him that
striveth with his Maker: Let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the
Earth: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou? or thy
work, he has no hands? Which words (he says) do verily signify thus much,
that God of his mere pleasure does so determine of men's estate either the one
way, or the other, as a Potter does make of clay what work he pleases. And
hitherto (he says) does that belong, which follows (Isai. 45. 10.) Woe unto
him that says unto his Father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What have
thou brought forth? For (says he) what has man deserved, why his parents
should engender him such, or such? And a little before by diverse arguments he
confutes those, who think that the Apostle speaking of De Reprobatione non
perinde omnes consentiunt. Quidam enim dicunt Apostolum supponere massam humani
generis infectam peccato original, etc. Verum si diligenter expendantur ea,
quae hoc cap. habet Apost. prorsus apparebit, tam Reprobationem, quam
electionem absolute non ex ullis esse praevisis meritis. Nam, 1. cum dicit, Cum
nihil egissent aut boni, aut mali, tam excludit actionem malam Esau, quam
actionem bonam Jacob, and consequenter tam malum meritum Reprobationis, quam
bonum meritum electionis. 2. Quaestioni isti, Numquid iniquitas, etc. non
respondet, ideo non esse, quia tota massa peccato vitiata est, etc. sed ita
respondet, ut tam horum Reprobationem, quam illorum electionem referat in solam
Dei voluntatem, eo tandem dicto curiosum interrogatorem compescens, O homo tu
quis, etc. 3. Comparatio illa de figulo ex eadem massa, etc. massae corruptae
hypothesim excludit. Hic enim profecto nihil in massa supponitur, nisi quod sit
indifferens, and formabilis ad utrumque -- In hanc sententiam, etc. Lamb. Hugo.
Vid. S. Thom. Cajetan. Lyran. Tileman. Perer. etc. Estius ad Romans 9. 13.
Reprobation does suppose the lump of mankind infected with original sin.
If (says he) those things, which the Apostle delivers in this Chapter, be
diligently considered, it will fully appear, that as well Reprobation as
Election is absolutely not of foreseen merits. For 1. When he says, neither
having done any good, or evil, he excludes as well the evil action of Esau,
as the good action of Jacob, and consequently as well the ill merit of
Reprobation, as the good merit of Election. 2. To that question, Is there
unrighteousness with God? he does not answer, that therefore there is not,
because the whole lump is depraved by sin, etc. but he answers so, as that
he refers as well the Reprobation of these, as the election of those, unto the
sole Will of God, and so represses the curious inquirer, O man, who art thou,
etc. 3. That comparison of a Potter of the same lump making one vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor, does exclude the supposition of a corrupt
lump. For here verily is nothing supposed in the lump, but that it is
indifferent, and may be fashioned both the one way, and the other.

Thus this learned Papist goes as far in the point both of Election and of
Reprobation as any Protestant (that I know) whatsoever. Neither would he have
us think that he goes alone; for he cites many, as Lombard, Hugo de S.
Victore, Aquinas, Cajetan, Lyra, Titleman, and Pererius, as being of the same
opinion with him, and interpreting the words of the Apostle in the same manner.
And this (I suppose) may suffice to vindicate the Doctrine of Protestants (even
such as go highest in this point) as touching Reprobation.

Now for the Scriptures objected against us, the first, viz. Wis. 1. 13. is not
Canonical. Hierome brandes that book called the the Wisdom of Solomon, as
falsely entitled; and says, that it is no where to be Fertur, etc. Et alius
Pseudepigraphus, qui Sapientia Solomonis inscribitur. -- Apud Hebraeos nusquam
est: quin and ipse stylus Graecam eloquentiam redolet, and nonnulli Scriptorum
veterum hunc esse Judaei Philonis affirmant. Sicut ergo Judith, and Tobiae, and
Maccabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas
non recipit: sit and haec duo volumina (Ecclesiasticum, and Librum Sapientiae)
legit ad ae dificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum
confirmandam. Hier. praefat. in Proverb.
found among the Hebrews (to whom the Oracles of God were committed, Romans 3.
2.) and that the style does smell of Greek eloquence, and that some ancient
writers affirm it to be the work of Philo a Jew. Therefore (says he) as the
Church does read indeed the Books of Judith, Tobie and the Maccabees, but does
not receive them amongst the Canonical Scriptures: so also does it read these
two volumes (viz. Ecclesiasticus, and the wisdom of Solomon) for the edifying
of the people, but not for the confirming of Ecclesiastical Doctrines. But
suppose it were Canonical, the place alleged is answered to our hand by one
of the Roman Church, Sensus hujus loci est, quod Deus no^ intendit perse primo
mortem alicujus, sed ratione alterius majoris boni conjuncti. Secu^do
explicatur locus iste de morte, quantu^ ad ejus causa^, scil. peccatu^. etc.
viz. Alvarez: when it is said, God made not death, the meaning (he says) is,
that God does not primarily of it self intend the death of any but in respect
of some other great good that is joined with it. And again, that place (he
says) is expounded of death in respect of the cause, to wit, sin. These
expositions of the place do free the Doctrine of Protestants from suffering
any prejudice by it, were the authority of it greater then indeed it is. The
next place is that, 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, etc.
Austine gives diverse interpretations of those words. First, thus, that the
meaning is, that God will have all to be saved that Debemus ita intelligere,
etc. tanquam diceretur, Nullum hominem fieri salvum, nisi quem salvum fieri
ipse voluerit, etc. Aut certe sic dictum est etc. ut omnes homines omne genus
hominum intelligamus per quascunque differentias distributum, reges, privatos,
nobiles, ignobiles, etc. Enchir. cap. 103.
are saved, and that none but such as he will save, can be saved. Secondly,
this that by all men are meant men of all sorts, how ever distinguished, Kings
and private persons, noble and ignoble, etc. This he shows to be agreeable
both to the Context, and also to the phrase of Scripture, Luke 11. 42. You
tithe Mint, and Rue, and every Herb, i. e. every kind of Herb. This latter
exposition of the Apostles Alvar. de Auxil. disput. 33.
words Alvarez says is also followed by Fulgentius, Beda, and Anselme. The
same Alvarez relates two other interpretations, which Austine gives of these
words, viz. first this, God will have all men to be saved, that is, he makes
men to will, or desire that all may be saved, as the Spirit is said to make
intercession for us, Romans 8. Deus vult, i. e. facit ut homines velint, omnes
salvos fieri, etc. Sic explicat S. Aug. de corrept. and great. cap. 15.
26. that is, makes us to make intercession or supplication, etc.

Qui omnes homines vult salvos fieri] h. e. vult and facit pios homines velle
seu desiderare omnium salutem. -- Quamvis Deus non velit omnes salvos facere,
sed solos electos: vult tamen omnes salvos fieri, scil. per nos, and quantum in
nobis est, dum praecipit ut omnium salutem quaeramus, and hoc ipsum studium in
nobis operatur. -- Hanc expositionem prae caeteris amplectimur. Est. a^ 1 Timothy
2. 4.
Estius upon the place does embrace this Exposition before any other. Who will
have all men to be saved] that is (says he) He wills, and makes godly men
to desire the salvation of all. -- Though God will not save all, but only the
Elect; yet he will have all to be saved, to wit, by us, as much as in us lies,
in that he commands us to seek the salvation of all, and this desire and
endeavor he works in us. -- This Exposition we embrace rather then any of
the rest.

The other Exposition which Quarta explicatio docet loqui Apostolum de
voluntate Dei antecedente, quae est voluntas signi, and voluntas secundum quid,
ut dicitur disput: sequenti. Hanc explicationem etiam tradit S. Aug. lib. ad
art. sibi falso impositos, art. 2. and cap. 15. de corrept. and great. etc.
Alvar. ubi supra.

Voluntas Dei antecedens est, quae fertur in objectum aliquod absolute
consideratum, and secundum se; dicitur autem haec voluntas antecedens, non quia
antecedit bonum, vel malum usum nostri arbitrii, ut arbitrantur auctores primae
sententiae, sed quia antecedit voluntatem qua Deus fertur in objectum
consideratum cum aliquo adjuncto, quae est consequens, and posterior
consideratio ejus. -- Si consideretur salus reproborum secundum se, and
absolute, sic est a Deo volita: si autem consideretur, secundum quod habet
adjunctam privationem, aut carentiam majoris boni, viz. boni universi
manifestationis justitiae divinae in reprobis, and majoris splendoris
misericordiae ejus in electis, sic non est volita a Deo. Et secundum hoc
asserimus, quod voluntate consequente Deus non velit omnes falvos fieri, sed
solum praedestinatos. Alvar. de Auxil. Disput. 34. number. 3.


Alvarez relates, is, that the Apostle speaks of Gods antecedent will. Thus
(he says) Austine does expound it in diverse places, and for this Exposition
he also cites Damascene, Prosper, Theophylaot, Oecumenius, Aquinas, as also
Chrysostom and Ambrose, and says that it is common among the Doctors. Now in
the next Disputation he tells us that Gods antecedent Will is that, which
respects the object simply considered, and by it self: and that this will is
called antecedent, not because it goes before the good, or ill use of our will,
as some think, but because it goes before that will, whereby God respects the
object considered with some adjunct, which is the consequent, and latter
consideration of it. If (says he) the salvation of the Reprobate be
considered simply by it self, so God does will it: but if it be considered, as
it has adjoined the privation, or want of a greater good, to wit, the
universal good of manifesting Gods Justice in the Reprobate, and of causing
his Mercy the more to shine forth in the Elect, so God does not will it. And in
this respect were affirmed, that God by a consequent will does not will that
all shall be saved, but only such as are predestinate.

Now take any of all these four Explications of the Apostles words, wherein
he says, that God will have all men to be saved (as for my part I like best
either the second, or the last) take any of them, I say, and the Apostles words
are nothing against that which Protestants hold concerning Reprobation. As for
that of Peter, that God is not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Bellarmine himself expounds both it, and the former place, viz. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
of that Verum est, Deum velle omnes salvos fieri voluntate illa, quam recte
Theologi antecedentem vocant. Bell. de great. and lib. arb. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Will of God, which Divines call Gods Antecedent will. Now what that Antecedent
will of God is we have seen even now out of Alvarez: if Bellarmine did
understand it otherwise (as Alvarez notes that some did) he is confuted by
Alvarez in the place above cited. Where he also cites Austine saying, Many are
not saved, not because they will not, but because God will not: which without
all controversy Multi salvi non fiunt, non quia ipsi nolint, sed quia Deus non
vult; quod absque ulla controversia manifestatur in parvulis. Aug. apud Alvar.
disput. 34. number. 5. Ergo conditio, quae includitur in voluntate antecedente,
qua Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, non est ista, si ipsi voluerint, aut
per eos non steter it. Alvar. Ibid.
is manifested in young children: whence he inferrs that the condition, which
is included in Gods Antecedent will, whereby he will have all men to be saved,
is not this, if they will, and if they do not hinder it.

And Bellarmine himself also, though he Verissimum est, non fieri omnes salvos
quia ipsi nolunt: nam si vellent, Deus eis utique non deesset. Caeterum nemo
vult salvus fieri, nisi Deus praeveniendo, and preparando voluntatem faciat eum
velle: cur autem Deus non faciat omnes velle, quis novit sensum Domini? and
quis consiliarius ejus fuit? Bell. loco proxime citato.
say, It is most true, that all are not saved, because they will not: for if
they would, God would not be wanting unto them. Yet immediately he adds, But
none can have a will to be saved, except God by preventing and preparing the
will, make him to will it. And why God does not make all to will this, who has
known the mind of the Lord? and who has been his Counselor? (Romans 11. 34.)
The last place of Scripture, which the Marquess objecteth, is Ezech. 33. 11.
As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the death of a sinner.

Now to this also we have Alvarez to answer for us, viz. first that it is meant
of spiritual death, which is by sin. Which Intelligitur de morte spirituali,
quae est per peccatum. Hanc enim non vult Deus sed solum permittit. Colligitur
haec explicatio ex contextu: ait enim, sed magis ut convertatur, and vivat. Si
autem explicetur de morte secunda, scil. de damnatione aeterna, dicendum est,
quod Deus non vult hanc mortem alicui infer, nisi supposito peccato, ut disp.
109. and 110. patebit. Alvar. de Auxil. disp. 33. number. 5.
God does only permit, but does not delight in it. And this Explication he
says, is confirmed by the words following, but rather that he be converted,
and live. And if it be expounded of the second death, which is eternal
damnation, the meaning, he says, is, that God will not inflict this upon any
but for sin.

But though God will not inflict damnation upon the Reprobate, but for sin;
yet this same Alvarez (as I have showed abundantly before) and so other Writers
of the Church of Rome do tell us, that God by his eternal Decree of
Reprobation of his mere Will, and Pleasure, does determine to suffer the
Reprobate to sin, and so to damn them for it. And thus now I have made it
appear (I hope) sufficiently, that by the consent of the Romanists themselves
the Scriptures alleged are not repugnant to the Doctrine of Protestants
concerning Reprobation: neither (I think) will the Fathers, whom the Marquess
cites, be against it. The first of them is Austine, who (as has before been
showed) is as much for us as we need desire. He is here produced against us,
but so as that I know not easily how to find what he says. For only li. 1.
de Civit. Dei. is cited, but no Chapter, whereas there are no less then 36. in
that book: this is a strange kind of citing Authors, but the fault may be in
the Printer, or in some other, and not in the Marquess. As for Cyprian, who is
next cited, I see not any thing in the place pointed at, which is to this
purpose, except this, Seeing it is written, Nam cum Scriptum sit, Deus mortem
non fecit, nec laetatur in perditione vivorum, utique qui neminem vult perire,
cupit peccatores poenitentiam agere, and per poenitentiam denuo ad vitam
redire. Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 2. vel edit. Pamel. Epist. 52.
God made not death, nor does he rejoice in the destruction of the living,
surely he that would not have any to perish, desires that sinners may come to
Repentance, and that by Repentance they may return unto life again. Now that
which Cyprian here alleges, viz. God made not death, etc. I have showed
before by the testimony of Hierome to be no Canonical Scripture, nor of
sufficient force to decide any point of controversy: as also that if it were,
yet by the acknowledgement of Alvarez it makes not against Gods Decree of
Reprobation, which we maintain. It has also been showed before in what
sense God would have none to perish, viz. by his Antecedent Will, with which
yet will stand the Decree of Reprobation, as we hold it; which likewise has
been showed, and that from both Bellarmine, and from Alvarez also. And that God
desires sinners may come to Repentance, and so to life, Protestants, (that I
know) do not deny, though they hold that God does give (and so from all
eternity did purpose to give) Repentance unto some, and not to others, as he
pleases; which I have also showed to be acknowledged by Bellarmine, Alvarez,
Estius, and others of the Church of Rome. And it is most clear by that of the
Apostle, If God peradventure will give them Repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. and that,
He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardneth. Romans
9. 18.

The third and last Father, who is here alleged, is Ambrose de Cain and Abel
lib. 2. but what Chapter, (whereas there are ten in that Book) is not
mentioned. Now I find that Chap. 3. has something, which Ideo omnibus opem
sanitatis detulit, ut quicunque perierit, mortis suae causas sibi ascribat, qui
curari noluit, cum remedium haberet, quo posset evadere: Christi autem
manifesta in omnes praedicetur misericordia, eo quod ii qui pereunt, sua
pereant negligentia, qui autem salvantur, secundum Christi sententia^
liberentur, qui omnes homines vult salvos fieri, and in agnitionem veritatis
venire. Amb. de Cain and Abel. l. 2. c. 3.
probably was aimed at by the Marquess, viz. this, Christ therefore offered
the help of healing unto all, that whosoever perishes, may ascribe the cause
of his death to himself, who when he had a remedy, whereby he might escape,
would not be cured. And that Christ's mercy toward all might be made manifest,
in that they that perish, do perish by their own negligence, but they that are
saved, are freed according to Christ's sentence, who will have all men to be
saved, and to come to the acknowledgement of the truth. Now I know no
Protestant but he will assent unto this, that whosoever perish, must ascribe
the cause to themselves, and that they perish through their own default. I have
before cited Calvin asserting thus much, That none do perish without their
desert. But this assertion of his is very well consistent with his Asserimus
nullos perire immerentes. Calv. Instit. li. 3. c. 23. Sect 12.
Doctrine about Reprobation, as I have showed by the testimonies of diverse
famous Writers of the Church of Rome. And whereas Ambrose says, that such as
perish, had a remedy, whereby they might escape, and that they therefore
perish, because they would not be cured. No Protestants, (I suppose) will deny,
but that such as perish through unbelief, if they did believe, should be
saved: but yet nevertheless not Protestants only, but Papists also (as I have
showed) do hold, that God from all eternity did decree and purpose to give
faith unto some, and not unto others, and that merely of his own will and
pleasure. And that therefore according to Austine (whose words are cited
before) the prime and supreme cause why some are not saved, is not because they
will not, but because God will not. For that which Ambrose has in the last
place, who will have all men to be saved, etc. enough has been said before to
show, that in the judgment of Austine, and diverse Romanists, it is nothing
against the absolute decree of Reprobation; and so I have done with this point.

In the next place the Marquess speaks of a man's assurance Page 66. and 67.
of his salvation, saying, that Protestants hold that a man ought to assure
himself of it; and to prove the contrary, which they of the Roman Church do
hold, he alleges 1 Cor. 9. 27. saying, S. Paul was not assured, but that
whilst he Preached to others, he himself might become a castaway. And Romans
11. 20. Thou stand in the Faith: be not high minded, but fear, etc. lest
thou also may be cut off. And Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with
fear and termbling.

Answ. Concerning this point, Protestants hold, 1. That a Christian may be
assured of his salvation. 2. That a Christian ought to labor for this
assurance. For the former of these positions we have diverse places of
Scriptures. As first that Famous place Romans 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, etc. Nay in all these things we are more then conquerours through
Him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. So also that 2 Cor. 5.
1. We know then if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have
a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, And
v. 6, 7, 8. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whiles we are here
in the body, we are absent from the Lord. For we walk by faith, and not by
sight. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body,
and to be present with the Lord. And that Phil. 1. 21. To me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain. And that 2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom. And in the same
Chapter v. 6, 7, 8. I am now ready to be offered, and my departure is at hand.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, etc. So also S.
Peter, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to
his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, through the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us. 1 Pet. 1.
3, 4. This hope, which believers have, or may have of salvation, is a lively
hope; it is a hope, that makes not ashamed. Romans 5. 5. because they are sure
to obtain that which they hope for, and shall not be disappointed of it. Hence
it is also that believers rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; 1
Pet. 1. 8. because they know they shall receive the end of their faith, even
the salvation of their souls. v. 9.

We have also Fathers to testify this truth; There flourishes with us (says
Cyprian) the strength of hope, and the firmness of faith; and amongst the very
Viget apud nos spei robur, and firmitas fidei, and inter ipsas seculi labentis
ruinas erecta men's est, and immobilis virtus, and nunquam non laeta patientia,
and de Deo suo semper anima secura: sicut per prophetam Spiritus S. loquitur,
etc. Ego autem in Domino exultabo, and gaudebo in Deo salvatore meo. Cypian. ad
Demetrian.
ruins of the decaying world the mind is raised up, and virtue is unmovable,
and patience is ever joyful, and the soul is always secure and confident of
her God. And immediately he confirms this by that of the Prophet Habakkuk,
Although the fig-three shall not blossom, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation. Hab. 3. 17, 18.

So again the same Father, Quis hic anxietatis and sollicitudinis locus est?
quis inter haec trepidus and moestus est, nisi cui spes and fid. s deest? Ejus
est enim mortem timere, qui ad Christum nolit ire: ejus est ad Christum nolle
ire, qui se non credat cum Christo incipere regnare. Scriptum est enim, justum
fide vivere. Si justus es, and fide vivis, si vere in Deum credis, cur non cum
Christo futurus, and de Domini pollicitatione securus, quod ad Christum voceris
amplecteris, and quod diabolo careas, gratularis? -- Deus de hoc mundo
recedentibus immortalitatem atque aeternitatem pollicetur, and tu dubitas: hoc
est; Deum omnino non nosse; hoc est Christum credentium Dominum and magistrum
peccato incredulitatis oftendere; hoc est in Ecclesia constitutum fidem in domo
fidei non habere. Cypr. de mortalit.
what place is there here for anxiety and carfulness? who in the midst of
these things can be fearful and sad, except he want hope and faith? It is for
him to fear death, that would not go unto Christ: it is for him to be unwilling
to go to Christ, that does not believe that he does begin to reign with
Christ. For it is written, The just shall live by faith. If thou be just,
and do live by faith, if thou do truly believe in God, seeing thou shall
be with Christ, and art sure of Gods promise, why do thou not embrace this
that thou art called unto Christ, and art glad that thou art freed from the
Devil? -- God does promise immortality and eternity to those that depart out
of this life, and thou doubtest: this is not at all to know God: this is to
offend Christ, the Lord and Master of Believers, with the sin of unbelief:
this is to be in the Church, the house of faith, and yet to have no faith. Here
we see how earnest Cyprian is to prove that Christians may, yea ought to be
confident against the fear of death, and that because they may and ought to be
assured of the life to come.

Thus also Credo promittenti, Salvator loquitur, veritas pollicetur, ipse dixit
mihi, Qui au dit verba mea, and credit ei qui misit me, habet vitam aeternam,
and transitum facit de morte in vitam, and in judicium non veniet; Ego audivi
verba Dmmini mei, credidi. Jam infidelis cum essem, factus sum fidelis, sicut
ipse monuit, transii a morte ad vitam, ad judicium non venio, non praesumptione
mea, sed ipsius promissione. Aug. tract. 22. in Joh.
Austine, I believe (says he) him that promises; The Savior speaks, the
truth promises, he has said unto me, He that hears my words, and believes
him that sent me, has eternal life, and is passed from death to life, and
shall not come into condemnation. I have heard the words of my Lord, I have
believed. Now whereas I was an unbeliever, I am made a Believer, as he has
said, I am passed from death to life, I come not into condemnation, not by my
presumption, but by his promise.

To this purposes also Sic ad ortum solis justitiae, Sacramentum absconditum a
seculis de praedestinatis, and beatificandis, emergere quodammodo incipit ex
abysso aeternitatis, du^ quisque vocatus per timorem, justificatus per amorem,
praesumit se quoque esse de numero beatorum; sciens nimirum quia quos
justificavit, illos and magnificavit. Quid enim? Audit se vocari, cum timore
concutitur, sentit and justificari, du^ amore perfunditur, and de
magnificatione disfidet? Ber. Epist. 107.
Bernard, The Sun of Righteousness arising (says he) the mystery concerning
the predestinate, and those that shall be made blessed, which was so long hid,
begins after a sort to come up out of the depth of eternity, whiles every one
being called by fear, and justified by love (that is, by Faith working through
love, as he said a little before) does assure himself that he is of the
number of the blessed, Knowing that whom he has justified them he has also
glorified. For why? He hears that he is called, when he is moved with fear;
he perceives that he is justified, when he is filled with love: and shall he
doubt of his being glorified?

And again, Thou have O man (says he) the justifying spirit a revealer of
this secret, and so testifying unto thy spirit, that thou Habes homo hujus
arcani indicem spiritum justificantem, eoque ipso testificantem spiritui tuo
quod filius Dei and ipse sis. Agnosce consilium Dei in justificatione tui --
Praesens namque justificatio tui, and Divini est consilii revelatio, and
quaedam ad futuram gloriam praeparatio. Aut certe praedestinatio ipsa potius
praeparatio est, justificatio autem magis jam appropinquatio. Bern. Ibid;
also art the Son of God. Acknowledge the counsel of God in thy justification.
-- For thy present justification is both a revelation of Gods Counsel, and
also a certain preparation unto future glory. Or truly predestination it self
is rather a preparation, and justification is rather an appropinquation unto it.

And again, Who is righteous, but he that does requite Gods Justus autem quis
est, nisi qui amanti se Deo vicem rependit amoris? Quod non fit nisi revelante
Spiritu per fidem homini aeternum Dei propositum super sua salute futura. Quae
sane revelatio non est aliud quam infusio gratiae spiritualis, per quam dum
facta carnis mortficantur, homo ad regnum praeparatur, quod caro and sanguis
non possident, simul accipiens in uno spiritu and unde se presumat amatum, and
unde redamet, ne gratis amatus si^. Bernard. Ibid.
love with love again? which is not done but when the spirit by Faith does
reveal unto a man Gods eternal purpose concerning his future salvation. Which
revelation surely is no other thing but the infusion of spiritual grace, by
which the deeds of the flesh are mortified, and so a man is prepared for that
Kingdom, which flesh and blood do not possess, receiving together by one
spirit both this, that he is assured that he is loved, and also this, that he
does love again, that so he may not be ungrateful to him, of whom he is loved.

Thus both Scriptures and Fathers testify that Christians may be assured of
their salvation. And that this assurance may be had, may be proved also by all
that has been said before concerning the stability of Faith once had, and the
certainty of persevering in the estate of grace, if a man be once in it. For
hence it follows, that if a man can be assured that he is in the estate of
Grace, he may also be assured of his salvation. Now that he may be assured of
his being in the state of grace some of the Romish Church, and that since
Luthers time, have maintained, as namely Catharinus, and the Author of the
Book called Enchiridium Coloniense, both which are mentioned in this respect
by Bellarmine. And because the Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 9. Bellar. de
Justif l. 3. c. 3.
does seem to determine the contrary, therefore Eisingrenius has written a
whole book to show that the determination of the Council is not indeed
against this, that a man may be assured that he has true grace in him. The
book I have seen and read many years ago, though now I have it not; And I
remember he holds that a man may be as sure that he has true grace, and that
his sins are forgiven, as he is sure that twice two make four, and that the
whole is greater then a part, and as he is sure of those things which he sees
with his eyes, and feels with his hands. That a man may have this assurance of
his present estate the Scripture plainly shows, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. We know that we
are passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren.

Whereupon says Nemo interroget hominem, redeat unusquisque ad cor suum, si
ibi invenerit charitatem fraternam, securus sit quia transit a morte ad vitam.
Aug. tract. 5. in 1 John
Austine, Let none ask man, let every one return unto his own heart, if there
he can find brotherly love let him be secure that he is passed from death to
life. So Romans 8. 16. The Spirit himself does bear witness with our spirits,
that we are the sons of God. Upon which words Ex hoc testimonio clare
videmus, credendum nobis esse quod sumus filii Dei. Caje. in Romans 8. 16.
Cajetan says thus, By this testimony we see clearly, that we must believe
that we are the sons of God. So also 1 Ioh. 3. 24. Hereby we know that he (viz.
Christ) abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. And 1 Cor. 2. 12.
We have received the spirit of God, that we may know the things that are freely
given unto us of God. Bellarmine says this place is not meant of the knowledge
of Non loquitur Apostolus de notita beneficiorum Dei, quae in particulari ad
hunc, autillum pertinent, sed de notitia beneficiorum, quae Deus praeparavit
electis suis, qualia sunt inprimis haereditas, and gloria regni caelorum. Bell.
de Iustif. lib. 3. cap 9.
Gods benefits, which belong unto this or that man in particular, but of the
knowledge of those benefits, which God has prepared for his Elect, as the
inheritance and glory of the Kingdom of Heaven. But if the Apostle speaks
only of our knowing what good things God has prepared in general for the
Elect, what is this more then appertains to the very Devils? for they know
that God has prepared Heaven, and happiness for the Elect; Cajetan therefore
is more ingenuous, expounding it of the holy Ghost infused into Spiritus S.
infusus Apostolis causavit in illis notitiam certam donorum Dei in eisdem --
Apostoli certam habebant notitiam, quod fides, spes, charitas, and alia dona
gratis data eis erant a Deo. Cajet. ad 1 Cor. 2. 12.
the Apostles, and causing them certainly to know the gifts of God, that were
in them. The Apostles (says he) had a certain knowledge, that Faith, Hope,
Charity, and other gifts, were freely given unto them of God. To add but one
place more, viz. that 1 Ioh. 5. 13. These things have I written unto you that
believe on the name of the Son of God, that you may know that ye have eternal
life. True (says Bellarmine) the Apostle says indeed, These things I write
Ait quidem, Haec scribo vobis qui creditis, ut sciatis, quia vitam habetis
aeternam: sed non ait, Haec scribo vobis, ut sciatis vos habere fidem, qualis
requiritur. Bell. de Iustif. lib. 1. cap. 11.
unto you that believe, that you may know that you have eternal life: but he
does not say, These things I write unto you, that you may know that you
believe, as you ought to believe. But (say I) the Apostle here did suppose that
they that truly believe, may know that they do so; for otherwise how should
they that believe, know that therefore they have life eternal, except they
first know that they do believe?

Now for the Scriptures objected against us, that 1 Cor. 9. 27. Lest having
preached to others, I my self should be a castaway, cannot be so understood,
as that Paul was uncertain either of his present justification, or of his
future glorification; for that will not consist with many other sayings of his
before cited. The meaning therefore is only this, that Paul's care was that his
Preaching and his conversation might be suitable, and that the one might not
confound the other. The word here rendered castaway, and 2 Cor. 13. 5.
reprobate, is neither here nor there taken in opposition to elect, but is as
much as reproved, so the word (...).
properly does import; as without the privative Particle it signifies approved,
1 Cor. 11. 19. That Romans 11. 20. Thou stand by (...).
faith, be not high minded, but fear, is nothing against assurance of
salvation, which does well consist with fear, viz. such a fear as is opposite
to high-mindednesse; this fear making us keep close unto God, and not to
depart from him, Ier. 32. 40. And whereas it is said Romans 11. 22. Lest thou
also may (or as we read it, otherwise thou also shall) be cut off, it is
spoken by the Apostle to the Church of Rome, and serves well to show that any
particular visible Church, even that of Rome, may fail; but from hence cannot
be inferred, that a true Believer may fall away, and perish. Neither is the
assurance of salvation infringed by that Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling. For as for our working out of our salvation,
it hinders not but Hope makes not ashamed. Romans 5 5. And every one that has
this hope, purifieth himself, etc. 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
that we may be assured of our salvation. We may be assured of that, which yet
we must use means to obtain. Ezekiah was assured that fifteen years should
be added unto his life, because God by his Prophet had told him so, Isai. 38.
5. Yet he used means for his recovery, v. 21. and so no question but he did
for the preservation of his life, by eating and drinking, and the like. Paul
also was assured, that both he, and all in the Ship with him should escape,
because God by his Angel had revealed it unto him, Act. 27. 23, 24, 25. yet
nevertheless he saw it needful Ut in timore Deo serviant, id est, non altu^
sapiant, sed timeant, quod significat, non superbiant, sed humiles sint.

Aug. de corrept. et great 6. 9.


to use means, whereby they might escape, Acts 27. 31. And for those words,
with fear and trembling, they do not imply diffidence and doubting, but
humility and lowliness of mind; fear and trembling being here the same as
Romans 11. 20. viz. that which is opposite to pride and high-mindednesse. The
Apostle 2 Cor. 7. 15. says that the Corinthians received Titus with fear and
trembling, that is, with all humility and reverence. So we must work out our
own salvation with fear and trembling, that is with reverence and with godly
fear, as is expressed Heb. 12. 28. But this is no argument at all why we may
not be assured of our salvation; no more then it follows that therefore the
Corinthians could not be assured of Titus his love and good will toward them,
and that be came unto them for their good, because they received him in that
manner.

David Psalm. 2. 11. bids serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Therefore there may be fear and trembling, and yet rejoicing too, and
consequently assurance of Gods love and favor; for without assurance of it
there can be no sound rejoicing in it. Joy (as Ramundus de Sabunde observes)
does arise from this, that Gaudium oritur ex hoc, quod aliqua res scit se
habere id quod habet, non ex hoc, quod habet. Ramund. de Sabund. Theolog.
natural. tit. 95.
one knows that he has that which he has, and not merely from this that he
has it.

Now for the fathers here alleged by the Marquess, viz. Am. Ser. 5. in Psalm.
118. Basil. in Constit. Monast. cap. 2. Hiero. li. 2. advers. Pelag. Chrysostom.
hom. 87. in Ioh. Aug. in Psalm. 40. Bern. Ser. 3. de Advent. and Ser. 1. de
Sept. I answer, it is true, Ambrose says, David desired that his reproach,
which Volebat auferri opprobrium, quod suspicatus est, vel quia cogitaverat in
cord, and non fecerat, and paenitentia licet abolitum, suspectus tamen erat ne
forte adbuc maneret ejus opprobrium, and ideo Deum precatur ut illud auferat,
qui solus novit quod nescire potest etiam ipse qui fecit. Ambros. Ser. 5. in
Ps. 118. (vel. 119) 39.
he suspected, might be taken away, either because he had thought in his heart,
but had not done it; and though it were abolished by repentance, yet he was
fearful lest perhaps the reproach of it did yet remain; and therefore he
prays God to take it away, who alone knows that which even he may be ignorant
of that has done it. But this does not argue that a man cannot in Ambroses
judgment be assured of his salvation; it only shows (contrary to what the
Papists hold) that a man cannot be justified and saved by his own inherent
righteousness, because though he be otherwise never so righteous, yet still
there is some sin in him, which he knows not of; according to that of the
Apostle (which Ambrose there cites) I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4. The Apostle denies that he was justified by
that righteousness that was in him, though he had the testimony of a good
conscience to rejoice in, 2 Cor. 1. 12. yet was he nevertheless assured that
he was justified, and should be saved through faith in Christ Jesus, as has
been proved before from Romans 8. 33. etc. and from other places. This was all
that Subobscure dictum videtur, sed explanavit Apostolus quod hic videbatur
obscurum, ubi ait, Nihil mihi conscius sum, sed non in hoc justificatus sum.
Sciebat n. se esse hominem, and sibi cavebat ut poterat, ne post suscepta
baptismi Sacramenta peccaret; ideoque delicti sibi conscius non erat: sed quia
homo erat, peccatorem se fatebatur, sciens unum esse Jesum lumen verum, qui
peccatum non fecit, nec est inventus in ore ejus dolus, ipsum solum
justificari, qui vere alienus esset a lapsu. Ambr. Ibid.
Ambrose meant, as appears by his words immediately going before those
objected; The Apostle (he says) Explaines David's meaning, saying, I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. He knew that he was a man,
and did take heed to himself as he could, that he might not sin after his
Baptism; therefore he knew nothing by himself; but because he was a man, he
confessed himself a sinner, knowing that Jesus alone is the true light, who
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, that he alone is justified
(i. e. perfectly just in himself) who was truly without all sin.

That which Basil (whose words I find in Bellarmine, though otherwise I have
him not to peruse) says, is directly to the same Bell de Iustif di. 3. cap. 7.
purpose, and imports no more then that of Ambrose. We do not understand
(says he) many things wherein we sin. Therefore the Apostle says, I know
Multa peccantes, plurima neque intelligimus. Quapropter dicit Apost. Nihil mihi
conscius sum, sed non in hoc justificatus sum, h. e. multa pecco, and non
intelligo. Bas. de Constit. Monast. cap. 2.
nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, that is, I sin in many
things, and am not aware of it. For Hierome, he is too loosely cited both by
the Marquess, and before him by Bellarmine, there being eleven long Chapters
in that book which is mentioned, but in which of them he says any thing
against us, they do not tell us. However the words objected are these. Sunt
justi, ad quos pervenit quasi opus impiorum, and sunt impii, ad quos perverni
quasi opus justorum. Hoc idcirco dicitur, quia certum judicium solius Dei est.
Hier. adv. Pelag l. 2. c. 2.
There are righteous men, to whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked: and there are wicked men, to whom it happens according to the work
of the righteous. This is said (viz. Eccles. 8. 14.) because certain judgment
belongs only unto God. These words by search I find in Hierome; but it plainly
appears, that his scope only is to prove against the Pelagians, that no man
in this life is so righteous, as to be without sin, which is not against us
in this controversy, but for us in another, as has been showed before. A
little after those words Hierome says thus, What mortal man is not taken with
some Quis mortalium aliquo errore non capitur? -- Vix salvatur (justus) in eo,
quod in quibusdam Dei indiget misericordia. Hieron. Ibid.
error? And that the righteous shall scarcely be saved (1 Pet. 4. 18.) because
in some things (or rather indeed in all things) he stands in needs of Gods
mercy. In the former Nihil mihi conscius sum, etc. Qui hoc dicebat, nullius
utique peccati sibi conscius erat, sed quia legerat, Delicta quis intelligit?
etc. idcirco temperabat sententiam, etc. Hieron. advers. Pelag. l. 2. c. 1.
Chapter Hierome brings in that of S. Paul; I know nothing by my self, etc.
and says, that though the Apostle were not conscious to himself of sin, yet
he did not justify himself, because he had read (Psalm. 19. 13.) who can
understand his his faults? Thus then his testimony makes indeed against the
perfection of a man's own righteousness; but not against his assurance of
salvation, which may well stand without the other. Chrysostom in the place
cited, comments upon that Ioh. 21. 17. Peter was grieved, Propterea
contristatus sum, ne forte me amare arbitratus, non amem: ut antea cum me
fortem and constantem putarem, postmodum imbecillis deprehensus sum. Chrysostom.
Hom. 87. in Joh.
because he said unto him the third time, love thou me? and he says, that
Peter feared lest now he thought himself to love Christ, when he did not; as
before he was deceived in thinking himself stout and constant, when it proved
otherwise.

But 1. Though Chrysostom so take the words of Peter, as if he might then be
mistaken in that opinion which he had of himself: yet it does not follow that
therefore he should hold that a man cannot be assured that he has saving
grace in him.

2. Austine gives another, and a better reason, why Peter was grieved that
Christ did ask him that question the third time, viz. because thereby Christ
(as he thought) seemed not to believe him; not that he Cum jam tertio ille
taedio afficeretur, quasi non sibi crediderit. Aug. in 1 John Tract. 5.
suspected his own heart, but he feared that Christ did suspect him, because
he did ask him the same question thrice over.

Maldonate the Jesuit cites Theodorus Heracleotes, Magis probo quod scribit
Theodorus Heracleotes, contristatum fuisse, quod cum Christus eum tam sepe, and
tam diligenter interrogaverat, indicare videretur se illum suspectum habere
etc. propterea respondisse, Domine tu nosti, etc. q. d. Tu, qui omnia nosti,
ignorare non potes verum esse, quod dico: quid ergo, quasi mihi non credens, me
tam saepe rogas? Maldon. in Joh. 21. 16, 17, 18.
as also thus expounding it, and saying, that therefore Peter answered, Lord,
thou know all things, thou know that I love Thee; as if he should have
said, Thou that know all things, can not but know that it is true that I
say: and therefore why do thou ask me so often, as if thou did not
believe me? This Exposition Maldonate does prefer before the other of
Chrysostom, which he also mentions, and says, that Quod subjungit, Domine
tu scis, non solum moderationis causa dictum puto, sed multo etiam magis, ut
quod dixerat, etiam, ipsus Christi testimonio confirmaret. Maldon. Ibid.
Peter saying, Lord, thou know, did speak so, not so much out of modesty, as
to confirm that which he had said, (viz. that he loved Christ) by Christ's own
testimony. Austine in Psalm. 40. has nothing (that I can see) to the purpose; I
suppose it should Novi quia justitia Dei manet, ultrum mea maneat nesclo.
Terret enim me Apost. dicens, Qui se putat stare, videat ne cadat. Aug. in
Psalm. 41. 8.
be in Psalm 41. from whence Bellarmine does produce this, I know that the
righteousness of God does remain, whether my righteousness may remain, I
know not. For the Apostle does make me to fear, saying, Let him that thinks
he stands, take heed lest he fall. (1 Cor. 10. 12.) I acknowledge Ergo quia
non est in me firmitas mihi, nec est mihi spes de me, ad me ipsum turbata est
anima mea. Vis non conturbetur? Non remaneas in teipso, and dic, Ad te Domine
levavi animam meam. Hoc planius audi, Noli sperare de te, sed de Deo tuo. Nam
si speras de te, anima tua conturbabitur ad te, quia nondum invenit unde sit
secura de te. Ergo quoniam ad me conturbata est anima mea, quid restat nisi
humilitas, ut de se ipsa anima non praesumat? Aug. Ibid.
these words of Austine; but that which follows immediately, shows the
meaning of them. Therefore (says he) because I have no strength (or
stability) in my self, neither have I hope of my self, my soul is troubled
toward my self. Would thou not have it troubled? Do not abide in thy
self, but, say, unto thee, O Lord, have I lift up my soul (Psalm. 25. 1.)
Hear this more plainly, Do not hope of thy self, but of thy God. For if thou
do hope of thy self, thy soul will be troubled toward thee, because it
has not yet found whereby it may be secure of thee. Therefore because my soul
is troubled toward me, what remains but humility, that the soul do not
presume of it self? Thus it clearly appears, that Austine spoke not against
assurance of salvation, but only against self confidence, and presumption.

The last Father alleged is Bernard, who says, This does add to the heap of
care, and Accedit ad sollicitudinis cumulum, and pondus timoris, quod cum and
meam, and proximi conscientiam servare necesse sit, neutra mihi satis est nota.
Utraque abyssus est imperscrutabilis, utraque mihi nox est, etc. Bern. Ser. 3.
de Advent.
to the weight of fear, that when as it is necessary to look both to mine own,
and my Neighbors conscience, neither of them is sufficiently known unto me.
Both are an unsearchable depth, both are night unto me.

But Bernard only means that it is very hard for a man to know his own heart,
because of the deceitfulness of it, not but that by the Spirit of God a man
may know it so far forth as to be assured of the truth of Grace in him; which
has been proved before by Bernards testimony in diverse places. So elsewhere
he says indeed, Who can say, I am of the Elect, I am of those that are
predestinate unto life, Quis potest dicere, Ego de electis sum, ego de
praedestinatis ad vitam, ego de numero filiorum? Quis haec, inquam, dicere
potest? reclamante nimirum Scriptura, Nescit homo si sit dignus amore, an odio.
Certitudinem utique non habemus, sed spei fiducia consolatur nos, ne
dubitationis anxietate penitus cruciemur. Bern. Ser. 1. in. Septuag.
I am of the number of Gods children? who, I say, can say these things? the
Scripture saying on the contrary, Man knows not whether he be worthy of love,
or hatred. Surely we have no certainty, but the confidence of hope does comfort
us, lest we should be tormented with the anxiety of doubting.

But 1. Bernard here builds upon a false ground, viz. that the Scripture says,
No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred, i. e. whether he be in
such an estate, as to be loved of God, or hated of him: whereas Solomon Eccles.
9. 1. (which place he means) only says, No man knows love or hatred by
all that is before them; that is, by outward things which befall men, as
prosperity and adversity, they cannot conclude either that God does love, or
that he does hate them: because (as it follows immediately) All things come
alike to all, i. e. all outward things; prosperity happens to the wicked, and
adversity to the godly; and therefore there is no judging of Gods love, or
hatred by these things: yet it follows not but that by other marks and trials
a man may know whether God love him or no; and so much Bernard himself has
confessed, as I have showed.

2. Neither does Bernard here absolutely deny that any can know himself to of
the number of those that shall be saved, only he denies such a knowledge, so
sure and certain, as to exclude all care of obtaining salvation. For so he
adds immediately, Therefore there are given certain signs, and manifest
tokens of salvation, that it may be without doubt that he is of Propter hoc
data sunt signa quaedam and indicia manifesta salutis, ut indubitabile sit eum
esse de numero electotum, in quo ea signa permanserint. Propter hoc, inquam,
quoa praescivit Deus, and praedestinavit conformes fieri imagini filii sui, ut
quibus certitudinem negat causa sollicitudinis, vel fiduciam praestet gratia
consolationis, Bern. Ibid.
the number of the Elect, in whom those signs shall remain. Therefore, I say,
whom God foreknew, them also he predestined to be be conformed to the image
of his Son, that to whom he denies certainty, that they may be careful, he yet
affords confidence, that they may have comfort. I grant, that Bernard presently
after seems to be very peremptory against a man's being Quales sumus, nosse
possumus, vel ex part; quales autem futuri sumus, id nosse penitus nobis
impossible est. Bern. Ibid.
assured of his perseverance, saying, What we are we may know, at lest in part:
what we shall be, that is altogether impossible for us to know. But it has
been proved before both by Scriptures and Fathers, that true justifying faith
once had cannot be wholly lost. And even Bernard himself (as before is showed)
does hold that a man may know assuredly that he is justified, and that
therefore he shall be glorified, because the Apostle says that whom God has
justified, them also he has glorified, that is, will certainly glorify, Romans
8. 30.

And therefore here he must be understood as intending only to prevent
security, and a casting off all care for the future. For so immediately he
goes on, Therefore let him that stands take heed lest he fall: Itaque qui
stat, videat ne cadat, and in forma, quae salutis indicium est, and argumentum
praedestinationis, perseveret atque proficiat. Bern. Ibid.
and let him continue and go on in that, which is both a token of salvation,
and an argument of Predestination. Thus then notwithstanding any thing
contained either in the Scriptures, or the Fathers, which are alleged, the
Doctrine of Protestants concerning assurance of salvation does remain firm
and sure, viz. that a man may have this assurance. And if so, then surely
(which is the other position) all ought to labor for this assurance, it being
to be had, and well worth the laboring for that it may be had; the Scripture
also requiring us to give diligence to make our calling, and our election sure,
2 Pet. 1. 10.

To proceed, We say (says the Marquess) that every man Page 67.
has an Angel guardian; you say he has not. We have Scripture for it, viz.
Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say
unto you, that in Heaven there Angels do always behold the face of my Father.
Acts 12. 13. S. Peter knocking at the door, they say, It is his Angel. They
believed this in the Apostles time. The Fathers believes it, etc.

Answ. For every ones having a peculiar Angel to guard him, I know not any
great controversy that there is betwixt Protestants and them of the Church of
Rome about it. Bellarmine in all his three great volumes of controversies has
none of this that I do find. Whether several Believers have several Angels
for their guardians Calvin neither affirms, nor denies, Instit. lib. 1. cap.
14. Sect. 7. The Rhemists on Mat. 18. 10. say that he will needs doubt of it,
but that he dares not deny it. The Scripture is clear for this, that the
Angels are appointed to guard the Elect; They are all ministering spirits, sent
forth to Minister for those that shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. The
like is to be seen in other places, as Psalm. 34. 7. and 91. 11. But that every
one has his peculiar Angel, this is not so clear but that we may well doubt
of it. Yea, if it be so understood, that each believer has only one Angel
guarding him, it will not agree with that Psalm. 91. 11. He has given his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee, etc. Nor with that Genesis 32. 1, 2. Where
it is said that as Jacob was returning out of Mesopotamia into Canaan, the
Angels of God met him; and therefore he called the name of the place
Mahanaim, that is, two Camps, or two Hosts, viz. that of his own, and the
other of the Angels. In this therefore Calvin might well be confident, as he
was, that every one of us has Hoc quidem pro certo habendum, non tantum uni
Angelo unumquemque nostrum esse curae, sed omnes uno consensu vigilare pro
salute nostra. Calv. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 7. Similia habet ad Mat. 18.
10.
not only one Angel to care for us, but that they all with one consent to
watch for our safety. This, he says, is to be held for certain. Neither
durst the Rhemists, or any others (that I know) quarrel with him about it. For
those two places, which the Marquess alleges, they are neither of them
sufficient to prove that every believer has his peculiar Angel. That Mat. 18.
10. where our Savior speaking of believers, calls the Angels their Angels,
does evince no more then this, that believers have the Angels to attend upon
them. For there is no necessity to understand it so that each particular
Believer has his particular Angel; no more then because it is said, obey your
guides ((...)) or governors, Heb. 13. 17. therefore each one has his peculiar
guide or governor: or because its said Isai. 3. 4. I will give children to be
there Princes, therefore each several person had his several Prince, or
Magistrate. The other place, viz. Acts 12. 15. it is his Angel, viz. Peter's,
is more obscure, neither (I confess) do I well know how to understand it.
Some by Angel there understand not a caelestiall spirit, but a messenger, as
the Geeke word (...), whence the Latin Angelus, and Camer. Myroth. ad Act. 12.
15.
the English Angel is derived, does primarily import. And they conceive this
to be the meaning, that the Damsel did not tell those within, that she heard
Peter's voice, but only said, that Peter was at the door, and she constantly
affirming this, they supposed that Peter had sent some messenger, and that the
Damsel mistaking what he said, imagined that Peter himself was there. But it
is not probable but that the Damsel would signify that it was Peter's voice,
which she heard, the Scripture expressly saying, v. 14. that she knew Peter's
voice. On the otherside, if a Heavenly Angel be there meant, it seems to
imply, that they supposed the Angel that guarded Peter, and therefore is called
his Angel, to represent the person of Peter, and to assume his voice; which
conceit seems very uncouth. However, if such an Angel be there meant, yet
only this can be inferred from thence, that Peter had his Angel to guard him;
but it follows not, that therefore he had an Angel proper and peculiar to
himself, and that only one certain Angel was appointed his guardian.

Neither do the Fathers, that are cited, (so far as I can see) speak home to
the point in question. Gregory Quis enim fidelium habere dubium possit, in ipsa
immolationis hora, ad sacerdotis vocem caelos aperiri, in illo Jesu Christi
mysterio Angelorum choros adesse, etc. Greg. dial. lib. 4. cap. 58.
of whom mention is first made, is here so impertinently alleged, that I
suppose there was some oversight in it. For he speaks nothing at all of the
Angels guarding men, but only of their being present at the celebration of the
Eucharist; which is nothing to our present purpose.

Athanasius, who is mentioned next, says only that there Athanas. de communi
essentia, sub finem.
are some supercaelestiall powers, qui apud homines permanent, that do abide
with men, and are hominum paedagogi, men's instructors or governors: but of
particular Angels belonging to particular men he speaks nothing. Chrysostom
in one place, Chrysostom de Sacerd. lib. 6.
which the Marquess quoteth, speaks of the Angels being present, when the
Eucharist is celebrated, and of their conveying to Heaven the souls of such,
as immediately before their death with a pure conscience received that
Sacrament; which he says one told him, that saw it; but to the question now
agitated, I find not that he says any thing in that place. Indeed Hom. 3.
(not as it is misquoted, Hom. 2.) in Coloss. he cites, Mat. 18. 10. and
says, Every Believer has an Angel: but this does not necessarily import,
Unusquisque n. sidel is habet angelum. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Coloss. Similiter, ad
Mat. 18. 10. His innuit verbis nostrum unum quemlibet angelum habere.
that each Believer has his peculiar Angel. What Gregorious Turonensis says,
(whose testimony is the next) wanting his works, I cannot yet examine. The next
after him is Austine, but he is mis-alledged, viz. Epist. ad Probam cap. 19.
Whereas there are but 16. Chapters in that Epistle, which is wholly about
prayer, and has nothing (that I find) about Angels. The last witness is
Hierome, who says indeed, Great is the dignity of souls, that every one from
his birth Magna dignitas animarum, ut unaquaeque habeat ab ortu nativitatis in
custodiam sui Angelum delegatum. Hieron. in Mat. 18. 10.

Unde legimus in Apocalypsi Joannis, Angelo Ephesi, Thyatirae, et Angelo
Philadelphiae, and angelis quatuor reliquarum Ecclesiarum scribe haec, Hieron.
Ibid.


has an Angel appointed to keep him. But it does not appear, that he
thought every one to have his peculiar Angel. The contrary rather appears by
that which he adds immediately after, viz. that hereupon John Revel. 2. and 3.
was bidden to write to the Angel of Ephesus, Thyatira, Philadelphia, and the
other four Cburches there mentioned. Though Hierome do mis-interpret the
Angels there spoken of in the Revelation, and therefore both he, and some
others of the ancients are in this rejected by Ribera, yet thereby we may
perceive, Riber. in Apoc. 1. ult.
that he did not hold every one to have a peculiar Angel, but one Angel to be
for a whole Church. If it be said, that there by Angel he meant Angels, the
singular number being put for the plural, the same may be said concerning the
other words which are objected. But enough of this point; there is more
controversy about those that follow.

We say (says the Marquess) the Angels pray for us, knowing Page 67.
our thoughts, and deeds: you deny it. We have Scipture for it, Zach. 1. 9, 10,
11, 12. Then the Angel of the Lord answered, and said, O Lord of hosts, how
long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against
whom thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years? Apoc. 8. 4. And
the smoke of the incense of the prayers of the Saints ascended from the hand of
the Angel before the Lord. This place was so understood by Irenaeus lib. 4.
cap. 34. and S. Hilary in Psalm. 129. tells us, This intercession of Angels Gods
Nature needs not, but our infirmities do. So S. Ambrose lib. de viduis,
Victor Utic. lib. 3. de persecut. Vandal.

Answ. Had the Marquess only said, that the Angels know our deeds, and pray
for us, there had been little cause to oppose: but whereas he says that they
know our thoughts, that may not be granted, the Scripture making this Gods
Prerogative. For thou, even thou only know the hearts of all the children
of men. 1 Kings 8. 39. (...). Theophyl. in Luc. 5.
Theophylact therefore upon Luke 5. 22. says that CHRIST proved himself to be
God by this, that (as it is there said) he knew men's thoughts. And the same
also is observed by Ostendit sibi competere, quod etiam Scripturae Deo proprium
esse passim docent, dum declarat se cordium esse inspectorem, etc. Jansen.
Concord. cap. 32.
Iansenius in his Comment upon the place. For that in Zach. 1. 12. some by the
Angel there spoken of understand Christ, the Vulg. Angelus testamenti.
Angel (or Messenger) of the Covenant, as he is called Mal. 3. 1. But others
understand a created Angel, viz. the Angel that talked with the Prophet
Zachary, and thence observe that the Angels pray for the Church. This seems
more probable by the words immediately following, And the Lord answered the
Angel that talked with me, v. 13. In the other place, viz. Revel. Hunc multi
Christum esse existimant. Rib. ad Apoc. 8. 3. The same also is confessed by the
Rhemists upon the place.
8. 4. Ribera tells us, that many think the Angel there mentioned to be
Christ. And though he dislike that Exposition, yet it is more then probable by
that which is said v. 3. There was given him much incense, that he should offer
it with the prayers of all Saints, etc. For what can we well understand by that
incense, but Christ's Merit and Meditation, whereby the prayers of the Saints
are acceptable and well pleasing unto God?

For the Fathers alleged, Est ergo altar in caelis. Illuc enim preces nostrae
diriguntur, and ad templum, quemadmodum Joan. in Apocal. ait, Et apertum est
templum Dei, and tabernaculum. Ecce enim, inquit, tabernaculum Dei, in quo
habitabit hominibus. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
Irenaeus speaks not either of this Angel spoken of Revel. 8. 4. or at all
of Angels praying for us. All that he says is, that there is an altar in
Heaven, to which our prayers must be directed: and then he cites John saying
in the Revelation, that the Temple and Tabernacle of God was opened: but this
is nothing to the point in hand.

Hilary is truly cited, speaking of the intercession of Angels, he says, that
not Gods Intercessione itaque horum non natura Dei eget, sed infirmitas nostra.
Hilar. in Psalm. 129.
Nature, but our infirmity does stand in need of it.

But (as I said before) I see not why we should deny, that Whether those
blessed spirits pray for us, is not here the question, but whether we are to
pray unto them. B. Usher. Answ. p. 421. He speaks of the Saints, but it may
hold of the Angels. Hieron. praefat. in Proverb.
the Angels pray for us; for it does not therefore sollow, that we may pray to
them; which is the next point to be considered. Yet I should have liked it
better, if Hilary had grounded himself upon that place of Zachary, which the
Marquess produced, then that he should build upon the Book of Tobit (as also
does Ambrose Ser. 92. for I find nothing this way in the place, which the
Marquess quoteth) that Book (as Hierome long ago has censured it) being
Apocryphal, and of no authority for the determining of matters of this nature.
What the last Author says, viz. Victor Vticensis, being not furnished with his
Book, I cannot tell; neither is there need to inquire after him, he being
alleged for no more then Hilarie, and he asserting no more then (I think)
may be granted.

But from the angels praying for us the Marquess passes to our Page 68.
praying to the angels. We hold it lawful (says he) to pray unto them: you
not. We have Scripture for it, Genesis 48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from
all evil, bless these Lads, etc. Hos. 12. 4. He had power over the Angel,
and prevailed: he wept and made supplications unto them. S. Austine expounding
these words of Job 19. 21. Have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand
of the Lord is upon me, says, that holy Job addressed himself to the Angels.
Prayer is a worship, a Religious worship as our adversaries grant. Now
worshipping of Angels is condemned, Col. 2. 18. and Revel. 19. 10. and. 22. 9.


Answ. That it is lawful to pray unto angels, Protestants deny, and that
justly, there being no ground, nor warrant for it in the Scripture, but much
against it. For the Scripture every where teaches and requires us to pray
unto God, and to none other. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Psalm. 50. 15.
After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. Mat. 6. 9. When ye pray
say our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2. In the day of my trouble I will call upon
thee. Psalm. 85. 7. As for me I will call upon God. Psalm. 55. 16. For this shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee. Psalm. 32. 6. How shall they call upon
him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10. 14. Now we both profess in the
Creed, and so are taught in the Scripture, to believe only in God. That your
faith and hope might be in God. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Ye believe in God, believe also
in me. Joh. 14. 1. viz. because Christ, who there speaks, is God. Prayer must
proceed from the heart, and not from the lips only. Give ear unto my prayer,
that goes not out of fained lips. Psalm. 17. 1. Unto thee O Lord do I lift up
my soul. Psalm. 25. 1. Pour forth your hearts unto him. Psalm. 62. 8. Hannah
spoke in her heart, etc. 1 Samuel 1. 13. Now God only knows the heart, as was
showed before.

The Fathers were of this mind. Nam and Deum oramus, etc. Tertull. de orat.
cap. 2.
Tertullian writing of prayer, and expounding the Lords Prayer, upon the first
words of it says, We pray unto God. And afterward in the same book,
Commendamus Deo preces nostr as. Ibid cap. 13.
We commend our prayers unto God: neither does he speak of praying unto any
other. And elsewhere, Nos pro salute imperatorum, Deum invocamus aeternum, etc.
Tertull. Apolog. cap. 30.
We call upon the Eternal God (says he) for the safety of the Emperors. Haec
ab alio orare non possum, quam a que me scio consecuturum, quoniam and ipse
est, qui solus praestat, etc. Tertull. Ibid.
And again more fully to the purpose, These things I cannot pray for from any
other, but from him, from whom I know I shall obtain; because he it is, who
alone does give them.

So Cyprian also writing of the Lords Prayer, all along supposes, and takes
it for granted, that it is God to whom we must pray. He says that to pray
otherwise then Christ has taught us, is not only ignorance, Ut aliter orare
quam docuit, non ignorantia sola sit, sed and culpa. Cypr. de orat. Dom.
but a sin also. Now Christ has taught us to pray unto God only.

And Cyprian says, that We must pray with the heart rather then with the
voice, Quia Deus non vocis, sed cordis auditor est. Nec admonendus est
clamoribus, qui cogitationes hominum videt. Cypr. Ibid.
because God hears not so much the voice as the heart. He says that before
prayer (viz. in the Congregation) the people were required to lift up their
hearts; and they used to Ideo and sacerdos ante orationem praefatione
praemissa, parat fratrum mentes dicendo Sursum corda; ut dum respondet plebs,
Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur nihil aliud se, quam Dominum cogitare debere.
Cypr. Ibid. Quomodo te audiri a Deo postulas, cum te ipse non audias? Ibid.
answer, we lift them up unto the Lord; whereby they were admonished to think
of nothing but the Lord when they prayed. And taxing those that pray
negligently, How do thou request that God should hear thee, when as thou
do not hear thy self?

And some of the ancients have proved Christ to be God by this very argument
that he is called upon, and prayed unto. If Christ be only man (says Si homo
tantu^modo Christus, cur homo in orationibus mediator invocatur, cum invocatio
hominis ad praestandam salutem inefficax judicetur? Novat. de Trinit. cap. 14.
Novatian) Why is man called upon in prayers as Mediator, seeing that the
invocation of a man is judged ineffectuall to afford salvation? Though Novatian
in some things proved an Heretic, yet was he not an Heretic in this: yea De
Trinitate disputaturus Novatianus Presbyter Romanus sub S. Fabiano Papa,
quantum apparet, adhuc Catholicus, etc. Pamel. in argum. lib. de Triuit.
Pamelius a Romanist tells us, that he wrote this whiles, for any thing that
appears, he was a Catholic.

Thus also that great hammer of the Arians, Athanasius, proved Christ to be
consubstantiall to the Fathet, by that of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11. Now God
himself, and our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you.

For (says he) none would pray to receive from God and from the Angels, or
Neque enim quispiam precaretur accipere a Deo, and ab Angelis, aut ab ullis
rebus creatis. Neque quisquam hanc verborum formam concepit, Det tibi Deus, and
Angelus; sed contra a Patre, and Filio propter unitatem uniformemque rationem
dandi. Athanas. orat 4. contra Arianos.
from any of the creatures. Neither would any speak in this manner, God and an
Angel give unto thee. But the Apostle asks of the Father and of the Son,
because of the unity of their nature, and the uniforme manner of their giving.

And immediately after he answers that place which the Marquess alleges,
viz. Non aliquem Angelorum cratorum, and qui natura Angeli erant in unum
copulavit cum Creatore Deo, neque omisso nutritio suo Deo, ab Angelo
benedictionem suis nepotibus postulavit: sed quia diserte locutus est de
Angelo, qui illum ab omnibus malis liberaverat, satis prae se tulit non ex
creatis Angelis aliquem, sed Filium fuisse Patris, quem Patri in suis precibus
consociavit, per quem Deus liberat quos vult. Hunc enim magni consilii Patris
Angelum noverat, nec alium nisi illum ipsum, qui benedicit, and liberat ex
malis, suis verbis expressit. Athanas. Ibid,
Genesis 48. 16. The Angel that reedemed me from all evil, bless the Lads,
saying, Jacob did not couple any of the created and natural Angels with God
the Creator; neither did he omit God that nourished him, and desire a blessing
for his nephews from an Angel. But in that he spoke expressly of the Angel
that redeemed him from all evil, he showed sufficiently, that it was none of
the created Angels, but the Son of the Father, whom he in his prayers joined
with the Father, by whom God does redeem whom he pleases. For he knew him to
be the So Christ is styled Isai. 9. 6. according to the Greek Translation.
Angel of the Fathers great Counsel, neither did he in his words express any
other but him that does bless, and redeem from evil.

Austine also in his book of true Religion, does frequently assert that
religious worship Quarta de Invocatione, quae est eximium genus adorationis.
Bellarord. disput. de Eccles. Triumph.
belongs not unto Angels, but to God only; and consequently that Angels are
not to be prayed unto, Prayer and Invocation being (as Bellarmine confesses) a
singular kind of adoration. That (says Quod colit summus Angelus, id colendum
etiam ab homine ultimo. -- Hoc etiam ipsos optimos Angelos, and excellentissima
Dei Ministeria velle credamus, ut unum cum ipsis colamus Deum, cujus
contemplatione beati sunt. -- Quare honoramus eos charitate, non servitute. --
Recte itaque scribitur hominem ab Angelo prohibitum, ne se adoraret, sed unum
Deum, sub quo ei esset and ille conservus. -- Ecce unum Deum colo, etc.
Quisquis Angelorum diligit hunc Deum, certus sum quod etiam me diligit. --
Religet ergo nos Religio uni omnipotenti Deo. Aug. de ver a relig. cap. ult.
Austine) which the highest Angel does worship, is also to be worshipped by
the lowest man. -- Let us believe that the best Angels and the most excellent
Ministers of God desire this, that we together with themselves may worship only
God, by whose contemplation they are blessed. -- Therefore we honor them with
love, not with service. -- Rightly therefore is it written, that a man was
forbidden by an Angel to worship him, and was required only to worship God,
under whom the Angel was man's fellow servants. -- Behold I worship only God,
etc. Which of the Angels soever does love this God, I am sure does also love
me. -- Therefore let Religion bind us only to the Almighty God.

Now for the two places of Scripture, which the Marquess objecteth, one of
them is already answered from Athanasius. And the same answer also belongs to
the other place, viz. Hos. 12. 4. the Angel there spoken of is not a created
Angel, but God himself, as appears by the words immediately going before v.
3. He had power with God; then follows v. 4. yea he had power over the Angel,
and prevailed; he wept also, and made supplications unto him. This shows that
God and the Angel there mentioned are one and the same. This which the Prophet
speaks of Jacobs making supplications to the Angel, has reference to that
Genesis 32. 26. I will not let thee go except thou bless me, as Hierome upon the
place observes. Now if Jacob would not desire a blessing for his Nephews from
a created Angel (and we have seen that in the judgment of Athanasius he
would not) then surely neither was it such an Angel of whom he himself did
seek to be blessed. And Hierome upon the words of Hosea says Roboratus
benedictionibus Angeli, qui ipse est Deus. Hicron. in Hos. 12.
plainly that this angel is God. None of the Fathers are here alleged against
us, but only Austine, whom I have showed to testify abundantly for us. That
which he Angelos videtur postulare, ut pro eo deprecentur, aut certe sanctos,
ut pro paenitente orent. Aug. in Job. 19. 21.
says in the place quoted, is that Job seems to desire the angels to entreat
for him, or else some of the Saints. But Pineda a Jesuit does not like this
Exposition, but calls it allegorical, and expoundes it (as it Quod Augustinus
exponit hic Angelos, aut sanctos invocari, allegoricum est. Pined in Job 19. 21.
ought to be expounded) of those friends of Job that disputed with him. If our
adversaries shall reply, that though Austine Amicos nominat, quibuscum
disputat. Pined. Ibid.
did not rightly expound the words of Job, yet however he showed it to be his
opinion, that the angels might be prayed unto. I answer, first Austine here
makes as well against them, as against us. For he speaks as much of Jobs
praying unto Saints, as unto angels: now our adversaries hold (as I shall show
more hereafter) that in those times before Christ's coming the Saints were not
to be prayed unto. Again, Austine does not say, that Job did pray either to
Saints or angels, but that he desired, yea only that he seems to have
desired, that they might pray for him. Thirdly for one place, wherein Austine
speaks obscurely and doubtfully for praying to angels, we have many plain
and evident testimonies of his against it, as before I have showed.

Lastly, Austine himself has taught us to believe neither him, Neque enim
quorumlibet disputationes, quam vis Catholicorum and laudatorum hominum, velut
Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus, ut nobis non liceat salva honorificentia,
quae illis debetur hominibus, aliquid in eorum scriptis improbare, atque
respuere, si forte invenerimus quod aliter senserint quam veritas habet, divino
adjutorio vel ab aliis intellecta, vel a nobis. Talis ego sum in scriptis
aliorum; tales volo esse intellectores meorum. Aug. Epist. 111.
nor any other further then they accord with the Scriptures, but that we may,
saving the reverence that is due unto them, dissent from them, when as they
dissent from the truth. Thus he says, he did in respect of the writings of
others, and so he would have others to do in respect of his writings.

From the Angels the Marquess passes to the Saints deceased, Page 68.
saying, We hold that the Saints deceased know what passes here on Earth; you
say they know not: we have Scripture for it. Luke 16. 29. where Abraham knew
that there were Moses and the Prophets books here on Earth, which he himself
had never seen when he was alive. The Fathers say as much, Eusebius. Ser. de Ann.
S. Hiero. in Epit. Paulae, S. Max. Ser. de Agnete.

Answ. That the Saints deceased do not know the particular affairs of men
here on Earth, the Scripture does teach us, Job. 14. 21. His sons come to
honor, and he knows it not, and they are brought low, but he perceives it
not of them. There Job speaks indefinitely of a man departed out of this life
(whether he be Saint, or no Saint) and shows, that he does not so much as
understand the estate of such as had most near relation unto him: and how then
shall we persuade our selves, that he does understand the estate of others?
And from those words Isai. 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel
knows us not, Austine does infer that the Dead are not acquainted with the
affairs of the Living. Si parents non intersunt, qui sunt alii mortuorum, qui
noverunt quid agamus, quidve patiamur? Si tanti Patriarchae quid erga populum
ex ipsis procreatum ageretur, ignoraverunt, quomodo mortui vivorum reb^s, atque
actibus cognoscendis adjuvandisque miscentur? Aug. de cur a^ pro mortuis. cap.
13.
If not our parents, (says he) what other dead persons know what we do, or
suffer? If so great Patriarchs (Abraham and Jacob) knew not how it fared with
those that did descend from them, how do the dead intermeddle in knowing and
helping the affairs of those that are alive? For my part, I think that place
of Esaias not so pertinent to the purpose, but that the meaning of it is, that
the people of Israel were so degenerate, that Abraham and Israel (if they knew
what manner of persons they were) would not own them, not acknowledge them for
their posterity: yet however, Austine shows what his Opinion was concerning
those that are deceased, viz. that they are ignorant of the things that are
done here; which is evident enough by those words of Job before cited.

Bellarmine says that Gregory upon the place does answer, that Bell. de Sanct.
beat. lib 1. c. 20.
naturally the dead know not how it fares with the liking; but that yet the
Saints, being glorified, do see in God all things, quae nimirum ad ipsos
pertinent, viz. which do belong unto them. But Gregory upon those words of Job
says thus, As they that are alive, know not where Sicut enim hi, qui adhuc
viventes sunt, mortuoru animae quo loco habeantur, ignorant: ita mortui vitam
in carne viventium post eos qualiter disponatur, nesciunt. Greg. Moral. lib.
12. cap. 14.

Quod tamen de animabus sanctis sentiendum non est: quia quae omnipotentis Dei
claritatem vident, nullo modo credendum est, quia foris sit aliquid, quod
ignorent. Greg. Ibid.


the souls of the dead are; so they that are dead, know not how they live that
are after them. Indeed he adds presently after, This yet is not to be thought
of the holy souls, because they that see the brightness of Almighty God, are
by no means to be thought ignorant of any thing besides. Therefore he
understands Job as speaking only of such dead persons, as are unholy, whereas
indeed Jobs words are indefinite, and indifferently to be understood of all
that are dead, except by special Revelation any thing done here below be made
known unto them. Thou destroyest the hope of man, v. 19. viz. his hope of
continuing here in this life. Thou changest his countenance, and sendest him
away, v. 20. This holds in respect of all: and then follows, His sons come
to honor, and he knows it not, etc. v. 21. So that the coherence of the
words shows, that they are meant generally of all that are deceased. And that
which Gregory says of the Saints, that seeing God, in him they see all things,
Bellarmine himself (it seems) did think too lavish, and therefore he limits
it to all things which concern them, or belong unto them. Which limitation
does indeed mar his market; for how does it appear, that it belongs unto the
Saints departed to understand particular occurrences here below, and namely all
the prayers that any shall make unto them? which is the scope, that they of the
Church of Rome aim at, when they speak of the Saints knowing things here on
Earth: but of that more (God willing) hereafter. But for the Saints knowing our
affairs, it was (it seems) in the time of Lombard (above 1100 years after
Christ) a point not much believed; For Lombard moving the question, says only
this, It is not incredible that the souls Non est incredibile animas sanctorum
quae in abscondito faciei dei very luminis illustratione laetantur, in ipsius
contemplatione ea, quae foris aguntur, intelligere, quantum vel illis ad
gaudium, vel nobis ad auxilium pertinet. Lomb. sent. lib. 4. did. 45. lit. f.
of the Saints enjoying the vision of God, do understand humane and earthly
affairs, so far as concerns their joy, and our help. He does not say, that
this is certain, but only that it is not incredible. And Bellarmine himself
relating four several De modo aurem quo cognoscunt, quatuor sunt Doctorum
sententiae, etc. Bell de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20.
opinions about the manner how the Saints know things here upon Earth, of two
of them, viz. that they know them by the relation of Angels, or by being after
a sort Sed neutra est sufficiens, etc. Bellarmin. Ibid.
every where present, he says plainly, that neither of them does satisfy,
and gives convincing Reasons for it.

And for the other two opinions, viz. that the Saints from the beginning of
their blessedness do in God see all things that any way appertain unto them:
Or that God does then reveal things unto the Saints, when any at any time do
pray unto them; he likes not the latter of these, because (he says) If the
Saints did need a new revelation upon every occasion, the Church would not so
boldly Si indiger ent Sancti nova revelatione, Ecclesia non diceret ita au
dacter omnibus Sanctis, Orate pro nobis, sed peteret aliquando a Deo, ut eis
revelaret preces nostras. Bellar. Ibid.
say unto all the Saints, pray for us, but would sometimes desire of God to
reveal our prayers unto them: And for the other Opinion, which remains, he
says no more but only that it is probable. So that we see Estque probabilis
haec sententia. Bell. Ibid.
by our adversaries own confession, they have no certainty of this, that the
Saints in Heaven are particularly acquainted with things here on Earth. Some
may say, that they are certain that it is so, though they be uncertain how it
comes to be so. I answer, indeed if the Scripture did affirm that so it is,
then we might and ought to be assured of it, though we could not see why it
is so. But the Scripture is so far from affirming it, that it denies it, as I
have showed; and therefore they that maintain it, must both answer the
Scripture where it is denied, and also by Scripture prove the contrary
assertion, which they neither do, nor can do. That place cited by the
Marquess, viz. Luke 16. 29. is not of force to prove it. For 1. Some Romish
Expositors, and namely Iansenius does confess that it is doubtful whether
that which is spoken of the rich Dubium est, an hoc exemplum sit tantum
parabola, etc. Jansen. Concord. cap. 97.
man and Lazarus, and so of Abraham, be any more then a Parable: and if it be a
History, and a Narration of a thing done, Si Historiam quis esse dixerit, and
rei gestae narrationem; necesse est camen fateatur, non omnia sic contigisse ut
narrantur. Certum est enim divitem in inferno non locutum esse lingua, nec
oculis corporalibus vidisse Abraham, etc. Jan. Ibid.
yet this (he says) must needs be confessed, that all things did not happen
so as they are related. For that it is certain that the rich man being in
Hell, did not speak with a Tongue, nor with bodily Eyes did see Abraham, and
Lazarus in his bosom, nor did complain of the scorching of his Tongue, nor
did desire water to cole it. Therefore (he says) Christ did accommodate
himself to our capacity, and declare the things of the life to come after the
manner of the things of this life, so that those Ita ut corporalia, quae post
hanc vitam commemorantur, sint allegorice and spiritualiter accipienda, sive
sit nuda parabola, sive vera Historia. Jansen. Ibid
things are to be understood allegorically and spiritually, whether it be a
bare Parable, or a true History. And for the words objected, he shows that
they are more easy to be understood, if this part of Scripture be taken not
for a History, but only for a Parable. For then it may be said, that Christ
did feign these things, which were not done indeed, only to instruct and
admonish those that are alive, that they should not think to excuse their
impenitency by this, that they were never informed of the estate of the life to
come by any that did return from it. That men might not think thus, he says,
that Christ did bring in the Si autem exemplum hoc non Historia esse dicatur,
sed parabola tantum, facilior erit quaestionis explicatio. Dici enim poterit
haec sic a Domino conficta esse, cum sic gesta non essent, tantum ad erudiendum
and monendum vivos, ne suae impenitentiae praetexant, quod de statu futurae
vitae nihil unquam didicerint ex his, qui e futura vita redierunt. -- Ideo quo
hanc cogitationem Dominus castigaret, proposuit hunc divitem orasse, ut Abraham
ad fratres suos Lazarum mitteret, and vulgarem hanc hominum cogitationem
exposuisse, ut sic Abrahae cujus magna erat apud Judeos authoritas, responsum
subiiceret quo talis cogitatio reprehenditur and confutatur. -- Hic jam ergo
Abraham hanc vulgi opinionem consutans respondit, Si Mosen and Prophetas non
audiunt, etc. Ian. Ibid.
rich man, desiring Abraham to send Lazarus to his Brethren, that so he might
also bring in the answer of Abraham, who was of great authority among the
Jews, by which answer that conceit is reproved, and confuted. For Abraham
confuting that opinion of the common sort of people answered, If they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe, although one should arise
from the dead. Thus then that place does not evince, that Abraham knew that the
Jews had the writings of Moses, and of the Prophets. 2. Suppose that part of
Scripture to be a History, and that Abraham did indeed know that the writings
of Moses and the Prophets were upon the Earth, yet it does not therefore follow
that he knew all the several things done amongst men. What God would please
to reveal, he might know, but how much that is, who can tell? yea the
Romanists themselves do hold that neither Abraham, nor any other, during the
time of the old Responderi potest, Abrahamum, Israelem, and alios Patres
veteris Testamenti non cognovisse posteros suos viventes, quia nondum beati
erant, etc. Bellarm, de Sanct. beatit. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Testament, did understand the estate of men here alive. Although the ground of
this opinion of theirs be not good, viz. because as then they did not enjoy the
blessedness of the life to come, yet however this is sufficient to extort from
them this place of Luke, and to show that they by their own principles can draw
no argument from it for their Purpose. For the Fathers which the Marquess
alleges, I can only look into Hierome, as being destitute of both the
other; But I have here, and continually almost cause to complain of the
Marquesses quotations, they being so wide, as here, and in many other places
they are. For there are 14. Chapters of this book of Hierome, that is
mentioned, but in which of these Chapters any thing to the purpose is to be
found, is not expressed, yet with much ado I find that Hierome seems to
suppose that Paula being dead knew this estate. But I find in another place
(viz. Adversus Vigilantium cap. 2.) that Hierome makes the Saints departed to
be every where, and by consequence to know what is done any where. Sequuntur
agnum quocunque vadit; Si agnus ubique, ergo and hi, qui cum agno sunt, ubique
esse credendi sunt. Hieron. advers. Vigilant. cap. 2.


But Ad cognoscendas preces, quae eodem tempore fiunt in diversissimis locis,
non sufficit celeritas, sed requiritur vera ubiquitas, quam nec Angelorum, nec
hominum spiritibus convenire credimus. Bell. de beatit. Sanct lib. 1 cap. 20.
Bellarmine likes not to build upon such a foundation, confessing that truly
and properly to be every where, is a thing, that does not belong either to the
souls of men, or to the Angels.

From the knowledge, which the Saints deceased are pretended Page 68.
to have of our affairs, the Marquess passes to their praying for us. This
he proves by Revel. 5. 8. The 24. Elders fell down before the Lamb, having
every one of them Harpes, and golden Vials, full of odours, which are the
prayers of the Saints.

And by Baruch 3. 4. O Lord Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers
of the dead Israelites. He adds also the testimonies of Aug. Ser. 15. de
verb. Apostoli, Hilar. in Psalm. 129. and Damas. de Fide l. 4. c. 16.

Ans. That the Saints in Heaven do not pray for us in particular, appears by
what has been proved already, viz. that our particular affairs are not
known unto them. That they pray for us in general, Protestants do not deny:
about this we do not contend, says Amesius against Bellarmine. And
Bellarmine himself cites the Apology Sancti orant pro nobis, saltem in genere]
Neque de ista propositione contentionem ullam fovemus. Ames. advers. Bellar. de
Invocat. Sanctor.

Bell. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20.


of the Augustane Confession granting thus much, that the Saints in Heaven do
pray for the Church in general. But for that place Revel. 5. 8. I see not how
it makes for the purpose. For neither does it appear, that the 24. Elders
there mentioned, are the Saints departed; nor, if they be, is it said, that
they pray for the Church here upon Earth. Indeed the Rhemists upon the place
say, Hereby it is plain, that the Saints in Heaven offer up the prayers of
faithful and holy persons in Earth, etc. And hence they infer, That the
Protestants have no excuse of their error, That the Saints have no knowledge
of our affairs, or desires. But there is no such thing, as they speak of,
plain by this place of Scripture, except (to use the Marquesses words) it be
margin'd with their own notes, senc'd with their own meaning, and enlivened
with their own private spirit. Page 52. and 53.


They take it for granted (as the Marquess also does after them) that the
Saints in Heaven are meant by the 24. Elders, and that the Saints after
mentioned, are the De viginti quatuor senioribus tam varia Patrum and
Expositorum sententia est, ut quo magis leguntur, eo lector reddatur incertior.
Riber. in Apoc. 4. 4.
Saints upon Earth, whereas the former of these is so far from being evident,
that their own Jesuit Ribera does tell us, that Concerning the 24 Elders the
opinion of the Fathers, and of Expositors is so various, that the more one
reads them, the more uncertain Alii totam Ecclesiam, etc. Ibid. Non esse
totam Ecclesiam constat, quoniam quatuor animalia non numerantur in illis. --
At si quatuor animalia sunt quatuor Evangelistae, quomodo secernuntur a numero
24 Seniorum, cum ipsi maxim ad hunc numerum pertinere videantur, ut qui inter
beatos omnes multum excellant? Respondeo non secerni ab illis, quasi ipsi
inferiores sint, aut ad numerum illum, aut ad illam dignitatem pertinere non
possint, sed quod dignitate quadam praeterea emineant, cujus causa extra illum
numerum constitui, and nominari debeant. Riber. ad Apoc. 4. 6.
he shall be. And among other opinions he faith that some by the 24. Elders
understand the whole Church. This Exposition indeed he dislikes upon this
ground, that the four beasts spoken of, are not comprehended in the 24.
Elders. But he enervates this reason himself, understanding by the 24. Elders
the most eminent among the Saints in Heaven, and by the four beasts the four
Evangelists, who yet are of the number of those eminent Saints, and so the
four beasts are also part of the 24 Elders, only (he says) they are
mentioned apart by themselves, as being out of that number, because besides the
excellency which is common to them with others, they have some excellency
which is proper and peculiar to themselves. By the thread of his own Exposition
it appears, that his argument is of no force why the 24. Elders may not
signify the whole Church. And although he make it to be without doubt, that
the 24. Elders Deinde ipsi offerunt orationes sanctorum, haud dubium quin
eorum, qui sunt in terra. Riber. ad Apoc. 4. 4.
do offer up the prayers of other Saints, viz. which are upon Earth, yet when
it is said, that the 24. Elders had golden Vialls full of odours, which are the
prayers of the Saints, Revel. 5. 8. I see not but that by the Saints there may
be understood the 24. Elders themselves as well as any others. If other Saints
be meant, distinct from the 24 Elders, Master Medes Exposition seems probable,
that by the 24 Elders are meant Ministers, and by the Mede on Revel. 4.
four beasts the rest of Gods people, and so here by the Saints, whose prayers
are offered up by Ministers, who in the public Assemblies are the mouth of the
people, and offer up their prayers unto God for them. But how ever it be, thus
much may sufficiently appear by what has been said, that the Romanists can
evince nothing from this Scripture as to this point, that the Saints in Heaven
do understand the particular estate of men here upon Earth, and pray for them.
For the other place alleged, viz. Baruch 3. 4. I give this answer, that the
Book is not Canonical, the Jews, to whom were committed the oracles of God
(viz. the Scriptures Librum autem Baruch notarii ejus, qui apud Hebraeos nec
legitur, nec habetur, praetermisimus. Hieron. praefat. in Jer.
of the old Testament) Romans 3. 2. Luke 16. 29. not owning it, as is observed by
Hierome, who therefore did let it pass, as himself testifies.

For the Fathers that are cited, Austine de verb. Apost. Ser. 15. has nothing,
that I see, to the purpose. Neither has Hilary in Psalm 129. any thing about
the Saints praying for us, but only about the Sunt secundum Raphaelem ad
Tobiam loquentem Angeli adsistentes ante claritatem Dei, and orationes
deprecantium ad Deum deferentes. Hill. in Psalm. 129.
Angels carrying the prayers of men unto God, which he fetches from the Book
of Tobit, but to that I have spoken before. Indeed in another place, viz. upon
Psalm 124. (which Bellarmine produces) he Sed neque desunt stare volentihus
sanctorum custodiae, neque angelorum munitiones. Hilar. in Psalm. 124.
says that neither the guards of the Saints, nor the Munitions of Angels are
wanting unto us. But I see not how any more can be inferred from this, then
that the Saints do in general pray for us, which we do not deny.

Neither do the words of Damascen in the place quoted import more then thus,
(...); Damasc. de Fide lib. 4. c. 16.
when he says that the Saints departed make intercessions for us, and that
therefore they are to be honored by us. This may well be understood (...);
Damas. Ibid.
of their praying in general for us. A little before indeed he has that
which does not sound well, viz. that every good gift does come down from the
Father of lights by them (viz. the Saints departed) to those that ask in faith
without doubting. The Scripture teaches us no such thing concerning the
Saints, but attributes this honor unto Christ, that by him we obtain of God
whatsoever is good and needful for us. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Romans 8. 32. But Damascene, though a man famous in his generation, yet
Bell. de Eccles. Scriptor.
is of no great antiquity, being (as Bellarmine computes) 731 years after
Christ, and therefore his testimony is of the less force, besides that some of
the Romanists, namely Sixtus Senensis Sixth. Sen. Bibl. li. 6. Annot. 187.
does note him as in some point of faith erroneous, viz. about the proceeding
of the holy Ghost.

But at length the Marquess comes to our praying to the Page 69.
Saints, that being the mark aimed at a long time. We hold (says he) that
we may pray unto them; you not: we have Scripture for it, Luke 16. 24. Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, etc. You bid us show one proof
for the lawfulness hereof, when here are two Saints prayed unto in one Verse.
And though Dives were in Hell, yet Abraham in Heaven would not have
expostulated with him so much, without a non nobis domine, if it had been it
self a thing not lawful. You will say, it is a parable: yet a jury of ten
Fathers, of the grand inquest, as Theophil. Tertull. Clem. Alex. S. Chrysostom. S.
Ier. S. Amb. S. August. S. Greg. Euthym. and Ven. Beda, give their verdict,
that it was a true History. But suppose it were a parable, yet every parable is
either true in the persons named, or else may be true in some others. The holy
Ghost tells us no lies, nor fables, nor speaks not to us in parables
consisting either of impossibilities, or things improbable. Job 5. 1. Call now,
if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou
turn? It had been a frivolous thing in Eliphaz to have asked Job the question,
if invocation of Saints had not been the practice of that time. The Fathers
affirm the same, S. Dionys. cap. 7. S. Athan. Ser. de Annunt. S. Basil. Orat.
de 44. Martyr. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad Pop. S. Hierome prayed to Paula in
Epitaph. S. Paulae, S. Maximus to S. Agnes Ser. de S. Agnete, S. Bern. to our
blessed Lady.

Answ. This point of praying to Saints, the Marquess (it seems) made great
account of, in that he bestowed so many words about it: but the unlawfulness
of this practice is clear enough by that which I have said before about
praying unto Angels. For I have demonstrated both by authority of Scriptures,
and also by testimony of Fathers, that prayer is to be made unto God only. And
if the Saints do not know our affairs here below (as I have showed that they
do not) then it must needs be absurd and irrational to pray unto them. Yea,
although we should but only desire them to pray for us, as here we desire the
prayers one of another. But whatever our Adversaries sometimes may pretend, yet
they are far from contenting themselves with this liberty, though it be more
then is allowed them. Their praying unto the Saints, is a worshipping of them,
as I have showed before by their own confession. Bellarmine also tells us, that
when they say, the Saints are only Notandum, cum dicimus, non debere peti a
sanctis, nisi ut orent pro nobis, nos non agere de Verbis, sed de sensu
verborum. Nam quantum ad verba, licet dicere, S. Petre miserere mei, salva me,
aperi mihi aditum caeli, item da mihi sanitatem corporis, da patientiam, da
mihi fortitudinem, etc. dummodo intelligamus, salva me, and miserere mei orando
pro me, da mihi hoc and illud tuis precibus, and meritis. Bellar. dc sanct.
beat. lib. 1. cap. 17.
to be requested to pray for us, they do not mean but that we may say, S.
Peter have mercy on me, save me, open an entrance into Heaven for me: give me
health of body, give me patience, courage, etc. So that we understand it thus,
Save me, and have mercy on me by praying for me: give me this or that by thy
prayers and merits. But what is this, but to displace Christ, and to set up
Saints in his room?

Their Pope Leo cited by their Cassander, concerning this same point, has
taught a Accepere sancti, non dedere coronas; and de fortitudine fidelium
exempla nota sunt patientiae, non dona justitiae. Leo apud Cassand. consult. de
merit. and intercess. sanct.
better lesson, saying, The Saints have received, not given crowns: and by the
fortitude of Believers we have examples of patience, not gifts of
righteousness.

This Cassander cites, showing how ill it suites with the Romish practice,
which he (although a Romanist) complains of as too exorbitant. Bellarmine
takes it very ill that Calvine says they pray unto the Virgin Mary to command
her Son: with great Dicit nos rogare Virginem, ut filium jubeat facere quod
petimus. At quis nostrum hoc dicit? Cur non probat ullo exemplo? Bell. de beat,
sanct. lib. 1. cap. 16.
indignation he cries out, Who of us does say this? Why does he not prove it
by some example?

But the forementioned Cassander plainly Quin and co ventum est, ut etiam
Christus jam in caelo regnans Matri subjiciatur: quomodo in nonnullis Ecclesiis
canitur, Ora Patrem, and jube filio, O faelix puerpera, Nostra pians scelera,
jure matris impera Redemptori. Cassand. ubi supra.
shows that Calvin did not charge them in that manner without cause. For
(says he) it is come to that pass, that Christ now reigning in Heaven is
made subject to his Mother, as they sing in some Churches, Pray the Father, and
command the Son, O happy child* bearing woman, who do expiate wickedness,
by the authority of a Mother command the Redeemer. He tells us also, that as
Ahasuerus told Esther he would give her half of his Kingdom, if she would ask
it; so Imo non defuerunt viri etiam celebres, qui assererent, id quod Hester
Assuerus promisit se petenti, dimidium regni daturum, in Maria completum esse,
in quam Deus regni sui, quod judicio and misericordia constat, dimidium, hoc
est, misericordiam transtulerit, altera regni part sibi rete^ta. Cassand. Ibid.
some famous men among them say, that Gods Kingdom consisting of Judgment and
Mercy, God has indeed given half of his Kingdom to the Virgin Mary, viz.
that part which consists in mercy, reserving the other part unto himself,
viz. that which consists of judgment. Whereby they intimate, that who so
desires mercy, must seek to the Virgin Mary for it, otherwise he can expect
nothing but judgment.

And (as Cassander also complains) all David's Psalms they Quid quod totum
Psalterium sublato ubique Domini nomine in nomen Dominae commutatum legimus?
Cass. Ibid.

Domina in te speravi. Psalm. 7. In Domina consido. Psalm. 10.

Conserva me Domina, quia speravi in te. Psalm. 15. Ad te Domina levavi animam
meam. Psalm. 24. In te Domina speravi, non confundar in aeternum. Psalm. 30.
Judica me Domina, and discern causam meam. Psalm. 42. Domina refugium nostrum
es in omni necessitate nost. a, Psalm. 45. Miserere mei Domina, quae matter
misericordiae nuncuparis, and secundum viscera miserlcordiarum tuarum munda me
ab omnibus iniquitatibus meis, effunde gratiam tuam super me, and solitam
clementiam tuam ne subtrahas a me. Psalm. 50.


as they call it, instead of Lord putting in Lady, and attributing that unto
the Virgin Mary, which David attributes unto God. As for example, Lady, in
thee have I put my trust. In the Lady do I trust. Save me O Lady, for I have
trusted in thee. To thee O Lady have I lift up my soul. In thee O Lady have I
trusted, let me never be confounded. Judge me O Lady, and discern my cause. O
Lady, thou art our refuge in all our necessity. Have mercy on me O Lady, which
art called the Mother of mercy, and according to the bowels of thy mercies,
cleanse me from all mine iniquities; Power out thy grace upon me, and withold
not thy wonted clemency from me. And so all along throughout all the Psalms it
runs after this manner. May we not now most justly apply that to the Romanists,
which Ambrose spoke of the Heathens? They think themselves not guilty, Et isti
se non putant reos, qui honorem nominis Dei deferunt creaturae, and relicto
Domino conservos adorant; quasi sit aliquid plus, quod reservetur Deo. Ambr. in
Romans 22.
who give the honor of Gods Name to the creature, and leaving the Lord adore
their fellow servants; as if there were any thing more, that might be reserved
for God.

Now for the Marquesses proofs, I marvel he should stand so much upon that
in Luke 16. 24. For 1. Chemnitius says well, We will not learn how to pray,
of the damned, whom God has cast off, and who are Non igitur a damnatis, qui a
Deo abjecti, and in aeterna desperatione sunt, discemus veram invocationem.
Chemnit. in Exam.

Orent igitur cum divite illo, qui ita exaudiri, and juvari volunt. Ibid.


in eternal despair.

And again, Let them pray as that rich man did, who would be heard, and helped
as he was.

2. Whereas the Marquess brings in a jury of ten Fathers, to prove that this
Scripture is no Parable, but a History, why should we be any more moved in
this case with their verdict, then Iansenius a Romanist was, who (as I have
showed before) thought it more probable, that it is no History, but a Parable:
or at least a History related after a parabolicall manner? Theophlylact also
says expressly that it is a Parable, and censures them as (...). Theophylact.
in Luke 16.
void of understanding, who take it for a History. His reason, I grant, is not
good, viz. that as yet neither the just, nor the unjust do receive their
reward. And yet (...). Theophy. Ibid.
that assertion of his also is advantageous unto us in this point. For our
Adversaries hold (as has been noted before) that therefore in the time of the
old Testament there was no praying to the Saints departed, because the Saints
then (as they say) were not in bliss, and so could not hear the prayers that
should be made unto them. Now Theophylact held, that the Saints in the time of
the new Testament are not in bliss until the last judgment, and the same was
the opinion Bell de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 4 and 5.
of many other Fathers. I know Bellarmine does endeavor to free both
Theophylact, and the rest, interpreting them as if they meant only in respect
of full and perfect bliss both in soul and body. But others of the Roman
Church do confess, that it was their opinion, that the souls of the
righteous do not enjoy the beatificall vision until the day of judgment.
Sixtus Senensis does Sixth. Sen. Bibl. l. 6. Annot. 345.
cite Irenaeus, Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Origin, Chrysostom, Lactantius,
Ambrose, Austine, Theodoret, Theophylact, Bernard, and others, as being of this
opinion: and therefore by our adversaries, own principles they could not
rightly hold the Invocation of Saints deceased. But to return to that
Scripture, Luke 16. Iustine Martyr (as he is cited by Bellarmine,) denies that
it is a true History. Justinus quaest. 60. ex iis, quas Gentes Christianis
opponunt, dicit narrationem de divite and Lazaro non esse veram Historiam. Bell
de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Chrysostom also says plainly that it is a Parable, Hom. 1. de Lazaro. And
yet he is one of the Fathers, whom the Marquess alleges to the contrary. I
know not what that means, which the Marquess says, every parable is either
true in the persons named, or else may be true in some others. For we do not
find persons named in any parable besides this; which is the maine, if not
only argument which is used to prove it a History rather then a Parable:
Narratio magis quam parabola videtur, quando etiam nomen exprimitur. Amb. in
Luc. 8. cap. 16.

Nomen proprium ipsius Lazari arguit esse Historiam, quamvis non efficaciter,
ut infra patebit. Jans. Concord. cap. 97.

Atque utraque haec ratio nominati mendici conveniens est, five exemplum hoc
sit nuda parabola, five etiam Historia. Jan. Ibid.


though Iansenius did not think this to be a convincing argument; and he shows
two reasons why the poor man was named, and not the rich, viz. 1. To teach us
that God regardes the poor that are righteous, more then the rich that are
wicked. 2. Because when one is commended, it is meet to name him, but not so
when one is condemned. And both these reasons (he says) stand good, whether
this narration be only a Parable, or a History. It is certain, the holy Ghost
tells no lies, nor fables, etc. Parables are not false, nor fabulous, yet
(...). Theophylact. ad Ioh. 3. page 410. Edit. Romans
Theophylact says well, We must not take all things that are spokken in
Parables, as Laws and Canons.

So Maldonate thought meet often to Tutissimum est, quod saepe moneo, non
nimis press tractandas esse parabolas: frangi saepe tractando; solereque hic
accidere, quod proverbio dici solet, ut qui nimium emungit, sanguinem eliciat.
Maldon. ad Luc. 15. 22.
admonish this, as a thing most safe, that Parables are not to be handled too
strictly; that they are often broken by handling; and that here that does
happen, which is said in the proverb, the too much wringing of the nose
brings forth blood.

The other place, viz. Job 5. 1. is very inconveniently alleged by the
Marquess for invocation of Saints deceased. Bellarmine was more wary in citing
it only to prove, that Angels, whom he there understands by Saints, may be
invocated. These words (says he) show, that it was the Indicant (haec verba)
tunc fuisse consuetudinem invocandi patrocinium sanctorum Angelorum. Bell. de
sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 19. Ante Christi adventum, sancti qui moriebantur, non
intrabant in coelu^, nec deum videbant, etc. ideo non fuit consuetum, ut
diceretur, S. Abraham ora pro me. Bell. Ibid.


custom then to call upon the holy Angels for their patronage. But to say (as
the Marquess does) that it appears by these words, that they used then to call
upon the Saints departed, is contrary to the tenet of the Romanists, who hold,
that during the time of the old Testament praying unto the deceased Saints was
not in use, because then the Saints that departed out of this life (as they
hold) did not go to Heaven, nor enjoy happiness. But the truth is, those
words Job 5. 1. Call now, etc. and to which of the Saints will thou turn? make
neither for the invocation of Saints, nor of Angels, the meaning of Eliphaz
being only to convince Job that none is punished as he was except he were
wicked; and therefore he bids him show any of the Saints, if he could, that
was so punished as he was. For this was the error of Eliphaz and the other two
friends of Job, that they thought Job could not be a godly man, because God did
so afflict him. Therefore God said his Anger was kindled against them, because
they had not spoken of him the thing that was right. Job. 42. 7. For the
Fathers, which are here objected, the first, viz. Dionys. is cited cap. 7, but
of what? For he wrote diverse Books. But his testimony is of little worth, it
being uncertain who he was, and when he lived, and this being evident to all
that have any the least taste of him, that he was not (as is pretended) that
Dionysius that is mentioned Acts 17. 34. which his fustian and bombast-stile
does sufficiently declare. The next is Athanasius; but I find no such piece as
Ser. de Annunt. either in his works, as they are extant both in Greek and
Latin, nor in Bellarmines Index or Catalogue of them, which he has in his
Book of Ecclesiastical writers; If perhaps the Marquess meant That I find
to be it, by Bell. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Ser de Sanctissima Deipara, Bellarmine in that same book censures it as not
belonging to Athanasius, but to some other long after his time, and in some
thing (as it seems) not very sound. Basil I have not to peruse, nor Maximus.
Stat sanctis supplicaturus, ut prose apud Deum intercedant. Chrysostloc. cit.
Chrysostom in the place quoted, viz. Hom. 66. de Pop. Antioch. does indeed
seem to speak for praying unto Saints to pray for us. But we must remember
how he is reckoned among them, who held that the Saints departed are not yet
in glory, and therefore if the Romanists will have him speak agreably to this
position, they must not have him for a patron in this cause touching the
invocation of Saints. And upon the same ground must they also let go Bernard,
who is likewise noted for the same opinion; He lived 1130 years after Christ.
Bell. de Eccles. Script.
though the truth is, he lived in very corrupt times, and therefore it is no
marvel if he did draw some dreggs; it is indeed a marvel, that he was not
more corrupted and infected then he was. There remains only Hierome, who in
the end of his Epitaph or Funeral Oration concerning Paula, addresseth his
speech unto her, bidding her farewell, and help him with her Vale, O Paula, and
cultoris tui ultimam senectutem orationibus juva. Fides and opera tua Christo
te sociant, praesens quod postulas facilius impetrabis. Hieron. in Epitaph.
Paul. in fine.
prayers. But 1. I have showed before, that Bellarmine does overthrow the
foundation that Hierome buildes upon, viz. that the Saints departed are every
where, and so can hear and understand whatsoever any stand in need of, and
desire of them; which Bellarmine confesses to be incompetible to any mere
creature, as indeed it is, this being a property that belongs unto God only. 2.
When the Fathers sometimes speak in that manner to the Saints deceased, their
speeches proceeded rather from affection then from judgment, and are
Rhetorical rather then Theological (...). Nazianz. in Julian. orat. 1. circa
initium.
expressions. As appears by that of Gregory Nazianzen, who in his first
Oration against Julian speaks thus unto Constantine, who was then dead, And
hear O thou soul of the great Constantine, if thou have any sense (or
understanding) of these things. Where the Greek Scholiast notes that (...).
Scholiast. Ibid.
Nazianzen did imitate Isocrates a Heathen Orator; This is spoken (says he)
in imitation of Isocrates, as if he should say, If thou have any power to hear
the things that are here spoken. And observe how Nazianzen (whom Hierome
calls his Master) spoke doubtfully, making it a question whether the Saints
departed do understand Gregorius Nazianzenus praeceptor meus. Hieron. Catal.
Scriptor. Ecclestast.
things here upon Earth. 3. Austine (who lived in the same time with Hierome)
in his book of true Religion Honorandi sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi
propter religionem. Aug dc vera relig. cap. 55.
speaking of the Saints deparred says plainly, They are to be honored for
imitation, but not to be worshipped for Religion. And in the Uni Deo and
Martyrum, and nostro, sacrificium immolamus; ad quod sacrificium, sicut homines
Dei, qui mundum in ejus confessione vicerunt, suo loco and ordine nominantur,
non tamen a sacerdote, qui sacrificat, invocantur. Ang. de Civit Dei lib. 22.
cap. 10.
last book of that famous work entitled Of the City of God, in the tenth
Chapter of it, speaking of the Martyrs, he says, that in the celebration of
the Eucharist they were mentioned in their place and order (viz. to praise God
for them, and to stir up others to the imitation of them) but yet that they
were not invocated, and that no prayers were put up unto them. This may suffice
to show how far in this point they of the Roman Church are departed both from
the Rule of Gods Word, and also from the judgment and practice of the ancient
Fathers.

We hold (says the Marquess) Confirmation necessary; you Page 69.
not: We have Scripture for it, Acts 8. 14. Peter and John prayed for them that
they might receive the holy Ghost (for as yet he was fallen upon none of them,
only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus) then laid they their
hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost. Where we see the holy Ghost
was given in Confirmation, which was not given in Baptism. Also Heb. 6. 1.
Therefore leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, not laying against the foundation of Repentance from dead works,
and of Faith toward God, of Baptism, and of laying on of hands, The Fathers
affirm the same, Tertul. de Resur. S. Pacian. de Bapt. S. Amb. de sacr. S.
Hierome contra Lucif. S, Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 1. speaking both of Baptism and
Confirmation says, Then they may be sanctified and be the sons of God, if they
be borne in both Sacraments.

Answ. Concerning Confirmation, the Romanists make it a Sacrament properly so
called, of the same nature with Baptism, and the Lords Supper. The matter of
this Sacrament they make Bell. de Confir. lib. 2. cap. 8. and 9, 10, and 11.
to be a certain Ointment compounded after a special manner, and consecrated
by a Bishop, wherewith the person to be confirmed, is anointed in the forehead
in the form of a cross. The form of the Sacrament they make to consist in
these words, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with
the Chrisme (or ointment) of salvation, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. The effect of this Sacrament they say is to
confer true sanctifying grace, and that more abundantly then Baptism does in
respect of the strengthening of the soul against the assaults of Satan. Now
this Confirmation Protestants deny to be a Sacrament, as having no institution,
nor any ground for it in the Scripture. The Author of the Treatise entitled De
unctione Chrismatis, who goes under the Name of Cyprian, Nec tamen cessantibus
his, quae ritu antiquo inoleverant, cum jam in populo Christiano circumcisio
videretur damnabilis, and sacrificia idololatriae imputarentur, unctionis
mysterium Religio Chapter istiana contempsit, etc.
but appears to have been some other, shows that this anointing, which they
use in confirmation, was taken up in imitation of that anointing which was used
in the time of the Law.

Bonaventure also (who lived betwixt Credo quod illud Sacramentu^ Christus nec
dispensavit, nec instituit. Bona. in sent. l. 4. did 7. art. 1 quaest. 1. Et
quaest. 2. Christus hoc sacramentu^ non instituit.
1200 and 1300 years after Christ) held that Confirmation was neither
dispensed, nor instituted by Christ.

And if it were not of Christ's instituting, Patet unum eundemque Deum in
Christo justificationis, and Sacramentorum auctorem agnoscendum esse. --
Perspicitur Sacramenta a Deo ipso per Christum instituta esse. Catechis.
Trident. de Sacram.
it can be no Sacrament properly so called, only Christ (as the Council of
Trents Catechism does acknowledge) being the Author and Ordainer of every
Sacrament.

And therefore the Council of Trent denounces Anathema Council. Trid. Scss. 7.
can. 1.
against all those that shall deny any of the Sacraments to have been of
Christ's institution.

For that Acts 8. 14. 17. which the Marquess alleges, it is nothing to their
Confirmation. For 1. There was laying on of hands, but no anointing with
Chrisme, nor signing with the sign of the Cross. 2. The giving of the holy
Ghost there spoken of, was in respect of some extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost, as speaking with strange Tongues, etc. as Cajetan himself upon the
place observes; and he solidly proves it Accepisse eos Sp. S. in effectu
sensibili (puta locutione linguarum) testantur subjuncta, quod Simon qui fuerat
Magus, viderit Spiritum S. datum per impositionem manuum. Cajet. ad. loc. Bell.
de Confir. lib. 2. cap. 2.
by this, that Simon Magus saw that the holy Ghost was given by the laying on
of the hands of the Apostles. Besides, Acts 19. 6. (which place Bellarmine
does join with the other) it is expressly said, when Paul had laid his hands
upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with Tongues, and
prophesied. That therefore, which the Scripture speaks of the Apostles laying
hands on some that had been Baptized, and conferring the holy Ghost upon
them, is far from proving that the Apostles did administer the Sacrament of
Confirmation, there being neither the matter, nor the form, nor the effect of
that pretended Sacrament. Bonaventure says plainly, Nec materiam, nec formam
Apostoli dispensaverunt. Bonav. lib. 4. did. 7. art. 1. quaest. 2.
The Apostles did dispense neither the matter, nor the form. And for the
effect, we have had already Cajetans Confession, viz. that the effect of the
Apostles laying on of their hands was a sensible giving of the holy Ghost, and
therefore not that which they make the effect of Confirmation. For the other
place of Scripture, viz. Heb. 6. 2. what reason is there why by laying on of
hands there mentioned, should be meant the Sacrament of Confirmation, which
they will have to be administered with an ointment made of Oil and Balsome;
whereas that Scripture speaks of no anointing? why may not that laying on of
hands be the same with that, 1 Timothy 5. 22. lay hands suddenly on no man? viz.
the laying on of hands used in the ordination of Ministers: which also we
read of 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 2 Timothy 1. 6. Or that laying on of hands, which is
mentioned Acts 8. and 19. whereby (as has been showed) the extraordinary and
sensible gifts of the holy Ghost were conferred upon Believers? Thus
Impositionis quoque manuum, Qua^ scil. and Spiritum S. accipiebant, cujus
gratia and futura praedicerent, and miracula ederent. Theophyl. ad loc.
Theophylact upon the place expounds it, of laying on of hands, whereby they
received the holy Ghost so as to foretell things to come, and to work
miracles. Et hoc ad prima fidei fundamenta in primitiva Ecclesia spectabat.
Cajet. ad loc.
Cajetan also understands it in like manner, of that laying on of hands, which
was peculiar to those Primitive Christians.

For the Fathers alleged, it is granted, that the Fathers do often speak of
anointing, and that they speak of it as of a Sacrament. But diverse things are
to be considered;

1. That the word Sacrament is by ancient Writers taken very largely.
Bellarmine Invenimus nomen Sacramenti in Scripturis tribui multis rebus, quae
omniu consensu non sunt Sacramenta, de qualibus nunc agimus. Bell. de effect.
sacram. l. 2. c. 24.
confesses that in the vulgar Latin Translation of the Scriptures the word is
used of many things that by the consent of all are no Sacraments properly so
called.

So Cassander says that besides those seven Et extra hunc numerum quaedam sunt
in Ecclesia celebrata signa, quae and ipsa latioris vocis notione Sacramenta
nonnunquam dicuntur. Et de his quoque septem Sacramentis certum est, ne ipsos
quidem Scholasticos existimasse omnia ea aeque proprie Sacramenta vocari. Nam
et de confirmatione quidam scripserunt, gratiam confirmationis non esse univoce
gratiam cum illa, etc. Cassand. Consult. artic. 13.
which the Church of Rome accounts Sacraments, there are some other things
used among them, which by a more large acception of the word are sometimes
called Sacraments. And that of those seven Sacraments it is certain the
Schoolmen themselves did not think them all to be alike properly called
Sacraments. And he instanceth in this very Sacrament of confirmation, showing
that some of the Schoolmen (namely Holcot) did not take it for a Sacrament of
like nature with Baptism.

The same Author tells us, that one shall hardly find any before Peter Lombard
Nec temere quenquam reperias ante Pet. Lomb^rdum, qui certum aliquem and
definitum numerum Sacramentorum statuerunt. Cassand. Ibid.
(who was 1145 years after CHRIST) that did set down a certain and
determinate number of the Sacraments.

But the Council of Trent has decreed, If any shall say, that the Sacraments
of the new Testament were not all instituted by Jesus Si quis dixetit
Sacramenta novae legis non fuisse omnia a Jesu Christo Domino nostro instituta;
aut esse plura, vel pauciora quam septem, viz. Baptismum, Confirmationem,
Eucharistiam, paenitentiam, Extremam Unctionem, Ordinem, and Matrimonium: aut
etiam aliquod horum non esse vere and proprie sacramentum, anathema sit.
Council. Trident. sess. 7. can. 1.
Christ our Lord; or that they are either more or less then seven, viz.
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme unction, Order, and
Marriage; or that any of these is not a Sacrament truly and properly so called,
let him be anathema. We may see therefore of what small standing the present
Roman faith is.

2. Some of the Fathers do expressly (...); Basil de Spir. S. cap. 37.
tells us, that the anointing, which they used, has no foundation in the
Scripture. Basil speaking of it, asks, what written word has taught it? And
so Bellarmine confesses that there is no institution of it in the Scripture,
and that they have it only by Tradition, which yet he says is most certain,
and no less to be believed then the written word it self. But we are bidden
go to the Law, and to the Testimony; and are told, that if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Isai. 8. 20.

3. The Fathers so peake of their anointing, as that they seem to make it
only an Appendix of Baptism. We came to the water; thou wentest in (says
Ambrose) then presently he adds, Thou wast anointed as Venimus ad fontem,
ingressus es -- Unctus es quasi athleta. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 2.
a wrestler.

So Tertullian, Being come out of that laver we are anointed with the blessed
anointing. Exinde egressi de lavacro perungimur benedicta unctione Tertull. de
Baptis. c. 8.


I know Pamelius makes that anointing there spoken of by Tertullian distinct
from Pamel. Annot. in Tertull. Bellarm. de Consim. lib. 2. cap. 6.
that used in Confirmation: but Bellarmine cites those words as meant of
confirmation.

So those very words of Cyprian, which Tunc enim demum plene sanctificari, and
esse filii Dei possunt, si sacramento utroque nascantur. Cypr. lib. 2. Epist.
1. sive edit. Pamel. Epist. 71.
the Marquess cites, Then they be fully sanctified, and be the Sons of
God, if they be borne of both Sacramments; those very words, I say, do argue
that Cyprian though he seem to speak of two Sacraments, yet indeed accounted
them but one Sacrament, in that he makes one and the same effect of both, viz.
to be borne, whereas they of Rome make birth only the effect of Baptism, and
strength the effect of Confirmation. Neither does it follow that in Cyprians
judgment they are two distinct Sacraments, because he Corpus and sanguis
Domini in duo Sacramenta secantur; quod aperte fit a Rabano. Cassand. Consult.
art. 13.
says both Sacraments. For so he might speak in respect of two several
signs, though both used in one and the same Sacrament; Even as Rabanus calls
the body and blood of Christ two Sacraments; he means the consecrated bread and
wine, which though they make but one Sacrament, yet because they are two
sacramental signs, he calls them two Sacraments.

4. Whereas the Fathers used to add Confirmation presently after Baptism,
whether it were one of years, or an infant that was Baptized, as is
acknowledged by Bellarmine, and other Romanists: now they think it not meet
to Confirm children Bell. de Confir. lib. 2. c. 7. Durant. de ritib. l. 1. c.
20.

Hoc tempore cum Baptizantur adulti, eodem die datur Baptismus, Confirmatio,
and Eucharistia, ut veteres faciebant: sed cum Baptizantur infantes,
differuntur alia duo Sacramenta, donec ad usum rationis pervernerint, etc.
Bell. Ibid. Summa ratione receptum est, quicquid Gerson censeat, hoc
sacramentum minine conferri antequam pueri rationis usum habuerint, and fidem
suam confiteri possint. Durant. Ibid. Si duodecimus annus non expectandus
videatur usque ad septimum certe hoc Sacramentum differ, maxim convenit.
Catech. Trident. de Confirmat.


until they come to the use of reason, and be able to confess their faith.
The Catechism set forth by the decree of the council of Trent, thinks it
requisite, that children be either twelve years old, or at least seven years
old before they be confirmed. And Pie and Religiose Synodus Mediolanensis Anno
1565. decrevit, minori sptennio Confirmationis sacramentum minime praebendum.
Durant. ubi supra.
Durantus tells us that a Synod at Millan did decree (and that, he says,
piously and religiously) That the Sacrament of Confirmation should be
administered to none under seven years old. Thus have they (by their own
confession) departed from the judgment and practice of the ancient Fathers
themselves; and why then should they press us with it?

After Confirmation the Marquess comes to communicating Page 70.
in one kind, which they hold sufficient. And he says that they have
Scripture for it, viz. Ioh. 6. 51. (not 15.) If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. Whence he inferrs, If everlasting life be sufficient,
then it is also sufficient to communicate under one kind. So Acts 2. 42. They
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and prayer. Where is no mention of the Cup, and yet they remained
steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine. So also Luke 24. 30, 35. Where Christ
communicated (he says) his two Disciples under one kind. He adds, that
Austine, Theophylact, and Chrysostom expound that place of the Sacrament.

Answ. The Scripture plainly shows, that our Savior instituting the Sacrament
of his Supper, took, and blessed, and gave the Cup as well as the bread, and
commanded that to be drunk as well as this to be eaten in remembrance of him.
Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. And the Apostle tells us, that, As often as
we eat this bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord, we show forth the Lords
death till he come. 1 Cor. 11. 26. And he bids v. 28. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
Protestants therefore have good reason to hold it necessary to communicate in
both kinds, and that it is utterly unlawful to withhold the Cup from people,
as they in the Church of Rome do. Our Adversaries think to put off those words
of our Haec verba (Bibite ex hoc omnes) dicuntur solis Apostolis, etc. Bell. de
Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 25.
Savior, Drink ye all of this, by saying that Christ spoke so only to the
Apostles, and therefore we must not infer from them, that the common sort of
people are to drink of the Cup in the Sacrament. But 1. by this reason they
may as well withhold the bread also from the people, and so deprive them of the
whole sacrament. For when Christ gave the Bread, and bad take, eat, he spoke
only to the Apostles, as well as when he gave the cup, and bad that all
should drink of it. 2. The Apostle spoke universally of all Christians,
requiring that having examined themselves they should not only eat of the
bread, but drink of the cup also. All antiquity is here on our side. How do
we teach, or provoke them (says Quomodo docemus, aut provocamus eos in
confessione nominis sanguinem suum fundere, si eis militaturis Christi
sanguinem denegamus? Aut quomodo ad Martyrii poculum idoneos facimus, si non
eos prius ad bibendum in Ecclesia poculum Domini jure communicationis
admittimus? Cypr. Epist. 54. edit. Pamel.
Cyprian) to shed their blood in the confession of Christ, if we deny them the
blood of Christ, when they are going to war-fare? Or how do we make them meet
for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first admit them to drink the Lords
Cup in the Church by the right of Communion? Thus spoke Cyprian (and he spoke
in the name of a whole Synod of Afric, as Pamelius observes) concerning Id
Episcoporum statutum, totius Synodi nomine, nuntiat Cornelio Cyprianus; atque
adeo non tam ipsius Cypriani, quam Synodi Africanae est haec Epistola. Pamel.
in argum. epist.
such as though they had grossly offended, yet were judged meet to be
admitted to the Sacrament because of a persecution, which was ready to come
upon them, that so they might be strengthened and prepared for it. This clearly
shows, that in Cyprians time all that did communicate at all, did communicate
in both kinds, and not in one only. So also in another place, Considering
(says Cyprian) Considerantes idcirco se quotidie calicem sanguinis Christi
bibere, ut possint and ipsi propter Christum sanguinem fundere. Cypr-epist. 56.
that they therefore daily drink the cup of Christ's Blood, that they also for
Christ may shed their blood. There is a decree of Pope Julius recorded by
Gratian, wherein he condemns the practice of some, who used Illud vero, quod
pro complemento communionis intinctam tradunt eucharistiam populis, nec hoc
prolatum ex Evangelio testimonium receperunt, ubi Apostolis corpus suum
commendavit and sanguinem. Seorsim enim panis, and seorsim calicis commendatio
memoratur. De consecrat. did. 2. cap. Cum omne.
to give unto people the bread dipped for a full communion. This he says is
not consonant to the Gospel, where we find that the bread and the cup were
given severally each by it self. Much more, we may suppose, he would have
disliked that the bread alone, without any manner of participation of the cup,
should have been administered. Sure I am, the reason that he alleges is every
whit as much against this as against the other. So another Pope. viz. Gelasius
(as the same Gratian relates) hearing of some, that would only receive
Comperimus quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri portione, a calice
sacrati cruoris abstineant; qui proculdubio (quum nescio qua superstitione
docentur astringi) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur. Quia divisio unius and ejusdem mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non
potest pervenire. ^ Ibid. cap. Comperimus.
the bread, but not the Cup, bade that either they should receive the whole
Sacrament, or no part of it, because the division of one and the same mystery
(he says) cannot be without great Sacrilege.

And whereas they speak of a concomitancy Nec superfluit haec, vel illa
sumptio -- Nam species panis ad carnem, and species vini ad animam refertur;
cum vinum sit sacramentum sanguinis, in quo est seeds animae; ideoque sumitur
sub utraque specie, ut significetur quod utrumque Christus assumpsit, carnem
and animam, and quod tam animae quam corpori participatio valeat: unde si sub
una tantum specie sumeretur, ad tuitionem alterius tantum valere
significaretur. Glossa Ibid.
of the blood with the body, and so would have it sufficient to receive the
bread only, the gloss upon that canon is expressly against them, saying,
that the bread has reference only to Christ's Body, and the Wine only to his
Blood: and that therefore the Sacrament is received in both kinds to signify
that Christ assumed both Body and Soul, and that the participation of the
Sacrament is available both to Soul and Body. Wherefore (it says) if the
Sacrament should be received only in one kind (in Bread only) it would show
that it availes only for the good of the one, viz. of the Body, and not for
the good of the other, viz. of the Soul. Not to multiply testimonies, De
administratione sacresancti Sacramenti Eucharistiae satis compertum est,
Universalem Christi Ecclesiam in hunc usque diem, Occidentalem vero seu Romanam
mill amplius a Christo annis in solenni praesertim and ordinaria hujus
sacramenti dispensatione utramque panis and vini speciem omnibus Christi
membris exhibuisse: id quod ex innumeris veterum scriptorum tam Graecorum quam
Latinorum testimoniis manifestum est. Cassand, Consult, art. 22.
Cassander in the very beginning of the Article, wherein he treates of this
point, ingenuously confesses that the Universal Church of Christ to this day
does, and the Western or Roman Church for more then a thousand years after
Christ did (especially in the solemn and ordinary dispensation of the
Sacrament) exhibit both kinds, both Bread and Wine to all the members of
Christ; which (he says) is manifest by innumerable testimonies of ancient
Writers both Greek and Latin.

And he adds, that they were induced Atque ut ita facerent inductos fuisse,
primum instituto exemploque Christi, qui hoc sacramentum corporis and sanguinis
sui duobus hisce panis and vini symbolis discipulis suis fidelium
communicantium personam repraesentantibus praebuit: tum quia in sacramento
sanguinis peculiarem quandam virtutem and gratiam hoc vini symbolo significatam
esse credebant: tum ab rations mysticas hujus instituti, quae a veteribus
vary adducuntur, viz. ad repraesentandam memoriam passionis Christi in
oblatione corporis, and effusione sanguinis, juxta illud Pauli, Quotiescunque
comederitis panem hunc, and calicem Domini biberitis, mortem Domini annuntiatis
donec veniat. Item ad significandam integram refectionem sive nutritione^, quae
cibo and potu constat, quomodo Christus inquit, Caro mea vere est cibus, and
sanguis meus vere est potus. Item ad designandam redemptionem and tuitionem
corporis and animae, ut corpus pro salute corporis, and sanguis pro salute
animae, quae in sanguine est, dari intelligatur, Ad significandum quoque
Christum utramque naturam assumsisse, corporis, viz. and animae, ut utrumque
redimeret. Cassand. Ibid.
hereunto, first by the institution and example of Christ, who did give this
Sacrament of his Body and Blood under two signs, viz. Bread and Wine, unto his
Disciples as representing the person of faithful Communicants. And because in
the Sacrament of the Blood they believed that a peculiar virtue and grace is
signified. So also for mystical reasons of this institution, which are
diversely assigned by the ancient Writers. As to represent the memory of Christ's
Passion in the offering of his Body, and the shedding of his Blood, according
to that of Paul, As often as ye eat this Bread, and Drink the cup of the Lord,
ye show forth the Lords death till he come. Also to signify full refreshing
and nourishing which consists in Meat and Drink, as Christ says, My flesh is
meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. Likewise to show the redemption
and preservation of Soul and Body, that Christ's Body may be understood to be
given for the salvation of our body, and his Blood for the salvation of our
soul, which is in the Blood. And so also to signify that Christ took both
Body and Soul, that he might redeem both.

And therefore he says, It is not without good cause, that very many good
men, even of the Catholic profession, being conversant Quare non temere est,
quod optimi quique etiam Catholicae porfessionis in divinorum and
Ecclesiasticorum scriptorum lectione versati, and his quas supra diximus
rationibus incitati, summo desiderio potiundi Dominici calicis incenduntur,
omnibusque modis contendunt, ut hoc salutare sacramentum sanguinis Christi una
cum sacramento corporis juxta veterem and multis seculis perpetuatam
universalis Ecclesiae consuetudinem in usum reducatur, etc. Cassan. Ibid.
in the reading both of Divine and Ecelesiasicall Writers, do most earnestly
desire to partake of the Lords cup, and by all means strive that this saving
Sacrament of Christ's Blood together with the Sacrament of his Body may again
use to be received according to the ancient custom of the universal Church,
which was continued for many Ages.

For the Scriptures which the Marquess alleges, the first of them, viz. Ioh.
6. 51. does not concern the Sacrament, which is not treated of in that
Chapter, as I have noted before, and that according to the judgment of
Iansenius a Romanist; to whom may be added diverse others of the Church of
Rome, who (as Bellarmine confesses) were of that opinion, viz. Bellar. de
Euch. lib. 1. cap. 5^
Biel, Cusanus, Cajetan, Tapper, and Hesselius. And even Bellarmine himself,
and others, who hold Non est controversia an in toto capite agatur de
Bucharistia: constat enim non ita esse. -- Solu^ igitur quaestio de illis
verbis, Danis quem ego dabo, caro mea est pro mundi vita, and de sequentibus
fere ad finem capitis. Bellar. Ibid.
that the Sacrament is spoken of in Ioh. 6. yet hold it not to be spoken of
till after those words, which the Marquess cites, in those words, which
follow immediately after, verse. 51. And the bread, which I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the World; in those words, I say, and
the rest that follow almost to the end of the Chapter, they say that our
Savior speaks of the Sacrament, but not in any of the former words of the
Chapter. And if the Sacrament were spoken of in that Chapter, those words v.
51. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, would not so much
evince a sufficiency of communicating in one kind, as the words a little
after, viz. v. 53. Verily, verily I say unto you, Except you eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his Blood, you have no life in you, would evince a
necessity of communicating in both kinds. For if those words be understood of
a Sacramental eating and drinking, it cannot be avoided but that by those very
words, as it is necessary to eat of the bread in the Sacrament, so is it to
drink of the cup also. For though by the forementioned concomitancy of the
blood with the Body, they say that when one kind only, viz. bread is
received, the Blood of Christ is drunk as well as his Body is eaten; yet (as
Iansenius well observes) that outward act of Verum non facilc apparet, quomodo
exterior illa sumptio possit dici bibitio. Manducatio enim recte dicitur, quia
sumitur ibi aliquid per modum cibi: sed quomodo bibitio, cum nihil sumatur per
modum potus? Jansen. Concord. cap. 59.
taking the bread in the Sacrament cannot be called drinking. It is rightly
called eating (says he) because something is taken by way of meat: but how
is it called drinking, when as nothing is received by way of drink? Neither is
it certain that in the other two places, viz. Acts 2. 42. and Luke 24. 30. by
breaking of bread is meant the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Cajetan Cajet. in
Act. 2. Jansen. Concord. cap. 146.
expounds the former place of ordinary bread, and the other place is expounded
by Iansenius after the same manner.

Neither is it true that Bellarmine says, Docet (Jansenius) voluisse Dominum
hoc exemplo demonstrare fructu^ and utilitatem Eucharistiae in una specie.
Bell. de Euchar. l. 4. c. 24.
that Iansenius teaches that Christ by that example would show the fruit and
benefit of the Sacrament received in one kind. Jansenius Effectu hic subsecuto
commendare fidelibus Dominus voluit vim Eucharistiae dignae susceptae, nempe
quod per eam oculi hominum illuminantur ad cognitionem Jesu. Jansen. Concord.
cap. 146.
does not speak of receiving the Sacrament in one kind (though I know he did
approve of it) but only says, that by the effect, that followed, the Lord
would commend unto us the virtue of the Sacrament worthily received, to wit,
that thereby our eyes are enlightened to know Jesus.

And whereas Austine, and Theophylact are said to understand Ex quibus
Theophylacti and Augustini sententiis apparet multis, illos sensisse Dominum
jam impertiisse suis Eucharistiae Sacramentum: verum magis intelligendum eos
hujus Sacramenti mentionem fecisse, quod illud hic a Domino mystice fuerit
commendatum and insinuatum. Jansen. Ibid.
that in Luke 24. of the Sacrament, Iansenius tells us, that so many think,
but that indeed they did rather make mention of the Sacrament, because it was
(not here spoken of in Luke, but) mystically commended and insinuated by our
Savior.

But suppose that the Sacrament were spoken of in those places, as probably it
is in Acts 2. because breaking of Bread is there joined with Doctrine and
Prayer, yet there is no sufficient ground for communicating in one kind. For
the figure Synecdoche, whereby the part is put for the whole, is not unusual in
the Scripture. Thus Soul, which is but a part of man, is put for man. All the
Souls that came with Jacob, etc. that is, all the persons. Genesis 46. 26. So
likewise flesh being a part of man, is used for man. I will not fear what
flesh can do unto me. Psalm. 56. 4. that is, what man can do unto me, as it is
expressed, verse. 11. So whereas David says, In thy sight shall no man be
justified, Psalm. 143. 2. Paul has it, There shall no flesh be justified in his
sight. Romans 3. 20. Thus the whole celebration of the Sacrament may be termed
breaking of bread, because that is one, and that an eminent part of it.

The Marquess goes on still concerning the same Sacrament, but so as in the
Church of Rome it is changed into a Sacrifice.

We hold (says he) that Christ offered up unto his Father, in Page 70.
the Sacrifice of the Mass (as an expiation for the sins of the people) is a
true and proper Sacrifice. This you deny: this we prove by Scripture, viz. Mal.
1. 11. From the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my Name
shall be great among the Gentiles: and in every place Incense shall be offered
to my Name, and a pure offering. This could not be meant of the figurative
offerings of the Jews; because it was spoken of the Gentiles: neither can it
be understood of the real sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; because that
was done but in one place, and at one time, and then, and there, not among the
Gentiles neither. Which could be no other but the daily sacrifice of the Mass;
which is, and ever was, from East, to West, a pure and daily sacrifice. Luke
22. 19. This is my body, which is given for you, not to you: therefore a
sacrifice. The Fathers are of this opinion.

Answ. That Christ is offered up in the Eucharist a Sacrifice truly and
properly so called, Protestants have good cause to deny. For the Eucharist is a
Sacrament, to be received by us; not a sacrifice, to be offered unto God.
Christ instituting the Sacrament, gave it to his Disciples; he did not offer
up himself as then unto his Father. The Scripture tells us, that We are
sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. Heb.
10. 10. And immediately after there it follows, that whereas the Leviticall
Priests did often offer the same sacrifices, Christ having offered one
Sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God. And Heb. 9.
25, 26, 27, 28. the Apostle proves that Christ was not to be offered often,
because his offering was his suffering; so that if he should have been offered
often, then he should also have suffered often. But (says he) as it is
appointed unto men to die once, etc. So Christ was once offered, etc.
Bellarmine also averres, that unto a true sacrifice it is required, that the
thing, Ad verum sacrificium requiritur, ut id quod offertur Deo in sacrificium,
plane destruatur, id est, ita mutetur, ut desinat esse id, quod ante erat.
Bell. de Miss. lib. 1. cap. 2.
which is offered unto God for a sacrifice, be plainly destroyed, that is, that
it cease to be what it was before. So that if Christ be offered up in the
Eucharist, a true and proper Sacrifice, then he must be destroyed, he must
cease to be what he was before. Whether or no it be blasphemy to affirm this
of Christ, let all judge.

Bellarmine indeed afterward endeavors to answer this argument; Let us see
what he Hostiam, quae offertur, occidi and mactari necesse est: Ergo si
Christus singulis Missis sacrificatur, eum singulis momentis mill in locis
crudeliter interfici oportet. -- Respondeo, Sacrificium Missae esse verissimum
sacrificium, and tamen non exigere veram hostiae occisionem. Solum enim occisio
requiritur in oblatione rei viventis, and quae in forma rei viventis offertur,
ut cum offeruntur agni, vituli, aves, and similia, quorum destruction in morte
consistit. At cum forma sacrificii est rei inanimae, ut Panis, Vini, Thuris,
and similium, non potest requiri occisio, sed solum consumptio rei illi
conveniens. In Missa igitur offertur quidem Christus, qui est res vivens, and
offertur in forma rei viventis, quantum ad repraesentationem, ubi solum
requiritur mors Repraesentata, non autem mors reipsa: sed ut est sacrificum
reale, and proprie dictum, offertur in forma panis and vini, juxta ordine^
Melchisedech, and proinde in forma rei inanimae. -- Quare consumptio hujus
sacrificii non debet esse occisio, sed manducatio. Bell. de Missa. l. 1. c. 25.
says. The argument he propounds thus, The sacrifice, that is offered, must
be slain. Therefore if Christ be sacrificed in every Mass, he must every
moment in a thousand places be cruelly slain. To this he answers thus, The
sacrifice of the Mass is a most true sacrifice, and yet does not require the
killing of that which is offered. For killing is only required in the offering
of a thing that has life, and which is offered in the form of a thing that
has life, as when Lambs, Calves, Birds, and the like are offered, whose
destruction consists in death. But when the form of the sacrifice is of a
thing without life, as of Bread, Wine, Frankincense, and the like, killing
cannot be required, but only such a consuming of the thing as is agreeable to
it. In the Mass therefore Christ is indeed offered, who is a thing having
life; and he is offered in the form of a thing having life, in respect of
representation, where only a death representative is required, but not death
indeed. But as he is a real and properly so called sacrifice, he is offered in
the form of Bread and Wine, according to the order of Melchisedech, and
therefore in the form of a thing without life. -- Wherefore the consuming of
this sacrifice ought not to be Killing, but Eating.

I have rehearsed his words at large, that so his answer may be seen at full.
But though there be many words, which he uses, yet it is somewhat hard to
know what he means. Certainly this is a very strange kind of sacrifice,
that he speaks of. Christ is offered up a sacrifice both in the form of a
thing that has life, and also in the form of a thing that is without life.
And as he is offered in the form of a thing that has life, he is only
offered in respect of representation; but as he is offered in the form of a
thing that is without life, he is really and indeed offered. So that Christ
being offered in the form of a thing that has life, his death is represented;
but he being offered in the form of a thing that is without life, his death is
not represented, and much less is it really executed, and yet Christ is so
really and properly sacrificed. These things do but very unhandsomely hang
together. But whereas he says, that the consuming of this sacrifice is the
eating of it, I demand, is Christ's Body so eaten, as that it cease to be what
it was before? If it be not, (as certainly it is not, Christ's Body being now
glorified, and so free from all mutation) then is it not truly and properly
sacrificed, Bellarmine himself telling us (as I have showed before) that
whatsoever is truly and properly sacrificed, is so destroyed, as that it
cease to be what it was before. To talk here of consuming the species or
form of bread, so that it cease to be what it was before, is nothing to the
purpose; for they maintain, that the Body and Blood of the Lord are that
sacrifice, Corpus and sanguis Domini sunt id sacrificium, quod in Missa proprie
offertur, and sacrificatur. Bell. de Miss. l. 1. c. 27.
which is properly offered and sacrificed in the Mass.

And whereas Bellarmine also speaks of Christ's being offered in the form of
Bread and Wine, according to the Order of Melchisedech, I desire to know by
whom CHRIST is so offered? For either by himself, or by the Priest that says
Mass. Not by himself; for here we speak of Christ's being offered in the
Eucharist, which is not administered by Christ, he being now in Heaven. Nor by
the Priest on Earth, there being no Priest after the order of Melchisedech, but
Christ only. Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 7. 15, etc. And thus indeed there is no Priest
upon Earth, that is properly so called; and consequently there is no true and
proper sacrifice to be offered. For every sacrifice presupposes a Priest to
offer it; and such as the sacrifice is, such also must the Priest be; he must
be a Priest properly so called, if it be a sacrifice properly so called. But
there is no such Priest upon Earth; there being none (as I have showed) after
the order of Melchisedech; nor yet any after the order of Aaron, for that order
is abolished, as all the Leviticall sacrifices are. And of any other order
besides these we read not in the Scripture.

Again, in a sacrifice properly so called, it must be some sensible thing, (as
our Adversaries Sacrificium est oblatio, etc. qua res aliqua sensibilis, and
permanens ritu mystico consecratur, and transmutatur. Bell. de Miss lib. 1.
cap. 2.
themselves acknowledge) that is offered. But Christ is not sensible in the
Eucharist; for by what sense is he there discerned? And therefore neither is
he there truly and properly sacrificed. Neither was this Doctrine (viz. that
Christ is properly sacrificed in the Eucharist) received in the Church of Rome
for more then 1100 years after Christ, as appears by the Master of the
Sentences, Post haec quaeritur, si quod gerit sacerdos, proprie dicatur
sacrificium vel immolatio, and si Christus quotidie immoletur, vel semel tantum
immolatus sit. Ad hoc breviter dici potest, illud quod offertur and consecratur
a sacerdote, vocari sacrificium and oblationem, quia memoria est and
repraesentatio very sacrificii, and sanctae immolationis factae in ara crucis.
Et semel Christus mortuus est in cruce, ibique immolatus est in semetipso;
quotidie autem immolatur in sacramento, quia in hoc sacramento recordatio fit
illius, quod factum est semel. Lombard. lib. 4. did. 12. lit. e. and f.
Peter Lombard, who propounds the question, whether that which the Priest does,
be properly a sacrifice, and whether Christ be sacrificed daily, or were only
once sacrificed. And to this he answers that, that which is offered and
consecrated by the Priest, is called a sacrifice, and an offering, because it
it a memorial, and representation of the true sacrifice, and holy immolation,
that was made in the Altar of the Cross. And Christ died once on the cross,
and was there sacrificed in himself; but he is daily sacrificed in the
Sacrament, because in the Sacrament there is a remembrance of that which was
done once.

Here we plainly see that he determines, that Christ is not properly sacrificed
in the Sacrament, but improperly, in that his sacrificing of himself upon the
cross is remembered and represented in the Sacrament, which is no more then the
Apostle says, viz. that Christ's death is showed forth in the Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11. 26. And thus Ambrose (as Lombard does cite him) Although we offer daily,
Etsi quotidie offerimus, ad recordationem mortis ejus fit. -- Offerimus and
nunc, sed quod nos agimus, recordatio est sacrificii. Ambros. apud Lombard.
Ibid.
it is for the remembrance of his death. -- We also offer now, but that which
we do, is a remembrance of the sacrifice which Christ offered. To this purpose
also he cites Austine.

Now for the places alleged by the Marquess, the first, viz. Mal. 1. 11. does
not particularly concern the Eucharist, but generally the spiritual worship
and service, which the Prophet foreshewed should be performed unto God in the
time of the New Testament, and which should not be confined and limited to one
certain place, and as the solemn worship and service of God in the time of
the old Testament was, but should be performed in every place, as well in one
place as another. This is that which our Savior said to the Woman of Samaria,
Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain,
nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. -- The hour comes, and now is, when
the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit, and in truth, etc.
Joh. 4. 21, 23. S. Paul also to the same purpose, I will therefore that men
pray every where, lifting up holy hands, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 8. This is that incense
and pure offering, which the Prophet Malachy said should be offered unto God in
every place. This incense and pure Offering are the prayers of the Saints,
Revel. 5. 8. And all spiritual sacrifices, which Christians offer acceptable
unto God thorough Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 5. What is this to prove that Christ
is truly and properly sacrificed in the Eucharist? It is true, the Iren. lib.
4. cap. 32. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 18. c. 35.
Fathers sometimes apply that place of Malachy to the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; but not as if Christ were there in that Sacrament truly and properly
sacrificed, nor as if that place concerned this Sacrament more then any other
spiritual worship now to be performed under the new Testament. Irenaeus in one
Chapter applies it to the Sacrament, and in the very Et in omni loco incensum
offertur nomini meo, and sacrificium purum. Incensa autem Joannes in Apocalyp.
si orationes esse alt sanctorum. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 33.
next immediately after he applies it to Prayer. Having cited the words of
Malachy, In every place incense is offered to my Name, and a pure offering,
immediately he adds, Now John in the Revelation says that incense are the
Prayers of the Saints. So also Ergo propie nunc ad sacerdotes Judaeorum sermo
fit Domini, qui offerunt caecum and claudu^, and languidum ad immolandum; ut
sciant carnalibus victimis spirituales victimas successuras. Et nequaquam
taurorum hircorumque sanguinem, sed thymiama, hoc est, sanctorum orationes
Domino offerendas, and non in una orbis provincia, judaea, nec in una Judaeae
urbe, Jerusalem, sed in omni loco offerri oblationem nequaquam immundam, ut a
populo Israel, sed mundam, ut in ceremoniis Christianorum. Hieron. ad Mal. 1.
Hierome in his commentary upon the words of Malachy. Now the Lord directs his
speech to the Jewish Priests who offer the Blind, and the Lame, and the sick
for sacrifice, that they may know that spiritual sacrifices are to succeed
carnal sacrifices. And that not the blood of Bulls, and Goats, but incense,
that is, the Prayers of the Saints are to be offered unto the Lord; and that
not in one province of the world, Judea, nor in one City of Judea, Jerusalem,
but in every place is offered an offering, not impure, as was offered by the
people of Israel, but pure, as is offered in the ceremonies (or services) of
Christians. Here it is very observable, that Hierome writing professedly upon
the place of the Prophet, to show the meaning of it, was so far from thinking
it to be peculiarly meant of the Eucharist, that he does not so much as
mention that Sacrament, otherwise then it is comprehended in those spiritual
sacrifices, which he says are here spoken of: but as he says, that
spiritual sacrifices in general are here signified, so particularly he
applies the words of the Prophet unto prayer, saying that it is the incense
which the Prophet speaks of.

The other place of Scripture, viz. Luke 22. 19. is as little to Bell. de
Missa. l. 1. c. 12.
the purpose, though Bellarmine also does allege and urge it in the same
manner, saying that Christ did not say, Vobis datur, frangitur, effunditur, sed
pro vobis, is given, broken, shed to you, but for you. But what of this? We
know and believe that Christ's Body was given, and his Blood shed for us on the
cross, in remembrance whereof according to Christ's institution we receive the
Sacrament: but does it therefore follow, that Christ is properly offered and
sacrificed in the Sacrament? The ground Illa verba temporis praesentis, etc.
Bell. Ibid.
of this conceit is, that the word is in the present tense, datur, is given,
not in the future, dabitur, shall be given. But this is too weak a foundation
to build upon. For Bellarmine cannot deny, but that in the Scripture Fateor in
Scriptura saepe accipi praesens, aut praeteritum pro futuro. Bellarm. Ibid.
the present, or the preter tense is often put for the future. And well might
it be so here, Christ being now ready to be offered, he instituting the
Sacrament the same night that he was betrayed, 1 Cor. 11. 23. the night before
he suffered. And therefore Cardinal At si praesentis temporis verbum,
frangitur, in quaestionem quis deducat, animadvertat scripta ab aliis
Evangelistis, and cessabit quaestio -- Eadem siquidem ratione, qua illi
Evangelistae futuram in cruce effusionem sanguinis significaverunt in
praesenti, effunditur: cadem ratione Paulus futuram in cruce fractionem carnis
Christi significat in praesenti, dicendo frangitur. -- Communis autem omnium
horum ratio (quare scil. Dominus Jesus in caena expressit futuram in cruce
sanguinis effusionem, and carnis fractionem verbis praesentis temporis) est ut
manifestaret discipulis, hujusmodi effusionem, and fractionem non distantem
tempore, sed tanquam praesentem esse. Et vere loquendo de tempore praesenti
Grammatico more, tempus effusionis and fractionis erat tunc praesens, quoniam
jam inchoatum erat tempus passionis ejus. Ac per hoc sicut inchoato die potest
significari verbo praesentis temporis quicquid fit illo die: ita inchoato jam
die passionis ejus, potuit significari verbo praesentis temporis omnis ejus
passio. Praesens enim Grammatice non est instants, sed quoddam confusum
praesens. Cajet. in 1. Cor. 11.
Cajetan was much more ingenuous then Cardinal Bellarmine. For upon 1 Cor. 11.
23. he notes, that both the Evangelists, and also Paul relating the words of
the institution of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, use the present tense is
given, or broken, and is shed, because when Christ did institute the Sacrament,
though his Body was not yet crucified, nor his Blood shed, yet the crucifying
of his Body, and the shedding of his Blood was at hand, and in a manner
present. Yea, the time of Christ's suffering (he says) was then present, as
being then begun. And therefore as when the day is begun, we may signify in
the present tense whatsoever is done that day: so the day of Christ's Passion
being begun (the Jews beginning the day at the Evening) all his Passion might
be signified by a word of the present tense. The present being taken
Gramatically not for an instant, but for a certain time confusedly present.
The ancient Writers also have expounded the present tense (used in the words of
the institution) by the future.

Hear Christ himself (says Audi ipsum tibi dicentem, quia hic est sanguis
meus, qui pro vobis effundetur, etc. Origin. Hom. 9. in Levit. ab ipso
Bellarmino citatus lib. 2. Euchar. cap. 8.
Origin) saying unto thee, This is my Blood, which shall be shed, etc. So also
Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradetur. Tertull. lib. 3. in Marcion.
citat. a. Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Tertullian rehearses Christ's words thus, This is my Body, which shall be
given for you. And even the vulgar Latin Translation, Mat. 26. 28. and Mar.
14. 24. has it in the future tense, effundetur, and so Luke 22. 20. fundetur,
shall be shed: and 1 Cor. 11. 24. tradetur, shall be given.

Now for the Fathers, whom the Marquess alleges as being of their opinion, I
answer, the Fathers indeed do frequently use the word sacrifice, and offering,
when they speak of the Eucharist; but it does not therefore follow, that
according to their opinion there is a true and proper sacrifice offered in the
Eucharist. For it is certain that they do also frequently use the same words,
when they speak of those things which the Romanists themselves acknowledge to
be no sacrifices properly so called; even as the Scripture speaks of the
sacrifice of Prayer, Psalm. 141. 2. of praise, Heb. 13. 15. of Alms, Heb. 13.
16. of our own selves, Romans 12. 1. And where the Fathers (as the Marquess
observes) call the Eucharist an unbloodly sacrifice, they sufficiently show
that properly Christ is not sacrificed in it. For (as Bellarmine himself does
tell us) All sacrifices (properly so called) that the Omnia omniao, quae in
scripturis dicuntur sacrificia, necessario destruenda erant, si viventia per
occisionem, si inanima solida, ut simila, and sal, and thus, per combustionem,
etc. Bell. de Miss. l. 1. c. 2.
Scriptures speak of, were to be destroyed, and that by staying, if they were
things having life; and if they were solid things without life, as fine Flower,
Salt, and Frankincense, they were to be destroyed by burning. Besides I have
showed before, by the testimony of Lombard, that the Fathers sometimes
expressly speak of Christ's being sacrificed in the Eucharist, in that there
is a commemoration and remembrance of the sacrifice which Christ upon the
cross did offer for us.

Baptismus est sacramentum repraesentativum mortis Christi: -- Et tamen nulli
veterum Baptismum sacrificium Deo oblatum unquam appellaverunt. Non igitur ista
sola repraesentatio causa esse potuit cur actio Caenae Domini sacrificium
appellatur. Bell. de Miss. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Bellarmine objects that Baptism does represent the death of Christ; and yet
none of the ancients do ever call Baptism a sacrifice: and therefore the
representation of Christ's death alone could not be the cause why they call the
Lords Supper a sacifice.

I answer, doubtless Bellarmines reading (...). Oecum. in Heb. 10.
was sufficient to inform him that diverse ancient Writers call Baptism a
sacrifice. Oecumenius upon Heb. 10. 26. says, that the meaning of those words,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, is that there is no second
Baptism to be expected. For by sacrifice (he says) is there meant the cross
(Christ's Sacrifice on the cross) and Baptism, wherein that sacrifice is
represented. After the same manner, and almost the same words writes
Theophylact upon that place to the Hebrews.

Chrysostom. and ejus sequaces per hostiam intelligunt aut Baptismum, aut potius
mortem Christi, quatenus in Baptismo operatu. Estius in Heb. 10. 26.
Estius also upon the place says that Chrysostom and his followers by
sacrifice there understand either Baptism, or rather the death of Christ, as
it does operate in Baptism.

Sed quaeris quid causae plerisque antiquorum fuerit, ut Baptismum hostiam
appellaverint, ideoque dixerint non superesse hostiam pro peccato, quia
Baptismus repeti non potest. Sane quia in Baptismo Christo commorimur, and per
hoc sacramentum applicatur nobis hostia crucis ad plenam peccati remissionem;
hinc illi Baptisma translatitie hostiam nuncuparunt, ac post Baptisma semel
susceptum nullam hostiam esse reliquam interpretati sunt, quia Baptisma
secundum non est. Can. Loc. Theolog. lib. 12. cap. 13. page 680. Edit. in 8.
And Melchior Canus affirms, that most of the ancients did call Baptism a
sacrifice, saying that there remains no sacrifice for sin, because Baptism
cannot be repeated. And he gives this reason why they spoke so, viz. because in
Baptism we die together with Christ, and the sacrifice of the cross by this
Sacrament is applied unto us for full forgiveness of sins. Therefore (says
he) by a metaphore they called Baptism a sacrifice, and said that after
Baptism there remains no sacrifice, because there is no second Baptism.

Thus then it may sufficiently appear, that there is nothing either in the
Scriptures, or in the Fathers, to prove that in the Eucharist Christ is offered
up unto the Father a sacrifice properly so called, but that both Scriptures and
Fathers are against it.

In the next place, We say (says the Marquess) that the Sacrament Page 71.
or Orders confers grace upon those, on whom the hands of the Presbytery are
imposed: you both deny it to be a Sacrament, notwithstanding the holy Ghost is
given unto them thereby; and also you deny that it confers any interior grace
at all upon them. We have Scripture for what we hold, viz. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, and
with laying on the hands of the Presbytery. So 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the gift of
God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. S. Aug. lib. 4. Quaest.
super Number. S. Cypr. Epist. ad Magnum. Optat. Milevit. the place begins, Ne
quis miretur. Tertull. in Praescript. the place begins, Edant origines.

Answ. That Orders (or the Magis proprie deberet vocari Ordinatio quam Ordo.
Durand. l. 4. did. 24. quaest. 1. Council. Trid. Sess. 23. can. 3.
Ordination of Ministers) is a Sacrament truly and properly so called, of the
same nature with Baptism and the Lords Supper, they of the Church of Rome do
hold, and the Council of Trent has denounced Anathema against such as deny
it. Chemnit. in Ex. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 19. Sect. 28.
Protestants on the other side, though they do not deny but that the name of
Sacrament largely taken may be given to Ordination, yet they deny that it is a
Sacrament in that sense as Baptism and the Lords Supper are Sacraments. A
Sacrament properly so called (as the name is attributed to Baptism and the
Lords Supper) is a Sign and Seal of the covenant of Grace, confirming unto us
that Christ is ours, and we his; that in him we are justified, and through him
shall be saved. Thus circumcision was a Sacrament in the time of the old
Testament, a token of the Covenant betwixt God and his people, Genesis 17. 11. a
Seal of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. So now is Baptism, Mat. 28.
19. Acts 22. 16. And so the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. But thus
Ordination is not a Sacrament, not serving to signify and seal the covenant
of Grace, as Baptism and the Lords Supper do. Calvinus agnoscit Ordinationem
esse verum Sacramentum. Bellar. de Sacram. Ord. lib. 1. cap. 1.

Quantum ad verum Presbyterii munus, quod ore Christi nobis est commendatum,
libenter co loco habeo. Illic enim ceremonia est, primum ex Scriptur is sumpta,
deinde quam non esse inanem, nec supervacuam, sed fidele Spiritualis gratiae
symbolum Paulus testatur. -- Spiritus S. gratiam (Christus) promisit, non ad
peragendam peccatorum expiationem, sed ad gubernationem Ecclesiae rite obeundam
and sustinendam. Calv. Iustit. lib. 4. cap. 19. Sect. 28.


Bellarmine says, that Calvin does acknowledge Ordination to be a true
Sacrament. But Calvin so grants it to be a Sacrament, as that he plainly shows
it to be no such Sacrament as Baptism and the Lords Supper are. As for the
true office of a Presbyter (or Elder, says he) which is commended unto us by
the mouth of Christ, I willingly account it a Sacrament. For there is a
ceremony, first taken from the Scriptures, and then also such as Paul does
testify not to be empty and superfluous, but a faithful token and pledge of
spiritual grace. But presently after he adds, Christ has promised the grace
of the holy Ghost, not for the expiating of sins, but for the right governing
of the Church.

Thus much also is yielded by Chemnitius (whom yet Bellarmine would make to
dissent from Calvin) There is Bell. ubi Supra.
(says he) a promise added, that God will Addita elt promissio, Deum daturum
gratiam, and dona, quibus ea, quae ad Ministerium pertinent, recte, fideliter
and utiliter praestare and exequi possint, qui legitime vocati sunt. Joh. 20.
Acciplte spiritum S. Chemnit. in Exam.
give grace, and gifts, whereby they who are lawfully called, may rightly,
faithfully, and profitably perform and execute those things, which belong unto
the Ministry. Joh. 20. Receive the holy Ghost.

And afterward again, This serious prayer (says he) used in the Ordination
of Ministers, because it builds upon Gods Precept Et haec seria oration in
ordinatione Ministrorum, quia nititur mandato and promissione Divina, non est
irrita. Hoc vero est, quod Paulus dicit, Donum, quod est in te per impositionem
manuum. Chemnit. Ibid. Si hoc modo intelligatur Ordinatio, de Ministerio verbi
and Sacramentorum, jamdudum Apologia Augustanae Confessionis nostrarum
Ecclesiarum sententiam declaravit, nos non gravatim Ordinem vocaturos
Sacramentum. Et additur ibi, Neque Impositionem manuum vocare Sacramentum
gravabimur. Late enim vocabulum Sacramenti patere supra ostendimus. Ibid.
and Promise, is not in vain. And this is that which Paul says, The gift,
which is in thee by the laying on of hands. He adds immediately, If
ordination be thus understood, viz. of the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, the Apology of the confession at Auspurge has long ago declared
what our Churches hold, viz. that we are not unwilling to call Order a
Sacrament. And there it is added, neither will we stick to call Laying on of
hands a Sacrament. For we have showed before that the word Sacrament is of a
large acception.

Thus Chemnitius; whereby it may appear, that neither does he dissent (as
Bellarmine pretends he does) from Melancthon, Bellar. Loc. supra. citat.
the Author of the Apology of the confession at Auspurge, though I have not now
liberty to consult that Author. And thus also it appears, that though
Protestants deny Ordination to be a Sacrament of the same nature with Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord, and that justifying and saving grace is either
conferred, or confirmed by it; yet they do not deny but that it may be called
a Sacrament, and that some interior grace is conferred by it, and that because
of those very words of the Apostle, which our Adversaries stand upon, the gift
that is in thee by the laying on of hands.

But Bellarmine will easily prove (he says) that Ordination is a true
Sacrament. For Facile ostendemus Ordinationem esse verum Sacramentum. Nam
gratia, quae illi promissa est, non est donum aliquod gratis datum, ut
prophetia, vel donum linguarum, sed gratia justificans. Nam imprimis Joh. 20.
cum Dominus tribuit Apostolis potestate^ remittendi peccata, quae est pars
quaedam sacerdotii, dixit, Accipite Spiritum S. non autem vocatur absolute
Spiritus S. in Scripturis donum illud, quod in impiis esse potest. Praeterea 2 Timothy 1. ubi dixerat Apostolus gratiam Timotbeo per manus impositionem datam,
subjungit explicans quae sit illa gratia, Non enim dedit nobis (id est, nobis
Episcopis) Spiritum timoris, sed virtutis, and dilectionis, and sobrietatis.
Bell. de Sacr. Ord. lib. 1. cap. 2.
(says he) the grace that is promised unto it, is no common gift, as
Prophecy, or the gift of Tongues, but justifying Grace. And this he proves by
that Ioh. 20. Receive ye the holy Ghost. For that gift which may be in the
ungodly, is never (he says) in the Scriptures called absolutely the holy
Ghost. He adds also that the gift spoken of 2 Timothy 1. 6. viz. which was given
to Timothy in his Ordination, was the spirit of love, and of power, and of a
sound mind, as it follows verse. 7.

I answer, the places alleged do not prove that justifying grace is promised,
or by promise annexed unto Ordination.

For 1. It is not true, that the gift, which may be in the wicked, is never in
the Scripture called the holy Ghost. For Acts 19. 6. it is said of some, that
when Paul laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them: yet by the
holy Ghost there is meant such a gift of the holy Ghost, as the wicked may
receive, viz. the gift of Tongues, and Prophecy: for so immediately it
follows, and they spoke with Tongues, and Prophesied.

2. Neither does it appear, that the Apostle 2 Timothy 1. 7. does explain what
he meant by the gift mentioned verse. 6. but having exhorted Timothy to stir up
the gift that was in him by laying on of hands, he adds as a motive to
enforce the exhortation, For God has not given unto us the spirit of fear,
but etc. As if he should say, All true Christians have received this Spirit of
God, and more especially all faithful Ministers: therefore stir up the gift
that is in thee, etc. But the end of Ordination is not the justification of the
person ordained, but the edification of others for whom he is ordained. He
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers. (Why? for what end?) For the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12.

So Durandus * Sacramentum Ordinis est spirituale medicamentum, non tamen
illius, qui Ordinem suscipit, qui jam debet esse sanus, sed communitatis: quia
per Ordinem efficitur homo dispensator sacramentorum, Durand. in Sent. lib. 4.
did. 24. quaest. 1. ad 1 m.
an acute and learned Schoolmen, says that the Sacrament of Order is a
spiritual medicine, yet not for him that is ordained, but for the people;
because by Ordination a man is made a dispenser of the Sacraments etc.

For the Fathers here objected, there is only one, viz. Cyprian, that I can
punctually answer unto. He in the place cited has nothing (that I find)
about Ordination. He speaks indeed there of imposition of Si habent (scil.
haeretici Spiritum S.) cur illic Baptizatis, quando ad nos veniunt, manus
imponitur ad accipiendum spiritum S. Cum jam utique illic acceptus sit, ubi si
fuit, dari potuit? Cyrian. Epist. 77. (Edit. Pamel.) ad Mag.
hands for the receiving of the holy Ghost; but the imposition of hands there
spoken of was not by way of Ordination, but by way of Confirmation, of which I
have spoken before. For Cyprian there speaks of laying hands upon all that had
been baptized by Heretics, when they did return to the Church, and not of
laying hands upon such as did receive Ordination.

The Marquess himself in the point of Confirmation alleged Cyprians 71.
Epistle, and this which he now alleges is in respect of the former part of
it, of the same subject with that, and the rest that follow, as Pamelius notes
in the Argument of the Epistle. The other Fathers Prior pars Epistolae ejusdem
est argumenti cum praecedentibus. Pamel in argum. Epist. 77. ad Magnum.
are so cited, that there is no examining what they say, without more labor
then the thing is worth, or reason does require. Austine is cited in his
questions upon Numbers, now there are 65 questions upon that book, but which of
them is meant, is not expressed. In like manner are Optatus and Tertullian
cited, without any mention made of the book, wherein Optatus has any thing to
the purpose, whereas there are seven Books, which he wrote; or of the
Chapter, in which Tertullian de Praescript. speaks about Ordination, whereas
that Book of Tertullian has 53. chapters. Neither does Bellarimne in this
controversy about Ordination Bell. de Sacram. Ord. lib. 1. c. 3.
allege either Tertullian, or Optatus at all; nor Cyprian, but only in a
work, which himself confesses to be none of Cyprians: nor yet Austine in
that place, which the Marquess cites. But how ever, it is granted, that the
Fathers sometimes call Ordination a Sacrament; and so do Protestants too, as
has been showed; though they deny it to be a Sacrament of the same nature
with Baptism and the Lords Supper; and so much (as I have showed) Durandus
himself does acknowledge, making it to be a remedy provided for the spiritual
welfare of others, and not of him that is ordained.

To proceed, We hold (says the Marquess) that the Priest, Page 71. and 72.
and other Religious persons, who have vowed chastity to God, may not marry
afterward. You deny first, that it is lawful to make any such vows: and
secondly, that those who have made any such vows, are not bound to keep them.
We have Scripture for what we hold, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. When thou shall vow a vow unto
the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will
require it of thee. So 1 Timothy 5. 11, 12. But the younger widows refuse, for
when they have begun to wax wanton against the Lord, they will marry, having
damnation, because they have cast off their first Faith. What can be meant
hereby but the vow of chastity? or by their first faith, but some promise made
to Christ in that behalf? Otherwise Marriage could not be damnable. So all the
ancient Fathers have expounded it. S. Aug. de bono viduit. cap. 9. S. Athanas.
de Virginit. S. Epiphan. haer. 48. S. Hier. contra Iovin. l. 1. c. 7.

Answ. One thing is here omitted by the Marquess, which yet we must observe,
viz. that they of the Church of Rome hold that Priests and Clergymen (as they
are called) ought not to Marry, and that they restrain them from Marriage,
causing them to vow against it. Some of them hold this to be of divine
institution; Bellarmine though he likes not that, yet makes it to Ego
verissimum puto, decretum hoc, quo votum est annexum Ordinibus, non quidem
proprie divinum esse, sed tamen esse Apostolicum, etc. Bell. de Cler. lib. 1.
cap. 18. Sanctissimus mos est Romanae Ecclesiae, rationique and Scripturis
consentaneus, atque a majoribus acceptus, quo neminem ad sacros ordines
admittat nisi caelibem, aut qui de uxoris consensu castitatem suam Deo
consecravit. Coster. Encbirid. de Caelib. Sacerdat. Quinta propositio.
be an Apostolical decree, which indeed amounts to as much. Costerus the
Jesuit says, It is the most holy custom of the Roman Church, agreeable to
reason and the Scriptures, and received from our ancestors, not to admit any to
holy Orders, but him that is unmarried, or that with the consent of his wife
has consecrated his chastity unto God.

And the same Author affirms, that Although a Priest finne grievously if he
commit Sacetdos si fornicetur, aut domi concubinam foveat, tametsi gravi
sacrilegio sese obstringat, gravius tamen peccat, si contrahat Matrimonium.
Ibid. Nona propositio.

Sacerdotibus nullo modo permittenda sunt Matrimonia. Ibid. Decima propositio.
Communiter dicitur, quod pro simplicl fornicatione quis deponi non debet, cum
paucissimi sine illo vitio inveniantur. Gloss. in did. 81. cap. Maximianus.
Dicunt hodie pro fornicatione neminem deponendum, nisi in ea perduret; and ideo
quia hodie fragiliora sunt corpora nostra quam olim erant. Gloss. in did. 82.
cap. Presbyter.


Fornication, yet much more if he Marry. And therefore he concludes, that
Priests are by no means to be suffered to Marry: Yet they may be suffered to
commit fornication; for so the Gloss upon Gratians Decrees tells us, that it
is commonly held, that one ought not to be deposed for simple fornication. And
mark the reason, because (sath he) very few are found without that fault. And
so in another place, They say that now none is to be deposed for fornication,
except he continue in it: and that because our bodies are now more frail then
they were in times past.

How well does this agree with the Scripture, which says that Marriage is
honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge? Heb. 13. 4. But says Bellarmine, if Marriage be honorable in all,
then in those that are near allied, and in Si conjugia omnium sunt
honorabilia, etiam conjugia consanguineorum in primo and secundo gradu erunt
honorabilia; and conjugia adolescentium injussu parentum contracta, erunt
honorabilia. Bell. de Cler. lib. 1. cap. 20.
those that marry without the consent of their Parents. I answer, Marriage may
be, and is honorable in all; and yet not all kind of Marriage. It is lawful
for any to marry, yet not to marry with any; they that marry, must marry in the
Lord. 1 Cor. 7. 39.

Bellarmine himself approves of Theophylacts In omnibus, i. e. in omnibus
legitime conjunctis, quicunque illi sint, etc. Ita Theophylactus in hunc locum,
and videtur magis literaliae expositio. Bellar. Ibid.
Exposition, viz. that Marriage is honorable in all, that is, in all that are
lawfully joined together, whosoever they be: Now such are all they, whom the
Scripture does not exclude, as it does not the Clergy. Gratian himself
confesses that it is Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos Pontifices supra
legantur esse promoti, non suut intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de legitimis
conjugiis nati: quia sacerdotibus ante prohibitionem ubique licita erant: and
in orientali Ecclesia usque hodie licere probantur. Did. 56. cap.
Caenomanensem.
but an Ecclesiastical Law, that forbids Priests to marry, and that before
this prohibition their Marriage was every where lawful, and so in his time was
accounted in the Eastern Church. Yea he says, that many, whose Fathers were
Priests, were promoted to be Popes; and that they were not to be thought borne
of fornication, but of lawful wedlock.

Non levibus de causis olim adducti fuerunt proceres Ecclesiae, etc. --

Contra tamen fatendum est graviter a posteris esse peccatum, qui hanc utilem
pro tempore constitutionem multis in laqueum verterunt, etc. Cassand. Consult.
artic. 23.

Quare nimis rigida and intempestiva hujus constitution is exactione,
gravissima and abominanda in Ecclesia scandala exitisse videmus. Nam causae
illae, quibus majores ad constitutionem hanc faciendam inductos esse diximus,
non solum hodie cessarunt, sed in contrarium sunt conversae. Nam primum videmus
hoc decreto usque adeo castitatem and continentiam in Christo non confirmatam,
ut per illud ad omne libidinis and flagitii genus fenestra aperta esse
videatur. Tum res in plerisque sacerdotibus ita comparatae sunt, ut conjugum
piarum consortio non modo ad functiones Ecclesiasticas obeundas non
impediantur, sed etiam ad earum procurationem adjuventur ab eis: quemadmodum de
patre suo Gregorio, and matre Nomia Gregorius Nazianzenus testatur. Ibid.


Cassander also acknowledges it to have been but a constitution of the
Church, and that though for a while it was expedient, yet afterward it became
a snare to many. He says, that by the rigid and unseasonable exacting of this
constitution, most grievous and abominable scandals are in the church. For that
the causes, which moved them in former times to make that constitution, are not
only now ceased, but even turned quite contrary. That by this decree chastity
and continency is so far from being confirmed, that thereby a window may seem
to be set open unto all kind of lust and lewdness. And that it fares so now
with some Priests, that the society of their godly wives is not only no
hinderance, but it is a help and furtherance unto them in respect of their
Ecclesiastical functions and employments, as Gregory Nazianzen testifies of
his parents.

It remains therefore (he says) that henceforth this statute Restat primum ut
in posterum ordinandis hoc statutum relaxetur, and more veteris Ecclesiae, and
huc usque Orientalium Ecclesiarum honesti quoque mariti ad Ecclesiae
Ministerium admittantur, etc.
be released, and that according to the custom of the ancient Church, and of
the Eastern Churches unto this day, honest married men may be admitted to the
Ministry of the Church, etc.

There are weighty causes (he says) why this constitution should be released.
And he cites Panormitan (a Cardinal, and great Sunt igitur hujus
constitutionis relaxandae graves causae, etc. Prudenter itaque observavit and
monuit Panormitanus, Experientia docente contrariu^ prorsus effectu^ secutu^ ex
lege illa continentiae, cum hodie non vivant spiritualiter, nec sint mundi, sed
maculentur illicito coitu cum illorum gravissimo peccato, ubi cum propria uxore
esset castitas. Unde debere Ecclesiam facere sicut bonus medicus, ut si
medicina experientia docente magis obsit quam profit, eam tollat. Ibid.
Canonist) observing and admonishing, that experience shows, that a quite
contrary effect has followed by that Law of continency, when as now they do
not live spiritually, nor are pure, but defiled with unlawful copulation, to
their most great sin, whereas with their own wives they might live chastely.
That the church therefore ought to do, as a good Physician does, who if he
find by experience, that the medicine does more hurt then good, he will
prescribe it no longer.

He goes further yet, and holds that not only they, who were Sunt autem causae
non leves, cur hodie iis quoque, qui jam ordinati, non libidine, sed
conscientia ducti, uxores duxerunt, and Ecclesiis utiles esse possunt, gratia
hujus legis fieri debeat, etc. Ibid. Posterior error long gravior est, non
solum licere ante Ordinationem, sed etiam post Ordinationem, uxorem ducere.
Bell. de Cler. l. 1. cap. 19.

Cum igitur haec Matrimonii contractio post Ordinationem solo statuto
prohibeatur, and exempla prisca extent, quae testentur, hujusmodi statuta non
tam anxie observata fuisse, quin ob Ecclesiae necessitatem aliquando relaxata
fuerint, quis non concedat in extrema hac Ecclesiae necessitate hoc idem hodie
fieri posse? -- Cur autem etiam in Ordinatis conjugium hodie admitti possit,
haec ratio est, quod ex hujusmodi conjugio non modo nulla offensio populi, sed
magna etiam utilitas sit expectanda. Nam eo res jam rediit, ut vix centesimum
invenias, qui ab omni commercio faeminarum abstineat, populus vero it a
affectus est, ut sacerdotis fornicatoris vel concubinarii Ministerium vel
prorsus condemnet, vel levius aestimet: maritum vero sacerdotem aequius ferat,
ut cum populo quoque jam notum sit, honorabile esse in omnibus conjugium,
adulteros autem, and fornicatores a Deo judicandos. Ibid.


married before, may be ordained, and yet still keep their conjugall society,
but also that such as are already ordained, may afterward marry, and yet
still continue their Ministry; though Bellarmine does call this an error much
more grievous then the other, that not only before Ordination, but even after
Ordination it is lawful to marry. But surely both Scripture and reason shows
this as lawful as the other. And to return to Cassander, he testifies that
marrying after Ordination is only forbidden by humane statute; and that
ancient examples do show that such Statutes are not precisely observed, but
that when the necessity of the Church does require it, they are dispensed with;
and therefore so it ought to be now (he says) in this case, there being so
great need of it. And he gives this reason why they that are ordained should
be permitted to marry, because not only no offense, but much benefit is to be
expected by it. For that scarce one of a hundred is to be found, who does
wholly abstain from women, and the people are so affected, that if a Priest be
a fornicatour, or keep a concubine, they will either altogether condemn his
Ministry, or make less account of it, and will rather suffer a Priest that is
married, it being now known even to the people, that Marriage is honorable in
all, and that Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will judge. Wherefore (he says)
if ever it were time to change an ancient Quare si unquam tempus fuit antiquae
alicujus consuetudinis immutandae, certe haec tempora hujus quamvis prisci
moris immutationem aliquam efflagitate videntur, cum optimi quique, and
religiosissimi sacerdotes, infirmitatem suam agnoscentes, and perpetuae
scortationis faeditatem exhorrescentes, si public non audent, certe privatim
conjugium ineunt, etc. Cum igitur hoc tempore, eo necessitatis res propemodum
redacta sit, ut aut conjugatus, aut concubinarius sacerdos sit admittendus,
quis non videt, etiamsi quid in hoc conjugio sit incommodi, minoris mali
ratione potius esse eligendum? Ibid.
custom, then certainly these times call for a change of this custom, though
it be ancient, when as all most good and religious Priests, acknowledging their
weakness, and abhorring the filthiness of continual Fornication, if they
dare not do it publikly, yet privately do marry. He concludes, that the
matter being brought almost to this, that a Priest must either be married, or
have a concubine, every one must needs see, that though there be some
inconvenience in this Marriage, yet it is to be chosen as a less evil then
the other.

This was the judgment of Cassander, a man of such note and eminency in his
time, that two Emperors, viz. Ferdinand the first, and Maximilian the second,
made choice of him above all, as a man most meet to compose (if it might be)
the differences betwixt Protestants and them of the Church of Rome.

Now whereas the Marquess says, that Protestants hold it unlawful to make
vows of chastity; it is true, such vows of chastity as are made and
maintained in the Church of Rome, which (as has been showed by the testimony
of Cassander) prove snares, and occasions of much unchastity, such vows (I
say) Protestants do indeed, and that most justly, hold unlawful. None ought
to vow that which is not in his power to perform; this is granted by all. Now
it is not in every ones power to live unmarried, nor in the power of any, but
to whom God is pleased to give it. I would that all men were even as I my
self, (says S. Paul) but every man has his proper gift of God, one after
this manner, and another after that. 1 Cor. 7. 7. And when the Disciples said,
If the cause of the man be so with his wife, it is good not to marry: our
Savior answered, All men cannot receive this saying, but they to whom it is
given. Mat. 19, 10, 11. And again v. 12. having said, There be Eunuchs, which
have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, he adds
immediately, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. Maldonate
though he would wrest the words another way, yet he is forced to Ita fere
omnes exponunt, ac si sensus esset, Non omnes, quod dicitis, praestare possunt,
i. e. uxore carere; quia non omnes castitatis donum habent, sed quibus datum
est. Quam interpretationem adduci non possum ut sequar, etc. Maldon. ad loc.
confess that generally all do expound them thus, All are not able to perform
that which you speak of, viz. to be without a wife: because all have not the
gift of continence, but only they to whom it is given. And though any see no
necessity of marrying for the present, yet they know not what necessity there
may be of it afterward; and therefore to vow against it must needs be rash
and dangerous. The Apostle bids, to avoid Fornication, let every man have his
own wife, and let every woman have her own husband, 1 Cor. 7. 2. And is it
lawful then for any to vow never to marry, when as they know not but that
thereby they shall expose themselves to the danger of Fornication? Even as they
of the Church of Rome by their vows do, very few being free from Fornication,
as I have showed before by the confession of Cassander, and so of the Gloss
upon Gratian. So also again the Apostle speaking to the unmarried, says, If
they cannot contain, let them marry; for it is better to marry then to burn.
1 Cor. 7. 9. But the vows of chastity which the Romanists speak of, and
contend for, presuppose that it is in any ones power to contain, and that
there is no fear of such burning, as the Apostle speaks of. And whereas the
Apostle would not have any under 60. years old to be chosen into the number of
widows, though without any vow that we read of, 1 Timothy 5. 9. they of the
Church of Rome allow as well young as old, of both Sexes, to vow to live
unmarried.

Estius himself upon the place says, that the Apostle requires that age,
because Exigit hanc aetatem, quia in hac aetate non solet esse periculum
incontinentiae. Est. in 1 Timothy 5. 9.
in that there uses to be no danger of incontinency.

But he adds presently after, that in the Tunc nondum extructa erant
monasteria, seu claustra, quibus coercerentur faeminae continentiam professae,
ne ad viros evagandi liberam potestatem haberent. Est. Ibid.
Apostles time they had no Monasteries, or close places, to keep Women in,
professing continency, that so they might not freely wander abroad unto men. I
do easily believe that there were indeed as then no such places, nor yet any
such profession neither, excepting such Widows as the Apostle speaks of, of
whom more anon. But withal I suppose, that although wandering abroad may be an
occasion of defilement, as the example of Dinah shows, yet walls and bars
are not enough to preserve chastity. And howsoever this is nothing to those
young Priests, that vow chastity, and yet are not shut up in that manner as
their Nuns are. That to be able to live a single life, is no common gift, and
consequently that such a life is not to be so commonly vowed, as now it is in
the Church of Rome, diverse of the Fathers do inform us, though some of them
went too far in this kind. Hilary speaking of those several kinds of
Eunuchs In uno posuit naturam, in altero^ necessitatem, in tertio voluntatem.
Naturam in eo, qui nascitur; necessitatem in eo, qui ita factus est; voluntatem
in illo, qui spe regni caelestis talis esse decreverit: cui nos similes esse,
si tamen possimus [NB.] admonuit. Hilar. can. 19. in. Mat.
mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 19. says, that one is so by nature, viz. he
that is borne so; another so by necessity, viz. he that is made so; and the
third so by will, viz. he that in hope of the Heavenly Kingdom has determined
to be so. And such (he says) Christ would have us to be, if (mark that) yet
we be able. Hierome, a man of excellent learning, and of great piety, of all
the ancient Fathers seems most exorbitant, as concerning Virginity; surely in
his writings against Iovinian he expresses himself many times very harshly;
as thus, If it be * Si bonum est mulietem non tangere, malum est ergo tangere.
Hieron. contra Jovinian. lib. 1.

Oro te, quale istud bonum est, quod orare prohibet? -- Jubet idem Apost. in
alio loco, ut semper oremus. Si semper orandum est, nunquam ergo conjugio
serviendum: quoniam quotiescunque uxori debitum reddo, orare non possum.
Hieron. Ibid.


good not to touch a woman; then it is evil to touch a woman. And again, What
kind of good, I pray you, is that, which hinders from praying? So he wrests
the words of the Apostle, as if he spoke of ordinary Prayer, taking no notice
of fasting, which the Apostle joins with Prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 5. The Apostle (he
says) elsewhere bids pray always. If we must pray always, then we must
never do the office of married persons. For whenever I render due
benevolence to my wife, I cannot pray. And in the same manner again, If we
must pray always, then we must always Si semper orandum est, ergo semper
carendum Matrimonio. Hier. Ibid.

Vae pregnantibus, etc. Non hic scorta, non lupanaria condemnantur, de quorum
damnatione nulla dubitatio est: sed uteri tumescentes, and infantum vagitus,
and fructus atque opera nuptiarum. Hier. ibid. Consideranda vis verbi, Replete
terram: Nuptiae terram replent, virginitas paradisum. Hieron. ibid. De Adam and
Eva illud dicendum, quod ante offensam in paradiso virgins fuerint: post
peccatum autem, and extra Paradisum protinus nuptiae. Hieron. ibid.


be free from Marriage. And citing those words, Woe to them that are with
child. etc. Mat. 24. 19. he says, Not harlots and brothelhouses are here
condemned, of whose condemnation there is no doubt; but great bellies, and the
crying of infants, and the fruits and effects of Marriages. Thus also does he
wrest that spoken to our first Parents, Be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the Earth. Genesis 1. 28. Marriage (says he) does replenish the Earth;
but virginity does replenish Paradise. And he says, that Adam and Eve before
they had sinned, were virgins; but after the fall, and out of Paradise, they
were Married.

Whereas nothing is more clear in the Scripture then this, that God did join
Adam and Eve together in Marriage before the fall, when they were in Paradise.
Diverse other such like inconvenient passages he has, being carried away with
the heat of contention. Yet even Hierome himself in that very book does
show, that Recte quidem sentitis, ait, quod non expediat homini ad caelotum
regna tendenti, accipere uxorem: sed difficilis res est, and non omnes capiunt
verbum istud, verum quibus datum est. Hieron. ibid.

Noli metuere, ne omnes virgins fiant, difficilis res est virginitas, and ideo
rara, quia difficilis. -- Si omnes virgins esse possent, nunquam and Dominus
diceret, Qui potest capere, capiat: and Apostolus in suadendo non trepidaret,
De virginibus autem praeceptum Domini non habeo. Hieron. Ibid.


to live unmarried, is no ordinary matter, nor for every one to undertake. This
(says he) is a hard matter, and all do not receive it, but they to whom it
is given. And again, Do not fear lest all become Virgins. Virginity is a
hard thing; and therefore rare, because hard. -- If all could be virgins, the
Lord would never say, Let him that is able to receive it, receive it. Neither
would the Apostle be so fearful in persuading to virginity, saying, Now
concerning virgins I have no Commandment of the Lord. 1 Corinthians 7. 25.

And in his commentary upon Mat. 19. Unde and infert, Qui potest capere,
capiat: ut unusquisque consideret vires suas, utrum possit virginalia and
pudicitiae implere praecepta. Der se enim castitas blanda est, and quemlibet ad
se alliciens: sed considerandae sunt vires, ut qui potest capere, capiat.
Hieron. in Mat. 19.
Christ (says he) inferres, He that is able to receive it, let him receive
it; that every one may consider his strength, whether he be able to perform
those things that are required of unmarried persons. For virginity of it self
is pleasing, and alluring any one unto it; but men's strength is to be
considered, that he that is able to receive it, may receive it. It Is true,
Hierome says there a little before, that he that asks it, and labors for
it, may receive it: but that must be understood, if God see it to be for his
glory, and our good. So is that to be interpreted, Ask, and it shall be given
unto you. Mat. 7. 7. And so also that, What things soever ye desire, when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Mar. 11. 24. The
Lord will give grace, and glory, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 84. 11. And so
consequently he will give all things that have a necessary connection with grace
and glory; such things may simply and absolutely be prayed for. But virginity
is not of that nature, and therefore there can be no such assurance of
obtaining it, although we pray for it.

Veritas dicit, Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc. Quod eo innotuit summum esse, quo
denegavit omnium: and dum praedicit quia difficile capitur, audientibus innuit,
captum cum qua cautela teneatur. Greg. Past. par. 3. admon. 29. Admonendi sunt
itaque, ut si tentationum procellas cum difficultate salutis tolerant, conjugii
portum petant. Scriptum namque est, Melius est nubere, quam uri. Greg. Ibid.
admonit. 28. Sine culpa quippe ad conjugium veniunt, si tamen necdum meliora
voverunt. Gregor. ibid.
Gregory also says, that those words of our Savior, All do not receive this
saying, show that all are not capable of it; and that it is a thing hard to be
obtained. And he says, that they that are unmarried, are to be admonished to
get into the haven of Wedlock, if they endure the storms of temptation so as
to endanger their salvation. And that because it it written, It is better to
marry, then to burn. Indeed he adds immediately, that it is no sin for
them to marry, if yet they have not vowed that which is better, he means, to
live unmarried. But the question is how such could lawfully vow a single life,
not knowing how unmeete they should be for it. And how obligatory such a vow
is, we shall consider anon.

But thus also Utinam magis turrim inchoaturi, sedentes computarent ne forte
sumptus non habeant ad perficiendum. Utinam qui continere non valent,
perfectionem temerarie profiteri, aut caelibatui dare nomina vererentur.
Sumptuosa siquidem turris est, and verbum grande, quod non omnes capere
possunt. Bern. de Convers. ad Cler. cap. 29.
Bernard complaining of the incontinency of the Clergy in his time, I wish
(says he) that they who are about to build a Tower, would sit down, and count
the cost, lest they prove unable to finish what they take in hand. I would that
they who cannot contain, would be afraid rashly to profess perfection, and
to give up their names to a single life. For it is a costly Tower, and a great
Word, which all are not able to receive.

Now for the other charge against Protestants, viz. that they hold, that such
as have made vows to live unmarried, are not bound to keep them; I answer,
they hold indeed, that such vows being made, and tending to the prejudice of a
man's soul by exposing him to unavoidable danger of Fornication without using
the remedy of Marriage, do not bind, but are better broken then kept; even as
it had been better that Herod had broken his Oath then that he should keep it
so as for his Oaths sake to cause John Baptist to be beheaded. That of the
Apostle holds good in respect of all, To avoid Fornication, let every man have
his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. Quanto tolerabilius
tali fulsset perjurium Sacramento? Amb. Offic. lib. 3. cap. 12.
1 Cor. 7. 2. And that v. 9. If they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is
better to marry then to burn. As therefore none ought simply and absolutely to
vow a single life, so if they have vowed, they ought to repent of their
rashness, and not to add sin to sin by keeping their vow whatsoever follow
upon it, but rather to marry then to burn with lust, or to commit Fornication.
The Gloss upon Gratian tells us, that in every Vow, or Oath, such general
conditions as these are understood, If God will, In omni voto vel Sacramento
intelliguntur hujusmodi generales conditiones, Si Deus voluerit, si vixero, si
potero. Gloss. in Cause. 22. Quaest. 2. cap. Beatus. In malis promissis rescinde
fidem: in turpi voto muta deretum: quod incaute vovisti, ne facias: impia est
promissio, quae scelere adimpletur. Cause. 22. Quaest. 4. cap. In malis.
If I live, If I be able. And Gratian himself cites that of Isidore, In evil
promises break thy word; in a dishonest vow change thy purpose; that which
thou have unadvisedly vowed, do not perform: it is a wicked promise, which is
performed by wickedness.

The same words are also cited by Lombard in his Sentences. To Lomb. lib. 3.
did. 39. lit. i. Ille, qui vovet, quodammodo sibi statuit legem, oblig^ns se
ad aliquid, quod est secundunt se, and in pluribus, bonum. Potest tamen
contingere quod in aliquo casu sit vel simpliciter malum, vel inutile, vel
majoris boni impeditivum, quod est contra rationem ejus quod cadit sub voto, ut
ex praedictis patet. Et ideo necesse est, quod determinetur in tali casu votum
non esse servandum. Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 88. art. 10. Si ex observatione talis voti
magnum and manifestum gravamen sentiret, and non esset facultas ad superiorem
recurrendi, non deberet homo tale votum servare. Aquin. Ibid. art. 2. ad 3 m.
this purpose also Aquinas, He that voweth (says he) does after a sort
appoint a Law unto himself, binding himself unto something, which in it
self, and for most part is good. Yet it may happen that in some case it is
either simply evil, or unprofitable, or hinders a greater good, which is
against the nature of that which falls under a vow, as appears by what has
been said before. And therefore it is necessary, that it be determined, that
in such a case a vow is not to be kept. And so again that Angelical Doctor,
as they style him, If by observing a vow great and manifest grievance ensue, a
man ought not to keep such a vow.

And Quod si ex fide se Christo dicaverunt, pudice and cast sine ulla fabula
perseverent; ita fortes and stabiles praemium virginitatis expectent. Si aurem
perseverare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius est nubant, quam in ignem delictis
suis cadant. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 11. vel Epist. 62. Edit. Pamel.
Cyprian writing of some that had professed virginity, but were found to act
contrary to their profession, upon that occasion gives this advice; If they
faithfully dedicate themselves to Christ, let them continue honest and chaste
without any simulation; and so being strong and stable, let them expect the
reward of virginity. But if they will not, or cannot persevere, it is better
that they marry, then that they fall into the fire by their offenses.

S. Cyprianus occasion quarundam Virginum, quae parum honest se gerebant post
votum continentiae, monet alias, ut si non habent firmum propositum
perseverandi, non voveant, sed nubant. Bell. de Monach. lib. 2. cap. 34. Loqui
Cyprianum de iis Virginibus, quae simplex (ut loquuntur) votum castitatis
emiserunt, non de velatis, quarum votum erat solenne, multa sunt, etc. quae
convincere videantur. Pamel. in Cypr.
Bellarmine would have Cyprian here only to admonish such as have not vowed
continency, rather to marry then to vow, if they have not a firm purpose to
persevere. But the words of Cyprian cannot without violence done unto them be
otherwise understood then of those Virgins, who did dedicate themselves to
Christ (as he speaks) by professing continency. And so Pamelius, though he
make some use of that other Exposition of Cyprians words, yet he cannot but
confess that Cyprian spoke of those Virgins that vowed chastity; only to
mitigate the matter, he will have Cyprian to speak of such as only made a
simple vow, and not a solemn vow, as they distinguish it. But this is nothing;
for the Scripture speaking of the force of vows, and requiring the performance
of them, does not use any such distinction, nor give any intimation, that a
simple vow more then that which is solemn may be broken, if it be just and
lawful. A vow has its power of binding, not from the solemnity of it, but
from its nature, viz. that it is a promise made to God; whether it be made
solemnly or no, is not material; though its true, the more solemn that it
is, the greater is the scandal in the breaking of it, but the sin otherwise is
the same, whether the vow be simple or solemn.

Hoc votum (nempe simplex) habet efficaciam ex jure divino. Aquin. 2. 2 ae.
quaest. 189. art. 5. Clemens dicit, quod apud Deum non minus obligat votum
simplex, quam votum solenne. Bonav. in Sent. l. 4. did. 38. art. 2. qu. 1.
Aquinas speaking of a simple vow, wherein no solemnity is used, says, This
vow is efficacious by divine right. And Bonaventure cites this saying of
Clemens, A simple vow does bind in respect of God, no less then a solemn vow.

For the Scriptures alleged against us, that Deuteronomy. 23. 2. and so diverse other
places do indeed require those that make a vow, to perform it: but this
cannot be understood of all vows whatsoever, but only of lawful vows. For
(as I have showed) unlawful vows are not to be kept, but to be broken; and I
have also showed, that vows of chastity, when they prove snares, and
hindrances of chastity, are unlawful, and so consequently to be broken. There
is more difficulty in the other place, viz. 1 Timothy 5. 11, 12. concerning which
place also Bellarmine says that nothing can there Quo loco per primam fidem
nihil aliud intelligi potest, nisi continentiae votu^, ut omnes omnino veteres
intellexerunt. Bell. de Monach. lib. 2. cap. 24.
be meant by first faith, but the vow of continency; and that generally all
ancient Writers did so understand it. But it does not appear by any thing in
the words of the Apostle, that the widows, which he speaks of, did make
any such vow; although by entering into the number of Widows, that were
maintained by the public charge of the Church, and withal did service to the
Church, in attending the sick, and the like, they did in a sort profess that
they intended to live unmarried. What need was there for such Widows to vow
continency, when as none of them were to be under 60. years old? 1 Timothy 5. 9.
Bellarmine tells us, that the Apostle, saying, Let not a Widow be chosen under
threescore Dico Apostolum, cum ait, Vidua eligatur non minus sexaginta annorum:
and, Adolescentiores viduas devita, i. e. non eas eligas, non loqui de
admissione ad votum continentiae, sed vel de electione ad quandam praefecturam,
and ordinem Diaconissae. -- vel, quod probabilius est, de admissione ad numerum
earum viduarum, quae ab Ecclesia alebantur. Bellar. de Monaeb. l. 2. c. 24.
years old; and, The younger Widows refuse, that is, do not choose them, does
not speak of admission unto the vow of continency, as if the younger Widows
might not be allowed to vow it; but he speaks either of election unto a
certain Office and Order of Deaconesse; or (which he thinks more probable) of
admission into the number of those Widows, which were maintained by the
Church. But there is scarce any thing sound in all this, save that it is true
indeed, the Apostle does not speak of admission to the vow of continency,
there being no such vowing in those times: but it is evident, that the Apostle
speaks of admission to a kind of profession of continency. For therefore he
bids refuse the younger Widows, because of their incontinency; But the younger
Widows (says he) refuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton against
Christ, they will marry. 1 Timothy 5. 11. And verse. 14. I will therefore that the
younger Women marry, etc. As if he should say, let not such as are not likely
to contain, be admitted among those who are to live unmarried. Now these, it
seems, were such as both had a kind of Office in the Church, were
Deaconesses, as Phaebe is stilled Romans 16. 1. according to the Original; and
also had maintenance from the Church. The former appears by 1 Timothy 5. 9, 10.
The latter by 1 Timothy 5. 3, 4. 16. So that whereas Bellarmine would make
several Expositions of these, they are to be joined together to make one
entire Exposition. And in both these respects, viz. both in respect of the
Office, and in respect of the maintenance, though more especially (it seems)
in respect of the Office, these Widows were to remain Widows, and not to
marry again; and that there might be little fear of their marrying the
Apostle would have the younger Widows refused, and none admitted but such as
were threescore years old, or more. But the greatest difficulty is, what is
meant by the first faith, which the Apostle says the younger Widows did cast
off, and therefore had damnation, 1 Timothy 5. 12. It is true, the ancient Writers
for most part expound it of a promise, or covenant of a single life; but all
that go this way, do not speak of any vow that was made: neither
Chrysostom, nor Theophylact does upon the place. Yea, Fidem pactum dicit.
Chrysostom.
some of the ancients show that they understood Fidem conventa dicit, and
pactiones. Theophyl.
the Apostle as speaking of the Christian faith, or the common faith, as it is
called Licet non sint digni fide, qui fidem primam irritam fecerunt, Marcionem
loquor, and Basilidem, and omnes haereticos, etc. Hieron. praefat. in Epist. ad
Tit.
Tit. 1. 4. sure I am, some of them make use of the Apostles words, and apply
them that way. Hierome speaking of Heretics says that they have cast off (or
made void) their first faith. So Scitum etenim cunctis est, quam graviter,
etc. invehatur in quosdam B. Apost. Paulus, qui mita levitate nimium cito
translati fuerant ab eo, qui eos vocaverat in gratiam Christi, in aliud
Evangelium, quod non est aliud: qui coacervarunt sibi Magistros ad sua
desideria, a veritate quidem auditum avertentes, conversi vero ad fabulas;
habentes, damnationem, quod primam fidem irritam fecissent. Vincent. Lirin.
advers. Haeres.
Vincentius Lirinensis in his Book against Heresies, says, It is well known,
how grievously the blessed Apostle Paul does inveigh against those, who with
wonderful lightness are quickly removed from him that called them to the
grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which is not another: who heap up to
themselves teachers after their own lusts, turning away their Ears from the
truth, being turned unto fables; having damnation, because they have made void
their first faith.

Bellarmine therefore was more curious Quod debeat fides hoc loco pro pacto ac
voto accipi, non pro fide Christiana, qua Deo credimus, colligitur ex illo
verbo adjuncto (irritam fecerunt.) Nam fides, qua Deo credimus, non recte
dicitur irritari, sed amitti, vel corrumpi: pacta autem and vota propriissime
irritari dicuntur. Bell. ubi supra.
and critical, if not rather more captious and contentious, then tender and
respective of the credit of these ancient Doctors, when he said, that faith
here must be taken for covenant and vow (yet there may be a covenant where
there is no vow) and cannot be taken for Christian faith; because Christian
faith is not rightly said to be made void, but to be lost, or corrupted: but
covenants and vows are most properly said to be made void. Hierom and
Vincentius understood the propriety of words as well as Bellarmine, who shows
himself Irritari twice put for irrita fieri.
barbarous in these very words, wherein he so plays the critic; yet they (we
see) thought it not improper to say, that Heretics make void the faith, which
is necessarily meant of the Christian faith, and not of any vow or covenant.
Nether do I see but that we may as properly say, that faith, being meant of
the Christian faith, is made void, as 1 Timothy 5. 12. (...). Heb. 10. 28. (...).
Gal. 2. 21. (...).
that the Law is made void, Heb. 10. 28. or that the grace of God is made
void, Gal. 2. 21. we read it in the former place despised, in the other
place frustrate, but the Greek word in both places is the same with that in
the Epistle to Timothy. And as the words will well bear this sense, viz. that
it is the Christian faith, which the Apostle says, some did cast off, or make
void, so this sense is agreeable to the Apostles expressions in other places of
this Epistle. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away,
concerning faith have made shipwreck. 1 Timothy 1. 19. If they continue in faith.
1 Timothy 2. 15. Some shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. And in the very
same Chapter, in which are the words controverted, If any provide not for his
own, etc. he has denied the faith, etc. See also 1 Timothy 6. 10. and 21.
1 Timothy 5. 8. So also in the other Epistle to Timothy; who concerning the truth
have erred, etc. and overthrow the faith of some. 2 Timothy 2. 18. Men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 2 Timothy 3. 8. I have kept the faith. 2 Timothy 4. 7. In all these places faith is understood of Christian faith: and
therefore probably so is it in that other place, about which we dispute. So
that this may well be the meaning of the place, that they, of whom the Apostle
speaks, being censured of the Church for their lightness and lasciviousness,
and not able to bear the disgrace, did quite cast off the Christian faith,
which before they professed, and so exposed themselves unto damnation. I see
nothing uncouth, nor incongruous in this Exposition; and it does well agree
with that which the Apostle says a little after, For some are already turned
after Satan. 1 Timothy 5. 15. which words seem to import a plain and open
renouncing of Christ; as on the other side to come after CHRIST, is as much as
to profess his Name. Mat. 16. 24. Luke 9. 23.

Object. But may some say, the Apostle reproves these of whom he speaks, for
that they begin to wax wanton against Christ, and will marry, which argues,
that they had vowed, or professed continency; for else why might they not
marry? The wife is bound by the Law so long as her husband lives: but if her
husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will, only in the
Lord. 1 Cor. 7. 39.

Ans. I grant, that those Widows, though they did not vow, yet by the very
course of life which they entered upon, did profess continency, marriage and
that course being inconsistent. And justly might they be reproved both for
their rashness in taking upon them that profession, and for their lightness
in falling off from it when there was no just cause for it. The Apostle does
not simply condemn them for having a mind to marry, but because out of
wantonness they would needs marry. And it might be called wantonness against
Christ, because they had addicted themselves to the service of Christ in his
Church and Members, which service they did desert by their wantonness. And in
this sense, by their first faith may be meant the promise, either formal, or
virtuall, which those Widows did make unto the church, that they would
remain Widows, and not marry; which promise they breaking merely out of
wantonness, well might the Apostle say that they had damnation for it. But all
this proves not that it is sinful and damnable for any that have vowed
continency, afterward to marry. Though Bellarmine will by no means endure
that those words Bell. de Mon lib. 2. cap. 30.
of the Apostle, I will therefore that the younger Widows marry, etc. 1 Timothy
5. 14. be understood of such as had professed continency, as if the Apostle
would have such to marry, if they could not contain. So also Estius upon the
place, who says, that otherwise the Apostle should Non hoc dicit Apost. de
junioribus illis viduis, quae jam voverant se non amplius nupturas. Neque n.
eas vult praecipitare in damnationem. Nam si damnationem habebant nubere
volentes, quanto magis nubentes? Est. ad 1. Tim. 5. 14.
cast them headlong into damnation. For if they have damnation, who have a will
to marry; how much more they that do marry? But though I think, that the
Apostles direct meaning was, that the younger Widows should not be admitted
into the number of those who were by their place and calling to profess
continency, into which number he would have none admitted under 60. years old;
yet Estius his reason is not valid. For the Apostle does not say, that the
younger Widows being admitted into that number, and afterward willing to
marry, or actually marrying, therefore had damnation; but because they would
marry out of wantonness, and so out of wantonness make void their first
faith, viz. their promise of continency made to the Church, if not their
Christian Faith, which before they professed. Notwithstanding which sentence,
it follows not, but that if, not through wantonness, but through weakness,
they were forced to marry, the Apostle would have them to do it, rather then
to do worse, viz. burn with lust, and commit Fornication. For whereas the
same author says, It is not better for such as have vowed contineney, to Qui
continentiae voto sunt alligati, iis non est melius nubere, quam uri. Est. ad
1. Cor. 7. 9.
marry, then to burn, this is nothing else but a flat contradicting of the
Apostle; or at least a contradicting of that Rule, We must not distinguish,
where the Law does Non est distinguendum, ubi lex non distinguit.

Nos autem nullum talibus laqueum debemus injicere. Pellag. apud Great. Cause.
27. quaest. 1. cap. De viduis.

Laqueum; eos separando; vel eos praecise prohibendo ne contrahant. Glos. ibid.


not distinguish. And we find in their own Canons, that if Widows did
profess continency, yet a snare was not to be cast upon them, to wit, as the
Gloss does expound it, by separating them from their Husbands, if they did
marry, or by forbidding them precisely to marry. Another Canon also, which
Quotquot Virginitatem pollicitam praevaricatae sunt, professione contempta,
inter bigamos, i. e. qui ad secundas nuptias transierunt, haberi debebunt.
Cause. 27. quaest. 1. cap. Quotquot.
they have, injoynes no more but this, that if such as profess Virginity, did
afterward marry, they should be ranked amongst those that did marry the second
time, viz. after the death of the first yoke fellow: which marriage the
Scripture does clearly allow, Romans 7. 2, 3. and 1 Cor. 7. 39. neither did any
Orthodox Writer ever condemn it. Their Canon Law indeed debarres those that
are twice married, from being Priests, Qui iteraverit conjugium, culpam quidem
non habet coinquinati, sed praerogativa exuitur sacerdotis. Did. 26. cap.
Quisine.

Cajet. in 1 Timothy 3.


(grounding upon the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 2. and Titus 1. 6. which places their
own Cardinal Cajetan does yet interpret otherwise) but yet grant that such
do not sin. They grant also that if any marry after a simple vow of
continency, the marriage does stand good, and is not to be dissolved. For this
they have a Canon out of Austine, which runs thus; Some say, that they Quidam
nubentes post votum asserunt adulteros esse: ego autem dico vobis, quod
graviter peccant, qui tales dividunt. Did. 27. cap. Quidam. Si vir simplex
Virginitatis votum habens, adjung^tur uxori, postea non dimittat uxorem, sed
tribus annis paeniteat. Ibid. Si vir.
that marry after a vow, are adulterers: but I say unto you, that they that
divide such, do sin grievously. And another out of Theodorus, thus; If a man
having a simple vow of virginity, join himself to a Wife, let him not
afterward put her away; but let him do penance three years.

And so Estius confesses, that we never Respondeo, nusquam legi apud veteres,
quod nuptiae viduarum, quae continentiam voverunt, irritae fuerint. Neque enim
votum earum erat solenne, etc. Estius in 1 Timothy 5. 12.
read in ancient writers, that if Widows, who vowed continency, did marry,
their marriage was void, and of none effect. For (says he) their vow was not
solemn. But I have showed before, that the distinction of simple and solemn
vow has no ground in Scripture; and that in respect of God, a simple vow does
bind as much as a solemn. And besides, if (as they allege, and cite some of
the ancients also for it) one Estius in 1 Timothy 5. 11. Bell. dc Monach. l. 2. c.
24.
having vowed continency (whether solemnly, or simply) is married unto Christ,
and therefore may much less marry another, then one that is already married
to a mortal man, then surely the marriage of such should much rather be judged
adultery, and be dissolved, then the marriage of those, who marry again, when
they are already married. Yet Bellarmine goes further, and acknowledges At
Scotus and Paludanus in 4. did. 38. and Cajetanus in 2. 2. qu. 88. art. 7. and
omnis schola Jureconsultorum, ut refert Panormitan: in c. Rursus. Qui clerici,
vel voventes, asserunt solo jure Ecclesiastico matrimonium irritum, quod post
votum solenne contrahitur. -- utraque sententia probabilis est. Bell. de Mon.
l. 2. c. 34.
that many prime Writers of the Church of Rome, as Scotus, Paludanus, and
Cajetane, and generally, as Panormitan does relate, all the Canonists affirm,
that only by Ecclesiastical right marriage made after a solemn vow is of no
force. And this opinion he grants to be probable. So then, by their own
confessions it may appear, that there is no Law of God against it, but that
such as have vowed continency, should marry if they be not able to perform
what they have vowed. And this may suffice for this point.

The Marquess goes on thus, We say, Christ descended into Hell, Page 72.
and delivered thence the souls of the Fathers: ye deny it. We have
Scripture for it, viz. Ephesians. 4. 8. When he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, etc. Descending first into the lower part of the Earth. This
lower part of the Earth could not be a grave; for that was the upper part: nor
could it have been the place of the damned; for the Devils would have been
brought again into Heaven. More clearly Acts 2. 27. Thou will not leave my
soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. There
is Hell for his soul for a time, and the grave for his body for a while.
Plainer yet, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by
the spirit; by which also he went, and preached unto the spirits in prison.
This prison cannot be Heaven; nor Hell, as it is the place of the damned: nor
the grave, as it is the place of rest. Therefore it must be (as S. Aug. Epist.
99. ad Evod. says) some third place: which third place the Fathers have called
Limbus Patrum. Also Zach. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy
Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is No is left
out in the Marquess his writing, but not I suppose by his fault.
no water. By this pit could not be meant the place of the damned; for they
have no share in the Covenant; neither are they Christ's prisoners, but the
Devils: neither could this pit be the grave, because Christ's grave was a new
pit, where never any was laid before. The Fathers affirm as much, S. Hieron. in
4. ad Ephesians. S. Greg. l. 13. Moral. c. 20. S. Aug. in Psalm. 37. 1.

Answ. That Christ did descend into Hell in that sense, as they of the Church
of Some do hold, viz. into a Region of Hell called Limbus Patrum, to deliver
the faithful thence, that lived and died under the old Testament, this
Protestants deny; and they have just cause to deny it. For the Scripture does
not show us any such Hell as this, which they speak of, much less that CHRIST
did descend into it. 1. The faithful that were before Christ, did enjoy the
benefit of him, as well as they that are since his coming. We believe (said
Peter) that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. we shall be saved even
as they. Acts 15. 11. Therefore they were saved by Christ, as well as we now
are saved by him: and consequently the faithful then through Christ did go to
Heaven, as well as now they do. 2. It is said of the faithful of the old
Testament, that they confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon the
Earth. Heb. 11. 13. and that they did seek a country, v. 14. not an earthly
country, but a better country, that is an Heavenly; and that God did prepare
for them a City, v. 16. 3. Abraham's bosom (as the place is called, where the
souls of the Saints of the old Testament were) is so described in the
Scripture, as that it could be no such place as they call Limbus Patrum. For 1.
The soul of Lazarus was carried thither by Angels; and therefore it should
rather be Heaven then Hell. 2. It was a place of comfort, Luke 16. 25. But
Nondum inveni, and adhuc quaero, nec mihi accurrit inferos alicubi in bono
posuisse Scripturam duntaxat Canonicam: non autem in bono accipiendum sinum
Abrahae, and illa^ requie^, quo ab Angelis pius pauper ablatus est, nescio
utrum quisquam possit audire, Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12. c. 33. Ita etiam.
Epist. 99.
Austine could not find (he says) with all his searching, where the
Scripture does make Hell to be any place of comfort; and he thought this a
good argument why Abraham's bosom could not be Hell. 3. There was a great gulf
fixed betwixt the place where Lazarus was, viz. Abraham's bosom, and the place
where the rich man was in torment, Luke 16. 26. And hence also In his ipsis
tanti magistri verbis, ubi ait dixisse Abraam, Inter vos and nos chaos magnum
firmatum est, satis, ut opinor, appareat, non esse quandam partem, and quasi
membrum inferotum tantae faelicitatis sinum. August. Epist. 99.
Austine infers, that Abraham's bosom is no part, or member as it were of
Hell. This (he says) does in his opinion sufficiently appear by those words,
betwixt us and you there is a great gulf fixed. Luke 16. 26. Augustinus etsi
in Epist. 99. ambigere videatur, an sinus Abraham, ubi erant animae Patrum
olim, in inferno esset, an alibi; tamen in lib. 20. de Civ. Dei c. 15. affirmat
in inferno fuisse. Bell. de Christi anima. l. 4. c. 11.
Bellarmine therefore does abuse his Reader, when he says, that Austine here
may seem to doubt whether Abraham's bosom, where the souls of the Fathers in
times past were, was in Hell, or some where else.

Iansenius is much more ingenuous, who confesses that Austine by disputing the
Augustinus Epist 99. disputando colligit, sinum Abrahae non fuisse aliquam
inferni partem. Jansen. Concord. cap. 97.
point did gather, that Abraham's bosom was no part of Hell. And he observes
also that Austine makes the faithful that Et Augustinus lib. 9. Confess.
loquens de Nebridio dicit, Quicquid illud est, quod sinus Abrahae vocatur, ibi
Nebridius meus vivit. Jansen. Ibid.
died since Christ, to be in Abraham's bosom, whereas their Limbus Patrum they
hold to have been only for the faithful that were before Christ. Neither is
it true, which Bellarmine says, that Austine elsewhere affirms Abraham's Si
non absurd credi videtur, etc. Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 20. cap. 15.
bosom to have been in Hell. For Austine in the place which Bellarmine
cites, only says, If it seem not absurdly to be believed; so that where
Austine speaks doubtfully, there Bellarmine makes him to determine; and where
he does determine, there Bellarmine makes him to speak doubtfully. 4. That
argument, which Bellarmine uses to prove that now in the Deus non est pronior
ad puniendum, quam ad remunerandum. Quare cum impii jam nunc in tormentis sint,
aequum certe videtur, ut etiam justi praemia sua percipiant. Bell. de Sanct.
beat. l. 1. c. 6.

Esse autem nunc impios in tormentis Evangelium testatur, Luc. 16. Bell. Ibid.


time of the new Testament the souls of the godly go to Heaven, is also of
force in respect of those in the time of the old Testament. God (says he) is
not more prone to punish, then he is to reward. Therefore seeing the wicked are
now in torments, it does truly seem equal and reasonable, that the righteous
do also now receive their rewards. And that the wicked now when they die, go
presently to the place of torments, he proves by that Luke 16. where it is
said, that the rich man immediately after his death was in torments. Now by
this reason the godly also that were before Christ, went to Heaven when they
died, for that Luke 16. shows, that before Christ, the wicked, when they died,
went to the place of torment. 5. Christ said unto the believing Theife, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Now Bellarmine approves Vera ergo
expositio est Theophylacti, Amrbosii, Bedae and aliorum, qui per paradisum
intelligunt regnum caelorum. Bell. de Sanct. beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 3.
of the Exposition of Theophylact, Ambrose, Bid, and others, who by Paradise
here understand the Kingdom of Heaven. And so is the word Paradise taken (as
Bellarmine also observes) 2 Cor. 12. 4. compared with v. 2. By this then it
appears, that the soul of Christ, when he died, went to Heaven, and
consequently to no such Limbus, or part of Hell, as they talk of.

For the places of Scripture, which the Marquess alleges, first that Ephesians.
4. 8, 9. does not speak of Limbus Patrum.

Cajetane upon the place, by the lower parts of the Earth understands the Earth
it Ac si apertius dixisset, quia descendit primum ad inferiorem partem mundi,
terram. Caje. in Ephesians. 4. 9.
self, which is the lower part of the World.

And Estius notes, that besides Cajetane, other Romanists also as Catharinus,
and Arias do embrace this Exposition, and that Alii terram ipsam intelligunt;
q d. in infimam mundi partem, quae est terra. Sensum hunc S. Thom. non reiicit;
Cajetan: amplectitur, and Catharin: and Arias: Pro his facere videtur
consequentia, quam Apost. indicat, hujusmodi: Christus ascendit in caelum: ergo
prius descendit, etc. Quae consequentia promptior est, si terram absolute
intelligas, quam si quid aliud. Nam ascensio Christi e terra in caelum
intelligitur. Est. ad loc.
Aquinas does not reject it. And (as Estius also observes) the argument which
the Apostle uses in those words, This that he ascended, what is it, but that
he descended first into the lower parts of the Earth, this argument, I say,
does much favor that Exposition. This consequence is more easy (says Estius)
if you understand the Earth absolutely, then if any thing else: because Christ's
ascension from Earth to Heaven is here understood.

And (say I) before Christ could ascend from Earth to Heaven, as he did, it
was necessary that he should descend from Heaven to Earth, viz. by his
Incarnation: but there was no necessity of his descending to Limbus Patrum
before his ascending into Heaven; for he might well enough ascend thither,
though he did never descend into the other place, suppose such a place to have
been. Estius also notes that some expound there the lower parts of the Earth
to Alii de sepuschro exponunt, juxta illud quod Dominus de se dicit Mat. 12.
Sicut fuit Jonas, etc. sic erit filius hominis in cord terrae, etc. Est. Ibid.
be the grave, which is called the heart of the Earth, Mat. 12. 40. And if by
the Lower parts of the Earth, some certain parts of it, which are lower then
some other parts, are to be understood, then most meet it is to understand the
Grave, into which CHRIST descended. It is strange that the Marquess says,
that the Grave was the upper part, and yet a little after says, Christ's Grave
was a new pit. If it were a pit, then was it not the upper part of the Earth,
but the lower part of it. Ezech. 32. 18. by the neither parts of the Earth are
meant Graves, as appears verse. 23. So in the place objected, Christ's Grave may
be called the lower parts of the Earth, that is, one of the lower parts (as
Judge. 12. 7. its said that Iephtah was buried in the Cities of Gilead, that is,
in one of the cities) in opposition to the surface, or uppermost part of the
Earth, on which we live.

Finally, Estius confesses, that it is not Hieron: and plerique infernum
intelligunt, etc. Qui sensus ersi non certus, probabilitatem tamen prae
caeteris habet. 1. Ex ipsa phrasi, qua utitur Apost. nam inferiores parts, i.
e. infima terrae, nihil aptius quam quod nos infernum dicimus, significant. Ut
in Psalm. 62. Introibunt in inferiora terrae. 2. Quia descensus Christi ad
inferos Pauso ante praecesserat ipsius in caelos ascensionem. -- Denique ex eo,
quod hic sequitur, ut impleret omnia. Est. Ibid.
certain, that there by the lower parts of the Earth, is meant a certain
Region of Hell, although he think that Exposition more probable then the
other. But that it has any such probability in it, his reasons do not evince.
For 1. It is not so, as he says, that the lower parts of the Earth do most
fitly signify Hell, either as they take it here for Limbus Patrum, or as
usually it is taken for the place of torment. I have showed out of Ezech. 32.
18. how the phrase is otherwise used, viz. for the Grave. Neither does it
appear that the words are taken in any other sense, Psalm. 63. 9. which place
Estius alleges; they shall go into the lower parts of the Earth, that is,
they shall be taken away out of the Land of the living, as it follows
immediately, They shall fall by the Sword, etc. 2. Christ's descent into Hell in
that sense, which the Romanists maintain, did not (as Estius pretends) go a
little before his ascension into Heaven. Neither (which he urges also) do
those words, prove it, that he might fill (or fulfill) all things. For those
words (as Estius himself does show) are diversely expounded. Some understand
it of Christ's fulfilling all things, that were written of him. Others expound
it thus, that he might fill all kinds of men Ut impleret omnia, de se scripta,
ut quidam exponunt. Alii omnia hominum genera spiritualibus donis implenda
significari putant. Est. ad Ephesians. 4. 10.
with spiritual gifts. And this sense does well agree with that v. 8. He gave
gifts unto men: and with that v. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, etc.

The other place which is next cited, viz. Acts 2. 27. is indeed more clear to
show that Christ's Soul was for a while left in Hell, but not in that Hell
which our adversaries speak of, viz. Limbus Patrum. For 1. Some by Hell there
understand the Hell of the damned. Thus Aug. Epist. 99. dicit Christum
descendisse ad loca inferni, ubi erant dolores, and tormenta. Et Fulgentius,
etc. Bell. de Christi anima lib. 4. cap. 16.
Austine and Fulgentius expound it, as Bellarmine observes, who also cites for
this Exposition Cyrill, Ambrose, Eusebius Emissenus, and Gregory Nyssen. And
therefore contrary to the opinion Aquinas 3. p. q. 52. art. 2. docet Christum
per realem presentiam solum descendisse ad Limbum Patrum, etc. At probabile est
profecto Christi animam ad omnia loca inferni descendisse. Bell. Ibid.
of other Romanists, he thinks it probable, that Christ's Soul did descend to
all the parts of Hell. But where does the Scripture show that Christ descended
into any Hell but one? If therefore he descended into the Hell of the damned
(which yet I do not say, nor believe that he did) then not into that Hell,
which they call Limbus Patrum. 2. Those words Thou will not leave my soul in
Hell, as spoken by David Psalm. 16. and commented upon by Peter Acts 2. those
words, I say, do show that Hell there mentioned could neither be the Hell of
the damned, nor Limbus Patrum, or at least that there is no necessity to
expound it of either. For 1. It is spoken of as a great benefit, a matter of
joy and rejoicing, that Christ's Soul was not left in Hell. Therefore my Heart
is glad, and my glory (or Tongue) rejoiced, etc. For thou will not leave, etc.
Psalm. 16. 9, 10. Acts 2. 26, 27. But they that hold Christ's descending either
into the Hell of the damned, or into Limbus Patrum, make him to descend as a
conqueror, one that went either to Patres describunt terrorem gehennae ac
daemonum in descensu Christi. -- Christus fuit in inferno liber, and liberator
aliorum, ut omnes Patres clamant. Bell. ubi supra.
triumph over the Devil in his own place, as it were; or to deliver the
souls, that were in limbus. Now why should it be accounted such a benefit,
such a matter of joy and rejoicing, for one not to be left there, where he is
only as a conqueror, and deliverer? Respondeo beneficium fuisse animae
Christi, quod celeriter corpori conjungeretur, sicut malum erat ei separatio:
and hoc modo beneficium illi fuit liberatio ab inferno, non ratione loci, sed
ratione separationis a corpore. Bell. Ibid.
Bellarmine answers, that it was a benefit to Christ's Soul, that it was
quickly joined again unto the Body, even as it was evil to the Soul to be
separated from the Body. And thus (says he) it was a benefit unto him to be
delivered from Hell, not in respect of the place, but in respect of separation
from the body. But who sees not, that by this reason Christ's Soul might as
well be in Heaven, as either in Limbus Patrum, or the Hell of the damned? For
though Christ's soul were in heaven, yet it was a benefit unto it to be
delivered out of that estate of separation, which it was in. 2. Those words,
Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, were meant of Christ's Resurrection, as S.
Peter tells us, Acts 2. 31. But Christ's Resurrection, though it did
presuppose his being in Hell, either as Hell is taken for the grave, or for the
state of death, yet not as it is taken either for Limbus Patrum, or for the
place of torment: Christ might well enough rise again, and yet never be in any
such Hell as one of these is, and the other is supposed to have been. 3. S.
Peter shows, that David in those words, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
spoke not of himself, but of Christ; for that the words being understood of
David, were not true, but most true, as understood of Christ. Men and Brethren,
let me freely speak unto you concerning the Patriarch David, that he is both
dead and buried, and his Sepulcher remains with us to this day. Therefore
being a Prophet, etc. Acts 2. 29, 30, 31. Here by David's Sepulcher remaning
with them unto that day, he means, that David was left in that Hell of which
he speaks, and so did not speak of himself, but of some other, viz. of
Christ, who was not left in it. Thus also S. Paul having cited the latter part
of the Verse, Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption, he also to
prove that this was meant of Christ, and not of David, adds, For David after
he had served his own Generation by the Will of God, fell asleep and was laid
with his Fathers, and saw corruption: But he, whom God raised up, saw no
corruption. Acts 13. 35, 36, 37. David spoke not of himself, but of Christ,
when he said, Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption; because
David did see corruption, which Christ did not see. So David spoke not of
himself, but of Christ, when he said, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell;
because David's Soul was left in Hell, where Christ's Soul was not left. This
is the Apostles argument; and herce it necessarily follows, that by Hell
cannot be meant either the place of torment, or yet Limbus Patrum: Not the
place of torment; for David's soul was not left in that Hell, it never came in
it. Nor yet can that Limbus be meant; for even the Romanists themselves do
hold that it was quite emptied before that time that Peter spoke; and therefore
David's soul was not in it then, whereas yet Peter signifies, that then it was
in that Hell, of which he spoke. By Hell therefore must be meant either the
grave, or the state of the dead. Ruffinus Sciendum sane est, quod in Ecclesiae
Romanae symbolo non habetur additum, descendit ad inferna; sed neque in
Orientis Ecclesiis habetur hic sermo: vis tamen verbi eadem videtur esse in eo,
quod sepultus dicitur. Ruffin. in Symb.
in his Exposition of the Creed, observes that in his time the Article of
Christ's descending into Hell was not in the Creed of the Roman Church, and that
the Eastern Churches had it not; yet he says, that it seems to he implied
in that which is spoken of Christ's Burial. And it is observed, that in all the
ancient B. Usher of Christ's descent into Hell.
Creedes, that were within 600 years after Christ, except one which Ruffinus
followed, if the article of Christ's burial were mentioned, then that of his
descending into Hell was omitted; and if his descending into Hell were
mentioned, then his burial is omitted, which argues, that the ancients did
take these two, viz. Christ's burial and his descending into Hell, to import
but one thing, or to differ but very little, and therefore thought it
sufficient to mention either the one, or the other. It is most evident that the
Hebrew word Sheol, and so the Greek Hades, which Psalm. 16. and Acts 2. are
rendered Hell, are often taken for the grave. Some of the Romanists deny that
Sheol is ever so used, but Genebrard, In errore versantur, qui eam vocem
(Sheol) nunquam sepulchrum designare contendunt. Genebr. in Symbol. Athanas.
who was sometimes Hebrew Professor at Paris, does confess that they are in
an error; and there are many places of Scripture to convince them. Genesis 42.
38. If mischief befall him, etc. you shall bring down my gray hairs with
sorrow to Sheol, i. e. the grave. For to what Hell else should gray hairs go
down? So Genesis 44. 29. and 31. and 1 King. 2. 6. And Job. 17. 13. If I wait,
Sheol is mine House, that is, the grave, as appears v. 14. I have said to
corruption thou art my Father; and to the worm, thou art my Mother, and
Sister. So Psalm. 141. 7. Our bones lie scattered at the mouth of Sheol, i. e.
the grave. So Genebrard upon the place expounds it juxta Sepulchrum, i. e. by
the grave, whereas the vulgar Latin has it secus infernum, near Hell. But
what Hell, except the grave, should dead men's bones lie scattered by? So in
many other places; and in all these places the Greek version has Hades, so
that Bellarmine needed not to have made so strange a matter of it as he does,
that H. Stephanus in suo magno Thesauro in gratiam Bezae (ut videtur) dicit
posse accipi pro sepulchro vocem (...), sed nullu^ invenire potuit auctorem,
qui ita locutus fuisset Bell. de Christi anima. l. 4. c. 10.
Henry Stephen in his great Thesaurus, should say that Hades may be taken for
the grave; neither had he cause to say that Stephen could find no Author that
did use the word in that sense. I have not now Stephens Thesaurus to look
into, but sure I am, that a man of far less reading then Stephen was of,
might have alleged many examples to that purpose. And for the Hebrew word
Sheol, Genebrard and Bellarmine pretend that Bell Ibid. Geneb. in Symb. Athan.
the Chaldie Paraphrast, and the Rabbines do expound it (...) Gehinnom, which
signifies the place where the damned are in torment. But 1. If it were so, this
were nothing to that Limbus which they contend for. 2. Neither is it true, that
those authors do usually so expound the word. For the Chaldie Paraphrast for
the most part keeps the Hebrew word Sheol it self, only sometimes it is a
little changed (...) Shiol: and many times does he use the word (...) Kebura,
or (...) Keburta, that is, the Grave, to express the Hebrew Sheol by; or,
which is the same in effect, (...) Be Keburta, or (...) i. e. the house of the
Grave. As Job. 7. 9. and 14. 13. and 17. 13. and 16. Psalm. 89. 48. and 141. 7.
and Eccles. 9. 10. In all these places does the Chaldie Pharaphrast render the
Hebrew word Sheol the grave, or the house of the grave; let any Romanist show
that he renders it so often by that word, which signifies the place of
torment, though (as I said before) that were nothing to their Limbus Patrum.
And thus also do the Rabbines interpret the word Sheol, R. Levi says that
Sheol does signify the Grave, and that therefore it is put for Death, 2 Samuel
22. 6. (...) R. Levi in 2 Samuel 22. 6. (...) R. Nathan de voc^ (...) in Concord.
(...) Ab. Ezra in Genesis 37. 35 (...) Ab. Ezra. Ibid. (...) Kimchi ad Psalm. 16.
10.
So also R. Nathan Mordecai in his Hebrew Concordance says, that the
interpretation of Sheol is the Grave. Aben Ezra also says the same in his
commentary on Genesis 37. 35. And moreover he taxes the vulgar Latin Translatour
for interpreting Sheol there Hell, supposing him to have meant the Hell of the
damned. Kimchi likewise says that those words Psalm. 16. 10. thou will not
suffer thy holy one to see corruption, are but a repetition of that which went
before, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell. Which shows that he took Sheol
(there rendered Hell) for the Grave. It is true, sometimes the Rabbines expound
Sheol by Gehinnam, i. e. Hell, the place of torment, but they do not hold that
to be the simple and genuine signification of the word; as appears by R.
Solomon on Genesis 37. 35. who says that Sheol there, according to the literal
Exposition, is the Grave, and that (...) R. Sal. ad Genesis 37. 35.
Jacobs meaning was, that he would go mourning to the Grave, and would not be
comforted; but that according to the mystical Exposition, by Sheol there is
meant Gehinnam, the Hell of the damned.

So Kimchi upon those words Psalm. 9. 17. (...) Kimchi ad Psalm. 9. 17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell, where the Hebrew is Sheol, interprets
it, Let the wicked be turned into the Grave, and afterward adds, that
mystically there by Sheol is understood Gehinnam, the place of torment.

Obj. But they say that in these words, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
the Grave cannot be meant by Hell, because the Grave is not a place for the
soul, but for the body.

Answ. The word Soul is sometimes put for the body, or (which is all one) for
man considered in respect of the body. As Genesis 46. 26. All the souls that came
with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, etc. There by souls are
meant bodies, or persons in respect of their bodies; for so generally both
Protestants and Romanists do hold, that not the Souls properly, but the
Bodies of children do proceed from the loins of their Parents. Yea, and
sometimes by Soul is meant the Body, when the Soul is departed out of it. As
Number. 19. 13. Whosoever touches the dead Body of any man, etc. There the word
rendered (...)
dead Body, is that which Psalm. 16. 10. and so usually elsewhere is rendered
Soul. Dico multum inter (...) and (...) interesle. Nam (...) est generalissima
vox, and significat sine ullo tropo tam animam, quam animal, imo etiam corpus,
ut patet ex plurimis Scripturae locis. -- At Graecum (...) ut Latinum anima,
non est tam generale, ut sine tropo possit accipi pro toto animali. Itaque in
Levitico non ponitur pars pro part, i. e. anima pro corpore, sed vocabulum,
quod ipsum corpus significare solet; aut certe ponitur totum pro part, i. e.
vivens pro corpore. At Act. 2. ponitur (...), quae animam solam significat.
Bell. de Gbristi anima l. 4. c. 12.
Bellarmine to take away this answer, says that there is great difference
betwixt the Hebrew word Nephesh and the Greek Psyche, both which are rendered
soul. For Nephesh (he says) is a most general word, and without any trope
does signify both Soul, and living creature, yea and the Body also. But the
Greek Psyche (he says) and so the Latin Anima, is not so general, as
without a trope to signify the whole living creature. And therefore in Levit.
21. 1. and 11. where also Nephesh i. e. Soul, is put for Body, yea for dead
Body.
Leviticus (he says) one part is not put for another, viz. the Soul for the
Body, but there is the word that usually signifies the Body it self: or the
whole is put for the part, that is, the living creature for the Body. But in
Acts 2. is used the word Psyche, which does signify the Soul only. Thus
Bellarmine; but a pity it is to see how a learned man, rather then he will
submit to truth, does plunge himself into absurdity, yea more absurdities then
one. But to pass by the rest, this is most gross, that Bellarmine does so
distinguish betwixt Nephesh and Psyche, as if the former sometimes did signify
the whole living creature, or the Body only, but not so the latter; when as in
these very places of Leviticus, which Bellarmine does speak of, viz. Levit.
21. 1. and 11. as in the Hebrew (...). Levit. 21. 1. (...). Ibid. v. 11.
the word Nephesh, so in the Greek the word Psyche is used; and therefore it
is apparently false, that the Greek word Psyche does signify the Soul only.
Yea, but says Bellarmine, when even Nephesh is opposed to flesh, it Praeterea
etiam Nephes, quando oponitur carni, non potest sumi pro carne. -- Hic autem
anima opponitur carni, cum dicitur, neque anima relicta est in inferno, neque
caro vidit corruptionem. Ergo hoc loco nullo modo tolerari potest Bezae
interpretatio, qui pro anima cadaver intelligi voluit. Bell. Ibid.
cannot be taken for flesh. Now here soul is opposed to flesh, his soul was
not left in Hell, neither his flesh did see corruption. Acts 2. 31. And
therefore here by no means can signify a dead body.

I answer, that in those words Acts 2. 31. there is no opposition betwixt Soul
and Flesh, no more then there is an opposition betwixt Leave and Forsake in
those words Heb. 13. 6. I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. So then
notwithstanding any thing that is objected, in those words, Thou will not leave
my Soul in Hell, by Hell may be meant the Grave, and by Soul the Body. But if
the word Soul be taken properly, then by Hell is to be understood the power of
death, or the state of the dead. And thus do Romish Writers sometimes expound
the word Hell. As Iansenius upon those words Prove. 15. 11. Hell and destruction
are before the Per infernum and perditionem significatur status mortuorum, and
non solum damnationum, ut nos fere ex his vocibus auditis concipimus, sed in
genere status defunctorum, Jansen. in Prove. 15. 11.
Lord, notes that by Hell and destruction is signified the state of the dead,
not only of the damned, as we usually conceive when we hear those words, but
the state of all in general, that are departed out of this life. So Genebrard
expounds that Psalm 30. 3. Thou have brought up my Soul from Sheol, Ab
inferno, id est, e statu mortuorum liberasti. Genebr. ad Psalm. 29. 4. vel. 30.
3.
from Hell, as the vulgar Latin reads it, he expounds it, I say, thus, Thou
have delivered me from the state of the dead. So likewise the same author upon
Psalm. 88. (or 89.) 48. Infernus significat totum mortuorum statum. Genebr. ad
Psalm. 88. 48.
says, Hell does signify the whole state of the dead. Thus generally all that
die, whether they be godly, or wicked, are said as in respect of the Body to
go to the Grave, so in respect of the Soul to descend into Hell.

This is the Law of humane necessity, (says Hilary) that when men's bodies are
buried, Humanae ista lex necessitatis, ut consepultis corporibus ad inferos
animae descendant. Quam descensionem Dominus ad consummationem very hominis non
recusavir. Hilar. in Psalm. 138.
their souls descend into Hell; which descent the Lord to prove himself true
man, did not refuse. The words also of S. Peter do confirm this Exposition,
viz. that Hell, in which Christ's Soul was, but was not left, is the state of
the dead, or the Power of death; Whom God has raised up, having loosed the
pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.
For David speaks concerning him, etc. Acts 2. 24. etc. To prove that CHRIST
could not be held by death (be (...).
still kept under the power of it) Peter alleges the words of David
concerning Christ, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell. Therefore Christ's not
being left in Hell signifies nothing else, but it is not being left under the
power of death: and consequently his being in Hell imports nothing else but
his being under the power of death, under which he was kept for a while, viz.
until his Resurrection. And this may suffice for answer to the Objection from
Acts 2. 27. The next place Objected is 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. of which place I
marvel that the Marquess should say that it is yet plainer then either of the
former. Austine being consulted by Evodius about the meaning of that place,
confesses that Question, quam mihi proposuisti ex Epistola Apostoli Petri,
solet nos, ut te latere non arbitror, vebementissime commovere, etc. Aug.
Epist. 99.

Vides quam latebrosum sit, and quae me moveant, ne affirmare hinc aliquid
audeam. Ibid.


it did exceedingly puzzle him, and that he durst not affirm any thing about
it. And the Jesuit Lorinus in his Commentary upon it, calls it difficillimum
locum, a most difficult place, and rehearses ten several Expositions of it.
And So Estius also upon the place says, This place in the judgment Locus hic
omnium pene interpretum judicio difficillimus, idemque tam vary expositus, ut
novem ejus interpretationes recenseat Jo. Lorinus, quibus ipse suam addit
decimam; tametsi nec omnes attigerit. Est. ad 1 Pet. 3. 29.
almost of all Interpreters is most difficult, and is so diversely expounded,
that John Lorinus does reckon up nine interpretations of it, to which he adds
his own for the tenth; and yet he has not touched all neither. And both he and
Lorinus note that only Arias Montanus did think the place easy to be
understood, but withal that his Exposition of it is such, as that others will
not easily embrace it. For, as they relate, Arias by the spirits in prison does
understand those eight persons, that were shut up in the Arc, which was a
kind of prison unto them. Bellarmine also upon occasion of this controversy
Ut autem hic locus, qui semper obscurissimus habitus est, intelligatur, etc.
Bell. de Christi anima lib. 4. cap. 13.
about Limbus Patrum, and Christ's descending into Hell, treating of this place
of Peter, says that it has always been accounted a most obscure place. Some
have thought that by Prison in those words of Peter is meant Hell, the place of
torment, and that Christ went and Preached there, and that such, as did then
believe were delivered. And thus Scit ergo (David) exhortatione^ hanc sanctos
quiescentes in inferno desiderare; scit, testante Apostolo Petro, descendente
in inferna Domino, etiam his, qui in carcere erant, and increduli quondam
fuerant in diebus Noe, exhortationem praedicatam fuisse. Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
(vel 119.) 81. etc.
Hilary seems to have understood it, who says, that the Apostle Peter does
testify, that when Christ descended into Hell, exhortation was Preachde also
to those that were in the Prison, who had sometimes been incredulous in the
days of Noah. For this opinion Hilary is taxed (though not named) by Bid, as
Estius observes, who yet endeavors to excuse Hilary, as not meaning by this
Prison the Hell of the damned, but Purgatory; and in that sense Hilarious
distinguit sanctos in inferno quiescentes, i. e. in sinu Abrahae tunc positos,
ab iis, qui in carcere erant, ut in loco paenali, vetera adhuc peccatorum
suorum debita luentes; quem locum Purgatorium vocamus. Est. ubi supra.
Praedicavit -- animabus, quae apud inferos in carcere, velut paenarum loco,
conclusae detinebantur -- Propter peccata sua quoad paenam adhuc expianda, apud
inferos carceri and cruciatibus addicti remanserunt, usque ad Christi
Redemptoris adventum. Est. Ibid.
Estius himself also does understand the words of Peter, viz. that by the
spirits in prison are meant the souls of those that were in pain and torment
for the expiating of their sins, until that Christ came, and Preached
deliverance unto them. But of Purgatory I shall speak hereafter; in the mean
time so much is obtained, that if the place be meant of Purgatory, then not of
Limbus Patrum, for that place (as they describe it) did much differ from
Purgatory, as being a place (they say) in which was no pain or torment.

But it may seem strange that the Marquess should allege Austine Epist. 99.
as holding that by the prison, which Peter speaks of, is meant Limbus Patrum,
when as indeed Austine in that Epistle is much against it. For besides what I
have before cited out of that Unde illis justis, qui in sinu Abrahae erant, cum
ille in inferna descenderet, nondum quid contulerit, inveni; a quibus eum
secundum beatificam praesentiam suae divinitatis nunquam video recessisse.
August. Epist. 99.
Epistle, he says that Christ by the beatificall presence of his Divinity did
never depart from those just persons that were in Abraham's bosom, (which the
Marquess says, is the same place with that called Limbus Patrum) and
therefore he did not find what Christ did for them, when he descended into
Considera tamen, ne forte totum illud, quod de conclusis in carcere spiritibus,
qui in diebus Noe non crediderant, Petrus Apostolus dicit, omnino ad inferos
non pertineat Aug. Ibid.
Hell. And having considered what he could of the words of Peter, he rather
thought that they did not speak of Hell at all. And therefore by the spirits
in prison he conceived to be meant men, that lived in the days of Noah, whose
souls were in their mortal bodies, as in a prison; to which men, he says,
Christ by his Spirit in Noah did Preach, though they yet nevertheless would
not believe. Bell. and Est. locis aute citat.
Bellarmine and Estius and others do acknowledge this to have been the
opinion of Austine in that Epistle concerning the words of Peter. And
Bellarmine also does confess, that this of Austine does differ but little from
Bezaes Exposition of the place, viz. that by the spirits in prison are meant
the souls of men, which were now, when Peter wrote of them, in prison, that
is, in Hell, to which men Christ by his Divine Spirit in Noah did Preach, when
they were alive upon Earth. And surely any that are impartial, will judge this
Exposition in that, wherein it differs from Austines, the more probable: and
yet Bellarmine, to show his Hanc Expositionem non refutarem, si ipsi Augustino
placeret omnino, etc Bell. ubi supra.
partiality, says that he would not have refuted Austines Exposition, if
Austine himself had been altogether pleased with it. Prima expositio est
Augustini Epist. 99. ad, Evod. quem sequitur Beda. Bell. Ibid.

Sequitur hanc Expositionem Beda in Comment. and Thomas 3. q. 52. ar. 2. ad 3.
cum paucis aliis. Non dissimilis sententia est Jo. Hesselii, etc. Est. ad 1
Pet. 3. 19.


Austines Exposition is embraced not only by Bid, whom Bellarmine only
mentions as herein following Austine, but also by Aquinas, and others, as
Estius observes, who also adds that Hesselius (a Romish Author) does
understand the place much after the same manner. And, as Lorinus does relate,
Diegus Lorin. in 1 Pet. 3.
Paiva, one that wrote in defense of the Council of Trent, does directly
expound the words of Peter as Beza does, though he would not have it thought
that Paiva did receive his Exposition from Beza. But against both Austines and
Bezaes Exposition it is objected first, that Spiritus, qui hic distinguitur
contra carnem, non videtur posse significare aliud quam animam, etc. Bell. loc.
citat.
the Spirit by which Christ went and Preached to the spirits in prison, 1 Pet.
3. 18, 19. is opposed to the Flesh; and therefore must signify Christ's Soul,
and not his Divine Nature. I answer, that Christ's Divine Nature is most fitly
understood there by the word Spirit, even as by the word Flesh is to be
understood not only his Body, but his whole humane Nature, in respect of which
nature Christ was put to death, and was quickened by his Divine Nature. Thus
does Oecumenius expound it, Put to death in the nature of flesh, (...). Oecum.
ad loc.
that is, the humane Nature, and raised again by the power of the Divine
Nature. And why should this Exposition seem strange, when as Flesh is put for
Christ's humane Nature, Ioh. 1. 14. The word was made Flesh. And so also Romans 1.
3. and 9. 5. And therefore on the other side the word Spirit may well denote
Christ's Divine Nature. For this Exposition Estius also cites Austine, and
Athanasius as alleged by Bid. And he does well observe, that this sense
agrees with that which is said of Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 4. For though he was
crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power of God. Besides, if
we should read quickened in the Spirit, and by Spirit understand Christ's
Soul, it would follow, that Christ's Soul Sed haec ratio non concludit; nam in
Scriptura passim dicitur vivificari id, quod non occiditur. 1. Reg. 27. Virum
and mulierem non vivificabat David, i. e. non relinquebat vivum. Bell. de Cbr.
an. l. 4. c. 13. ubi etiam alia istiusmodi exempla affert.
was sometime dead. This was Austines argument against that Exposition, as is
observed by Bellarmine. Who says that the argument does not conclude; for that
often in the Scripture that is said to be quickened, which is not put to death.
But his answer is not satisfactory. For though it is true, that in the
Scripture to quicken or to make alive is sometimes no more then to preserve
(...) vivificare.
and keep alive; as 1 Samuel 27. 11. and 2 Samuel 8. 2. where both in the
Original, and in the vulgar Latin the word used does signify to make alive.
Yet nevertheless nothing in Scripture is said to be made, that is, kept alive,
but that which is obnoxious unto death, and may die: but Christ's Soul, and
generally the Souls of men are of an immortal nature, and do not die, when
the body dies. Besides, what great matter was it (as Estius observes) if when
Christ's Body died, his Soul did remain Quid magnum, si anima Christi,
moriente carne, vivens permansit; quando nec in pessimis hominibus anima
moritur ut quae natura sit immortalis. Est. ad 1 Pet. 3. 18.

Proinde melius intelligitur Christus vivificatus spiritus, i. e. anima: quia
factus est in spiritum vivificantem, hunc scil. quando a morte Resurrexit ad
vitam immortalem. Est. Ibid.


alive; when as even in the worst men that are, the soul does not die, as
being by nature immortal? And therefore he says it is better understood
thus, Christ was quickened in the Spirit, that is, he was made a quickening
Spirit, viz. when he rose from death unto life immortal. And he cites that 1
Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam was made a living Soul; the last Adam was made
a quickening spirit. But that sense will not well suite the words of Peter,
which do not show what Christ is made being risen again, but in what respect
and by what means he did rise again, viz. by the spirit, that is, by his
Divine Nature, as in the flesh, that is, his humane Nature he was put to
death. But again it is objected, that S. Peter says Christ went and preached
to the spirits in prisons; therefore it is meant of the soul, not of his
Divine Nature, in which respect Illud, veniens praedicavit, si de anima
intelligatur, proprie accipi po^erit: vere enim venit ad locum, ubi non erat:
at si de Divinitate, non potest accipi nisi improprie. Bell. loc. cit.
it cannot be said but improperly that he went. I answer, there is no
necessity to take it properly in the words of Peter, more then in the words of
Paul, Ephesians. 2. 17. when he says that Christ came and Preached peace unto the
Ephesians; which must be meant of coming and Preaching by the Apostle; for
otherwise Christ in his own person did not come and preach unto them. And thus
Estius notes it to be expounded by Ambrose, the Interlineary Gloss, Aquinas,
Lyra, and Cajetane. It is objected again, that by spirits in prison cannot be
understood living men, except S. Peter should on Per spiritus, qui in carcere
erant, non videtur posse intelligi homines viventes, nisi de industria S.
Petrus affectaverit improprietatem, and obscuritatem. Bell. ubi supra.
purpose speak improperly and obscurely. I answer, according to Bezaes
Exposition, (which in his particular does differ from Austines, and is the more
probable) not living men, but the souls of men separated from their bodies,
are termed spirits in prison, as being in the prison of Hell when Peter wrote
of them; though they were not so, but were joined to their bodies, and so both
souls and bodies joined together were living men, when Christ preached unto
them. But Bellarmine further objects that 1 Pet. 4. 6. where it is said, that
Bell. Ibid.
the Gospel was preached to the dead, which he will have so understood, as
that men being dead, and departed out of this life, the Gospel was Preached
unto them. But the true and genuine meaning of the words rather is this, that
the Gospel was Preached to them, that are now dead; though they were not dead,
but alive when the Gospel was preached unto them. Even as in the verse
immediately going before it is said, that Christ will judge both the quick and
the dead, that is, those that are now alive, or shall be alive at Christ's
coming; and those that are now dead, or shall be dead at Christ's coming; who
yet shall not be judged whiles they are dead, but they shall be raised up, and
made alive, and so be judged. As therefore Peter calls them dead, because so
they are now, and were, when he wrote of them, though they shall not be dead,
but alive, when they shall be judged. So for the same reason he calls them
dead, to whom the Gospel was preached, though when the Gospel was preached
unto them they were alive, and not dead. And in like manner he calls them
spirits in prison, to whom Christ went and Preached, because so they were when
he wrote, though they were not so when Christ went and preached unto them. But
Bellarmine charge Beza with being so bold as to change Augustinus servat
textum, ut invenit a majoribus Scriptum: Bezs pro sua audacia mutat, and ubi
nos habemus, Qui in carcere erant, ipse vult legi, Qui in carcere sunt. Bell.
loc cit.
the Text, because where they read, the spirits that were in prison, he
reads, the spirits that are in prison. But, as Beslarmine himself could not
but confess, in the Original there is neither that were, nor that are, but
the words (...).
are (as our Translatours render them) the spirits in prison; so that either
the words that were, or that are, may be understood, as the sense will bear.
Estius confesses that some (I suppose, he means some not Quamvis nonnulli
(sunt) supplendum putent, multo tamen melius noster interpres, ut alii fere
omnes (erant) suppleverant. Nam verbum praeteriti temporis (praedicavit)
supplementum postulat temporis consimilis, erant, vel fuerant, eo scil.
tempore, quo praedicavit. Est. ad loc.
Protestants) understand, that are: but he holds it better to understand, that
were, as the verb is of the Pretertense, preached. But this reason is of no
moment. For if because the word Preached has reference to the time past,
therefore it must be meant of the Spirits that were in prison, when Christ
Preached unto them: by the same reason when it is said that Christ shall judge
both the quick and the dead, because shall judge does respect the time to come,
therefore also it must be meant of those that shall be dead, when Christ shall
judge them. But this does not follow; and so neither does the other. And thus,
I hope, it may appear, that those words of Peter make nothing for Limbus
Patrum. The fourth and last place of Scripture, which is alleged by the
Marquess is Zach. 9. 11. where the pit that is spoken of, he says, cannot be
the place of the damned, nor the Grave. But what then? must it therefore be
Limbus Patrum? It does not follow; for by the pit there may be something else
meant then either the place of the damned, or the Grave, or Limbus Patrum, viz.
the Babylonish captivity, as the Rabbines upon the place expound it. Bellarmine
citing Calvin for this R. Sal Kimchi and Abrabanecl. Bell de chr. an. l. 4. c.
11.
Exposition says, that it has no probability, because immediately before there
is a prophecy of Christ, Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Sion, behold thy King
comes unto thee, etc. Therefore (says he) how should Quomodo ergo ista
cohaererent, si de captivitate Babylonica ageretur? Bell. Ibid.
these things cohere, if the captivity of Babylon were spoken of? I answer,
well enough; the Prophet having told them of Christ's coming unto them, might
well presently after speak of their deliverance out of captivity, as a great
benefit which they had already obtained through Christ (in whom all the
promises are yea, and in him amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.) and whereby they might be
assured of far greater benefit by him, even of deliverance from the captivity
of sin and Satan. Estius in his Exposition of the hard places of Scripture,
treating of this place, says indeed that many understand it of Christ's
descending into Hell, and delivering thence the souls of the just; but Vary
hoc exponitur -- Unus sensus est, Christum per Meritum Passionis suae omnes
electos suos, qui tenebantur tanquam vincti sub potestate diaboli, liberasse.
-- Sic lacus, in quo non est aqua, est captivitas humani generis, qua quamdiu
detinetur, vacuum est ab aqua Divinae gratiae. Est. ad Zach. 9. 11.
withal he tells us, that it is diversely expounded, and that one Exposition
is, that Christ by the Merit of his Passion did free all the Elect, who were
held captive under the power of the Devil. And thus (he says) the pit,
wherein is no water, is the captivity of mankind, in which so long as it is
held, it is empty of the water of Divine Grace. Diverse Romanists do Bell.
loco proxime eitato. Ribera ad loc. Annotat. on the Doway-Translation.
cite Hierome as interpreting this place of the Prophet Zachary, of Limbus
Patrum, and of Christ's descending thither: But they that peruse Hieromes own
words, will find, that he neither speaks of Christ's descending, nor of
Limbus Patrum; and that indeed he meant only that which Estius expresses.
He gives, the sense of the Prophets Quod ita intelligitur; In sanguine
passions tuae, eos, qui vincti in carcere tenebantur inferni, in quo non est
ulla misericordia, tua clementia liberasti. -- In hoc lacu inferni morabatur
dives ille quondam puratus, cujus lingua magniloqua paenaru^ exurebatur
incendiis; and in tantu^ non habebat ulla aquarum refrigeria, ut extremi digiti
pauperis tincti in aqua refrigerium postularet. Hieron. ad Zach. 9. 11.
words thus; By the blood of thy passion, thou through thy clemency have
delivered those, who were held bound in the prison of Hell, in which there is
no mercy. And he adds a little after, that the rich man spoken of Luke 16.
was in that pit, which was so void of all water of comfort, that he desired
Lazarus might but dip the tip of his finger in water to cool his Tongue. Here
it is evident, that Hierome by the pit without water understands the Hell of
the damned, which is without all comfort, though the Marquess say that place
cannot here be meant. Now whereas Hierome says that Christ by his Passion did
deliver those that were bound in that prison, I suppose he did not mean, that
any being once in Hell, as that rich man that he mentions, were afterward
delivered out of it; himself seems to exclude that sense, when he says, that
in that prison there is no mercy, viz. to be obtained: but his meaning was,
that such, as by reason of sin were in the state of damnation, Christ did
deliver by his Passion. But thus neither this place of Zachary, nor any other
place of Scripture does prove a Limbus Patrum, or that Christ descended into
Hell in that sense as they of the Church of Rome maintain. For the Fathers,
whom the Marquess cites, Austine in Psalm. 37. 1. has nothing about Limbus
Patrum, or Christ's descending into Hell; and I have showed before that he
gathered by the Scripture, that Abraham's bosom, was no such Limbus, as the
Romanists imagine: yea, that he held the Saints that died before Christ's
incarnation to have always enjoyed the beatificall presence of Christ's
Divinity, which is point blanke contrary to their opinion. Hierome, I grant, in
Ephesians. 4. 9. seems to speak for them, where he says, By the lower parts of
Inferiora autem terrae infernus accipitur, ad quem Dominus noster Salvatorque
descendit, ut sanctorum animas, quae ibi tenebantur inclusae, secum ad caelos
victor abduceret, Vnde and post Resurrectionem ejus, plurima corpora justorum
in sancta civitate visa sunt. Hieron. ad Ephesians. 4. 9.
the Earth is understood Hell, to which our Lord and Savior descended, that he
might victoriously carry with him to Heaven the souls of the Saints, which
were kept there. Whereupon also after his Resurrection many bodies of the just
were seen in the holy City.

But Hieromes meaning might be only this, that Christ by the virtue and
efficacy Ascendens quippe in altum, captivam duxit captivitatem. Nos qui nunc
in Christum credimus de gentibus congregati, cum essemus creatura Dei, a
diabolo capti sumus, and ejus satellitibus distributi. Venit igitur Dominus
noster Jesus Christus, secundum Ezechielem, vasa captivitatis secum apportans,
and operto capite (ne ab adversariis cognosceretur) praedicavit his, qui capti
erant, remissionem, and qui tenebantur in vinculis solutionem, and nos de
catenis hostium, and de compedibus libetavit. Hieron. ad Ephesians. 4. 8.

Liberatosque nos, and per novam captivitatem de captivitate veteri erutos,
secum duxit in caelum. Ibid.


of his death, did deliver the Souls of all Saints (whether before or after
his coming) from Hell, which otherwise by reason of sin was the place that
did belong unto them. Thus a little before upon those words, when he ascended
up on high, he led captivity captive, Hierome does express himself, saying,
We, who now believe in Christ, were taken captive by the Devil, and were
delivered over to his officers. Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ came, bringing
with him the vessels of captivity, and preached remission to those that were
taken, and deliverance to those that were bound; and delivered us from the
Chains, and Fetters of our enemies. And having delivered us, and by a new
captivity brought us out of our old captivity, he carried us with him into
Heaven. He cannot here mean, that we were actually in Hell, and then from
thence, delivered, and carried up with Christ into Heaven. But his meaning must
needs be this, that whereas sin had brought us under condemnation, so that
nothing but Hell did remain for us, Christ by his death delivered us, and made
a way for us into Heaven, into which otherwise we could find no entrance.
After the same manner very well may the other words be understood so as to
import no such place as they call Limbus Patrum. However he meant, yet it
appears sufficiently by the words of Austine before cited, that the opinion of
Limbus Patrum was not generally received in that time wherein Hierome lived,
Austine and he being contemporaries. The other Father yet remaining, is
Gregory, but there is no such place as that mentioned, viz. li. 13. Mor. ca.
20. for that book has only 17. Chapters in it: yet I find Bellarmine also
to cite Bell. de Christ. anum. l. 4. c. 14.
Gregory after the very same manner, yea and to bid us also see Cap. 21. But
the words, which Bellarmine cites as out of Cap. 20. are indeed in Cap. 15.
viz. Whiles our Master and Redeemer penetrating the Dum conditor ac redemptor
noster claustra inferni penetrans, electorum exinde animas eduxit, no, illo ire
non patitur, unde jam alios descendendo liberavit. Gregor. Moral. lib. 13. cap.
15.
cloisters of Hell, did bring out from thence the souls of the Elect, he
suffers not us to go thither, from whence by descending he did deliver others.

These words of Gregory might admit of Priores etenim sancti and sustinere
adversa poterant, and tamen a corporibus educti, adhuc ab inferni locis
liberari non poterant: quia necdum venerat, qui illuc sine culpa descenderer,
ut eos, qui ibi tenebantur ex culpa, liberaret, Ibid. c. 16.
the same Exposition with those of Hierome before spoken of, but that in the
next Chapter he is more plain saying, The former Saints could endure
adversity, but yet they could not be delivered from Hell, when they died,
because he was not yet come, who should descend thither without sin, that
he might deliver those, who were held there by reason of sin. But the reason
that Gregory here gives, is too weak; for though Christ were not then come in
the flesh, yet his death was as effectual to those, that believed in him,
then, as after his coming, as I have proved before. Neither is the gound or
occasion of these words of Gregory good; for he buildes or comments upon that
of Job 17. 13. If I wait, Sheol (Hell, as Gregory understands it) is mine
house. But I have showed before, that Sheol does not properly signify Hell, as
either we, or our adversaries usually take the word, but the Grave, or the
state of the dead. And so the Chaldie Paraphrast (...)
there for Sheol has that which signifies the house of the Grave. This
appears to be the meaning in that place by that which follows immediately
after, v. 14. I have said to corruption, Thou art my Father, to the worm, thou
art my Mother and Sister. If our adversaries will yet stand upon the authority
of Gregory, I answer, that we are not tied to the authority of any in this
kind, further then they concur with the Scripture: and if we were, yet
Austines authority were to be preferred, as being 200 years more ancient then
Gregory; but of this point enough.

From Limbus Patrum we must now pass to Purgatory, to Page. 73.
which the Marquess does next lead us. We hold (says he) Purgatory fire,
where satisfaction shall be made for sins after death: you deny it. We have
Scripture for it, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 15. The fire shall try every man's work, of
what sort it is; if any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but
he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. S. Aug. so interprets this
place upon Psalm. 37. also S. Ambrose upon 1 Cor. 3. and ser. 20. in Psalm. 118.
S. Hier. l. 2. c. 13. advers. Joan. S. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39. Origin Hom. 6.
in cap. 15. Exodus

If there be any such place as Purgatory, it does much more concern us then
Limbus Patrum, which they hold to have been made void, and of no use long ago,
but this they pretend to continue still, and to be of as much force as ever it
was. But we find nothing in Scripture to prove any such place, or any such
fire, as that of Purgatory, wherein they that have not fully satisfied for
their sins in this life, must lie, and fry, until they have made full
satisfaction, and then be taken out, and conveyed to Heaven. For thereore they
call the place Purgatory, and the fire Purgatory fire, Vocatur Purgatorium
locus quidam, in quo tanquam in carcere post hanc vitam purgantur animae, quae
in hac non plene purgatae fuerunt, ut nimirum sic purgatae in caelum ingredi
valiant, quo nihil intrabit coinquinatum. Bell. de Purgat. l. 1. c. 1.
because (they say) in that place, by that fire the Souls are purged, which
were not fully purged in this life, that being so purged, they may have
entrance into Heaven. But how does this agree with the Scripture? That tells
us, that the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
And that if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous; And he is the propitiation for our sins. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. It is
only Christ, who by his blood does satisfy for our sins, and so purge us
from them; we cannot do it by any thing, which we either do or suffer in this
life, much less is it to be done by us hereafter when we are dead. God does
indeed afflict his children here in this World, thereby to purge them; By this
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
his sin. Isai. 27. 9. But this affliction is only castigatory, not
satisfactory. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the World. 1 Cor. 11. 32. After this life is ended, there
remains no more affliction for the godly, for any thing that we can find in
Scripture. We know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. -- Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whiles we are
at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. For we walk by Faith, and
not by sight. We are confident, I say, willing rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 6, 7, 8. The Apostle
speaks there not peculiarly of himself, or such eminent ones as he was, but
generally of all Believers, as appears by those words, For we walk by faith,
and not by sight; which is as true of every believer, as it was of Paul. Now if
the faithful, when they depart out of this Tabernacle, the body, go to their
house prepared for them in Heaven, and are present with the Lord, and enjoy the
sight of him; then surely there is no such thing as Purgatory, to keep them, I
know not how long absent from God, in pain and torment. And so the Scripture
tells us, that they that die in the Lord, are blessed, and rest from their
labors. Revel. 14. 13. But how are they blessed, and how do they rest from
their labors, if yet after they are dead, they must endure Purgatory, the
pains whereof, they say, are most grievous, and such as that no pains here in
this life are to be Paenas Purgatorii esse atrocissimas, and cum illis nullas
paenas hujus vitae comparandas docent constanter Patres. Bell. de Purgat. lib.
2. cap. 14. B. Thomas dicit, minimam paenam Purgatorii esse majorem maxima
paena hujus vitae. Bell. Ibid. Repugnat Ecclesiae consuetudo, quae anniversaria
sacra celebrat pro defunctis, etiamsi constet eos ante centum vel ducentos
annos esse mortuos. Quod certe non fieret, si Ecclesia crederet, non puniri
animas ultra december annos. Bell. Ibid. cap. 7. Scribit Beda l. 5. Hist. c. 15.
cuidam ostensas fuisse Purgatorii paenas, dictumque illi esse, animas, quae in
Purgatorio degunt, salvandas omnes in die judicii, etc. ubi clare indicat,
aliquos jam defunctos usque ad diem judicii mansuros. Bell. Ibid.
compared with them? Yea, some hold that the least pain in Purgatory, is
greater then the greatest pain that is in this life. And whereas Dominicus a
Soto thought that none did continue in Purgatory above ten years, Bellarmine
confutes this by the custom of their Church praying for those that were known
to be dead a hundred or two hundred years before. Which argues, that (as they
suppose) souls may continue so long in Purgatory. Yea, he cites Bid, who
lived about 900 years ago, telling of one, to whom was showed the pains of
Purgatory, and it was told him, that all the Souls in Purgatory should be
delivered and saved in the day of judgment, etc. whence he infers, that
according to Bid some now dead (yea that were dead many hundred years ago)
must abide in Purgatory until the day of judgment. And will any call such
blessed? will any say that such rest from their labors? In a word, the
Scripture tells us but of two places appointed for such as depart out of this
life, the one a place of comfort, and the other a place of torment; and withal
it tells us, that betwixt these two places there is such a great gulf fixed,
that they that are in the one, cannot pass unto the other. Luke 16. 25, 26.

Neither do we want the testimonies of Quamdiu enim corpus hoc permanet,
commune cum caeteris sit necesse est, and corporalis conditio communis, nec
separari generi humano ab invicem datur, nisi istinc de seculo recedatur. Intra
unam domum boni and mali interim continemur: quicquid intra domum evenerit,
pari sort perpetimur; donec aevi temporalis fine completo, ad aeternae vel
mortis, vel immortalitatis hospitia dividamur. Cyprian. ad Demetrian.
the ancient Fathers for the asserting of this truth, which we maintain.
Cyprian says, that though the godly and the wicked fare alike here, yet when
this life is ended, then their estates do much differ. We are contained (says
he) for a while both good and bad in one house; whatsoever does happen within
the house, we suffer alike, until this temporal life being ended, we are
divided to the habitations either of eternal death, or of immortality. He
makes no third place distinct from those of immortality, and of everlasting
death; neither does he make any stay after the end of this life, but that such
as escape the habitation of endless death, do immediately pass to the
habitation of immortality. So the same Father again. The Kingdom now is very
near at hand, etc. Regnum Dei, fratres dilectissimi, caepit esse in proximo,
etc. jam terrenis caelestia, and magna parvis, and caducis aeterna succeduant.
Quishic anxietatis and sollicitudinis locus? Quis inter haec trepidus and
maestus est, nisi cui spes and fides deest? ejus est enim mortem timere, qui ad
Christum nolit ire: ejus est ad Christum nolle ire, qui se non credat cum
Christo incipere regnare. Scriptum est enim, justum fide vivere. Si justus es,
and fide vivis, si vere in Deum credis; cur non cum Christo futurus, and de
Domini pollicitatione securus, quod ad Christum voceris, amplecteris, and quod
Diabolo careas, gratularis? Cyprian. de Mortal.
now after earthly things follow heavenly, after small things great, after
fading things eternal. What place is there here for anxiety and carfulness?
who can now be fearful, and sad, but he that has neither hope, nor faith? For
it is for him to fear death, who is not willing to go to Christ: and it is
for him to be unwilling to go to Christ, who does not believe that he begins
to reign with Christ. For it is written, that the just does live by faith. If
thou be just, if thou do live by faith, if thou do indeed believe in
God; why being to be with Christ, and being sure of the Lords promise, do
thou not embrace this, that thou art called unto Christ; and rejoice that thou
art freed from the Devil? Thus in a time of mortality did Cyprian comfort and
encourage Christians against the fear of death. But how will all this consist
with Purgatory? How is the Kingdom of God so nigh at hand? how do things
heavenly and eternal succeed things earthly and fading, if after this life
the souls of Christians may continue many hundred years perhaps in the flames
of Purgatory before they can get to Heaven? Might not this well make every one
to fear death, and to tremble at the approach of it? Might not a Christian at
his Death well cry O animula, vagula, blandula, Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Adrian. Imperat.
out with the Heathen Emperor, O poor Soul, whither art thou now going? But
Simeon denique ille justus, etc. Probans scil. atque contestans tunc esse
servis Dei pacem, tunc liberam and tranquillam quietem, quando de istis mundi
turbinibus extracti, sedis and securitatis aeternae portum petimus, quando
expuncta hac morte ad immortalitatem venimus. Cypr. Ibid. Deus de hoc mundo
recedenti tibi immortalitatem, atque aeternitatem pollicetur, and tu dubitas?
Hoc est Deum omnino non nosse; hoc est Christum credentium Dominum and
magistrum peccato incredulitatis offendere; hoc est, in Ecclesia constitutum
fidem in domo fidei non habere. Quantum prosit exire de seculo, Christus ipse
salutis atque utilitatis nostrae magister ostendit: qui cum discipuli ejus
contristarentur, quod se jam diceret recessurum, locutus est ad eos dicens, si
me dilexissetis, gauderetis, quoniam vado ad Patrem: docens scil. and
ostendens, cum chari, quos diligimus, de seculo exeunt, gaudendum potius quam
dolendum. Cyprian. Ibid.
Cyprian goes on, and citing that of Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, he adds, that then
the servants of God have peace, then they have free and calm quietness, when
being taken out of the tempests of this world, we arrive at the haven of
eternal rest and security, when as this death being past we come to
immortality. And so again, God does promise immortality and eternity unto
thee, when thou go out of the world; and do thou doubt? This is not at
all to know God: this is to offend Christ the Lord and Master of believers,
with the sin of unbelief; this is to be in the Church, the house of Faith,
and yet to have no Faith. How profitable it is to go out of the World, Christ
himself, the Master of our salvation and welfare does show, who when his
Disciples were sorrowful, because he said he was to leave them, said, If you
had loved me, you would rejoice because I go to the Father, (Joh. 14. 28.)
teaching us, that we should rather rejoice then be sorry, when they depart out
of the world, whom we love, who are dear unto us.

Thus also Hierome writing to Paula to Lugeatur mortuus, sed ille, quem gehenna
suscipit, quem tartarus devorat, in cujus paenam aeternus ignis aestuat. Nos
quorum exitum angelorum turba comitatur, quibus obviam Christus occurtit,
gravamur magis, si diutius in Tabernaculo ista mortis habitemus. Quia quamdiu
hic moramur, peregrinamur a Domino. Illa nos cupido teneat, Hei mihi, quia
peregrinatio mea prolongata est, etc. Hierou. Epist. 25.
comfort her concerning the Death of her Daughter Blaesilla, says, Let the
dead be lamented, but such an one whom the place of torment does receive, whom
Hell does devour, for whose punishment the everlasting fire does burn. We,
whose departure a troop of Angels does accompany, whom Christ does come to
meet, are more grieved (or, as some read gravemur, let us be more grieved) if
we abide longer in this Tabernacle of death: because so long as we abide here,
we are as pilgrims absent from the Lord. Let that desire possess us, woe is
me, that my pilgrimage is prolonged, etc. Austine plainly says, that the
Catholic faith by Divine authority does believe the first Primum locum fides
Catholicorum Divina authoritate credit, regnum esse caelorum; secundum
gehennam, ubi omnis apostata, vel in fide Christi alienus ae^ern^ supplicia
experietur; tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in Scripturis sanctis
invenimus. Aug. in Hypognost, ultra medium.
place to be the Kingdom of Heaven; the second to be Hell, where every
apostate, or such us are aliens from the faith of Christ, do suffer
everlasting punishments; a third place we are altogether ignorant of, yea we
find in the holy Scriptures, that there is no such place. Bellarmine answers
that Austine there speaks of those places, which are everlasting. Loquitur de
locis aeternis. Bell. de Purg. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Which indeed is true; for he speaks of Heaven, and of Hell (the place of
torment) which are everlasting places for those to abide in, that are in them.
But withal he says that there is no third place, viz. for those that depart
out of this life. Besides, how can the Romanists yield that there is no
everlasting place besides Heaven, and Hell, viz. Gehenna (which is the word
that Austine uses) the Hell of the damned? when as they hold a Limbus
infantium, an everlasting place for Infants to Pro paena solius damni aeterna
est Limbus puerorum. Bellar. de Purgat. l. 2. c. 6.
abide in, that die without Baptism: which place they make to be distinct both
from Heaven, and from the place of torment. For there (they say) such children
as die unbaptized, suffer the punishment of loss, whereby the place differs
from Heaven; but not the punishment of sense, whereby it differs from the Hell
of the damned. But Quod autem non negaverit Aug. aut quicunque fuit auctor
Hypognostici, tertium locum temporarium post hanc vitam, ex eo potest
intelligi, quod fides Catholica docet praeter caelum and infernum fuisle ante
Christi passionem sinum Abrahae, ubi degebant animae sanctorum Patrum. Bell. de
Purgat. l. 1. c. 13.
Bellarmine proves that Austine, or whosoever was the Author of the book
called Hypognosticon, did not deny that there is a third place to abide in for
a time after this life, because the Catholic faith does teach, that besides
Heaven and Hell there was before Christ's death Abraham's bosom, where the
souls of the holy Fathers did abide. I answer, that Abraham's bosom was any
such Limbus Patrum as the Romanists imagine, was no part of Austines Creed, as
I have showed before out of Austines undoubted writings. And therefore Erasmus
(though Bellarmine unjustly carpe at him for it) might well write Purgatory in
the Inepte igitur Erasmus ponit in margin ad illa verba [tertium penitus
ignoramus] Purgatorium, q. d. Purgatorium est locus tertius, quem ignorant fides
Catholica. Bell. Ibid.
margent over against those words, a third place we are altogether ignorant of;
signifying that Purgatory is a third place, of which the Catholic faith is
ignorant. But what need is there to allege particular Fathers, when as the
Bishop of Rochester, who was Nemo certe dubitat Orthodoxus, an Purgatorium sit,
de quo tamen apud priscos nulla, vel quam rarissima mentio: sed and Graecis ad
hunc usque diem non est creditum esse. Roffens. contra Luther. citat. a
Polydor. Vergil. de Invent. l. 8. c. 1.
beheaded in the reign of Henry the Eighth for maintaining the Popes
supremacy, in his book against Luther (as he is cited by Polydore Vergill,
who was an agent here in England for the Pope in the time of Henry 8.) when as
(I say) that Author confesses, that Purgatory is never or very seldom
mentioned by the ancient writers; and that the Grecians to this day do not
believe that there is any such thing as Purgatory. Now for the place of
Scripture, which the Marquess says they have for Purgatory, viz. 1 Cor. 3.
13, 15. First it is to be observed, that whereas Bellarmine does allege
diverse other places besides this for proof of Purgatory, the Marquess waves
all the other, and mentiones only this, conceiving it (as it seems) more
plain and pregnant then the rest. Yet, 2. Bellarmine tells us, and bids us
mark it, that this is one of the most obscure Nota in primis, locum istum
Apostoli, 1 Cor. 3. esse unum ex difficillimis, and utilissimis totius
Scripturae. Nam ex co statuunt Catholici duo Ecclesiastica dogmata,
purgatorium, and venialia peccata. Bell. de Purgat. l. 1. c. 5.
places of all the Scripture: though withal he says, it is one of the most
useful places, because from thence they have (as he supposes) a foundation
both for Purgatory, and for venial sins. But (as has been observed before
out of Austine) In iis quae aperte posita sunt in Scripturis, inveniuntur illa
omnia, quae continent fidem moresque viv^ndi. Aug. de doct. Christ. l 2. c 9.
the Scripture is clear in those things, which concern faith; and therefore
we must not build points of faith upon obscure places. Now so obscure is this
place, viz. 1 Cor. 3. 13, 15. that Bellarmine spendes a long Chapter merely in
the explication of it. And yet when all is done, nothing can be made of it for
Purgatory. For Bellarmine confutes those that Alii intelligunt de paenis
Purgatorii; sed neque id recte dici potest. Bell. de Purgat. l. 1. c. 5.
think Purgatory to be meant by the fire mentioned, v. 13. The fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is: and he proves, Superest igitur, ut dicamus
hic Apostolum loqui de igne severi, and justi judicii Dei, qui non est ignis
purgans, vel affligens, sed probans, and examinans. Bell. Ibid.
that the fire there mentioned, is the fire of Gods severe and just judgment,
which is not a purging and afflicting, but a proving and examining fire. So
that Bellarmine does take away one half of the Marquesses quotation; and
indeed the whole quotation. For though Bellarmine would have those words v. 15.
he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire, to be understood of Purgatory;
yet who sees not, that it is absurd to take the word fire otherwise there then
v. 13. And therefore In primis apparet, igne^ uno modo in hoc contextu accipi
debere. Est. ad 1 Cor. 3. 13.
Estius upon the place says, that it is evident, that one and the same fire is
meant in both Verses. Which fire he will have to be that, which shall burn up
the World at the last day. So also Bellarmine notes some to understand it; as
some of the tribulations of this life: and some of everlasting fire. All these
Expositions Ignis conflagrationis.
Bellarmine relates, and confutes, as justly he may, that being indeed the true
Exposition, which he embraces, but does not extend far enough, viz. that by
fire is meant Gods Severe and just judgment, whereby the works of all must be
tried, as it were by fire; though the Apostle there speak peculiarly of
Ministers, and of their Doctrine: and so as it were by fire shall they be
saved, that adhere to the foundation Christ, though their works be found like
wood, hay and stubble, vain and unprofitable, so that they suffer loss in
that respect, as having no reward nor benefit of those works. Now whereas the
Marquess says, that Austine interprets this place of Purgatory, in his
commentary upon Psalm. 37. I answer, it is true, Austine there does cite or
rather glance at this place, and expound it as meant de emendatorio igne, of a
purging fire, and says that this fire is more grievous then Gravior tamen est
ille ignis, quam quicquid potest homo pa^i in hac vita. Aug. in. Ps. 37.
any thing that a man can suffer in this life. But besides what has been
cited before Libri, qui inscribuntur Hypognosticon eruditi sunt, and utiles,
and vetusti auctoris, sed phrasin non habent Augustini, etc. Bell. de Scriptor.
Ecclesiast.
out of Austine (if Hypognosticon, be his, which Bellarmine thinks not, though
he says, the work is learned and profitable, and done by some ancient
Author) but besides that, I say, Austine in his most elaborate piece, de
Civit. Dei, handling this place of Sive ibi tantum, sive and hic and ibi, sive
ideo hic ut non ibi, secularia, quamvis a damnatione venialia, concremantem
ignem transitoriae tribulationis inveniant, non redarguo, quia forsitan verum
est. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 21. c. 26.
the Apostle, shows himself altogether unresolved whether there be any
Purgatory fire after this life is ended. Whether (says he) they find the fire
of transitory tribulation burning up those secular affections, which yet do not
bring damnation, there only (in the other World) or both there and here, or
therefore here that they may not find them there, I do not gainesay, because
perhaps it is true.

Here we see Austine taking the point into consideration, had no more then a
perhaps, he was far from being assured of that which they call Purgatory.
Bollarmine pointing at that place of Austine, but not Solum dubitat, an ignis
Purgatorius sit idem in substantia cum igne Gehennae, de quo dicitur Mat. 25.
Ite in ignem aeternum. Bell de Purgat. l. 1. c. 10.
citing the words, says that Austine there does only doubt whether Purgatory
fire be the same in substance with Hellfire, of which it is said, Mat. 25.
Depart into everlasting fire. But it was his policy to conceal Austines words;
for all that have any view of them, must needs see, that he doubts whether
there be any Purgatory fire in the World to come. So the same Father in his
Enchiridion, (which it seems, he wrote when he was old) speaks as doubtfully
as may be of Purgatory. That there is some such thing also after this life, is
not incredible; and whether it be so, may be inquired. But whether it be Tale
aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est; and utrum ita sit,
quae ri potest. Et ut inveniri, aut latere possit, nonnu los fideles per ignem
quendam purgatorium (quando magis minusue bona pereuntia dilexerunt) tanto
lardius citiusque salvari: non tamen tales, de quibus dictum est, quod regnum
Dei non possidebunt, etc. Aug. Enchir. c. 69.
found, or lie hid, that some faithful ones are so much the later or the
sooner saved by a certain Purgatory fire, by how much they did more or less
love these good things that perish; yet not any such, as of whom it is said,
that they shall not possess Gods Kingdom.

Here he makes it a question whether it be so, or no, and the most that he
says is, That it is not incredible, which is far Bell. ubi supra.
from asserting it as a thing that ought to be believed. Bellarmine says that
Austine here only doubts, whether after this life souls be burnt with the fire
of grief for the loss of temporal things, as here they use to be when they
are forced to want things, which they most desire. But besides that the words
of Austine (which here also Bellarmine did prudently omit) do plainly refuse
this gloss, there is no sense at all (that I can see) in it. For how should
souls after this life grieve for the loss of temporal things? Is there any
use of temporal things after this life is ended? How then should Austine make
it a question, whether souls in the other World are grieved, and even burnt
with grief for the loss of these things, which could do them no good, if
they had them? But again, in the preceding Chapter of the same Book Austine
treating Ignis enim, de quo locutus est eo loco Apost. Paulus, talis debet
intelligi, ut ambo per eum transeant, id est, and qui aedificat supra hoc
fundamentum aurum, argentum, lapides pretiosos, and qui aedificat ligna,
faenum, stipulam. -- est quidem ignis tentatio tribulationis. -- Salvus est
quidem, sic tamen quasi per ignem. Quia urit eum rerum dolor, quas dilexerat,
amissarum, sed non subvertit, neque consumit, fundamenti stabilitate atque
incorruptione munitum. Aug. Enchir. cap. 68.
of this place, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. says, that the fire, which the Apostle
speaks of, must so be understood, as that both pass through it, both he that
upon the foundation buildes Gold, and Silver, and precious stones, and he that
buildes wood, hay, and stubble; and this he clearly proves by the words of the
Apostle. Now this does quite exclude Purgatory from being the fire there
mentioned. For they will not have Purgatory to touch him that buildes Gold, and
Silver, and precious Stones, but only him that buildes wood, and hay, and
stubble. Austine therefore makes this fire that the Apostle writes of, to be
tribulation, and says, that a man is said to be saved, yet as it were by fire,
because the loss of those things, which he loloved, does burn him with
grief, yet nor subvert, nor consume him, because he is strongly fixed upon the
foundation. And this may suffice for Austines testimony, which is objected
against us. The next is Ambrose, who indeed says that the Apostle in those Cum
dicit, sic tamen qua si per ignem, ostendit salvum illum quidem suturum, sed
paenas ignis passurum, ut per ignem purgatus fiat salvus, and non sicut perfidi
aeterno igne in perpetuum torqueantur. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 3.
words, yet so as by fire, does show that such a man shall be saved, yet so as
that he shall suffer the pains of fire, that being purged by fire he may be
saved, and not as they that are perfidious, be for ever tormented with
everlasting fire. Here he interprets the Apostle indeed as speaking of a
Purgatory fire; but yet it does not appear that he meant it of a Purgatory
after this life. For notwithstanding any thing that I yet see to the contrary,
he may be understood of the fire of affliction, with which God does purge his
people here, that so they may not perish hereafter, 1 Cor. 11. 32. The same
Author (if yet the same; for many think that those Commentaries upon Paul's
Epistles, are not Ambroses, and that Commentaria in Epistolas S. Pauli a multis
non creduntur Ambrosii, nec sine causa. Bellar. de Sc iptor. Ecclcfiastic,
not without cause, as Bellarmine judges) in the other place that is pointed
at, as by the Marquess, so also by Bellarmine, viz. Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118.
touches upon the words of the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. but how our Cave ligna, cave
stipulam ad judicium Dei tecum deseras, quae ignis exurat. Cave cum in uno aut
duobus habeas quod probetur, in pluribus operibus deferas quod offendat. Si
cuju, opus arserit, det^imentum patietur, potest tamen and ipse per ignem
salvari. Unde colligitur quia idem homo and salvatur ex part, and condemnatur
ex part. Ambros. in Psala 18. Scrm. 20.
adversaries can gain any thing by him, I cannot see. Take heed (says he)
thou do not bring with thee wood, or stubble, which the fire may burn up,
(...) Gods judgment. Take heed lest being approved in one or two things, thou
bring that, which in more works does offend. If any ones work shall be burnt,
he shall suffer loss, yet he also may be saved by fire. Whence it is gathered,
that the same man is in part saved, and in part condemned. Here Ambrose
himself sufficiently shows, that he speaks of the fire of Gods judgment,
whereof he makes express mention. Neither can he mean any such Purgatory as
our adversaries plead for, seeing he speaks of that which shall befall a man
at the last judgment; for immediately before he brings in that of the Apostle
2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear Omnes oportet nos ante tribunal Christi
assistere, etc. Cave ligna, etc. Amh. Ibid.
before the judgment seat of Christ, etc. and then adds that before cited,
Take heed thou bring not with thee unto Gods Judgment wood, stubble, etc. Now
when the day of judgment Primus error est Origenis, qui extendit tempora
Purgatorii ultra diem Resurrectionis. Bell. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 1.
comes, then our adversaries hold that Purgatory cease. Bellarmine notes
this as an error in Origin, that he extends the time of Purgatory beyond the
Resurrection. So much therefore for Ambrose. After him is cited Hierome lib. 2.
cap. 13. advers. Joan. I suppose it is meant of John Bishop of Jerusalem, to
whom Epiphanius wrote an Epistle, admonishing him to beware of the error of
Origin, which (it seems) he suspected him to be guilty of; this Epistle being
written by Ephiphanius in Geeke, Hierome translated into Latin, and so it is
inserted among the Epistles of Hierome, being the 60 Epistle. Then Hierome
himself wrote a long Epistle, which is the 61. to Pammachius about the errors
of this John of Jerusalem, which Epistle is divided into 16 Chapters. And after
that another about the same subject to Theophilus, which contains but three
Chapters. Therefore the Marquess here must mean the Epistle to Pammachius,
which yet Chapt. 13. has nothing at all about Purgatory. Bellarmine cites
nothing out of Hierome, against John of Jerusalem, Bell. de Purgat. l. 1. c. 10.
but something out of him against the Pelagians, viz. this, If Origin say, that
no reasonable creatures shall be destroyed, and give repentance to the Si
Origenes omnes rationabiles creaturas dicat non esse perdendas, and Diabolo
tribuit paenitentiam; quid ad nos, qui and Diabolum, and satellites ejus,
omnesque impios and praevaricatores dicimus perire perpetuo; and Christianos,
si in peccato praeventi fuerint, salvandos esse post paenas? Hieron. advers.
Pelag. l. 1. c. 9.
Devil, what is that to us, who say that the Devil, and his Angels, and all
the wicked and ungodly do perish for ever, and that Christians, if they be
prevented in sin, shall be saved after punishment? Here indeed Hierome seems
to make some Christians after this life to suffer punishment, and yet to be
saved. But if he do speak of punishment to be endured after this life (which
is not clear and certain, though, I confess, it is probable by those words,
if they be prevented in sin) yet he seems withal to have held that some even
after the day of judgment shall be punished, yet so as to be saved, which
Bellarmine (as I have showed) noted as an error in Origin; and therefore
Hierome in this (as it seems) following Origin, does dissent as well from
Romanists as from Protestants.

Now that Hierome was of that opinion, may appear by that which he says a
little Illud vero, quod in sequenti ponis capitulo, in die judicii iniquis and
peccatoribus non parcendum, sed aeternis eos ignibus exurendos, far quis
potest, and interdicere te misericordiam Dei, and ante diem judicii de
sententia judicis judicare; ut si volverit iniquis and peccatoribus parcere, te
praescribente non possit? dicis enim, scriptum est in Psalm. 103. Deficiant
peccatores a terra, and iniqui, ita ut non sint -- Non dicit eos aeternis
ignibus exurendos, sed a terra desicere, and iniquos esse cessare. Aliud enim
est, ipsos a peccato, and iniquitate desistere; and aliud ipsos perire
imperpetuum, and aeternis ignibus concremari. Hieron. Ibid.
before in the same Chapter. That which thou put in the Chapter following
(says he to his adversary) that the unjust and sinners shall not be spared in
the day of judgment, but shall be burnt with everlasting fire; who can endure,
that thou should interdict Gods mercy, and before the day of judgment Judge
of the Judges sentence? For thou say, that it is written in Psalm. 103. Let
the sinners fail from the Earth, and the unjust, that they be no more. -- He
does not say, that they shall be burnt with everlasting fire, but that they
fail from the Earth, and oease to be unjust. For it is one thing for them to
cease from sin, and from iniquity; and another thing for them to perish for
ever, and to be burnt with everlasting fire. Hierome seems not to be so clear
in the other words for this, that some are punished after this life, and yet
saved; as he is in these words for this, that some shall be punished after the
day of judgment, so as thereby to cease from sin and iniquity (to be purged
from it) but not so as to perish for ever and to be burnt with everlasting
fire. Our adversaries therefore (so far as I can see) must relinquish
Hieromes testimony, who either says nothing at all for them, or more then they
would have. After Hierome is cited Gregory lib. 4. dial. cap. 39. It is true,
Gregory there says, that for some light faults we are to believe De quibusdam
levibus culpis esse ante judicium purgatorius ignis credendus est. Greg dial.
lib. 4 cap. 39.
that there is a Purgatory fire before the (last) judgment. But mark 1.
Gregory there immediately before cites many places of Scripture, as Ioh. 12.
35. Isai. 49. 8. with 2 Cor. 6. 2. Eccles. 9. 10. by which places he says it
is certain, that such as every one is when he goes out of this World, such
shall he Ex quibus nimirum sententiis constat, quia qualis hinc quisque
egreditur, talis in judicio praesentatur. Greg. Ibid.
be when he comes to Judgment. See then if these places of Scripture be not
more clear against Purgatory, then that which he after alleges, is for it.
He alleges that Mat. 12. where it is said, that he that sins against the
holy Ghost, shall not forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come. From whence he gathers, that some sins are forgiven in In qua sententia
datur intelligi, quasdam culpas in hoc seculo, quasda^ vero in futuro posse
laxari. Gregor. Ibid.
this World, and some in the World to come. But 1. how will this stand with
that which he said before? For if some sins not forgiven in this world, may
be forgiven in the world to come, how shall every one be found at the last
judgment such as he is when he dies? 2. The collection from that place of
Matthew, is not good. For those words, neither in this World, nor in the World
to come, import neither more nor less then never, as S. Mark expresses it,
He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness. Mark.
3. 29. Theophylact expounds it thus, he shall not be forgiven neither in this
World, nor in the World (...), etc. (...). Theophy. in Mat. 11.
to come, that is, he shall be punished both in this World, and in the World
to come. And so also (as Iansenius confesses) it is Jansen. concord. cap. 49.
expounded by Chrysostom. Some observe that neither in this World, nor in the
World to come, is a Hebraisme for never. Bellarmine says that this is false;
but he was not so conversant in the Jewish writings, as to be fit to give
sentence in this case. Drusius, who was better skilled in that kind, cites
Drus. Prove. class. 2. l. 3. prove. 24.
the Scholiast upon Ben Sira saying thus, They that are of an intemperate
tongue, cannot be cured, neither in this World, nor in the World to come.
Besides Iansenius says that this Conduplication, neither in this Hae
conduplicatione significatur, quod sicut non remittetur hoc peccatum in
praesenti seculo propter sui enormitatem: ita multo minus remittetur in futuro,
quod non est seculum gratiae, sicut praesens: Jansen, Concord. c. 49.
World, nor etc. does signify that as this sin shall not be forgiven in this
World, because of the enormity of it; so much less shall it be forgiven in the
World to come, which is not a time of Grace, as this present World is. If it be
not a time of grace, how then can sins be pardoned in that World, which here
were not pardoned? We grant, that sins may be said to be forgiven in the
World to come, yet only such sins as are forgiven in this World, the
forgiveness of which sins shall be declared and made manifest Sicut ergo
sententia fertur in morte uniuscuiusque, and tunc incipiunt aliqui puniri,
aliqui praemiari; and tamen dicuntur haec eadem fieri in novissimo judicio,
quia tunc fient coram toto mundo manifestissime, etc. ita and examen fieri
potest in morte uniuscujusque privatim, and iterum postea in ultimo judicio
public. Bell. de. Purg l. 1. c. 5.
in the day of judgment. Bellarmine himself says that every one is examined,
and receives his sentence when he dies, and then some begin to be punished,
and some to be rewarded: and yet nevertheless these things are said to be done
in the last Judgment, because then they shall be done most manifestly before
all the World, to the greater honor of the godly, and the greater shame of the
wicked. Even so though sins are forgiven in this World, or not at all, yet
they are said to be forgiven in the World to come, because in the last
judgment it shall be made manifest to all the World that they are forgiven. 3.
Gregory grants a Purgatory after this life only for some small and light
sins, as idle talking, immoderate laughing, etc. But they of the Church of
Rome do now hold, Sed tamen, ut praedixi, hoc de parvis minimisque peccatis
fieri posse credendum est, etc. Greg. ubi supra.

Peccata mortalia remittuntur in hoc seculo quoad culpam, and in alio interdum
quoad paenam. Bell. de Purg. l. 1. c. 4.

Quamvis hoc de igne tribulationis in hac nobis vita adhibito possit intelligi,
etc. Greg. loc. citat.


that mortal sins (as they call them) in respect of the punishment are
sometimes remitted not here in this World, but in the World to come. 4. Gregory
in that same place says that the fire which the Apostle speaks of 1 Cor. 3.
13, 15. may be understood of the fire of tribulation, which is endured in this
life. What do our adversaries now gain by Gregory? He takes away one
principal place, that they build upon for Purgatory: he alleges many places,
from which by his own confession so much is evinced as indeed cannot consist
with Purgatory: he builds upon a place, which both in the judgment of other
Fathers professedly commenting upon it, and also by diverse reasons appears to
make nothing for Purgatory: and concerning that Purgatory, which he does hold,
he comes short of the opinion of our adversaries; all which things considered,
they can get little by his testimony. The next and last Father objected against
us is Origin, whose testimony, if it were most clear for a Purgatory after
this life, yet it were of small force, he being censured (as I have showed
before) by Bellarmine as erroneous in this point, holding that there shall be a
Purgatory even after the day of judgment. Yet Bellarmine also thought good to
make use of his testimony, viz. this, He that is saved, is saved by fire; that
if perhaps he have any lead mixed with Qui salvus sit, per ignem salvus sit, ut
si quid forte de specie plumbi habuerit admixtum, id ignis decoquat, and
resolvat ut efficiantur omnes aurum putum. Orig. 6. hom. in Exodus 15.
him, the fire may melt and consume it, that so all may be made pure Gold. Thus
I confess, Origin writes in the place, which the Marquess cites. And so also
in the same Veniendum est ergo omnibus ad ignem, veniendum est ad conflatorium.
Orig. Ibid.
place he has these words, which though Bellarmine does not allege, yet some
have thought to make for Purgatory, and so they do as much as the other. All
must come to the fire, all must come to the Furnace. Where Interpretatur locum
Pauli 1 Cor. 3. de Purgatorio, quod conflatorium vocat. In marg.
in the margent it is noted (by Genebrard, I suppose, who was the overseer of
that Edition) that Origin speaks of Purgatory. But it may easily appear to
any that look into Sicut forna^ probat aurum, sic homines justos tentatio.
Orig. Ibid.

Non enim tantus erat, ac talis (Petrus) qui nihil omnino de specie plumbi in
se haberet admixtum. Habuit licet parum; propter quod dicit ad cum Dominus,
Modicae fidei, quare dubitasti? Idcirco igitur qui salvus sit, etc. Orig. Ibid.


Origin, that neither in these words, nor in the other before cited, Purgatory
is meant by that fire and furnace whith he speaks of, but affliction. As the
furnace (says he) does try Gold, so does affliction the righteous. And
speaking of Peter he says, He was not so great, nor such an one as that he had
no mixture of lead in him. He had some, though but a little; and therefore the
Lord said unto him, why did thou doubt, O thou of little faith? And then
immediately follow the words which Bellarmine alleges, and the Marquess (I
presume) aims at, Therefore he that is saved, is saved by fire, etc. What is
this to the Romish Purgatory? I am confident, they will not say, that Peter had
need of this Purgatory, yet he had of that which Origin speaks of, and so
all whosoever they be, it being affliction, by which here in this life even the
best are tried and also purified. And thus much for Purgatory; in the last
place comes extreme unction.

Lastly, (says the Marquess) We hold extreme Unction to be a Sacrament: you
neither hold it to be a Sacrament, neither do you Page 73.
practice it as a duty. We have Scripture for it; Jam. 5. 14. Is any sick among
you, let him call for the Elders of the Church; and let them pray over him,
anointing him in the Name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the
sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him. Neither any, nor all the Sacraments were, or could be
more effectual to men's good, nor more substantial in matter, nor more
exquisite in form, nor more punctual in the designation of its Ministry:
other Sacraments being bounded within the limits of the souls only good; this
extends it self to the good both of soul and body. He shall recover from his
sickness, and his sins shall be forgiven him. And yet it is both left out in
your practice, and acknowledgement. The Fathers are on our side; Orig. hom. 2.
in Levit. Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerd. Aug. in Speculo, and Ser. 215. de temp.
Vener. Bed. in 6. Mir. and S. James; and many others.

As for extreme Unction, as they call it, that is, the anointing Answ.
of the sick with oil, as the manner is in the Church of Rome, Protestants do
not acknowledge it to be either a Sacrament, or a duty, because they see no
ground in Scripture either for the one, or for the other. The Scripture indeed
in two places, viz. that which the Marquess cites, and Mar. 6. 13. does speak
of anointing the sick with oil: But that anointing was extraordinary, peculiar
to those times, when there was, as other extraordinary gifts bestowed upon men,
so, the gift of healing, which is mentioned, Mat. 10. 1, 8. and 1 Cor. 12. 9,
30. in which places of Scripture this gift is ranked with casting out devils,
speaking with strange tongues, and working of miracles. And so Mark 6. 13. It
is said of the Apostles, They cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many
that were sick, and healed them. It is plain, that this anointing with oil was
of like nature with casting out of devils, that is, that it was a miraculous
cure wrought by the Apostles. And that in Saint James was of the same kind
with this in Saint Mark, as I shall show anon. But now the gift of healing in
that manner being ceased, we say that the ceremony is to cease also, and not to
be used. The Marquess insisteth much upon the words of Saint James, as being
very clear and full to prove both that this anointing is a duty, and also that
it is a Sacrament. And so the Romanists must hold, because the Council of
Trent has determined, that the holy anointing of the sick was instituted by
Christ Instituta est sacra haec unctio infirmorum, tanquam vere, and proprie
Sacramentum N. T. a Christo D. N. apud Marc. quidem insinuatum, per Jacob.
autem Apost. ac Domini fratrem fidelibus commendatum, ac promulgatum. Council.
Trid. Cess. 14. de instit. extr. Unct. cap. 1.
our Lord, as a Sacrament of the new Testament truly and properly so called;
and that this Sacrament is insinuated in Mark, but commended to the faithful,
and promulgated by James the Apostle, and the Lords brother. And whosoever
shall gain say this, the Council does Ibid. de extr. Unct. can. 1.
pronounce them accursed. But there being two places of Scripture, which
mention this anointing with oil, it may seem strange that the Marquess should
allege only the one, and wholly wave the other: we shall see (I hope) by and
by that this is as much as to quit both places, they being both to one and the
same purpose. The Council of Trent (we see) thought good to make use of both,
yet so as to lay the more weight upon that in James, saying only that the
Sacrament of anointing is insinuated in the other. And so Bellarmine does Bell.
de extr. Unct lib. 1. cap. 2.
mainly build upon the words of James, yet so as that he will have the words of
Saint Mark to contain in them a figure and adumbration of this Sacrament, which
they call extreme Unction. Let us take what they grant, viz. that the anointing
mentioned Mar. 6. was not properly sacramental. So much the Marquess tacitly
does acknowledge, and Bellarmine expressly, citing for Bell. Ibid.
this opinion Ruardus, Iansenius, Dominicus a Soto, and others, yea confirming
it by diverse arguments. 1. Because that anointing, which the Apostles used,
was referred only or chiefly to the cure of the body, as is manifest by the
words of Saint Mark; but Sacraments directly concern the soul, and the body
only by accident. 2. The Apostles as then were not Priests; and therefore could
not administer Sacraments. Though they did baptize, yet (he says) that is
nothing, because it is not so of the essence of Baptism, as it is of extreme
Unction, that he should be a Priest that does administer it. 3. The Apostles
did promiscuously anoint all that were diseased, the blind, and the lame, etc.
but the Sacrament of Unction (they hold) is only for those that lie sick, and
are like to die. 4. The Apostles did not enquire whether they whom they did
anoint were baptized, or no, and it is altogether probable, that many were
anointed by them, that were mere infidels. But neither extreme unction, nor any
other Sacrament, (they say) belongs unto those that are not baptized. By these
reasons Bellarmine proves that the anointing, which we read of Mar. 6. was not
the Sacrament of extreme Unction. Now if this Sacrament be not meant in Mar. 6.
neither is it in Iam 5. For by the testimony both of ancient writers, and also
of modern Romanists, the anointing which Saint James speaks of, is the same
with that which Saint Mark mentions. Beda upon the words of Saint Hoc and
Apostolos fecisse in Evangelio legimus. Bed. ad illud Iac. 5. Ungentes eum,
etc. (...), etc. Theophyl. ad Mar. 6. Ita etiam Occumenius ad Iac. 5.

Quod sit eadem (Unctio) apparet ex Theophylacto and Beda, qui testantur hanc
unctionem talem fuisse, qualis est ea, cujus meminit Jacob. in epist. sua. --
Ex quibus patet, hos sensisse Unctionem, cujus hic fit mentio, eandem fuisse
cum ea, cujus meminit Iacobus. Iansen. ad loc. Mar. in Concord. cap. 55.


James, anointing him with oil, etc. does parallel that place with the other,
Mar. 6. saying, We read in the Gospel, that thus did the Apostles. Thus also
Theophylact upon the words of Saint Mark says, That the Apostles anointed with
oil, only Mark does relate; which also James the Lords brother does say, Is
any among you sick, let him, etc. Iansenius confesses that these Authors,
Beda and Theophylact, do testify that the anointing spoken of Mar. 6. is such
as Saint James does mention in his Epistle, and this he says is evident by
their words, which he cites. Bellarmine does attribute this opinion (viz. that
the same anointing is meant both Mar. 6. and Jam. 5. to Waldensis, and
Alphonsus de Castro, two late writers (though one of them was a good while
before Luther) both very Alphons. advers. hoeres. de extr. Unct.
zealous in defense of the Church of Rome; yet I confess, that in Alphonsus
where he speaks of extreme Unction, I do not find Mar. 6. mentioned. Maldonate
upon Mar. Vellem hoc loco soli mihi essent haeretici refellendi, liberius in
solos incurrerem. Nunc autem nonnullos ex nostris auctoribus in haereticorum
castris recognoscens timeo, ne dum in haereticos tela conjicio, aliquem forte
Catholicum feriam. Mitto illos paulo vetustiores, etc. Quid attinebat vigente
nunc Lutheranorum and Calviniansrum haeresi Catholicos doctosque viros dicere,
scriptisque mandare, oleum illud ab Apostolis non tanquam Sacramentum ad
sanandos animos, sed tanquam medicamentum ad curanda corpora, adhibitum fuisse,
neque hic de Sacramento, quo nunc Catholica utitur Ecclesia, extremae Unctionis
agi? ergo Sacramentum est, si hic non est? Maldon. ad Mar. 6.
6. is most vehement for this, that the same anointing is spoken of there, and
Jam. 5. and takes it very ill that any of their Authors should hold otherwise,
and should say, and write, that the anointing which the Apostles used, was not
sacramental for the healing of the soul, but rather medicinal for the curing
of the body, and that the Sacrament of extreme Unction, is not treated of in
Mar. 6. Where then (says he) is this Sacrament, if it be not here? Very good;
-- Ubi yet Bellarmine by unanswerable reasons has proved that no such
Sacrament is here, viz. Mar. 6. and therefore by Maldonates own inference it is
no where, viz. in no place of Scripture to be found. Maldonate objecteth, that
the anointing Mar. 6. could not be medicinal, because it Si medicamentum
tantum erat, cur ad omne morborum genus adhibebatur? -- Deinde quorsum Apostoli
medicamentis usi fuissent? Non enim medicinam sed Evangelium profitebantur,
etc. Ibid.

Illud certum, quod oleum hoc non naturaliter sanabat aegrotos, nec adhibebatur
ab Apostolis veluti natural pharmacum. Nam quomodo eodem pharmaco quis mederi
possit omnibus morbis? Sed ex Domini institutione Unctionem hanc sequebatur
sanitas, etc. Iausen. Concord. cap. 55.


was used for the healing of all diseases; and because the Apostles were not to
use medicines, seeing it was not Physic, but the Gospel, which they professed.
But this is of no force; for they whom Maldonate opposes, acknowledge that the
oil, which the Apostles anointed with, did not naturally cure the diseased,
nor was used as a natural medicine; and they prove it by Maldonates own
argument, because naturally one medicine cannot cure all diseases. But they
say, that by Christ's institution upon this anointing with oil, the sick were
healed. Maldonate would take away this answer, saying, Quid ejusmodi opus erat
signo, quum secura statim sanitas fidem faceret? quam poterat quidem oleum non
augere, sed abrogare, etc. Maldon. loc. cit.
that there was no need of any sign, seeing that the cure which was wrought
would work belief; and that the using of oil, would rather hinder faith; for
that thereby people might think that the cure was wrought by the natural
virtue of the oil, and not by divine power. But the reason, which himself
alleges, would hold off people from any such conceit, viz. because they might
see that all manner of diseases were healed with one and the same oil, and
that therefore it could not be by the natural virtue of it. Besides, that
immediately upon the anointing with oil, the sick were healed, whereas
naturally some time would have been spent before the cure was wrought; Yet was
not the anointing with oil superfluous, no more then the laying on of hands,
which was used both for the healing of the sick, Mar. 16. 18. and also for the
giving of the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 17. though naturally that ceremony had as
little virtue in that kind as the other. Thus then whiles some of our
adversaries say, that extreme Unction is not that which Saint Mark treats of;
and others of them say, that Saint Mark, and Saint James do both speak of one
and the same Unction, and that if extreme Unction be not spoken of Mark. 6. we
know not where to find it in the Scripture; betwixt them both we may safely
conclude, that this Sacrament of theirs has no firm foundation. But because
the Marquess only, and others mainly build upon the words of S. James, this
is to be added, that Cardinal Cajetane in his Commentary upon James does not
only Nec ex verbis, nec ex effectu verba haec loquuntur de Sacramentali
Unctione extremae Unctionis; sed magis de unctione, quam Dominus Jesus
instituit in Evangelio, a discipulis exercendam in aegrotis. Textus enim non
dicit, infirmatur quis ad mortem, sed absolute, infirmatur quis? Et effectum
dicit infirmi alleviationem: and de remissione peccatorum non nisi
conditionaliter loquitur: quum extrema unctio non nisi prope articulum mortis
detur, and direct (ut ejus forma sonat) tendit ad remissionem peccatorum.
Praeter hoc quod Jacobus ad unum aegrum multos Presbyteros tum orantes, tum
ungentes, mandat vocari, quod ab extremae Unctionis ritu alienum est Cajet in
Jac. 5.
parallel him with Mark, but also does both say and prove that he does not
speak of the Sacrament of extreme unction. Because 1. The Text does not say,
Is any sick unto death? but absolutely, Is any sick? whereas extreme unction,
as they use it in the Church of Rome, is only for those of whose life there is
no hope. 2. The effect of S. James his anointing is the raising up (the bodily
amendment) of the sick; neither is any thing spoken but conditionally of the
forgiveness of sins. Whereas extreme unction (as the form of it does show)
tends directly to the remission of sins. 3. James bids send for many Elders
to one sick person, both to pray for him, and to anoint him, which is different
from the manner of extreme unction. Thus we see how many of our adversaries by
consequence, and some of them directly grant, that there is nothing in the
Scripture for that extreme Unction, which they use, and maintain to be a
Sacrament.

Now for the humane testimonies, which the Marquess alleges, the first is
Origens, who in the place mentioned has nothing to the purpose. He Cum non
erubescit sacerdoti Domini indicare peccatum suum, and quaerere medicinam, etc.
In quo impletur and illud, quod Apost. dicit, Si quis autem infirmatur, Orig.
Hom. 2. in Levit.
cites indeed the words of S. James, which speak of anointing with Oil, but
it is not in respect of Unction, but in respect of Confession of sin that he
does cite-them. After him is cited Austine in Speculo; but there being 33.
Chapters of that Book, which of them is meant, we cannot tell. Neither is it
much worth the inquiry; for Erasmus shows that Book to be none of Austines,
in that the Author inserts some verses out of Boethius, who was long after
Austine; Besides other reasons, which he gives; yet Bellarmine asserting
Austine to Bell. de Scriptor. Eccles.
be the Author of the Book, takes no notice of the reasons alleged against
it, though he confess that some do doubt of it. In the other place of
Austine, which is pointed at, I find indeed, that he does Infirmatur aliquis,
inducat presbyteros, etc. Videte, fratres, quia qui in infirmitate ad Ecclesiam
cucurrerit, and corporis sanitatem recipere, and peccatorum indulgentiam
merebitur obtinere. Cum ergo duplicia bona possint in Ecclesia inveniri, quare
per praecantatores, per fontes, and arbores, and diabolica phylacteria, per
characteres, and aruspices, and Divinos, vel fortilegos multiplicia sibi mala
miseri homines conantur infer? Aug. Ser, 215. de temp.
cite the words of S. James, but yet so as that our adversaries gain little by
it. For he refers those words of anointing with Oil, etc. unto bodily
health; and so inveigheth against those that by Charms, and Spells, and the
like superstitious and ungodly practices bring upon themselves manifold
miseries. Now bodily health is a thing, which the Romanists have no respect
unto in their Unction, but use it directly for the good of the Soul, even as
they do Baptism, and the Lords Supper. And this also takes off the testimony
of Chrysostom, who showing what benefit people have by Ministers, or (as he
calls them) Priests, Parents ne corporalem quidem interitum a liberis amoliri
possunt, neque ingruentem morbum propulsare; cum hi (sacerdotes) laborantem, ac
morti jam jam propinquam animam identidem servarint, aliis remissiorem paenam
infligentes, alios prorsus labi non permittentes, non Doctrinae solum, atque
commonitionis, sed etiam precum subsidio. Chrysostom. l. 3. de sacerd.
says that Parents cannot prevent so much as the bodily destruction of their
children, nor keep off a Disease when it seizes on them; but these do often
preserve people alive, when they are even ready to die; and sometimes mitigate
their pain; and sometimes keep them from being ill at all, not only by the
help of their Doctrine, and admonition, but also of their prayers. And then
he cites that Iam. 5. Is any sick among you? Let him send for the Elders, etc.
All this is nothing to the Romish Unction; for besides that Chrysostom does
not at all speak of Priests anointing, but of their teaching, admonishing, and
praying, and in this respect does bring in the words of S. James; besides this,
I say, it is directly a corporal benefit, which he insisteth on, as freedom
from sickness, mitigation of pain, deliverance from Death; and therefore that
which he says, makes nothing for extreme Unction, which they of the Church of
Rome say, was instituted of God to this end, that we departing out of this
mortal life, may have a more ready way to Heaven. Ut ex hac mortali vita
decedentes, expeditiorem ad caelum viam haberemus, extremae Unctionis
Sacramentum (Deus) instituit. Catechis. Trident. Sacramentum exeuntium. Ibid.
And therefore they call it the Sacrament of such as go out of this World.
What is this Sacrament then concerned in the words of Chrysostom, who speaks
only of preserving life and health here in this World? In the last place
Venerable Bede is alleged. But 1. He is against them in this (as I have
showed before) that he makes Mark and James to speak both of one and the same
thing; whereas diverse of them both say and prove, that Plurimorum se
adjutorio, and hoc seniorum curare meminerit, neque ad juniores minusque doctos
causam suae imbecillitatis referat, etc. Bed. in Jac. 5.
Mark does not speak of Sacramental Unction. 2. By Elders Bid understands
Elders in respect of age. And he says expressly, and alleges also Pope
Innocentius Nec solum Presbyteris, sed ut Innocentius Papa seribit, etiam
omnibus Christianis uti licet eodem oleo in sua and suorum necessitate ungendo.
Bed. Ibid.
for it, that not only Presbyters, but also all Christians may use this Oil
and anoint with it, when either they, or any belonging unto them have need.
Which is enough to prove that he does not make this Unction a Sacrament, as
they of the Church Ut Minister sit sacerdos, est de essentia Unctionis -- Non
est rata Unctio, si laicus inungat, Bell. de Extr. unct. l. 1. c. 2.
of Rome do. For (says Bellarmine) it is of the essence of the Sacrament of
extreme Unction, that the Minister of it be a Priest: and if a lay man do
anoint any, it is of no force. Si quis dixerit proprium extremae Unctionis
ministrum non esse solum sacerdotem, anathema sit. Council. Trident. sess. 14.
can. 4. de extrem. unct.
Yea the Council of Trent says, If any one shall say, that not only a Priest
is the proper Minister of extreme Unction, let him be anathema. What do they
say to Bid then, and to Innocentius whom Bid cites? They answer, that
Innocentius and Bid speak Bellar. de Extr. Vnct. l. 1. c. 9. Jan. Coneord.
cap. 55.
not of him that is to administer the Unction, but of him that is to receive
it. But this is a very violent and forced interpretation, and such as Bedes
words will not admit. For he having said, It is the custom of the Church,
that they that are weak should be anointed by Presbyters with Ecclesiae
consuetudo tenet, ut infirmi oleo consecrato ungantur a Presbyteris, and
oratione comitante sanentur, Nec solum Presbyteris, etc. Bed. Ioc. cit.
consecrated Oil, and by Prayer accompanying it be made whole: immediately
after he adds, Neither only Presbyters, but also (as Pope Innocentius writes)
all Christians may use this Oil by anointing with it either in their own, or
in their friends necessity. It is manifest, that Bid here speaks of
Christians using the Oil not so as to be anointed, but so as to anoint with
it, and that both themselves and others, as they saw cause. 3. Bid also (as
appears by his words even now cited) makes this anointing with Oil, which (he
says) the Church did use in his time, to have reference to the body, and the
health of it; neither does he speak any thing of any spiritual effect, that it
should have upon the soul. And thus also it appears, that he does not speak
of the Sacrament of extreme Unction. Olim haec unctio non, ut hodie fere fit,
ad extremum usque vitae periculum, and valetudinem jam deploratam differebatur,
sed graviore aliquo morbo invadentehujusmodi orationes, and unctiones per
septem aliqua^do dies continuabantur. Ide^ illud veteribus in more suit, ut
post officium unctionis, si periculum imminebat, corporis and sanguinis
Dominici communicatio, quae (...) and perfectio omnium Sacramentorum habebatur,
subjiceretur; a quo veteti more licet nonnihil hodie variatum sit, etc.
Cassand. consult. artic. 22. Servanda est Ecclesiae Catholicae perpetua
consuetudo, ut ante extremam unctionem, Paenitentiae and Eucharistiae
Sacramentum administretur. Catechis. Trident. de extrem. unct.
Cassander also confesses, that in the Church of Rome they have now departed
from antiquity. 1. In this, that in more ancient times they did not use (as now
they do) to defer this anointing, until life were even in extreme danger, and
there was no hope of recovery. 2. In this, that anciently they used after this
anointing, if there were danger, to receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body and
Blood; whereas now they have no such custom. Yea, the Carechisme of the
Council of Trent says, that before extreme Unction, the Sacrament of Penance
and of the Eucharist is to be administered; and that this is the perpetual
custom of the Catholic Church; which is directly contrary to that which
Cassander affirms. But this (I hope) may be enough to show that the Romish
Sacrament of extreme Unction has no support either from the Scriptures, or
from the ancient Fathers.

The Marquess having waded thorough all the forementioned parts of
controversy, and (as he supposes) proved the Scriptures to be on their side,
now sings as it were an Epinicion, or a song of victory, saying, Thus, most
sacred Sir, we have no reason to Page 154.
wave the Scriptures Umpirage; so that you will hear it speak in the Mother
language, etc.

But how little the Scriptures Umpirage does favor them Answ.
of the Church of Rome, let the Reader judge by what has been said on both
sides, the Scripture being understood in that sense, which it self does make
out, and to which also the ancient Fathers and Doctors have subscribed, which
(I suppose) the Marquess does mean by the Scriptures Mother-language. As for
the Church of Rome, it has long showed it self the Scriptures stepmother,
keeping it shut up in an unknown tongue, or not permitting Christians the
liberty to make use of it, excepting such as can obtain a special dispensation
for it; yea in many things going directly contrary to the Scripture, and even
in a manner casting off the authority of it. Here presently after the Marquess
brings in the saying of Austine, Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae
authoritas commoveret, I should not believe the Gospel it self, unless I were
moved by the authority of the Church; as if, were it not for the authority of
the Church, the Scripture were of no force, neither could deserve any credit.
So the Romanists do frequently pervert those words of Austine; but Austines
meaning was only this, that the Churches authority by way of introduction was a
means to bring him to believe the Gospel, by propounding and commending the
Gospel unto him, as a thing to be believed, whereas otherwise he should not
have given heed to it, nor taken notice of it; not as if he did finally rest in
the authority of the Church, and resolve his faith into it. No; for (as I have
showed before) he would have the Church it self sought in the Scripture, and
proved by it. Had not the woman of Samaria told those, among whom she lived, of
Christ, they had not come to the knowledge of him, much less to believe in
him; yet having heard Christ himself, they did not rest in the testimony of
the woman, but said unto her, Now we believe not because of thy saying; for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, and the
Savior of the world. Joh. 4. 42. So should not the Church hold out unto us the
Scriptures, we should not know, much less believe them; but at length (God by
his Spirit opening our understandings that we may understand the Scriptures,
Luke 24. 45.) we come to be convinced by the Scriptures themselves, that they
are the Oracles of God, and of divine authority. Melchior Canus, a learned
Writer of the Church of Rome, holds that the formal reason of our faith is not
the authority of Cui and tertium subjiciendum est, rationem formalem nostrae
fidei non esse Ecclesiae auctoritatem, h. e. fidei ultiman resolutionem non
fieri in Ecclesiae testimonium. -- Eorum hic errorem dissimulare non possum,
qui asserunt, fidem nostram eo, tanquam in ultimam credendi causam, reducendam
esse. -- Huc enim pertinet illud Ioannis 4. Jam non propter tuam loquelam
credimus: Ipsi enim audivimus, and scimus, etc. Mel. Can. locor. Theol. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Non est enim Ecclesiae auctoritas ratio per se movens ad credendum, sed
causa fine qua non crederemus. Can. Ibid. Proponit enim Ecclesia, ut rem
exempli causa illustremus, Evangelium Matthaei esse a Deo revelatum, etc. Ego
igitur non credo Evangelistam dicere verum, quia Ecclesia eum dicit verum
dicere, sed quia Deus revelavit. Et tamen Ecclesia proponens est causa sine qua
ego non admitterem illud Evangelium esse Matthaei. Ibid. Nec si nobis aditum
praebet ad hujusmodi sacros libros cognoscendos, protinus ibi acquiescendum
est; sed ultra oportet progredi, and solida Dei veritate niti. Qua ex re
intelligitur quid sibi voluerit Aug. cum ait, Evangelio non crederem, nisi me
moveret Ecclesiae authoritas. Et rursum, per Catholicos Evangelio credideram.
Videlicet negotium Augustino erat cum Manichaeis, qui absque controversia suo
cuidam Evangelio credi volebant, and Mani^baeorum fidem astruere. Rogat igitu
Aug. ecquid facturi sint, si in hominem incidant, qui ne-Evangelio quidem
credat, quove genere persuasionis sint eum in suam sententiam adducturi. Certe
se affirmat non aliter potuisse adduci, ut Evangelium amplecteretur, quam
Ecclesiae auctoritate victum. Non it a que docet fundatam esse Evangelii sidem
in Ecclesiae auctoritate, verum simplicitet nullam esse certam viam, qua sive
infideles, sive in fide novitii, ad sacros libros ingrediantur, nisi Ecclesiae
Catholicae unum eundemque consensum. Id quod ejusdem Epistolae cap. 4 and in
lib. de utii. creder. di ad Honorat. satis ipse explicavit. Can. Ibid.
the Church, that is, that the last resolution of our faith is not into the
Churches testimony. And he says, that he could not dissemble their error, who
hold that our faith is to be reduced thither, as to the utmost cause of
believing. For the confuting of this error, he says belongs that Ioh. 4. Now
we believe not because of thy saying, for we our selves have heard him, and
know, etc. The same author averres, that the authority of the Church is not a
reason by it self moving to believe, but only a cause (or means) without
which we should not believe, viz. Because (as he adds) the Church does
propound unto us that the Scripture is the word of God, and except the Church
did so propound it, we should never (ordinarily) come to believe it; yet we do
not therefore believe the Scripture to be Gods word, because the Church does
say it, but because God does reveal it. If the Church (says he) does make way
for us to know such sacred books, we must not therefore rest there, but we must
go further, and must rely on Gods solid truth. And then he brings in that
very speech of Austine, and shows what he meant by it. Hereby is understood
(says he) what Austine meant, when he said, I should not believe the Gospel,
except the authority of the Church did move me. And again, By the Catholics I
had believed the Gospel. For Austine had to do with the Manichees, who
without dispute would have a certain Gospel of theirs believed, and so would
establish the faith of the Manichees. Austine therefore asks them what they
would do, if they did light upon a man, who did not believe so much as the
Gospel; what kind of persuasion they would use to bring him to their opinion.
He affirms, that himself could not be otherwise brought to embrace the
Gospel, but that the authority of the Church did overcome him. He does not
therefore teach, that the faith of the Gospel is grounded upon the Churches
authority, but only that there is no certain way, whereby either infidels, or
novices in the faith, may have entrance to the holy books, but one and the same
consent of the Catholic Church. This he himself has sufficiently explicated
in the fourth Chapter of that Epistle, and in his book to Honoratus concerning
the benefit of believing. I have thus largely cited the words of this learned
Romanist, because no Protestant can speak more clearly, and more fully to the
purpose. That which the Marquess after adds, is nothing against us, viz.
That there was a Church, before there was any Scripture; that though the
Scripture be a light, yet we have need of some to guide us; though it be the
food of our souls, yet there must be some to administer it unto us; though it
be an antidote against the infection of the devil, yet it is not for every one
to be a compounder of the ingredients; that though it be the only sword and
buckler to defend the Church from her Ghostly enemies, yet this does not
exclude the noble army of Martyrs, and the holy Church, which through all the
world does acknowledge Christ. All this, I say, is nothing at all against us,
who do so assert the authority of the Scripture, as that we do not evacuate
the Churches ministry. Timothy must preach; but it is the word (viz. of God
contained in the Scriptures) which he must preach. 2 Timothy 4. 2. If any man
speak (for the instructing of others) he must speak as the Oracles of God. 1
Pet. 4. 11. He must confirm that, which he does speak, by the Scriptures. And
so on the other side they that hear, must take heed how, and what they hear.
Luke 8. 18. Mark 4. 24. They must not believe every Spirit, but must try the
Spirits, whether they be of God. 1 John 4. 1. They must to the Law, and to the
Testimony; for that if any speak not according to this word, it is because they
have no light in them. Isai 8. 20. They must search the Scriptures diligently,
to see whether the things delivered unto them be so, or no. Acts 17. 11.

OF THE CHVRCH of ENGLAND. THE SECOND PART OF THE Rejoinder to the Marquess of
WORCESTER'S Reply to His late MAJESTY'S Answer to the said Marquesse's Plea
for the ROMISH RELIGION.
THE Marquess says, that he will now Page 75.
consider the Opinions of Protestants apart from them of the Church of Rome,
and begin with the Church of England. The Religion of this Church, he says, as
it is in opposition to theirs, consists wholly in denying, (for that what she
affirms, they affirm the same) as, the Real presence, the Infallibility,
Visibility, Universality, and Unity of the Church, Confession and Remission of
sins, Free Will, Possibility of keeping the Commandments, etc. And you may as
well (says he) deny the blessed Trinity (for we have no such word in
Scripture, only inference) as that which you have already denied, for which we
have plain Scripture, etc.

But, 1. it is not altogether so, that what the Church of England does affirm,
the same they of the Church of Rome Answ.
do affirm also. For the Church of England, Art 9. does affirm (alleging the
authority of the Apostle for proof thereof) that Concupiscence has of it self
the nature of sin even in the regenerate, which the Romanists deny; the
Council of Trent accurseth Si quis per Jesu Christi D. N. gratiam, quae in
baptismate confertur, reatum originalis peccati remitti negat; aut etiam
asserit non tolli totum id, quod veram and propriam peccati rationem habet, sed
illud dicit radi tantum, aut non imputari; anathema sit, etc. Council. Trident.
de orig. peccat.
those that hold this doctrine. 2. In what sense we deny the Real presence, and
the other particulars here mentined, I have showed before; as also what little
cause they have to boast, that either Scripture or Fathers do make for those
assertions of theirs wherein we dissent from them.

That which the Marquess after adds of a Woman's being Page 75.
head, supreme, or moderatrix in the Church, I have likewise spoken to
sufficiently before.

That a Layman should excommunicate, and that upon every ordinary occasion, as
non-payment of Fees, and the like, for which the Marquess taxes this Church,
I am content that it pass among the Errata's of our Church, as he was pleased
to speak (though without cause) concerning some passages in the Fathers, as I
have noted before. It is our Doctrine, and not our Discipline, that I endeavor
to defend.

After the Church of England, the Marquess comes to Page 76.
the Church of Saxony, and so passes to the Church of Geneva, as he
pretends; but yet indeed he speaks only of two particular persons relating
to those Churches, viz. Luther and Calvin, as if whatsoever were held by them,
were to be imputed to those Churches to which they did relate: which surely is
not fair dealing; much less, that all Protestants should stand charged with
all their sayings, were they indeed such as the misconstruction of adversaries
would make them. We honor these, and many more, as men eminently active in
that great work of reforming the Church; yet do we not ascribe an infallibility
unto them, as the Romanists do unto their Popes: We do not say of them, as
Bellarmine Bell. de Pontif, lib. 4. cap. 5.
does of the Pope, that if they should command vices, and forbid virtues, we
were bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evil. No, we know the
Apostle bids us prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
21.

But let us see what it is that the Marquess does say, and Of Luther's
Doctrine.
first of Luther.

1. He charge Luther as saying of the book of Ecclesiastes, Page 76.
That it has never a perfect sentence in it, and that the Author Obj.
thereof had neither boots nor spurs, but rid upon a long stick, or in begging
shoes, as he did when he was a Friar.

The places which the Marquess cites for proof of this, Answ.
I cannot examine, they not being in Luthers Works, of that Edition at least,
which I have liberty to peruse. But therein I find that Luther does comment
upon the book of Ecclesiastes, and does speak after a far other manner of it,
saying, that it is a Book Is liber multis nominibus dignus, qui omnium manibus
tereretur, ac quibusvis, tum vel maxim reipublicae procuratoribus notissimus
esset. Luth. tom. 4. praesat. in Eccles.
worthy that all should be much versed in it; and that all, and especially
Magistrates, should be well acquainted with it.

2. He taxes Luther for saying of the book of Job, That Obj.
the argument thereof is a mere fiction, invented only for the setting down of
a true and lively example of patience.

If Luther did say thus (which is more also then I can find) Answ.
though I am far from being of his mind; for I suppose, that if there had not
indeed been such a man as Job in the history of him is described, the Prophet
Ezekiel, and S. James would not have mentioned him as they do, Ezekiel. 14. 14,
20. Jam. 5. 11. Yet that most famous Doctor amongst the Jews, Moses
Maimonides, Nosti quosdam esse, qui dicunt, Jobum nunquam fuisse, neque creatum
esse; sed historiam illius nihil aliud esse quam parabolam: quae incertitudo
(temporis in quo vixit Job) sententiam illorum confirmat, qui dicunt illum nec
fuisse, nec creatum esse. Maimon. More Neb. par. 3. cap. 22.
shows that some were of this opinion, that there never was such a man as Job,
and that the history of him is but a parable. And this opinion himself inclines
unto, though (I confess) his reason is of small force, viz. because they that
hold otherwise, cannot agree about the time in which Job lived.

3. Luther (as is alleged against him) says, That it is a Obj.
false opinion, and to be abolished, that there are four Gospels; and that the
Gospel of S. John is only true.

Neither can I find any such thing as this in Luther, that Answ.
the Gospels written by the other three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
are not as true as that written by John. But I find that which does
sufficiently evince the contrary, viz. that Luther in the fifth volume of his
Works, has Annotations upon the first seventeen Chapters of St. Matthews
Gospel; and that in his Notes upon the first Chapter, he diverse times calls
both Matthew and Luke Evangelists, or publishers of the Gospel.

4. Luther (as the Marquess alleges) says of the Obj.
Epistle of S. James, That it is contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and
unworthy an Apostolical spirit.

Thus also diverse other Romanists have charged Luther, Answ.
as Campian, Duraeus, Breerley, and Silvester Petrasancta; yet the Camp. rat.
1. Dur. contra VVhil. Breer. Apol. Eilv. contra I^pi. Molin.
words which they mention are not to be found in Luthers works. But (say the
Romanists) they were in them, though afterward they were left out. I answer,
Then, it seems if there were any such words, they were not approved. Duraeus
confesses Tibi vero Whitakere ignosco, qui exemplaria Wittembergae tantum, vel
Argentorati excusa legeris. Nam si quae Jenae olim edita fuerunt, vidisses, and
c. Dur. contra whitak. fol. 8.
that those words are not in Luthers works set forth either at Wittemberge, or
at Strasburge, but only in those set forth at Jena; which argues that if there
were any such words, they found but little approbation. Mr. Breerley says,
that the later And concerning the Epistle of St. James, Luther, not in the
latter editions of Wittemberge corrupted by the Zuinglians, and others, etc.
Breerl. Apol. Tract. 2. chapter 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 2.
Editions of Luthers works at Wittemberge were corrupted by the Zuinglians and
others. But surely if Luthers Works were corrupted, and that in the Editions of
Wittemberge, it must be by others, and not by the Zuinglians. For is it likely,
that the Zuinglians, who were such adversaries unto Luther, that Mr. Breerly,
and after him the Marquess does frequently allege them against Luther, is it
likely (I say) that they should corrupt Luthers Works in that kind, so as
indeed to purge them from that which was amiss in them? And if they would do
Luther this favor, yet how should they do it at Wittemberge, where (I suppose)
not the Zuinglians, but the Lutherans did bear sway, and would have the chief
hand in setting forth Luthers Works in that place? And for that first Edition
of Luthers Works at Jena, though (it seems) Luther did speak less honorably of
St. James his Epistle, as I confess Atque inde etiam facile discitur,
Epistolam Jacobi nomine inscriptam, haudquaquam Apostolicam esse Epistolam.
Nullum enim prope elementum in ea de his rebus legis. Luth. tom. 5. in 1. Pet.
1.

Sane in prima Bibliorum Germanicorum Editione in Praesat. Epist. Jacobi
scribit, came non posse dignitate certare cum Epistolis Petri and Pauli, sed
Epistolam stramineam esse, si cum illis comparetur. Sed 1. Nuspiam vocat
contentiosam, tumidam, aridam. 2. Aliud est loqui (...), aliud (...). 3. In
posterio^ibus Bibliorum Editionibus verba illa sunt omissa. Post annum 1526. in
nulla Bibliorum Editione straminea a Luthero vocatur. 4. Contrarium potius in
posterioribus illis Editionibus habetur, videl. quod eam quamvis a veteribus
rejecta, tamen laudet, ac pro utili ac commoda habebat. Gerh. de S. Scrip.
sect. 279.


I find him to speak elsewhere in his Works, yet not so basely as his
adversaries of Rome do charge him. Gerhard, a great Lutheran, says that Luther
indeed in his Preface to S. James his Epistle, in the first Edition of the
German Bible, did say that this Epistle is not of like worth with the Epistles
of Paul and Peter, and that it is strawie, if it be compared with those
Epistles. But that he no where terms it contentious, swelling, dry; nor yet
simply, but only comparatively strawie. And that after the year 1526. in no
Edition of Luthers Works it is so called, but the contrary rather is to be
found, to wit, that Luther did commend this Epistle (though some of the
Ancients did reject it) and account it good and profitable. It seems then, that
Luther himself did retract that, which he had written concerning the Epistle
of S. James, his censure of it having been too bad, though yet not so bad as
the Romanists would make it: And although this does not justify Eusebius. hist.
l. 2. c. 23. and l. 3. c. 22.

Hieron. in Cata. Scriptor. Ecclesiastic.

Cajet. in Jac. 1. 1. and in Heb. 1. Whit. contra Camp.


Luther (as I do not desire to defend him, or any man in that wherein he is to
be condemned) yet it might make his opposers the more mild, that Eusebius and
Hierome of old do show, that the authority of this Epistle was some while
doubted of; and Cardinal Cajetane, Luthers contemporarie, did somewhat scruple
at it; and so did he also argue against the authority of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Some also say, that Erasmus censures this Epistle of James, as not
savouring of Apostolical Ve^um supervacuum arbitror anxie de autore digladiari;
rem potius amplectamur, and Spiritum S. autorem exosculemur. Eras. in Jac. 1. 1.
authority. But in that Edition which I have of Erasmus his notes upon the New
Testament, I find no such censure, but that he would not have us contend about
the Whether it were the Apostle James, or some other.
Author, but to i^ brace the matter, acknowledging the Holy Ghost to be the
Author of it. This advice is worthy to be followed by Protestants as well as
Papists.

5. Luther is taxed for saying, That Moses in his writings Obj.
shows unpleasant, stopped and angry lips, in which the word of grace is not,
but of wrath, death and sin. And that he calls him a Gapler, executioner,
and a cruel Sergeant.

This does Mr. Breerley object against Luther, and I grant Answ.
that Luther indeed has those words, tom. 3. in Psalm. 45. But he speaks of
Moses only as contradistinct to Christ, as a Breerl. ubi sup.
mere Lawgiver. For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. So Moses his ministration was the ministration of
death, 2 Cor. 3. 7. and the ministration of condemnation, v. 9. The Law simply
considered, does convince of sin, and condemn for sin. For by the Law is
the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. And it says, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do
them, Gal. 3. 10. Now no man does, or can perform this, and therefore (says
the Apostle there) as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse.
And so the Law works wrath, Romans 4. 15. This is not through any fault of the
Law, but by reason of sin, which is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.
and so makes liable to the curse and condemnation, which by the Law belongs to
those that transgress. The Law (says Ambrose) is not wrath, but it works
wrath, Non ergo lex ira est, sed iram operatur peccati, id est, poenam, dum non
ignoscit sed vindicat. Ambros. in Romans 3 Quando enim nulli proficit gloria
vultus ejus (sc. Mosis) non habuit fructum gloriae, sed magis obfuit; licet non
suo vitio, sed peccantium. Ambros. in 2 Cor. 3.
that is, punishment to him that sins, in that it does not pardon sin, but
revenge it. And again, The glory of Moses his countenance (says he) had not
the fruit of glory, in that it did not profit any, but rather hurt, though not
through its own fault, but through the fault of those that sin. This is
spoken of the Law, as it stands in opposition to the Gospel, wherein
reconciliation and salvation Per totum Psalmum facienda est antitithesis Mosi
seu legis cum Evangelio. Luth. ubi supra.
through Christ is set forth. And in this sense only did Luther speak of Moses,
as himself expressly shows.

6. The Marquess adds, that for Luther's doctrine, he holds Obj.
a threefold Divinity, or three kinds, as there are three Persons.

For proof of this, only Zuinglius is cited. But Luther and Answ.
he being such adversaries, their testimonies one against the other are of
small force. Had any such thing been in Luthers writings, the Romanists
themselves (I doubt not) would have found it out, Sancti Patres (praesertim
Augustinus l. 11. de civ. Dei, c. 24.) observant, quod Moses his tribus verbis
utitur, Deus dixit, fecit, vidit, quasi hoc modo tres Divinitatis Personas
voluerit ostendere. Luth. in Genesis 1.
and not have referred us only to Zuinglius for it. Luther on Genes. 1. does
expressly speak of three Persons, but one Divinity, as being the same in all
the three Persons.

7. That Luther is angry with the word Trinity, calling it a humane Obj.
invention, and a thing that sounds very coldly.

The place alleged I have not opportunity to examine: Answ.
but thus much I say, that Luther believing the thing, viz. that there are
three Divine Persons, (as I have showed immediately before) I see not why he
should dislike the word Trinity.

8. That he justistifies the Arrians, and says, they did very well Obj.
in expelling the word (Homousion) being a word that his soul hated.

Thus also Duraeus, and before him Campian, and before Answ.
them both Bellarmine charge Luther with saying, that his Dur. defens. camp.
Camp. rat. 8. Bell. praesat. disp. de Christ.
soul did hate the word Homousion, which the Orthodox Fathers used, to show
against the Arrians the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father. But they
wrong Luther, as their manner is: For Quod si odit anima mea vocem Homousion,
and nolim ea uti, non ero haereticus. Quis enim me cogit uti, modo rem teneam,
quae in concilio per Scripturas definita est. Luth. cont. Latom.
he does not say, that his soul did hate that word; but that if his soul did
hate it, and he would not use it, yet he should not be a heretic, so that he
did hold the thing signified by the word, which the Fathers in the Nicene
Council did determine by the Scriptures. He speaks thus in respect of the
Papists, who will not be content with Scripture-terms, but will invent terms of
their own to pervert the sense of Scriptures. As Latomus (against whom he
writes) would not call Concupiscence sin, as the Apostle calls it, but a
punishment of Paulus praecipit, ut vitares profanas vocum novitates, and
loquereris ut ipse loquitur, and facris vocum antiquitatibus inhaereres. Luth.
contra Latom.
sin. Hereupon Luther (I think) went too far concerning the word Homousion,
though not so far as his Romish adversaries do charge him. He says that this
word used in confutation of the Arrians Nec est quod mihi homousion illud
objectes, adversus Arrianos receptum. Non fuit receptum a multis, iisque
praeclarissimis, quod and Hieronymus optavit aboleri, etc. -- Etsi Arriani male
senserunt in fide, hoc tamen optime, sive malo, sive bono animo exegerunt, ne
vocem profanam, and novam in regulis fidei usurpare liceret. Scripturae enim
sineeritas custodienda est, nec praesumat homo ore suo loqui aut clarius, aut
sincerius, quam Deus ^locutus est ore suo. Luth. ibid.
is not to be objected against him: For that many, and those most excellent men
did not receive it, and that Hierome wished it were abolished. And that
although the Arrians did err in the faith, yet they did well however to
require, that a profane and new word might not be used in rules of faith: For
that the sincerity of Scripture is to be preserved, and man is not to presume
to speak either more clearly, or more sincerely then God has spoken. I
confess that Luther in this seems to me to exceed, as men are apt to do in
favor of that cause which they prosecute. But yet it appears that he was sound
in the faith, and did not comply with the Arrians, who opposed the word
Homousion, not so much for the new invention, as for the signification of it.

Mr. Breerly, who has also this charge against Luther, (as Breerl. Apol.
tract. 2. chapter 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 13.
indeed he has most of that which the Marquess objecteth against Protestant
Divines) cites Luther against Latomus, in the Edition of Wittembergh 1551. and
says, that the latter Editions are altered and corrupted by Luthers Scholars,
as he had showed (he says) the like before, viz. concerning that place, where
Luther (they say) did speak so reprochfully of S. James his Epistle. But, 1.
This is not like the other: For here he says, Luthers works were altered by
his Scholars; but there he says, they were altered by his adversaries. 2. As I
have showed the other to be improbable, so also is this. For Luther died anno
1546. so that the Edition which Sleidan. comment. lib. 16.
was anno 1551. was five years after Luthers death; and surely by that time
Luthers Scholars had leisure enough to make such an alteration, as Mr. Breerly
speaks of, in Luthers works, if they had been so minded. I cannot therefore but
take this as a trick of Mr. Breerley's, when he saw Campians quotation of
Luther confuted by Dr. Whitaker, to pretend some former Edition of Luthers
Works, as having it so as Campian alleged. And this is the more apparent, in
that Dureus professedly taking upon him the defense of Campian against Dr.
Whitaker, never so much as takes notice of that which the Doctor says against
Campian for falsifying the words of Luther, so far was he from knowing of that
pretended Edition anno 1551. which should have it (forsooth) just so as Campian
quoted it.

9. Luther (as the Marquess tells us) affirmed, that Christ was from all
eternity, even according to his humane nature. For Obj.
proof hereof only Zuinglius is cited.

But (as I noted before) Zuinglius his testimony is not sufficient Answ.
to make good a charge against Luther. Let Luthers words be produced, and then
it will appear that he is justly charged.

10. He affirms (says the Marquess) that as Christ died with Obj.
great pain, so he seems to have sustained pains in hell after death.

Indeed I find such words in Luther on Plal. 16. and I acknowledge Answ
it to be a gross error, so far am I from defending him in it. Christus sicut
cum summo dolor mortuus est, ita videtur and dolores post mortem in inferno
sustinuisse, ut nobis omnia superaret. Luth. tom. 3. in Ps. 16. Ita ego interca
verbis Perri Act. 2. inherebo, donec meliorn doctus suero. Luth. ibid.
But withal this I find, that Luther was nothing confident in that
particular. For he adds immediately, that he would so understand the words of
Peter Act. 2. 24. until he were better informed

11. That the Divinity of Christ suffered, or else he were none of Obj.
his Christ.

This also Bellarmine does object against Luther; and I confess, Answ.
that if the word Divinity be strictly and properly taken, Bell. de Christ^ in
Presat.
the assertion is most erroneous. But Bellarmine Propter identitatem, quae in
divinis est inter naturam and hypostasin, quandeque natura ponitur pro persona,
vel hypostasi. Et secundum haec dicit Aug. naturam divinam esse conceptam and
natam, quia scil. persona Filii est concepta and nata secundum natural humane^.
Aquir. part. 3. quaest. 35. art. 1. ad 1.
probably was not ignorant that Aquinas observes, that because of the identity
that is betwixt the divine Nature, and the divine Person, sometimes the Nature
is put for the Person. And that thus Austine says, that the divine Nature was
conceived and born, because the Person of the Son was conceived and born, in
respect of the humane nature. So in like manner Luther might say, that the
Divinity, or divine Nature did suffer, because the Person of the Son did suffer
according to the humane nature. That Luther meant no otherwise then thus, is
clearly his Si enim persuaderi mihi patiar, ut credam solam naturam humanam pro
me passam esse, profecto Christus mihi non magni pretii salvator erit, sed ipse
tandem salvatore eget. -- Si forte venefica illa domina ratio reclamare
voluerit, dicens, Divinitas neque pati, neque mori potest; tu respondebis,
verum id quidem est, nihilo minus tamen quia Divinitas and Humanitas in Christo
unam personam constituunt, Scriptura propter hypostaticam illam unionem etiam
Divinitati omnia illa tribuit, quae humanitati accidunt, and vicissim
humanitati quae divinitatis sunt. Et sane revera ita se res habet; hoe enim
fateri necesse est, Haec. persona (monstrato Christo) patitur, moritur. Haec
autem persona est verus Deus. Recte igitur dicitur, Filius Dei patitur. Etsi
enim una ipsius pars (ut sic loquar) Deitas videl. non patiatur, tamen ea
persona, quae Deus est, patitur in altera sua part, nimirum humanitate. Revera
enim Filius Dei pro nobis crucifixus est. Ipsa enim, ipsa, inquam, persona
crucifixa est secundum humanitatem. Luther. apud Gerherd. de Person. and ossi.
Christi, sect. 195.
words, which I find in Gerhard, viz. these, If I shall suffer my self to be
persuaded that only the humane nature did suffer for me, truly Christ shall be
a Savior of small worth unto me, for he himself at length will need a Savior.
-- If perhaps that bewitching lady Reason will reclaim, saying, The Divinity
cannot suffer, nor dye; thou shall answer, That indeed is true; yet
nevertheless because the Divinity, and the Humanity in Christ make one person,
therefore the Scripture because of the hypostatical union does attribute to the
Divinity all those things which happen to the Humanity; and so to the Humanity
those things which belong to the Divinity. And truly thus it is indeed; for we
must needs confess, This Person (Christ being pointed at) does suffer and dye.
But this Person is true God, Therefore it is rightly said, The Son of God does
suffer. For though one part of him (as I may so speak) viz. the Deity does not
suffer, yet that person, which is God, does suffer in his other part, viz. the
Humanity. For indeed the Son of God was crucified for us. That same, I say,
that same Person was crucified Si in una lance appendantur peccata nostra and
ira Dei peccatis nostris debita, ac in altera lance ponatur tanuim humanae
naturae mors aut homo tanuim pro nobis passus, tunc altera lanx ad infernum
usque nos deprimet. Quod si vero in adversa lance ponatur Dei passio Dei mors,
Dei sanguis, seu Deus pro nobis passus; and mortuus, tunc gravior and
ponderosior fiet lanxista quam omnia peccata nostra, and universa Dei ira.
Luth. ibid.
according to the Humanity. And again, If our sins, and Gods weath due to our
sins be weighed in one scale, and in the other scale be put only the death
of humane nature, or only a man having sufered for us; then the other scale
will weigh us down to hell. But if in the opposite scale be put the passion of
God, the death of God, the blood of God, or God having suffered for us, then
that scale will be more heavy and ponderous then all our sins, and all Gods
anger. This does abundantly show that Luther was most orthodox in this point
touching Christ's Person and Natures. And thus that also is answered, which
immediately follows, being indeed but the same with that which went before;
viz. That if the humane nature should only suffer for him, Christ were but a
Savior of vile account, and had need himself of another Savior. In what sense
Luther spoke this, and how sound and true it is in that sense wherein he spoke
it, is evident by his own words before cited.

12. The Marquess cites Hospinian, saying, that Luther Obj.
held the body and blood of Christ both is and may be found according to the
substance not only in the bread and wine of the Eucharist, or in the hearts of
the faithful, but also in all creatures, in fire, water, or in the rope and
halter, wherewith desperate persons hang themselves.

Whether Hospinian writ thus of Luther, not having his Answ.
book which is cited, I cannot say. Hospinian being, though a Protestant, yet
against Luther in point of the Sacrament, might peradventure wrest Luthers
words beyond his meaning. However if Luther did hold so, I leave him to answer
for himself, or some other to answer for him. I hold both him to have erred in
his Consubstantiation, and the Romanists in their Transubstantiation.

13. Luther (as is objected) averreth that the ten Commandments Obj.
belong not unto us; for God did not lead us, but the Jews forth of Egypt.

That Luther speaks to this effect, I grant; yet was he far from teaching
that Christians are free from the observation Answ.
of the ten Commandments. For immediately after that which the Marquess Falso
ergo fanatici lege Mosi nos onerant, qui ad nos nihil locutus est. Doctorem
sane Mosen recipimus, and agnoscimus, unde multum salutaris, ut paulo post
dicitur, doctrinae discimus. Sed legislatorem aut gubernatorem non agnoscimus,
cum ipse suana ministerium tantum ad illum populum restrinxerit. -- Non habere
Deos alienos, Deum timere, ei considere, and obedire, non abuti eius nomine,
parentibus honorem habere, etc. sunt ab omnibus servanda, and ad omnes
pertinent, sed non quia a Mose praecepra, sed quia naturae hominum hae leges
(quae in decalogo recitantur) inscriptae sunt. Quare etiam gentes, quibus Moses
ignotus suit, and quibus Deus non est locutus, ut illis, norunt Deo esse
obediendum, Deum esse adorandum, honorandos parents, etc. Luth. tom. 3.
Quomodo ^^ori Mosis legendi sunt.
cites, he says thus; Falsely therefore do fanaticall persons burden us with
the Law of Moses, who spoke nothing unto us. Indeed we receive and acknowledge
Moses as a teacher, from whom we learn much wholesome doctrine, as shall be
showed a little after. But we do not acknowledge him our Lawgiver, or
Governor, seeing he restraine^ his Ministry to that people, viz. the Jews. --
Not to have other gods, to fear God, to trust in him, and to obey him, not to
abuse his name, to honor parents, etc. these things are to be observed by all,
and belong to all; yet not because they were commanded by Moses, but because
these Laws (which are rehearsed in the De^alogue.) are imprinted in man's
nature. Wherefore also the heathens, that knew not Moses, and to whom God did
not speak, as he did to the Israelites, knew that God is to be obeyed and
worshipped, that parents are to be honored, etc.

This doctrine of Luther is no other then they of the Roman Church do teach.
Estius, a great Doctor of that Church, writing upon Quamvis expeditior sensus
videatur de lege quatenus ceremonialis est* nihil tamen vetat universam legem a
Mose latam intelligi, quatenus ab eo lata est. Tota e^im Mosis legislatura
cessat per Christum, nec lege decalogi Christianus tenetur, nisi quatenus cum
lege naturae convenit, and a Christo renovata est. (...). ad Gal. 2. 19.
those words, Gal. 2. 19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, says, Although
the sense may seem more easy, if it be understood of the Law, as it is
ceremonial; yet may the whole Law given by Moses be understood, so far forth as
it was given by Moses. For the whole legislative office of Moses does cease by
Christ; neither is a Christian bound by the Law of the Decalogue, but as it
does agree with the Law of nature; and is renewed by Christ. So the Catechism
set forth by the decree of the Council of Trent, Quamvis haec lex ^^daeis in
monte a Domino data fuerit, tamen quonia^ natura omnium mentibus multo ante
impressa, and consignam erat, atque ob eam rem De^s universos homines illi
perpetuo parere voluit; p^^rjmum prodo^^t verba^illa, qu bus, Mose ministro
atque interpret, Hebraeis promulgata ^st, and populi Israelitici hist^riam
quae mysteriorum, est plena diligenter expli^are. Catechis. Tridens. in init^o
ex^is. cation^s decalogi.
coming to explain the ten Commandments, says, Although the Law was given by
the Lord in the Mount to the Jews, yet because by nature it was long before
imprinted in the minds of all, and so God would have all at all times to obey
him; it will be very profitable diligently to explain these words in which by
the Ministry of Moses the Law was promulgated to the Hebrews, etc. Here they
clearly intimate, that the ten Commandments do not concern Christians as
published by Moses, but as imprinted in the heart of man by nature; which is
all that Luther teaches, who both in his greater and lesser Catechism
expounds the ten Commandments, which he would not have done, if he had held
that they do not bind Christians to the observing of them. But this doctrine he
expressly disclaimeth, as I have already showed.

14. Luther is taxed for saying, that faith, except it be without (even the
least) good works, does not justify, and is not Obj.
faith.

Nothing is alleged out of Luthers writings for proof of Answ.
this, but only C^vels defense of Mr. Hooker is cited, which book I have not
to peruse; yet I find Bellarmin^ citing Luthers own words Tom. 1. operum
suorum sic ait in 3. Propositione, Fides nisi sit sine ullis, etiam miminis
operibus, non justificat im^ non est sides. Bellar. de Justis. l. 1. c. 121.
to this very purpose. But Luthers meaning (I suppose) was only this, that in
the work of justification faith is altogether without works, so that no works
concur with it unto justification: not but that otherwise faith is accompanied
with good works, so that where faith (true justifying faith) is, there will be
good works also. Bellarmine indeed does tell of some rigid Lutherans, Bell.
ibi^^
who so hold faith alone to justify, as not to admit other virtues so much as
to be present with it. And this he says they would have to be Luthers opinion;
yet he confesses Chemnitius, a famous Lutheran, to agree with Calvin in this,
that though faith alone does justify, yet faith that does justify is not
alone* even as the heat of the Sun alone does burn, yet that heat is not alone,
but has light joined with it.

And for Luther himself, his writings plainly show, that although he exclude
works from having any thing to do in our justification, as generally
Protestants do, yet he was no enemy to good works. After that we have taught
faith in Christ (says he) we Postquam fidem in Chris^^m doctrimus, docemus
etiam de bonis operibu^. Non quod opera ^ut charitatom rejicimus, ^t adversa^ii
nos acc^sant. Luth. in Gal. 2. Fides non ficta, neque hypocritica, sed vera,
and vivax ea est, quae exercet, and urget bona opera per charitatem. -- Vere
non credit si opera charitatis fidem non sequuntur. -- Dicunt, si fides, sine
opere justificat, ergo nihil operemur, sed credamus solum, and faciamus quae
volumus. Non sic impii, dicit Paulus: verum est, sine operibus fidem
justificare; sed de fide vera loquor, quae postquam justificaverit, non stertet
otiosa, sed est per charitatem operosa. Luth. in Gal. 5. 6.
also teach good works. And again, We do not reject works, and love, as the
adversaries do accuse us. And again, Faith not fained, nor hypocritical, but
true and lively, is that, which does exercise, and urge good works through
love. So also again, Some say, if faith without works do justify, then let us
not work, only let us believe, and let us do what we will. Not so, ye ungodly,
says Paul. It is true, that faith alone does justify, but I speak of true
faith, which when it has justified, is not idle, but does work through love.

15. Luther is charged with saying, That we are equal in dignity Obj.
and honor with St. Paul, St. Peter, the blessed Virgin Mary, or all the
Saints.

The Edition of Luthers Works which the Marquess cites, Answ.
not agreeing in the folio's with that which I meet with, I cannot tell whether
Luther says thus or no; or if he do, in what sense he says it; but if he have
such words, I presume he means in respect of imputed righteousness, which is
one and the same to all that believe, not in respect of inherent
righteousness, which is more in some then in others. In respect of imputed
righteousness, the Spouse of Christ here upon earth is Sine macula deputatur,
quia culpa non imputatur. Gilbert. in Cant. 4. 7.
all fair, and there is no spot in her. But in respect of inherent
righteousness just men are not made perfect until hereafter in the life to
come. Heb. 12. 23. In this respect the inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor.
4. 16.

16. That all the holiness, which they have used in fasting, and prayer,
enduring labors, chastising their bodies, austerity and hardness Obj.
of life, may be daily performed by a hog or a dog.

Whether this charge be true, I cannot examine for the Answ.
reason even now alleged. Neither do I see how Luther or any rational man
should make prayer a thing performable by a hog or a dog. Otherwise who sees
not, but that these bruit creatures may be made to fast (see Jon. 3. 7. 8.) and
to endure bodily hardness? The Apostle clearly distinguishes betwixt bodily
exercise and godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. And both Scripture and experience show,
that all these things mentioned by the Marquess, may be performed by the
wicked as well (I mean for the outward act) as by the godly. See Isa. 1. 11. to
15. and Isa. 58. 3. etc.

17. Another charge against Luther is that he holds, That in the absence of a
Priest, a woman, or a boy, or any Christian Obj.
may obsolve.

It seems then that Luther does not say, that any may do it as well as a
Priest; for then what need to say, in absence of a Answ.
Priest? And may not any Christian declare the glad tidings of salvation unto
an afflicted conscience? Does not the Apostle, speaking to Christians in
general, bid them comfort the feeble-minded, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. As for that
confession to, and absolution by a Priest, which the Romanists contend for, we
know no ground nor warrant in Scripture for it.

18. The next charge is, that he says, They only communicate worthily, who
have confused and erroneous consciences. Obj.


I find this objected by Campian, and answered by Dr. Answ.
Whitaken, so as to aknowledge the truth of the assertion in this sense, that
they only are meet for the Sacrament, who Camp. rat. 8. whitak. Resp. ad rat.
Camp.
are sensible of their sins, and so of the need they have of Christ for the
remission of them, according to that of our Savior, The whole have no need of
the Physician, but they that are sick, Mat. 9. 12.

19. That a Priest, especially in the New Testament, is not made, but born, not
consecrated, but created. Obj.


Where Luther says thus, I cannot find, nor can I conjecture what he means,
if he do say it. Answ.


20. That the Sacrament were true, though it were administered by the Devil. Obj.


How Luther is baited for this by Hospinian and Covel, Answ.
his fellow-Protestants (as the Marquess says he is) I wanting their books
cannot see: but it Luther meant of such a Devil, as Christ spoke of, viz. a
Judas, Joh. 6. 70. neither Protestants nor Papists can justly oppose him, they
holding (as generally they do) that the virtue of the Sacrament does not depend
upon the dignity of him by whom it is administered.

21. That among Christians, no man can or ought to be a Magistrate; Obj.
but each one is to other equally subject: and that among Christian men none is
superior save one, and only Christ.

This same charge is also brought against Luther by Mr. Answ.
Breerley, who yet has that which is a sufficient answer to it: Breerl. Apel.
tract. 3. sect. 5.
For he cites Luther admonishing to obey the Civil Magistrate, only not
allowing him power over the conscience. This indeed is Christ's prerogative; and
in this respect Christians are to be subject only unto Christ. Ye are bo^ght
with a price, be ye not the servants of men, I Cor. 7. 23. We must indeed be
subject to the higher power for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. but that is,
because God, who is Lord over the conscience, does command it: so that it is
not the Magistrates, power, but Gods only that does reach the conscience.

22. That the Husband, in case the Wife refuse his bed, may say Obj.
unto her, If thou will not, another will; if the Mistress will not, let the
Maid come.

This being objected by Campian, Dr. Whitaker answers, Answ.
that Luther counseled the Husband to speak thus to the Wife, in terrorem, so
as thereby to affright her out of her obstinacy. Yet he acknowledges, that
Luther in point of Divorce went too far, and that he was not willing to plead
for him. Neither will I, in any thing wherein he is justly taxed: As I confess
he is in the two next particulars that follow, (which also concern the same
subject) if he did indeed assert those things which are alleged.

23. That Polygamie is no more abrogated then the rest of Moses Obj.
law; and that it is free, as being neither commanded nor forbidden.

Two places in Luthers Works are here quoted to make Answ.
good this charge, one whereof I cannot find, but the other I meet with,
(though not of that Edition indeed which is expressed) and find that which is
quite contrary to this here objected. Luther commenting on Genesis 16. where
Abraham by the advice Abrahae quoque insign's sanctimonia est, qui cum se
usitato exemplo tueri, and aliam ducere poterat, (polygamia enim tum in usu
erat) tamen id non facit, nisi uxore jubeme. Luth. in Genesis 16.
of Sarah being barren, took Hagar for his Concubine, says that Polygamie was
then in use, and so Abraham might of himself following the custom of the times
have taken another wife, Porro ex hoe facto non est constituendum exemplum,
quasi nobis eade^ liceat facere: circumstantiae enim considerandae sunt, etc.
Igitur singular hoc horum conjugum factum neutiquam in exemplum habendum,
praesertim in Novo Testamento: nam Vetus Testamentum polygamiam etiam liberorum
causa permisit. Luth. ibid.
but yet would not do it till Sarah did put him upon it. And from this fact of
Abraham, he says, we must not frame an example, as if we might do the like.
And that though the Old Testament did permit Polygamie, yet now in the New
Testament it is otherwise. So that Luther (so far as I find) was far from
making polygamie a thing indifferent, and free for any that have a mind to it.

24. That it is no more in his power to be without a woman, then Obj.
it is in his power to be no man: and that it is more necessary then to eat,
drink, purge, or blow his nose.

Luther here speaks of himself; and what his power was in this particular that
he speaks of, he had best cause to know. Answ.
Indeed Mr. Breerly together with these words cites some other sayings of
Luther, wherein he seems to speak generally Breerl. Apol. tract. 2. cap. 2.
sect. 10. subdivis. 11.
of all, as being altogether unable to contain from women. And to this effect
also the Marquess here immediately after cites some words of Luther in Latin,
saying that not any of his English shall be accessory to the transportation of
such a blast into his native language. But it is usual with them of the Church
of Rome to pervert, if not the words, yet the meaning of their adversaries, and
especially of Luther and Calvin, against whom they bear the greatest hatred.
Candor and ingenuity would easily conceive, that Luther spoke in that manner,
of men, as for most part they are, viz. not having the gift of continency,
which comparatively but few have. Luthers own words (as Mr. Breerly himself
does cite them) sufficiently declare Puella, in qua non est sublime hoc donum
continentiae, nihilo facilius carere potest matito, aut viro, quam cibo, aut
potu, somno, etc. I. ^th. apud Brecrl. loc. citat.
his meaning. The young woman (says he) that has not this high gift of
continency, can no more want a husband, or a man, then she can want meat,
drink, sleep, etc.

25. Luther (says the Marquess) says, How can a man prepare Obj.
himself to good; seeing it is not in his power to make his ways evil? For God
works the wicked work in the wicked.

One of Luthers books, wherein he is said to speak thus, Answ.
I find among his Works, (viz. de servo arbit.) But the Edition being diverse
from this here mentioned, I cannot find the words that are objected. If Luther
have these words, I doubt not but by the circumstances of the place it will
appear, that he was free from charging God foolishly, however that expression
seem harsh, That God works the wicked work in the wicked. Yet in some sense
this may be affirmed. For a wicked work may be considered as a work, and as
wicked. As a work, Actus peccati and est ens, and est actus, and ex utroque
habet quod sit a Deo. Omne enim ens, quocunque modo sit, oportot quod derivetur
a primo ente. -- Sed peccatum nominat ens, and actionem cum quodam defectu;
defectus autem ille est ex causa creata scil. lib. arbit. Aquin. 12. qu. 79.
art. 2.
so it is from God, who is the supreme cause of every thing that has any
entity, or being in it. But it is not from God, as it is wicked; for so it
imports defect, and therefore is not to be ascribed unto God, who cannot any
way be defective, but it is to be imputed only to the creature. But though God
be not the author of men's wicked works as they are wicked, yet is he the
orderer and disposer of them. And thus Luther might well say, It is not in man's
power to make his ways evil, viz. so as he himself will, but as God will, who
permits, restrains, orders, and disposes man's waves as he pleases.
Thus, as the Prophet says, The way of man is not in himself, neither is it in
man that walks, to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. Bellarmine himself does
tell us, That God by his Deus mirabili potentia regit corda etiam impiorum, and
impedit ne aliud perficiant, conentur, velint, cogitent, quam quod ipse
permittit, ipsamque culpam eis vertit in poenam, and ad multa bona malis eorum
voluntatibus ipse sum potens, summeque bonus utitur. Bellar. de amiss. great.
and statu peccati lib. 2. cap. 16.
wonderful power does rule the hearts even of the wicked, and does restrain
them so that they cannot effect, endeavor, will, or think otherwise then be
does permit, and does turn their fault into their punishment; and being both
most powerful, and most good, does use their evil wills for the accomplishing
of much good. And he cites Augustine saying, That God does not make men's wills
evil, but he makes use of them as he pleases. But the Non facit voluntates
malas, sed utitur eis ut voluerit. Aug. apud Bellar. Ibid.

Deus non solum permittit impios agere multa mala, etc. sed etiam presidet
ipsis voluntatibus malis, easque regit and gubernat, torquet ac flectit in eis
invisibiliter operando; ut licet vitio proprio malae sint, tamen a divina
providentia ad unum potius malum, quam ad aliud, non positive, sed permissive
ordinentur. Bellar. ibid. cap. 13.


Cardinal speaks yet more fully: God (says he) does not only permit the
wicked to do many evil things, but also is president over their evil wills,
and does rule and govern them, yea wrest and bend (N B) by working invisibly in
them; so that although they be evil through their own fault, yet by the
divine providence, not positively, but permissively they are ordered to one
evil, rather then to another. This expression, which Bellarmine here uses of
Gods wresting and bending the wills of wicked men in their wicked designs, is (I
think) as high as any that either Luther or Calvin do use, of whom yet the
Romanists, and amongst them Bellarmine himself complains, as making God the
author of sin, though they disclaim and abhor the Position as much as they
that are so invective against them,

Before the Marquess has fully done with Luther, he has Page 79.
by the way a fling at Zuinglius, saying that he denies all Paul's Epistles to
be sacred. But in the place cited I find it otherwise. Zuinglius Quasi vero
Paulus Epistolis suis jam tum tribue rit, ut quicquid in eis contineretur
sacrosanctum esset. Non quod ipse velim non sacrosancta esse, quae illius sint,
sed quod noim Apostolis imputari immoderatam arrogantiam, etc. Zuingl. tom. 2.
sol. 10.
does not deny all Paul's Epistles to be sacred, yea he says expressly that he
does not deny this; only he says, that Paul then when he wrote, did not
attribute so much to his Epistles, as that whatsoever was contained in them,
should be sacred; he thought that if the Apostle had done so, it had been too
much arrogance in him; wherein I am far from being of his mind.

There is nothing material, which the Marquess here Answ.
does further allege against Luther; only he cites two or three passages,
wherein Luther does vaunt of himself; which though it may perhaps argue some
vanity of the man, yet does it not argue any falsity of his doctrine. I never
required (says Luther) Nunquam exegi ut me quis modestum aut sanctum haber et,
sed ut Evangelium omnes agnoscerent. Luth. ad Praesat. Latonii.
that any should account me modest, or holy, but that all should embrace the
Gospel. Yet might he without any vain boasting say, (as the Marquess objecteth
Page 170.) that he would not have his doctrine to be judged either by Men or
Angels; that is, he being assured of its truth, and agreeableness to Gods
word, he would not refer it to the censure either of Men or Angels, so as to
submit unto them if they should condemn it. In this he had respect (it seems)
to that of the Apostle, Though we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8. And thus much for answer to those things which are
alleged against Luther.

In the next place the Marquess falls upon Calvin, and brings many charges
against him; but by the examination of the Page 8 c.
matter it will appear, that Calvin is altogether as injuriously dealt with as
Luther, if not more. Of Calvin's Doctrine.


1. He maintains (its said) that three Essences do arise out of the holy
Trinity. Obj.


I wish the Marquess had either cited Calvin's words, or at least the place so,
as that I might have found what he says. Answ.
But he only cites Tract. Theol. p. 793. Where in the Edition which I have
(viz. Genev. an. 1576.) is no such thing to be found. Neither need I to search
into Calvin's Works for the answering of this charge. Bellarmine himself (who
would have been ready Calvinus fatetur lib. 1. Instit. cap. 13. sect. 13. Unam
numero naturam esse in tribus distinctis personis. Bellar. de Christ. l. 2. c.
19.

Praeterea ibid. sect. 23. aperte dicit, essentiam a Patre, Filio esse
communicatam. Bellar. ibid.


enough to find out any such gross stuff in him) does justify him in this
point, confessing that Calvin does acknowledge only one nature in three
distinct persons. And that he does plainly say, that the Essence is
communicated to the Son by the Father: which also does take away the next
charge, viz. That the Son has his substance distinct from the Father, and that
he is a distinct God from the Father. By Bellarmines own confession Calvin's
doctrine is directly contrary.

2. He teaches (says the Marquess) That the Father can Obj.
neither wholly, nor by parts communicate his nature to Christ, but must
withal be deprived thereof himself.

This is clearly confuted by Calvin's words which Bellarmine Answ.
alleges: If there be any differe we in the Essence (viz. of the Father and
the Son) Si in essentia est discretio, respondeant, annon cum Filio eam
communicaverit? Hoc vero non potuit esse ex part, quia dimidium fabricare Deum
nefas esser. Add quod hoc modo foede lacerarent Dei essentiam. Restat ut tota
and in solidum Patris and Filii sit communis. Calvin Instit. lib. 1. cap. 13.
sect. 23. citat. a Bellar. ubi supra.
let them answer whether the Father did communicate it to the Son, or no? Now
this could not be in part; for it is not lawful to make half a God. Besides by
this means they should foully tear in pieces Gods Essence. It remains, that the
whole and entire Essence is common to the Father and the Son.

3. Calvin is said to deny that the Son is begotten of the Fathers Obj.
substance, and to affirm that he is God of himself, not God of God.

Diverse Romanists besides, and before the Marquess Answ.
would make Calvin guilty of some gross herefie, in saying that the Son is,
(...) God of himself. But Bellarmine has a whole Chapter about Dum rem ipsam
excutio, and Calvini sententias diligenter considero, non facile audeo
pronuntiare illum in hoc errore fuisse, siquidem docet Filium esse a se
respectu essentiae, non respectu personae, and videtur dicere velle, personam
esse genitam a Patre, essentiam non esse genitam, nec productam, sed esse a
seipsa, etc. Bellar. loco ante citato.
this very point, and does clear Calvin from that aspersion which others cast
upon him, showing that he spoke of the Son, not in respect of his Person, but
in respect of his Essence; and that his meaning is, that the Person of the Son
is begotten of the Father, but that the Essence of the Son is not begotten, nor
produced, but is of it self. So another Revera si attente Calvinus legatur,
tantum videbitur voluisse, Filium, ut Deus quidem essentialiter est, ex se
esse, and solummodo ut persona est, esse ex Patre. Id quod veruin est. Nam
licet verissime Patres and Concilia asserant, Deum esse ex Deo, accipiendo
vocabulum: Dei personaliter, ut seil. significat quoque personam ipsam Patris
and Filii; tamen Filius quatenus essentialiter Deus est, id est, ut est illud
simplissimum quod est Deus, non est ab alio, quia ut sic est quid absolutum. --
In eo sensu videtur Filium appellasse (...) Epiph. haer. 69. Greg. de Valent.
citat. a Rivet. in Genesis exercit. 14.
learned Jesuit, viz. Gregorius de Valentia (as I find him cited) does
ingenuously confess, that Calvin's doctrine in this point, being rightly
understood, is sound and true, viz. That the Son as he is essentially God, is
of himself, and only is from the Father as he is a Person. When the Fathers and
Councels affirm the Son to be God of God, he says, they take the word God
personally, viz. as it signifies both the Person Father, and of the Son: yet
(says he) the Son, as he is essentially God, so he is not from another. And in
this sense he says Epiphanius seems to have called the Son (...), that is,
God of himself.

4. He taxes Calvin for saying, That dream of the absolute power of God, which
the Schoolmen have brought in, is execrable blasphemy.

Calvin in one of the places alleged (for the other I cannot consult) says
thus: Neither do we bring in the device of absolute power; which Neque tamen
commentum ingerimus absolutae potentiae; quod sicuti profanum est, ita merito
detestabile nobis esse debet. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. sec. 2. Non fingimus
Deum exlegem, qui sibi ipsi lex est. Calv. ibid.
as it is profane, so we have just cause to detest it. But Calvin was far from
denying that absolute power of God, whereby he is able to do whatsoever he
pleases: Only he seems to deny God to have such an absolute power, as to be
able to do any thing, whether it be right or wrong. For he adds immediately,
We do not feign God to be without law, who is a law unto himself.

5. It is objected against Calvin, that those words, The Father is greater then
I, (Joh. 14. 28.) he will not have restrained Obj.
to the humane nature, but will extend them to Christ as God and man.

Many places are cited for proof of this; some whereof, Answ.
for want of the same Edition, though I have the book, I cannot examine, viz.
Tract. Theol. p. 794. and 792. my book in those pages has nothing to the
purpose. And so also it is in all other places, where the Marquess does cite
those Theological Tractates. Another place here also the Marquess cites,
which is as if it were not cited, viz. Calvin on Mat. 22. the verse being not
mentioned, the quotation is to no purpose. Two other places he cites also, viz.
Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 14.. 3. and on Joh. 17. 12. but in neither of these
places does Calvin speak any thing about those words, My Father is greater then
I. It may seem strange, that the Marquess should here cite so many places out
of Calvin's Works, and yet pretermit his Commentary upon those very words about
which he taxes him. Now Calvin commenting upon those words, says, That Vary
detortus fuit hic locus. Ariani, ut Christum probatent quendam secundarium esse
Deum, objiciebant minorem esse Patre. Patres orthodoxi, ut tali calumniae ansam
praeciderent, dicebant hoc debere ad naturam humanam referri. Atqui ut impie
hoc testimonio abusi sunt Ariani, ita nec recta nec consentanea fuit Patrum
solutio. Hic enim neque de humana Christi natura, neque de aeterna ejus
divinitate sermo habetur; sed pro infirmitatis nostrae captu^se medium inter
nos and Deum constituit. -- Utres clar^us pa^cat, crassuis adhuc loquendum est.
Non consert hic Christus Patris divinitatem cum sua, nec humanam suam naturam
divinae Patris essentiae omparar; sed potius statum praesentem coelesti
gloriae, ad quam mox recipiendus erat, etc. Calv. ad Joh. 14. 28.
the Arians did wickedly abuse this testimony, to prove that Christ is but a
secondary God, and not equal with the Father; and that yet on the other side,
the Orthodox Fathers did not rightly interpret the words of Christ's humane
nature: For that here neither Christ's humane nature, nor his eternal divinity
(he says) is spoken of; but Christ according to the weakness of our capacity
does set himself in the midst betwixt God and us. He explains it further thus:
Christ (says he) does not compare his Fathera Divinity with his own, nor does
he compare his humane nature with his Fathers divine essence; but rather his
present estate with that heavenly glory, into which he was by and by to be
received. Though Calvin's exposition here may seem somewhat quaint, neither do I
see why the received interpretation should not stand, viz. that Christ spoke of
himself, as he was man; yet however Calvin plainly shows, that he was far
from having any compliance with the Arians, in denying the equality of the
Son with the Father.

6. Calvin is charged to sever the person of the Mediator Obj.
from Christ's divine person; and to maintain with Nestorius, two persons in
Christ, the one humane, and the other divine.

Calvin had nothing to do with the heresy of Nestorius, Answ.
neither do the places alleged prove him any whit guilty of it. He speaks
indeed of the person of the Mediator, yet does he not make Mediatoris personam
nondum attingo. Calv. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 13. sect. 9. Nondum de Mediatoris
persona nobis sermo est. sect. 23. Mediatoris suscepit personam and munus.
sect. 24.
that a distinct person from Christ's divine person. I meddle not yet (says he)
with the person of Mediator. And again, We do not yet speak of the person of
Mediator. His meaning plainly is this, and no more then this; that as yet he
spoke of Christ only as God, and not as Mediator. And when he says, that
Christ took upon him the person and office of Mediator, Gerere personam
aticujus, etc.

Vide Vallam Elegant. lib. 6. cap. 34.


he seems to take the word person not for that which in Greek is hypostasis, a
substance subsisting by it self; but as the Latins frequently use the word for
quality, or state. Thus he seems to use the word Person, in that after it
immediately he adds the word office. However, Calvin does expressly condemn
the heresy of Nestorius, and has a whole Chapter to prove that in Procul
abigendus est a nobis Nestorii error. -- In Ephesina synodo merito damnatus
fuit Nestorius. Calv. Inst. l. 2. cap. 14. sect. 4. Similiter etiam sect. 5.
Christ two natures make but one Person. Calvin therefore here has hard
measure, being charged with Nestorianisme, when as he not only in plain terms
does explode it, but also does bend his whole force against it.

7. Calvin is taxed for saying, That Christ's soul was subject Obj.
to ignorance; and that this was the only difference betwixt us and him, that
our infirmities are of necessity, and his were voluntary.

It is true, Calvin understands that Luke 2. 40. and 52. so, as that Christ as
man was not perfect in knowledge at first, Answ.
no more then he was in stature. And surely this seems to be the plain and
simple meaning of the words, especially those v. 52. And Jesus increased in
wisdom, and stature; though others expound them, that as Christ grew in age,
so he did show forth his wisdom more and more. But Jansenius confesses that
Ambrose says, that Christ as man did grow in knowledge. And Ambrosius hoc loco
fatetur Christum secundum quod homo erat, profecisse. -- Et sub nomine
Theophili in catena aurea legitur, etc. Proficere dicitur exeo, quod humanitas
proficiebat in ipso. Jansen. Concord. cap. 12.
that the same exposition also is found under the name of Theophilus, another
ancient Author. He adds indeed, that these sayings of the Ancients are well
understood by the Schoolmen of Christ's wisdom acquired by use and experience,
when as before from his first conception he had the knowledge of all things
infused into him. Yet he speaks of this infused knowledge only as a thing which
he Omnino videtur Christo etiam quatenus homini tribuendam perfectam omnium
rerum a conceptione cognitionem ei infusam. -- Omnino verisimile est, etc.
Janss. ibid.

Vetum cum sapientiam hanc, quae Christo tanquam homini ab initio conceptionis
sit insusa, quaque omnia ab initio cognovisset, etiam ut homo, quidam putent
non posse ex Scripturis probari, putant simplicius hunc locum sic explicandum,
ut dicatur Christum secundum sapientiam divinam, h. e. eam quae ei competit
tanquam Deo, non profecisse; secundum sapientiam autem humanam, h. e. eam, quae
ei ut homini competit, vere profecisse, hominum quidem more, sed tamen supra
modum humanum. Jansen. ibid.


thought very probable, not as a thing which he held most certain. And he
confesses that some (I presume he means of the Church of Rome; for otherwise
he would not so much regard what they thought) are of opinion, that it cannot
be proved by Scripture, that such wisdom was infused into Christ from his
conception, whereby as man he should know all things at the very first: and
therefore they think the words of S. Luke more simply understood thus, that
Christ in respect of that wisdom which he had as man, did truly grow, as other
men do, though in a far greater measure. Thus also did Erasmus (who was before
Calvin) understand it, not thinking it meet that Neque vero perinde nos move^t,
si id pugnet cum aliquo placito Scholasticorum, etc. Eras. ad Luc. 2. 52.
the opinion of the Schoolmen should sway in this matter.

8. Of like nature is that which follows, viz. that Obj.
Calvin says, It is evident that ignorance was common to Christ with the
Angels. And that he particularizeth wherein, viz. that He knew not the day of
judgment; nor that the fig tree was barren, till he came near it.

That Christ as man, knew not what kind of tree it was, Answ.
until he came nigh it, Calvin thinks not Improbable; yet he grants, that
Christ Nihil absurdi est, si dicamus, secundum hominem speciem arboris suisse
illi incogniam: fieri tamen potest, ut consulto accesserit, eventum non
ignorans. Calv. ad Mal. 21. 18.
might on purpose go unto it, though he were not ignorant often the event.
Concerning the other place, viz. Mar. 13. 32. he is more confident; and so well
might he be, the Text being clear and express: But of that day and hour
knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father. Some understand it so, that Christ did not know it, to make it known:
But thus neither does the Father know it; for he does not make it known. It is
therefore to Cer^e Cyrillus lib. 9. Thesaur. cap. 4. fatetur Christum de se,
quatenus homo erat, dixisse, quod ignoraret diem judicii, etc. Jansen. Concord.
cap. 123.
be understood of Christ in respect of his humane nature. And so Cyril
understands it, as Jansenius confesses, though he himself rather likes the
other exposition.

9. The Marquess says, that Calvin is not afraid to censure Obj.
certain words of Christ to be but a weak confutation of what he sought to
refute. And that he says, Christ seems here not to reason solidly.

Answ.
This is just as if one should charge their Angelical Doctor Aquinas with
saying, That there seems to be no God, and that, God seems Videtur quod Deus
non sit. Aquin. part. 1. qu. 2. art. 3.

Videtur quod Deus sit corpus. Ibid. quaest. 3. art. 2.


to be a body: Or rather indeed with saying, That there is no God, and that God
is a body. For thus is Calvin dealt with, commenting upon that, Matthew. 12. 25,
26. Every Kingdom divided against it self, etc. If Satan cast out Satan, etc.
by way of objection he says, Videtur tamen pa^um solida esse refutatio, etc.
Verum nulla in Christum cecidit talis suspicio, etc. Calv. ad Mal. 12. 25.
This confutation may seem not very solid; and then immediately he answers the
objection. Thus also in his Commentary upon that Mat. 9. 5. Whether is easier
to say, etc. Christ (says he) does seem not to reason solidly, etc. Then
presently he adds, But the Videtur tamen parum solid ratiocinari Christus,
etc. Sed in promptu est solutio, etc. Calv. ad Mat. 9. 5.
answer is easy, etc. Of this same nature are the five next following
passages, wherein Calvin is made to say that, which (as the manner of
Expositors is for the better elucidating of that which they have in hand) he
only brings in as an objection, and presently gives answer to it. This is a
piece of the strangest dealing that ever I met with. I do not find that the
Marquess had these allegations from any, as many of the rest (I see) he had:
neither can I think him to have been of such an ignoble disposition, as
wittingly and wilfully so to pervert a man's words and meaning. Therefore I
suppose it was his immoderate desire to find any thing in Calvin, that might
be liable to exception, which made him hastily take hold of that which did
occur, never considering the true sense and meaning of it. But to proceed.

10. Calvin (says the Marquess) says, that Christ refused and denied, as
much as lay in him, to perform the office of a Mediator. Obj.


It Is true, Calvin has these words, but they also are part of an objection.
For the very next word is, Respondeo, I answer. Answ.
So that I might have joined this with those other Calv. ad Mat. 26. 39.
passages immediately before mentioned; though there seems indeed some more
color for this allegation then for the other, yet is there no just ground for
this neither.

11. The next charge against Calvin is, that he says, That Obj.
Christ manifested his own effeminatenesse, by his shunning of death.

This also is of like nature with the former. Calvin writing Answ.
upon those words, Joh. 12. 27. Now is my soul troubled, etc. says, that
Videtur initio sententia haec multum diserepare a proximo sermon. Illud
plusquam heroici pectoris signum erat, hortari suos non modo ad subeundam
mortem, sed libenter and cupidc oppetendam, ubi res ita postulat: nunc mortem
refugiendo mollitiem suam fatetur. Nihil tamen hic legimus, quod non optime
conveniat, etc. Caeterum saluti nostrae utile fuit, imo necessarium, sic affici
Filium Dei. -- Sciamus ergo mortem non fuisse delitias, aut lusum Christo, etc.
Calv. ad Joh. 12. 27.
this does seem to differ much from that which is next before. For that there
Christ showed great courage, exhorting his Disciples not only to suffer death,
but to suffer it willingly and defirously, if the case so require; but now by
shunning death, he confesses his weakness (or softness) of spirit. Then he
adds by way of answer, that yet here is nothing which does not very well
agree. That it was expedient and necessary for our salvation that the Son of
God should be so affected. And that hence we are to know, that Christ's death
was no sport or play unto him, etc. So then the word mollities (which the
Marquess renders effeminatenesse, and not unfitly, I confess, for it
properly signifies softness, and is used for softness of spirit) that word,
I say, is here applied to Christ in a way of Scornful men (Nasuti homines, as
Calvin speaks) are apt to interpret Christ's sear of death effeminatenesse.
objection, though Calvin does positively aver, that Christ was deeply affected
with the horror of his approaching death; and that he was so indeed, is most
evident both by this, and other places of the Evangelical history.

12. The Marquess adds, He says that Thieves and Malefactors hasten to death
with obstinate resolution, despising it with Obj.
haughty courage, others mildly suffer it. But what constancy, courage, or
stoutnesse was there in the Son of God, who was astonished, and in a manner
stricken dead with fear of death? How shameful a tenderness was it to be so
far tormented with fear of common death, as to melt in bloody sweat, and not be
able to be comforted but by the sight of Angels?

Calvin disputes against those who would have it only a Answ.
mere bodily death, not having any curse Convicti ad aliud tandem cavillum
transiliunt; quamvis mortem timuerit Christus, maledictionem and iram Dei, a
qua se tutum esse noverat, non timuisse. Sed expendant pii lectores, quam
honorisicum hoc sit Christo, molliorem ac magis meticulosum fuisse, quam
plerosque gregarios homines. Contumaciter ad mortem properant latrones, etc.
Calv. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 12.
and wrath of God annexed to it, which Christ did fear. But (says he) let the
godly Readers consider, how honorable this is for Christ, to have been more
effemiuate and faint-hearted then most ordinary men. Then follow the words
objected, Thieves and other Malefactors do hasten unto death with obstinate
resolution, etc. The series of the Discourse does plainly show, that Calvin
speaks not positively, but upon supposition, that if it were so, as some hold,
then all this would follow; which he is so far from asserting, that by the
absurdity of it, he proves the erroniousnesse of their opinion whom he does
confute.

13. The Marquess proceeds in his charge against Calvin, saying, He says that
the same vehemency took Rather it should be, took from Christ, etc.
Christ from the Obj.
present memory of the heavenly decree; so that he forgot at that instant, that
he was sent hither to be our Redeemer.

This allegation I grant, is true. Calvin on Mat. 26. 39. has these words
indeed; neither will I undertake the defense Answ.
of all Calvin's expressions, or opinions: I think it not so safe to ascribe
forgetfulness unto Christ, though as Calvin meant it, I do not see that there
is any impiety in it. And the word (...) Mar. 14. 33. importing horror, and
astonishment, may seem to make for it. However Calvin was careful to inculcate
Tenendum quidem est, quod nuper dixi, non fuisse turbulentos Christi affectus,
qui more nostro ejus animo puram moderationem excuterent, etc. Calv. ad Mat.
26. 39. Ibid. Resp. non posse in hac naturae nostrae corruptione perspici
affectuum fervorem cum temperie qualis in Christo fuit. Vide plura. Et vide
Instit. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 12.
this, that he would have none to think that there was any turbulencie and
disorder in Christ's affections, as there is in ours; but only that Christ was
stricken with fear and anxiety so far forth as the sound and entire nature of
man can bear.

14. Calvin is taxed for saying, That Christ's prayer was not Obj.
premeditate, but the force and extremity of grief wringed from him this hasty
speech, to which a correction was presently added, and he chastises, and
recalleth that vow of his, which he had let suddenly slip.

I acknowledge that Calvin has these words in the same Answ.
place, viz. on Mat. 26. 39. neither do I much approve of them: yet, by what
has been said already, it may appear that Calvin's meaning was good, only so
to set forth the anxiety of Christ's soul, as yet to exempt him from whatsoever
is evil and sinful. Bellarmine himself, though he rake up, and rack Calvin's
sayings, to Dicit (Calvinus) Christi naturam fuisse perfectum, and nullam in eo
fuisse passionum inordinationem. Bellar. de Christ. lib. 4. cap. 8.
make them odious, yet confesses that he says, that Christ's nature was
perfect, and that there was no inordinacie of affections in him. But I will
make use of the words of learned Dr. Field, who has answered these objections
against Calvin, long ago.

The Papists (says he) impute I know not what blasphemy to Calvin, for that he
says, Christ corrected the desire and wish that Dr. Field, of the Church, book
5 chap. 18.
suddenly came from him. But they might easily understand, if they pleased,
that he is far from thinking, that any desire, or expressing of desire was
sudden in Christ, as rising in him without consent of reason, or that he was
inconsiderate in any thing he did or spoke; but his meaning is, that some
desires which he expressed, proceeded from inferior reason, that considers
not all circumstances; and that he corrected and revoked the same, not as evil,
but as not proceeding from the full and perfect consideration of all things fit
to be thought upon, before a full resolution be passed. Another learned man
also says, that Calvin Calvinus appellar posteriora haec verba Non siout ego,
etc. correctionem, sed eo sensu, quo Rhetores correctionis figura uti solent;
non quasi aliquod male effatum emendaret, sed ut quod adhuc effatum non erat,
opportune adderet. Origin. revocans desiderium, and quasi recogitans. Hieron.
and Gloss. Interl. revertens in semetipsum. Parker (ni fallor, neque enim nunc
mihi liber est ad manum) de descens. Christ. ad infer.
calls those words, Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, a
correction, in that sense as Rhetoricians are wont to use the figure so called:
not as if he did amend that which was ill spoken, but seasonably to add that
which yet was not spoken. And he cites Origin saying, that Christ did in those
words recall his desire, and as it were recogitate. So likewise he cites
Hierome, and the Interlineary Non, inquic, hoc fiat, quod humano affectu
loquor, sed propter quod ad terras tua voluntate descendl. Hieron. ad Mat. 26.
39.
Gloss, saying, that Christ did return into himself. Hierome does yet further
paraphrase thus: He says, Let not that be, which I speak with a humane
affection Relinquebat naturam humanam parts suas agere, quemadmodum egisset,
si neque cum Divinitate conjuncta fuisset, nec de divino decreto quicquam
scivisset. -- Apt apposita moderatio: Sic enim naturae infirmitatem oftendit,
ut ultra divinae voluntatis terminos non egrediatur. Maldon. ad Mat. 26. 39.
but that, for which by thy will I descended to the earth. The Jesuit
Maldonate says, that Christ left the humane nature to act its part, as it
would have done, if it had not been joined with the divine nature, nor had
known any thing of Gods decree. So he writes upon those words, Father, if it be
possible, etc. And upon those, Nevertheless not as I will, etc. he says, A
moderation is fitly added: For he so shows the infirmity of nature, that yet
he does not exceed the bounds of Gods will. That which Maldonate here calls a
moderation, and Hierome calls a returning into himself, and Origin and the
Gloss call a recalling of the desire, and a recogitating, is as much as that
which Calvin calls a correction.

15. But the Marquess proceeds, and charges Calvin with Obj.
these words: Thus we see Christ to be on all sides so vexed, as being over
whelmed with desperation, he ceased to call upon God, which was as much as to
renounce his salvation: and this (the Marquess says, he says a little
before) was not fained, or as a thing only acted upon a stage.

Surely all that have any spark of Christianity in them, Answ.
must needs assent to Calvin in this, that Christ's passion, as the Evangelists
relate it, was not fained nor acted upon a stage; though (it seems) Nec vero
fictc vel theatrice conqueritur se a Patre relictum. Calv. ad Mat. 27. 46.
they of the Church of Rome on Good Friday (as they call it) use to make a kind
of Stage Play of it. But how unworthily In die Parasceves crucifixus paulatim
detegitur, and ostenditur. Bellar. de Imag. Sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 23.
is Calvin here used? He is made to say, -that Christ was overwhelmed with
desperation, ceased to call upon Sic impios Christi hosts impulit, (nempe
Satanas) ut proterve ejus precationem in risum converterent; volens hoc
artificio cum praecipuis armis spoliare. Et certe haec admodum gravis tentatio
est, etc. Tantundem igitur valuit haec ironia, vel caninus latratus, ac si
negassent Christo quicquam esse negotii cum Deo, quod Eliam implorans in aliud
asylum se conferret. Sic videmus omni ex part fuisse vexatum, ut desperatione
obrutus ab invocando Deo absisteret; quod erat saluti renuntiare. Calvin. ad
Mat. 27. 47.
God, and did as much as renounce his salvation. But any that look into the
place alleged, may see that Calvin is far from this blasphemy. That which he
says, is this, that the wicked enemies of Christ, by Satan's instigation,
deriding him when he cried, Eli, Eli, etc. did labor to overwhelm him with
desperation, and to make him cease calling upon God, which had been as much as
to renounce salvation.

As before Calvin was made positively Caeterum si hodie tam conductitii
Antichristi rabulae, quam domestiei etiam nebulones, quae a nobis recte dicta
sunt, suis calumniis indigne depravant, ne miremur idem nobis quodcapiti nostro
accidere. Calvin. ibid.
to aver that, which he brought in by way of objection; so here that is
censured as spoken by him, which he only speaks of Christ's enemies. But it is
worthy to be observed, that immediately after those words, which are so
pitifully perverted, Calvin comforts himself and others with this
consideration, that if our words, which are right and good, be depraved and
slandered, it is no marvel, seeing Christ himself was thus dealt with. But to
proceed.

16. Calvin (as is alleged) says, That Christ in his soul Obj.
suffered the terrible torments of a damned and forsaken man.

This allegation is true, and so also is that, which follows Answ.
in the next passage but two, and I note it here, because it is of the same
nature. It is no marvel, if it be said that Christ went down into hell, since
he suffered that death, wherewith God in wrath strikes wicked doers. Calvin
has these sayings in the place alleged, viz. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect.
10. I am not Sermon. on Psalm. 16. 10.
of Calvin's mind for the meaning of the article about Christ's descent into
hell, as I have elsewhere showed. And peradventure Calvin might go too far in
exaggerating the sufferings of Christ's soul, as others in this may be too
remiss. But when Calvin speaks of Christ suffering the torments of a damned
man, he means such torments as are without all mixture of sin, for that he
always removes far from Christ, as I have showed before.

And that Christ did suffer the torments of a forsaken man, his own words upon
the cross do show, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Christ had
special cause (as Jansenius observes) to complain, that he was forsaken of
his God, in Propria quadam ratione Christus se derelictum a Deo suo conqueri
potuit, qui cum unitam sibi haberet divinitatem, ejus tamen consolationem in
carne non sensit diffusam. Jansen. concord. cap. 143.
that he had the divine nature united to him, and his humane nature did not
feel any comfort of it. And in this respect it may be said, that Christ
suffered that death, wherewith God in wrath does strike wicked doers, though in
other respects there was great difference.

17. Calvin is charged with this saying, In the death of Obj.
Christ occus a spectacle full of desperation.

Calvin's meaning will easily appear to any that look upon Answ.
his words as they are in the place quoted. He speaks of Joseph of Arimathea
Nunc dum in Christi morte spectaculum desperationis plenum occurrit, quod etiam
viriles animos frangere posset, unde illi reperte tam generosa animositas, ut
inter summos tetrores nihil metuens, longius quam rebus pacatis progredi non
dubitet? Calv. in Mat. 27. 57.
his courage in begging of Pilate Christ's body to bury it, saying, Now when in
Christ's death occurs a spectacle full of desperation, which might have been
able to break a stout heart, whence has he on the sudden such a generous
spirit, that in the midst of terrors fearing nothing, he should not doubt to
proceed further then when all was quiet? Any may here plainly see, that Calvin
speaks not of any desperation that Christ in his death did fall into; but his
meaning is, that a natural man, yea one that had but a small measure of faith,
could have apprehended nothing in Christ's death but matter of desperation. And
surely this appears by the words of the two Disciples (not to speak of the
deportment of the Apostles) We trusted that it had been he that should have
redeemed Israel, Luke 24. 21.

Another sentence is here immediately after cited out of Calvin, viz. In this
spectacle there was nothing but matter of extreme despair. The very words show
it to carry the same sense with the former, though otherwise I can say nothing
to it, the place from which it is taken being mis-cited; for on Joh. 14. 6
Calvin has no such thing.

18. The Marquess taxes Calvin for saying, Christ sitting at the right hand
of his Father, holds but a second degree with him in Obj.
honor, and rule, and is but his Vicar.

Calvin on Mat. 26. 64. does say, That Christ is said to sit at Answ.
the right hand of the Father, because he Dicitur autem Christus sedere ad
dextram Patris, quia summus rex constitutus (qui ejus nomine mundum gubernat)
quasi secundam ab eo honoris and imperii sedem obtinet. Sedet ergo Christus ad
Patris dextram, quia ejus est Vicarius. Calv. ad Mat. 26. 64
has as it were after him the second seat of honor and rule; and because he
is his Vicar. So that Calvin indeed does not say, that Christ sitting at the
right hand of his Father; but, that Christ as sitting at the right hand of his
Father, holds but a second degree, etc. that is, that Christ's sitting at the
right hand of God, though it import great honor and dignity, yet such, as
whereby Christ is but in a second degree of honor under the Father. And surely
this is most true, it belonging unto Christ as man, to sit at the right hand of
God, (as the Council of Trents Ad explicandum Christi gloriam, quam ut homo
prae caeteris omnibus adeptus est, eum in Patris dextra esse confitemur.
Catechis. Coucil. Trident.
Catechism does teach) the honor and dignity which that sitting imports,
though otherwise it be most great, yet must needs be inferior to that, which
belongs to the Father and so also to Christ, as he is one and the same God with
the Father.

19. Lastly (says the Marquess) Calvin holds it absurd, that Christ Obj.
should challenge to himself the glory of his own resurrection, when the
Scripture every where teaches it to be the work of the Father.

It may seem wonderful, that men's words and writings should be thus depraved.
Two places of Calvin are cited for proof of this which is alleged against
him. Now in the Answ
former place, viz. on Joh. 2. 19. he says thus. Here Christ does challenge to
himself Hic sibi Christus resurrectionis gloriam vendicat, quum tamen Scriptura
passim testetu esse opus Dei Patris. Sed haec duo probe inter se convenient.
Scriptura enim, ut Dei potentiam nobis commendet, Patri hoc diserte adscribit,
quod excitaverit Filium a morte: hic vero Christus peculiariter Divinitatem
suam praedicat. Ac Paulus utrumqut conciliat ad Romans 8. 11. nam Spiritum; quem
facit resurrectionis authorem, promiscue nunc Christi, nunc Patris Spiritum
nominat. Calv. ad Joh. 2. 19.
the glory of his resurrection, when as the Scripture usually does testify
that this is the work of God the Father. But these two do well agree together.
For the Scripture, to commend unto us Gods power, does expressly ascribe this to
the Father, that he raised his Son from the dead: but here Christ peculiarly
sets forth his own Divinity. And Paul does reconcile both, Romans 8. 11. For the
Spirit, which he makes to be the Author of the resurrection, he promiscuously
calls sometimes the Spirit of Christ, sometimes the Spirit of the Father. So
also in the other place, viz. on Romans 8. 11. Surely (says he) Christ rose A
selpso certe ac propria virtute Christus resurrexit: Sed quemadmodum solet
Patri transcribere quicquid in se divinae virtutis est, ita Apostoius non
improprie ad Patrem transtulit quod fuit in Christo maxim proprium opus. Calv.
ad Romans 8. 11.
again of himself, and by his own power: But as he used to transcribe to the
Father whatsoever divine power is in him, so the Apostle does not improperly
transfer to the Father that which was Christ's most proper work. Who does not
now see, that Calvin is most far from saying that, which is charged upon him?

20. But the Marquess (notwithstanding the word lastly Obj.
did seem to speak as much) has not yet done with Calvin; but further taxes
him for saying, God is author of all those things, which these Popish Judges
would have to happen by his idle sufferance.

Calvin in the place cited, not barely says that it is so, Answ.
but says that he has plainly showed by Scripture that it is so. And
therefore Et jam satis aperte ostendi, Deum vocari eorum omnium authorem, quae
isti censores volunt otioso tantum ejus permissu contingere. Calv. Instit. l.
1. c. 18. s. 3.
it had been meet that Calvin's proofs should have been examined, before his
doctrine were condemned. Calvin abhorres that position, that God is the author
of sin; as may be seen in the very next Section to that which the Marquess
cites: Yet he proves by many places of Scripture, that God does not only
permit those things wherein men sin, but also in some respect is the author
of them: As for example, that God was the author of Shimei's cursing; not as it
was his sin, but as it was David's affliction. So David acknowledged, saying,
The LORD has said unto him, curse David, 2 Samuel 16. 10. And again, v. 11. The
LORD has bidden him.

21. The next and last charge against Calvin, is little or Obj.
nothing different from that immediately preceding, viz. that he says, Our
sins are not only by Gods It is misprinted, commission.
permission, but by his decree and will.

The Marquess speaks of Calvin's famous brethren condemning this blasphemy. But
they, whom he mentions, Answ.
are (I think) all Lutherans, and so ready to make the worst they can of any
thing that they find in Calvin. But whereas in the conclusion he says, What
Scriptures or Fathers is there for all this? Surely Calvin has alleged many
Scriptures for that which he asserteth; which it Quod aurem nihil efficiant
homines nisi arcano Dei nutu, etc. innumeris and claris testimoniis probatur,
Calv. Inst. l. 1. c. 18. sect. 1. Non male alicubi Augustinus ita definit, quod
ipsi peccant, eorum esse; quod peccando hoc vel illud agant, ex virtute Dei
esse, tenebras prout visum est dividentis. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 4.
sect. 4.
had been meet to take some notice of, as I have said before. He also cites
Austine determining thus, That men sin, it is of themselves; but that by
sinning they do this or that, it is by the power of God, who divides the
darkness as he pleases.

And thus have I also answered those things that are in point of Doctrine
objected against Calvin.

After Calvin the Marquess deals with Zuinglius, and objects Os Zuinglius his
Doctrine
diverse things against his Doctrine.

1. Zuinglius (says the Marquess) confesses himself to have Obj.
been instructed against the Mass, by a certain admonisher, which he Page.
184. etc.
knew not, whether it was black or white.

It is true, Zuinglius relates, how having disputed with a Answ.
Scribe about the meaning of those words, This is my body; and having been
Visus sum mihi in somno, multo cum taedio demio contendere cum adversario
Scriba, etc. (nihil altius quam somnium na^^amus, quod ad nos attinet, tamet si
leve non est, quod per somnium didicimus, gratia Deo, etc.) Ibi (...) visus est
monitor ades^e (ater fuerit, an albus, nihil memini; somnium enim narro.) qui
diceret, Qoin igna^e, respondes ei, quod Exo. 12. scribitur, Est enim Phase, h.
e. transitus Domini. Protinus ut hoc phaslna visum est, simul experg^^^o, etc
Zuingl. tom. 2. sol. 249.
urged to produce some place, which is not a parable, where the word is does
import as much as signifies, lie was much troubled about it in his sleep, and
thought that one (whether black or white, he could not remember) stood by him,
and bade him allege that in Exodus 12. 11. It is the Lords Passover.
Whereupon he awaked, and rose, and considered the place, and presently after
preached upon it, so that such as did a little stick before, were fully
satisfied.

Now though Mr. Breerley, and after him the Marquess Breerl. Apol. tract. 2.
cap. 2. sect. 11. subdivis. 2.
make a great matter of this, and say that is derided by learned Protestants
(they cite some Lutherans, as great adversaries to Zuinglius in the matter of
the Sacrament, as the Papists are) yet I see nothing in it that is liable to
any just exception. For it is usual with men to be troubled in their sleep
about that wherein they have been busied before; and sometimes it happens, that
in their sleep that is represented unto them, which before with all their study
they could not find out. As Austine somewhere (I do not now remember the
place, but I have read it in him) tells of one that taught Rhetoric, and being
troubled about the meaning of something that he met with, and was to treat of
to his Scholars, in his sleep he thought that Austine did explain it unto him.
But that which here they take hold of, perhaps is this, that Zuinglius says,
he did not know whether his admonisher were black or white; they seem to
understand this so, as if he knew not whether that admonisher were an evil, or
a good spirit. But if they so take it, they bewray too much ignorance of the
Latin tongue, wherein it is usual, and indeed Albus an ater sis, nescio. Solet
dici de homine vehementer ignoto. Eras. Adag. cent. 6. adag. 99.
a proverbial speech to say, I know not whether he be black or white; that is,
he is one altogether unknown unto me. Erasmus in his Adages sufficiently shows
this to be the meaning of the words, and cites Cicero, Quintilian, Apuleius,
Hierome, using them in this sense.

2. The Marquess says that Zuinglius is taxed by Calvin for depraving the
Scripture, for changing the word est, and putting in Obj.
significat, in his Translation of the New Testament.

But the Marquess does not tell us, where Calvin does Answ.
thus tax Zuinglius; and I suspect that there is some mistake in that word
Calvin, and that it should be some other name.

3. He charge Zuinglius with saying, that these sayings, and the like, If
thou will enter into life, keep Obj.
the Commandments, etc. are superfluous, and hyperbolical.

But in the place alleged, viz. Tom. 1. Fol. 137. Answ.
Zuinglius has no such matter, there is no mention made of those words, If
thou will enter into life, etc.

4. Zuinglius is taxed for saying, that Original sin Obj.
It is misprinted can damn us.
cannot damn us; calling it but a disease, or contagion.

It is true, Zuinglius says, that Original sin is a disease, but Answ.
such an one as of it self is not capable, Unde colligimus, peccatum originale
morbum quidem esse, qui tamen per se culpabilis non est, nec damnationis poenam
infer potest, etc. donec homo contagione hac corruptus Legem Dei
transgreditur, quod tum demum fieri consuevit, cum Legem sibi positam videt,
and intelligit. Zuingl. de Bap. tom. 2 fol. 90.
nor can infer damnation, except a man being corrupted with this contagion
transgress the Law of God, which then uses to happen, when he sees and
understands the Law given unto him. And in this I plead not for Zuinglius, I
confess he erred, and is worthy to be taxed. But I do not know any Protestants
that do second Some endeavor to excuse Zuinglius in this, but I see not how he
can be excused.
him in this; I speak not of Socinians, Arminians, etc. but such as are
otherwise sound and orthodox. Neither should the Romanists here so much tax
Zuinglius, seeing they hold that Concupiscence after Baptism, though it remain
the same that it was before, is in it self properly no sin, but Bellar. de
amiss. great. and stat. peccat. lib. 5. cap. 7.

Bellar. de great. primi hom. cap. 5.


is only called sin, because it proceeds from sin, and inclines unto
sin. Yea they hold, that had man been created (as they suppose he might have
been) in his pure naturals, that is, in a mere natural condition, not having
any supernatural grace superadded to his nature, he should have had the same
concupiscence, which now he has in the state of corrupt nature. The state of
man since the fall of Adam (they say) does not Quare non magis differt status
hominis post lapsum Adae a statu ejusdem in puris naturalibus, quam differt
spoliatus a nudo. -- Proinde corruption naturae non ex alicujus doni naturalis
carentia, neque ex alicujus malae qualitatis accessu, sed ex sola doni
supernaturalis ob Adae peccatum amissione perfluxit. Bell. ibid.
differ more from the state of man in his pure naturals, then one that is
stripped of his clothes differs from one that is naked, having never had
clothes. And therefore (they say) the corruption of man's nature does not
proceed from the want of any natural gift, nor from the access of any evil
quality, etc. Its true, some of the Romish writers are of another opinion; but
Bellarmine Bell. ibid.
shows that the most of them hold thus; yea he alleadges, that this is the
determination of two Popes, and that therefore all ought to hold it.

5. Zuinglius is said to make baptizing of Infants a thing indifferent, which
may be used or left off. Obj.


Zuinglius complains of the Catabaptists in his time, for keeping such a stir
because children were baptized, Answ.
saying, Number tanti momenti res haec est, ut tantas turbas and dissidia propter
hanc excitare conveniat, etiamsi par vulorum haptismus nullis, omnino
Scripturarum testimoniis inniteretur? externum quiddam est, and ceremoniale,
quo ut aliis rebus exter^is, ecclesin digne and honest uti potest, veliidem
hoc omittere, and rite tollere, quatenus ipsi ad aedificationem and salutem
omnium facere videtur. Zuingl. de Baptis. tom. 2. fol. 96.

Baptismum in Circumcisionis locum successisse, abunde satis demonstratum est.
Zuingl. ibid. fol. 95.

Prohibere ne baptismi signum infantes accipiant, quid aliud est, quam eosdem a
Christo repellere? Ibid. fol. 86.


That the matter was not of such moment, as that there should be so much stir
about it, though there were no testimonies at all to prove it. It is (he says)
an external thing, and ceremonial, which as other external things, the Church
may lawfully either use, or omit, as she sees it make for edification and
salvation. Here Zuinglius seems only to mean thus much, that the Church for
avoiding of tumults and combustions, may for a while forbear the administration
of Pedobaptisme. Yet Zuinglius was far from holding the baptizing of children
to be a thing indifferent: For he says, that it succeeded in the room of
Circumcision; And that to hinder children from receiving Baptism, is as much
as to repel them from Christ.

6. Zuinglius is censured for saying, That Princes may be Obj.
deposed by the godly, if they be wicked, and go contrary to the rule of Christ.

I grant that Zuinglius has words to this purpose. But Answ.
(as a learned Writer observes) Zuinglius living in a Republic, did not
sufficiently Idex toto illo tractatu constat, Zuinglium in ea sententia fuisse,
regna omnia esse electiva, nulla proprie successiva, and haereditaria; in quo
non negamus eum errasse in facto, ut loquintut; contrarium enim nobis certum
est: sed vivebat ille in republica, in qua regnonorum jura non satis
expenderat. Hoc igitur posito fundamento, existimavit eos, ad quos jus
electionis pertinebar, illud sibi etiam reservasse, ut si Rex vel Princeps
electus, non staret juramento suo, sed re^pub. pessum ire sineret and tyrannice
gubernaret, tum etiam possent talem Principem deponere, etc. -- Quid mirum si
ita senserit Helvetius, etc. Rivet. Jes. vap. cap. 13. sect. 8.
consider the Laws and rights of Kingdoms. He thought that all Kingdoms were
elective, none successive and hereditary, which was his error. And hereupon,
that they, to whom belonged the right of election, did reserve this power to
themselves, that if the King did not keep his oath, but did rule tyrannically;
they might depose him. Zuinglius also (in the place cited by the Marquess)
has these words, (which also the forementioned Author does relate) Non est
qued eum trucides, nec ut bellum and tumultum quis excitet, sed aliis viis res
tenianda; quia in pace vocavit nos Deus, 1 Cor. 7. that is, Thou must not kill
him, nor must any raise war or tumult, but the matter must be attempted some
other way; for God has called us in peace, 1 Cor. 7. Concerning Zuinglius his
opinion in this point, see likewise B. Bilson in his book entitled, The true
difference betwixt Christian subjection, and Antichristian rebellion, page 513,
etc. But when the Romanists tax Zuinglius, and so other Protestant writers for
stich doctrine, what do they else but verify that of the Poet, Clodius accusat
moechos, Catalina Cethegum? What do they else but tax others for that, wherein
themselves are most fatilty? See B. Bills. ibid. p. 425, etc. and Rivet. Jes.
vap. cap. 12.

7. In the last place, Zuinglius is charged with this saying, Obj.
That when we commit adultery, or murder, it is the work of God, being the
mover, the author, or inciter, etc. God inoveth the thief to kill, etc. he is
foreed to sin, etc.

That learned Protestant, viz. Graweras, by whom (the Marquess says)
Zuinglius is reprehended for this, was a Answ.
Lutheran, and so as ready to reprehend any thing in Zuinglius as they of the
Church of Rome are. But let Zuinglius speak for himself. The Law Cum lex homini
est data, semper peccat, cum contra legem facit, quamvis nec sit, nec vivat,
nec operetur nisi in Deo, ex Deo, and per Deum. Sed quod Deus operatur per
hominem, homini vitio vertitur, non etiam Deo: hic enim sub lege est, lile
liber, etc. Unum igitur atque idem facinu^, puta adulterium aut homicidium,
quantum Dei authoris, motoris, ac impulsoris opus est, crimen non est; quantum
autem hominis est, crimen ac foelus est. Ille enim lege non tenetur, hic autem
lege etiam damnatur. Zuing. de Provid. tom. 1. fol. 365.
(says he) being given unto man, he always sins, when he does any thing
against the Law; although he neither is, nor lives, nor works, but in God, from
God, and by God. But that which God works by man, is reckoned as a fault in
man, but not in God. For man is under a law, but God is free, etc. Therefore
one and the same act, to wit, adultery or murder, as it is of God the author,
mover and inciter, so it is no crime: but as it is of man, so it is a crime and
a wickedness. For God is not bound by any law; but man is even condemned by
the Law. Here Zuinglius teaches no other doctrine then (as I have showed
before) Aquinas does, and no learned Romanist (I am sure) will gainsay, viz.
that God is the author of that which is sin in man, as adultery, or murder;
yet not as it is sin, viz. an irregularity and swerving from the Law, but
only as it is an action, and has some entity or being in it. Whereas he speaks
of Gods forcing man Permitto coactum esse, etc. Zuing. ibid. p. 366.
to sin, though I do not like the expression, yet it is but like to that
which Bellarmine (whose words I cited before) uses, when he says that God
does bend and wrest the wills of wicked men. The meaning of them both, I
suppose, is, that God by his overruling providence does so order it, that
though (as was also cited before out of Austin) men do wickedly of themselves,
yet he makes them to do this rather then that, as he pleases.

The Marquess now comes to Melancthon, and his doctrine. Of Melancthons
Doctrine.
And 1. he charge him with teaching, that there are three Divinities, as
there are three Persons. Page 85.


Stancarus, whom the Marquess cites as reprehending Obj.
Melancthon for this, was Melancthons adversary, and therefore Answ.
his testimony in this case is of no weight. But the Marquess also cites
Melancthons Common-Places, an. 1545. Now in Melancthons Works set forth in four
Volumes at Wittemberge, an. 1580. in the Index of the Books contained in the
first Volume, the last Edition Locorum Theologicorum postrema Editio absoluta
anno 1545.
of those Common-Places is said to have been in the year 1545. though
afterward where the Common-Places Locorum Theologicorum postremn Editio
absoluta Wittembergae anno 1543.
themselves are exhibited, the last Editidition of them is said to have been
an. 1543. But thus it seems the last Edition was at least an. 1545. if not
before. Now it is not probable, that if such a gross error had slipped from
Melancthon, in his Common-Places, it would have been in the last Edition of
them. However, I find no such thing in them, as is alleged, but the quite
contrary, viz. Una est aeterna Essentia divina; that is, There is one eternal
divine Essence. And again, Sunt tres Personae Divinitatis, that is, There are
three Persons of the Divinity. So that Melancthon does acknowledge but one
Divinity, though three Divine Persons.

2. The Marquess says, That he affirms Polygamie not Obj.
to be against Jus divinum, and advises Hen. 8. to it.

I find no such piece among Melancthons Works, as Council. Answ.
Theol. which the Marquess cites to make good this accusation. But I find
Examen Theologicum, Vidimus etiam multos, qui usitatas leges connubiorum ideo
negligebant, quod leguntur dissimilia veterum exempla de polygamia, and de
conjugiis Jacobi, qui duas sorores duxit. Non est autem exemplis, sed legibus
judicandum, and in hac tanta re considerentur praecepta divina. Certissimum
est, legem conjugii primam ita sancitam esse, ut unius maris, and unius
foeminae conjunctio esset. -- Filius Dei nos ad primam institutionem retrahit,
etc. Melancth. tom. 1 fol. 339.
and in it the contrary to this, which Melancthon is here charged with. We
have seen many (says he) who did neglect the usual Laws of Marriages, because
we read how of old they had many wives, and Jacob married two sisters. But we
must judge not by examples, but by Laws; and in a matter of such moment as
this, let Gods precepts be considered. It is most certain, that the first Law
of Marriage was so established, that one man, and one woman should be joined
together. -- The Son of God does draw us back to the first institution, etc.

3. He is said to teach peremptory resistance against Magistrates; Obj.
and to enable the inferior Magistrate to alter Religion against the contrary
Edicts of the Superior.

For the latter part of this charge the Marquess cites Answ.
Council. Theol. which book I find not (as I said) amongst Melancthons Works.
For the former part, he cites Melancthon on Romans 13. but in that place there
is not a syllable (that I can see) whereby it may appear, that Melancthon
teaches any resistance against the Magistrate. All that I find is, that he
teaches Magistracy to be of God, and answers the arguments of the
Anabaptists against it.

Here the Marquess adds, So Calvin, so Beza, so Goodman, so Danaeus, so Knox,
etc. all hold it lawful to depose, murder, or to arraign their Prince, etc.
But where these Authors, either all or any of them do hold thus, he shows
not, he does not so much as point at any of their writings where such doctrine
may be found. I know that some of these Authors here mentioned, are charged in
this kind by Romish Writers; but withal I know that the charges brought
against them are answered. See Rivet. Jes. Vap. cap. 13.. 9. 10, 11. Bills. of
Christ, subject. Page 509. etc. The former of these answers to what is
alleged against Calvin; the latter, to what is alleged both against him,
and against Beza, Goodman, and Knox. But some of the Authors, whom the
Marquess here cites, as being of this opinion concerning Magistrates, he was
much mistaken in, viz. Bancroft, who did declare himself To this purpose does
the Marquess himself cite Mr. Bancroft, page 203.
so much the other way, that he taxed some of these here mentioned by the
Marquess, as being not respective enough of the honor due to Magistrates. His
book I have read, though now I have it not; nor do I perfectly remember the
title of it. I think also that there is the like mistake concerning Sutcliffe,
whom the Marquess also joyneth with the 1* ^st; I think that he also was so
far from teaching such doctrine, that he did rather tax those, who did but
seem to teach it. But I am not so well assured of him, as of the other.

After Melancthon the Marquess speaks of Andraeas Musculus, Of Andraeas
Musculus his doctrine.
who (he says) was not afraid openly to teach, that the Divine nature of
Christ died upon the Cross with his humane nature. Page 86.


Wolfangus Musculus is an Author well known; but Andraeas Musculus, I confess,
I have not heard of before, so far am I Answ.
from being able to say what he holds: but if he hold, as the Marquess here
alleges, I shall be as ready to explode and abhor his opinion, as any other.

In the next place the Marquess speaks of the divisions Page 86. etc.
of Protestants, which (I confess) have been, and are too The divisions of
Protestants.
great; though diverse of the Sects which he mentions, I do not know that ever
I read of before. But what if Protestants differ among themselves, and so must
needs some of them be in error? Yet may they for all this be in the truth so
far forth as they all agree, and consequently so far forth as they dissent from
the Church of Rome. There were many Sects among the Jews, as Pharisees,
Sadduces, and Herodians, spoken of in Scripture, and the Essenes mentioned by
Josephus. These differing one from another, must certainly some of them err;
yet as they agreed together in opposing Paganism, they were all right.

Whilst the Catholics (says the Marquess) have no jars, no differences
uncomposed, having one common Father, one Conductor Page 87.
and Adviser, as Sir Edw. Sands confesses.

The Authors book, which the Marquess cites, I have, Answ.
but not so distinguished as that which he refers unto, and therefore I
cannot find the words which he alleges. But seeing mention is made of this
book, I think it meet here to insert some things out of it, that so the Reader
may perceive what manner of unity and agreement it is that is amongst them of
the Church of Rome. But now (says that worthy Author) to come to the view of
their Ecclesiastical government, Sir Edward Sand's Europae Spec. p. 23. etc.
not so much as it is reserred to the conduct of souls, though that be the
natural and proper end of that regiment, but rather as it is addressed to the
upholding of the worldly power and glory of their Of the unity that is in the
Church of Rome.
order, to the advancing of their part, and overthrow of their opposites, which
I suppose be the points they now chiefly respect; I think, I may truly say,
there was never yet State framed by man's wit in this world more powerful and
forcible to work those effects; never any either more wisely contrived, and
plotted, or more constantly and diligently put in practice and execution:
insomuch that but for the natural weakness, and untruth, and dishonesty, which
being rotten at the heart abate the force of whatsoever is founded thereon,
their outward means were sufficient to subdue a whole world. -- In their art
they have certain head-assertions, which as indemonstrable principles they urge
all to receive and hold, As, That they are the Church of God, within which
great facility, and without which no possibility of salvation. That divine
Prerogative gramed to them above all other Societies in the world, does
preserve them everlastingly from erring in matter of faith, and from falling
from God: That the Pope Christ's deputy, has the keys of heaven in his
custody, etc. In these (...) no doubt or question is tolerable; and who so join
with them in these, shall find great connivence in what other defect or
difference soever, etc. And by this plot they have erected in the world a
Monarchy more potent then ever any that has been before it, etc. And
afterward, To what a miserable push (says he) have they driven the world,
either in their pleading against them with such force of evidence, Page 202.
and 203.
or in their learning of them, and joining with them, as to stop the month of
the one, and hang the faith of the other on this (...) paradox, I and my Church
cannot possibly err, and this must you take upon our own words to be true. For
as for their conjectural evidence out of the Scripture, there seems to be as
much, or more for the King of Spains not erring, as there is for the Popes; it
being said by the wisest, that the heart of the King is in the hands of God; a
divine sentence is in his lips, and his mouth shall not transgress in
judgment. And a little after: Although it were perhaps not untruly said by a
great Clerk of their own, that the Popes not erring was but Page 204. and 205.
an opinion of policy, and not of Theology; to give stay to the Laity, not
stop to the Divines, of whom in such infinite controversies and jarrings (NB)
about interpretations of Texts, and conclusions of Science, wherein many have
spent a large part of their lives, never any yet went, neither at this day does
go to be resolved by the Pope, as knowing it to be true, which their own Law
delivers, that in holiness any old woman, in knowledge many a Friar might
out-go the Pope, but in power and authority the whole world was under him; yet
at this day they do so generally cling to him, and draw by his line (as having
no hope either of standing against their opposites, but only by him, or of
unity among themselves, but only in him) that touch him, and touch them, etc.
And elsewhere in the same book, It is a Page 114. etc.
wonderful thing (says he) to see what curious order and diligence they use to
suffer nothing to be done, or spring up among themselves; which may any way
give footing to the Religion which they so much hate. And first for the
Scriptures, for as much as the Reformation seems grounded upon them, etc.
though as well to beat back the irksome outcries of their adversaries, as also
to give some satisfaction to their own, that they might not think them so
terribly afraid of the Bible, they were content to let it be translated by some
of their favorers into the vulgar, as also some number of Copies to be
saleable a while at the beginning; yet since having husbed that former clamor,
and made better provision for the establishing of their Kingdom, they have
called all vulgar Bibles straightly in again (yea the very Psalms of David,
which their famous Preacher B. Panigarola translated) as doubting else the
unavoidablenesse of those former inconveniences. -- Neither yet in their very
Sermons, though they preach always in a manner on the Gospel of the day, do
they read, or any other ways recite the Text, but discourse only on such
points of it as they think fittest, without more solemnity, that no sound of
Scripture may possess the people; although the use in France be otherwise for
that matter. Yea some parts of Scripture, as S. Paul's Epistles, they are so
jealous of, and think so dangerous, that by report of diverse (for my self did
not hear it) some of their Jesuits of late in Italy in solemn Sermon, and other
their favorites elsewhere in private communication, commending between them S.
Peter for a worthy Paul, and his writings censured by the Jesuits, and others
of the Church of Rome.
spirit, have censured S. Paul for a hotheaded person, who was transported so
with his pangs of zeal and eagerness beyond all compass in sundry his
disputes, that there was no great reckoning to be made of his assertions; yea
he was dangerous to read, as savouring of heresy in some places, and better he
had not written of those matters at all. Agreeable to which I have heard other
of their Catholics deliver, that it has been heretofore very seriously
consulted among them, to have censured by some means, and reformed the writings
of S. Paul; though for mine own part I must profess I can hardly believe this,
as being an attempt too too abominable and blasphemous, and for these times too
desperate a scandal. But howsoever, he of all others is least beholding to
them, whom, of mine own knowledge and hearing, some of them teach in the Pulpit
not to have been secure of his preaching, but by conference with St. Peter, and
other of the Apostles; nor that he durst publish his Epistles till they had
allowed them. -- And as in the foundation of the Reformation, which is the
Scripture, so much more in the edifice it self, the doctrine and opinions, they
beat away all sound and echo of them, being not lawful there to allege
them, no not to glance at them, not to argue and dispute of them, no not to
refute them. In ordinary communication to talk of matter of Religion, is
Reasoning about matter of Religion not suffered in the Church of Rome, nor
scarce to talk of it.
odious and suspicious; but to enter into any reasoning, though but for
argument sake without other scandal, is prohibited and dangerous. Yea it was
once my fortune to be half threatened for no other fault then for debating with
a Jew, and upholding the truth of Christianity against him: so unlawful are
all disputes of Religion whatsoever. And their Friars even in France, in their
endeavors to convert others, will say it is lawful to persuade them, but not
so to dispute with them. But in Italy this is much more exactly observed, etc.
-- But the most strange thing, as to me it seemed of all other, is, that those
principal Writers, who have employed themselves wholly in refuting from point
to point the Protestants doctrine and arguments, are so rare in Italy, as by
ordinary enquiry, I believe, not to be found. The controversies of Bellarmine
and such like Writers scarce to be found in Italy.
Cardinal Bellarmine I sought for in Venice in alplaces. Neither that, nor
Gregory of Valentia, nor any of su^^ quality could I ever in any Shop of Italy
set eye on; but in instead of them an infinite number of mere invectives and
declamations: which made me entertain this suspicious conjecture, that it
might be their care that no part of the Protestants positions and allegations
should be known, they were so exact, as to make discurrent in some sort even
those very books, which were constrained to recite them, that they might refute
them, etc. By these and other passages in that book, which the Marquess was
pleased to cite, we may see what a politic, indeed, yet withal a poor and
pitiful Unity that is, which is amongst them of the Church of Rome, though the
Marquess here (as also before about the beginning of his Reply) does so boast
of it.

But the Marquess begins again to fall upon Protestant Page 87, etc.
writers, and to inveigh against them, as guilty of strange and unheard of
blasphemies, vileness and wickedness. And as if the testimonies which he
alleges for proof hereof, were not to be doubted of, he says, that they are
the testimonies of Protestants themselves, and not of any of the Church of
Rome. But the most of his testimonies are those of Luther and his followers,
concerning Zuinglius and those that joined with him; or the testimonies of
these concerning the other. Now these being adversaries one to the other, as
the Romanists are to them both, the testimonies of the one against the other
are to be accounted no more valid, then if the testimonies of the Romanists had
been alleged against them. Mr: Breerley premonisheth him, that shall
undertake to answer his Apology, to forbear to urge the testimonies In his
Advertisement.
of such, as persisted professed enemies to the Roman Sea, and also of those,
who, though but for a time, did stand in some opposition against it. Yet
himself (and from him the Marquess) usually does urge the testimonies of
those, who were professed adversaries to them, against whom they are urged. But
waving those particulars which are founded upon such testimonies (as indeed the
most are) there are some other, to which I shall endeavor to give answer.

1. It is objected, That Luther was taught by the Devil, that Of Luther's
conference with the Devil.
the Mass was naught; and overcome with the Devils reasons, he abolisht it.

Ans. It is true, Luther himself does at large relate, how Luth. de Missprivat.
and unct. sacerdot. tom. 7. fol. 228, etc.
that about midnight when he awaked, the Devil did dispute with him, and
convince him, that the Mass, which for many years he had celebrated, was evil
and unlawful, as being most repugnant to Christ's institution. This many of the
Romish writers upbraid him with, as if the Mass must needs therefore be good,
because the Devil did plead against it, and Protestants make use of those very
arguments which the Devil did urge in his dispute with Luther. But though the
Devil be a liar, and has always some evil and false end at which he aims, yet
the thing it self which he says is not always false. For he confessed Christ
to be the Son of God, Mat. 8. 29. and Paul and his companions to be the
servants of the most high God, which did show the way of salvation, Act. 16.
17. Neither do I see any reason, why Luther might not come to see his error,
and to correct it, by the Devils dispute with him, though the Devil intended no
such matter; as well as Monica, Austin's mother, came to see her vice and to
abandon Aug. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 8.
it, by being upbraided with it by one, whose intent was nothing less then to
work such an effect upon her. Mr. Breerley will not admit, that the Devil in
that dispute did seek to drive Luther to despair: But Luther, whom any
indifferent man will rather believe in this case, did judge otherwise of it. It
is true (says Verum quidem est, quod mendax sit (sc. diabolus) sed ejus
mendacia non sunt simplicis artficis, sed long callidiora and instructiora ad
fallendum, qua^ humanus animus assequi possit. Ipse sic adoritur, ut
apprehendat aliquam, and solidam veritatem, quae negari non potest, atque eam
adeo callide and astute urget and acuit, adeo speciose fucat suum mendacium, ut
fallat vel cautissimos. Uti cogitatio illa, quae Judae cor percussit, vera
erat, Tradidi sanguinem justum: hoc Judas negare non poterat. Sed hoc erat
mendacium, Ergo est desper andum de gratia Dei. Et tamen diabolus hoc
mendacium, hanc cogitationem tam violenter ursit, ut Judas eam vincere non
posset, sed desperaret. Proinde, bone frater, domine Papista, non mentitur
Satan, quando accusat, aut urget magnitudinem peccati, etc. Sed ibi mentitur
Satan, quando ultra urget, ut desperem de gratia, etc. Confessus quidem sum
(lege Dei convictus) coram diabolo, me peccasse, me damnatum esse, ut Judam.
Sed verto me ad Christum cum Petro, etc. Luth. loc. citat. fol. 230.
he) the Devil is a liar, but an artificial liar; his lies are more cunning and
crafty, then man is able to imagine. He lays hold on some clear truth that
cannot be denied, and does urge it so subtly, and does so varnish his lie, as
to deceive even those that are most wary. As that thought which he put into
Judas, was true, I have betrayed innocent blood: this Judas could not deny. But
this was a lie; Therefore I must despair of Gods mercy. Yet did the Devil bring
him to this. Therefore when the Devil does urge the greatness of sin, he
does not lie: but herein he lies, that he would make me to despair of Gods
grace. I confessed (being convinced by the law of God) before the Devil, that I
sinned; but with. Peter I turn me unto Christ, etc. This plainly shows, what
(in Luthers judgment) the Devil did aim at, though he failed in his design.
Neither is this answer impertinent, as Mr. Breerley also does pretend, as may
sufficiently appear by what I have said before. It makes nothing (he says) to
prove that the Devil therefore did not instruct Luther against the Breerl.
Apol. page 741.
Mass. But what if Luther were convinced of his error by those arguments,
which the Devil urged against him, only to drive him to despair? This does
but set forth the wisdom and goodness of God, in making use of the malice of
the Devil for the good of those whom he loves. As Austine observes in the
reformation, which God wrought in his Mother, when she Quid tunc egisti Deus
meus? Unde curasti? Unde sanasti? Nonne protulisti durum and acutum ex altera
anima convitium, tanquam medicinale ferrum, ex occultis provisionibus tuis, and
uno ictu putredinem illam praecidisti? Illa enim irata, exagitare appetivit
minorem dominam, non sanare, etc. At tu Domine rector coelitum and terrenorum,
ad usus tuos contorquens profunda torrentis, fluxum seculorum ordinans
turbulentum, etiam de alterius animae in sania sanasti alteram. Aug. Confess.
lib. 9. cap. 8.
was a young girl, by the means of a maid that falling out with her, cast her
in the teeth with her wine-bibbing, thinking only to reproach and vex her; but
God by the distemper of the one did work a cure upon the other.

From Luther the Marquess passes to Zuinglius, saying, that Page 88.
Gualterus calls him the author of war, the disturber of peace, proud and
cruel: and instances in his strange attempts against the Tigurines his
fellows, whom he forced by want and famine to follow his Doctrine, and that he
died in armor, and in the war.

When I only looked upon the place, as cited by the Marquess, Answ.
viz. In Apolog. pro Zuing. I could not but admire, Zuinglius vindicated.
that Gualterus in his Apology for Zuinglius should write thus of him: But
examining the truth of the Quotation, I am much more filled with admiration.
For Gaulterus is made to charge Zuinglius Hic ergo nonnullorum infirmitate
abusa adversariorum improbitas, Zuinglium iniquissimum belli authorem, and
violentum pacis publicae turbatorem fingit, etc. Duo itaque hic nobis agenda
veniunt: primum quod Zuinglius nec belli author fuerit, nec violento gladio
immanis and barbari militis instar, in aciem and pugnam eruperit: alterum, quod
non ideo vel miser, vel mendax, and blasphemus dici possit, quod eo mortis
genere sublatus fit. -- Licet his and communem patriae morem addere, quae non
abs re militiis pro patria susceptis, verbi and rerum sacraru^ ministros
adhibere solet. -- Pug^ae non ut belli imperator, vel antesignanus, sed ut
Pastor pro more gentis, and civis fidelis, Zuinglius interfuit. -- Obiit certe
in bello Zuinglius, and armatus obiit: sed bonus civis, and fidelis pastor suis
periclitantibus deesse, nec gregem suum pereuntem deserere potuit. Gualt. Apol.
pro Zuingl.
with these things, which he does purposely and professedly clear him of,
complaining of those that do charge him with them. He shows that Zuinglius was
not the author of that war, which was betwixt the Tigurines and their
neighbors. It was the fashion (he says) among the Tigurines, when they went
to war in behalf of their country, to have their Ministers along with them. And
so Zuinglius went out to battle, and died in it, and that armed; yet not either
as chief Commander, or Ensignebearer, but only as a good Citizen, and faithful
Pastor, who might not leave his people in such an exigence. And whereas the
Marquess speaks of Gualterus his instancing in Zuinglius his strange attempts
against the Tigurines, etc. it was a great oversight in him: For Gualterus only
taxes them, who say, Zuinglius Tigurinis novi and exquisitifacinoris contra
socios audendi author fuerit, vt videl. victus inopia and famis necessitate eos
in suas parts concedere cogeret, etc. that is, That Zuinglius caused the
Tigurines to attempt a strange enterprise against their companions, (other
Helvetians that were their confederates) so as by want and famine to force them
to join with them, etc. Thus all this great charge brought against Zuinglius,
is built merely upon mistakes.

The next that the Marquess falls upon, is Beza, upon whom is cast a most foul
asperfion, That in his Epigrams he Page 89.
has Verses concerning his Boy Andebert, and his Wench Candida; and that
having debated at large which sin is to be preferred, he chooses the Boy at
last.

Answ. If Beza had indeed sometime been guilty of this Beza vindicated.
vile enormity which is fained of him, what could any justly infer from
hence, but that the grace of God did eminently appear in that change which
afterward was wrought in him? The Apostle having spoken of such as are guilty
of gross sins, and among the rest of this here charged upon Beza, says to
the Corinthians, And such were some of you, but you are washed, but you are
sanctified, but you are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God, I Cor. 6. II. But it can never be proved that Beza was
guilty of such wickedness, though diverse both Romanists and Lutherans have
charged him with it. Beza has made answer for himself. I. He confesses
Poeticos meos lusus, quum ut res serio dictas and scriptas interpretaris, quis
te judex ae quus audiat? Beza Apol. 2. ad Claud. de. Saints.
that in his younger years he had exercised his Poetical faculty by composing
amatorious Verses: but, he says, it is no equal dealing, that what he did in
Cur, publico scripto a me abdicatos faetus aboleri non sinis? Beza ibid.
sport, should be interpreted as done in earnest. 2. He professes, that he had
by a public writing rejected and disavowed Et quaenam, illa est Candida? Uxor
mea scilicet, quam in meis versiculis, praegnantem super is commendo, quum uxor
mea nunquam etiam pepererit. Beza, ibid.
those Verses; and complains of his adversaries, who would not suffer them to
be abolished. 3. He shows that this Candida spoken of in his Epigrams, is but
a fained name. 4. That Quid, quum usque eo proveheris, ut meam cum honestissimo
viro, and jam tum in Senatu Parisiensi advocato, quem vocant, nunc vero in
civitate Aureliensi magna cum dignitate versanti, amioitiam and familiaritatem
summam ad nefarium and execrandum illud scelus transferas, etc. quis teipsum
vir honestus non execretur? Beza ibid.
Andebert, who is also mentioned in those Epigrams, was a man of known
integrity, and of great dignity in France; and that therefore an odious thing
it was, so to pervert that great friendship and familiarity which he had with
him, as to turn it into that execrable filthiness not to be named. Mr.
Breerley, who sets down a great Breerl. Apol. page 583, etc.
many of those Verses, which the Marquess does but point at, takes upon him to
refell that which some others answer in the behalf of Beza, but never takes
notice of this which Beza has said in his own behalf.

But the Marquess returns to Luther; and besides other things which he objects
against him, but proves only by the Page 90.
testimony of his adversaries, or by such pieces of Luthers own Works as I have
not liberty to peruse, he taxes him for giving such opprobrious terms to King
Henry 8.

Ans. It is true, K. Hen. 8. having written (or at least some other in his
name) against Luther and his Doctrine, Luther Of Luther's writing against K.
Hen. 8.
did return answer so as to show but small respect to the person against whom
he wrote. But afterward Luther, in an Epistle which he wrote to the King,
confessed his fault, humbly craving Mihi conscius maxim sum gravissime esse
tuam Majest, libello meo, quem non ingonio meo, sed incitantibus his qui
Majest. tuae parum favebant, stultus and praeceps edidi --.Quare his liter is
prosterno me pedibus Majest. tuae quam possum humillime, and per Christi
amorem, crucem and gloriam oro and obsecro, Majest. tua dignetur sese
submittere, and veniam donare in quibuscunque Majest. tuam laesi, etc. Deinde
si Majest. tuae sereniss. non videbitur contemnendum, ut alio libello publico
palinodiam cantem, and nomen Majest. tuae rursus honorem, det mihi clementem
aliquam significationem, tum in me mora non erit ulla, faciam illud
libentissime. Luth. epist. ad Reg. Angl. tom. 2.
pardon, and offering to write a public recantation, and to do the King
honor, if he should require it. Indeed the King not answering Luthers
expectation, but instead of accepting his submission setting forth another book
against him, with his Epistle annexed to it, and insulting over him as if he
had recanted his doctrine, Luther made answer to this book also, yet so as to
abstain from those terms of contumely and reproach which before he had used,
only showing that he was firm and steadfast in his doctrine, yea daily more and
more confirmed in it; and that no Superbe ad istud Regis scriptum eram
taciturus, nisi me mea Epistola moveret, quom quicunque est libelli author, it
a interpretatur, quasi palinodiam cecinerim, h. e. meam doctrinam
retractaverim, ut omnino respondendum esse putem. -- Si quis vel regum vel
principum arbitratur Lutherum sese ita submissurum ipsis, ut quasi partim recte
pie^que docuerit, petiturus sit veniam supplex: nemo omnium mortalinm (quod ad
doctrinam nostram attinet) unquam a me tanti fiet, ut eum sim vel flocci
pensurus, tantum abest ut quisquam me palinodiam cantaturum sperare debeat. --
Absit nobis in causa religionis submissio: absit omnis patefactae veritatis
revocatio. -- Si quis forte libellum Regis contra me scriptum legens, dubitet
de me meaque constantia, and voluntate, quasi quae antea scripserim and
docuerim, ea Epistola, quam Regi seripsi privatim, recantaverim; is hoc sibi
persuadeat, adeo ^^e non recant^sse, nec recontaturum unquam, ut aperte sentiam
me indies incredibiliter magis magisque divina gratia corroborari, tam procul
abest ut apicem vel iota sim revocaturus. Luth. ad maledic. and coutumel.
Script. Reg. Angl. lit. tom. 2.
man's person, how great soever he were, should be of any esteem with him so as
to bring him to any recantation in that respect.

The Marquess having censured some of the prime Doctors Page 93.
of the Reformed Churches, falls to censure the people, as being generally
averse from all honesty and godliness; and to this end he all eadgeth the words
of Luther, and some others, who complain of the vicious and corrupt ways of
those that live under the pure preaching of the Gospel; and he concludes, How
could the people be better, when their Ministers were so bad?

Bellarmine urging also some of these testimonies, proceeds so far in his
censure, as to say, that though among them of the Church of Quod vero attiner
ad populum, sunt quidem in Ecclesia Catholica plurimi mali, sed ex haereticis
nullus est bonus; and quanquam res ipsa notissima est, etc. Bell. de Not.
Eccles. l. 4. c. 13.
Rome (for that he means by the Catholic Church) there be many bad, yet among
Protestants (whom after his manner he terms Heretics) there is none good; and
this (he says) is notorious. Of the people prosessing the Protestant Religion.


But if both Ministers and people were bad, as their adversaries pretend, yet
might their doctrine and profession be good for all that. It was the Apostles
complaint in his time, All seek their own, not the things that are Jesus
Christ's, Phil. 2. 21. Yet the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which they preached and
professed, was never a whit the worse for all this, though with some it might
be worse accounted of. In like manner the Prophets frequently complain of the
people of the Jews, whose Religion nevertheless was the only true Religion in
the world. See Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6. Jer. 5. 1. 2. and 9. 2. etc. Ezekiel. 22. 2. etc.
and so many other places. And that the Protestant doctrine is not to blame,
what ever the Preachers and professors of it be, may appear by those very
testimonies which the Marquess and other allege. For in that (as they show)
Ministers tax and reprove people for being so bad, it argues that the doctrine
delivered unto them, is good, though they make no good use of it. But that
Protestants are so universally bad, as that Bellarmine should say there is none
good among them, is too gross an aspersion; and Sedillud apud Genevates
laudabile, si quid usquam gentium, quodque Rempub. efficit, si non opibus, and
imperii magnitudine, certe vitrutibus ac pietate florentem: illa scil.
Pontificum censura, qua nihil magis, ac divinius cogitari potuit ad coercendas
hominum cupiditates, and ca vitia quae legibus humanis ac judiciis emendari
nullo modo possunt. -- Igitur nulla meretricia, nullae ebrietates, nullae
saltationes, nulli mendici, nulli otiosi in ca civirate reperiuntur. Bedin.
Method. histor. cap. 6. prope finem.
wondrous impudence it is to add, that this is notorious to all that know
them. I will only cite the testimony of Bodinus one that never withdrew himself
(for any thing I find) from communion with the Church of Rome: He speaking of
Geneva, where Calvin and Beza were Ministers of the Gospel, exceedingly
commends the discipline there used, Then which (he says) nothing could be
imagined greater, and more divine for the restraining of men's lusts, and those
vices, which by humane Laws and Judgments could no way be reformed. Insomuch
that no whoredoms, no drunkenness, no dancings, no beggars, no idle persons
are found in that City.

But to proceed, the Marquess in the conclusion of all that he has in this
kind, relates horrible things of Calvin Page 95.
in respect both of his life and death, alleging that they are written by two
known and approved Protestant Authors.

One of these Authors, whose words the Marquess alleges, was indeed a
Protestant, but a great Lutheran, to Answ. calvin vindicated.
wit, Schlusselberg, and a professed adversary unto Calvin; and I presume so
also was the other, who (the Marquess says) did write the life of Calvin, and
confirm that which is said by the former, to wit, So the name is printed
whether rightly or no I know not.
Herennius, though I have not heard of him before. Mr. Breerley (so far as I
find) never mentions him, though he make very frequent use of Schlusselberg,
whose words concerning Calvin, here cited by the Marquess, he all eadgeth in
two several places of his Apology. But however, Breerl. Apol. p. 416. and 580.
Bolsecus is the man from whom at first did proceed whatsoever any have in
disgrace of Calvin, either for his life, or death. Now this Author lived some
while at Geneva where Calvin was, and being opposed by him (it seems) for some
things which he could not approve, he both became Vide Beza in vita Calvin.
Calvin's bitter enemy, and also turned back to Popery, and was a Papist at that
very time when he wrote of Calvin, as is confessed by Mr. Breerley, who says,
that therefore he does purposely forbear to urge his testimony; in which
respect Breerl. Apol. p. 580.
also, it may be, the Marquess made no mention of this Author, because he
would not seem in this case to allege any of their own Church. But to what
porpose is it, that they forbear to cite Bolsecus, when as they cite those, who
have nothing in this kind but from Bolsecus? He was the first, and for some
while the only man that did traduce Calvin, as concerning his life and death.
And therefore Bellarmine, Bell. de Not. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 14. and 17.
as writing before those, whom Mr. Breerley and the Marquess mention,
alleges only Bolsecus as relating things that concern Calvin of this nature.

But if Mr. Breerley (and so other Romanists) could think there was just cause
to except against the testimonies of Breerl. in his Advertisement
Benno, and others concerning Pope Hildebrand, called Gregory 7. alleging
that they were his adversaries, and took part with the Emperor against him,
though yet Benno was a Cardinal, and the rest were all Romanists; what candor
and ingenuity is there to allege against Calvin the testimonies of those who
did profess themselves adversaries unto him? Besides, that Bolsecus the first
deviser of these calumnies, was one of their own party. For the things that are
objected; That concerning the manner of Calvin's death, appears most false, by
what Beza has written of it, who being with Calvin at Geneva when he dyed, had
more cause to know Beza in vita Calvin.
the truth then Bolsecus, who was removed (I think) from Geneva before that
time.

And the other particular about Calvin's being stigmatized, is clearly and fully
refuted by Andreas Rivetus in his Jesuita Vapulans, where he produces the very
Records of that Rivet. Jes. Vap. cap. 2:
City, where this is said to have been done, and shows by the inquisition
that was there made concerning Calvin (it being the place where he was born)
that nothing is objected against him, but only his falling off from the Roman
Religion. And thus (I hope) both Calvin and others are sufficiently vindicated,
and purged from those aspersions that are cast upon them.

Now if I had a mind to recriminate, I might easily (to use the Marquess his
words) enlarge my Paper to a volume of Page 93.
instances in their Popes and Cardinals, Monks and Friars, Priests and Jesuits
(not to speak of their other sort of people) of whose monstrous wickedness
their own Authors have largely testified. But I like not Camarinam hanc movere,
to stir this puddle; I Will only cite one Distich of Mantuan, who was somewhat
before Luther, and is commended by Bellarmine as a learned and godly Poet, and
one that wrote much in Bell. de Eccles. Scriptor.
commendation of the Saints; but see what he writes in commendation of Rome,
where the Popes Holiness (as they style him) has his Palace:

Vivere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma: Mantuan. Silv. lib. 2.

Omnia eum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
That is,

Depart from Rome, if holy you would be:
For there may be all things but Piety.
Toward the end of the Reply, the Marquess goes about to prove, That the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome is the Page 96. etc.
same still that it was at the first.

But, 1. if all the testimonies were truly and pertinently alleged, yet are
they not sufficient to evince what he asserteth, not so much as one place of
Scripture being produced for proof of any of those points, on which he
insisteth. And therefore though those ancient Writers, which are cited, did
indeed speak so much as is pretended, yet there being no ground nor warrant for
those things from the Scripture, we may say in the words of our Savior, From
the beginning it was not so. 2. Most of the particulars Mat. 19. 8.
which are mentioned, I have spoken to before, and have showed, that neither
Scripture nor Fathers are on their side, but both against them. 3. And for some
few points not touched before, I shall briefly consider and examine what is
objected.

The Marquess says, That of old the Church did offer prayers for the dead,
both public and private, to the end Page 98.
to procure for them ease and rest, etc.

Prayer for the dead, as they of the Church of Rome do Answ.
now use it, is grounded upon Purgatory. It is certain (says Bellarmine)
Certum est, Ecclesiae suffragia non prodesse beatis, nec damnatis, sed solum
iis qui in Purgatorio degunt. Bell. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 18. in initio.
that the suffrages of the Church do not profit either the blessed, or the
damned, but only those that are in Purgatory. Now concerning Purgatory I have
spoken enough before, showing that it has no foundation in Scripture, and also
that the ancient Writers do give sufficient testimony against it. That prayer
for the dead therefore which the ancient Church did use, was not such as the
Church of Rome now uses: It was not to deliver any out of Purgatory-pains,
which they were supposed to be in, but to perfect and consummate their
happiness. This may appear by Ambrose his praying for the Emrour Theodosius
after he was dead. He believed him to enjoy perpetual light, Absolutus igitur
dubio certamine fruitur nunc augustae memoriae Theodosius luce perpetua,
tranquillitate diuturna, and pro iis, quae in hoc gessit corpore, munerationis
divinae fructibus gratulatur. Ambros. de obitu Theodos.

Da requiem perfectam servo tuo Theodosio, requiem illam quam praeparasti
sanctis tuis. Ibid. In B. Ushers Answer p. 200. it is cited, Da requiem
perfecto servo tuo Theodosio. But in my book Edit. Basil. 1567. it is as I have
alleged, which reading does seem much better then the other.

Dolendum est, quod nobis cito raptus fit; consolandum, quod ad meliora
transierit. Ambros. de obitu Valentin. Quod in terris seminasti, hic mete. --
In Jacob Patriarchae tranquillitate quiescas. Ibid.

Nulla inhonoratos vos mea transibit oration; nulla nox non donatos aliqua
precum mearum contentione transcurret. Omnibus vos oblationibus frequentabo.
Ibid.

Te quaeso sum Deus, ut charissimos juvenes matura resurrectione suscites and
resuscites: and immaturum hunc vitae istius cursum maturae resurrectione
compenses. Ibid. in fine.

(...). Liturg. Basil. and Chrysostom. cited by B. Usher Answ. p. 216.


and tranquillity, and to have obtained the reward of those things which he had
done in the body; yet he prayed for him; but how? That God would give him that
perfect rest which he has prepared for his Saints.

Ambrose also prayed for the Emperor Valentinan after his death. But did he
think him to be in Purgatory? No such matter: He was persuaded that he was
removed to a better estate; that what he had sown upon earth, he did then reap;
and that he did rest in the tranquillity of the Patriark Jacob. Yet he
professes, that he would not cease to pray both for him, and for his brother
Gratian, who was departed out of this life, and (as Ambrose believed)
translated into a better before him. How does he then pray for them? Only thus,
That God would vouchsafe to raise them up with a speedy resurrection. And thus
the Church (as it is in some ancient Liturgies) used to pray unto God, to
remember all those that were departed in the hopes of the resurrection of life
eternal.

The Marquess cites Tertullian and Austine; but besides that Tertulliun was
fallen into the heresy of Montanus, when he wrote that book, which is cited, as
is noted by Pamelius, and the book it self Enimvero and pro anima ejus orat,
and refrigerium interim adpostulat ei, and in prima resurrectione consortium.
Tertul. de Monogam. cap. 10.
does make manifest; besides this, I say, Tertullian speaks of a woman's praying
for her deceased husband, that he might have part in the first resurrection,
which savours of the opinion of the Chiliasts, amongst whom he is reckoned by
Hierome in his Catalogue of Ecolesiastical Writers, where he speaks of Papias
whom he notes as the first founder of that opinion. As for Austine, I have
showed before that he was not resolved concerning Purgatory, and therefore
neither can any thing be concluded from about praying for the dead in that kind
as they of the Roman Church do practice it.

After prayer for the dead, the Marquess speaks of the Page 99.
fast of Lent, which he says the Church anciently held for a custom, not
free, but necessary, and of Apostolical tradition, and so to fast all the
Fridayes in the year in memory of Christ's death, except Christmas Day fell on a
Friday.

It is true, Hierome (as is alleged) speaks of a Fast of forty days, which
they used to observe, and that according to Answ.
the tradition of the Apostles. But this tradition was very Hicron. ad Marcel.
Epist. 54.
uncertain, it seems, and the observation of the Fast very various. For
Socrates an ancient Ecolesiastical historian records, that somewhere they
fasted three weeks before Easter, somewhere Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 21.
six weeks; and that in some places they began their Fast seven weeks before
Easter, but did fast only fifteen days, not altogether, but now one day, now
another. And yet (which he says he wondered at) all did call their Fast
Quadragesimam, A forty days Fast: He says also moreover, that they did not
only thus differ in the number of days, in which they fasted, but also in the
manner of their fasting. For some (as he relates) did eat both fish and foul:
Some did abstain from eggs, and all fruit that is enclosed in a hard shell:
Some did eat nothing but dry bread: Some not so much as that neither: Some
having fasted until the ninth hour (three a clock in the afternoon) 'did then
use diverse kinds of meats. And he adds, that seeing there is nothing in
Scripture Ac quoniam nemo de ea praeceptum literarum monumentis proditum potest
oftendere, perspicuum est, Apostolos liberam porestarem in eadeui cujusque
menti^ and arbittio permisisse, etc. Socrat. ibid.
commanded concerning this matter, it is manifest that the Apostles left it
free to every one to do herein as he should think meet. And the like also for
the different manner of observing the Lent-fast in respect of the time, Sozomen
lib. 7. cap. 19.
has Sozomen in his Ecclesiastical history, who lived in the same time with
the other, viz. 440. years after Christ according to Bellarmines computation.
Bell. de Scrip. Eccles.


The Church (says the Marquess) held then mingling of water Page 99.
with wine in the sacrifice of the Eucharist, for a thing necessary, and of
divine and Apostolical tradition.

Cyprian indeed in the place all eadged, viz. Epist. 63. does Answ.
speak of the mixture of wine and water in the Eucharist, as a thing necessary
to be obsered. But 1. Austine has taught us, That it is no wrong to Cyprian to
make a difference betwixt his writings Nos nullum Cypriano facimus injuriam,
cum ejus quassibet literas a canonica divinarum Scripturarum authoritate
distinguimus. Aug. contra a Crescon. lib. cap. 31.

Unde est ista traditio? utrumne de dominica and Evangelica authoritate
descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis atque Epistolis veniens? Ea enim
facienda esse, quae scripta sunt, Deus testatur, and proponit ad Jesum Nave,
dicens, Non recedet liber legis, etc. Item Dominus Apostolos suos mittens,
mandat baptizari gentes, and do eri, ut observent quaecunque ille praecepit. Si
ergo aut in Evangelio praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum Epistolis, aut Actibus
continetur, etc. observetur divina haec ^^ sancta traditio. Cyprian Epist. 74.


and the Scriptures. 2. Cyprian himself, though speaking of another occasion,
does show us what we are here to answer, Whence (says he) is this tradition?
Did it come either from Christ in the Gospel, or from the Apostles in their
writings? For God does require us to do those things that are written, saying
to Joshua, The book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, etc. Jos. 1.
8. And when Christ sent his Apostles, he bade them baptize all Nations, and
teach them to observe whatsoever he commanded, Mat. 28. 19. 20. If therefore it
be commanded in the Gospel, or contained either in the Epistles, or in the Acts
of the Apostles, then let it be observed as a divine and holy tradition. Now in
the Epistle, which the Marquess alleges, Cyprian proves against the
Aquarians (such as did use only water in the Eucharist) that Christ in the
institution of the Sacrament used wine; this he proves by that which is written
Mat. 26. 29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, etc. but
that Christ also did use water, he does not prove, neither can it be proved by
the Scripture. Yet our Divines do grant, that probably Christ might mix wine
and water in the Sacramental cup, not for any mystical signification, nor as a
matter of necessary observation, but only as in those hot Countries they used
commonly to drink wine mixed with water Vide Chemnit. Exam.
to abate the strength of it. Neither do they therefore condemn them of the
Church of Rome for using this mixture, but for using it so as to make it a
sin not to use it. Bellarmine Bell. de Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. Caterum.
indeed says, that it is no less certain that Christ did mix water with wine
when he instituted the Sacrament, then that he did use any wine at all for that
purpose. For, he says, neither the Evangelists, nor Paul make any mention of
wine when they speak of the cup in the Eucharist. As for the words, I will not
drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, etc. he says, S. Luke does plainly
show, they were spoken not of the cup in the Eucharist, but that cup which was
given after the eating of the Pascal Lamb. But this contradits Cyprian in that
very Epistle, which is alleged against us. For their citing these words, he
infers from them as a thing Dico vobis, non bibam amodo, etc. Qua in part
invenimus calicem mixtum fuisse, quem Dominus obtulit, and vinum fuisse, quod
sanguinem suum dixit. Unde apparet, sanguinem Christi non offerri, si desit
vinum calici, etc. Cypr. Epist. 63.
clear and evident, that it was wine which Christ called his blood; and that
the Sacrament is not rightly celebrated, if wine be wanting. Yea Maldonate
cites many of the ancient Writers besides Cyprian, who understand those words
of the cup in the Maldon. in Mat. 26. 29.
Eucharist. And whereas Bellarmine does urge Luke 22. 17, 18. to prove that
those words, I will not henceforth drink etc. have reference to another cup,
and not that in the Eucharist, Austine (as himself confesses) takes those
words in Luke to Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 1: cap. 11. sect. Si rursus.
be related by anticipation, and not in their due order, which Matthew and Mark
observed. And though he say, that Austine did not diligently consider the
place, yet Jansenius writing professedly Jam quae de calice narrantur a Luca,
antequam acceptum panem commemoret, verisimile omnino est secundum Augustini
sententiam, intelligenda esse de calice sacro, quo scil. sanguinis sui
participationem Dominus tradidit, ut per prae occupationm illa Lucas narraverit
ante acceptum panem, etc. Jan. Concord. c. 131. sub ini^. Vetum verisimiliorem
D. Augustini sententiam, illud facit, etc. Jansen. ibid. Quidam Catholici
asserunt haee verha (Mat. 26. 29. Mar. 14. 25) non esse dicta a Domino post
calicem sacrum, sed post priorem illum calicem, cujus meminit Lucas, quem
volunt alium esse ab isto, etc. At istud non patitur ordo horum
Evangelistaruum. Cum enim nullius alterius calicis feceri^t mentionem
praeterquam sacri, quando dicitur, ex hoc genimine, nullus alius calix
intelligi potest ab eis demonstratus, quam cujus meminerunt. Jansen. ib. sub
finem cap.
upon it, approves Austins opinion rather then Hieroms who conceives two
several cups to be spoken of in S. Lukes Gospel; neither does Bellarmine answer
his argument, which he does allege for it. But however, he shows that the
words, as they are related by S. Matthew, and S. Mark, cannot be referred to
any other cup then that in the Eucharist, of which they make mention
immediately before, and of none other. 3. Cyprian in this very point about the
mingling of wine and water in the Eucharist does differ as well from them of
the Church of Rome as from Protestants. For he makes this mixture of such
necessity, as to hold it no Sacrament, if there be not in the cup both wine and
water. Otherwise Sic autem in sanctificando calice Domini offerri aqua sola non
potest, quomodo nec vinum solum potest. Nahr^st vinum tantum quis offerat,
sangius Christi incipit esse sine nobis: si vero aqua sit sola, plebs incipit
esse sine Christo. Quando autem ut^umque miscetur, etc. tunc sacramentum
spiritale and coeleste perficitur. Sic vero calix Domini non est aqua sola, aut
vinum solum, etc. Cypr. Epist. 63.

Falso Chemnitius Catholicis in commune tribuit, quod asserant aquam in
Eucharistia esse de necessitate Sacramenti cum paucissimi id affirment. Bell. de
Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. Po^ro.

Acculat (Chemnitius) Ecclesiam, quod existimet non posse esse calicem Domini,
nisi aqua adsit, and hanc vocat falsam opinionem necessario taxandam. At opinio
illa, quod attiner admodum loquendi, S. Cyprian. est lib. 2. epist. 3. Quod ad
rem attinet, non est Ecclesiae Catholicae, fortasse etiam nec S. Cypriani. Bell.
ibid. cap. 11. sect. Quinto.


if there be either only water, or only wine, he holds it to be none of
Christ's Cup, none of his Sacrament. But Bellarmine taxes Chemnitius for
charging them of the Roman Church with this opinion, and says, that very few
of them do hold it. Why then do they press us with the testimony of Cyprian,
they themselves dissenting from him as well as we? For it is over vain and
frivolous, that Bellarmine says, that though Cyprian spoke in that manner, yet
perhaps he meant otherwise.

But to proceed, The Marquess says that anciently the Page 99.
Church held exorcismes, exsufflations, and renuntiations, which are made in
Baptism, for sacred ceremonies, and of Apostolical tradition. And a little
after, The Church in the ceremonies of Baptism used then oil, salt,
wax-light, exorcismes, the sign of the Cross, the word Ephata, and other
things that accompany it, etc.

But 1. What authority is there from Gods word for all, or any of these
Ceremonies? Let them be proved by the Answ.
Scriptures, and then we will acknowledge them for divine and holy traditions;
but otherwise we have no reason to do it. And for this we have Cyprian (to whom
other ancient Writers might be added, if need were) to speak for us, as I have
showed a little before, though here among others he also be alleged against
us. 2. Bellarmine speaking of rites and ceremonies says, That they must not,
so be multiplied, as with their multitude to Ritus non sunt nimis
multiplicandi, ita ut sus^ multitudine obruant quodammodo religionem, cui
servire debent. -- Ita docet Augustinus, Epist. 119. c. 19. Bell. de effect.
Sacram, l. 2. c. 30. sect. His addunt.
overwhelm Religion, to which they ought to be subservient. And for this he
cites Austine. But surely the ceremonies of Baptism, which the Marquess here
partly expresses, and partly intimates (Bellarmine does Bell. de Bapt. lib. 1.
cap. 25. and 26. and 27.
reckon up particularly no fewer then two and twenty) are so many, as that they
must needs overwhelme Baptism. 3. Some rites and ceremonies anciently used in
Baptism, are now abolished Nunc pro regionum varietate vel una, vel trina
mersio adhibetur neutrum enim est de essentia Sacramenti. Bell. de Bap. lib. 1.
cap. 26. sect. Quarta.

Ecclesia statuit, ut una tantum mersione daretur baptismus, ut patet ex
Council. 4. Tolet. cap. 5. Bell. de Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 28. sect. Ac primum.


in the Church of Rome. Anciently they used to dip the person baptized thrice
in the water, which now Bellarmine says is not so, but in some places they dip
once, and in some place thrice; neither being of the offense of the Sacrament.
But elsewhere he tells us, that the Church has determined in the fourth Council
of Toledo, that there shall be but one dipping used in Baptism. So also
Bellarmine amongst the ceremonies of Baptism anciently used, mentions Quinta
ceremonia olim suit delibatio lactis and mellis, seu vini; quae tamen hoc
tempore non est in usu. Bellar. de Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 27.
the tasting of milk and honey, or wine; which ceremony yet, he says, now is
not in use. Thus their Apostolical traditions, as they call them, they
themselves can reject when they please.

The Church held then (says the Marquess) Baptism for Infants of absolute
necessity; and for this cause thou permitted Laymen Page. 99.
to baptize in danger of death.

The absolute necessity of Baptism is not here simply Answ.
urged, but only in respect of infants. The Marquess, it seems, considered,
that there are express testimonies of Antiquity for the salvation Sed audio
vos dolere, quod non acceperit sacraments baptismatis. -- Non habet ergo
gratiam, quam desideravit? Ambros. de obitu Valentin. Vide ibidem plura. Vide
etiam Bernard. Epist. 77. and Aug. de bapt. contra Donatist. l. 4. c. 22.
of some of years that die unbaptized. 2. And why is there not the same hope
for infants? Why must Baptism be more absolutely necessary for them then for
others? The Romanists themselves distinguish of baptism, and tell us of the
baptism of water, Baptismus fluminis, flaminis, and sanguinis. Bell. de bapt.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
of the Spirit, and of blood or martyrdom; and hold either of the two last to
be available unto salvation without the first. Is not God able to baptize
Infants with his Spirit, though they want the baptism of water? And where has
he said, that he will not do it? It is without doubt (says Bellarmine) that
true At sine dubio credendum est, veram conversionem supplere baptismum aquae,
cum non ex contemptu, sed ex necessitate sine baptismo aquae aliqui decedunt.
Bellar. loc. citat.
conversion does supply the want of the baptism of water, when any not through
contempt, but through necessity die without it. Now it is without doubt, that
God can, if he please, work spiritual regeneration in Infants that are not
baptized with water; and that if they die without that baptism, it is on their
part merely of necessity, and not of contempt. And if children dying
unbaptized, do necessarily perish for want of baptism, then Christian parents
must sorrow for the death of such children, as they that have no hope; whereas
the Apostle forbids Christians to sorrow for the dead in that manner, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 13. Bellarmine also confesses, that diverse Si baptismus est necessarius,
peribunt sine sua culpa infiniti infantes; quod alienum videtur a Dei
misericordia. Hoc argumentum Petri Martyris fuit etiam quorundam Catholicorum,
ut Cajetani, Gabrielis, and aliorum, etc. Bellar. de Baptis. lib. 1. cap. 4.
sect. 5.
great and eminent writers of the Church of Rome, as Cajetan, Gabriel, and
others have thought it not agreeable to the mercy of God, that innumerable
infants should perish without any fault of theirs, merely for want of that
outward baptism, which it was not in their power to have. And Cassander
testifies that in his time many very learned Cassand. Consult. artic. 9.
men did hold, that though children died without baptism, yet the desire of the
Church, and especially of their parents to procure them baptism, if it could
have been, is accepted of God, and available to those children, as if they had
been baptized. 3. The Ancients were as much for the necessity of Infants
receiving the Eucharist, as for the necessity of their being baptized.
Augustinus sexcentis locis docet aded esse omnibus Eucharistiam ad salutem
necessariam, ut ne infantes quidem nisi ea sumpta salvi esse possint. Mald. ad
Joh. 6. 28.

Missam facio Augustini and Innocentii sententiam, quae 600 circiter annos
viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam infantibus esse necessariam. Idem ibid.
ad v. 53.


Austine (as Maldonate relates) in many places makes the Eucharist so
necessary, as to deny that Infants can be saved without it. For which opinion
also the same Jesuit cites Pope Innocentius, and says, that for 600. years
it did prevail in the Church. Yet the Romanists have taken leave to depart from
the Ancients in this, therefore in reason they may give us leave to depart from
them in the other, except the authority of Scripture can be proved to be
against us. 4. Concerning the estate of Infants dying unbaptized, the Romanists
themselves generally recede from the opinion Venturus est Dominus, etc. ditas
parts facturus est, dextram and sinistram. Sinist^is dicturus, Ite in ignem
aeternum, etc. Dextris dicturus, Venite benedicti, etc. Nullus relictus est
medius locus, ubi ponere queas infantes. -- Qui non in dextra, proculdubio in
sinistra. Ergo qui non in regno, proculdubio in ignem aeternum. Aug. de verb.
apost. sermon. 14.
of Austine, whom here the Marquess does allege against us. For he says,
that there is no middle place for Infants; but that either they must inherit
the kingdom of Heaven, or else must endure everlasting fire: and this latter
he makes to belong unto all that die without baptism. But they of the Church
of Rome are of another mind: For they make the damned to be in one region of
Hell, Constituunt Scholastici communi consensu intra terram quatuor sinus, sive
unum in quatuor parts divisum; unum pro damnatis, alterum pro purgandis,
tertium pro infantibus sine baptismo abeuntibus; quartum pro justis, qui
moriebantur ante Christi passionem. -- Pro poena solius damni aeterna est
limbus puerorum. Bellar. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
where they are in torment; and Infants that die unbaptized, in another region
of Hell, where they suffer no pain, but only the loss of Heaven, and that
happiness which the Saints enjoy. They have no reason therefore to urge us
with Austin, when as themselves do not accord with him.

The Church held then (says the Marquess) diverse Degrees Page 99.
in the Ecclesiastical regiment, to wit, Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, the Acolythe, Exorcist, Reader, and Porter.

Here are eight several sorts of Ecclesiastical officers, Answ.
which are reckoned as so many several orders. For so presently after the
Marquess adds, And in the Episcopal order acknowledged diverse seats of
jurisdiction of positive right, etc. Thus he makes Episcopacie, and so the
rest, each of them a distinct order, and that (as it seems) of divine right.

But 1. for Episcopacie, the Schoolmen hold it to be no distinct order.
Lombard, the Master of them, reckons but seven distinct orders; to wit, all
these here mentioned excert Lombard. lib. 4 did. 24.
Bishops, and says that anciently Bishops and Presbyters were the same. Apud
vetres idem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerunt. Lomb. ibid.

Intra hunc gradum and ordinem contingit esse distinctionem dignitatum and
officiorum, quae tamen novum gradum vel ordinem non constituunt, ut
Archipresbyter, Episcopus, Archiepiscopus, Patriarcha, Pontifex summus. -- Hanc
ergo opinionem sustinendo dicamus, quod Episcopatus praecise loquendo non est
ordo, etc. Bonavent. in Sent. lib. 4. did. 24. art. 2. quaest. 3.


So also Bonaventure, whom the Church of Rome has canonized for a Saint, and
styles the Seraphical Doctor, he also (I say) professedly disputing the
question, whether Episcopacie be an order, concludes that it is not, but only a
dignity, and that a Bishop is in that respect of like nature with an
Archpresbyter (or Dean) an Archbishop, a Patriarch, and a Pope. And he cites
also Hugo de S. Victore, who was somewhat more ancient then Lombard, as being
of this opinion. Cassander says, that the Divines and Canonists do not agree
in An Episcopatus inter ordines ponendus sit, inter Theologos and Canonistas
non convenit. Convenit autem inter omnes, olim Apostolorum aetate, inter
Episcopos and Presbyteros, discrimen nullum fuisse, sed postmodum ordinis
servandi, and Schismatis evitandi causa, Episcopum Presbyteris fuisse
praepositum, cui soli Chirotonia, id est, ordinandi potestas servata (...).
Cassand Consult. artic. 14.
this, whether Episcopacie be to be reckoned amongst orders. But all (he says)
agree in this, that in the Apostles time there was no difference betwixt
Bishops and Presbyters, but that afterward for the keeping of order, and the
avoiding of Schism, a Bishop was set over the Presbyters, and the power of
ordaining was reserved unto himonly. Apud veteres iidem Episcopi and Presbyteri
fuerunt. Hieron. Epist. ad Ocean. Vide Hieron. Epist. ad Evagr.
Hierome is plain to this purpose, to wit, that at first Bishops and
Presbybyters were the same, and he proves it by Phil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 28. Tit.
1. 5, 6, 7.

2. For the last five orders, to wit, Subdeacons, Acolythe, Exorcist, Reader,
and Porter, they have no foundation at all in Scripture; we find there no
mention Cum omnes sint spirituales, and sacri, excellenter tamen Canones duos
tantum sacros ordines appellari censent, Diaconatus scil. and Presbyteratus,
quia hos solos primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis praeceptum
Apostoli habemus. Lomb. lib. 4. did. 24.

Constat etiam sacros ordines proprie Diaconatum, and Presbyteratum, ut quos
solos primitivam Ecclesiam in usu habuisle legatur, id quod testatur Urbanus
Papa, and annotavit Chrysostom. and Ambros. in 1 Timothy ex. eo quod Episcopi
ordinationi statim Diaconi ordinationem subjiciat. Ad minores vero ordines quod
attinet, qui olim quinque se ordine consequentes memorari consuerunt; hi sane
praesente tempestate, neglecta omni disciplina, and politia Ecclesiastica
prorsus confusi sunt, and eorum officia propemodum cessarunt, etc. Cassand.
Consult. artic. 14.


of them. And Lombard confesses, that the office of Deacons and of Presbyters,
are by way of excellency called holy orders; for that the primitive Church had
only those two, and the Apostle gave precept concerning them only. So also
Cassander says, it is manifest, that Deacons and Presbyters are properly
called holy orders; for that the primitive Church had those only. And this he
says is testified by Pope Urban, and noted by Chrysostom and Ambrose. And as
for the five lesser, and inferior orders, he says, that now in the Church of
Rome: they are altogether confused, and almost abolished.

The Marquess says, that anciently the Church had one Page 10^.
Supereminent (by Divine Law) which was the Pope, without whom nothing could be
decided, appertaining to the universal Church, and the want of whose presence,
either by himself, or his Legates, or his confirmation, made all Councels
(pretended to be universal) unlawful.

1. The name of Pope anciently was common to all Answ.
Bishops. Hierome calls Alipius an African Bishop, Pope Alipius. So also he
Sanctum and venerabilem fratrem nostrum Papam Alipium, ut meo obsequio salutes
obsecro. Hieron ad Aug, Epist. 98. Memento mei, sancte et venerabilis Papa.
Hier. Epist. 91. ad Aug. Beatissime Papa, Epist. 94. ad Aug. Damasus and
Ursicinus, supra humanum modum ad rapiendam Episcopalem sedem ardentes, scissis
studiis asperrime conflictabantur, adusque mortis vulnerumque discrimina
adjumentis utriusque progressis. -- Constatque in Basilica Sicinini, ubi ritus
Christiani est conventiculum, uno die centum trigin^a septum reperta cadavera
peremptorum, etc. Neque ego abnuo, ostentationem rerum considerans urbanarum,
hujus rei cupidos, ob impetrandum quod apperunt, omni contentione laterum
jurgari debere; quum id adepti, futuri sint ita securi, ut ditentur
oblationibus matronarum, procedantque vehiculis insidentes circumspecte
vestiti, opulas curantes profusas, adeo ut eorum convivia regales superent
menlas. Qui esse poterant beati revera, si magnitudine urbis despecta, quam
vitiis opponunt, ad imitationem antistitum quorundam provincialium viverent,
quos tenuitas edendi potandique parcissime, vi^itas etiam indumentorum, and
supercilia humum spectantia perpetuo nu^ini, verisque ejus cultoribus ut puros
commendant, and verecundos. Am. Marcel* lib. 27.
styles Austine in diverse Epistles, which he wrote unto him. 2. That the Bishop
of Rome, to whom the name of Pope in after times came to be appropriated, is
Supereminent by divine Law, was no part of the Ancients Creed. Indeed of old
the Bishops of Rome, by reason of the wealth and glory of the City, did live in
a very pompous and stately fashion, so as in their feasts to exceed Kings: And
thereupon there was great striving for the place: when Damasas (whom the
Marquess here points at as so highly honored by Hierome) came to be Pope,
there was such a conflict betwixt him and Urscicinus about it, that in one day
there were found in a Church 137. dead bodies of those that were slain in the
conflict. This is related by Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived in the same time
when this happened. And though he were no Christian, yet that he did not write
thus out of any ill affection toward Christians, and a desire to disgrace
them, may appear, as by that ingenuity and impartiality which he elsewhere
usually shows in his history, so by this, that in this very place he much
commends other Bishops of meaner places, and says, that the Bps. of Rome might
have been happy indeed, if they would have imitated them, and despising the
greatness of the City, would have lived sparingly, and carried themselves
humbly as other Bishops of the Roman Provinces did. But so also for the same
reason, to wit, the honor and dignity of Rome, the Bishop thereof had some
privilege and preheminencie above others. And so the first Council of (...).
Council. Constantinopol. 1. can. 3.
Constantinople decreed, that the Bishop of Constantinople should have the
second place, to wit, next after the Bishop of Rome, because it was new Rome.
And afterward the Council of Chalcedon (...). Council. Chalced. can. 28.
(which was the fourth general Council, as that of Constantinople was the
second) for the very same reason confirmed the same, plainly expressing thus
much, that because Rome had been the seat of the Empire, therefore the Fathers
had given the chief honor to the Bishop of that City, and that now
Constantinople being advanced to that honor (Constantine having removed his
seat thither) it was meet that the Bishop of that place should likewise be
advanced, so as to be next to the Roman Bishop. Thus it plainly appears, even
by this very Council, which the Marquess alleges, that the dignity of the
Bishop of Rome is built merely upon humane authority, and earthly
consideration. Neither does Hierom attribute such supereminencie as is Nune in
occidente sol justitiae oritur; i^ orient autem Lucifer ille, qui ceciderat,
supra sidera posuit thronum suum. Hieron. ad Damas. Epist. 57.
pretended, to Damasus the Roman Bishop: but being in the Eastern parts, which
were much infected with Arianisme, and knowing that Damasus was free from that
infection, he consulted him about a point, wherein he feared lest some Arians
in the East might ensnare him. But that Hierome did not hold the Bishop of Rome
to be supereminent by divine Ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive
Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis,
ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est and sacerdotii. Potentia divitlarum, and
paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimiorem, vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit.
Ceterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. Hieron. ad Evagr. Epist. 85.
Law, is clear and evident by what he wrote to Evagrius, namely this,
Wheresoever a Bishop is, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, whether at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, whether at Alexandria, or at Tanis, he has the
same merit, and the same Priesthood. The power of riches, and the meannesse of
poverty, does not make a Bishop either higher, or lower: but they are all the
successors of the Apostles.

The Marquess goes on, saying, In the Church then the Service Page 100.
was said throughout the East in Greek, and throughout the West, as well in
Africa, as in Europe, in Latin; although that in none of the Provinces (except
in Italy, and the Cities where the Roman Colonies resided) the Latin tongue
was understood by the common people.

That divine Service should be performed in a tongue, which the people
understand not, is most repugnant both Answ.
to reason and Scripture. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. plainly and fully declares
against it, and shows the absurdity of it. For he that speaks in an unknown
tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God: for no man understands him, v.
2. Now brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues (viz. unknown
tongues) what shall I profit you? v. 6. And even things without life giving
sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how
shall it be known what is piped or harped? v. 7. For if the Trumpet give an
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? v. 8. So likewise
you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it
be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. v. 9. Therefore if I
know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a
Barbarian, and he that speaks, shall be a Barbarian unto me, v. 11. Else when
thou shall bless in the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what
thou say? v. 16. In the Church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue, v. 19. The case here is so clear, that Cardinal
Cajetan in his Commentary Ex hac Pauli doctrina habetur, quod melius ad
aedificationem Ecclesiae est orationes publicas, quae audiente populo dicuntur,
dici lingua communi Clericis and populo, quam dici Latin. Cajetan. in 1 Cor.
14.
upon the place, is forced to confess, That by this doctrine of the Apostle,
it is better for the edification of the people, that public prayers be made in
a tongue, which both the Clergy and the people understand, then that they be in
Latin. And hereupon Unde discere debemus eligibilius esse, aut in Ecclesia
dicantur divina (horae fell. canonicae, and missae) intelligibiliter sine
melodia Musica, quam sic ut non intelligi possint, qualiter sunt tam particulae
quae sonis commi^untur, quam quas cantus reddit imperceptibiles, etc. Cajet.
ibid.
also he expresses his dislike of the use of Organs, and of chanting in Divine
Service, and says, that it were better such musical melody were laid aside,
and that Divine Service were so performed, as that people might understand it.
Austine indeed shows, that in Illud etiam; quod jam auferre non possumus de ore
cantantium populorim, super ipsum floriet sanctificatio mea, nihil profecto
sententiae detrahit; auditor tamen peritior mallet hoc corrigi, ut non floriet,
sed florebit diceretur. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 13.
his time and Country the Latin tongue was used in Divine Service; but withal
he shows, that the people did understand it, though they were not very
Grammatical and exact in it. And therefore sometimes barbarous Habeo in
abscondito quoddam ossum. Sic enim potius loquamur. Melius est, ut reprehendant
nos Grammatici, quam non intelligant populi. Aug. in Psalm. 138.
words were permitted, because the people were acquainted with them, and
understood them better then pure Latin words. For this reason he says in that
place, which the Marquess Nam and Latina aliquando (infans utique) nulla
noveram; and tamen advertendo didici sine ullo metu atque cruciatu, inter etiam
blandimenta nutricum, and joca arridentium, and laetitias alludentium. Didici
vero illa sine ulla poenali onere urgentium, cum me urgerer cor meum ad
parienda concepta sua: and quia non esset nisi aliqua verba didicissem, non a
docentibus, sed a loquentibus, in quorum and ego auribus parturiebam quicquid
sentiebam. Aug. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 14.
cites, that floriet was used for florebit, that is, shall flourish. And so
elsewhere he says, that he would rather use the word ossum for a bone, then
os, choosing rather to be reproved by Grammarians then that the people should
not understand him. And that the Latin tongue was then generally understood by
the people where he lived, is most evident also by that which he writes in his
Confessions, to wit, that though he had very much ado to learn the Greek
tongue, yet the Latin he learnt without difficulty, even whilst his Nurse and
others played with him, and because he heard none speak any other Language.

The Marquess, to prove still, that the Church of Rome is not changed, but is
the same that it was of old, mentions Page 100.
diverse things which the Church then (he says) observed, as distinction of
Feasts, and ordinary days, etc.

1. These are things of an inferior alloy in comparison of many things wherein
Protestants charge the Church of Answ.
Rome to be altered from what of old it was. 2. The same things might be
observed of old, yet not in the same manner as now in the Church of Rome they
are, viz. so as to place the worship of God in such things. So they now do,
which makes Vide stupiditatem nostram, and perversitatem. -- O praeposteram
Religionem! Ferus in Mat. 15.
Ferus (though one of their own Authors) cry out, Behold our stupidity and
perverseness. And again, O preposterous Religion! 3. If Protestants have
abolished such things, besides that they might lawfully do it, God in his word
not requiring them; and had just cause to do it, they being grown into such
abuse; besides, I say, the Romanists cannot justly tax them for it, seeing
they themselves have abolished some things, which formerly were observed in the
Church, as I have noted before. And to those particulars before mentioned let
this be added, that anciently Vigils were in use; both Priests and people used
to watch the night before some solemn festival. And when Vigilantius spoke
against it (though not without Polyd. Verg. de Invent. l. 6. c. 4.
cause, as Polydore Vergil confesses) Hierome inveighed against him for it,
Nam quod dicis eum vigilias execrari, facit and hoc contra vocabulum suum, quod
dormire velit Vigilantius. Hier. ad Riparium, epist. 53.
and scoffingly said, that in this he did contrary to his name, that he had
more mind to sleep then to watch. But the abuse of these Vigils was such, that
(as the said Polydore Polyd. Verg. loc. cit. Bell. de cult. Sanct. l. 3. c. 17.
Vergil relates) though the name continued, yet the thing it self was
abolished; and so much also is acknowledged by Bellarmine.

The Marquess speaks of the Church anciently making Processions with the
Relics of Martyrs, kissing Page 100.
them, etc.

Austin in the place which the Marquess cites (viz. de Civ. Answ.
Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8.) has much about Miracles wrought at the monuments of
some Martyrs: but of honoring or worshipping their Relics, I do not see any
thing that he says. Hierome, indeed, in the place alleged speaks of
honoring the relics Dicit (Vigilantius) quid necesse est te tanto honor non
solum honorare, sed etiam adorare illud nescio quid, quod in modico vasculo
transfer endo colis? Et rursus in eodem libro; Quid pulverem linteamine
circumdatum, adorando oscularis? Et in consequentibus; Prope ritum gentilium
videmus sub praetextu religionis introductum in Ecclesias, sole adhuc fulgente
moles cereorum accendi etc. Quis enim, o insanum caput, aliquando martyrs
adoravit? -- Cereos autem non clara luce accendimus, sicut frustra calumni
aris; sed ut noctis tenebras hoc solatio temperemus, etc. Hieron. contra
Vigilant. cap. 2. and 3.
of Saints, and does contest with Vigilantius about it. But whereas Vigilantius
did inveigh against the adoring of them, and burning Waxe-candles before them
at noonday, Hierome calls him a mad-brain, asking, Who did ever adore Martyrs?
And saying, that they used Wax-lights, not as he did slander them, in the
daytime, but only in the night, when there was need of them. And in his
Epistle to Riparius, which was written about Vigilantius, he says, that they
were so far from worshipping the relics of Martyrs, that they did Nos autem
non dico martyrum reliquias, sed ne solemn quidem and lunam, non angelos, non
archangelos, non cherubim, non seraphim, and omne nomen quod nominatur and in
praesenti seculo and in futuro, colimus and adoramus, etc. Hieron. ad Ripar.
epist. 53.
neither worship the sun, nor the moon, nor Angels or Archangels, nor Cherubim,
nor Seraphim, nor any name that is named either in this world, or in that to
come. He taxes Vigilantius for grudging, that any respect was showed to the
Dolet martyrum reliquias pretioso operiri velamine, and non vel pannis vel
cilicio colligari, vel projici in sterquilinium. Hieron. advers. Vigilant. cap.
2.
relics of Martyrs, and that they were not rather cast to the dunghill. If
this were his opinion, I think few Protestants will plead for him. But
howsoever, Hierome shows himself far from that, which they of the Church of
Rome do now maintain and practice. How exceeding gross they are in this kind,
Erasmus has lively set forth, and that not in his Colloquies (which he wrote
for delight, yet for profit also; and as the Poet says, Ridentem dicereverum
quid vetat?) but in a more serious work, viz. his Annotations on the New
Testament. Videas hodicpassimad quaestu^ ostentari lac Mariae, quod honor
propemodum aequant corpori Christi consecrato* prodigiosum oleum; fragmenta
crucis tam multa, ut si in acer vum redigantur, vix una navis oneraria vehat:
hic ostentari Francisci cucullum, illic intimam vestem Mariae virginis; alibi
pectinem Annae, alibi caligam Joseph, alibi calceum Thomae Cantuariensis, alibi
Christi praeputium, quod cum sit res incerta, religiosius adorant quam totum
Christum. Neque vero haec ita proferunt tanquam toleranda, and pleboculae
donanda affectibus; verum huc fere summa religionis vocatur, etc. Eras. in Mat.
23. 5.
You may now (says he) every where see held out for gain Mary's milk, which
they honor as much almost as Christ's consecrated body; prodigious Oil; so
many pieces of the Cross, that if they were all gathered together, a great
ship would searce carry them: Here Francis his Hood set forth to view; there
the innermost Garment of the Virgin Mary; in one place Anna's Comb, in another
place Joseph's Stocking, in another place Thomas of Canterbury his Shoe, in
another place Christ's Foreskin, which though it be a thing uncertain, they
worship more religiously then Christ's whole person. Neither do they show these
things as things that may be born with, and to please the common people, but
they place almost all religion in them, etc.

From Relics we pass to Pictures. The Church then Page 100.
(says the Marquess) had the picture of Christ, and of his Saints, both out
of Churches, and in them, (not to adore them with god-like worship, but) by
them to reverence the Soldiers and Champions of Christ.

Were there no other point but only this concerning Answ.
Pictures and Images, it were enough to show how much the Church of Rome is
degenerate. Irenaeus taxes the Carpoeratians (who are also Etiam imagines,
quasdam quidem depictas, quasdam autem and de reliqua materia fabricatas
habent, dicentes formam Christi factam a Pilato, etc. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24.

Si statuas, and imagines frigidas mortuorum suorum simillimas non adoramus,
quas milvi and mures, and araneae intelligunt, nonne laudem magis quam poenam
merebatur repudium agniti erroris? Tertul. Apologet. cap. 12.

Etsi a Numa concepta est curiositas superstitiosa, nondum tamen aut
simulachris, aut templis res divina apud Romanos constabat. Ibid. cap. 25.


called Gnostics) for having Images, some painted, some carved; and for
saying, That when Christ was upon earth, his resemblance was made by Pilate.
And Tertullian not only shows, that Christians did not worship Images, but he
speaks most contemptibly of them, calling them cold Images, and saying that
Kites, Mice, and Spiders, do perceive what they are. And he observes, that even
the heathen Romans themselves had no Images in the time of Numa Pompilius,
though he was the deviser of (...). Plut. in Numa.
that superstition, which was among them. And it is very observable, that
Plutarch, a heathen Writer relates, that Numa forbade the Romans to make any
Image, whereby to represent God; and and that for 170. years the Romans had no
Images of a religious nature. For (says he) it is not lawful to represent
better things by worse; neither is it possible to apprehend God otherwise then
by the act of the understanding. The Pagan Caecilius Cur nullas aras habent,
templa nulla, nulla nota simulacra? Cacil. de. Christianis apud Minut.

Quod enim simulachrum Deo fingam, eum si recte existimes, sit Dei homo ipse
simulachrum? Minut. in Octav. Deum illum suum, quem nec ostendere possunt nec
videre, etc. Caecil. ibid.

At enim quem colimus Deum, nec ostendimus, nec videmus: imo ex hoc Deum
credimus, quod cum sentire possumus, videre non possumus. Minut. ibid.


upbraided Christians, because they had no Images. Minutius Felix granted they
had none, saying, What Image shall I devise of God, seeing that, if you
consider well, man himself is Gods Image? And when the same Pagan objected,
that Christians talked of a God, whom they could neither show to others, nor
see themselves; Minutius answered, That by this they did believe that there is
a God, in that though they could not see him, yet they were sensible of him.
This argues, that Christians then had no Images, as Pagans had; for but by
their Images, the Pagans themselves could neither show, nor see the gods that
they did worship. Arnobius also writing against the Gentiles, reproves them for
their An nunquid dicitis forte praesentians vobis quandam his numinum exhiberi
simulachris; and quia Deos videre non datum est, eos ita coli, and munia
officiosa praestari? Hoc qui dicit, and asserit, Deos esse non credit; nec
habere convincitur suis religionibus fidem, cui opus est videre quod teneat, ne
ina ne forte sit, quod obscurum non videtur. Deos (inquitis) per simulachra
veneramur. Quid ergo, si haec non sint, coli se dii nesciunt, hec impertiti a
vobis ullum sibi existimabunt honorem? Arnob. contra gent. lib. 6.
Images, saying that they showed themselves not to believe that there were any
such gods as they pretended to worship, seeing they must have some Images to
look on, as if their gods being not seen, were not at all. And whereas they
did allege, that they did worship their gods by their Images; he asks them,
if except there were such Images, their gods could not tell that they did
worship them? That of Epiphanius is very famous, and most remarkable Inveni
velum pendens in foribus Ecclesiae tinctum, atque depictum, and habens imaginem
quasi Christi, vel sancti cujusdam: non enim satis memini cujus imago fuerit.
Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem Scripturarum
hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud, and magis dedi consilium custodibus
ejusdem loci, ut pauperem mortuum eo obvolverent, and efferrent. Epiphan. ad
Johan. Hierosolym. inter opera Hieron. tom. 2. Epist. 60.
to our purpose, which he writes in an Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem,
which Epistle Hierome translated out of Greek into Latin. He says, that as he
traveled, he happened to espy a Vail before a Church door, having in it the
Image either as it were of Christ, or of some other Saint; for he could not
remember whose Image it was. But when he saw such an Image, and knew that it
was repugnant to the Scriptures, he tore it in pieces, and counseled the
Churchwardens to make a winding sheet of it, to wrap some poor man in when he
was dead. Marianus Victorius (a Romish writer) says, It is wonderful, how
they that oppose Images, do exult from this place of Epiphanius. And Mirum est,
quam ex hoc loco Iconomachi hodie exultent. Cum tamen ipsa verba plane
demonstrent, non Christi, aut fahcti alicujus, sed puri hominis eam fuisse
imaginem. Imo si quis diligenter locum expendet, constabit ex eodem contrarium
maxim. Cum enim superius dicat, Inveni ibi velum, etc. dicere-videtur, talem
fuisse eam imaginem, qualis soleat esse vel Christi, vel alicujus Sancti, quae
in Ecclesiis depingi solita sit. Mar. Victor. in Annotat. ad. loc.
I say, it is wonderful, how they that defend Images, are put to their shifts
to elude this place of Epiphanius, it being so plain and home against them.
This Author says, that Epiphanius speaks not of the image of Christ, nor of
any Saint, but of some ordinary man. Yea, he says, if one mark it well, he
shall find this to be the sense, That it was an Image like the image of Christ,
or of some Saint, which was usually painted in Churches. What can be a more
violent perverting of words then this is? Bellarmine therefore disliking this
answer, as also that which some others give, says, that the more common and
true answer is, that Communior and verior solutio est, verba illa esse
supposititia. Bell. de Imagine. Sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 9. sect. Ad Quintum.
those are none of Epiphanius his words, but are supposititious. But Hierome,
it seems, took them for the words of Epiphanius; for else he would not have
translated them, and joined them to the Epistle as a part of it.

The Marquess, to prove the ancient use of Images, cites Eusebius. de vita Constable.
but he cites neither book nor chapter, when as there are four books of that
subject, and in some of them above 70. in some above 60. and where the fewest,
above 50 chapters. It may be he means that, which Eusebius relates lib. 1.
cap. 22, etc. viz. That Constantine in a vision from heaven saw the sign of
the Cross, with this inscription, In this overcome! and being warned by Christ
in his sleep to do it, he caused that Figure to be painted in his Banner which
he used in his wars. But Dr. Rainolds has long Rain. confer. cap. 8.
since showed by the description which Eusebius makes cap. 25. that it was not
properly the sign of Christ's Cross, though it had some resemblance with a
Cross, but was indeed the two first Letters of the name (...) Christ, joined
together thus and so that it was the name of Christ, that was thus represented
unto Constantine. And if it had been the very sign of Christ's Cross, yet
there being a special injunction for the making and using of it, (for I dare
not discredit the relation) it would not follow, that therefore ordinarily the
picture of Christ's Cross (much less of Christ crucified) is lawful; no more
then it follows, that the Jews might lawfully have brought pictures and images
into the Temple, because God commanded Cherubims to be pictured in it. si
eundem Deum observas, habes legem ejus, Ne seceris similitudinem. Si and
praeceptum sactae postea similitudinis respicis, and tu imitare Mosen, Ne
facias adversus legem simulacrum aliquod, nisi and tibi Deus jusserit. Tertul.
de. Idolol. cap. 5.


The Marquess also does allege Basil. in Martyr. Bar. But, 1. Bellarmine
(whom it is likely the Marquess followed) Bell. de imagine. Sanctor. l. 2. c. 9.
understands (or would have others to understand) Basil so, as if he had seen
the picture of Martyr Barlaam (of whom he was speaking) somwhere in the Church,
whereas in Basil there appears no such (...). Basil. homil. in Martyr. Barl.
matter. Only he calls upon the famous Painters, and bids them show forth their
art in drawing the pourtraicture of this Martyr. 2. I see not why by Painters
there must be meant such as are properly so called; but that the word may be
taken metaphorically for Orators, whom Basil would have to set forth the
praises of the Martyr more lively then he had done. 3. However it were in
Basils time, yet the more ancient Writers, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Arnobius,
and Minutius, (who are before cited) show that in their time Images were not in
use. And to those may be added Clemens Alexandrinus (who was almost 200 years
before (...) etc. Clem. Alex. in Protrept. edit. Graec. in fol. page 24.
Basil) who proceeds so far as to make it unlawful for Christians to exercise
the Art of Painting or Image-making; so far was the Church then from using any
such Pictures or Images as we now (...) Ibid. page 25.
treat of. And he tells the Heathens, that they were very studious to make an
Image as fair and beautiful as might be, but had no care to keep themselves
from being like to images in stupidity. Zelum vos, ne quid manu factum adorari
possit, habuisse laudamus; sed frangere casde imagines non debuisse judicamus.
Idcirco enim pictura in ecclesiis adhibetur, ut hi qui literas nesciunt, contr
saltem in par^etibus videndo legant, quae legere in codicibus non valent. Tua
ergo paternitas and illas servare, and ab earum adoratu populum prohibere
debuit, etc. Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 111.
4. A long time after Basil, when images came to be used in Churches for
history sake, yet they were not worshipped. Gregory Bishop of Rome (above 200
years after Basils time) hearing that Serenus Bishop of Massilia had broken
certain Images that were in Churches, because some did worship them, wrote unto
him about it, and commended him Et quidem quod eas adorari vetuisses, omnino
laudamus; fregisse vero reprehendimus. -- Si quis imagines facere voluerit,
minime prohibe; adorare vero imagines, modis omnibus devita. Greg. lib. 9.
Epist. 9.
for his zeal in not allowing Images to be worshipped, yet disliked his
breaking of them, saying that such as cannot read, may be instructed by them.
And to the same purpose he wrote unto him again, willing him not to hinder the
making of Images, but by all means to hinder the worshipping of them.

But what more common now in the Non solum autem licere in Ecclesia imagines
habere, and illis honorem and cultum adhibere ostendet. Parochus, cum honos,
qui eis exhibetur, referatur ad pro^otypa, verum etiam maximo fidelium bono ad
hanc usque diem factum declarabit. Catechis. Trident. p. 43. edit. Colon. an.
1567.

Sequitur quod eadem reverentia exhibeatur imagini Christi, and ipsi Christo.
Cum ergo Christus adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est, quod ejus imago
sit adoratione latriae adoranda. Thom. part. 3. qu. 25. art. 3.


Church of Rome, then to worship Images? Their Trent-catechisme requires the
Parish Priest to instruct people, that the worshipping of Images is not only
lawful, seeing that the honor done to them, redounds to those things that are
represented by them, but also very profitable. And the prime Doctors of the
Church of Rome hold, that the very same worship belongs to the Image, which
belongs to that which it represents. The same reverence (says Aquinas) is to
be exhibited to the image of Christ, as to Christ himself. And therefore seeing
Christ is worshipped with divine worship, it follows, that his Image is to be
worshipped with divine worship. So Bonoventure says, All reverence which is
showed to the image of Christ, is showed to Omnis reverentia quae imagini
Christi offertur, exhibetur Christo. Et propterea imagini Christi debet cultus
latriae exhiberi. Bonav. in Sent. lib. 3. did. 9. art. 1. quaest. 2.
Christ himself: and therefore the image of Christ ought to be worshipped with
divine worship. And Bellarmine mentions diverse of their Schoolmen besides, as
Cajetane, Marsilius, Almain, Carthusianus, Capreolus, and others, Bell. de
Imag. lib. 2. cap. 20.
that did hold this opinion. And though he himself labor to qualify the
matter with distinctions, which few understand, yet he grants, that Admitti
potest, imagines posse coli improprie vel per accidens eodem genere cultus, quo
examplar ipsum colitur. -- Sic concionatotes alloquuntur imaginem crucifixi,
eique dicunt, Tunos redemisti, tu nos Patri reconciliasti, etc. Bell. de
Imagine. lib. 2. cap. 20.
improperly and by accident images may be worshipped with the same kind of
worship wherewith the sampler is worshipped. And thus Preachers (he says)
speak to the image of Christ crucified, and say, Thou have redeemed us, thou
have reconciled us unto the Father. I will only here add the words of Sir
Edwin Sands, who speaking of the scandals Europ. Specul. page 228. and 230.
of Christians which hinder the conversion of the Jews, says thus; But the
greatest scandal of all other is their worshipping of Images, for which both
Jews and Turks call them Idolatrous Christians. -- And therefore they say, for
their coming to the Christian Sermons, that as long as they shall see the
Preacher direct his speech and prayer to that little wooden Crucifixe, which
stands on the Pulpit by him, to call it his Lord and Savior, to kneel to it,
to embrace it, and kiss it, to weep upon it (as is the fashion of Italy) this
is preaching sufficient for them, and persuades them more with the very sight
of it to hate Christian Religion, then any reason that the world can allege
to love it.

Whereas the Marquess speaks immediately after of the Page 100.
sign of the Cross; I grant, that anciently it was much used by Christians, as
Adomnem progressum, atque promotum, ad omnem^aditum and exitum, ad vestitum and
calcoatum, ad lavacra mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quacunque nos
conversatio exercet, frontenr crucis signaculo terimus. Tertull. de Cor. Mil.
cap. 3.

Harum and aliarum ejusmodi disciplinatum si legem expostules Scripturarum,
nullam invenies. Ibid.

Et qui hominem summo supplicio pro facinore punitum, and crucis ligna feralia
little ceremonias fabulantur, congruentia perditis sceleratisque tribuunt
altaria, ut id colant quod merentur. Caecil. apud Minut.

Cruces etiam nec colimus, nec optamus. Minut in Octav.


appears by Tertullian. But besides that he confesses, that there is no
Scripture for it, and other things which likewise they did observe; besides
this, I say, he speaks nothing of adoring of the Cross; and Minutius Felix,
who lived about the same time with Tertullian, is express against it. When
Cecillus objected against Christians, that they worshipped the wood of a
Cross, Minutius answered saying, We neither worship, nor desire Crosses. The
Author, that the Marquess alleges to prove the ancient adoration of the
Cross, viz. Paulinus, I have not, and therefore cannot examine what he says;
but howsoever, he was above two hundred years after Minutius; and Gregory, who
was about as much after Paulinus, was against the worshipping of any thing made
with hands, as appears by the words before cited.

Finally (says the Marquess) the Church then held, that to the Catholic
Church only belongs the keeping of the Apostolical tradition, Page 101.
the authority of interpretation of Scripture, and the decision of
controversies of faith: and that out of the succession of her communion of her
doctrine, and her ministry, there neither was Church, nor salvation.

1. For Apostolical traditions, enough has been said before. 2. And so also of
interpretation of Scripture, and Answ.
decision of controversies of faith. 3. I understand not what is meant by
objecting against us, that out of the Catholic Church there is no Church. For
the Catholic Church being the Church universal, and so comprehending all
particular Churches as parts and members of it, who can doubt, that there is no
Church out of the Church Catholic? But what is this to the Church of Rome,
which once indeed was a sound part of the Catholic Church, but the Catholic
Church it never was, nor could be, except a part could be the whole?

In that which follows, page 101. etc. there is nothing but the same matter as
before, only the form is somewhat altered, and therefore there is no need that
I should trouble either my self, or the Reader any further about it; only I
shall add one or two Animadversions. 1. Whereas it is objected (page 105.
etc.) that Luther, after his deserting the communion of the Church of Rome, did
yet hold some points of Popery; and so also Husse, and Wickliffe, and others,
that otherwise opposed themselves against the errors and corruptions of that
Church. I answer, That as Rome was not built at once, so neither was it
demolished at once, but by degrees: it is no marvel therefore, if those worthy
men did (at least for a while) retain some Romish opinions and practices, after
that in many things they had discovered the truth, and stood up in defense of
it. 2. Whereas it is pretended (page 106.) that before Berengarius, who was
above 1000. years after Christ, none did oppose that real presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, which the Romanists maintain; besides that I have
sufficiently confuted this before, the Marquess might have seen from
Bellarmine himself, that there were Hic author primus fuit, qui serio, and
copiose scripsit de veritate corporis and sanguinis Domini in Eucharistia
contra Bertramum Presbyterum, qui fuit ex primis qui eam in dubium revocarunt.
Bell. de Paschasio Ratherto in lib. de Scriptor. Eccles.
some, who above 200. years before Berengarius, did oppose that doctrine, which
in this particular the Church of Rome now does hold, namely Bertram a
Presbyter, who was about 800. years after Christ, and (says Bellarmine) was
one of the first that did call in question that doctrine. But Bellarmine does
too much mince the matter; for Bertram did more then call in question that
real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which the Romanists do hold; he did
plainly assert that which Protestants maintain, viz. that the substance of
bread and wine does still remain after consecration, as is to be seen in
Hospinians first part of the Sacramentary history, and so in others that cite
that Author; for the book it self (I confess) I have not seen, that I do
remember. But that is here worthy to be observed, which the Romish censurers of
Books say, speaking of this book of Bertrams about the Sacrament; Although (say
Quanquam librum istum magni non existimemus momenti, itaque non magnoperc
laboraturi. simus, si vel nusquam sit, vel intercidat; attamen cum jam saepe
recusus sit, and lect us a plurimis, etc. in veteribus Catholicis aliis
plurimos feramus errores, and extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato commento
persaepe negemus, and commodum iis sensium affingamus, dum opponuntur in
disputationibus, aut in conflictionibus cum adversariis; non videmus cur non
eandem aequitatem, and diligentem recognitonem mereatur Bertramus, ne haeretioi
ogganniant nos antiquitatem pro ipsis facientem exurere, and prohibere. Index
Expurgat. an. 1599. page 12.
they) we do not much value this book, nor should greatly ear if it were no
where to be found, yet seeing it has been often printed, and read of very
many, etc. and we sufer very many errors in other ancient Catholics; we
extenuate them, we excuse them, and finding out some device, we often deny
them, and fain some good sense of them, when they are opposed in disputations,
or conflicts with the adversaries; we see not why Bertram may not deserve the
same favor, and diligent recognition, lest Heretics prate against us, and
say, that we burn antiquity, and prohibit it, when it makes for them. Some
things therefore in Bertrams Non male aut inconsulto igitur omittantur omnia
haec a pa. 3. (Considerandum quoque quod in pane illo etc.) usque ad illud
multo post (Sed aliud est quod exterius geritur, etc.) -- Legendum
invisibiliter pro visibiliter. Ibid. p. 16. and 17.
book they will have to be quite left out, and some things to be quite altered,
as namely for visibly to be read invisibly. Such devices have they of the
Church of Rome to corrupt ancient Writers, when they make against them, and
then they pretend that all are for them. Thus the Marquess in the conclusion
of his Reply (page 230.) pretends, that they have the prescription of 1600.
years possession and continuance of their Churches Doctrine, and evidence out
of the word of God, and the Fathers witnessing to that evidence, and the
decrees of Councels, and Protestants own acknowlegdements. But what ground
there is for this pretense, let the Reader judge by comparing and considering
what is said on both sides. And so I also shall leave the success of my labor
unto God, in whose hand are the hearts of all.

An Addition of some few things omitted in the foregoing REJOINDER.
THe Marquess, page 69. cites Basil orat. in 40 (it is misprinted 44) Mart.
as affirming that we may pray unto the Saints departed. But in that Oration
Basil affirms no such thing: He shows indeed his approbation of praying (not
(...). Basil. orat. in 40 Martyrs.
unto the Martyrs, but, which is quite another thing) to God at the monuments
of the Martyrs. The most learned B. Usher observes, That the memory of the
Martyrs indeed was from the very beginning had in great reverence; and at their
Memorials and Martyria, B. Ush. Answer of Prayer to Saints, pa. 434.
that is to say, at the places wherein their bodies were laid, (which were the
Churches, whereunto the Christians did in those times usually resort) prayers
were ordinarily offered up unto God, for whose cause they laid down their
lives. But this is no argument, that they then prayed to the Martyrs, though
that error might take occasion (afterward) to creep in by this means.

The Marquess taxes Calvin for holding, that Christ's soul was subject to
ignorance. To what I have already said in answer to this charge, I add, that
in this particular Fulgentius was of the same mind with Calvin. For confuting
those that held Si anima vel incellectus naturae in Christo defuisse credetur
humanae, quid in infant bonum malumqne dicitur ignorasse? (citat Isa. 7. 16.
atque addit) Anima igitur humana, quae rationis capax naturaliter facta est,
bonum malumque in infant Christo nesciisse dicitur, quae secundum Evangelicam
veritatem in puero Jesu sapientia and gratia profecisse narratur. Fulgent. ad
Trasim. lib. 1.
Christ to have no humane soul, he says thus: If we must believe that the
humane nature in Christ wanted a soul, what is it, that in Christ being an
Infant, is said not to have known good and evil? (Then he cites Isa. 7. 16.
expounding it of Christ, and adds) Therefore the humane soul, which is
naturally made capable of reason, in Christ being an Infant, is said not to
have known good and evil; which according to the truth of the Gospel, in Christ
being a child, is related to have increased in wisdom, etc.

To that also that has been said before concerning Calvin's death, let this be
added: How far Calvin was from despairing at his death, as the Marquess does
object, may appear by what he wrote to his dear friend Farel, when he looked
for death every moment. I hardly breath (says he) and expect continually Aegre
spiritum traho, and assidue expecto dum me anhelitus deficiat. Satis est quod
Christo vivo, and morior, qui suis lucrum est in vita and morte. Calv. Epist.
344.
that breath should fail me. It is enough that I live and dye to Christ, who to
those that are his is both in life and death advantage. This (as appears by the
date of the Epistle). Calvin wrote at Geneva the second day of May, in the year
1564. and (as Bucholcerus in his Chronology notes out of Beza) the twenty
seventh day of the same month he dyed.

The Marquess, page 99. speaks of Marriage as anciently held by the Church to
be a true and proper Sacrament. This particular I omitted, having spoken of the
rest which he there mentions, to wit, Confirmation, Orders, and Extreme
Unction, in answer to that which elsewhere he says of them. For Marriage
therefore, 1. There is nothing in the Scripture to prove it a Sacrament
properly so called. That of the Apostle Non habes ex hoc loco prudens Lector a
Paulo conjugium esse Sacramentum. Cajetan. in Ephesians. 5. 32.
so much insisted on, This is a great mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32. Their own Cardinal
Cajetane upon the place confesses to make nothing to the purpose. 2. That the
Fathers call Marriage a Sacrament, does not evince that they thought it to be
of the same nature with Baptism and the Lords Supper. For (as I have before
showed) they often use the word Sacrament largely, and apply it to diverse
things, which even in our Adversaries account properly are no Sacraments. 3.
Durandus an acute and learned School-man, who lived about the year 1320. does
hold, that though Marriage be a sign of a holy thing (to Argumenta prima
probant, quod matrimonium non est sacramentum stricte and proprie dictum, sicut
alia sacramenta novae Legis; sed non probant quin sit sacrae rei signum, and
sic largo modo sacramentum. Durand. in Sent. lib. 4. did. 26. quaest. 3. number.
15.
wit, the conjunction of Christ and the Church) and so in a large sense a
Sacrament, yet it is no Sacrament strictly and properly so called, nor of the
same nature with the other Sacraments of the New Testament, to wit, Baptism,
and the Lords Supper: and this he confirms by diverse arguments. I know
Bellarmine endeavors to answer Durandus his arguments; but his answers are
consuted by Amesius and others, and therefore I will not stand about them. I
will only prove from Bellarmine himself, that Marriage is properly no
Sacrament. Every Sacrament properly so called, is administered by some other,
and not by the same party, to Commune est omnibus Sacramentis, ut ab alio
dentur, ab alio accipiantur: neque ullus sibi ipse Sacramentum administret.
Bellar. de Missa lib. 1. c. 22. in initio.

Matrimonium non eget alio Ministro praeter ipsos contrahentes. Bell. de Matr.
l. 1. c. 5. sect. Atque hinc. Et c. 6. sect. Ex his.

Necesse est conjuges ipsos esse proprios hujus Sacramenti Ministros. Et ibid.
sect. Neque absurdum. Proprie qui Matrimonii Sacramentum efficient, ipsi
conjuges sunt.


whom it is administered. But Marriage is not administered by some other, but by
parties themselves that are married, whiles they mutually express their
consent one to the other: Therefore Marriage is no Sacrament properly so
called. Bellarmine does own both the Proposition and the Assumption, and
therefore he may not deny the Conclusion. This is argumentum ad hominem (as
they call it) of force against Bellarmine: I do not see what he could, or any
holding his principles can answer to it. But to make the argument simply and
absolutely convincing, I will frame it otherwise. For indeed the Proposition
laid down by Bellarmine is not simply and absolutely true, to wit, Every
Sacrament properly so called is administered by some other, and not by the same
party to whom it is administered. This is not essential to a Sacrament; for then
the Lords Supper should be no Sacrament to the Minister himself, but only to
those that communicate with him. And so if Abraham did circumcise himself, (as
is probable he did) his Circumcision should have been no Sacrament unto him,
which is most absurd. Thus therefore I frame the argument: Every Sacrament of
the New Testament is to be administered by such as are peculiarly appointed of
God to be Ministers of his holy things. But Marriage is not administered by
such; Therefore it is not a Sacrament of the New Testament. In the Proposition
I say, Every Sacrament of the New Testament, because whether it were so in
respect of Circumcision, the story of Zippordh, and some other places of
Scripture perhaps may make it questionable. But for the Sacraments of the New
Testament, our Savior has ordained those that are Ministers of the word to
have the administration of them also, Mat. 28. 19, 20. And the Apostle bids,
Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The Sacraments therefore being the mysteries of
God, only the Ministers of Christ are now the stewards and dispencers of them.
But this is not necessarily requisite in the point of Marriage, that a Minister
Quanquam requiritur ex decreto Ecclesiae Minister Ecclesiasticus, qui consensum
conjugum exquirat, and eundem approbet and declaret, and benedictione
Sacerdotali confirmet; tamen proprie qui Matrimonii Sacramentum efficient ipsi
conjuges sunt. Bell. de Matr. l. 1. c. 6. sect. Neque absurdum.
should dispense it. Though ordinarily a Minister be employed in the
celebration of Marriage, for the instructing and exhorting of the parties
married, and for praying unto God for his blessing upon them; yet this is not
by Christ's peculiar appointment, but only (as our Adversaries confess) by the
Churches order, and therefore not simply necessary; Marriage were every way
complete, though no Minister were employed in it, though in diverse respects
that is expedient; but howsoever properly the parties themselves that are
married, are they by whom Marriage is administered, whiles they give themselves
each to other.

The End.
Errata in the First Part.
Page 114. Properly, read piously. p. 121. deceived, r. deceased. p. 122. saw,
r. slew. p. 123. work, r. rock. p. 124. that, r. not. p. 136. supposition. r.
suspicion. p. 166. Patres, lege fratres. p. 205. reply, r. rely. p. 214. thy,
merit, r. my merit. ibid. die, r. did. nomen, l. nomine. p. 215. discente, l.
dicente. p. 222. So say the Translators, etc. That has reference to those
words, Some may, and indeed do say, etc. ibid. inevitable, r. inevitably. be
being, blot out being. p. 230. If the Apostle had -- add these words,
considered mankind as corrupt, he would not have said. p. 231. fastened, r.
fashioned. p. 235. were affirmed, r. we affirm. p. 252. to, r. do. p. 262.
liking r. living. p. 291. Lombard who, blot out who.

Errata in the Second Part.
Page 26. this same, r. the same. p. 40. at least, r. at furthest. p. 45.
commending, r. contending.


