HEREFORDSHIRE ORCHARDS, A PATTERN For all England.

Written in an Epistolary Address to Samuel Hartlib Esquire

By I. B.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Anno M. DC. LVII.

To my very worthy Friend,
The zealous solicitor of Christian peace Amongst all Nations, The constant
Friend of distressed Strangers, The true-hearted lover of our Native Country,
The sedulous advancer of Ingenuous Arts, and Profitable Sciences, And the
Principal Contriver of General Accommodations, SAMUEL HARTLIB Esquire

SIR,
YOur industrious endeavors for the benefit of all men, and particularly for
the good of this Nation, has well deserved the grateful acknowledgement of
all good men, and of my self in special: for that in my rural retirement I
have received some profit, and very much innocent and refreshing delights in
the perusal of those treatises, which are by your diligent hand communicated
to the public.

My education was amongst Scholars in Academyes, where I spent many years in
conversing with variety of books only. A little before our wars began, I spent
two summers in traveling toward the South, with purpose to learn to know men
and foreign manners. Since my return, I have been constantly employed in a
weighty office, by which I am not disengaged from the care of our public
welfare in the peace and prosperity of this Nation; but obliged to be the more
sollicitous and tender in preserving it, and promoting it. Wherefore, taking
notice that this County is reputed the Orchard of England, and (in the
generality of good husbandry) excels many other places; I offer it (as my
duty) to give you some plain and unpolished account of our Agriculture in
Herefordshire: which I do the more willingly undertake, for that I do not yet
know of any other address is made unto you from this County. Here I observe
the wisest and best of our Gentry to be very careful in setting forward such
kind of husbandry, as best agrees with the nature of the soil where he
inhabiteth. From the greatest persons to the poorest cottager, all habitations
are encompassed with Orchards and Gardens; and in most places our hedges are
enriched with rows of fruit trees, pears, or apples, Gennet-moyles, or crab
trees. Of these, the Pears make a weak drink fit for our hindes, and is
generally refused by our Gentry, as breeding wind in the stomach; yet this
drink (till the heat of Summer has caught it,) is most pleasing to the female
palate, having a relish of weak wine mixed with sugar. If mingled with some
harsh kind of apples, it makes a happy mixture; and our observant housekeepers
know how to mix them to the best advantage. Some pears are apt to incline 2the
drink to be roapy, and they are known by giving a wheyish color to the liquor.
I know a good husband that cuts down and destroys such peare-trees from off
his ground, calling them the worst kind of weeds. For others are so nice as to
refuse the drink, and women love it best, as sweetest, till it be roapy. Most
other kinds of perry are of a more waterish color, then apple-cider, and more
lushious. The white-horsepeare yields a juice somewhat near to the quality of
cider; and the neighborhood of Bosbury is famous for a peculiar perry, which
has many of the masculine qualities of cider. It is as quick, strong, and
heady, high-colored; and retains a good vigor two or three Summers, yea in
great vessels and good cellars many years, before it declineth. The fruit is
so hard and course, that a man cannot endure to bite a morsel of it, and a pig
will refrain it. This Bosbury pear is there called the Bareland pear: and as
the liquor approaches to apple-cider in color, strength, and excels in
durance; so the bloom comes forth of a damaskrose color, like apples, not
like other pears. Our Gennet moyles are commonly found in hedges, or in our
worst soil, most commonly in Irchinfield, or toward Wales, where the land is
somewhat dry and shallow. This fruit is nice, and apt to be discouraged by
blasts, and we do ordinarily expect a failing of them every other year,
especially in dry soil; and the reason is apparent and necessary. But this
fruit makes the best cider in my judgment, and such as I do prefer before the
much-commended red-strak't must. For this Gennet moyle, if it be suffered to
ripen upon the tree, not to be mellow but to be yellowish and fragrant, and
then to be hoorded in heaps under the trees, a fortnight or three weeks before
you grind them; it is (at distance) the most fragrant of all cider-fruit, and
gives the liquor a most delicate perfume. So, for tarts and pyes, it is much
commended. The Crab is commonly ground for Verjuice, and sometimes hoorded till
near December, and then mingled with cider, or washings of cider, to make a
mordicant cider, which does well please our day-labourers; and would surely
well agree with a French peasants palate. And, for a fresh wonder, I assure you,
that we have lately found out, that one of our most delicate kinds of Cider is
made of a kind of Crab, called a Bromsbery Crab, thus hoorded: it being much
like a stomach wine, of a very pleasing sharpness. This experiment is not yet
known to many of our Countrymen, it being reserved to few as a novell mystery.
I have sometimes tried the Cider of Pippins only, well ripened, not green
windfalls, nor overripened, and somewhat hoorded: and I find it to be a very
pleasant drink, and do conceive it to be the most wholesome, and most
restorative of all sorts of Cider.

I need not tell you how all our villages, and generally all our highwayes (all
our vales being thick set with rows of villages) are in the springtime
sweetened, and beautyfied with the bloomed trees, which continue their
changeable varietyes of Ornament, till (in the end of Autumn) they fill our
Garners with pleasant fruit, and our cellars with rich and winey liquors. Few
cottagers, yea very few of our wealthiest yeomen do taste any other drink in the
family, except at some special festivalls, twice or thrice in the year, and
that for variety, rather than with choice.

Orchards being the Pride of our Country, and the Scene of my present
discourse, I will offer unto you two Observations upon that argument, as
properly directive to them that can affect the pleasure or profit, which must
needs be, in many respects, very much: As, for that they do not only sweeten,
but also purify the ambient air, (which I conceive to conduce very much to
the constant health and long lives, for which our County has been always
famous;) and for that they fence our habitations and walks from the stroke of
winds and storms in the Winter, and afford us shelter and shade in the heat of
Summer; and (if I may acknowledge grateful trifles) for that they harbor a
constant aviary of sweet singers, which are here retained without the charge or
violence of the Italian Wiers.

My first Observation is this; I conceive that, if other Countries would submit
to the same patience and industry, as is usual amongst us, they might partake
of a great measure (at least) of the same blessings. As we see in our borderers
of Shropshire, Worcestershire and Glocestershire, and also in Somersetshire;
and much more in Kent and Essex, etc. My reason I take from the wonderful
difference of soyles where we abound with rich Orchards. About Bromyard, a cold
air, and a shallow barren soil, yet store of Orchards of diverse kinds of spicey
and savoury apples. About Rosse and Webley, and toward the Hay, a shallow,
hot, sandy or stony rye-land, and exposed to a changeable air from the disgusts
of the black mountain; yet here, and all over Irchinfield, and also about
Lemster, both toward Keinton, and toward Fayremile (which makes a third
difference of shallow and starvy land,) in all these barren provinces, as good
store of undeceiving Orchards, as in the richest vale of the County, even by
From banks. Only, as I fore-noted, where the dryest fruit trees are planted in
a very hot, shallow, and dry soil, there we must be content with a full and
certain blessing every second year. This being also allowed, that some soil
and some air is more agreeable for some kind of fruit, than for other: as for
example, Worcestershire is more proper for pears and cherryes, than
Herefordshire, and Herefordshire more proper for Apples. The reason of the
difference may in part appear by this following illustration. Where the turf is
very shallow, the rough starvy ground (which in this country we wrongfully
call Marle) hinders the tender root of the apple tree from descending deep
enough for due nourishment, and fit shelter. There (as in the ground which we
esteem the most barren) the root of the pear tree, having a more piercing
vigor, breaks his way through this course Marle, as it will also cleave
through some veins of rocks and stones; and, under this starvy ground, it finds
a more congeniall and richer nourishment; as appears by the store of fruit,
fair and juicy, and also by the rind of the tree, smooth, bright-coloured, and
free from moss. This we also note, that in a deep soil, that is most kind for
apples, if the root of a pear tree descends deep into a soft clay ground, the
tree spends all his strength in growing downwards, and becomes less spacious,
less beautiful in the head, and less fruitful. And where some pears find
great difference of soil, whether grafted or planted by the stock, there it
differs sometimes in bulk, and often times in other qualities very much. Which
seems to me to explain, why there is such different kinds of pears in every
Country: their shape and their nature, and therefore also their names, being
changed so often, and so easily.

Also I have frequently noted, that the richest Cider, and the best-tasted
apples for the table, do grow in the soil that is less deep and less
commended for other uses, as in a high ground, or dry land. And you shall find
the better-tasted fruit to be more wrethed or wrinckled, or spotted with warts,
moles, or freckles, or of a more russet, or yellow color. The other apple,
that comes from the richer and lower ground, is more pallid, more plump, but
more waterish and insipid. I conclude this observation with this direction,
That since no kind of soil should wholly discourage us, and yet much regard
must be had of fitting the fruit to the soil, therefore we must employ our
first care in the plantation of a nursery, where our experiences may daily
increase, and the plants also be educated, prepared and fitted for the
neighboring soil. For what Columella says of Vines, I may as truly say of
Fruit Trees; Quod ex longinquo petitur, parum familiariter nostro solo venit,
propter quod difficilius convalescit alienum exterae regionis. Optimum est ergo
eodem agro quo vitem dispositurus es, vel certe vicino, facere seminarium:
idque multum refert loci natura etc. de arbor. cap. 1.

My second observation is intended to encourage the plantation of a Nursery, by
directing the sure way how to fit the soil with the greatest variety of fruits,
and also to obtain the speediest reward together with a yearly delight in
novelties, and a like growth in experiences.

But because I must now imbark ninto some paradoxes, which will not easily
obtain belief, and least of all amongst our own Countrymen here in
Herefordshire, for some reasons which hereafter will occurr, I will make my
entrance with a plain and true story.

Some years ago I read a small treatise of Orchards and Gardens written by
William Lawsone, Printed 1626.
a North-countrey man. In it I found many assertions which seemed to me so
strange, so contrary to our general opinion, so discordant from our daily
practice, and so incredible, that I could not forbear my smiles. I related the
particulars to all our best Artists. Every man confirmed me, that the treatise
wa^ wholly ridiculous, and in no respec^ worthy to be examined and weighed: yet
I thought I found many signs of honesty and integrity in the Man, a sound,
clear, natural wit, and all things attested and affirmed upon his own
experiences. This raised m^ wonder the more. Amongst many particulars, some
were as follows.

1. That the best way to plant a^ Orchard were to turn the groun^ with a spade
in February, and to se^ from February till May, every month^ some kernels of
the best and sounde^ apples, or pears etc. finger deep, a^ a foot distance:
And by removing the rest (as time and occasion should advise) to leave the
likeliest plant to reside in the natural place unremoved. Chapter 7. page 17.

2. That the kernels of every apple would bring forth apples of the like kind.
Chap. 7. page 18.

3. That by the leaves of each spiring plant you might distinguish each kind of
fruit, whether delicate or harsh, etc. Chapter 7. page 18.

4. That trees thus raised might be preserved or continue for a thousand years,
etc. Chap. 14. page 47.

5. That apples either grafted, or any time removed, could never be sound,
durable, or otherwise perfect.

1. The first of these Assertions was rejected, as dilatory, and retarding our
hopes and reward for half an age.

2. The second was contradicted by daily experience, which voucheth that many
apple-kernels will degenerate to crabs, at least if taken from apples planted
on a crab-stock: and that crab-kernels are better for a plantation, than any
apple-kernels.

3. The third note was wholly unknown and unobserved in our Country.

4. The fourth, like an unreasonable phansy.

5. The fifth, as refuted in all our Orchards every where.

Notwithstanding these oppositions, I still retained my good opinion of the
man's honesty and experience. Therefore I resolved to make exact trial with
patience. I dig'd holes of three foot breadth in a parcel of ordinary
clay-ground. [Note that the whole piece of clay-ground was turned somewhat deep
with the spade before, that the setlings might gather root as well in that
vulgar ground, as also in the finer mold.] I enquired slips of several trees
that grew without graffing, and bore several fruits of their natural kind:
these I placed each kind round about the verges of the several holes. By
diligent enquiry the first Spring I found fourteen several sorts of these
natural apples, the fruit much differing in taste, shape and color; some only
green and sowrish, some red-straked, some party-colored, and very pleasant,
some table-fruit in Summer, some Winter fruit, some cider fruit. Of all these
the Kentish codling was by odds the worst: not many better then the French
Cornell. Having placed these slips in the border of the hole at a foot
distance, I filled up the hole with a fine kind of garden-mould, carried
thither in barrows. This I raised not in Tumps, for I foresaw the
inconvenience, that it would be a harbor for ants or pismires. I kept it also
at an equal level, that the rain might not lodge there, and corrupt the young
roots. In the midst of this fine mold, in the most temperate weather, I did
monthly, from Autumn to the next Spring, set kernels of the finest sort of
apples, with delineating in a sciograph the several kinds in several places. I
now find that the kernells of apples grafted on crab-stocks prove not all
crabs, nor (as I guess) altogether of the kind of that apple, whence the
kernel was taken.

2ly, That, as the mold is ^^ner where they first grow, so the fruit seems
more civil, and in course ground they degenerate toward the crab. Our
neighbors, for a nursery, sow the dross or must (as we call it) of apples
ground in a cider-mill. But I have noted the fairest kernells to be bruised in
the mill, the remainder being small, and sown in course land, become a kind of
crabs.

And that the kernells of natural apples do very much propend to the kind of
which they are descended. This was neglected, and therefore unknown to our
neighbors, who had no need of this curiosity, as being so addicted to
graffing, that they take not notice of any natural apple, except the Gennet
moyle, the Kydoddin, the Sweeting, and the French Cornell; which are found in
all places. It Is sure that kernells of the same apples, in a far differing soil,
do produce a different apple; but (as I said) still with some inclination to
the original, if it be the kernel of an ungrafted apple. And this may
advertise the best season of designing variety; namely, in application of
choice compost to the very kernel, as Gab. Plat prescribes Exp. 14. page 210.
of the Additions to the excellent Legacy. All other stories, of pouring liquors
into the bark, or bulk of the tree, are effete and idle phansies, for nine
days wonder.

3ly, I find the truth, and that much more might be added to Lawsons rules, of
distinguishing the hopefulnesse of the fruit by the first leaves of the
yearling plant. For a short and dark-green leaf prognosticateth a crabbed
fruit. With a larger leaf and thick, but also dark-green, I have found a good
Winter-apple, but the stock hardy to endure a stiff clay-ground. A fady
willowish broad leaf notes a flat, insipid apple, as the Kentish Codling,
which holds out well against blasts. A paler green, as the Poppinjay, or
barbery leaf, specially if the leaf be limber also, notes a delicate fruit:
and the broader the leaf, the fairer that fruit. A wrinkled leaf, neither very
dark, nor very light, proves red-strak't crab-stocks have reddish tops. More
particulars will occurr by ordinary observation.

4ly, For the incredible durance of apple trees to a thousand years, I have
upon much experience and many reasons much abated the presumption of my
censure. It Is certainly true (as Gabriel Plat in the foresaid place notes,)
that if a man aim at his present profit, then graffing is his way: but if he
aim at the profit of his posterity, then it is best not to graft at all. This
I add, that most ungraffed apples are apt by the overweight of their fruit to
lean toward the ground: and I have seen many of them quelled quite to the
ground; where they do renew their strength, and get up again into many Trunks,
in a continued order, answerable to the old fable of the Giant Antaeus. Every
aspiring Trunk of some of these natural apples, is much more lasting than any
grafted fruit-tree: and many very aged people have assured me, that they have
discerned no difference either of their growth or decay, in their whole age
from their childhood. I will tell you upon my credit the wonders of one tree of
this kind, now growing in Ocle Pitchard: the fruit is not very sappy, nor
pleasant; the leaf dark-green, and stiff. My known friend (for trial) made of
that tree five of our large hogsheads, consisting of sixty four Statute gallons
of cider, without the mixture of any water. It ordinarily yields four
hogsheads, and seldom or (as they assure me that dwell there) never fails of
three. Yet few of our Countrymen have heard of it, or take notice of it. This
tree has had very many uprisings, so that I conceive it has been many
hundreds of years making this progress. My dear alliance, Mr. Thomas Tailor,
was owner of it many years, and dwelt always in that parish. He is now past
eighty years old, of firm strength and fresh memory: yet he affirms, that he
never could discern any change in the tree. And his wife for many years tried
to plant the branches, but was utterly discouraged by their slow motion. I have
for three years tried some branches, which seem only to keep a faint life,
with very little progress. The ground on which this great tree grows, is
pasture, and seems not in the age of man to have been broken up, or relieved
with compost, or fresh mold; which may show, that it is a very hardy plant. So
much upon the adventure of mine own credit, which may be examined by a thousand
witnesses, to confirm the credit, or rather guess and proposal, of Mr. Lawson.

5ly. For duration of the fruit-tree, much care must be had in the removal,
which should be soon after the leaf is fallen, when the Autumnall rains have
softened the earth at the roots, that the roots be not bruised or wounded in the
removal: and then the tree should keep the same position toward the heavens;
the roots laid also in the same posture, the smaller fibers or bearded roots
rather cut at the ends, then crumpled up: and the earth in which the stock is
laid, somewhat of the same kind, but bettered, and mellowed, not with
undigested muck, but with fine mold, and shovellings of the fold. If the roots
are cut or bruised, to the same proportion the branches must be lopped. In a
grafted plant every bow should be lopped, at the very tops, in apples and
pears; not in cherries and plums. In a natural plant, the bows should not at
all be lopped, but some taken off close to the trunk; that the root at first
replantation be not engaged to maintain too many suckers. And this must be done
with such discretion, that the top-branches be not too close together; for the
natural plant is apt to grow spiry, and thereby fails of fruitfulness.
Therefore let the reserved branches be divided at a convenient roundnesse. The
branches that are cut off, may be set, and will grow, but slowly. If the top
prove spiry or the fruit unkind, then the due remedy must be in graffing.

Neither is graffing to be used only as a remedy. For it does most certainly
improve the kind of the fruit: insomuch that a graft of the same fruit does
meliorate the fruit, as is lately much observed by our Welsh neighbors, who do
graffe the Gennet-moyle upon the same stock, and thereby obtain a larger apple,
more juicy, and better for all uses: and some triplicate their graffings (for a
curiosity) upon the same account.

And it is noted amongst us, that a pearmain or any other pleasant fruit either
for cider, or the table, is much sweeter, if grafted upon the stock of a
Gennet-moyle, or Kydoddin, than if grafted on a crab-stock; though much less
lasting upon the stock of the Gennet-moyle: the Gennet-moyl being also less
lasting, especially amongst us, where they are generally planted of large
setlings, which must needs wound them in their very beginnings, and therefore
hinder their duration.

Also graffing does much precipitate, or at least expedite the reward,
especially if the graffe be taken from a branch that has some years
constantly born sound fruit plentifully. Trust not to one years trial. Potest
enim vel anni proventu, vel aliis de causis, etia^ naturaliter infoecunda semel
exuberare: sed ubi plurimis velut emeritis annorum stipendiis fides surculo
constitit, nihil dubitandum est de foecunditate: nec tamen ultra quadriennium
talis extenditur inquisitio, says Columella in a like case; lib. 3. c. 6.

1. Thus we see how to hasten the reward both by graffing, and in the choice of
the graffe.

2. And how to sweeten the fruit and better it, both by the choice of a
pleasing stock and also of a kind graffe.

3. And how to multiply variety in the diversity of compost, especially at the
first plantation of the kernel; and I add, with frequent application of
pleasant infusions, and liquids, as in which annise seeds, fennel, rosemary, or
other agreeable aromaticks have been steeped: yet beware of giving too much
juice to a young plant; for that may drown it, or make it less gustfull: And I
never saw an Orchard prove, where the ground was wetted with a water-gall, or
where the moisture did for some time lie there, and could not be drained away.
Yet near a running sink of soyled water, I have seen the approaching trees
never fail of their fruit.

4. And hence we see how to plant an Orchard that may probably remain to the
worlds end. And in this point I have insinuated some part of my paradoxes, by
the way of a story, and in pretense of defending another against the opinion
and common practice of mine own Contrymen. Mr. Lawsons book I have not now
at hand, neither can I record his judgment verbally, but I think I have stuck
close to his sense.

He adds, that the fruit of the natural plant does grow better and
pleasanter by time, as better at thirty years growth than at twenty years
growth. This I know not. See Chap. 7. page 18, 19.

Also he requires much more distance of the trees than we observe as sixty
foot at least. Our common Orchards are at twenty foot distance; our best
Orchards at thirty at least, by alternative rows per quincuncem. In large
crofts of arable, reserved for constant tillage, which is a necessary help to
fruit trees, our best husbands graft high, and prefer Lawsons utmost
distance, even sixty yards, that the teames may not annoy the trees; and then
the trees bear a full load of fruit, and spread to the natural perfection.
This I add, that if you would have the trees grow tall, and shadow more in
Summer, and keep off winds better in Winter, and the fruit the sweeter, then
you should plant the closer together, yet never nearer then twenty foot.

To conclude my paradoxes; He that is provided of a nursery, need not be very
nicely provident for the longevity of his trees. A small parcel of ground will
furnish store for all his grounds, and for all his neighborhood, to play away
upon graffings and novell experiments. And to encourage this nursery, I now
sum up all with my last paradox, That for these four last years, whereof two
were very dry Summers, I laid the fruitful sprayes of natural apple-plants in
the ground, some very small, not two foot above ground, all thereabout; and
from the first Summer to this present Spring, they never failed to bear as
thick as traces of onyons. But it is better for the plant, if you pull off the
young apples soon after they be knitted, the first year at least. Some I laid
also of four yards length under ground, the sprayes lying slope above ground:
these grow and bear incredibly. Others I slope, and pare away the bordering
turfe, that the reflected Sun may give me the early benefit of a dwarf Orchard;
and these against Midsummer, are as big as a Ladies fist. I present them to
store of witnesses. If I dwelt near Cheapside, I should make my new-planted
Nursery as rich as an Orchard. All natural apples are not of this precocity:
the more durable (as I said before) are much more sullen. Some require a knot
for the root, others not: all three the better for it. To some a small slice
from the bark is as good. Before December, whilst the spray grows on the tree,
by the bluntness of the bud you may discover what branch will bear fruit the
next Summer immediately following, if you cut off the branch, and set it before
the buds be sprouted too far forward, (as you may in February, or the beginning
of March.) This (with some) will pass as a prophesy. A sore blast or
May-Frosts may deceive you. Of these natural apples there are not past six or
seven kinds distinguished by proper names amongst us. I conceive they can never
be distinguished, for that every individual always assumes a peculiar nature
from the infinite variety of compost. In this nursery, it is the same pains, and
no charge, to try the seeds of firres, pines, cypres, pitch, etc. which prove
better for replantation than in hot beds.

Of the Art of graffing either with the ciens, bud or leaf, I shall say
nothing, because every village amongst us yields store of Artists: and many
books show the rules; but in these things an Artist can teach more in a day,
than a book in a month.

One reason why fruit do so abound in this County, is, for that no man has of
late years built him a house, but with special regard to the proximity of some
ground fit for an Orchard, which should be of some depth, as is commonly
toward the foot of a descending ground, and frequently with a proclivity
toward the South; and the land not too friable or hollow, but somewhat tough,
binding and tenacious, least the winds root up the stocks. And many times
servants when they betake to marriage, seek out an acre or two of ground, which
they find fit for Orchard: for this they give a fine, or double value for years
or lives; and thereon they build a Cottage, and plant an Orchard, which is all
the wealth they have for themselves, and their posterity.

For Gardens, we have little encouragement to design more than is for the
necessary use of our own families, except our River Wye may be made navigable
for transportation. And by defect of transportation, our store of cider is
become a snare to many, who turn Gods blessings into wantonness and
drunkenness. The credit of Cider being of few late years much advanced in the
estimation of our best Gentry, who have sought out the right method of ripening
and hoording the choicest fruits, and of finding the right season of drawing
it, and some also of bottling it. But I am confident that much more may be
added to the perfection of it, when they shall also apply to it the due
subtleties of the mysterious art of fermentation.

I found it much amended, by putting pure cider upon the fresh lees of a butt
of sack, newly drawn.

In Vines our Gentry have lately contended in a profitable ambition to excel
each other: so that the white muscadell is vulgar, the purple and black grape
frequent, the parsly-grape and Frontiniack in many hands.

Wall-nuts belong to our highway sides, and are fittest for dry and stony
grounds. I find them for the dryest ground of the Nursery a never-failing
companion. In Columella we may find many excellent rules how to ascertain and
hasten their growth, and to mend their quality.

The large Chestnut being such a masculine food for lusty rusticks, and so
much used at the best tables in France, and so savoury in the condiment of our
strongest cider with salt, I much blame our Countrymen, that we have no more
use of a food that would soon become cheap, common, and lasting.

All these nuts and filberts do accelerate growth, (as I have proved,) by the
rules of Columella: In aqua mulsa, nec ninius dulci macerato, it a jucundioris
saporis fructum, cum adoleverit, praebebit, and interim melius and celerius
frondebit, lib. 5. cap. 10. and again, de arb. 22. I cannot tell whether it
should not be read, nec nimis dulci; but I tried it in milk, and also in stale
urine steeped in sheeps-dung, with good success. He adds for an improvement,
Et in medulla ferulae sine putamine nucem Graecam vel avellanam abscondito, and
ita adobruito. A worthy person tried the kernells of cherry-stones and
plum-stones, having first broken and cast away the shells, and setting them in
Summer time, as soon as they were ripe; and he assures that they got a years
advantage in celerity.

I do much wonder that such a singular honest man as Gabriel Plat should write,
that it is found by experience, that a chestnut in ten or twelve years will
grow into a fair tree, able to be the master-post of a fair buildding. And the
like of the Wallnut, Exp. 13. page 269. Addit. to the Legacy.

I am at the like wonder at honest Cap. Blithes precedent of small quickset
oaks, that at eleven years growth made sparrs and small building-timber, Chap.
25. page 158. Edit. 1652.

Our elm is of speediest growth, all timber, always shredded to be the
tallest of English trees; and found in rows on our highways, and at every
cottagers door, except they be compelled to give place to fruit trees.

In many journeys through Shropshire, I have scarce seen two elmes of the right
kind. The crust of the earth there is too shallow. But the root of the oaks
cleaves through the harder earth, and surely finds a marly substance for his
plentiful sustenance to the full depth of his stature, quod quantum vertice ad
auras
Aethereas, tantum radice ad Tartara tendit.
Georg. 2. verse. 191.

All our hills have sometimes born oaks, or few failed, and I conceive most are
very apt for it. But of late the Iron-mills have devoured our glory, and
defloured our Groves.

We are generally noted to excel in all kinds of husbandry: our ploughs are
light, but we listen after further directions which come to us through your
hands. The rye of Clehanger and of some parts of Irchinfield is as good as the
Muncorne or Miscellane of many other Countries; and our wheat is upon the
ground far richer than I saw any in the fair vale of Esome in Worcestershire
and Warwickshire, as in my travells, I sometimes examined it in the company of
other more skillful husbandmen.

For pastures we add improvements daily, and as a stranger passes by our
habitations, by our fences, Orchards, pastures, arable, he may distinguish a
well-ordered housekeeper and a freeholder, from an over-wracked Tenant, and an
unthrift.

This is the Country where Rowland Vaughan began his Waterworks; and I can
name you a great number of admirable contrivers for the public good.

The Lord Scudamore may well begin to us; a rare example, for the well-ordering
of all his family, a great preserver of woods against the day of Englands need,
maintaining laudable hospitality regularly bounded with due sobriety, and
always keeping able servants to promote the best expediencies of all kinds of
Agriculture. And Sr. H. L. has heartily prosecuted the same encouragements.
Our learned Mr. B.H. drives on the same design, as far as the glances of a most
sedulous employment will permit. Mr. R. of L. is excellently apt, and
constantly diligent in the pursuit as well of delicacies, as necessaries. Mr.
S. of W. has in few years raised an under-tenement, from 8l. yearly, and so
rented, to be well worth 60l. yearly, and so rented, or thereabouts. He never
fails in any point of good husbandry. Mr. F. of B. has raised his poor
pastures from the value of 2s. -- 6d. to be better worth than 20s yearly. C. M.
has metamorphosed his wilderness to be like the Orchards of Alcinous; herein
also a hearty patriot. I must cease to name men, since in every village there
is some excellent republican.

With one sad note I must now conclude this discourse. I wish this sore
proverb, Bona terra, mala gens, may not belong to us. The most High has filled
us with his blessings, but we fail so much in returning due thanks, that we
many times turn his blessings into heavy curses, and make his liberal gifts
the prevailing cause of our hasty ruin. And whereas the rural life should in
all reason be the most humble, tame, and innocent: yet daily experience
shows, that where any Trade of Manufacture is driven on, there the word of
God bears a price: Where Trade thrives not, there the word of God is at the
best but as a pleasant song: if sometimes they hear it, yet seldom they obey
it. And all doors and highwayes are oppressed with idle and sturdy vagabonds:
and it is more easy for an honest Iusticiary to do the work of Hercules in
cleansing the Augaean stable, than to remedy such a customary and prevailing
evil. Our fresh expectation is, that some worthy Patriot will break through the
difficulties of an obstructive people, and force open a way for trade and
commerce. Let our prayers and importunities press on all true-hearted patriots
thus to advance the public. For this adventure is, without dispute, sure of a
reward in heaven, and not only free from the envy of men, but also always
acknowledged to deserve everlasting Monuments of glory. And thus also in the
person of another (as under a fit vail of modesty) I briefly hint unto you,
what esteem we do truly ow unto your labors. I pray the Lord to remember your
diligence in the great day of his appearance in glory.

May the 3d. 1656. Your hearty well-wisher, and obliged servant in the Lord, I.
B.

SIR,
HAving employed one day upon a long letter to you concerning Orchards and the
Culture of Herefordshire, and the Messenger being not yet gone, I shall now add
somewhat, or at least sum up the result of my former discourse.

The ground for an Orchard should rather incline toward the South than toward
the North: yet no necessity of niceness in that point. They prove well toward
the North. So rather toward the rising Sun, than toward the West. Yet the
West wind is the best, and the Western Sun best ripening. And the blasts
commonly come from the full South, and about Noon: wherefore we pray with the
Psalmist, to be delivered from the evil that flies at Noontide.

Yet a diligent observer may find that the hurtful winds are apt to gather
into channels upon the surface of the earth, as the streams of water do: and a
man may find by his eye and reason, and see it confirmed by anniversary
experience, that at a miles distance one point of the heavens is far more
agreeable, or more hurtful than another, either by the conduct of hills and
vales in the neighborhood, or at distance, or by vapors arising from lakes,
rivers, or moorish grounds, which by frosts are turned into blasts. For we have
confirmed it into a proverb, that dry frosts do not blast, but moist frosts,
and frosts following after rain do: and dampy grounds make frosts that would be
dry in other places, become moist in the neighborhood. Also sometimes in a
very bottom the air is penned so close, and the Suns heat so multiplied by
reflections, that it is apt to gather the Southern blasts (which, as I said,
are the more frequent, and more hurtful to the nicer fruit, and to hops,) as
in a furnace or oven.

If the crust, or richer surface of the earth be near a foot deep, it is fully
enough: and if the crust of the earth be deeper, yet I have seldom seen any of
our stocks set more than a foot deep, except they be great stocks, which should
keep their former depth.

If the ground be equable, that is, in any proclivity relating toward a
level, then it is pity to stock it with natural plants. The more expedite way
were in October to settle crab-stocks at thirty foot distance in the
forementioned best order, per quincuncem: and after three years, the next
following Spring, send for an Artist to graft them with the best fruit.

The Crab-stocks should not be above the bigness of a man's hand-wrist: if
bigger, it is less apt to close with the graft, and then the rain finds hole,
to the danger of the stock. Our usual custom was, upon the plain stock to set
two or three grafts, which (for variety) might be different, without any
hazard or damage. Of late many do slope the stock for one only grafte
conceiving this the more certain way to unite the stock and graft fully and
speedily. In a Nursery, if the stocks be as small as twigs, the surest and
speediest way is by the joynt-graft, where no less than eight sides are
engaged, and this is an improvement of the last stamp.

We cannot trust to any Artist, but have need to use a true and careful friend
in the choice of grafts from the fruitful branch of a sound and fruitful
tree. And an error in this point (besides the mistake of the fruit,) may
prorogue the reward for five years or more, which is a sad loss. Columella's
former note is worthy to be remembered in this point.

If the ground be very unequal, it is a great charge, and a very gross vanity
to level it. For there is a kind of beauty, and a sure refreshment in a
wilderness; at least it is a good soil if appendant to a pleasant garden. And
it may be better, more kind, and more fruitful, most certainly more fit for
variety, and for all change of seasons by inequality, than by equality. And
this is the ground that is fittest for the natural apple, who is then wronged,
maimed or wounded, when he is hindered from his natural course, or forced into
order. Yet I should not plant him in such bottoms, where the water cannot pass
away: the descent were best for his situation.

The apples we commend for grafts, are the Stockin-apple, the
Iellyflower-apple, the Well-apple, the Eliot, the Queen-crab, the Quince-apple,
the Winter-quining, the Harvey, the William, the Lenard, the Iohn-apple, the
Snouting, not forgetting the pearemain, and pippin, and leather-coat. These,
and many more that are namelesse, are for the Table.

For cider, the streak't must is most commended; but it is but a kind of shrub or
hedge-plant, not apt to grow to a large tree, and spending strength so thick
and so constantly, that the planter commonly survives to see the decay of his
own work. There is a white must, much commended for a strong lusty cider, the
tree long lasting. Another white must has this fault; they abide not on the
tree, to be gathered together, but are always dropping one after another.

I need not note such cautions as may afford choice for all seasons, early and
late, and in the first stocking of the ground to plant pears and apples
alternatively, at least if we have no certainty of the nature of the ground;
and there is a beauty as well as profit in variety: and pears grow long before
they take up much room, and for the most part begin to be in perfection, when
the grafted apple is decayed. Or a Winter-apple, which lasts longer, and grows
slower, may be alternative to a cider-apple.

The clay-land binds the tree faster from wind-strokes, the sandy-land
hasteneth the growth more. By rows of Elmes every Orchard and Village is
generally fenced from the North and North-East wind: yet no necessity.

For Hops, we make have to be the chief hop-masters in England; our Country
having store of Coppice-woods, and many provident men within these three years
planting abundance of the fairest and largest sort of hops. All about Bromyard
in a base soil there is great store. At first we adventured only upon deep,
low, rich and moorish grounds: now we climb up the hills with wonderful
success. We find also that the bottoms are apt to gather heat as an oven (as
is abovesaid) and that begets hony-dewes, when the more open air escapes it.

Our Poets new and old, and all best judgments do highly commend the pleasure
of a Grove, Horat. l. 2. Epist. 2.
Scriptorum chorus omnis amat Nemus, and fugit urbes. We do commonly devise a
shadowy walk from our Gardens through our Orchards (which is the richest,
sweetest, and most embellisht grove) into our Coppice-woods or Timber-woods.
Thus we approach the resemblance of Paradise, which God with his own perfect
hand had appropriated for the delight of his innocent Masterpiece. If a gap
lies in the way between our Orchard and Coppice, we fill up the vacancy with
the artificial help of a hop-yard. Where a busy weed gives the shape of a
wood. This must content us, 'till we can gain the credit of a Vineyard, which
as yet hangs between hope and fear. The late dry Summers did swell us with
hopes; the later fickle Spring and moist Autumn did blast, or drown our
expectation.

Some sow acorns, and ash keys, and other seeds for Woods, in wild and hilly
grounds. Others count it much better to plant quick-sets, which make more have,
and may be more reducible to the beauty of order.

Before we adventure for Woods upon untryed ground, it is not amiss to make use
of Sr. Hugh Plats his augur. My self having bought a small tenement, thought it
worth the while to see the nature of mine own land, for nine foot depth, which
was soon done. By that I found where sand, where stone, and where marle of the
best sort were nearest at hand: I found the reason why one piece of arable was
more cold and moist, and less fruitful than another.

We have a belief, that the most barren surface has the richest entrails, not
only of metallic Mineralls, but also of stone, yea of marle, or some other
rich material. And this is certain, that which we esteem the richest land, and
buy it at the dearest rate by far, that is in many respects the poorest land:
as for example, our richest land is esteemed to be on From banks, the pasture
very rich, the arable a stiff clay bearing the best wheat; yet this clay is
very unkind for Gardens, it does devour much compost. It is a slow ground for
Orchards; the arable is much inclinable to mildewes: if we have need to turn it
into pastures, though we have great advantages of land-flouds, or other fat
waters, and the ground seem very likely for pasture, yet it is almost as good
to give it away, as to go about to turn it into pasture. I have seen, that in
twenty years it gathers not a turf, or sward. Yea lately, the want of
winter-flouds two years together left the best pastures as bare, hard, starvy,
chapt and cheany, as the basest land on the Welsh mountains. And if the arable
be there once out of heart, or miss of one course of plowing, it is costly
work to recover it.

On the contrary, in many places of the hot rye-land, where the pastures have a
course seagreen blade, or short and poor, and where the fields refuse wheat,
pease, and fitches, there sheep thrive best, and their dung suddenly recovers
the arable, which is light, and easy for a weak team: in three or four years
it is at the best for such pasture as it proves. The pastures quickly improved
by fatting sheep there, that may ly upon it night and day. The land quick for
Orchards, or any sort of trees, as well the tallest Elmes, as the Ash: easily
sitted for Gardens, for hemp, flax, turnips, parsnips, etc. Hence you may judge
which of these were more worthy to be called the richer land: if the rich
water-flouds did not give the rich pastures the advantage on one side. And
hence you may see what a prevalency there is in the advantage of pasture only.

I have seldom seen pastures forced by Compost in this Country, as I have
seen it elsewhere. Only in the Winter we feed our cattle on the higher
pastures, and in the hazard of a rot, some follow the directions of Gabriel
Plats, in putting out their sheep all nights; which has proved a safeguard to
the sheep, and a great help to the pasture. Other helps of pasture we do not
omit, every rill of water is carefully conducted to the best use. If it runs
from a fat stream, land-floud, or limestone, we find benefit in it, if
withal we let it pass over and away, before it exchangeth it is fatness into
a cold hunger, which falls out in very few days. Some water we find so hungry,
that we dare not receive it, but at seasons of necessity. Lime we have seldom
tried upon pasture. Ashes we find excellent to beget the white and purple
hony-suckle, if sifted on the ground in February, till it has half candyed the
ground, like a hoare-frost. Our best English hay-seed is by experience found to
be our more natural friend.

Our grasiers, which are butchers, do find this fault in the excellent pastures
stored with gilt-cups, which is a kind of crowfoot, that it makes the fat of
their beef look yellow, as if it were of an old beef.

The hony-suckle and delicate grass we sort for cowes, the sowrer for the
breed of young cattle, the harder and stronger for laboring Oxen; and if it be
rough, and little better than sheep-pasture, it is the better for Horses, to mend
the breed of them for the saddle. In an hyperbolicall excess, for the suller
illustration, I may say, that a Nag fed upon high grounds and dry grounds is,
for travel, as much beyond a Nag I bred in the lower medows, as a lion
exceeds a cow in activity. For a bag to market, or a cart, you may breed them
in the lower meadows, and you shall see them big-limm'd, well-truss't, and apt
to tire themselves with their own bulk and weight. The other that are bred on
dry-ground, are airy and sinewy, full of spirits and vigor, in shape like the
barbe: they rid ground, and gather courage and delight in their own speed. Thus
colts well chosen, and sheep well ordered, may be a rich help to repair the
distresses of dry pasture.

For sheep we are skilled beyond the rules of Gab. Plats. Our wool being the
finest of England, and our sheep small, and not bearing above 16. ounces
ordinarily, (yet I have seen our fairest Weathers bear thirty ounces of wool)
being small and nice, they are generally housed by night, Summer and Winter.
And are therefore liable to two kinds of rot: the one is only of the liver at
first, and if it be discerned, it is cured by the butchers knife, without much
loss to the owner; the other rot prevails over the whole body of the sheep,
and makes the flesh sit for nothing but dogs. I know some places, in which
there has not been a rot in the memory of any of the inhabitants; but there
they change often, because the ground is very stony, and in two or three years
wears out their mouths: And nothing preserves sheep better than change of
soil. Our common husbandmen keep their small flocks at all adventure without
much care or caution. But for larger flocks our shepherds of Lemsters-oer and
Irchinfield are most incomparably expert.

Whilst this letter is under my hand, by a conference with Mr. S. concerning
Orchards, I am assured, that upon a long trial (as in a way of contestation) it
was found experimentally, that some apples raised of kernels did exceed the
best that could be found of grafted apples in delicacy of taste.

That he tried to meliorate the Kentish Codling, by a graft of the same kind,
and it proved worse.

That a near neighbor made a hogshead of cider of Kentish Codlings only: he
tasted it this very week. It had a taste far differing from all our other cider,
not bad, nor very excellent. That it looks like perry, of a wheyish color.

He also gave me at his own house a most pleasant drink, which I thought to be
cider, and preferred it before red-strak't cider, which was of the best, and,
for trial, brought out to me and others at the same time. This commended drink
was compounded of crabs never hoorded, but shaken from the tree, and
immediately ground together with perry of that lushious kind, which at this
time of the year is always wont to be roapy. This drink was not clear, but had
some resemblance of roapy perry. But he assures, that the crab does by this
composition always preserve the perry from being roapy. If so (as of all men I
can best believe him, who will not break his word to save his life) this is an
excellent art, at one time to make Crabs, which grow naturally in all wild,
dry, and barren soil, a rich fruit; and by them also to make a rich benefit of
those pears, which in the language of another good husband were called a
Cumbersome Weed.

He prescribes, that the more lushious the pear be, the more crabs be added
to it. By the taste in the mill, you may fit it, generally more pears than
crabs. He notes that these crabs were not of the forementioned Bromsbury
crabs, but common crabs: of which common crabs he advertiseth there are two
sorts. The first soon ripe, and yellowish, and fit to be mingled with the
pears that are first ripe. And of this kind was the cider that he gave to us.
The other is a more sullen crab, green about the end of Autumn. This agrees
with it is contemporary pears. Or to make a kind of Scythian wine, fit to
quicken the palate of a sturdy hind, they may be laid in heaps, for a months
hoording, and then ground by themselves, or with Winter-apples. We know how
welcome to foreign peasants, and also to our seamen, a rough vinegar or
verjuice would be, either to mingle with pottage, or with water for drink. We
have not yet felt so much want in England, as were necessary to teach us the
use of crabs, or other general branches of frugality. The Bromsbury Crab, so
often mentioned, is far larger than either of the other sort, and in shape like
an apple.

Sir, It Is time I should now give you rest. In this you may see my hearty
desires toward the improvement and welfare of our Native Country. If we must
be hindered of Trade with Spain, I wish our English indignation would scorn to
feed at their tables, to drink of their liquors, or otherwise to borrow or buy
of them, or of any of their confederates, as long as our native soil did
supply us with necessaries. I pray God to strenghthen us all in a firm love to
his holy truth, and in a mutual love to each other, under the shelter of his
everlasting Mercies.

Hereford May 13. 1656. Your servant in the Lord, I.B.

An extract of Mr. Hartlibs letter dated September 4. 1656.
He desires, that these letters may be presented to public view, for an
example to worthy men in other Countries to do the like in these, and other
parts of Husbandry. That the Latin passages should be turned into the
vernaculous Language, and many expressions altered into more plain and common
English, that all vulgar capacities may understand them, etc.

The Answer.
1. That it is now too late to polish any parts of those letters with such
accuratenesse, as becomes a piece dressed for severe judgments. If it must fly
abroad, it must go as it is, all parts alike, in the free garb of a natural
simplicity; written with speed, and with more care of truth, than of fit words.

Instead of a Translation of Columella's sentence page 12. lin. 19. I would
annex this short English gloss; That which is far fetched, may have little
familiarity with our soil, and may a long time take it unkindly to be banished
from its native place.

I dare not adventure for an exact translation, having no other edition but
that of Hieron. Commeline 1595, which is so full of errors, that I suspect
every line. It were an excellent work, if any man would publish a
well-corrected copy of the four Roman Husbandmen, they being rare Monuments of
Antiquity; the first, namely that of Cato the Censor, being almost 2000 years
old. Being now destitute of Libraries, if I should undertake it, having no one
old exemplar upon which I should frame my conjecture, at the best success, I
should show more wit than honesty. For I hold it a most pernicious presumption,
to intrude our own phansies instead of such great Authorities.

Page 25. line 23. the Latin may be untranslated, being but a rational
inference, to authorize that which is there said in English.

Page 27. line 9. To the worlds end. I use these words in a vulgar sense. For
in very truth, and well-grounded Theology, we have no reason to conceive it to
belong now, before the world shall be changed or consumed by the last fire.

Page 28. line 5. To explain this per Quincuncem to the dullest, we may add
these English words; as in a diaper-napkin, or in common glasse-windows, which
is the rhombular figure.

I dare adventure to use no more than the first letters of some men's names,
least I have blame for my good meaning. As in this I have merited little, so I
expect no better reward: yet you have very much obliged me ever to subscribe,

Yours unfeignedly I. B.
The Reader may be further advertised, that upon Mr. Hartlib's motion, the
argument of Herefordshire Orchards is by the same hand explained, confirmed,
and for all capacities amplified on a much larger discourse, reduced to the
form of a familiar dialogue, and now coming forth.



FINIS.

