Juvenilia SACRA, OR Divine Youthful Meditations; CONSISTING, Of a Dialogue
between Christ and the Soul. A Preparation to the Lords Supper. Characters of
the Pious and Impious Man. Of the Good, and Wicked Woman. The Four Quarters of
the Year. Ten Historical, Ten Scripture, and Ten Occasional Applications.


By, P. B. Gent.

London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, for John Playfere, at the White Bear in the
Upper Walk of the New-Exchange, 1664.

Perlegi hunc Libellum cui Titulus (Juvenilia Sacra) in quo nihil reperio sanae
fidei Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglica aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Joh. Hall R. ^. D. Episc. Lon. a sac. Domest.
Mar. 15. 1663.
TO HIS Honored Friend, Francis Dashwood Esquire
SIR,
I Have Read of Pylades and Orestes and many others, but the Past, Present, or
Future Age, have not; nor will never Produce such a Stupendous Example of
Friendship, as Yours to me; which though I cannot Requite, yet I will never
Cease to Acknowledge. I here Present You the Fruits of my Youthful Idle Hours
and it will be a Repetition of your former Courtesy, to Protect and Accept
such a Trifle; yet therein You have Your own Picture drawn in the Character of
my Piou^ Man, which if it be not to the Life, the World will conclude, that it
is not because You wanted Merit* but the Unskilfulness of,

Your Humble Servant, P. B

Courteous Reader,
PErhaps in the Perusal of my little Book, thou may think me too Satirical,
but I hope thy Ingenuity will apply these Invectives to those, unto whom they
were directed, to the Vicious; for mistake me not, I am none of those that
think all they which wear black patches, cannot go to Heaven, I only aim at
such, as hang them out as the Ensigns of Lust; neither do I carp at all that
are attired in Gorgeous Apparel: (No) for surely, the Lillies Beauty, and
Solomon's Royalty, was not displeasing to God; But only at such who are proud in
them, that hug their Inventions for devising fantastique fashions, that spend
most of their time, in pruning of their Locks, and setting those Netts to catch
Fools, Suppose you should be Enamoured of a false, though a seeming Lovely
Beauty, and at the Instant of the Enjoyment of your Imaginary Heaven, when your
Sun should disrobe her self of her Shroud; If then I say instead of the Beams
of a dazzling Beauty, you should meet with nothing but Deformity; Those Tresses
which you have Esteemed as the Netts of Cupid, as the Beams of the Sun, should
prove the horrid spoils of the dead; and those teeth which you called Pearls,
should be false, as her self, and confined each night, into a Box; would not
this fright your resolution? This is all that I have endeavored to do, to
unmask the Strumpet, and show you her ugly Visage, hoping it may persuade you
no longer to serve so deformed a Mistress; Here thou will find Heavenly Milk
for Babes; Counsel for Young Men, and such was I, being but sixteen when I
wrote most of them; hereafter when my Judgment grows Riper with my Years, I
shall endeavor to give thee more solid food; If you reap any Fruit by the
perusal of my Book, I am too well paid for my Labor in Composing it,

Thine P. B.

Heaven and Earth in a Dialogue betwixt the Soul and Christ.
CHRIST. 1. AH Foolish Soul! how often have I displayed unto thee the Beauties,
and Riches of Heaven, proposed such Glories as thy dim eyes were too weak to
behold; Why will thou feed on husks? empty pleasures, when thou may be
satisfied with Heavenly Manna, and Fountains of ever Living Waters? why will
you walk in the ways of Sin? which are black as Egyptian darkness, horrid and
full of precipices, and decline the milkie paths of Heaven which are smooth,
and full of Innocence.


SOUL. 2. True Lord, but yet my Darling World, comes with ten thousand charms,
and ravishes my Soul, and can those paths be unpleasant, which are strewed with
pleasure, and paved with love, if thy paths are so smooth, how then comes it
that thy Servants so often stumble in them, sure they are either rugged, or as
you say hells are, so they are dark, it is the Poets milkie way is full of Stars.


CHRIST. 3. Thy Darling, and all her Charm will soon leave thee; do thou
trust to terrene pleasures? Alas the World is but a rotten staire to mount up
to Glory; Had Jacobs Ladder had one such round in it, he could never have
mounted up to Heaven by it; Could thou by the eye of Faith, but see the
beauty of holiness, the charms of thy Savior, how would thy enlarged Soul be
ravished with them; and if there be any rubbs in Heavens path, there are no
precipices, they do but stumble, not fall; whereas the wicked, when they are
once fallen, are like the Elephant, they seldom rise; and as the Poets, so is
Heavens milkie way full of Stars; it is stuck full of the Pious Examples of my
Saints, which may serve as so many Constellations to guide thee; And I thy
Savior am thy North Star, by which if thou do stear, thou can not err.


SOUL. 4. But Lord are not thy paths more rugged then those of sin, Loves fire
with a kind of mistick heat only cherishes our Souls, and who would not rather
live in such a flame, then such as do thy Servants, who are consumed by that of
Martyrdom; what are thy cares but deaths heads, sighs and tears, and are these
thy pleasures? is this Heavens banquet?


CHRIST. 5. The Paths of sin seem smooth, but alas they are paved with thorns,
though sin has subtly covered them with flowers, and gilded her poison:
Hells flames are not so black as those of lust, instead of cherishing thy Soul,
it preyes upon it; whereas the Fire of Martyrdom, does make you like Gold to
come out of it more glorious: And if Deaths Heads, Sighs and Tears, are such
harsh food unto thee, it is because thou know not how to use them aright,
and besides this thou shall eat Celestial Manna, and if all this will not
please thee thou shall by faith eat my Flesh, and drink thy Saviors Blood.


SOUL. 6. When I assault a Beauty, what delight it is to see what pretty
shifts it will make, to avoid being conquered, how sometimes I am forced to let
mine eyes, shower on her stony heart, till their continual dropping have worn
away its hardness? what pretty devices it makes us invent, when Doves are our
Post-Masters, how sometimes I seek to bribe my pretty Enemy with gifts, and
then how I glory in my Conquest? my thinks Caesar did not so well deserve a
triumph, for subduing the Universe, as I for Vanquishing my little World.


CHRIST. 7. And I will teach thee how thou shall woe Heaven, how thou shall
make the Heavens bow, and come down, and catch thy pious whispers, and my Holy
Dove shall be the Carrier of them, and bring them into my Fathers bosom, and
thus shall thou subdue Heaven, and thousands of Angels shall rejoice at thy
Victory, and thou shall ride in Triumph on a Cherubs wings, and thus shall thou
enter the everlasting Gates of the King of Glory.


SOUL. 8. How do the Ravishing Charms of a beauteous Face allure my Soul? Who
would not be an Astronomer in such a Sky? O! I could eternally gaze on her
fair Stars, and view the mistick Circles, and Lines of that little Heaven.


CHRIST. 9. How then would thou be ravished at thy Saviors Beauties? when
Angels themselves, are not Eagles enough, to behold such a Sun, without vailing
their faces with their wings.


SOUL. 10. Oh but then her eyes have a powerful influence over me? with what a
Divine Light they pierce through my Soul? How does it ravish my heart to behold
those pretty Babies in them? how like airie Cherubs they dance on our twisted
Beams? Had Adam fallen for such Apples, he had in some sort been more excusable.


CHRIST. 11. And will thou loose Heaven again for an Apple? If her eyes are
Stars, they are blazing ones, and such as portend thy Ruin. Troy had stood,
had not Hellens eyes set it on Fire; Thou will prove but a bad Pilate if thou
Stearest by those Stars; Ah how Glorious, how full of charming Innocence must
thy Saviors eyes be, which as my Spouse sings, are as the Doves, washed with
milk.


SOUL. 12. Who can see her cheeks? and not admire their rich Carnation? or who
but views the Cherries of her Lips, and would refuse such a Banquet?


CHRIST. 13. And can thou not forbear to quaffe poison, because it is in a
ruby Cup, If her Cheeks be Beds of Roses, do thou not care if thou art
smothered in them? Oh how fragrant are the Roses of thy Saviors Cheeks? how
soft are those beds of Spices? how sweet must his Lips be? That like Lillies
drop with sweet smelling Myrrh.


SOUL. 14. Can she be less then Heaven? From whom the same effects proceed?
Does not the Lightning of her eyes, like that of Heaven, melt the soul, yet
spare its sheath* Is there not the Harmony of the Spears, in her tongue? If
man be called a little world, surely woman is a little Heaven, and then what
mistick fetters are her locks? when Kings in the midst of Mighty Arms have
been enchained by them? And how Lord am I able to break those fetters, when the
great Sampson, he to whom the strongest bonds, were but as Flax before the
Fire, was manacled by them?


CHRIST. 15. And if Beauty do spread her locks to catch thee? must thou needs
be taken? It Is the degenerate Fly, is trapt in the subtle net of a Spiders web,
the Noble Eagle breaks through such a weak toil.


SOUL. 16. How does the presence of my fair one Cheer my heart? those Clouds of
sorrow which benighted my Soul, fly away at the approach of my fair Sun; But
ah! her absence is my Hell? then my eyes are loath to open their lidds, since
that which only was pleasing to them is gone, unless it be to free a tear,
which they detained in their Cristal Prisons.


CHRIST. 17. Foolish Soul, thus to Joy when thy ruin is near, and bewail it
absent? were those tears shed, because thy Son of Righteousness had withdrawn
his face, they were worthily spent, indeed thou should resemble the pretty
Mary Gold, which when night is come, and it is deprived of its beloved object,
it hangs down its weak head, and washes its Cheeks in tears; but as soon as its
Sun appears, it advances its Crown, and displaies its Saffron Cheeks, and if
any tears appear on them, they are tears of Joy; For after a while I will come
unto thee again, and comfort thy sick soul with Apples, and kiss away thy
tears with the kisses of love, and I will fill thy heart with joy, till it
overflow its banks, and I will leave thee no more, but we will fly to the
Mountains of Myrrh, to the Hills of Frankincense, and there will I give thee
my Loves, there shall thou enjoy pleasures and beauties, as lasting as yours
are fading.


SOUL. 18. Can that Beauty be fading, that has a continual Summer in its
Cheeks for forty years? And how can the Lillies of her Cheeks wither? seeing
they have two such Crystal Fountains, as her eyes to water them, two such Suns
to cherish them, with their heat and influence.


CHRIST. 19. Alas how short a moment is thy forty years, to the eternity of thy
Saviors Beauty? Do thou place thy Felicity in such fading Beauties, when in
that space its Lillies and Roses shall wither? and then not all her Charms, nor
her Angels voice shall bribe Death; the silent Rhetoric of her eyes shall not
woe him to defer the stroke one moment; but those Crystal Fountains shall be
dried up, and darkness possess the Orbs of those fair Suns.


SOUL. 20. But Lord there are more variety of pleasures in the service of sin,
then in thine; sometimes sweet society joys my soul; sometimes again I
recreate my self, sitting by the sweet murmurs of some purling Brooks, and
bathing in it, or under the shade of some lovely Grove.


CHRIST. 21. This, and more then this can I give thee, thou shall sit with
greater pleasure under the shadow of my wings, thou shall sit by the streams
of Righteousness, and bath thy Soul in them, thou shall commune with Heaven it
self and quiers of Angels with Joyful Hallelujahs, shall salute thy Ear.


SOUL. 22. Sometimes my Fancy i^ both pleased and busied, to view magnificent
Palaces, how their Towering heads seem to kiss the Clouds, the stateliness of
their Gates, the Richness of their pavements, and glittering with Gold.


CHRIST. 23. And I will carry thee to the New Jerusalem, to my Fathers
Mansions, whose every Gate is Pearl, the Streets are paved with Gold, and
precious Stones, that which is now thy Idol, thou shall then tread under thy
feet, and how glorious a reflex must they make, being gilded by the Beams of
the Son of Righteousness, there is no other Son, the Glory of God and the Lamb
are the Light thereof; And then will thou say, Fool that I was, I had thought
that thy Jerusalem, had been like one of our Cities.


SOUL. 24. They say Riches have wings and fly away; true they fly away, but
then they send me home in their stead, sweet Wines delicious Cates, and
gorgeous Apparel, and who would part with such beloved Minions, since they
make me respected of all? Nay I think my self almost a God, whilst I walk in
the midst of my thousands of Angels.


CHRIST. 25. If they are Angels, they are evil ones, they fly away, and send
thee home sweet Wines, and delicious Cates, that is Fevers, and Surfets, do
thou trust to such helps? as are swallowed in the curling of Neptunes, or thy
Princes frown? But will thou be Rich indeed? Oh! then Treasure up thy Wealth in
Heaven, if thou will put out thy money to the highest Interest, put it out to
the Poor, and then thou need not fear to loose it, for God himself is their
security, and surely he is sufficient to repay thee?


SOUL. 26. Surely they are deceived, that say a Crown has more Thorns then
Jewels in it; That Ambition is a Mountain, whose ascent is craggie, and its top
of Glass; If State be a Prison, it is a Golden one, and who can be more secure
then he that is encompassed with huge Arms? with what raptures is my soul
inspired, to see it self elevated above the Common Rank, like some New Star
stuck in the Firmament, the Object of all men's eyes and wonder.


CHRIST. 27. If thy Prison be of Gold, the more is thy misery, for it is the
stronger. A silly Shepherd is a far more happy King then thou; whiles he makes
a Molehill his Throne, none seek to rend it from him, and being but low, his
Fall cannot be Great, his Innocent Subjects obey his Voice, and without
murmuring pay him the Tribute of their Silver Fleeces: But thou deceivest thy
self in thy Security on a Throne; Do thou think to escape Storms and Thunder
by ascending a Mountain? If thou will ascend unto the Stars indeed, thou must
do it by descending, for humility is the readiest flight to Heaven, and that is
a path so plain and smooth, thou need not sea^ falling, and there alone tho^
can rest secure, for Legions o^ Angels shall be thy Guard, an^ thousands of
Cherubins wit^ their flaming Swords defend the^


SOUL. 28. But Lord I am a Souldie^ and shall I forego my Fame which speaks me
great, and Ring^ through the Universe? Whilst (...) carve out a Monument of my
ow^ Glory with my Sword, where if (...) perish it is Nobly, and in the Be^ of
Honor.


CHRIST. 29. Thy Fames story must b^ writ with thy own Blood, thy ga^ping
wounds must be the mouth (...) to speak thee Famous, see at wha^ a rate thou
purchasest empty Honor? And will thou for a blast o^ breath, lose thy own
breath, and (...) ^t be in a bad Cause, thy Soul too? But if thou fightest
under my Banners, thou shall subdue Sin and Hell, Monsters and Devils, and
every drop of blood thou loosest, I will Esteem as a Precious Ruby.


SOUL. 30. What though I have not Virtue? Yet I can look so like her, that
simple ones can call me pious.


CHRIST. 31. But thou must be pious, and not only seem so, else thy God when
he comes to bind up his Jewels, will easily discern such Bristow Stones from
Diamonds, and give thee the reward of Hypocrites.


SOUL. 32. But Lord, thy Servants, do not only lead a life full of Misery, but
often leave this Life with a bloody Exit.


CHRIST. 33. Alas, my Yoke is easy to all them that bear it, for my Spirit
strengthens them in all their troubles, nay I can make them even in love with
Death it self, and sweeten that bitter Cup to them.


SOUL. 34. Surely Death is a grim Servant, what can there be in him to enamour
me, is it his Beauty? Ah no! Night and Darkness are in his face, his Embraces
are rough, he darts not smiles, but a deadly shaft, and is this a Beauty to be
ravished with?


CHRIST. 35. Is a Feast the worse, because a Black-amoore Ushers thee to it?
Such is Death, or else Death is but like a dark Veil drawn over thy face; and
although thou do sit in a scarlet Cloud, yet thou shall rise again with
greater Luster of Immortality and Glory.


SOUL. 36. Thou art all sweet oh my Savior, thou have overcome, and now I find
all my supposed delights but as a dream; Now I see my Delila's Deformity, She
that I once thought fair as Heaven, but I now look on her eyes as Nauplius
false Light set to draw the Grecians to their Ruins; on her Cheeks, as beds
that for one Rose bear a thousand Thorns; on her lips, as soft wax wherewith we
sealed many a wicked bargain; on her locks as fatal Gives that have kept me
too long a Prisoner; that bosom which I called Loves Tempe, is now as a Valley
hideous with Thorns; her voice is as the Screetch Owls which bodes
destruction; Oh that foolish man should trust these Sirens; Farewell, for eve^
all you false Beauties, farewell my Delilahs: I will sigh no more, to puff the
spark of Affection into a flame in my Minions breast, to thee sweet Jesu shall
they be sent; to thee shall all my vows be paid, thou shall be the Sun under
whose sweet influence I will desire to live, thy Arms the Prison, from which I
will pray never to be freed; when I fit by the murmurs of a Brook, it shall be
to consider its Obedience to its Makers Command, in paying the Tribute of its
water to the Sea; And how I have run backwards; when I lie under a Tree's fair
shade, it shall be to admire the soft music of its leaves, as if every leaf
were a tongue to sing its Makers Praise, and how mine has either been silent
or else Blaspheming of him. I will be Ambitious, but it shall be of thy Favor;
My Riches I Will distribute to the Poor, and then they will have wings indeed and
take their flight to Heaven; The desires of my heart shall be to be dissolved,
and to be with my Savior; For Lord, the Walls of my Clayey Prison hinder my
Soul from viewing thee fully, it can but peep through the Casements of my
eyes, and so by reflex in thy word, see some weak glimmerings of thee; This,
this is the way to make me a Conqueror, me thinks already my wars are done,
and I have nothing now to expect but Rewards and Triumphs, hence forward is
laid up for me a Crown of Life and Glory.


A PREPARATION TO THE LORDS SUPPER.
OUr Blessed Savior knowing how weak man is to perform his Duty, least we
should faint in our Pilgrimage to the New Jerusalem, has provided for our
Sustenance his own flesh and blood: A Food which the Angels have not; do thou
therefore run often, and with Joy, to the Supper of thy dearest Lord, and not
with the Israelites, seem to have Manna so long about thy Tents, that now thou
loathest it; thou often faintest in thy Combat with Satan, and therefore have
often need of this Cordial, of this Chalice of blessing to comfort thee, and
can thou too often remember thy Savior? Or is that which he has done for
thee not worthy thy memory? But have a care that thou come prepared, for Bees
suck honey from this flower, but Spiders poison: And if thou unworthily
receivest, this water of life will become as the waters of Marah, it will be
bitter unto thy Soul: It is the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, put on therefore
thy Royal Robes; but Purples or Tyrian silks is not the wedding Garment,
wherewith thou must be clothed, but Faith, Hope, Repentance, Eucharist, and
Charity; and now that Christ will come in and Sup with thee, let not the
filthiness of the Room drive him away.

Aspicis ut veniant ad candida tecta Columbae,
Accipiet nullas sordida turris aves.
And that spotless Dove will not dwell in a polluted Soul; and therefore thus
do thou prepare the Cabinet of my heart, first wash it thoroughly with
Repentance tears, then make it bright with Charity, for the money thou give
in Alms guilds thy soul; hang it round with Purity and Innocence; let it be
paved with Love; and least it seem dark, alight in it the Lamp of a holy Zeal.
Thou must examine thy self, and repent thee of all thy sins; Ah Crucify them
which have Crucified thy Savior; thou must not have the least affection for
any of them, no, not for thy Darling Crown it with hatred and contempt, which
has Crowned him with Thorns, and why shoulde^^ thou spare thy Darling sins,
when the Almighty spared not his Beloved? And then think of the greatness of
thy sins; which could not be expiated but by the death of the Son of God: and
the with humble thoughts of thy sel^ with a broken heart receive a broken
Savior. Christ will not dwel^ in a Den of Thieves, thou must overturn the
Tables filled with unlawful gain, and cast out Frau^ and Covetousness,
whipping the^ out of the Temple of thy heart thou must lay aside Anger, and
without Malice approach the Table of the Lamb of peace; and though the
worldling had rather ^^st sins false Delicates, yet do thou hunger and thirst
after this ^ood, Oh it proves sweet to the ^hirsty Soul.

This duty of preparation ought not to be the work of an hour, or a day, for
thy Soul is too filthy to be cleansed in an hour, and thy Rebellious Lusts too
stubborn to be subdued in a day; and when thou have with the most diligent
care, and strictest zeal, prepared thy heart, yet still confess thine own
filthiness, for indeed thou may justly fear that thou shall lodge thy
Savior, as he was at his birth, in a Stable amongst Beasts, in a foul soul,
amongst bad thoughts, and evil desires; and therefore pray that he would
cleanse thee, and then thou will be clean indeed; thy poverty can be no excuse
to thee, for this is such a Garment as every one may purchase.

The happy hour being come approach with reverence, imagin^ your self at Gods
Table, that yo^ are at Supper in Heaven; hereb^ the eye of Faith thou may
represent to thy self thy Savior Passion writ in red Characters; the Sun of
Righteousness setting in^ ruddy Cloud. Here thou maye^ behold that lovely Rose
of Sharo^ purpled with his own blood; the Lamb of God worried by Wolves now he
truly seems as a Lilly amongst the Thorns, whilst Crucified betwixt two
Thieves; tho^ may behold him denied b^ men whom Devils confessed, scoffed,
and wounded, whom the Angels count i^ their highest Glory to reverence.

When thou see the bread broken, ah then remember a torn Savior; as thou
tastest the sweetness of the wine, think what a bitter Cup he drank: see, see
him stretching out his Arms ready to embrace thee, and fixed with nails, as if
to signify they would be ever open: See those hands which healed others, now
wounded; that mouth praying for those which filled it with Gall and Vinegar:
Consider what a weight did thy sins add to his Cross, when he sunk under it;
The Jews Crowned him with Thorns, but how many Thorns in that Crown were thy
sins? The Thorns pricked his Temples, and thy sins his Soul. Then remember the
infiniteness of his love, does he delight in the death of a sinner, who dyed
that he might live? Would he have bought thee at such a dear rate, if he had
not loved thee? He paid for thee every drop of his hear^ blood; Those were the
Rubie^ wherewith he purchased thy Redemption; and Lord what an ill bargain thou
seem to have of it and almost to have been too profuse of thy Celestial
Treasure, to pay down such a price for a poo^ worm, a clod of earth: How short
is all love to thine, who ever fed his Friend with his own flesh and blood?
This Lord thou do; and least we should doubt of the reality of thy love, thou
suffer a window to be made in thy side that through it we might look, and
see the sincerity of thy heart*

When thou can thus represen^ to thy self the Dolor of thy Saviors Passion,
what tears should this extract from thy eyes? What sighs from thy bosom? And
if thou art not filled with Compassion, the very Earth and Rocks will rise up
in Judgment against thee, for the Earth trembled, and the Rocks groaned, and
were rent a sunder at his sufferings.

But this is not all, thou must not only commemorate thy Saviors death, but
withal believe, that his wounds make thee whole; that his blood cleanses all
thy spots, appeases his Fathers wrath, and subdues sin and hell, his Cross was
the Club wherewith our spiritual Hercules subdued all his and our Enemies; If
thou can thus receive thy Savior, he will not only come in and Sup, but
abide with thee for ever: A bundle of Myrrh will thy Beloved be, and will lie
all night betwixt thy breasts: thou may then be assured that thy sins are
forgiven, thou have Gods hand in the Scriptures, and the broad Seals of Heaven,
in this Sacrament, for the pardon of them How bitter will the Worlds Delicates
taste after this feast? It is sai^ of one, that he sold a Kingdom for a Cup of
water; ah who would not, though he were Master of the Universe, sell it for one
drop of the Chalice?

And now thy Christ being entered into thy Soul, entertain the great Guest with
holy Discourse^ desire him, since he has cast or the strong man, now to keep
po^session; and Satan, knowing the he who has so often overcom^ him is within,
will be discourage to assault thee any more; and if the Blind and Lame, the
Sick and Leprous, were cured but with a touc^ of his Garments: Surely thou will
be thoroughly healed, seeing tha^ Jesus dwells in thy Soul; and the^ return him
Praises and Thanksgiving, because he has brought thee to his Banqueting
House, and displayed his Banner of Love over thee; and has made thee sit down
under his shadow with great delight whilst his fruit has been sweet to thy
taste; and do not thou refuse to feed his Members with Bread, who has fed thee
with the Bread of Life; and now thou art cleansed, take heed thou Defile not
thy self again; Alas, spots add not to the Beauty of Christ's Spouse; and seeing
he to Espouse thee has become bone of thy bone, and flesh of thy flesh: and
has left Father and Country, Heaven and Glory, for Love of thee: Ah, do not
thou run after a second Love; do but compare thy Spouse to the deformity of
Satan, and then sure thou can not be so stupid, as to exchange a spotless
Dove^ for a Vulture: beauty, and him that is the choicest of ten thousands, for
a Blackamore, and Deformity: Let his Love therefore alone satisfy thee, and
thus whe^^ the night of thy death is come thou shall go and enjoy thy Spouse
for ever.

CHARACTERS OF THE PIOUS, IMPIOVS,
Man. GOOD, WICKED,
Woman.
A Pious Man,
IS the only Ulysses that can pass by the Sirens of the Earth, and not be
taken by them: the Strumpet World, spreads forth her Dangling Tresses to
ensnare him, warbles her most Ravishing Lays to Court him to her Embraces; but
he like Sampson snaps his bonds in sunder, and all her Charming can never
induce him to Dance afte^ her Pipe. In the Glass of h^^ Wisdom, he sees the
Vanity o^ the Delights of Lust; by it he perceives the Lillies which the
La^vious fancy in their Minio^ Cheeks, to be Lillies indeed, no^ some and
unsavory, therefore cha^ he is, and under the Roses of h^ Lips, are hid
prickles, which the^ lie in Garrison to defend the^ from the Rude Assaults of
Lus^ His House is a little Church, h^ Heart the Altar, whereon conti^ually
flames a Holy and Religion Fire; Temptations may Assail but not Conquer him,
or if an^ pleasure do take hold of him, it but to make him taste their bitt^
sweetness, that so he may the mo^ abhor them: He is above the World, and being
founded on the Rock of his Salvation, he the^ sits and laughs to see how the
Ambitious man puffs and sweats, to Climb the craggy Mountain, Honor, from
which he often irrecoverably falls. He is a Pious Dove, not Gall enough in him
to provoke an injury, his mind is a Sea always calm, neither the adverse
puffs of Fortune, nor the nipping blast of Malicious Tongues, can raise one
wave, or make it swell into the least Intemperate Anger, Afflictions cannot
dismay him, for he knows them to be the Corrections of a Gracious Father, yea
even at the Martyrs stake, like the pretpy Nightingale against a Thorn, he can
sweetly chaunt forth Hallelujahs to his God; and therefore needs not be
smothered in a Chamber full of Roses, as a Tyrannous Emperor did his Servants,
that they might meet with sweetness, even in the bitterness of Death for he
can find it in the midst o^ the flames, which is to him but a bed of Roses;
he has often tug^g'd and wrastled with Satan, an^ though the Devil may give
him (...) half turn, or some little foiles, ye^ yet he is always fain to take
the fall himself; Nay sometimes h^ will prevail with God, and b^ his fervent
Prayer, disarme the Almighty, as it were of his Thunder, and with his tears
quench the fire of his sparkling Anger; Hi^ Virtues Crown him with a starry
wreath of Glory, in which hi^ Wealth, which others count their greatest
Diamond, he Esteems hi^ least spark, and if he rejoice i^ them, it is only that
by possessin^ them he is able to do good, an^ sustain the bruised Reed; Him
self is a Pearl above all hi^ Riches, for in Poverty he appears most
Glorious, his Wealth at best is but the Gilded Casket, which incloses this
Jewel, and the Shroud being gone, his Soul being open and uncovered, shines
with greater Glory and Luster: In all Conditions he is content, and so in Rags
injoys a Kingdom, and will rather fit down with his poor Pittance, then make
the Backs of the Poor, the Ladder to climb to the Gaudy Seat of Wealth. He
thinks every Man Good, because he is so Himself; chide him, if your reproof be
just, he will thank you; if unjust, his Innocence is his only Defense, and
indeed an Impenetrable Armor, on which the Darts of Malice may Graze, but
never Pierce: There is a Composed Calmness in his Soul, the Elements War not
with one another, the Fire makes not the Water boil, Choler justles not
Mildness away; but all the Pegs being wound up to their just height, his Soul
like a well tuned Instrument, strikes an Harmony equal to that of the Spears.
He esteems a moderate State best, and therefore like the humble Briar, has
chosen a middle Station; not so low that Contempt can step upon him, nor so
High, but that the Storms and Billows pass over his head. He is a Star of the
first Magnitude; a Tree, which like those in the Hesperian Garden bears Golden
Apples. A Nose-gay, wherein his Virtue's like so many pretty Flowers send forth
a Fragrant Sweetness, and happy is she whose Bosom i^ possessed of so pleasing
a Posy. He i^ never in better Company then when he is alone, for then will his
Soul commune with his God. He is knit unto his Friend by his Heart Strings, and
nothing but the Sword of Death can dissolve the Gordian Knot. His life is a
well Acted Comedy, which always ends with a happy Exit. Death which to others
seems so Grim to him, appears of a Smiling Countenance, and that deadly Draught
but a Spicy Cup. His good Name is a Precious Ointment, a sweet Flower which
shall Bud in Eternities Garden, and ever be a fragrant Odor in the Nostrils of
Posterity. Lastly, He is a Phaenix, it is rare to see two of his Kind
together, and out of his Funeral Ashes shall arise, young and glittering with
the Beams of Immortality and Glory.

The Impious Man,
IS a strange Kind of Monster^ made up of Swine, Goat, an^ Vulture. The Tavern
is hi^ Church, his Mistress the Golden Calf, to which he dulier pays hi^
Devotion, then to his Maker. Hi^ Mouth is a Cannon, which he always keeps
Charged with at Oath, and will out-goe any Can^noneer in the Celerity of
Discharge. He loves Mirth as hi^ life, and cares not if he Dance a Jig to Hell.
He is a weak un^ manned Fort; no Vice, but at first Battery, makes a Breach into
his Soul; if Satan does but present him with a Cherry from his Mistris's Lip,
or an Apple of her eye he is as soon taken with the Beauty of them, as was Adam
with his in Paradise, and never imagins it to be Forbidden Fruit, if he taste
those Cherries in Lasciviousness. Before he could speak, he could speak
Mischief; before he could go, he could run in the ways of ^in. His Heart by
its hardness, should be a Flint, and yet is none, for that has Fire in it,
but his not one spark of Grace. Yet if God in his Mercy causes any Streams of
Righteousness to slow out of him, ^e renues his Miracles in the Wilderness;
and brings Water out of (...) Rock. He is a strange kind of ^oyle, in which
though Virtues ^eeds be sown, will still bring up Wild Oats, a Medly of
Wickedness, Pandoras Box was never filled with so many Evils. He has his
Paradoxical custom to repair to, a Hot-house in the midst of Summer, [as if he
would practice Hell here on Earth] and that no^ to heat him, but quench hi^
Flames; but alas it often prove^ too hot for him, and he is Scorcht^ and by a
Hellish Fire too, and so comes home by Weeping Cross He rises up early to Sin,
and scorn^ to be outdone by any man in mischief, and so takes pains to
purchase Destruction, and large stride^ to Hell. His Drunkenness depriving him
first of his rational Soul, makes him a Beast, and then of his Senses also, and
so h^ becomes a mere Stock, and ye^ this man thinks himself in the Right Way;
but let him res^ assured, that though we read o^ the Good Thief who at last
stol^ into Heaven, yet never of any man that Staggered in thither; H^ greedily
feeds on the Fruits of sin, and is ravished with their false sweetness,
although they are but Dainties dressed by Hells Fire; He is made up of wiles, and
whilst he smiles every dimple is a pit of destruction, and every Syllable he
speaks a nooze to catch thee; he ^s a slave to his Wealth, Satan detains him
Prisoner in Golden Chains, and he is content with such Fetters, and had rather
enjoy the ^ompany of an Angel in his poc^et, then in Heaven; but having ^y
extortion wrung an Estate out ^f the very bowels of the Poor, ^r by deceit
increased his Store; ^he Worm grows proud, and ^alks as if his head were
above the Clouds, or knocked at the Battlements of Heaven, and every man must
strike sail to his pride, but whilst he deceives his poor Neighbor, at the
same time Satan cheats him of his Soul. Thus in his prosperity he seems to have
the heart of a Lion, or out-rore the Thunder, but in misery that of a Child,
like a bladder he swell^ with the least puff, and is down again with the least
prick; and yet sometimes his passions so blind him, that the Wasp with an eage^
fury will pursue an imaginary injury; his revenge must be writ in bloody
Characters; but alas whereas by other sins he goes by degrees, by this he
oftentimes from the place of Combat, make^ but one leap into Hell; He is an
useless drone, and spends the greatest part of his life in Gluttony and
Drunkenness, in Gayeties and empty Vanities, and i^ may for fashion-sake, may
send forth a few Prayers, and Ejaculations, but they also are lame and ^aggy
winged, and never reach to ^eaven; Thus he regardlesse lets ^is Glass run, as
if his time were (...) no value, whilst the Pious Man ^y spending it
virtuously, esteems and makes every grain of sand a ^earle, and those very
pleasures ^e imagines to enjoy here, are ^oth vanishing and imperfect; In ^^e
midst of his delights, his con^ience the bird in the breast, in^ead of a sweet
Lullaby, sings him ^small notes, interrupts his sleeps, and soure's his
pleasures; This is ^is portion here, and without Re^entance he will be
hereafter a ^ire-Brand of Hell, the object of ^he Almighties Indignation, the
^^ceptacle of all those Torments which the wrath of Incensed Ma^sty, and
Justice can Inflict.

The Good Woman,
IS a white Rock, that Repells a Shocks of Temptations, brea^ those fiery
waves, and turns the^ into froath; And as the pret^ Mary-Gold, will not turn it
se^ nor open its leaves, to any oth^ Light, to any other Star, but on^ the Sun;
So this sweet flower (...) all but her Husband is shut and r^served; he is the
Sun to who^ alone she opens her leaves, and h^ embraces; her arms are chai^
strong enough to keep her Hu^band at home, and he is so tak^ with that pleasing
Captivity, the when he considers how far t^^ Nectar of her kisses, surpass h^
sweetest wines, and the cherries (...) her lips the fruits of sin, they e^sily
persuade him to forsake all ^lewd society. Columbus never discovered such Mines
of Treasure in the vast Universe, as are in this little World. She blushes at
the hearing of an obscene Speech, as if her Cheeks hung out their red flaggs of
defyance, to such a rude party.

She is commonly silent, or at least she will be but the treble in the consort,
for low music, and a soft tongue, make always the sweetest Harmony; She is of
an an humble spirit, and to all Courteous and Affable, the windy praises of
flatterers cannot puff her into pride, for beauty she knows like the Glory of
a Rainbow, soon passes away, and that those eyes which they compare to the
Sun, are out-shined by the dwindling Beams of a farthing Candle; If a storm
arise in her Husbands breast as rain the winds, so one little shower of her
tears will allay its blustering; her sighs will puff out the fire of his
anger; she opposes not his rising fury, but counts it the best Victory, if as
the Scythians she can conquer by retreating. Her Apparel is decent, though not
costly, she can be fair without patches, and if her own native beauty be not
charming enough to purchase her a Consort, she thinks that none but fools will
be taken with such poor baits, for surely a good beauty, as well as good wine
needs no Bush; She seldom fixes her eyes on any man, least some one be
vanquished, by continually discharging her darts from those Crystal Quivers;
neither will she let those subtle spies to wander, for the roving arrow, as
well as the directed shaft may chance to hit the mark; Her husbands afflictions
she makes her own, and by a secret sympathy seems to partake of the same
griefs; he is her head, no wonder then, if she be troubled when her head aches;
She loves not to dally with the flames of lust, nor play with Cupids shaft, for
she knows edge tools are sharp, and may cut her fingers.

Tears are the Beads of her Devotion, and she wooes heaven so Nobly, and with
such perseverance, that she will seldom let her God go without a blessing from
him; She is up with the early Lark, and as that pretty Quirister when he first
rises from his bed of Grass, she sings some prayer or Ejaculation, and when
her husband rises, it is like Phoebus full of blushes to see his Hesper, his
Morning Star, so duly usher him to his task.

She is a Casket full fraught with Rich Jewels; when Satan showed our Savior
all the Glories of the World, this little World surely was the greatest Wonder,
the greatest Temptation; The saying proves false in her, that there is no
Fortress so strong, but that an Ass laden with Gold may enter, for the
English men's Angels can neither tempt her, nor their Crowns allure her, nor the
French Pistols shoot her Chastity dead; She is the Crown of her Husbands joy,
and it sweetens his Labor to think when his course is done, and his work at an
end, he shall go and rest his wearied neck in his Theti^ Lap; As her life is
sweet, so when she dies, she expires like the Phaenix all in spices, and leaves
a perfume behind her.

The Wicked Woman,
IS a Basiliske, for with her eyes she will look thee dead, and as Archimedes
Glasses were said to burn Ships afar off, so her false Optics often fire at a
distance; At the first assaults of Lust, she blushed, and wept, and her eyes
bewailed the sad Conquests they had made, till her Lover came and wiped away
her tears, and whispered his false story in her ears, and she was charmed, and
was willing first to be drawn by the Cords of Vanity, and then she could run
without drawing, and entice frail man to taste of her Forbidden Fruit; So by
degrees she grew a proficient in Wickedness, and at last she committed sin
with greediness, and as of a Viper, always a Viper proceeds, so I use brought
forth Murder, and thus as her face was tainted with a false fucus, so was her
Soul with the blood of her Infant; She is a strange kind of fortress, that not
only yields without resistance, but also sues to be taken; She will outvie
Cupps with men, but whilst she Carouses others healths, she drinks away her
own; Her body is often fair to a wonder, but by her wicked deeds she seems to
confirm the Opinion of the Moors, that there are white Devils; Her chiefest
pleasure is to catch young Birds and Fishes; but whereas in others the chiefest
of their Art is in the subtle concealing of their snares, she hopes to catch
most, when she most discovers hers; Her Locks are the lines, her barred Breasts,
the Baits wherewith she goes a Fishing, and hopes to catch some silly one with
those Flesh-baits; sometime in a moment she catches her silly Prey; otherwhile
like a cunning Angler, she lets the wanton Fry sport with the Bait, till they
are taken in the Snare: Which having taken that which seems strangest, is that
contrary to others, she only Strips them of their Skales, and so lets them go;
She is a strange kind of Butcher that sells her own Flesh, and that for less
then would buy a Calf; She is Loud and Stubborn, her Tongue is no sooner heard
in the House, but like a Fatal Alarm Bell, it sets the whole Family in an
Uproar; With a thousand Arts* she endeavors to Hide and Prop the defects of
Time, and Nature, but who will not judge that which is so Be-patch't, a Ruinous
Fabric; She is a Salamander that lives in the Fire of Lust, an Ordinary open
to all comers; She may well be called the Weaker Vessel, he that relies upon
her, Launches his Honor in a Leaking Bark; She is surely an Athiest, for
Pleasure is her God. Bride-well her Hell, and the Constable or Marshal, all the
Devils she fears; Her Favor is more Fatal then her Malice, for that at most
can but Kill thy Body, but her Smiles will persuade thee to destroy thy own
Soul; the burnings of Granado's, is a gentle and Lambent Fire, to that of her
Eyes; She persuades the silly Youth to turn his Land into Gold, till at last,
she leaves him nothing but the Water of Repentance and Tears; Her Strength and
Stomach seem beyond Belief, for she will swallow two Acres of Land for a
Breakfast, and carries two more upon her Back; When she says she is your
Servant, it is no Complement; She is a common Puddle, wherein every Stallion
comes and Quenches his Thirst: Lastly, It is but a ^ust Judgment of God upon
her, that she who would live in a hot house here, should live Eternally in one
hereafter.

THE FOUR Quarters OF THE YEAR.
Quid non in species secedere quatuor annum,
Aspicis, aetatis peragentem imitamina nostrae.
OVIDIUS. Nam tener and lactens puerique simillimus avo,
Vere novo est, tunc herba nitens, and roboris expers,
Terget and insolida est, and spe, delectat agrestes,
Omnia tunc florent, florumque coloribus almus,
Ludit ager.

THE Glorious Preparation which Dame Nature makes, declares the Springs
approach, tha^ season wherein she lays in, and i^ delivered of her wonderful
Births* And the pretty Flower no soone^ peeps out of the Bosom of it^ Mother,
but it is Enameled with Pearly drops, a true Emblem o^ thy Infancy; for when
thou were first brought forth, thy Eye^ distilled with Tears, the forerunners
of thy future Misery; No in this only does it resemble thee but as the
Flower, is subject to be cropped by Beasts, to be Blaste^ with Winds, so is it
in every one^ power that passes by, to Ravis^ thy Life from thee; Afflictions
an^ Sickness can Disroab thee of a^ thy Beauty, and see thou were n^ sooner
Born, but thou offendes^ the Flower ill prospers, and the Pretty Lilies droops
its wea^ head, laden with Dew and Tears Darkness and Affliction surround
thee, but can thou but Repent, as the Comfortable Beams of the Morning Sun,
dries up the Dewy Purles on the Lillies Cheeks; so will the Sun of
Righteousness wipe away all Tears from thy eyes, and Dissipate those Clouds of
Darkness: It is thy Sins which Ecclipses the Sunshine of his Glorious Face.
But perhaps thou may ask me, which of the Trees or the Flowers of the Field
I would have thee Resemble? Not the Cedar, for that is the Ambitious Man, and
besides it bears no Fruit; Nor the Birchen Tree, for that is the Tyrant, Gods
Scourge; whose Crimson hue, shows it Delights in Blood. Nor the Lilly, for that
is the Hipocrite, Fair without and Unsavory within; But it is the Rose I would
have thee imitate, let its Blushing Cheeks teach thee Modesty, its Prickles
Watchfulness, and always to stand upon thy Guard; the expanding its Leaves at
the Suns approach, thy Willingness to Receive thy Savior; but above all,
Matchless are its inward Virtues, such would I have thee, thy inward Graces,
like that sweet Flowers, to surpass thy outward Beauties. In this season all
Nature seems to Rejoice, the Fields are Diapred with Fragrant Flowers, Neptune
Smiles, not one Wrinckle in his Front; The Lillies are Clothed with Beauty
above Solomon's Royalty; and thou least thou should be left Naked; Intseat of
thy Savior, and he will Cloth thee with the Robes of Righteousness; let
Penitent Tears be thy Pearls, make Bracelets of thy Folded Arms, and thus
attired; Oh! how lovely will thou be in Gods sight? not Solomon, or the Lillies
of the Field, did ever parallel thy Glory.

Oh teach thy Infant steps to walk in the ways of thy God; How fragrant is the
budding Rose? how sweet will the perfume of thy Infant piety be to him? the
very Birds by their pretty warbling, the purling Brooks by their sweet murmurs,
seem to caroll their praises to their Maker; and wilt ^hou be more ungrateful
then these? Oh! Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; Christ is in
Love with little ones, and bids them come unto him; Ah! he will embrace thee in
his Everlasting Arms, and cherish thee in his own Bosom; Do but thy indea^our,
and he will Guide and Sup^ort thy weak feet, and thou will highly need his
aid, for the young Bird is easily ensnared, and Satan will lay his baits for
thee, swee^ wines, and luscious delicates, to please thy taste, the charming
laye^ of lacivious Sirens, to lull the asleep, show thee the Roses of their
Cheeks, and Lillies of their hand^ and then ask thee if thou an^ afraid of a
few flowers; But ah^ sly from them, for under tho^ flowers lurks a Serpent.
Vlysse gifts cannot be safe to Troy, a^ these are but his Gins, which (...)
thou art not wary will soon entrap thee; but thou will say, the match is
unequal, a child again^ such a potent Enemy; Oh! b^^ thy Christ will gird thee
wit^ strength to cope with him; an^ then again thou dispairest becau^ thy lusts
are untamed, and perhap^ do say, what can a green hat^ Apple please my
Saviors taste, who ^s altogether sweetness? Oh! but he can sweeten the bitter
waters of Marah; the sour Apple by time grows sweet and mellow, and (...)
clouded morn, may prove a glo^ious day.

Summer, OR YOUTH.
OVIDIVS. Transit in aeestatem post, ver robustior Annus,
^itque valens Juvenis, neque enim ^obustior aetas
^lla, nec uberior, nec quod magis ardeat ulla est.

THe Sun and thou are climbing toward the Meridian; The Birds by this time
have chosen themselves Mates, and this being the greatest Act to felicity in
this life; I can find no Nobler Example to follow then the Dove, that Emblem of
innocent Love, looks not to the Richness and Gayety of her mates feathers, but
to the sweet composure of its limbs, and the charming effects of his sweeter
nature for him she will reject the gaudy Peacock; These two harmless one^ will
sweetly sit and bill, whilst the ravinous Vulture is engaged i^ wounds and
quarrels; take hee^ least being too covetous, thou sellest thy content for a
little drosse^ and it may be to one who may prodigally spend it; choose but
(...) pious and loving Consort, and b^ assured thou have a Pearl worth the
Worlds Treasure; And no^ being joined in Hymen's bonds let the twining Vine
teach thee, how indissolvable the Marri^^e Knot is, for it will sooner suffer
its arm to be rent off, then (...) be separated from the strikt Embrace of its
Beloved Elm; So must thou ^eave all for thy Spouse, let neither the Iron teeth
of time, or necessity be able to dissolve that knot; But methinks, I see thee
with admiration gaze on the great ones of the World, and sighest at thy own
less Glorious Condition, but grieve not because thou art none of those Loftier
Cedars; true, thou ^rt low, but the less subject to ^torms and Thunder, the
high Mountain is barren, it is the low Val^ey, and Humble Heart, that brings
^oorth the best Fruit; And yet I ^ould have thy Contemplations ^are to Heaven;
The Lark builds ^er Nest on the ground, yet when she sings, she Towers above
the Clouds, as if she disdained Earth; Earth is unworthy the Larks Harmony and
thy thoughts, thou will not need the wings of a Dove, on the wings of
Contemplation, thou will outstrip the Lark, and sooner reach Heaven; But let
Heaven be the object of thy Meditations, which surpasses the Earth as much in
Excellency, as in immensity (...) Earth has Flowers for its pavement, and
Heaven Stars, or rather those Stars are the knotty ends o^ Heavens Tapistry;
Ah! how Glorious then must those Mansions be whose superficies is so
beautifull^ but all this cannot persuade thee to forsake thy darling World, thy
wedges of Gold fasten thee to it, the arms and tresses of Laciviou^ Strumpets
enchain thee, and thou unmindful of Heaven, carried on with thy Youthful heat,
swimmest in a Sea of pleasure; this Stage of thy life seems delightful to
thee, strewed with Perfumes and Flowers, and thy Glass filled with Golden
Sands, and thou with the Marigold, in pride advancest thy glittering Crown, but
poor blossom, whence springs this vain pride, is ^it from thy Beauty? Alas,
that will soon fade, and no Rose will sooner wither then that in thy Cheeks; or
from thy prosperous Felicities? But how many sorrows meet each minute to
interrupt them, which may soon turn thy quiet calm into a storm? Or is it from
thy Valor, and frequent Victories ore thy Foes? Oh! that were better turned
against thy self, and thou shall obtain more Glory by subduing thy self, the
little World, then by being Conqueror of the great One; Have a care that
neither Prosperities, not delight sooth thee into a security; How often is the
pretty Nightin-Gale, even whilst she sits, and Carolls forth her sweet Lays,
killed by the Archer; And we see many in the midst of their jollity, carried
aloft on the wings of pleasure, shot by Death, and tumble from the height of
their mirth into the grave; Oh! forsake the World, and all her empty delights,
suck no longer her false breasts, her milk is but sugared poison, thou art now
a man, and at these years, it is time for thee to be wained.

AUTUMN, OR Manhood
OVIDIUS. Excipit Autumnus posito ferrore Juventae,
Maturus mitisque inter juvenemque senemque,
Temperie medius.

GOne are thy Mirthsome days, thy Summer is done, till now thou were a young
Sprig, and the sweet Breath Zephyr only wantoned with thy tender Leaves, thou
have danced out thy Youth in Loves and Pleasures, but now it is time for thee
to bear Fruit; thou may trifle away no more hours, but as thy Years, so let
thy Faith increase; endeavor that the Seeds of it may take firm Root in thy
Soul; entreat the Sun of Righteousness to shine on it, omit not sometimes to
water it with a few Repentant Tears, and no doubt it will Prosper; And do not
think to purchase Heaven by sitting still; how does the little Emmet toil
before she possesses her store; the Husbandman purchases his increase with the
sweat of his Brows; Heaven like the Hesperian Garden is guarded by a watchful
Dragon, and no coming to the golden Fruit, nor entering this Paradise, till thou
have Vanquished him: The Sheep yield their Silver Fleece to their Careful
Pastor; The Springs and Rivers pay their Tribute to the Sea; and will thou
return no Fruit? either be barren or bear evil Fruit; Oh no! thou art now grown
a goodly tree, thy boughs are extended to Heaven, and can now not only be
good thy self? but do good unto others; Oh let the parched Rose, the Sunburned
Traveller, enjoy the comfort of thy shade; Let the Mate-deprived Dove, the
Mournful Widow perch under thy Roof; Untwist no^ the weak Wreathing Jvy
from thy Arms, but support the Poor and Needy; but perhaps thou thy self art
Poor and Thirsty; and see the Joyful swain Feast on the Fruits of his Happy
Labor; O do thou but ask of thy Savior, and he will give thee of the
Fountains of ever Living Waters, Co^^^stial Manna, and the Bread of Life to
satisfy thy Hunger; but some say the Meat is sweetest that is nearest the
Bone, and so thou may desire one: Well then, take a Deaths Head, for out of
it, a Pious Man will pick Heavenly Food. Oh here is a Feast indeed! that great
Shepherd will not let his Sheep to want; for he has promised they shall feed
among the green and fat Pastures, and that he will lead them to the cooling
Streams; from him thou receivest all that thou have, it is he Communicates all
those Blessings, all those Beauties and Graces thou Enjoyest; It is the Sun
beams that Damask the Apples Cheeks, and it is the Sun of Righteousness that
makes thy Soul blush for its Sins; White and Red are the Compounds of an
Earthly Beauty, and White and Red Innocence, and Pious shamfac'dness, are the
chiefest of the souls perfections. Christ's Beloved Spouse was White and Ruddy,
thou of thy self art Poor and Naked, if he do not Enrich thee; But thy Autumn
is done, the trees begin to shed their leaves, and thou thy hairs; and now thou
beginst by piece meal to fall into the Grave; thou have but one strain more to
the top of thy Life, and that a Rotten one too; Age that subtle Thief steals
swiftly on thee; Learn therefore willingly to submitt thy spirit into thy
Saviors hands, like the Corn, to fall and Kiss the Feet of him that cuts thee
off, can thou Murmur at him that does but fell the tree to transplant it into
a better soil; but above all things be prepared for thy end, that when thy
hour comes, thou may fall like Fruit, full ripe for Heaven.

WINTER, OR Old Age.
OVIDIUS. Inde senilis Hyems tremulo venit horrida passu,
Aut spoliata suos, aut quos habet alba capillos.

THat Season is come that covers the ground and thy Head with Snow; the Lillyes
have lost their Milky hue; the Trees have nothing to hide their naked Arms;
the Springs are Congealed, their Waves no more wanton with the Shore, nor thy
Blood in thy Veins. See Worldlings, see; What is bocome of the Idol thou so
much Adorest? Where are all those charming Beauties which shined in thy Face?
that Face which some have called a little Heaven, wherein thy Eyes like two
Suns Displayed their Beams; but now alas thy Heaven is Clouded, thy Suns are
eternally Ecclip'd, and nothing remains of thy beautiful Fabric, but the
ghastly Ruins, so Frail is Serene Beauty; thy Life at longest was but a Span,
but how short a space of that span have thou to Live? Old Wood soon Blazes out,
soon will thy shortened Tapour sink into its Urne; now or never is the time for
thee to be Fruitful; if thou prodigally wastest this thy last inch of thy
Tapour, thou art irrecoverably lost; The Lilly Withers, but with the next
Spring will appear in a fresher beauty; but if thy Sun set in a Cloud, it will
never more arise. See, see the Heavens weep for thee, and seem to show thee thy
duty, the violent blasts that Boreas sends from his swollen Cheeks, intimate
that thy sighs should be fervent; Its distilling in plentiful showers, that
those eyes which in thy youth were Lustful flames, should now be trickling
Fountains; Oh! quench those Flames with Penitent Tears; have thou misspent thy
time, yet despair not, if thou will return, there is mercy for thee; those
tears are pearls of vallue enough to redeem thy time? What if time have
Furrowed thy Face; Plowed Land the better bears Fruit; but methinks I hear thee
say, What must Trees bear Fruit in Winter? Oh yes! Man is a Tree must bear in
all the Seasons, especially in the Winter of his Age, and shall either for
being fruitful be transplanted into Heavens Garden, there eternally to
flourish, or else for his Barrenness, be hewn down for the Devils Fire; But
alas! thy heart is colder then the Season, the curled stream is ^ockt up in
Ribs of ice, and that ^s frozen; Oh! beg of the Sun of Righteousness to shine
on it, and ^e will dissolve thy Icy heart, and make it flow into streams of
Righteousness; Time has silvered thy ^aire, do thou silver thy time; and
though in thy Youth, like the silver Swan, thou were a stranger to Harmony, yet
at the last thou must ^ither like her sing melodiously, or ^owle in Hell for
ever; Summon together all thy strength, all that ^hou have of pious in thee,
that thou may expire like the dying Tapour in a Glorious Blaze; Oh let the
sweetest be at the bottom, if the sand of thy Youths-Glasse were of Gold, that
of thy old age is powder of Rubies, every grain^ of it is worth a Universe, and
doe^ thou so slightly value this Inestimable Jewel; Is this a time for thee to
dance lustful measures when every minute thou maye^^ dance into thy Grave? when
lik^ an aged tree, with every wind tho^ totterest, when every sickness^ shakes
thy very heart strings, tak^ heed for if Death catch thee dancing; the flying
bird is the faires^ mark, and that black Archer wi^^ not neglect his advantage,
and (...) thou may caper into Hell.

Historical Applications.
Quocumque tempore non cogitaveris
Deum, puta illud tempus amisisse.

1.
HEnry the fifth King of England, in his Younger years was a most Dissolute
Prince, addicted to Robberies, and many other lewd Practices, which made the
world guess by these pretty Tyrannies, those High ones, he would afterward
commit; But this Crooked Twig, proved as Goodly an Oak, as ever grew in
Britains Forest, For when he came to be King, he ^orsook both them, and all
those of his Companions that would not turn over a new leaf with him.

I have spent the best part of my Youth in pleasures, Oh! that I could now with
this good King, devote the rest of my days, unto the service of my God; When I
was a Child, I did like a Child, but now I am a Man, I will do like a Man; then
I was Ignorant, but now I have reason to Consider, that all things here below
are Vanity ^ Therefore will I leave off my Drunkenness, to taste of the
Fountains of ever Living Waters, in comparison of which, the best o^ Wines, are
as the bitter waters o^ Marah; I will forsake my Gluttony to taste of the Bread
of Life; My Christ shall be my Riches, will contemn the Worlds Delilahs, that I
may enjoy him for my Spouse; is there any beauty in them? Oh! but he is more
lovely, the choicest often thousand; The fairest earthly Beauties, in
comparison of Him, are but blear-eyed Leahs; it is he only is the lovely Rachel,
that deserves our seven Years, yea all our life's Service.

2
THe Fabulous Poets report of Ixion, that in his Lustful heat, thinking to
embrace an armfull of pleasure, in the enjoyment of fair Juno, was deceived,
and found it but a mist.

Thus foolish man pursues, fleeting delights for realities, and persuades his
heart that he shall long enjoy them; He grasps the mist in his arms, but alas,
he will find that their glittering gayeties will disappear; His shining Taper
will out in a snuff, his pleasing dream will pass away, his Sirens Song will
end, his Juno, his Darling pleasure will vanish into smoke, and prove at last
sour like the Grapes of Sodom, or like those Apples which are said to turn
into ashes if but touched; so will they, and we shall have nothing left of
them, but their Cinders to increase out Torments in Hell.

3.
CAesar after his Victories, and Glorious Triumphs, was murdered in the
Senate House; Herod in the midst of his Glory, eaten up by Worms; Swedelands
Mirror cut off by Death, in the strength of his Years.

Alas! what a vain thing is man a mere bubble, a walking shadow, one blow cuts
his thread in twain, one little bullet stops his breath, one sickness pulls him
into his Grave; it is most certain, that we shall all take up our Lodging in
Deaths dark Retiring-room, the Grave; but nothing more uncer^ain then the
time, when? Oh! that we could therefore be always about that task which we
have here to do, like the Heliotropium, still turning toward our sun, Our Sun
of Righteousness: Thus if we live whereas the Waftage of the Wicked out of
this world, is Stormy and Tempestuous, and are rou^ed by the Horrors of never
dy^ng Torments; our shall be calm and gentle: Our Deaths will prove but a short
sleep, and when we awake, we shall find our selves in Abraham's bosom,
encompassed with incomparable Felicities.

4.
MEn whilst they are in this World, do but play the Industrious Be, always
buzzing about, seeking some Flower, some occasion by which they may increase
their Stock: their chiefest Garden is the Exchange, to which they in Numbers
resort, there it is they meet with most bargains, and from thence with loaded
thighs they fly unto their Hives or Houses.

Thus should the Life of every Christian be, could we be but as wise for Heaven
as we are for the World; with the Emmet, carry but one grain of corn, do but
one Pious deed a day; this day draw a line of Christian Charity, that of
Obedience, and another day of Humility, we should soon draw the whole Image of
our savior in our souls; and at the years end, find our spiritual treasure
increased to a massy heap. Heavens Exchange-Royal is the Church, for there we
may hear glad tidings of our Celestial affairs; there we shall be sure to meet
with good bargains; it is there only that the Exchange never falls, but is
always at a high Rate: for a few odd pence bestowed in Alms, we shall receive
innumerable Treasures; for a few trickling penitent Tears, Inestimable Jewels;
and for a few old rags given to the needy, the Clothing of a Glorious
Immortality.

5.
ZEuxis a Famous Painter, Pourtraying a Vine and a Man by it on the same
Tablet, the Grapes were so exquisitely drawn, that the deceived Birds flew and
peckt them; yet by this we may see, that though Art may Imitate, yet it is far
short of Nature; for had he drawn the Man so well to the Life, they would have
been more afraid of him, then allured by the Grapes; Art may Pourtray a Rose of
a fresh Carnation, but compare its Beauty to a real one, of how faint a die it
will seem to the others native Crimson.

And yet how many have we in this age who daube over the works of Nature, and
think to borrow a Beauty from a few colors: but poor souls, do they think to
mend Gods work? has thy God commanded thee, Not to make unto thy self any
Graven Image, or the likeness of any thing, and do thou make one of thy
self? could you but see how like unskillfull Painters, you mar what you would
mend. It Is Satan presents you with a false mirror, wherein that seems fair,
which indeed is deformity it self; did you but see your selves in Virtues
Glass; you would confess that a Moore with his Darke-lanthorn face, is a far
more Real and Lovely Beauty then yours: Christ's Spouse went not thus
disguised, he will never know you with such a v^zzard on, neither shall those
have any share in his Victory, who wear and serve under the Devils Colors.

6.
SInon was a Crafty Grecian, most expert in the Art of dissembling: This Sinon
by his Deceit, and Feigned tears persuaded the Credulous Trojans to draw in the
Wooden Horse, and with it their Ruin.

Every Fair show must not be trusted, for Cain could friendly parley with his
Brother, and slay him; And Judas come with a Hail Master in his mouth, and
betray his Lord: Man busies himself to invent mischief, and with dissimulation
covers his snares; His heart is crooked and full of guile, a forge of iniquity,
a mint wherein lies are coined to deceive the Innocent; He sings thee asleep,
as Mercury did Argus, that he may slay thee; In the one hand he carries a Rose,
wherewith smiling in your face, he pleasingly tickles your nose; in the other a
Dagger to stab thee to the heart: In thee therefore Oh my God will I put my
Confidence, for Just and True are thy ways, and all thy paths are Righteous.

7.
IT is said of Demosthenes, that being to deliver an Oration to the People in
the Marketplace, he had very few Auditors, whereupon he whooping, whistling,
and acting the Fool, the People pressed in great numbers to see him, when he
rebuking their folly, got them by this device to stay and hear his Eloquent
Oration.

And alas! how thin are our Churches now a days? How few come to hear Gods
divine Orators, and were every one to give a shilling or two in Alms when they
come to Church, as they do to see a Stage Play, I fear our Temples would have
fewer Auditors then they have; whereas at a Comedy, the thronged Theaters
almost crack with numbers. Thus can we lay out our money, for that which is not
Bread; and men's perverse hearts are so stubborn, that scarce any persuasions
can prevail to draw them from this folly: Fools thus to despise Celestial
Manna, for dirty crumbs, and the sacred word of a God, for a few humane
inventions.

8.
THersites was of such a currish disposition, that he was always barking at
those who had done him no injury; he could not see Ulysses, but he must term
him Coward; no^ Menelaus, but he must beat him with his broken Ribb, with his
Wives dishonor.

Just thus have I seen some sit snarling all the day at others; they whet their
Tongues to pierce the sides of the Innocent: they cannot see a man pass by
without casting some of their filth upon him; but give me, Oh my God, a quiet
Conscience! the best Antidote against their poison, then shall I enjoy a
continual Feast within me, although their Malice seek the desturbance of my
Peace; and at length, their Calumnies shall return upon their own heads; That
pitch wherewith they intended to blurr my Innocence, shall stick upon their own
fingers; then shall I Triumph in my Innocence, but they be ashamed of their
hatred and folly.

9.
WE read, that Aesops Cock finding a Pearl, contemned it for one Barley Corn:
Christ is our Precious Pearl; but alas! how many reject him for a little
worldly gain? How many will sell their Savior for a less price then did
Judas? but oh my God! grant that I may endeavor, yea give all I have to
purchase this Pearl, then shall I prove a happy Merchant; for none but those
who have this Pearl shining in their Bosoms, can enter Heaven. That is the
Sacred Badge by which St. Peter knows who he is to let enter those Everlasting
Gates. Let Worldling scrape this Dunghill World, but I, when I have got this
Pearl, my Christ, have attained such riches, to which theirs is but Dross and
Dung.

10.
DIogenes was a man so much despising Riches, yt being proferd great Wealth by
Alexander, he bid him stand out of the Sunshine, as being a comfort, that all
his Riches could not bring him; He chose a Tub for his Palace, a Wooden dish
was all his Household Stuff, and Water and Herbs his chiefest Sustenance:
Though some may take this for a Tale of a Tub; yet surely it is a great example
of a Generous and Moderate life, which without doubt was full of a perfect
Tranquillity. His mind was calm, not like the Merchants tossed with every Wind
more then his Ship, nor alarmed with Thieves seeing he had nothing but his
Wooden dish to loose; and Christians may be ashamed to be so far out-gone by a
Heathen in Morral Virtue: but yet we find this Diogenes, whose diet was so
spare to desire the unchaste embraces of a Lais; Ah! how then does the Pampring
of our bodies now a days put oil to the flame, and increase our natural
lustful desires; ^t is a worthy sentence of Hesiod, that half is better then
the whole; one dish will serve nature better then ten, for with our many
Courses, we course away our Health; though Bread and Water be all my Food, as
long as the Sun of Righteousness shines on me, I will not envy Sardanapalus
all his daints of the Sea and Land.

Scripture Applications.
This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall
Meditate therein Day and Night.

1.
UNmatchable was the strength of Sampson, yet could he notwithstand the
charming allurements of Delilah; but by her treachery, his so admired strength
was brought to naught.

How careful therefore ought we to be, to eschew the company of these subtle
charmers, to stop our ears to these Sirens Harmony: does their pleasing
Warbling Ravish thee? Oh! consider their Lustful Lays will lull thee a sleep
to thy ruin: Do thou admire them for their Lilly hands? Know that therewith
they will lead thee to all uncleanness: Perhaps their Golden Locks may ensnare
thee, but be assured, that every curle is a chain to hold thee to thy sin: Or
if their twinkling eyes have bewitched thee, consider them as false Lights, as
the fatal Funeral piles of thy honor and chastity; thy Savior had not
whereon to lean his Head, and will thou rest on a downy Bed with thy lewd
Minion: Oh no! but reject these Delilah's, since they like Sylla and Charybdys,
miserably Shipwreck all those that approach them.

2.
NAaman Captain of the Host of Assyria was a Leaper, who was Cured by Elisha,
by being dipped seven times in the River Jordan.

Most Leaprous is my soul, wash it therefore, Oh my Savior! in the Jordan of
thy blood; but are not Abana and Pharphar Rivers of Damascus, better then the
Streams that flow from thee? Oh no! they may wash the filth from our bodies,
but never from our souls. It Is only the Rivolet of thy blood can make us
perfectly clean: Oh! be thou my Jesus, or the Physician to my sick soul, and
heal me; and for my Cure, I will not return thee money, or coin, nor offer up
unto thee Sheep, or Oxen; but Prayers, Thanks, and Tears; Sacrifices most
acceptable unto thee; Incense which smells sweetest in thy Nostrills.

3.
When the Israelites abode in Shittim, the Daughters of Moab, allured then to
commit Whoredoms; and thence we see a sad story of Cozby, arise; who was slain
in the lustful embraces of her Lover, in the sight of all the Congregation.

And yet how many Daughters of Moab have we in these days; Ah! how many
Delilahs, which wear the Sun of Darkness in their Faces, and I fear to in
their hearts; who prefer a white Cheek or a Cherry Lip, before the beauty of
Holiness it self; and which covet no other Heaven, but their Lovers Arms.
Fools thus for a moment of fading pleasures, to purchase everlasting Torments:
For let them know, their Patches do not Beautify their Faces, but set so many
black spots upon their Souls; their Anointing and Painting, causes them to
slide the quicker into Hell; and their Pouders and Perfumes, do but make them a
daintier bit for Devils.

4.
When Goliath Encountered David, he was Armed with a Helmet of Brass, and a
Coat of Maile, with a Sphere like a Weavers Beam; but on the contrary, David
comes in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel; and
thus with a Sling and a Stone only, he Slays this mighty Phylistine.

Victory is in the hand of God, and in vain is the strength of man without his
assistance: if God be on thy side, let not the number of Enemies dismay thee,
for he can defend his Elisha with Charriots of fire, and save his David both
out of the Paw of the Lion, and out of the Hand of the Phylistine: He that
comes in the name of the Lord of Hosts, is sufficiently armed against all
Encounters; thus Guarded, I Will not fear the World, the Flesh, no nor Satan
himself, for when the Tempter comes, I will meet him with my Saviors answer;
[It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve;] This, this is the way with these Weapons, with David I will strike the
Monster in the forehead and slay him.

5.
Sinful Soddom sinned against God, and Just God Punished Soddom; But what was
wretched Sodoms sin, which has not been in our habitations? what Crime did
miserable Gomorrah perpetrate, which we have not committed? Niniveh in forty
days, could Repent at the Preaching of one Jonas, and we not in forty years,
though hundreds thunder daily in our ears, the emminent Judgments of God upon
us. Purples and Silks are the Sackcloth, and Powders and Perfumes the Ashes
which we Repent in. Ah! our God, we have justly deserved, that thou should
make our Land a place of dead men's Sculls, an Island encompassed with her own
Blood. Once, what Land more Righteous then England? and alas! now who more
sinful? she was once the Daughter of Nations, the joy and perfection of the
whole Earth; but now her Beauty is departed from her, she is black, but no more
comely: Lord we were once thy Darlings, as dear unto thee as the Apple of thine
eye; Oh! therefore do not leave ^is nor forsake us, but draw us with the Cords
of thy Love, that we may once more run after thee; Pour the Oil of thy Mercy
into our Souls, and heal us, that thou again may be our God, and we thy
People.

6.
WHen I call to mind my Christ's Death, I cannot but admire the goodness of my
Savior, that he the Son of the King of Kings, should suffer his precious side
to be pierced with a Spear; His Sacred Temples, those beds of sweetest Spices
to be rent and torn, and all to preserve me from destruction: But must no less
then the blood of the King of Heaven be the Balm to heal our wounded Souls?
Shall my Jesus shed forth more drops of Blood then I shed tears? Shall he be
Crucified for me, and I not Crucify my Sins? Ah no! I will not be ungrateful
to such a Savior, to such a sweet Redeemer; But I will bath my self in
Repentant Tears, I will weep day and night because of my sins, my mouth shall
continually Praise my ever Blessed Redeemer.

7.
WE Read, that though the Prodigal had spent his Wealth in Riot, yet when he
came to his Father with the confession of his fault in his mouth, he not only
pardons him, but kills a fatted Calf, for joy of his return, and receives him
gladly.

Men cannot be readier to sin, then God to forgive a penitent Sinner; Art thou
turned Prodigal and have forsaken thy Heavenly Fathers House, spent thy
Celestial Treasure by turning his Grace into Wantonness? Yet if thou will at
length return, Oh! he will Receive thee with Embraces of Love, and kiss thee
with the kisses of his mouth; yea there will be rejoicing in Heaven, and it
will be a day worthy an Angels joy, wherein a Son is new born to the King of
Glory: Despair not then, Oh my Soul! to find pardon at the hands of thy
Merciful Father, it is in his power alone to make a Blackamore white; nay were
thou stayed as much as was Manasses that made the Temple slow with innocent
blood; if thou will but wash thy wounds with penitent tears, he will pour the
oil of his mercy into them, and heal thee.

8.
THe poor Widow casting but two Mites into the Treasury, was more praised by
our Savior, then those Rich men which cast in plentifully of their Abundance.

It is not the largeness of Alms, but the freeness of heart by which it is
given; not the length of Prayer, but its fervency that is pleasing unto God;
The short but humble Petition of the Publican was sooner accepted, then the
long vain Glorious Prayer of the Pharisee; and the Widows two Mites before the
Rich men's great gifts; let the Wealthy cast in of their Abundance, but I,
though I cannot with Solomon Sacrifice thousands of Oxen, yet will I endeavor
to offer up unto thee my heart; This Lord is the Mite I give thee, give thee
dId I say? Alas! that was thine before, and I must pay thee Tribute with thine
own Coin; But I have so defaced the Image of the Great Caesar of Heaven, which
was stamped on it, that thou will scarce know it for thine own; yet Lord if I
can sincerely tender it to thee, even this despised Mite thou will not contemn.

9.
CHrist going to see Jerusalem, Rode thither not in one of Caesar's Glittering
Charriots, but on an Humble Ass; The King of Kings, he that Rides in Triumph
on the Clouds, he that Sits mounted on Cherubins, dained to Ride on an Ass,
and surely a better Triumph then any of the Caesar's; and by this we may see how
far above all men he was meek, whose Triumph the subject of our greatest pride,
was more humble then others humblest actions; and wherefore did he thus debase
himself, but to teach us Humility? what do we see in our selves to be proud of?
Is it our frailty, or because we are born of the dust? How goodly a thing it is
to see a poor worm, a clod of dust, clad in the pomps of the silk worms spoils,
to vaunt it self? Oh! our God give us humble Souls; Pride and Ambition puffs up
the heart of man, and the path to Heavens gate is too narrow for the swelling
ambitious Soul to walk in; those who in their own conceits are goodly Caedars,
in Gods are but despised Shrubs, fit stubble for Hells Fire.

10.
HOly Peter by that Excellent Sermon of his Crucified Savior, converted
thousands to the Faith.

Great Orpheus, who with the Music of thy tongue, did not only make Trees,
and Stones, but very Beasts to dance; Those Breasts which were Barbarous, and
Raging like a Tempestuous Sea, thou made smooth as the brow of a Cherubin:
Thy Saviors words are now true, thou art become a Fisher of Men, and have
taken no less then three thousand at a draught; If this be so, what then is the
reason, that instead of having three thousand converted at a Sermon, I fear we
have three thousand Sermons, and scarce one converted? Have the Dispensers of
the Word now a days less skill in Angling for Souls, then this Blessed Fisher?
Oh no! surely it is the hardness of our hearts, which were they not more obdure
then Stones, the Hammer of the Word would break them; were we not exceeding
secure, those Sons of thunder would waken us, not deafer then Adders, those
Sacred Charmers would Charm us.

OCCASIONAL Applications.
Vel bonas cogitationes alat animus, vel statim malas extinguat.

1. On a Withered Rose.
THis Flower in the Gayeties of her Youth, was Fresh and Glittering like a New
Married Bride; but being Coy, and Self-conceited, She defended her self from
all those that would crop her, with her prickles; At last time, blasting her
Orient hue, she is rejected of all, and stands in a corner unregarded, bedewing
her Cheeks each Morn for her former folly: Thus Lord in the pride of my youth
have I disdained thee, thou have woed me till thy locks were wet with the dew
of Heaven, thou did promise to transplant me into thy Garden, water me with
thy tears, and nourish me under the shadow of thy wings; Oh! what a happy
flower had I then been, but I like a sullen Rose stubbornly denied, Crucified
thee afresh, and pricked thy fingers: I knew Lord that the Offering of the first
Fruits were most pleasing unto thee, that the blooming Rose, and early morning
virtues, smelt sweetest in thy nostrills; Yet have I continued in sin, whilst I
was able to sin, and now return unto thee because I can sin no more; Whilst my
Tapour was long, and its flame shining as the Lamp of Heaven; I spent my Light
in Satan's Court, and now come to burn my Snuff in thy Palace; Oh! that my head
were waters, and my eyes Fountains of tears, that I might weep night and day
for my Youths follies; Oh! how justly may I fear that thou will refuse Satan's
leavings, that because in my Youth I rejected the things that did belong unto
my peace, that now they are hid from my eyes: Is a wrinckled Beauty a fit
Spouse for the King of Glory? Will he inhabit Ruins? But Lord thou art
merciful, if our Return be hearty, we can never come too late unto thee;
therefore will I not despair to be admitted, amongst that Blessed Posy of
Flowers, which thou will place in thine own Bosom.

2. The Fly in the Candle.
THis Fly, and Ambitious Icarus, soaring too nigh its Sun, the Candle, scorches
its wings, and so perishes.

Thus too many poor Christians dally with Hell, and nibble too long till they
are taken with the snare, they deem the day far off, and themselves secure,
though at the brink of the Burning Lake; they take an Ignis Fatuus for their
Guide, and never consider that it leads, unto Pitts or Precipices; With the
Fly, the Light of the Candle, Lusts flames seem pleasing to them, but they are
unmindfull that they will burn them: Thus miserable wretches buzzing too nigh
the fire their wings are scorched, and they perish; too much Sun shine, too
many Pleasures so blind their eyes, that they cannot see their danger, and so
are precipitated into the Pit.

3. On a Blotted Paper.
PAper whilst fair serves for many good uses, but being once blotted, is not
fit to have Characters upon it, but only to supply some servile Occasion, or
the Fire.

Has not God Created most of us a fair sheet, pure and without blemish? and
shall our pride commaculate our faces with patches; every patch we wear is a
blur in the fair story of our lives? and where do we think there is space for
God to set his Impressions, and Characters upon us, to mark us out for his,
being already blotted, and full of the Devils stamps; Our bodies are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, and shall we thus Soil them? Oh no! for God will
never dwell in such defiled lodgings, Christ will never own us for his, seeing
the mark of the Beast in our Foreheads; But that Immaculate Lamb will separate
such spotted Goats from his unblemisht Sheep, with a depart from me you
workers of Iniquity, I know you not.

4. The Sow in the Mire.
A Brutish Nature will always act accordingly, nothing can persuade a silly
Swine from its nasty Mire, nay were a Bed of Doves Feathers set before it, it
would rather choose to wallow in its filth, then repose in it, although it often
meets with a stone which molests its imaginary rest.

What a true Emblem of a worldling is this? for oh! how it tickles his fancy to
wallow in the Mire of sin? Earth is his delight, he is always tending to the
Ground his thoughts, his Meditations are all Earthly, as if his Creator had not
made his countenance erected, but grovelling downwards like these brute Beasts:
He will not be withdrawn, although he often meets with a stone, and his
dainties have too sour a sauce, for he cannot laugh heartily but the tears
will stand in his eyes; Thus the best of Earthly Felicities have a tart
farewell, yet will he not forsake them, but prides himself in his sports, and
like the Swine, because he sees them not, he thinks himself Beautiful; But the
wise-mans eyes see how vilely he is bedaubed: Lord we are all vile and filthy,
Oh! do thou wash us in thy Sons Blood, and then though we are never so unclean,
we shall be white as Snow.

5. On the whipping of a top
THe oftener the Child strikes the Top, the better it spins, but if the stroke
be omitted, of it self it cease to go, if too violent it over-turns it.

Thus Lord is it with us, as long as thy Rod of Affliction lies on us, we go
and walk the better in thy ways; the more stripes thou give, the more
prayers send we up unto thee; But often when thou ceasest scourging of us, then
we cease glorifying of thee: But oh! my Savior remember the smart of thy own
Stripes, and so have pity on mine; Consider Lord, what a powerful Arm sets on
the blow, thou need not whet thy Sword to destroy a broken and bruised Reed;
but cheer up, Oh my Soul! thy Prayers are heard; me thinks I see my Jesus
Mediating for me, and smiling in his Fathers Face, interposes his hand betwixt
every blow; thou have such an Advocate, as cannot, will not he denied; when he
undertakes thy suit, thou may boldly presume of Pardon.

6. On a Fleet of Ships in the Night.
SEe with what a nimble security the Fleet glides through the Bosom of the
deep, though Darkness surround it, and Rocks on each side threaten
Destruction; guided only by the skill of the Pilot, and the little light in
their Admiral.

Our Savior that Blessed Pilot, has made the most perfect discovery of the
new Jerusalem unto us; and if we will but follow his course, we shall find
sufficient Light in him to guide us; and who can doubt of a Prosperous Voyage,
having such a Pilot: can thou fear Storms, when both the Wind and the Sea
obey him; or Pirates, when he has already carried away that grand Pyrat the
Devil, captive in Chains. Oh my Jesu! Thou Celestial Palinurus, do thou
steer, for thou only can do it, this crazy Bark of my Soul, Securely
through all Enemies, by all Rocks, by Scylla and Charybdys the Devil and the
Flesh, till it arrive at Heaven, the Saints Indies; where is such Treasure, as
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard of, neither has it entered into the
Heart of Man to conceive.

7. On the dropping of the Eaves.
Wonderful are the Effects of these little drops of Water, for they falling on
a Stone, not only soften it, but wear it away.

Lord, I have a Flinty, Rocky Heart; Ah! do thou let fall the Drops of thy
Grace and soften it, till it bow's in Obedience unto thee; What Heart so
Stubborn, which the Distillations of thy Mercy cannot make pliable. But yet
alas! we see to our sorrow, that though thy Mercies come unto some, rather like
Showers then by Drops, yet are they not at all Mollified, but rather Hardened in
their Obstinacy toward thee; Stony ground, Barren Souls, which such sweet
showers cannot make fruitful; for every little favorable blast puffs them up,
and they think their Causes must needs be Just because they Prosper; but let
them not deceive themselves, for they are but Exalted with woeful Capernaum, to
the Heavens; that their fall may be the greater into Hell.

8. On a Shipwreck.
Poor Passengers in a Storm, being Ship Wrackt by the Furious Sea; know not
where to turn in their Distress, but unto the same Rock, which was the cause
of their Destruction.

Lord, thy Waves and thy Billows have gone over me; Oh! whither, whither shall
I turn but unto thee? Lord, I know that if thou do lead me through the
Wilderness Hungry and Thirsty, thou can Rain down Manna from Heaven, and draw
Water out of the Rocks for me, if one of thy Hands is armed with a Rod, in the
other thou have the Balm of Gilead; thou Lord art the strong Tower of Israel,
and the Rock of Jacob; under the Shadow of thy Wings I shall Rest secure: the
Winds may blow, and the Seas swell, but all their Rage shall prove but Froth:
he that relies on any other defense trusts to a Fort of Sand, which the least
wind scatters; it is thou Lord alone, art able to deliver my Soul out of the
deep Waters.

9. The Castle.
MAn is a Fortress, Beleaguerd All his Life with Armies of innumerable sins,
and Satan is their Captain General. His Forces are divided into three
Squadrons; The first is composed of Scarlet Troops, and under these, fight
Blood-thirstinesse. Revenge, and Murder; and these commonly take the Fortress
by Storm. His second Squadron has black Ensigns, under which fight Despair,
and he gives a furious Assault; Next comes Covetousness, who seeks to Bribe
and Betray the Fortress, and with these are all other deeds of Darkness; but
his third Squadron have White Ensigns, and under these, are all catching
Pleasures and Allurements; Ambition, Fame, Pride, Riot, and Lasciviousness:
It Is these that come with the white Flag of Truce, and yet mean War; it is these
that seem to be the least considerable Troops, and yet the most to be feared;
it is these lay all the Ambushes, with these are his Artillery, and that is
Woman; out of the Loop-holes of her eyes, she discharges her murderers; this is
the fatal Flame that sets the whole Fortress on fire, and besides these, that
he may not omit any thing on his part, he has intelligence within, even thy
own thoughts; thou thy self art foe to thy self, and Satan beats thee with thy
own Weapons; but that which shows the height of his Policy is, that he will be
sure to storm the Fort in the Weakest place: but do thou Jesu stand in the
breach, and repel him back; do thou Man the Castle with Assurance and
Constancy; Strengthen Faith, that it may keep its Ground; cause Repentance to
open the Floodgates of his Eyes, and drown its Foes; and thus shall the Siege
be raised, and thou remain Conqueror and Faithful Soldier to the King of
Heaven, who will reward thy Victory with a Wreath of Glory.

10. The Ship.
THis World is a Sea, Man is the weak Bark that is tossed in that Restless
and Stormy Ocean; our hands are two of the Oars that Row us thither, and every
good Deed we Act, we fetch a Stroke toward Heaven; and the Almighties Spirit
is the gentle Blast that fills our Sails, for without it we are becalmed. He
that sails with the Tide glides toward Hell; Orphans sighs, are the winds that
drive him swiftly on, he has often a merry Gale, and he seldom thinks on the
sadness of his Voyage, till he almost arrive at the Dismal Haven of Death; and
though God the Searcher of Hearts, who knows if he lived longer, whether he
would steer a new course, may pardon him; yet this is dangerous, and he often
Miserably Perishes. But he that will steer in a direct course to Heaven, must
Sail against the Tide, and he must always be Rowing; for whilst he is idle,
the Stream carries him backwards; he will often meet with a thousand
Impediments in his Voyage. Though Historians doubt whether there be any Sirens,
yet in this Sea he will meet with many. Riches is the Fatal Remora, which
sticks to the bottom of the Vessel and hinders its course; but above all, he
must have a care he does not Shipwreck himself against the White Rock of a
Woman's Breast. And besides these, he shall meet with other Storms, which will
drive him back again; but he must Wrestle with these difficulties, and tug
against the Stream, and if he chance to overcome the Tempest; Zephyrus gently
filling his Sails, and he enjoys Peace and Tranquillity; let him consider,
that after the wanton play of Porposes there comes a Storm, and therefore
repair the Breaches which the Tempest has made; has Despair enterd? cast it
out and resume thy Anchor of Hope; and at last thy Voyage shall be Prosperous,
and thy Bark shall unlade its Precious Freight in the Bosom of its Savior,
that Great Factor of Souls; who will Treasure it in his Celestial Storehouse,
and bind it up amongst his Jewels to all Eternity.

A Table of the several Subjects in this Book.
HEaven and Earth, a Dialogue, wherein Christ Convinces the Soul that all those
Honors, Gifts and Pleasures, which it imagines to enjoy here, are to be found
in him with advantage, page 1 A preparation to the Lords Supper, p. 25
Character of the Pious Man, p. 37 Character of the Impious Man, p. 44 Character
of the Good Woman, p. 50 Character of the Wicked Woman, p. 55 The four Quarters
of the Year; And First of Spring, or Infancy, p. 61 Second, Of Summer, or
Youth, p. 67 Third, Of Autumn, or Manhood, p. 73 Fourth, Of Winter, or Old
Age, p. 78 Ten Historical Applications. 1. Henry the Fifth; By his Example to
forsake this Worlds Vanities, p. 83 2. Ixions Cloud, or the vanity of Earthly
pleasures, p. 85 3 Caesar's, Herod's, and Swedlands Kings death, or the Frailty
of Man's Life, p. 86 4. The Exchange; Or Divine Trafick, p. 87 5. Zeuxis Tablet,
against Painting, p 89 6. Sinon, or the Hypocrite, p. 91 7. Demosthenes
Oration; Against Commedies, p. 92 8. Thersites, Or the Back-biter, p. 94 9.
Aesops Cock; Christ our Pearl of Price, p. 95 10. Diogenes, An Example of
Temperance, p. 96 Ten Scripture Applications. 1. Sampson; Lust to be avoided,
p. 98 2. Naaman; Christ's blood can only cleanse Us, p. 100 3. Cozby; Lusts
punishment, p. 101 4. David and Goliath; God alone the Giver of Victory, p 102
5. Soddom; Its sins compared to Englands, p. 103 6. Christ's Death; Expressing
his Love to Us, p. 105 7. The Prodigal; Gods mercy upon Repentance, p. 106 8.
The Widows Mite; God regards not the full hand, but the heart of the Giver, p.
108 9. Christ Riding on an Ass; His Humility, p. 109 10. Peter's Sermon; The
words power, and our hardness of heart, p. 110 Ten Occasional Applications. 1.
On a withered Rose; Our backwardness to Repentance, and Gods mercy, p. 112 2.
The Fly in the Candle; Carnal Security, p. 115 3. On a Blotted Paper; Against
Patches, p. 116 4. The Sow in the Mire; or the worldling, p. 118 5. The
Whipping of a Tap; or Fatherly Correction, p. 120 6. On a Fleet of Ships in the
night; Christ our Pilote, p. 121 7. The dropping of the Eaves; Mercies cannot
mollify us, p. 123 8. On a Shipwreck; Christ the Rock of our Salvation, p.
124 9. The Castle; Man a Besieged Fortress, p. 126 10. The Ship; the World a
Sea, wherein poor man is tossed, p. 128
FINIS.
ERRATA'S
For CAres, Page 4. line 8. Pilate, p. 8. l. 6. S^earest, p. 8. l. 7. Arms, p.
9. l. 17. So^s, p. 13. l. 6. Brooks, p. ibid. l. 13. Son, p. 14. l. 20. Arms,
p. 16. l. 20. sit, p. 20. l. 18. may for, p. 48. l. 22. party, p. 51. l. 9.
T^rget, p. 61. l. 5. Lillies, p. 62. l. 22. intseat, p. 64. l. 19.
indissolvable, p. 69. l. 2. strikt, p. 69. l. 5. wained, p. 70. l. 17. Fer^ore,
p. 73. l. 2. strain, p. 77. l. 9. Ecclip'd, p. 79. l. 10. our, p. 87. l. 14.
Worldling, p. 96. l. 2. staid, p. 107. l. 1^. sports, p. 119. l. 9.
Read Cares Pilote Steerest Armies Suns Brook Sun Armies set may be for parley
Turget Lilly entreat indissoluble strict weaned Fervore staire Eclipsed ours
Worldlings staind spots



