THE BEGGARS BUSH.

Written by FRANCIS BEAVMONT, Gentlemen. And JOHN FLETCHER, Gentlemen.


You may speedily expect those other Plays, which Kirkman, and his Hawkers
have deceived the buyers withal, selling them at treble the value, that this
and the rest will be sold for, which are the only Original and corrected
copies, as they were first purchased by us at no mean rate, and since printed
by us.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson, and Anne Mosely, at the three Pigeons,
and at the Princes Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

DRAMMATIS PERSONAE.
GOswin a young Merchant of Bruges, viz. Florez the right Earl of Flanders
Woolfort, Usurper of the Earldome, Clause King of Beggars, viz. Gerrard Father
to Florez, Hubert disguised ^^ke a Huntsman, A Lord of Flaunders Hemskirk, A
Favorite of the Usurper. Lord Arnold Two Lords of Flaunders disguised like
Beggars Lord Costin, Two Lords of Flaunders disguised like Beggars Iaqueline,
Daughter to Gerrard. Bertha, Heir of Brabant. Van-dunck Burgomaster of Bruges
Merchants, Saylor, etc. Higgen, Ferret, Prig, Snap, and others, Beggars. Boors,
Soldiers Young Merchants, and others, Guests at Goswins Wedding. Margaret,
Wife to Vandunck. Attendants, Boy with a Song.
The Scene BRUGES.

BEGGARS BUSH.
Actus Primus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter a Merchant and Herman. Mer. IS he then taken?


Her. And brought back even now sir.


Mer. He was not in disgrace?


Her. No man more lov'^,
Nor more deserved it, being the only man
That durst be honest in this Court.

Mer. Indeed
We have heard abroad sir, that the State has suffered
A great change since the Countess death*

Her. I^ ha^h sir.


Mer. My five years absence has kept me a stranger
So much to all ^he occurents of my Country,
As you shall bind me for some short relation
To make me understand the p^^sent times.

Her. I must begin then with a war was made
And seven years with all cruelty continued
Upon our Flanders by the Duke of Br^bant
The cause grew thus: During our Earls minority,
Woolf^rt, (who now usurps) was empl^y^d thither
To ^rea^ about a ma^ch between our Earl
And the Daughter and H^ir of Brabant; during which treaty
The Brabander pretends, this Daughter was
Stolen from his Court by practice of our State,
Though we are all confirmed, 'twas a sought quarrel
To lay an unjust gripe upon this Earldom,
It being here beli^v'd the Duke of Brabant
Had no such loss. This war upon it proclaimed,
Our Earl, being then a Child, although his Father
Good Gerrard lived, yet in respect he was
Chosen by the Countess favor for her Husband,
And but a Gentlemen, and Floriz holding
Hi^ right unto this Country from his mother,
The State thought fit in this defensive wa^,
Woolfort being then the only man of mark,
To make him General.

Mer. Which place we have heard
He did discharge with honor.

Her. I, so long,
And with so bl^st successes, that the Brabander
Was forced (his treasures wasted, and the choice
Of his best men of A^ms tired or cut off)
To ^ave the fi^ld, and s^und a base retreat
Back to his Country; bu^ so br^ken both
I^ m^n^ and mea^s, er'e to make head again,
(...) ^i^herto he s^^s down by his loss,
Not da^ing, or for h^nour, or rev^nge
Aga^n to attempt his fortune. But this Victory
(...) broke our State, and made a deeper hurt
In Flanders then the g^eatest overthrow
She ^ver r^ceiv^d: For Woolfort n^w beholding
H^m^el^ an^ actions in the flattering glass
O^ s^lf-deservings, and cherisn't by
The strong assurance of his power, for then
A^l Cap^ains of the Army were his creatures,
T^ c^mm^n Soldier too at his devotion,
Made so by full indulgence to their rapines
And secret b^un^i^s; this strength too well known,
And what it could effect, soon put in practice,
As fur^hered by the childhood of the Earl
And their improvidence that might have p^i^c't
The hear^ ^f his designs, gave him ^ccasion
To sieze the whole, and in that plight you find it.

Mer. Sir, I receive the knowledge of thus much
As a choice favor from you.

Her. Only I must add,
Bruges holds out.

Mer. Whether sir, I am going,
For there last nigh^ I had a ship put in,
And my horse waits me. Exit.

Her. I wish you a good journey.


Enter Woolfor^, Hubert. Wool. What? Hubert stealing from me! who disarmed him?
It was more then I commanded; take your sword,
I am best guarded with it in your hand,
I have seen you use it nobly.

Hub. And will turn it
On mine own bosom, ere it shall be drawn
Unworthily or rudely.

Wool. Would you leave me
Without a farewell, Hub^rt? fly a friend
Unweari^d in his study to advance you?
What have I ere possessed which was not you^s?
Or either did not court you to command it?
Who ever yet arrived to any grace,
Reward or trust from me, but his approaches
Were by your fair reports of him preferred?
And what is more, I ma^^ my self your servant,
In making you the master of those secrets
Which not the rack of conscience could draw from me,
Not I, when I asked m^rcy, tru^t my prayers with;
Yet after these assurances of love,
These ties and bonds of friendship, to forsake me,
Forsake me as an enemy? come you must
Give me a reason.

Hub. Sir, and so I will,
If I may do it in private, and you hear it.

Wool. All leave the room: you have your will, s^^ down
And use the liberty of our first friendship.

Hub. Friendship? when you proved Traitor first that vanished;
Nor do I owe you any though^ but hate;
I know my ^ight ha^h forfeited my head;
And so I may make you first understand
What a strange monster you have made your sel^,
I welco^e it.

Wool. To me this is strange language.


Hub. To you? why what are you?


Wool Your Prince and Master,
The Earl of Flaunders.

Hub. By a proper title,
Raised to it by cunning circumvention, force,
Blood, and proscripti^^s.

Wool. And in all this wisdom;
Had I not reason? when by Cerrards plots
I should have first been called to a st^ict account,
How, and which way I had consumed that mass
Of money, as they term it, in the war,
Who underhand had by his Ministers
Detracted my great action, made my faith
And loyalty so suspected; in which ^ailing
He sought my life by practice.

Hub. With what forehead
Do you speak this to me? who (as I know it)
Must and will say it is false.

Wool. My guard there.


Hub. Sir you bad me sit, and promised you would hear
Which I now say you shall; not a ^ound more,
For I that am conte^ner of mine own,
Am Master of your life; then here is a sword
Between you and all aids, Sir; though you blind
The credulous beast, the multitude, you pass not
These gross untruths ^n me.

Wool. How? gross untruths.


Hub. I, and it is favorable language,
They had been in a mean man lies and soul ones.

Wool. You take strange license.


Hub. Yes, were not those rumors
Of being called unto your answers, spread
By your own followers; and weak Gerrard wrought
(But by your cunning practice) to believe
That you were dangerous; yet not to be
Punished by any formal course of law,
But first ^o be made sure, and have your crimes
Laid open after, which your queint train taking
You fled unto the Camp, and th^re craved humbly
Protection for your innocent life, and that,
Since you h^d escaped the fury of the war,
Y^u might not fall by treason; and for proof^
You did not for your own ends make this dange^,
Some that had been before by you subornd,
Came sorth and took their oaths they had been hired
By Gerrard to your murder This once hea^d,
And easily believed, the enraged Soldier
Seeing no further then the outward man,
Snatched h^st^ly his A^ms, ran to the Court,
Killed all that made resistance, cut in pieces
Such as were Servants, or thought Friends to Gerrard,
Vowing the like to him.

Wool Will you yet end?


Hub. Which he foreseeing, with his Son, the Earl,
Forsook the City; and by secret ways
As you give out, and we would gladly have it,
Escaped their fury; though it is more then feared
They fell among the rest: Nor stand you there
To let us only mourn the impious means
By which you got it; but your cruelties since
So far transcend your former bloody ills,
As if compared, they only would appear
Essays of mischief; do not stop your cars,
More are behind yet.

Wool. O repeat them not.
It Is hell to hear them named.

Hub. You should have thought
That hell would be your punishment when you did them.
A Prince in nothing but your Princely lusts
And boundless rapines.

Wool. No more, I beseech you.


Hub. Who was the Lord of house or land that stood
Within the p^ospect of your covetous eye?

Wool. You are in this to me a greater Tyrant
Then ere I was to any.

Hub. I end thus
The general grief, now to my private wrong,
The loss of Gerrards daughter Iaqueline,
The hoped for partner of my lawful bed,
Your cruelty has frighted from mine arms,
And her I now was wandering to recover.
Think you that I had reason now to leave you,
When y^u are grown so justly odious,
That even my stay here,, with your grace and ^^vour,
Makes my life irksome? here surely take it,
And do me b^t this fruit of al^ your friendship,
That I may dye by you, and not your hangman.

Wool O Hubert, these your words and reasons have
As well drawn drops of blood from my grieved heart,
As these tears from mine eyes;
Despise them not;
By all that is sacred I am serious, Hubert,
You now have made me sensible what ^uries,
Whips, hangmen, and tormentors a bad man
Does ever bear about him: let the good
That you this day have done, be ever numbered,
The first of your best actions;
Can you think
Where Florez is, or Gerrard or your love,
Or any else, or all that are p^oscrib'^?
I will resign what I usu^p, or have
Unjustly forced; the days I have to live
Are too too few to make them satisfaction
With any penitence; yet I vow to practice
All of a man^

Hub. O that your heart and tongue
Did not now differ!

Wool. By my griefs they do not;
Take the good pains to search them out; it is worth it;
You have made clean a Leper, trust me you have,
And made me once more fit for the society,
I h^pe, of good men.

Hub. Sir, do not abuse
My aptness to believe.

Wool. Suspect not you
A faith that is built upon so true a sorrow,
Make your own safeties; ask them all the ties
Humanity can give; H^mskirick too shall
Along with you to this so wished disc^very,
And in my name profess all that you promise;
And I will give you this help ro't; I have
Of late received certain intelligence
That some of them are in or about Bruges
To be found out; which I did then interpret
The cause of that Towns standing out against me,
But now am glad it may direct your purpose
Of giving them their safety, and me peace.

Hub. Be constant to your goodness, and you have it. Exit.


Scaena Secunda.
Enter three Merchants. 1 Mer. It Is much that you deliver of this Goswin.


2. Mer. But short of what I could; yet have the Country
Confirmed it true, and by a general oath,
And not a man hazard his credit in it^
H^b^ars himself with such a confidence
As if he were ^^e mast^r of the Sea;
And not a wind upon the Saylors compass,
But from one part or other was his Factor?
To bring him i^ the b^s^ commodities
Merchant e're ventured for.

1. Mer. It Is strange.


2. Mer. And yet
This does in him deserve the least of wonder,
Compared with other his peculi^r fashions,
Which all admire: he is young, and rich, at least
Thus far reputed so, that since he lived
In Bruges, there was never brought to harbor
So rich a Bottom but his bill would pass
Unquestioned for her lading.

3 Mer. Y^^ he still
Continues a good man.

2 Mer. So good, that but
To doubt him would be held an injury
Or rather malice, with the best that traffic;
But this is nothing, a great stock, and fortune
Crowning his judgment in his u^dertakings,
May keep him upright that way: But that wealth
Should want the power to make him dote on it,
Or youth teach him to wrong it, best commends
His constant temper; for his outward habit
It Is suitable to his present course of life:
His table furnished well, but not with dainties.
That please the appet^^e only for their rareness,
Or the dear p^ice: no^ given to wine or women
Beyond hi^ health, ^r warrant of a man,
I mean a good one; and so loves his state
He will no^ hazard it at play; nor lend
Upon the assurance ^f a well pen^'d Letter,
Although a challenge second the denial,
From such as make the opinion of their valor
Their means of ^eeding.

1 Mer. These are ways to thrive,
And the means not cursed

2 Mer. What follows this,
Makes many (...) with him, in their wishes,
For his prosperity: for when desert
Or reason leads him to be liberal,
His noble mind and ready hand contend
Which can add most to his free courtesies,
Or in their worth, or speed to make them so.
Is there a virgin of good fame wan^s dowre?
He is a father to her; or a Soldier
That in his Countries ser^ice, from the war
Has brought him only scars and want? his house
Receives him, and relieves him with that care
As if what he possessed had been laid up
For such good uses, and he steward of it.
But I should l^se my self to sp^ak him further
And stale in my relation, the much good
You may b^ witn^ss of, if your remove
From Bruges be not speedy.

1 Mer. This report
I do assure you will not hasten it;
Nor would I wish a better man to deal with
For what I am to part wi^h.

3 Mer. Never doubt it;
He is your man and ours* only I wish
His too much forwardness to embrace all bargains.
Suck him not in the end.

2 Mer. Have better hopes;
For my part I am confident: here he comes.

Enter F^orez and the fourth Merchant. Flor. I take it at your own rates, your
wine of Cyprus;
But for your Candy sugars, they have met
With such soul wea^her, and are prized so high
I cannot s^ve in them.

4 Mer. I am unwilling
To seek another Chap-man; make me offer
Of something near my price, that may assure me
Y^u can deal for them.

Flor. I both can; and will,
But not with too much loss; your bill of lading
Speaks of two hundred chefts, valued by you
At thirty thousand g^^ders: I will have them*
At twenty eight; so, in the payment of
Three thousand sterling, you fall only in
Two hundred pound.

4 Mer. You know they are so cheap --


Flor. Why look you, I Will deal fair^y, there is in pr^son
And at your suit, a Pirate, but unable
To make you satisfaction, and p^st hope
To live a week, if you should prosecute
What you can prove against him; set him free,
And you shall have your money to a stiver,
And present payment.

4 Mar. This is above wonder,
A Merchant of your rank, that have at sea
So many Bottoms in the danger of
These water-the^ves should be a means to save them,
It more importing you for your own s^fety,
To be at charge to s^^ur the sea of them,
Then stay the sw^rd of Justice, that is ready
To fall on one so conscious of his guilt
That he dares not de^y it.

Flo. Y^u mistake me,
If you think I would ch^rish in this Captain
The w^^ng he did to you or any man,
I was l^tely with him, (^aving first from others
True t^stimony be^n a^ured, a man
O more desert never put from the shore.)
I read his l^tters of Mart from this State granted,
F^r the r^covery of such losses as
He ^ad received in Spain; 'twas that he aimed at,
Not at three tuns of wine, biscuit, or beef,
Which his nec^ssity made him take from you.
If he had pi^lag'd you near, or sunk your ship,
Or thrown your men o're-boord, then he deserved
The Laws ex^reamest rigor: But since want
Of what he could not live without, compelled him
To that he did, (which yet our State calls death)
I pity his misfortune; and to work you
To some compassion of them, I come up
To your own price: save him, the goods are mine;
If not, seek else where, I Will not deal for them.

4 Mer. Well Sir, for your love I will once be lead
To change my purpose.

Flo. For your prof^ rather.


4 Mer. I'^e p^esently make means for his discharge,
Till when I leave you.

2 Mer. What do you think of this?


1 Mer. As of a deed of ^oble pity, guided
By a strong judgment.

2 Mer. Save you Master Goswin.


Flor. Good day to all.


2 Mer. We bring you the refusal
Of more Commodities.

Flor. Are you the owners
Of the Ship that last night put into the Harbor?

1 Mer. Both of the Ship and lading.


Flor. What Is the fraught?


1 Mer. Indico, Quitchincel, choice Chyna st^^ff^.


3 Mer And cloth of Gold brought from Cam^all.


Flor. R^ch lading,
For which I were your chapman, but I am
Alr^ady out of cash.

1 Mer. I Will give you day
For the moiety of all.

Flor. How long?


3 Mer. S^x months.


Flor. It Is a fair ^ff^r, which (if we agree
About the prizes) I with thanks accept of,
And will make p^esent payment of the ^est;
Some two hou^s hence I Will come aboard

1 Mer. The Gu^ner shall speak you welcome.


Flor. I Will not fail.


3 Mer. Good morrow. Exit. Mer.


Flor. Heaven grant my Ships a safe return before
The day of this great payment, as they are.
Expected three months sooner, and my credit
Stands good with all the wo^ld.

Enter Gerrard. Ger. Bless my good Master;
The prayers of your poor Beads-man ever shall
Be sent up for you.

Flor. God 'a mercy Clause,
There Is something to put thee in mind hereafter
To think of me.

Ger. May he that gave it you
Reward you for it, with encr^ase, good Master.

Flo. I thrive the better for thy prayers.


Ger. I hope so.
This three years have I sed upon your bounties,
And by the fire of your blessed charity warmed me,
And yet, good Master, pard^n me, that must,
Though I have now r^ceiv'd your alms; presume
To make on suit more to you.

Flor. What is it Clause?


Ger Yet do not think me impudent I beseech you,
Since hitherto your charity has prevented
My begging your relief; it is not for money
Nor clothes (good Maste^) but your good word for me.

Flo. That thou shall have, Clause, for I think thee honest.


Ger. To morrow then (dear M^ster) take the trouble
Of walking early unto Beggars Bush,
And as you see me among others (Brethren
In my affliction) when you are demanded
Which you like best among us, point out me,
And then pass by, as if you knew me not.

Flo. But what will that advantage thee?


Ger. O much, Sir;
'Twill give me the pre-eminence of the rest,
Make me a King among 'em, and protect me
From all ab^^e such as are stronge^ might
Offer my ag^; Sir, at your better leizure
I will inform you further of the good
It may do to me.

Flo. 'Troth thou make me wonder;
Have you a King and Commonwealth among you?

Ger. We have, and there are S^ates are governed worse.


Flo. Ambition among beggars?


Ger. Many great ones
Would part with half their 'states to have the place
And credit to beg in the first file, Master:
But shall I be so much bound to your furtherance
In my petition?

F^or. That thou sh^^t not miss of,
Nor any worldly care make me forget it;
I will be early there.

Ger. Heav^n bless my Master. Exeunt.


Actus Secund^s,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Higgen, Ferret, Prig, Clause, Iaculine, Snap, Gy^kes, and other Beggars.
Hig. COme P^i^ces of the ragged regime^^,
You of the blood, Prig my most upright Lord,
And these (what name or title e're they bear)
Iarkman, or Patrico, Cranke, or Claperdudgeon,
Frat^r or Abram man; I speak to all
That st^nd in fair E^^ction for the title
Of King of Beggars, with the command adj^yning;
Higgen, your Orator in this Inter-regnum,
That whilome was your Dommerer; does beseech you.
All to stand fair, and put your selves in rank,
That the f^^st comer may at his first view
Make a free choice, to say up the question.

Fer. Pr. It Is done Lord Higgen.


Hig. Thanks ^o Prince Prig, Prince Ferret.


Fer. Well, pray my Masters all Ferret be chosen;
You Are like to have a merciful mild Prince of me.

Prig. A very tyrant, I, an arrant tyrant,
If e're I come to reign; therefore look to it,
Except you do provide me hum enough,
And Lour to bouze with: I must have my Capons
And Turkeyes brought me in, with my gre^n Geese,
And ducklings in the season; fine fat chickens;
O^ if you chance where an eye of tame Phesants
O^ Partridges are kept, see they be mine,
Or straight I seize on all your privilege,
Places, revenues, offices, as forfeit;
Call in your crutches, wooden legs, fal^e bellies,
Forced eyes and teeth, with your dead arms, nor leave you
A durty clout to beg with of your heads,
Or an old rag with Butter, Frankincense,
Brimstone and Roz^n, birdlime, blood, and cream,
To make you an old sore; not so much soap
As you may f^me with i'^h' fa^ling-sickness;
The very bag you bea^, and the brown dish
Shall be escheated. Al^ your dainti^st dells* too
I will deflowr, and take your dearest Doxy^s
From your warm sides; and then some one cold night
I Will watch you what old barn you go to roost in,
And there I Will smother you all i'^h' musty hay.

Hig. This is tyrant-like indeed: But what would Gynkes
Or Clause be here, if either of them should reign?

Ger. Best ask an ass, if he were made a Cammel,
What he would be^ or a dog, and he were a Lion.

Gynks. I care not what you are, Sirs, I shall be
A beggar, still, I am sure, find my self there.

Enter Florez. Snap. O here a Judge comes.


Hig. Cry a Judge, a Judge.


Flo. What ail you, Sirs? what means this outcry?


Hig. Master,
A sort of poor souls met: Gods fools, good Master,
Have had some little variance amongst our selves
Who should be honestest of us, and which lives
Uprightest in his call: Now, 'cause we thought
We never should gree on it our selves, because
Indeed it is hard to say; we all dissolved to put it
To whom that should come next, and that is you* Mastership,
Who, I hope, will te^mine it as your mind serv^s you,
Right, and no otherwise we ask it: which,
Which does your Worship think is he? sweet M^ster,
Look ^ver us all, and tell us; we are seven of us,
Like to the seven wise Masters, or the Planets,

Flo. I should judge this man with the grave beard,
And i^ he be not --

Ger. Bless you, good Master, bless you.


Flo. I would he were. There Is something too, amongst you,
To keep you all honest. Exit.

Snap. King of heaven go with you.


Omn. Now good reward him,
May he never want it, to comfort still the poor in a good hour.

Fer. What is it? see: Snap has got it.


Snap. A good crown, marry.


Prig. A crown of gold.


Fer. For our new King: good luck.


Gynks. To the common treasury with it; if it be gold
Thither it must.

Prig. Spoke like a Patriot, Ferret. --
King Clause, I bid God save thee first, first, Clause,
After this golden token of a crown;
Where Is Orator Higgen, with his gratulating speech now,
In all our names?

Fer. Here he is pumping for it.


Gyn. H'has c^ugh'd the second time, it is but once more,
And then it comes.

Fer. So, out with all: expect now --


Hig. Thou that ar^ chosen, venerabl^ Clause,
Our King and Sovereign, Monarch of the Maunders.
Thus we throw up our N^b-c^eats first for joy,
And then our filches* last we clap our fambles,
Three subject signs, we do it without envy:
For who is he here did not wish thee chosen,
Now thou art chosen? ask 'em: all will say ^o,
Nay swea^'t; '^is for the King; but let that pass.
When last in conference at the bouzing ken
This other day, we sat about our dead Prince
Of famous memory, (rest go with his rags:)
And that I saw thee at the tables end
Rise moved, and gravely leaning on one Crutch,
Lift the other like a Scepter at my head,
I then presaged thou shortly would be King,
And now thou art so: but what need presage,
To us, that might have read it in thy beard,
As well as he that chose thee? by that beard
Thou were found out, and marked for Sovereignty.
O happy beard! but happier Prince, whose beard
Was ^o remarked as marked out our Prince,
Not bating us a hair. L^ng may it grow,
And thick, and fair, that who lives under it
May live as safe as under Beggars Bush,
Of which this is the thing, that bu^^^ ^ype.

Omn. Excellen^, ^xc^ll^nt O (...) good Higgen;
Give him leave to s^it; the ^in, well ^p^ken Hi^gen.

Hig ^is is the beard, the b^sh, or b^shyb^ar^,
Under whose ^^ld and silver ^^ign 'twas said
So many Ages since we all should smile
On impositions, taxes, grievances,
Knots in a State, and whips unto a Subject,
Lie lurking in this beard, but all hemmed out:
If now the beard be such, what is the Prince
That owes the beard? a father; no, a grandfather;
Nay, the great-grandfather of you his people.
He will not force away your hens, your bacon,
When you have vent^r'd hard for it, nor take from you
The fattest of your puddings; under him
Each man shall eat his own stolen eggs and butter,
In his own shade, or sunshine, and enjoy
His own dear De^l, Doxy, or Mort, at night,
In his own straw, with his own shirt, or sheer,
That he has filtch'd that day, I, and possess
What he can pu^chase, back or belly cheats
To his own pr^p; he will have no purveyors
For Pigs and Poultry.

Ger. That we must have my learned Orator,
It is our will, and every man to keep
In his own path and circuit.

Hig. Do you hear?
You must hereafter maund on your own pads he says.

Ger. And what they get there is their own, besides
To give good words.

Hig. Do you mark? to cut been whids,
That is the second Law.

Ger. And keep afoot
The humble and the common phrase of begging,
Lest me^ discover us.

Hig. Yes, and cry some^imes,
To move compassion: Sir, there is a table
That does c^mmand all these things, and enjoy^s 'em
Be perfect in their crutches, their feigned p^aisters
And their true pass-ports, with the ways to stammer,
And to be dumb, and dea^, and blind, and lame;
Th^re all ^he halting paces are set down
In The learned language.

Ger. Thither I refer them;
Those you at leisure shall inte^pret to them;
We love no heaps of Laws where few will serve

Omn. O gracious Prince, 'save, 'save the good King Clause.


Hig. A Song to crown him.


Fer. S^t a Sentinel out first.


Sn. The word?


Hig A Cove comes, and fumbumbis to it. -- Strike.


The Song.
CAst our caps and cares away, this is beggars Holy-^ay;
At the Crowning of our King, thus we ever dance and sing:
In the world look out and see, where so happy a Prince as he?
Where the Nation live so free, and so merry as do we?
Be it peace, or be it war* here at liberty we are,
And enjoy our ease and rest; to the field we are not pressed;
Nor are called into the Town, to be troubled with the Gown.
Hang all Offices we cry, an^ the Magistrate to^, by:
When the sub^i^ie's increast we are not a penny ceast:
Nor will any go to law with the B^g^ar for a straw.
All which happiness he brags, he does ow^ unto his rags.
Enter Snap, Hubert, Hemskirk. Snap. A Cove: Fumbumbis.


Prig. To your postures; arm.


Hub. Yonder Is the Town* I see it.


Hemsk. There Is our danger
Indeed before us, if our shaddows save not.

Hig. Bless your good Worships.


Fer. One small piece of mon^y


Prig. Amongst us all poor wretches.


Ger. Blind and lame.


Gynks. For his s^ke that gives all.


Hig. P^^iful Worships.


Snap. One little ^oyt.


Enter Iaculine. Iac. King, by you leave, where are you?


Ger. To buy a little bread,

Hig. To feed so many
Mouths as will ever pray for you.

Prig. Here be seven of us.


Hig. Seven good Master, O remember seven, Seven b^^ssings.


Fer. Remember, gentle Worship.


Hig. Against seven deadly sins,

Prig. And seven sleepers.


Hig. I^ they be h^^d of heart, and will give nothing. --
Alas, we had not a charity this three days.

Hub. There Is amongst you all?


Fer. Heaven reward you.


Prig. Lord reward you.


Hig. The Prince of pity bless thee.


Hub. Do I see? or is it my fancy that would have it so?
Ha? it is her face: come hither maid,

Iac. What have you,
Bells for my squirrel? I have given Bun meat;
You do not love me, do you? catch me a butte^fly,
And I Will love you again; when? can you tell?
Peace, we go a birding: I shall have a fine thing.

Hub. Her voice too says the same; but for my head
I would not that her manners were so changed:
Hear me thou honest fellow; what is this maiden
That lives amongst you here?

Gyn. Ao, ao, ao, ao.


Hub. How? nothing but signs?


Gyn. Ao, ao, ao, ao.


Hub. It Is strange;
I would fain have it her, but not her thus.

Hig. He is de-de-de-de-de-de-deaf, and du-du-dude-dumb Sir.


Hub. 'Slid they did all speak plain even now methought;
Do thou know this same maid?

Sn. Why-why-why-why-which, gu-gu-gu-gu Gods fool,
She was bo-bo-bo-bo-b^rn at the barn yonder,
By be-be-b^-be-B^ggars Bush^bo bo-Bush;
Her name is My-my-my-my-my-match, so was her mo-mo-mo-mothers too-too.

Hub. I understand no word she says; how long
Has she been here?

Sn. L^-lo-long enough to be ni-ni nigled, and she have go-go-go-good luck.


Hub. I must be better informed then by this way.
Here was another face too that I marked,
O the old man's: but they are vanished all
Most suddenly; I will come here again:
O* that I were so happy as to find it,
What I yet hope it is put on.

Him. What mean you, Sir,
To stay there with that stammerer?

Hub. Farewell friend; --
It will be worth return to search: Come,
Protect us our disguise now; prithee Hemskirk
If we b^ taken, ^ow do thou imagine
This Town will use us, that has ^tood so long
Out against Woolfort?

Hem. Even to hang us forth
Upon their walls a sunning, to make Crows meat;
If I were no^ assured of the Burgoma^ter,
And had a pretty scuce to ^ee a niece there,
I should scarce venture.

Hub. Come, it is now too late
To look back at the p^rts: good luck, and enter. Exeunt.

Scaena Secunda.
Enter Florez. Flo. Still blowst thou there? and from all other parts,
Do all my Agents sleep, that nothing comes?
There Is a conspiracy of winds and servants,
If not of Elements, to have me break.
What should I think, unless the Seas and sands
Had swallowed up my ships? or fire had spoiled
My warehouses? or death devoured my Factors?
I must have had some ^eturns.

Enter Merchants. 1 Mer. 'Save you Sir.


Flo. 'Save you.


1 Mer. No news yet of your Ships?


Flo. Not any yet Sir.


1 Mer. It Is strange.


Fl. It Is true Sir* what a voice was here now?
This was one passing be^l; a thou^and ravens
Sung in that man now, to presage my ruin.

2 Mer. Goswin, good day, these w^^ds are very constant.


Flo They are so Sir. to hurt --


2 Mer. Have you had no Letters
Lately from England, nor from Denmark?

Flo. Neither.


2 Mer. This wind b^ings them; nor no news over land,
Through Spain, from the Straights?

Flo. Not any.


2 Mer. I am sorry, Sir.


Flo. They ^alk me down; and as it is said of Vultures,
They scent a field sought, and do smell the carcasses
B^ many hundred miles: So do these my wracks
At greater distances: why, thy will heaven
Come on and be: yet if thou please, preserve me
But in mine own adventure here at home,
Of my chaste love* to keep me worthy of her,
It shall be put in scale against all i^l fortunes:
I am not broken yet, nor should I f^ll,
Me thinks, with less then that that ruins all.

Exit. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Van-dunck, Hubert, Hemskirck, and Margaret, Boors. Van. Captain, you are
welcome; so is this your f^iend
Most saf^ly welcome; though our Town stand out
Against your Master, you shall find good quarter;
The truth is, we not love him.

Meg. some wine;
Let Us ta^k a little treason, if we can
Talk treason against the Traitors; by your leave Gentlemen,
We here in Bruges think he does usurp,
And therefore I am bold with him.

Hub. Sir, your boldness
Happily become, your mouth, but not our ears,
While we are his servants; And as we come here
Not to ask questions, walk forth on your wa^ls,
Visi* your Courts of Guard, view your munition,
Ask of your corn-provisions, nor i^quire
Into the least, as spies upon your strengths;
So let us entr^^t we may receive from you
Nothing in passage or discourse, but what
We may with gladness and our honesties hear,
And that shall ^ealou^ welcome.

Van. G^od; let us drink then;
Mage, fill out; I keep mine own pearl still Captain,

Mar. I hang fast man.


Hem. Old Jewels commend their keeper, Sir


Van. Here Is to you with a heart, my Captains friend,
With a good heart; and if this make us speak
Bold words anon, it is all under the R^se
Forgotten: drown all memory when we drink.

Hub. It Is freely sp^ken, noble Burgomaster,
I Will do you ^ight.

Hem. Nay, Sir, mine heir Vandun^k
Is a true S^ates man.

Van. Fill my Captains cup there; O that your M^ster Woolfort
Had been an honest man!

Hub. Sir?


Van. Under the Rose.


Him. Her^'s to you Marget.


Mar. Welcome, welcome Captain.


Van. Well said my pearl still.


Hem. And how does my Niece?
Almost a woman, I think? This friend of mine
I drew alon^ with me through so much hazard,
Only to see her; she was my err^nd.

Van. I, a kind Uncle you are, (fill him his glass)
That in seven years could not find leisure. --

Hem. No,
It Is not so much.

Van. I Will bate you never an hour on it:
It was before the Brabander 'gan his war,
For moonshine, in the water there, his daughter
That never was lost; yet you could not fi^de time
To see a Kinswoman: but she is worth the seeing, Sir*
Now you are (...), you ask if she were a woman?
She is a woman* Sir; fetch her forth Marget.
Exit Marg. And a fine woman, and has suitors.

Hem. How*
What suitors are they?

Van. Batchelors; young Burgers:
And one a gallant, the young Prince of Merchants
We call him here in Bruges.

Hem. How? ^ Merchant?
I thought Van-dunck, you had understood me better,
And my Niece too, so trusted to you by me,
T^an to admit of such in name of suitors.

Van. Such? he is such a such, as were she mine,
I Would give him thirty thousand Crowns with her.

Hem. But the same things, Sir, fit not you and me. Exit.


Va^. Why, give's some wine then; this will fit us all:
Here Is to you still, my Captains friend; all out:
And sti^l, would Woolfort were an honest man,
Under the Rose I speak it: But this M^rchant
I, a brave boy; he lives so in the Town here,
We know not what to think on him; At some times
We fea^ he will b^ bankrup^, he does st^etch
T^nter his credit so; embraces all,
And to it, the winds have be^n contrary long:
But then if he should ^ave a^l his returns,
We t^ink he would be a King, and a^ half sure (...).
Your (...) a Tr^ytor, for all this
Under the Ro^e; (...) to you; and usurps
The Ea^ldom from a b^tter man.

Hub. I marry Sir,
Where is that ^^an?

Van. Nay soft* and I could te^l you,
It Is ten to one I would not: here is my hand;
I love not Woolfort; sit you still with that:
Here comes my Cap^ain again, and his fine N^^ce;
And th^re's my Merchant, view him w^ll; fil^ wine here.

Ent^r Hemskirk Bertha, and Florez. Hem. You must not only know me for your
Unc^e,
N^w, but obey me* you go cast your self
Away upon a dunghill here? a Merchant?
A petty fellow? one that makes his trade
With Oaths and perjuries?

Flo What is that you say, Sir?
If it be me you speak of, as your eye
Seems to direct, I wish you would speak to me, Sir.

Hem. Sir, I do say she is no merchandise;
Will that suffice you?

Flo. Me^chandise; good Sir!
Though ye be Kinsman to her, take no leave thence
To use me with contempt: I ever thought
Your Niece above all price.

Hem And do so still* Sir;
I assure you her ra^e's at more then you are worth.

Flo. Y^u do not know what a Gentleman's worth, Sir,
Nor can you value him.

Hub. Well said Merchant.


Van. N^y,
Let him al^ne, and ply your ^^tter.

Hem. A Gentleman?
What^ of the wooll-pack? or the sugar-chest?
Or lists of Velvet? which is it? pound or yard,
You vent your C^ntry by?

Hub. O Hem^kirk, fie.


Van. Com^ do not mind 'em; drink, he is (...) Woolfort,
Cap^ain, I advise you.

Hem. Al^s, my pretty man,
I thi^k'^ be ang^y, by its look: Come hither,
Turn this wa^ a little: If it were the blood
O Char^cmain, ^s't may (for oug^t I know)
B^ some go^d Botchers issue he ^in Bruges.

Flo. H^w?


Hem. N^^, I'^e not certain of that; of this I am,
If it ^nce buy and sell, its gentry is gon^.

Flo. H^, ^a!


Hem. Y^u are angry though ye laugh.


Flo. N^, now it is pity
O^ you^ poor argu^ent Do not you the Lords
O^ land (if you be any) sell the grass,
The corn, the straw, the milk, the cheese?

Van. And butter;
Remember butter; do not leave ou^ butter.

Flo. The B^^fs and Muttons that your grounds are stored wi^h?
Swin^, with the very mast, b^side the woods?

Hem. No, for these sordid uses we have Tenan^s,
Or else ou^ B^yliffs.

Flo. Have not we, Sir, chap-men,
And Factors then, to answer these? your error
Fetch*c from the Heralds A B C and said over
With your Court-faces, once an hour, shall never
Make me mistake my self. Do not your Lawyers
Se^l all their practice, as your Priests their Prayers?
What is not bought and sold? The company
That you had last, what had you for it, in faith?

Hem. You now grow saucy.


Flo. Sure I have been bred
Still with my honest liberty, and must use it.

Hem. Upon your equals then,

Flo. Sir, he that will.
Provoke me first, makes himself my equal.

Hem. Do you hear? no more.


Flo. Yes Sir, this little, I pray you,
And't shall be aside, then after as you please.
You appear the Uncle, Sir, ^o her I love
More then mine eyes; and I have heard your scorns,
With so much scoffing, and so much shame,
As each st^ive which is greater: but be^ieve me,
I sucked not in this patience with my milk.
Do not presume, because you see me young,
Or cast des^ights on my profession,
For the civility and tameness of it.
A good man bears a contumely worse
Than he would do an injury. Proceed not
To my ^ff^nce: wrong is not still succesful,
Indeed it is not: I would approach your Kinswoman
With all respect done to your self and her.

Hem. A ^ay companion; handling her? take that.


Flo. Nay I do love no blows, Sir, there is exchange.


Hub. Hold, Sir.


Mar. O murder.


Ber. He^p, my Goswin.


Mar. Man.


Van. Let 'em alone; my life for one*


Flo. Nay come
(...) you have will.

Hub None to offend you; I Sir?


Flo. He that had thank himself: not hand her? yes Sir.
And clasp her, and embrace her; and (would she
Now go with me) bear her through all her race,
Her Father, Brethren, and her Uncles, armed,
And all their Nephews, though they stood a wood
Of Pikes, and wall of Cannon: Kiss me Gertrude;
Quake no^, but kiss me.

Van. Kiss him, girl, I bid you:
My Merchant royal, fear no Uncles: hang 'em,
Hang up all Uncles: Are we not in Bruges?
Under the Rose here?

Flo. In this cirle, Love,
Thou art as safe as in a Tower of brass;
Let such as do wrong, fear.

Van. I, that is good,
Let Woolfort ^ook to that.

Flo. Sir, here she sta^ds,
Your Niece, and my Beloved. One of these titles
She must apply to; if unto the last,
Not all the anger can be sent unto her
In frown, or voice, or other art, shall force her,
Had Hercules a hand in it: Come, my Joy,
Say thou art mine aloud, Love, and profess it.

Van. Do; and I drink to it.


F^^. Prethe^ say so, Love.


Ber. 'Twould take away the honor from my blushes:
Do not play the Tyrant, sweet; they speak it.

Hem. I thank you Niece.


Flo. Sir, thank (...) for your life,
And fetch your sword within.

Hem. You insult too much
With your good fortune, Sir. E^it Florez.

Hub. A brave clear spirit:
Hemskirk you were to blame; a civil habit
Often covers a good man; and you may meet
In person of a Merchant, with a soul
As resolute, and free, and always worthy,
As else in any file of mankind: pray you,
What meant you so to flight him?

Hem. It Is done now,
Ask no more of it, I must suffer.

Exit Hemskirk. Hub. This
Is still the punishment of rashness, sorrow;
Well, I must to the woods, for nothing here
Will be got out; there I may chance to learn
Somewhat to help my enquiries further.

Van. Ha?
A looking-glass.

Hub. How now, brave Burgomaster?


Van. I love no Woolforts, and my name's Van-dunck.


Hub. Van-drunk it is rather: Come, go sleep within.


Van. Earl Florez is right heir, and this same Woolfort,
Under the Rose I speak it, --

Hub. Very hardly.


Van. Usurps: and a rank Traitor as ever breathed;
And all that do uphold him. Let me go,
No man shall hold me, that upholds him;
Do you uphold him?

Hub. No.


Van. Then hold me up. Exeunt.


Enter Florez and Hemskirk. Hem. Sir, I presume you have a sword of your own,
That can so handle another.

Flo. Faith you may, Sir.


Hem. And ye have made me have so much better thoughts of you,
As I am bound to call you forth.

Flo. For what, Sir?


Hem. To the repairing of mine honor and hurt here,

Flo. Express your way.


Hem. By fight, and speedily.


Flo. You have your will: Require you any more?


Hem. That you be secret, and come single,

Flo I will.


Hem. As you are the Gentleman you would be thought?


Flo. Without the Conjuration, and I Will bring
Only my sword, which I will fit to yours,
I Will take his length within.

Hem. Your place now, Sir?


Flo. By the sand-hills.


Hem. Sir, nearer to the woods,
If you thought so, were fitter.

Flo. There then.


Hem. Good.
Your time?

Flo. 'Twixt seven and eight.


Hem. You Will give me, Sir,
Cause to report you worthy of my Niece,
If you come like your promise.

Flo. If I do not,
Let no man think to call me unworthy first,
I Will do'^ my self, and justly wish to want her.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius,
Scaena Prima.
Enter three or four Boors. 1 B. COme, English Beer hostess, English Beer by
the belly.


2 B. Start Beer boy, stout and strong B^er* so, sit down lads,
And drink me upsey- Du^ch;
Frolic, and fear not.

Enter Hig. like a Sow-gelder, singing. Hig. Have ye any work for the
Sow-gelder, boa?
My horn goes too high, too low, too high, too low.
Have ye any Pigs, Calves, or Colts,
Have ye any lambs in your holts,
To cut for the stone?
Here comes a cunning one.
Have ye any branches to spade;
Or e're a fair maid
That would he a Nun,
Come kiss me, it is done.
Hark how my merry horn does blow,
Too high, too low, too high, too low.

1 B. O excellent! two pence a piece boys, two pence a piece.
Give the boys some drink there. Piper wet your whistle.
Can tell me a way now, how to cut off my wives Concvpiscence?

Hig. I Will sing ye a Song for it.


The SONG.
TAke her, and hug her,
And turn her and tug her;
And turn her again boy, again,
Then if she mumble,
Or if her tail tumble,
Kiss her a^ain boy* amain.
Do thy endeavor,
To take off her fever,
Then her disease no longor will reign.
If nothing will serve her,
Then thus to preserve her,
Swinge her amain ^oy, amain.
Give her cold jelly
To make up her belly,
And once a day swinge her again.
If she stand all these pains
Then knock out her brains,
Her disease no longer will reign.
1. Bo. Mo^e excellent, more excellent, sweet Sow-gelder,.


2. Po. Threepence a piece, three pence a piece.


Hig. Will you hear a Song how the Devil was gelded?


3. Bo. I, I, let us hear the Devil roar, Sow-gelder.


1. Bo. Groats a piece, groats a piece, groats a piece.


Enter Prig. and Ferret. Prig. Will ye see any feats of act^vity,
Some ^eight of hand, leigerdemain? hey pass,
Presto, be gone there?

2. Bo. Sit down Jugler.


Prig. S^rra^, play you your art w^ll^s draw near piper:
Look you my honest friends, you s^e my hand;
Plain dealing is no Devil: lend me some money;
Twelve-pence a piece will serve.

1. 2. B. Ther^, there,

Prig. I thank you,
Thank ye heartily: when shall I pay ye?

All B. Ha, ha, ha, by 'th mas^e this was a fine trick.


Prig A merry sl^ight toy^t but now I Will show your worships
A trick indeed,

Hig M^^k him well now my Masters.


Prig. Here are three balls,
These balls shall be three bullets,
One, two, and three t ascentibus, malentibus,
Presto, be gone: they are van^sh'd; fair play Gentlemen,
Now these three, like three bullets, from your three noses
Will I pluck pr^sently: fear not, no harm boys,
Titere, tu patule.

1. B. Oh, oh, oh.


Pri^. Recubans sub fermine fagi.


2. B Ye pull too hard; ye pull too hard.


Prig Stand fair then:
Silvestram trim tram.

3 B. Hold, hold, hold.


Prig. Come al^st bullets three* with a whim-wham:
Have ye their moneys?

Hig. Yes, yes.


1. B. Oh rare Jugler.


2. C. Oh admirable Jugler,

Prig. O^e trick more yet;
Hey, come aloft: sa, sa, flim, flum, taradumbis?
East, west, north, south, now fly like Ia^k with a oumbis.
Now all your money's gone: pray search your pockets.

1. B. Humb.

2. B. He,

3. B. The Devil a penny'^ here,

Prig. T^is was a rare trick.


1. B. But 'twould be a far rarer t^ restore it.


Prig. I Will do ye that too: look upon me ^arnestly,
And move not any ways your eyes from this place,
This button here: pow, whir, whiss, shake your pockets.

1. B. B^'th m^sse '^is here again boy.


Prig. R^st ye ^^rry;
My first tr^ck has paid me.

All B. I, take i^, take it,
And take some drink, too.

Prig. Not a drop now I thank you;
Away, we are discove^'d else.

Exit. Enter Gerrard like a blind Aquavitae man, and a boy singing the SONG.
BRing out your Cony-skins, fair maids to me,
And hold 'em fair, that I may see;
Gray* black, and blew: for your smaller skins,
I Will give ye loo^ing-glasses, pins.
And for your whole Coney, here is ready ready money.
Come gent^e Jone, do thou begin,
With thy black, black, black Cony skin.
And Mary then, and Jane will follow,
With their silver-hair'd skins, and their yellow
The white Cony-skin, I will not lay by,
For though it be faint, it is fair to the eye,
The gray it is warm but yet for my money,
Give me the bonny, bonny black Coney.
Come away fair maids, put your ware away.
Cony-skins, Cony-skins, have ye any Cony-skins,
I have fine brace-lets, and sine silver pins.
Ger. Buy any brand-wine, buy any brand-wine?


Boy Have ye any Cony-skins.


2. B. My fine Canary-bird, there is a Cake for thy worship,

1. B. Come, fill, fill, fill suddenly: le^'s see Sir,
What Is ^his?

Ger. A penny Sir.


1. B. Fill till't be sixpence,
And there is my pig.

Boy. This is a counter Sir.


1. B. A counter? stay ye, what are these then?
O execrable Jugle^! O damned Jugler!
Look in your hose, hoa: this comes of looking forward.

3. B. Devil a Dunkirk! what a rogue's this Jugler,
This hey pass, repass, h'as repast us sweetly.

2. B. Do ye call these tricks:

Enter Higgen. Hig. Have ye any ends of gold or silver.


2. B. This fellow comes to mock us; gold or silver? cry copper.


1. B. Yes my good friend.
We have e'ne an end of all we have.

Hig. 'Ts well Sir,
You have the less to care for: gold and silver,

Exit. Enter Prig. Pr^ Have ye any old cloakes to sell, have ye any old cloaks
to sell. Exit.


1. B. Cloakes? look about ye boys: mine is gone.


3. B A -- juggle 'em?
-- of their Presto^s: mine is gone too.

3. B. Here Is mine yet.


1. B. Come, come, let us drink then: more brand-wine.


Boy Here Sir.


1. B If e're I catch your Sow-gelder, by this hand I Will strip him;
Were ever fools so ferkt? we have two clokes yet,
And all our caps; the Devil take the flincher.

All B. Yaw, yaw, yaw, yaw.


Enter Hemskirk. Hem. Good do'n my honest fellows,
You are merry here I see.

3. B. 'Ti^ all we have l^ft Sir.


Hem. What have thou! Aqua-vitae?


Boy, Yes.


Hem. Fill out then;
And give these honest fellows round.

All b. We thank ye.


Hem. May I speak a word in private to ye?


All b. Yes Sir.


Hem. I have a business for you, honest friends,
If you dare l^nd your help, shall get you crowns.

Ger. H^?
Lead me a little nearer, boy.

1. B. What is it Sir?
If it be any thing to pu^chase money,
Which is our want, command us.

Boors. All, all, all Sir.


Hem. You know ^^e young sp^uce Merchant in Bruges.


2. B Who, Master Goswin?


Hem. That: he owes me money,
And here in town there is no stirring of him.

Ger. Say ye so?


Hem. This day upon a sure appointment,
He meets me mile hence, by the Chase side,
Under the row of Oaks, do you know it?

All b. Yes Sir.


Hem. Give 'em more drink: there if you dare but venture
When I shall give the word to seize upon him,
Here Is twenty pound.

3. Bo. Beware the Jugler.


Hem. If he resist, down with him; have no mercy.


1. Bo. I warrant you: we will hamper him.


Hem. To discharge you,
I have a warrrant here about me.

3. Bo. Here Is our warrant,
This carries fire in the tail.

Hem. Away with me then,
The time draws on,
I must remove so insolent a Suitor,
And if he be so rich, make him pay ransom
Ere he see Bruges towers again: thus wise men
Repair the hurts they take by a disgrace,
And piece the Lions skin with the Foxes case.

Ger. I am glad I have heard this sport yet,

Hem. There Is for thy drink, come pay the house within boys,
And loose no time.

Ger. Away with all our haste too.


Exeunt. Scaena Secunda.
Enter Florez. Flo. NO wind blow fair yet? no return of moneys?
Letters? nor any thing, to hold my hopes up?
Why then it is destined, that I fall, fall miserably,
My credit I was built on, sinking with me.
Thou boisterous North Wind, blowing my mis^ortunes,
And ^rosting all my hopes to cakes of coldness,
Yet stay thy fury: give the gentle South
Yet leave to court those ^ai^es that bring me safety,
And you auspicious fires, bright twins in heaven
Dance on the shrowds: he blows still stubbornly,
And on his boisterous rack rides my sad ruin;
There is no help, there can be now no comfort,
To morrow with the Sunset, sets my credit.
Oh misery! thou curse of man, thou plague,
In the midst of all our st^ength thou strik'st us*
My virtuous love is tossed too, all what I have been,
No more hereafter to be seen then shadow;
To prison now^ well, yet there is this hope left me,
I may sink fairly under this days venture,
And so to morrow's cross'^, and all those curses:
Yet manly I Will invite my fate, base fortune
Shall never say, she has cut my throat in fear.
This is the p^ace his challenge called me to,
And was a happy one at this time for me,
For let me fall before my foe in the field,
And not at bar, before my creditors;
Aa's kept his word: now Sir, your swords tongue only
Loud as you dare, all other language, --

Enter Hemskirk. Hem. Well Sir,
You shall not be long troubled: draw.

Flo. It Is done Sir,
And now have at ye,

Hem. Now

Enter Boores. Flo. Betrayed to Vi^lains?
Slaves, ye shall buy me bravely,
And thou base coward.

Enter Gerrard and beggars. Ger. Now upon 'em bravely,
Conjure 'em soundly boys.

Boores. Hold, hold.


Ger. Lay on still,
Down with that Gentleman rogue, swinge him to sirrup:
Retire Sir, and take breath: follow and take him,
Take all, it is lawful prize.

Boores. We yield.


Ger. Down with 'em
Into the wood, and rifle 'em, tew 'em, swinge 'em,
Knock me their brains into their breeches.

Exeunt. Boores. Hold, hold.


Flo. What th^se men are I know not, nor for what cause
They should thus thrust themselves into my danger,
Can I imagine. But s^re heavens hand was in it;
Nor why this coward knave should deal so basely
To eat me up with slaves: but heaven I thank thee,
I hope thou have reserved me to an end
Fit for thy creature, and worthy of thy honor:
Would all my other dangers here had suffered,
With what a joyful heart should I go home then?
Where now heaven knows, like him that waits his sentence,
Or hears his passing bell; but there is my hope still.

Enter Gerrard. Ger. Blessing upon you Master.


Flo. Thank ye; leave me,
For by my troth I have nothing now to give thee.

Ge. Indeed, I do not ask, si^, only it grieves me
To see you look so sad; now goodness keep ye
From troubles in your mind.

Flo. If I were troubled,
What could thy comfort do? prithee Clause, leave me.

Ger Good master be not angry; for what I say
Is out of true love to ye.

Flo. I know thou love me.


Ger. Good Mr. blame that love then, if I prove so saucy.
To ask ye why ye are sad.

Flo. Most true I am so,
And such a sadness I have got will sink me.

Ger. Heaven shield it, sir,

Flo. Faith, thou must lose thy master.


Ger. I had rather lose my neck sir: would I knew --


Flo. What would the knowledge do thee good, so miserable
Thou can not help thy self? when all my ways
Nor all the friends I have --

Ger. You do not know, sir,
What I can d^^ cures sometimes, for men's cares
Flow, where they least expect 'em.

Flo. I know thou would do,
But farewell Clause and pray for thy poor ^n after.

Ger. I will not leave ye.


Flo. How?


Ger. I dare not leave ye,
And till ye beat me dead, I must not leave ye.
By what ye hold most precious, by heavens goodness,
As your fair youth may prosper, good Sir tell me:
My mind believes yet something's in my power
May ease you of this trouble.

Flo. I will tell thee,
For a hundred thousand crowns upon my credit,
Taken up of Merchants to supply my traffiques,
The winds and weather envying of my fortune,
And no return to help me off, yet sh^wing,
To morrow, Clause, to morrow, which must come
In spron, thou shall find me poor, and broken*

Ger. I cannot b^ame your grief sir.


Flo. Now what say thou?


Ge. I say you should not shrink; for he that gave ye,
Can give you more; his power can bring ye off, sir;
When friends and all forsake you, yet he sees you.

Flo. That Is all my hope.


Ger Hope still sir; are you tied
Within the compass of a day, good master,
To pay this mass of money?

Flo. Even to morrow;
But why do I stand mocking of my misery?
Is It not enough the floods, and friends forget me?

Ger. Will no less serve?


Flo. What if it would?


Ger. Your patience,
I do not ask to mock ye: it is a great sum,
A sum for mighty men to start and stick at;
But not for honest: have ye no friends left ye;
None that have felt your bounty, worth this duty?

Flo. Duty? thou know it not.


Ger. It is a duty,
And as a duty from those men that have felt ye,
Should be returned again: I have gained by ye,
A daily alms these seven years you have showered me,
Will half supply your want?

Flo. Why do thou fool me?
Can thou work miracles?

Ger. To save my master,
I can work this.

Flo. Thou will make me angry with thee.


Ger. For doing good?


Flo. What power have thou?


Ger. Enquire not:
So I can do it to preserve my master;
Nay if it be three parts.

Flo. O that I had it!
But good Clause talk no more, I feel thy charity,
As thou have felt mine: but alas!

Ger. Distrust not.
It Is that that quenches ye: pull up your spirit,
Your good, your honest, and your noble spirit;
For if the fortunes of ten thousand people
Can save ye, rest assured; you have forgot, Sir,
The good ye did, which was the power you gave me;
Ye shall now know the King of Beggars treasure:
And let the winds blow as they please, the seas roar,
Yet, here to morrow, you shall find your harbor,
Here fail me not, for if I live I'e fit ye.

Flo. How fain would I believe thee!


Ger. If I lie master,
Believe no man hereafter.

Flo. I will try thee,
But he knows, that knows all.

Ger. Know me to morrow,
And if I know not how to cure ye, kill me;
So pass in peace, my best, my worthiest master.

Exeunt. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Hubert like a Huntsman. Hub. Thus have I stolen away disguised from
Hemskirk,
To try these people, for my heart yet tells me
Some of these Beggars are the men I look for;
Appearing like my self, they have no reason
(Though my intent is fair, my main end honest)
But to avoid me narrowly; that face too,
That woman's face, how near it is! O may it
But prove the same, and fortune how I Will bless thee!
Thus, sure they cannot know me, or suspect me,
If to my habit I but change my nature,
As I must do: this is the wood they live in,
A place fit for concealment, where, till fortune
Crown me with that I seek, I Will live amongst 'em. Exit.

Enter Higgen, Prig, Ferret, Gynks, and the rest of the Boores. Hig. Come bring
'em out* for here we sit in justice:
Give to each one a cudgel, a good cudgel:
And now attend your sentence, tha? you are rogues,
And mischievous base rascals (there is the point now)
I take it, is confessed.

Prig. Deny it if you dare, Knaves.


Boores. We are Rogues Sir,

Hig. To amplify the matter, then rogues as ye are,
And lamb'd ye shall be t're we leave ye.

Boores. Yes Sir.


Hig. And to the open handling of our justice,
Why did ye this upon the proper person
Of our good Master? were you drunk when you did it!

Boores. Yes indeed were we.


Prig. You shall be beaten sober,

Hig. Was it for want you undertook it?


Boores. Yes Sir.


Hig. You shall be swing'd abundantly.


Prig. And yet for all that
You shall be poor rogues still.

Hig. Has not the Gentleman
Pray mark this point brother Prig, that noble Gentleman,
Relieved ye often, found ye means to live by,
By employing some at sea, some here, some there,
According to your callings?

Boores. It Is most true Sir.


Hig Is not the man an honest man?


Boores. Yes truly.


Hig. A liberal Gentleman? and as ye are true rascals,
Tell me but this, have ye not been drunk, and often,
At his charge?

Boores. Often, often.


Hig. There Is the point then,
They have cast themselves, brother Prig.

Prig. A shrewd point brother.


Hig. Brother, proceed you now, the cause is open,
I am somewhat weary.

Prig. Can you do these things?
You most abominable stinking Rascals,
You turnip-eating Rogues ^.

Boores. We are truly sorry.


Prig. Knock at your hard hearts Rogues, and presently
Give us a sign you feel compunction,
Every man up with his cudgel, and on his neighbor
Bestow such alms, till we shall say sufficient,
For there your sentence lies, without partiality,
Either of head, or hide, Rogues, without sp^ring,
Or we shall take the pains to beat you dead else:
You shall know your doom.

Hig. One, two, three, about it.


Prig. That fellow in the blew has true compunction,
He beats his fellows bravely, oh, well struck boys.

Enter Gerrard. Prig. Up with that blew breech, now plays he the Devil,
So get ye home, drink small beer, and be honest.
Call in the Gentleman.

Ger. Do, bring him presently,
His cause I Will hear my self.

Enter Hemskirk. Hig. Prig. With all due reverence,
We do resign, Sir.

Ger. Now huffing Sir, what is your name?


Hem. What Is that to you, Sir?


Ger. It shall be ere we part.


Hem. My name is Hemskirk,
I follow the Earl, which you shall feel.

Ger. No threatening,
For we shall cool you sir; why did thou basely
Attempt the murder of the Merchant Goswin?

Hem. What power have thou to ask me?


Ger. I will know it,
O flea thee till thy pain discover i^.

Hem. He did me wrong base wrong.


Ger. That cannot save y^,
Who sent ye hi her? and what further villainies
Have ye in hand?

Hem. Why would thou know? what prefi^,
If I had any private way* could rise
Out of my knowledge, to do thee commodity?
Be sorry for what thou have done, and make amends fool,
I Will talk no further to thee; nor these rascals.

Ger. Tie him to that tree.


Hem. I have told you whom I follow.


Ger. The Devil you should do, by your villainies;
Now he that has the best way, wring it from him.

Hig. I undertake it; turn him to the Sun boys,
Give me a fine sharp rush; will ye confess yet

Hem. Ye have robbed me already, now you^ murder me.


Hig. Murder your nose a little: does your head purge Sir?
To it again, 'twill do ye good.

Hem. Oh!
I cannot tell you any thing.

Ger. Proceed then.


Hig. There Is maggots in your nose, I'^e fetch 'em out Sir.


Hem. O my head breaks.


Hem. O my head breaks.


Hig. The best thing for the Rhume Sir,
That falls into your worships eyes.

Hem. Hold, hold.


Ger. Speak then.


Hem. I know not what.


Hig. It lies in's brain yet,
In lumps it lies, I Will fetch it out the finest:
What pretty faces the fool makes,? heigh^

Hem. Hold,
Hold, and I Will tell ye all^ look in my doublet,
And there within the lining in a paper,
You shall find all.

Ger. Go fetch that paper hither,
And let him loose for this time.

Enter Hubert. Hub. Good even my honest friends.


Ger. Good even good fellow.


Hub May a poor huntsman, with a merry heart,
A voice shall make the Forest ring about him,
Get leave to live amongst ye? true as steel boys.
That knows all chases, and can watch all hours,
And with ^y quarter-st^ff^, though the Devil bid stand,
De^l such an alms, shall make him roar again?
Prick ye the fearful hare through cross ways, sheep walks,
And force the crafty Reynard climb the quicks^ts;
Rouse ye the lo^tie Stag, and with my bell-horn
Ring him a knell, that all the woods shall mourn him,
'Till in his funeral tears he fall before me?
The Polcat, Marterne, and the rich skinned Lucerne,
I know to chase the Roe, the wind our-stripping
Isgrin himself, in all his bloody anger,
I can beat from the bay; and the wild Sounder
Single: and with my armed staff, turn the Boa^,
Spite of his ^omy tushes; and thus strike him,
'Till he fall down my feast.

Ger. A goodly fellow.


Hub. What make thou here, ha?


Ger. We accept thy fellowship.


Hub. Hem^kirk, thou art not right I fear, I fo^^ thee.


Enter Ferret. A Letter. Fer. H^re is the paper: and as he said, we found it.


Ger. Give me it, I shall make a shift yet, old as I am,
To find your knavery: you are sent here, Sir,
To discover certain Gentlemen; a spy-knave:
And if ye find 'em, If not by perswa^ion,
To bring 'em back, by poison to dispatch 'em.

Hub. By poison, ha?


Ger. Here is another, Hubert.
What is that Hubert, Sir?

Hem. You may perceive there.


Ger. I may perceive a vi^lanie, and a rank one,
Was he joined partner of thy knaverie?

Hem. No.
He had an honest end, would I had had so,
Which makes him escape such cutthroats.

Ger. So it seems,
For here thou art commanded, when that Hubert
Has done his best and worthiest service, this way,
To cut his throat; for here he is set down dangerous.

Hub. This is most impious.


Ger. I am glad we have found ye,
Is not this true?

Hem. Yes; what are you the better?


Ger. You shall perceive Sir, e're you get your freedom:
Take him aside; and friend, we take thee to us,
Into our company, thou dare be true unto us?

Hig. I, and obedient to?


Hub. As you had ^red me.


Ger. Then take our hand: thou art now a servant to us,
Welcome him all.

Hig. Stand off, stand off, I Will do it:
We bid ye welcome three ways; first for your person,
Which is a promising person; next for your quality,
Which is a decent, and gentle quality;
Last or the f^^quent means you have to feed us;
You can steal, it is to be presumed?

Hub. Yes, Venison,
Or if I want --

Hig. It Is w^ll you understand right,
And shall learn daily: you can drink too?

Hub. Soundly.


Hig. And ye dare know a woman from a weather cock?


Hub Yes it I handle her.


Ger. Now swear him.


Hig. You are welcome brother.


All. Welcome, welcome, weldome, but who shall have the keeping
Of this fellow?

Hub. Thank ye friends,
And I beseech you if ye dare but trust me,
For if I have kept wild dogs, and beasts for wonder,
And made 'em tame too: give into my custody
This roaring rascal, I shall hamper him.
With all his knocks and knavery, and I fear me,
Discover yet a further vill^ny in him;
O he smells rank o'th rascal.

Ger. Take him to thee,
But if he escape --

Hub Let me be even hanged for him;
Room S^r, I Will tie ye to my l^^sh.

Hem. Away Rascal.


Hub. Be not so stubborn: I shall swinge ye soundly,
And ye p^ay tricks with me.

Ger. Now swear him.


Hig. I crown thy nab with a gag of benbouse,
And stall thee by the salmon into the clowes,
To maund on the pad, and strike all the cheats
To mill from the Nuffmans, commision and sla^es,
Twang del^'s in the stiromel, and let the Quire Cuffin,
And Hermon Beck strine, and trine to the Ruffin.

Ger. Now interpret this unto him.


Hig. I pour on thy pate a pot of good al^^
And by the Rogues oath, a Rogue thee install,
To beg on the way, to rob all thou meets,
To steal from the hedge, both the shirt and the sheets:
And l^e with thy wench in the straw till she twang,
Let the Constable, Justice, and Devil go hang.

Ger. So, now come in,
But ever have an eye S^r, to your prisoner.

Hub. He must blind both mine eyes, if he get from me.


Ger. Go, get some victuals, and some drink, some good drink,
For this day we^'l keep holy to good fortune;
Come and be f^olick with us.

Hig. Ye are a stranger. Exeunt.


Scaena Q^arta.
Enter Florez, and Bertha. Ber. Indeed ye are welcome: I have ha^rd your escape,
And therefore give her leave that only loves you,
(Truly, and dearly loves you) give her joy leave
To bid you welcome: what is it makes you sad man?
Why do you look so wild? is it I offend ye?
Beshrew my heart, not willingly.

Flo. No Iertred.


Ber. Is It the delay of that ye long have looked for,
A happy marriage? now I come to urge it:
Now when you please to finish it.

Flo. No news yet?


Ber. Do you hear Sir?


Flo. Yes.


Ber. Do you love me?


Flo. Have I lived
In all the happiness fortune could seat me,
In all men's fair opinions?

Ber. I have provided
A Priest, that is ready for us:

Flo. And can the Devil,
In one ten days, that Devil chance devour me!

Ber. We Will fly to what place you please.


Flo. No star prosperous?
All at a swoop?

Ber. You do not love me Goswin?
You will not look upon me.

Flo. Can men's prayers
Shot up to heaven, with such a zeal as mine are,
Fell ^eck like lazy mists, and never prosper?
Gyv^s I must wear, and cold must be my comfort.
Darkness, and want of meat: alas! she weeps too;
Which is the top of all my sorrows: Iertred.

Ber. No, no, you will not know me; my poor beauty;
Which has been worth your eyes.

Flo. The time grows on still:
And like a tumbling wave, I see my ruin
Come rolling over me.

Ber. Yet will ye know me?


Flo. For a hundred thousand crowns?


Ber. Yet will ye love me?
Tell me but how I have deserved your slighting?

Flo. For a hundred thousand crowns?


Ber. Farewell dissembler.


Flo. Of which I have scarce ten: oh, how it starts me!


Ber. And may the next you love, hearing my ruin.


Flo. I had forgot my self, O my best Iertred!
Crown of my joys and comforts!

Ber. Sweet, what ayle ye?
I thought you had been vexed with me.

Flo. My mind, wench,
My mind o'reflow'd with sorrow, sunk my memory.

Ber. Am I not worthy of the knowledge of it?
And cannot I as well affect your sorrows,
As your delights? you love no other woman?

Flo. No I protest.


Ber. You have no ships lost lately?


Flo. None that I know of.


Ber. I hope you have spilt no blood? whose innocence
May lay this on your conscience.

Flo. Clear, by heaven.


Ber. Why should you be thus then?


Flo. Good Iertred, ask not,
Even by the love you bear me.

Ber. I am obedient.


Flo. Go in my fair, I will not be long from ye;
Nor long, I fear me, with thee: At my return
Despise me as you please.

Ber. The good gods guide ye. Exit.


Flo. Now for my self, which is the least I hope for,
And when that falls, for man's worst fortune, pl^y. Exit.

Actus Quartus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Florez and four Merchants. Flo. WHy Gentlemen, it is but a week more I
entreat you,
But seven short days, I am not running from ye,
Nor, if you give me patience, is it possible
All my adventures fail; you have ships abroad,
Endure the beating both of wind or weather;
I am sure 'twould vex your hearts to be protested;
Ye are all fair Merchants.

1 Mer. Yes, and must have fair play,
There is no lying here else; one hours failing
Fails us of all our friends, of all our credits:
For my part I would stay, but my wants tell me
I must wrong others i^'t

Flo. No mercy in ye?


2 Mer. It Is foolish to depend on others mercy:
Keep your self right, and even cut your cloth, Sir,
According to your calling: you have lived here
In Lord-like prodig^lity, high and open,
And now ye find what it is: the liberal spending
The summer of your youth, which you should glean in,
And like the laboring Ant make use and gain of,
Has brought this bitter stormy winter on ye,
And now you cry.

3 Mer. Alas! before your poverty
We were no men, of no mark, no endeavor;
You stood alone, took up all trade, all business
Running through your hands, scarce a sail at Sea
But laden with your goods: we poor weak pedlers,
When by your leave, and much entreaty to it,
We could have ^^oage for a little cloth,
Or a few wines, put off, and thank your Worship.
Lord, how the world's changed with ye? now I hope, Sir,
We shall have sea-room.

Flor. Is my misery
Become my scorn too? have ye no humanity,
N^ part of men left? are all the bounties in me
To you, and to the town, turned my reproaches?

4 Mer. Well get your moneys ready, it is but two hours,
We shall p^otest ye else, and suddenly.

Flo. But two days.


1 Mer. Not an hour, ye know the hazard.


Exit. Flo. How soon my lights put out: hard-hearted Bruges,
Within thy walls may never honest Merchant
Venture his fortunes more: O my poor wench too.

Enter Gerrard. Ger. Good fortune, Master.


Flo. Thou mistak'st me Clause,
I am not worth thy blessing.

Ger. Still a sad man?

Enter Higgen and Prig, like Porters. No belief gentle Master? come, bring it
in then,
And now believe your Beadsman.

Flo. Is this certain?
Or do thou work upon my troubled sense?

Ger. It Is gold, Sir,
Take it and try it.

Flo. Certainly it is treasure;
Can there be yet this blessing?

Ger. Cease your wonder,
You shall not sink for never a sous'd flap-draggon,
For nere a pickled pilcher of 'em all, S^r;
It Is there your full sum, a hundred thousand Crowns;
And good sweet master, now be merry; pay 'em,
Pay the poor pelting knaves, that know no goodness,
And cheer your heart up handsomely.

Flo. Good Clause
How came thou by this mighty sum? if naughtily
I must not take it of thee, 'twill undo me.

Ger. Fear not; you have it by as honest means
As though your father gave it; Sir, you know not
To what a mass the little we daily get
Mounts in s^ven years; we beg it for heavens charity,
And to the same good we are bound to render it.

Flo. What great ^^curity?


Ger. Away with that, Sir;
Were not ye more then all the men in Bruges,
And all the money in my thoughts --

Flo. But good Clause,
I may dye presently.

Ger. Then this dies with ye.
Pay when you can, good Master, I Will no parchments,
Only this charity I shall entreat ye,
Leave me this ring.

Flo. Alas* it is too poor Clause.


Ger. It Is all I ask, and this withal, that when
I shall deliver this back, you shall grant me
Freely one poor petition.

Flo. There, I confess it,
And may my faith forsake me when I shun it.

Ger. Away, your time draws on: Take up the money
And follow this young Gentleman.

Flo. Farewell Clause,
And may thy honest memory live ever.

Ger. Heaven bless ye and still keep ye; farewell Master. Ex^unt.


Scaena Secunda.
Enter Hubert. Hub. I have locked my youth up close enough for gadding,
In an old tree, and set watch over him.
Enter Iaculine. Now for my Love, for sure this wench must be she;
She follows me; Come hither pretty Minche.

Iac. No, no, you will kiss.


Hub. So I will.


Iac. Y'ded law?
How will ye kiss me, pray you?

Hub. Thus: soft as my loves lips.


Iac. Oh!


Hub. What Is your Fathers name?


Iac. He Is gone to heaven.


Hub. Is it not Gerrard, sweet.


Iac. I Will stay no longer;
My mother's an old woman, and my brother
Was drowned at Sea, with catching Cockles. O love!
O how my heart melts in me! how thou fir'st me!

Hub. It Is certain she: pray let me see your hand sweet.


Iac. No, no, you will bite it.


Hub. Sure I should know that Gymmal.


Iac. It Is certain he: I had forgot my ring too.
O Hubert, Hubert.

Hub. Ha? methought she named me --
Do you know me, Chick?

Iac. No indeed, I never saw ye,
But methinks you kiss finely.

Hub. Kiss again then;
By heaven it is she.

Iac. O what a joy he brings me.


Hub. You are not Minche?


Iac. Yes pretty Gentleman,
And I must be married to morrow to a Capper.

Hub. Must ye my sweet? and does the Capper love ye?


Iac. Yes, yes, he will give me pie, and look in mine eyes thus.
It Is he; it is my dear love: O blessed fortune!

Hub. How ^ain she would conceal her self? yet show it,
Will ye love me, and leave that man? I Will serve.

Iac. O, I shall lose my self.


Hub. I Will wait upon ye,
And make ye dainty Nose-gays.

Iac. And where will ye stick 'em?


Hub. Here in bosom, and make a crown of Lilli^s
For your fair head.

Iac. And will ye love me 'deed-law?


Hub. With all my heart.


Iac. Call me to morrow then,
And we will have brave cheer, and go to Church together.
Give you good even, Sir.

Hub. But one word fair Minche.


Iac. I must be gone a milking.


Hub. Ye shall presently.
Did you never hear of a young Maid called Iaculine?

Iac. I am discovered; hark, in your ear I Will tell ye;
You must not know me^ Kiss and be constant ever.

Hub. Heaven curse me else, it is she; and now I Am certain
They are all here: No^ for my other project.

Exeunt. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Florez, f^ur Merchants, Higgen, and Prig. 1 Mer. Nay, if it would do you
courtesy.


Flo. None at all Sir;
Take it, '^is yours: there is your ten thousand for ye,
Give in my Bills: your sixteen.

3 Mer. Pray be pleased, Sir,
To make a further use.

Flo. No.


3 Mer. What I have, Sir,
You may command; pray let me be your Servant.

Flo. Put your hats on; I care not for your courtesies,
They are most untimely done, and no truth in 'em.

2 Mer. I have a fraught of pepper.


Flo. Rot your pepper;
Shall I trust you again? there is your seven thousand.

4 Mer. Or if you want fine sugar, it is but sending.


Flo. No, I can send to Barbary; those people
That never yet knew faith, have nobler freedoms.
These carry to Vanlock and take my Bills in:
To Peter Zuten th^se: bring back my Jewels:
Why are these pieces?

Exter Saylor. Saylor. Health to the noble Merchant;
The Susan is returned.

Flo. Well?


Say. Well, and rich, Sir,
And now put in.

Flo. Heaven thou have heard my prayers.


Say. The brave Rebecca ^oo, bound from (...) Straights,
With the next tide is ready to put after.

Flo. What news of the Fly-b^at?


Say. If this wind hold till midnight,
She will be here, and wealthy, escaped fairly.

Flo. How, prithee Saylor?


Say. Thus, Sir; she had fight
Seven hours together with six Turkish Galleys,
And she fought br^vely, but at length was boarded,
And ove^laid with strength; when presently
Comes boring up the wind Captain Van-noke,
That valiant Gentleman you redeemed from prison;
He knew the Boat, set in, and fought it bravely,
Beat all the Galleys off, sunk three, redeemed her,
And as a service to ye, sent her home, Sir.

Flo. A^ honest noble Captain, and a thankful.
There Is for thy news; go drink the Merchants healt^, Saylor.

Say. I thank your bounty, and I Will do it to a doyt, Sir. Exit Saylor.


1 Mer. What miracles are powered upon this fellow?


Flo. This year I hope, my friends, I shall escape prison,
For all your ca^es to catch me.

2 Mer. You may please, Sir,
To think of your p^or servants in displeasure,
Whose all they have goods, moneys, are at your service.

Flo. I thank you,
When I have need of you I shall forget you:
You are paid I hope.

All. We joy in your good fortunes.


Enter Van-dunck. Van. Come Sir, come take your ease, you must go home
With me, yonder is one weeps and howls.

Flo. Alas, how does she?


Van. She will be better soon I hope.


Flo. Why soon Sir?


Van. Why when you have her in your arms, this night,
My boy she is thy wife.

Flo. With all my heart I take her.


Van. We have p^epared; all thy friends will be there,
And all my rooms shall smoke to see the Revel:
Thou have been wronged, and no more shall my service
Wait on the knave her Uncle; I have heard all,
All ^is baits for my boy; but thou sh^lt have her;
Have thou dispatched thy business?

Flo. Most.


Van. By the mass Boy,
Thou tumblest now in wealth, and I joy in it;
Thou art the best Boy that Bruges ever nourished:
Thou have been sad, I Will cheer thee up with Sack,
And when thou a^t lusty I Will fling th^e to thy Mist^ess:
She Will hug thee, sir.

Flo. I long to see it.
I had forgot you; there is for you my friends;
You had but heavy burdens; commend my love
To my best love; all the love I have
To ^on^st Clause, shortly I will thank him better.

Exit. Hig. By the Mass a Royal Merchant,
Gold by the handful; here will be sport soon Prig.

Prig. It partly seems so, and here will I be in a trice.


Hig. And I boy;
Away apace we are lookld for.

Prig Oh these baked meats,
Methinks I smell them h^ her.

Hig. Thy mouth waters. Exeunt.


Scaena Quarta.
Enter Hubert and Hemskirck. Hub. I must not.


Hem. Why? it is in thy power to do it, and in mine
To reward thee to thy wishes.

Hub. I dare not, nor I will not.


Hem. Gentle Huntsman,
Though thou ha^t kept me hard, though in thy duty,
Which is required to do it, the have used me stubbornly,
I can forgive thee freely.

Hub. You the Earls servant?


Hem. I swear I am near as his own thoughts to him,
Able to do thee --

Hub. Come, come, leave your prating.


Hem. If thou dare but try.


Hub. I thank you heartily, you will be
The first man that will hang me, a sweet recompense;
I could do, but I do not say I will,
To any honest fellow that would think on it,
And be a benefactor.

Hem. If it be not recompensed, and to thy own desires,
I^ within th^se ten days I do not make thee --

Hub. What, a false knave?


Hem. Prithee, p^e he conceive me tightly, any thing
Of profit or of place that may advance thee.

Hub. Why, what a G^os-cap would thou make me,
Do not I know that men in misery will promise
Any thing, more then their lives can reach at?

Hem. Believe me Huntsman.
There shall not one short syllable
That comes from me, pass
Without its full performance.

Hub. Say you so, Sir?
Have ye ere a ^ood place for my quality?

Hem A thousand Chases, Forests, Parks; I Will make thee
Chief ranger over all the games.

Hub. When?


Hem. Presently.


Hub. This may provoke me; and yet to prove a knave too.


Hem. It Is to prove honest; it is to do good service,
Service for him thou art sworn too, for thy Prince,
Then for thy self that good: what fool would live here
Poor, and in misery, subject to all dangers
Law and lewd people can inflict, when bravely,
And to himself he may be Law and credit?

Hub. Shall I believe thee?


Hem. As that thou holdst most holy.


Hub. Ye may play tricks.


Hem. Then let me never live more.


Hub. Then you shall see, Sir, I will do a service
That shall deserve indeed.

Hem. It Is well said Huntsman,
And thou shall be well thought of.

Hub. I will do it: It Is not your letting f^ee, for that is mere nothing;
But such a service, if the Earl be noble,
He shall for ever love me.

Hem. What is it Huntsman?


Hub* Do you know any of these people live here?


Hem. No.


Hub. You are a fool then; here be those to have 'em,
I know the Earl so well, would make him caper.

Hem. Any of the old Lords that rebel^d?


Hub. Peace, all;
I know 'em every one, and can betray 'em.

Hem. But will thou do this service?


Hub. If you will keep
Your faith, and free word to me.

Hem. Will thou swear me?


Hub. No, no, I will believe ye: more then that too,
Here Is the right heir.

Hem. O honest, honest Huntsman!


Hub. Now, how to get these Gallants, there is the matter;
You will be constant, it is no work for me else.

Hem. Will the Sun shine again?


Hub. The way to get 'em.


Hem. Propound it, and it shall be done.


Hub, No slight,
(For they are devilish crafty, it concerns 'em)
Nor reconcilement, (for they dare not trust neither,)
Must do this trick.

Hem. By force?


Hub. I, that must do it:
And with the person of the Earl himself,
Authority (and mighty) must come on 'em,
Or else in vain; and thus I would have ye do it:
To morrow night be here; a hundred men will bear 'em;
(So he be there, for he is both wise and valiant,
And with his terror will strike dead their forces.)
The hour be twelve a Clock; now for a guide
To draw ye without danger on these persons;
The woods being thick and hard to hit, my self
With some few with me, made unto our purpose,
Beyond the wood, upon the plain will wait ye
By the great Oak.

Hem. I know it: keep thy faith Hunts-man,
And such a shour of wealth --

Hub. I warrant ye:
Mi^s nothing that I tell ye.

Hem. No.


Hub. Farewell;
You have your liberty, now use it wisely*
And keep your hour; go closer about the wood there.
For fear they spy you.

Hem. Well.


Hub. And bring no noise with ye.


Hem. All shall be done to the purpose: farewell Hunts-man. Exit


Enter Gerrard, Higgen, Prig, Gynks, Snap, Ferret. Ger. Now what is the news in
town?


Gyn. No news but joy, Sir;
Every man wooing of the noble Merchant,
Who has his hearty commendations to ye.

Fer. Yes, this is news, this night he is to be married.


Gyn. By the Mass that is true, he marries Vanduncks daughter,
The dainty black-ey'd bell.

Hig. I would my clapper
Hung in his Bald-rick, what a peal could I ring?

Ger. Married?


Gyn. It Is very true Sir; O the pyes,
The piping-hot-mince-pies.

Prig. O the plum pottage.


Hig. For one leg of a Goose now would I venture a limb boys;
I love a fat Goose as I love Allegiance,
And -- upon the Boors, too well they know it,
And therefore starve their poultry*

Ger To be married
To Van-duncks daughter?

Hig. O this precious Merchant;
What sport he will have? But hark ye brother Prig,
Shall we do nothing in the foresaid wedding?
There Is money to be go^, and meat I take it;
What think ye of a moris^?

Prig. No, by no means,
that goes no further th^n the street, there leaves ^^;
Now we must think of something that must draw us
Into the bowels of it, into the buttery,
Into the Kitchen, into the Cellar, something
That that old drunken Burgo-master loves;
What think ye of a Wassel.

Hig. I think worthily.


Prig. And very fit it should be; thou, and Ferret,
And Gynks to sing the song; I for the structure,
Which is the bowl.

Hig. Which must be up-sey English,
Strong lusty London Beer; le^s think more of it.

Ger. He must not marry.


Enter Hubert. Hub. By your leave in private,
One word, Sir, with ye, Gerrard; do not start me,
I know ye, and he knows ye that best loves ye;
Hubert speaks to ye, and you must be Gerrard,
The time invites you to it.

Ger. Make no show then;
I am glad to see you, Sir, and I am Gerrard;
How stands affairs?

Hub. Fair, if ye dare now follow;
Hemskirk I have let go, and these my causes;
I Will tell ye privately, and how I have wrought him,
And then to prove me honest to my friends,
Look upon these directions; you have seen his.

Hig. Then will I speak a speech, and a brave speech
In praise of Merchants; where is the Ape?

Prig. -- Take him,
A gowty Bear-ward stole him the other day.

Hig. May his Bears worry him, that Ape had paid it;
What dainty tricks? -- of that whoreson Bear-ward:
In his french doublet, with his bastar'd bullions,
In a long stock tied up, O how daintily
Would I have made him wait, and change a trencher,
Carry a cup of wine? ten thousand stinks
Wait on thy mangy soul thou lowzy Bear-ward.

Ger. It Is passing well, I both believe and joy in it,
And will be ready, keep you h^re the mean while,
And keep this in; I must a while forsake ye^
Upon mine anger no man stir this two hours.

Hig. Not to the wedding, Sir?


Ger. Not any whither.


Hig. The Wedding must be seen, Sir; we want meat too,
We be monstrous out of meat.

Prig. Shall it be spoken,
Fat capons shook their tails at's in defiance,
And Turkey toombs such honorable monuments?
Shall Piggs, Sir, that the Parsons self would envy,
And dainty Ducks? --

Ger. Not a word more, obey me.


Exit Ger. Hig. Why then come dole^ul death, this is flat tyranny,
And by this hand --

Hub. What?


Hig. I Will go sleep upon it. Exit Hig.


Prig. Nay, and there be a wedding, and we wanting,
Farewell our happy days: we do obey, Sir.

Exeunt. Scaena Quinta.
Enter two young Merchants. 1 Mer. Well met, Sir, you are for this lusty
wedding.


2 Mer. I am so, so are you, I take it.


1 Mer. Yes,
And it much glads me that to do him service
Who is the honor of our trade and lu^^er,
We meet thus happily.

2 Mer. He Is a noble fellow,
And well becomes a bride of such a beauty.

1 Mer. She is passing fair indeed; long may their loves
Continue like their youths, in spring of sweetness;
All the young Merchants will be here
No doubt on it;
For he that comes not ^o attend this wedding,
The curse o^ a most b^ind one fall upon him,
A loud wife and a lazy: here is Vanlock.

Enter Vanlock and Frances. Van. Well overtaken Gent^emen, save ye.


1 Mer. The same to you Sir: save ye, fair Mistress Frances,
I would this happy night might make you blush too.

Vanl. She dreams ap^ce


Fran. That Is but a drowsy fortun^.


2 Mer. Nay, take us with ye too, w^ come to that end;
I am sure ye are for the wedding.

Vanl. Hand and heart man,
And what their fe^t can do; I c^uld have tript it
Before this whoreson gou^.

Enter Gerrard. Ger. Bless ye Masters.


Vanl. Clause? how now Clause, thou art come ^o see thy Master,
(And a good Master he is to all poor people)
In all his joy; it is honestly done of thee.

Ger. Long may he live, Sir; but my business now is,
If you would please to do it, and to hi^ too.

Enter Florez. Vanl. He Is here himself.


Flo. Stand at the door my friends?
I pray walk in: welcome fair Mistress Frances,
See what the house affords, there is a young Lady
Will bid you welcome.

Vanl. We joy your happiness. Exit.


Flo. I hope it will be so. Clause n^bly welcome,
My honest my best friend, I have been careful
To see thy moneys --

Ger. Sir, that brought not me;
Do you know this Ring again?

Flo. Thou had it of me.


Ger. And do you well remember yet the boon you gave me*
Upon the return of this?

Flo. Yes, and I grant it,
Be it what it will; a^k what thou can, I Will do it,
Within my power.

Ger. Ye are not married yet?


Flo. No.


Ger. Faith I shall ask you that that will distu^b ye,
But I must put ye to your promise.

Flo. Do,
And if I faint and flinch in it --

Ger. Well said Master,
And yet it grieves me to, and yet it must be.

Flo. Pre^hee distrust me not.


Ger. You must not marry,
That Is part of the power you gave me; which to make up,
You must presently depart and follow me.

Flo. Not marry, Clause?


Ger. Not if you keep your promise,
And give me power to ask.

Flo. Pre^hee think better,
I will obey by heaven.

Ger. I have thought the best, Sir.


Flo. Give me thy reason; do thou fear her ^onesty?


Ger. Chaste as the ice, for any thing I know, Sir.


Flo. Why should thou light on that then? to what purpose?


Ger. I must not now discover.


Flo. Must not marry?
Shall I break now, when my poor heart is pawned?
When all the preparation?

Ger. Now or never.


Flo. Come, it is not that thou would; thou do but fright me.


Ger. Upon my sou^ it is, Sir, and I bind ye.


Flo. Clause, can thou be so cruel?


Ger. You may break, Sir,
But never more in my thoughts appear honest.

Flo. Di^'st ever see her?


Ger. No.


Flo. She is such a thing,
O Clause, she is such a wonder, such a mirror,
For beauty* and fair virtue, Europe has not:
Why have thou made me happy to undo me?
But look upon her, then if thy heart relent not
I Will quit her presently; who waits there?
Servant within. Sir?

Flo. Bid my fair love come hither, and the company;
Prithee be good unto me; take a man's heart,
And look upon her truly; take a friends heart*
And feel what misery must follow this,

Ger. Take you a noble heart and keep your promise:
I forsook all I had to make you happy.
Enter Bertha, Van-donk, and the rest Merchants. Can that thing called a woman
stop your godness?

Flo. Look there she is, d^^l with me as thou will now
Did ever see a fairer?

Ger. She is most goodly.


Flo. Pray ye stand still.


Ber. What ailes my love?


Flo. Did thou ever,
By the fair light of heaven, behold a sweeter?
O that thou knew'st but love, or ever selt him,
Look well, look narrowly upon her beauti^s.

1. Mer. Sure h'as so^e strange in hand, he star^s so.


2. Mer. This Beggar has a strong power over his pleasure.


Flo. View all her body.


Ger. It Is exact and excellent.


Flo. Is she a thing then to be lost thus lightly?
Her mind is ten times sweeter, ten times nobler,
And but to hear her speak, a Paradise,
And such a love she bears to me, a chaste love,
A vertu^us, fair, and fruitfullove: it is now too
I am ready to enjoy it; the Priest ready, Clause,
To say the holy words shall make us happy,
This is a cruelty beyond man's study,
All these are ready, all our joys are ready,
And all the expectation of our friends
'Twill be her death to do it.

Ger. Let her die then.


Flo. Thou can not: it is impossible.


Ger. It must be.


Flo. 'Till kill me too, '^will murder me by heaven, Clause
I Will give thee half I have; come thou shall save me.

Ger. Then you must go with me: I can stay no longer,
If ye be true and noble.

Flo. Hard heart, I Will follow:
Pray ye all go in again, and pray be merry.
I have a weighty business, give my cloak there,
Enter Servant (with a Cloak.) Concerns my life, and state; make no enquiry,
This present hour befaln me* with the soonest
I shall be here again: nay pray go in Sir,
And take them with you, it is but a night lost Gentlemen.

Van. Come, come in, we will not lose our meat yet,
Nor our good mirth, he cannot stay long from her
I am sure of that.

Flo. I will no^ stay; believe Sir, Exit.

Gertrude. a word with you*

Ber. Why is this stop Sir?


Flo. I have no more time left me, but to kiss thee,
And tell thee, this, I am ever thine: farewell wench. Exit.

Ber. And is that all your ceremony? Is this a wedding?
Are all my ho^es and prayers turned to nothing?
Well, I will say no more, nor sigh, nor sorrow; oh me,
Til to thy face I prove thee false. Exit.

Actus Quintus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Bertha, and a Boore. Ber. LEad, if thou think we are right, why do
thou make
These often stands? thou said thou knewst the way

Boor. Fear nothing, I do know it: would `twere homeward.


Ber. Wrought from me, by a Begg^r? at the time
That most should tie him? It Is some other Love
That has a more command on his affections,
And he that fetched him, a disguised Agent,
Not what he personated; for his fashion
Was more familiar with him, and more powerful
Then one that asked an alms: I must find out
One, if not both^ kind darkness be my shroud
And cover loves too curious search in me,
For yet, suspicion, I would not name thee.

Boor. Mistress, it grows somewhat pretty and dark.


Ber. What then


Boor. Nay, nothing; do not think I am afraid,
Although perhaps you are.

Ber. I am not, forward*


Boor. Sure but you are: give me your hand, fear nothing.
There Is one leg in the wood, do not pull backward:
What a sweat one on's are in, you or I?
Pray God it do not prove the plague; yet sure
It has infected me; for I sweat too,
It runs out at my knees, feel, feel, I pray you.

Ber. What ailes the f^llow?


Boor. Hark, hark I beseech you,
Do you hear nothing?

Ber. No.


Boor. List: a wild hog,
He grunts: now it is a bear: this wood is full of 'em.
And now, a wolf Mistress, a wolf, a wolf,
It is the howling of a wolf.

Ber. The braying of an ass; is it not.


Boor. Oh, ^ow one has me;
Oh* my left ham, far^well.

Ber. Look to your shanks,
Your breech is safe enough, the wolfe's a Fernbr^^e.

Boor. But see, see* see. There is a Serpent in it,
It has eyes as broad as platters; it spits fire;
Now it creeps toward us, help me to say my prayers*
It has swallowed me almost, my breath is stopped,
I cannot speak; do I speak Mistress? tell me.

Ber. Why, thou timorous Sot, can thou perceive
Any thing in the bush, but a poor glo-worme?

Boor. It may be it is but a glo-worm now, but 'twill
Grow to a fire-drake presently.

Ber. Come thou from it:
I have a precious guide of you; and a courteous
That gives me leave to lead my self the way thus.

Boor. It thunders, you hear that now.


Ber. I hear one hollow.


Boor. It Is thunder, thunder:
See, a flash of Lightning,
Are you not blasted Mistress? pull your mas^ off,
It has played the barber with me here: I have lost
My beard, my beard, pray God you be not shaven,
It will spoil your marriage, Mistress.

Ber. What strange wonders
Fear fancies in a Coward?

Boor. Now the earth opens.


Ber. Prithee hold thy peace.


Boor. Will you on then?


Ber. Both love and jealousy have made me bold,
Where my fate leads me, I must go. Exit.

Boor. God be with you then.


Enter Woolfort, Hemskirk, and Attendants. Hem. It was the fellow sure, he that
should guide me,
The hunts-man that did hollow us.

Woolf. Best make a ^^and
And listen to his next: ha?

Hem. Who goes there?


Boor. Mistress, I am taken.


Hem. Mistress? look forth soldiers.


Woolf. What are you si^^ah?


Boor. Truly all is left
Of a poor Boor, by daylight, by night no body,
You might have spared your drum, and guns, and pikes too
For I am none that will stand out Sir, I.
You may take me in with a walking stick
Even when you please, and hold me with a pack-threed.

Hem. What woman was it you called to.


Boor. Woman? none Sir.


Woolf. None? did you no^ name Mistress?


Boor. Yes, but she is
No woman yet ^ she should have been this night.
But that a Beggar stole away her Bridegroom.
Whom we were going to make hu^-and-cry after;
I tell you true Sir, she should ^a'bin ma^r^ed to day,
And was the Bride, and all; but in came Clause,
The old lame Beggar, and whipped up Mr. Goswin;
Under his arm, away with him as a Kite,
O^ an old Fox, would swoop away a gossi^g.

Hem. It Is she, it is she, Niece?


Ber. Ha!


Hem. She Sir.
This wa^ a noble entrance to your fortune,
That being on the point thus to be married,
Upon her venture here, you should surprise her.

Wool. I begin Hemskirk, to believe my fate
Works to my ends.

Hem. Yes Sir* and this adds trust
Unto the fellow our guide, who assured me Florez
Lived in some Merchants shop, as Gerrard did
In The the old beggars, and that he would use
Him for the train, to call the other forth,
All which we find is ^one -- That Is he again -- Holla again

Woolf. Good we sent out to meet him.


Hem. Here Is the Oak.


B^r. O I am miserably lost, thus fallen
Into my Uncles hands, from all my hopes:
Can I not think away my self and dye?
O I am miserably lost, thus fallen
Into my Uncles hands, from all my hop^s:
No matter now, where thou be false or no,
Goswin, whether thou love another better,
Or me alone; or where thou keep thy vow,
And word, or that thou come, or stay; for I
To thee from henceforth must be ever absent,
And thou to me: no more shall we come near,
To tell our selves, how bright each others eyes were,
How soft our language, and how sweet our kisses,
Whilst we made one our food, the other our feast,
Not mix our souls by sight, or by a letter
Hereafter, but as small relation have,
As two new gone to inhabiting a grave:
Can I not think away my self and die?

Enter Hubert, Higgen, Prig, Ferret, Snap, Gincks, like Boores. Hub. I like
your habits well: they are safe, stand close.


Hig. But what is the action we are for now? ha?
Robbing a Ripper of his fish?

Prig. Or taking
A poultrer prisoner, without ransom, Bullye^?

Hig. Or cutting off a convoy of bu^ter?


Fer. Or surprising a Boors ken, for granting cheats?


Prig. Or cackling cheats?


Hig. Or merge^y-praters, Rogers*
And Tibs o'th the Bu^te^y?

Prig. OF I could drive a Regiment
Of geese before me, such a night as this,
Ten leagues with my hatt, and staff, and not of hiss
Heard, or a wing of my troops disordered.

Hig. Tell us,
If it be milling of a lag of duds,
The fetching of a back of clothes, or so,
We are horribly out of linen,

Hub. No such matter.


Hig. Let me alone for any Farmers dog,
If you have a mind to the cheese-loft: it is but thus:
And he is a silenced Mast^ff, during pleasure.

Hub. Would it would please you to be silent.


Hig. Mum.


Woolf. Who Is there?


Hub. A friend, the Huntsman.


Hem. O it is he.


Hub. I have kept touch Sir, which is the Earl of these?
Will ye know a man now?

Hem. This my Lord's the friend
Has undertook the service.

Hub. I^'t be worth
His Lordships thanks anon, when it is done
Lording, I Will look for it, a rude woodman,
I know how to pitch my toils, drive in my game*
And I have don't, both Florez and his Father
Old Gerrard, with Lord Arnold of Benthuisen;
Cozen, and Iaqueline, young Florez Sister,
I have 'em all.

Woolf. Thou sp^akst too much, too happy,
To carry faith with it.

Hub. I can bring you
Where you shall see, and find 'em.

Woolf. We will double,
What ever Hemskirk then has promised thee.

Hub. And I Will deserve it treble; what horse have you?


Woolf. A hundred.


Hub. That Is well: ready to take
Upon surprise of 'em?

Hem. Yes.


Hub (...) ^hen,
Your force in^o five Squadrons, for there are
So many out-^ets w^yes through the wood,
That issue from the place where they are lodged;
Five several ways, of all which p^ssag^s
We must possess our selves, to round '^m in,
For by one starting hole, they'^l all escape e^se,
I and four B^ors here, to ye will be guides.
The Squadron where you are, my sel^ will ^^ad.
And that they may be more s^cure, I Will use
My wonted whoops, and hollowes, as I were
A hunting for 'm; which will make them rest,
Careless of any noise, and b^ a direction
To the other guides ^ow w^ approach ^m stil^.

Woolf. It Is ordered well, and relisheth the Souldie^.
Make the division Hemskirk: you are my charge,
Fair one, I'^e look to you.

Boor. Shall no body need
To look to me? I Will look unto my self.

Hub. It Is but this, r^member.


Hig. Say, it is done boy, Ex^unt.

Scaena Secunda.
Enter Gerrard and Florez. Ger. By this ^ime; Sir, I hope you want no reasons
Why I broke off your marriage, for though I
Should as a Subject study you my Prince
In things indifferent, it will not therefore
Discredit you, to acknowledge me your Father,
By harkening to my necessary counsels.

Flo. Acknowledge you my Father? Sir I do,
And may impiety, conspiring with
My other Sins, sink me, and suddenly
When I forget to pay you a Sons duty,
In my obedience, and that helped sorth
With all the cheerfulness.

Ger. I pray you rise,
And may those powers that see and love this in you,
Reward you for it: Taught by your example
Having received the rights due to a Father,
I tender you the allegiance of a Subject:
Which as my Prince acc^pt of.

Flo. Kneel to me?
May m^untains first fall down benea^h ^h^ir valleys,
And fi^e no more mount upwards, when I suffer
An act in nature so pr^posterous;
I must overcome in this, in all things else
The victory be yours t could you here read me,
You should perceive how all my faculties
Triump^ in my blessed fate, to be found yours;
I am your s^n, your Son Sir, and am prouder
To be s^, to the ^ather to such goodness
(Which heaven be pleased, I may inherit from you)
Then I shall ever o^ those speci^ll titles
That plead for my succ^ssion in the Earldome
(Did I p^ssess it now) l^ft by my mother.

Ger. I do believe it: but --


Flo. O my loved Father,
Before I knew you were so, by instinct,
Nature had taught me, to look on your wan^s,
Not as a strange^s: and I know not how,
What you called ch^ritie I thought the payment
Of some religious debt nature stood bound for;
And last of all, when your magnificent bounty,
In my low ebb of fortune, had brought in
A flood of blessings, though my threatening wan^s
And fear of their ^ff^cts, still kept me stupid,
I soon found out, it was no common pity
That lead you to i^.

Ger. Think of this hereafter
When we wi^h joy may call it to remembrance,
There will be a time more opportune, then now,
To end your story, with all circumstances,
I add this only: when we fled from Woolfort
I sent you into England, and there placed you
With a brave Flanders Merchant, called rich Goswin,
A man supplied by me unto that purpose,
As bound by oath never to discover you,
Who dying left his name and wealth unto you
As his reputed Son, and yet received so;
But now, as Florez and ^ Prince, remember,
The countries* and the subjects general good
Must challenge the first part in your affec^ion:
The fair maid, whom you chose to be your wife,
B^ing so far be^eath you, tha^ your love
M^^t gr^nt* (...) not your equal.

Flo. In disc^nt
Or borrowed glo^i^s, from dead Ancesto^s,
But ^or her b^autie* chastity, an^ all virtues
Ever remembre^ in the best of women,
A M^na^ch might r^ceive from her, not give,
Though she were ^is Crowns purchase, In this only
Be ^n indulgent Father: in a^l ^lse,
U^e my authority.

Enter Hubert, ^emskirk, Woolfort, Bertha, and Soldiers. Hub. S^r, h^re be two
of 'em,
The Father and the Son, the rest you shall have
A^ ^ast as I can rouse them.

Ger. Who Is this? Woolfort?


Wool. I criple, your feigned cru^ches will not he^p you,
Nor patched disguise that has so long concealed you,
I^'s now no halting: I must here find Gerrard,
And in this Merchants h^bit, one called Florez
Who would be an Earl.

Ger. And is, were thou a subject.


Flo. Is this that Traitor Woolfort?


Wolf. Yes, but you
Are they that are betrayed: Hemskirk;

Ber. My Goswin
Turned Prince? O I am poorer by this greatness,
Then all my former jealousies or misfortunes.

Flo. Gertrude?


Woolf. Stay Sir, you were to day too near her,
You must no more aim at those easy acce^ses,
Less you can do it in air, without a head,
Which shall be suddenly try'de.

Ber. O take my heart, first,
And since I cannot hope now to enjoy him,
Let me but fall a part of his glad ransom.

Woolf. You know not your own value, that entreat

Ger. So proud a f^end as Woolfort.


Woolf. For so lost
A thing as Florez.

Flo. And that would be so
Rather then she should stoop again to thee;
There is no death, but's sweeter then all life,
When Woolfort is to give it: O my Gertrude,
It is not that, no P^incedom that I go from.
I^ is from thee, that loss includes a^l.

Wool. I, if my young prince knew his loss, he would say so,
Which that he yet may chew on, I will tell him
This is no Gertrude, nor no Hemskirkes N^ece,
Nor Vandoncks daughter; this is Bertha, B^rtha,
The heir ^f B^abant, ^he that caused the war,
Wh^m I did steal, during my treaty there,
For your minority, to raise my self;
I then for^seeing 'twould beget a quarrel.
That, a necessity of my employment,
The same employment, make me master of strength,
That strength, the Lord of Flanders, so of Brabant,
By marrying her ^si, which had not been to do:
She come of ye^rs, but that the expectation
First of her Fathe^s death retarded it,
And since the standing out of Bruges, where
Hemskirk had hid her, till she was n^er lost:
But Sir, we have recovered her: your M^rchantship
May break, for this was one of your best b^^tomes
I think.

Ger. Insolent Devil!


Enter Hubert, with Iaqueline, Gynks and Costin. Woolf. Who are these,
Hemskirke?


Hem. More, more, Sir.


Flo. How they triumph in their treachery?


Hem. Lord Arnold of Benthusin, this Lord Costin.
This Iaqueline the sister unto Florez.

Woolf. All found? why here is brave game, this was sport-royall,
And puts me in thought of a new kind of death for 'em.
Huntsman, your horn: first wind me Florez fall,
Next Gerrards, then his daughter Iaquelins,
Those rascals, they shall dye without their rights:
Hang 'em Hemskirk on these trees; I Will take
The assay of these my self.

Hub. Not here my Lord,
Let 'em be broken up, upon a scaffold,
'Twil show the better when their arbou^'s made.

Ger. Wretch art thou not cont^nt thou have betrayed u^,
But mock us too?

Gynks. False Hubert, this is monstrous.


Woolf. Hubert?


Hem. Who, this?


Ger. Yes, this is Hubert, Woolfort,
I hope he has helped himself to a tree.

Woolf. The first,
The first of any, and most glad I have you Sir,
I let you go before, b^t for a train;
I^'t you have done t^is service?

Hub. As your H^ntsman,
But now as Hubert; save your selves, I will,
The Woolf's a foot, let slip, kill, kill, kill, kil^,

Enter with a dru^ V^n-do^ck Merchants, Higgen, Prig, Ferret, Sn^p. Woolf.
Betrayed?


Hub. No, but well caught: and I the Huntsman.


Van-d. How do you Woolfort? Rascal, good knave Woolfort.
I speak it now without the Rose; and Hemskirk,
Rogue Hemskirk, you that have no niece, this Lady
Was ^tolne by you, and taken by you, and now
Resigned by me, to the right owner here:
Take her my Prince*

Flo. Can this be p^ssible,
Welcome my love, my ^weet, my worthy love.

Van-d. I have given you her twice: now keep her better, and thank
Lord Hubert, that came to me in Gerrards name,
And got me out, with my brave boys, to march
Like Caesar, when he bred his Commentaries,
So I, to end my Chronicle, came sorth
Caesar Van-donck, and veni, vidi* vici,
Give me my Bottle, and set down the drum;
You had your tricks Sir, had you? we have tricks too,
You stole the Lady?

Hig. And we led your Squadrons
Where they have scratc'ht their legs a little, with brambles,
If not their faces.

Prig. Yes, and run their heads
Against ^re^s.

Hig. It Is Captain Prig, Sir.


Prig. And Coronell Higgen.


Hig. We fi^l'd a pit with your people, some with legs,
Some with a^mes broken, and a neck, or two,
I think, be l^o^e.

Prig. The rest too that escaped,
Are no^ yet out of the briars,

Hig. And your ho^ses, Sir,
Are w^ll set up in Bruges all by this time*
You lo^k as you were no^ well Sir, and would be
Shortly let blood; do you wan^ a scarf^?

Vand-d. A halter.


Ger. 'Twas like your self, honest, and noble Hubert:
Ca^'st thou behold these mirrors altogeth^r,
Of thy long^ false, and bloody usurpation?
Thy tyrannous proscription, and fr^sh treason*
And not so see thy self, as to fa^l down
And sinking force a grave wi^h thine own guilt,
As deep as hel^, ^o cover thee and i^?

Woolf. No, I can stand, and praise the toils that took me,
And laughing in them dye; they were brave snares.

Flo. 'Tw^re truer valor if thou durst repent
The wrongs the have done, and live.

Woolf. Who I repent?
And say I am sorry? yes, it is the fools language
And no^ for Woolfort.

Vand^d* Woolfort thou art a ^ivell,
And speakst his ^anguage, oh that I had my longing
Under this row of trees now would I hang him.

Flo. No, let him live, until ^e can repent,
But banished from our State, that is thy doom.

Van^d. Then ha^g his worthy Captain here, this Hemskirk
For profit of the example.

Flo. No, let him
Enjoy his shame too: with his conscious life,
To show how much our innocence contemns
All practice from the gui^tiest, to molest us.

Van-d. A noble Prince.


Ger. Sir, you must help to join
A pair of hands, as they have done their hearts here,
And to their loves with joy.

Flo. As to mine own,
My gracious Sister, wor^hiest Brother:

Van-d. I Will go before, and have the bon-fi^e made,
My fire-work^, and flap-dragons, and good back-rack,
With a peck of little fishes, to drink down
In healths to this day.

Hig, Sligh^, here be changes,
The B^lls have not so many, nor a dance, Prig.

Prig. Our Company's grown horri^^e thin by it,
What think you Ferret?

Fer. Marry I do think,
That we might all be Lords now, if we could stand fo^'t

Hig. Not I, if they should offer it: I'^e dislodge first,
R^move the Bush to another climat.

Ger. Sir, you must thank this wo^thy Burgomaster,
Here be friends ask to be looked on too:
And thanked, who though their trade, and course of life
Be not so perfect, but it may be bettered,
H^ve yet used me with courtesy, and bin tru^
Subjects unto me, while I was their King,
A place I know not well how to resign.
No^ unto whom: But this I will entreat
Your grace, command them, follow me to Bruges;
Where I will take the care on me, to find
Some manly, and more profi^ab^e course
To fit them, as a part of the R^publique.

Flo. Do you hear Sirs? do so.


Hig. Thanks to your good grace*


Prig. To your good Lordship.


Fer. May you both live long.


Ger. Attend me at Van-doncks, the Burgomasters. Ex. all but Beggars.


Hig. Yes, to b^^t hemp, and be whipped twice a week,
O^ turn the wheel for Crab the Rope-maker*
Or ^earn to go along with him, his cours^;
T^at'^ a fi^e course now, in the Commonwealth, Prig.
What say yo^ to it?

Prig. It is the backwardst course
I know in the world.

Hig. Th^n Higgen will scarce thrive by it,
You do conclude?

Prig. 'Faith hardly* very hardly.


Hig. Troth I am partly of your mind, Prince Prig.
And therefore farewell Flanders, Higgen will seek
Some safer shelter, in some other Climat,
With this his tattered Colony: Let me see,
Snap, Ferret, Prig, and Higgen, all are le^t
O^ the true bloo^: what? shall we into England?

Prig. Agreed,

Hig. Th^n b^ar up bravely with your Brute my lads
Higgen has prig'd the prancers in his days:
And sold good peny-worths; we will have a course.
The spirit of Bottom is grown bottomless.

Prig. I Will mand no more, nor cant.


Hig. Yes, your six-peny worth
In priv^te, b^other; sixpence is a sum
I Will steal you any man's dog for.

Prig. For sixpence more,
You Will tell the owner where he is.

Hig. It Is right,
Higgen must practice, so must Prigt, o eat:
And write the Letter: and gi' the word, But now
No more, as either of th^se.

Prig. But as true Beggars,
As ere we were.

Hig. We stand here, for an Epilogue*
Ladies, your bounties first; the rest will follow,
For women's favors are a leading alms,
If you be pleased look cheerely through your eyes:
Out a^ your maskes.

Prig. And let your beauties sparkle.


Hig. So may may you never want dressings, jewels* gowns
Still in the fashion.

Prig. Nor the men you love,
Wealth, nor discourse to please you.

Hig. May you Gentlemen,
Never want good fresh suites nor liberty.

Prig. May every Merchant here see safe his ventures.


Hig. And every honest Citizen his debts in.


Prig. The Lawye^s gain good Clyents.


Hig. And the Clyents good Counsel.


Prig. All the Gamesters here good fortune.


Hig. The Drunkards too good wine.


Prig. The eaters me^^
Fit so their tastes and pallats.

Hig. The good wives kind Hus^ands.


Prig. The young maids choice of Suitors.


Hig. The Mid-wives merry hearts.


Prig. And all good ch^^re*


Hig. As you are kind unto us and our Bush,
We are the Beggars and your daily Beadsmen,
And have your money, but the Alms we ask
And live by, is your Grace, give that and th^n
We Will boldly say our word is, Come again.

FINIS.
THE PROLOGUE.
TO please you with this Play, we feare-will be
(So does the Author too) a mystery
Somewhat above our Art; For all men's eyes,
Ears, faiths, and judgments, are not of one size.
For to say truth, and not to flatter ye,
This is nor Comedy, nor Tragedy,
Nor History, nor any thing that may
(Yet in a week) be made a perfect Play:
Yet those that love to laugh, and those that think
Twelve-pence goes farther this way then in drink,
Or Damsels, if they mark ^he matter through,
May stumble on a foolish toy, or two,
Will make 'em show their teeth: pray for my sake
(That likely am your first man) do not take
A distaste before you feel it: for ye may
When this is hist to ashes, have a Play,
And here, to out-hisse this; be patient then
(My honuor done) y' are welcome Gentlemen.
THE EPILOGUE.
IF you mislike; (as you shall ever be
Your own free Judges) this Play utterly,
For your own Nobleness, yet do not hiss,
But as you go by, say it was amiss;
And we will mend: Chide us, but let it be
Never in cold blood: OF my honesty,
(If I have any) this I Will say for all,
Our meaning was to please you still, and shall.

