A BLOODY PLOT, Brought to light by Gods providence: Wherein was intended, A
great insurrection, and rising of the Papists in diverse Counties of this
Kingdom, on Thursday, October 18. 1641.

ONE Mr BEALE Over-hearing their Discourse, which is here related, according to
the ttue Copy, by him presented to the PARLIAMENT.

With the Number, and Names of some Papists that are committed about the said
Plot: and why?

Whereunto is added, A RELIGIOUS AND GRAVE SPEECH Spoken by Sir Robert Philips
in Parliament, for the drawing up of the Remonshrance ready to the King.

Printed according to the true Coppie, presented to the High Court of
Parliament, by the Author himself, 1641.

A True DISCOVERY Of a bloody Plot.
ON Monday about one or two of the clock in the Afternoon, Thomas Beale
walking in the fields beyond the Pesthouse, hearing the Discourse, perceived
their names, the one to be George, the other philips.

George. What a wicked thing was it, that that plot did not take effect?


Philip, Oh 'twas a wicked thing indeed! but I hope it was dismissed, that a
better might take place.


George. I hope it will prove a better, if it be not unluckily prevented.


Philip. For my part I do not fully understand the matter, for I came but last
night to Town, and as soon as I came to my Lords, they told me I must needs
come again this morning; and when I came, I was conveyed up into the Lords
chamber, and there was my Lord and Father Jones, and Father And^ewes: and
Father Andrews related to me what service I was for, but yet I could not fully
understand the scope of it.


George. No: why, thou know whether thou carriedst thy Letters.


Phil. Yes, I carried Letters into Buckinghamshire, and into Warwickshire, and
into Worcestershire; but I did not know for what: but at one place I was
bravely entertained, at Mr. Sh: as soon as ever he read the letter, he caused
me to he set to dinner, and when I had dined, he gave me a Letter to deliver
to my Lord, and a piece for my self, and charged me to make all speed I could
to London again: but prithee why do thou bring me to stand here?


George. I stand here, because in yonder path (pointing to the rode way before
him) I promised to stay for Dick Jones: thou know him, do not?


Phil. Yes, as well as I know thee.


George, He Is a good lusty fellow thou know, and he is appointed to kill
that raskally puritan Pym, him that has bin the chief cause of our misery.


Phil. But I fear still the puritans will prevail.


George, Tush, tush, prevail; how can that be? being we have so many friends
both in the lower and the upper house; and when all these base puritans are
killed, then on a sudden all the City will be in a tumult, and then on the
instant will there be risings in ^ several places of the land, to my
knowledge: in Buckinghamshire, in Warwickshire, in Worcestershire; in
Lancashire, (the other two places I romember not.)


phil. Yea marry Sir, this sounds well, if we can but escape, we shall all be
made men.


George. If we escape, we shall be brave fellows; Lords, and Knights, and
Gentlemen: and we have as brave ways to escape as ever men had: for we can
quickly change our names, and our clothes, and our face too, and with that he
plucked a false beard out of his pocket, saying, am I the man I was; putting it
on as I conceive


Phil. That is a dainty way indeed, we may thank Father Andrews for that trick;
for if we have but the least time, presently we can change our shapes: but if
we should be taken, it is but our lives, and then we shall be Saints: for we
to day took the holy Sacrament on it, and were shrieved.


George. So did we on Saturday, I was the 37 man, and we had forty shillings a
man: and when that was gone, we might come and fetch more.


Phil. I think I was the last of all for after I was in my Lords Chamber, I
staid till 5 more came, and I understood that Father Jones said we were all,
and I was last set down, and was the hundred and eight, and we had all 40 s. a
piece, (shaking his pockets) but how cunning Father Jones was, he set down all
our names on the one side, and just against them the names of them we should
kill: but prithee who must kill the Lords?


Geor, O they be brave fellows in their scarlet Coats, and their Cloaks lined
with plush, they had ten pounds a man, and if we should prevail, we shall
every man have the possessions and lands of him that we killed: there be 4
Londoners Tradesmen, that are to kill ^ the puritan Citizens*


Phil. I do but think what a racket there will be when this is done; though
all be not killed, yet it will make such a tumult for the time, that it will
make them have little mind to send to Ireland.


Geor. Ay, that was Father Andrews his wit, to prevent sending to Ireland, and
I hope if they prevail there, we shall not need to fear here.


Phil. Thou know him that thou art for ay, as well as I know thee; and I
(swearing most bloudily) will be his death, though it cost me my life a
thousand times, he is a great fa^-guts fellow, either coming down stairs,
or in their Coaches, or at any other place:


Having spoken thus, he that they looked for Dick Jones it seems did appear,
which caused George suddenly to leap up, saying, now he is coming; and by his
sudden starting, he deseryed me on the other side of the bank; which when he
had, he desperately swore he would end me first, and with that, stepping up the
bank on the sudden, ere I could recover my legs, which were so nummed with
kneeling, that indeed for the time I could not stand, he drew his repier and
ran me through my cloak, short coat, breeches, shirt and breeches on the other
side: and by the almighty providence of God, ran betwixt my thighs, and yet
did me no hurt at all: so thinking he had ended me (for indeed I lay still,
being in such a sudden fear with the ^ight, and hearing him speak so
bloudily, and fearing a second blow) he leaped back again, and ran away out
of my sight, before ever I could recover my senses to take notice which way he
ran, but as soon as ever I came to my self, I posted to the Parliament House,
and first related it to Alderman Somes: he and Mr. Pymme satisfied the Lower
House of it, where I was examined, and afterward in the Lords House three
several times: and since that the place has bin seriously viewed, both by
Lords and Commons, and the truth made apparent, and I hope some of the Plotters
taken: which I pray God they may be, if it please him, for Jesus Christ his
sake: to whom be praise for ever, Amen.

THE NAMES of the Papists Committed.
I.
ON the aforesaid 18. day of November, there was one Sherborne a Recusant,
brought as a Delinquent to the House, for saying his Son had hurt a man in the
fields: therefore he had sent him out of the town, that he might not be
questioned, for it was conceived, that his Son had hurt Mr. Beale, and that he
knew of the Conspiracy.

II.
Afterward on Saturday following, the House of Commons was turned into a
Committee, to receive the Names of such eminent Recusants, as bear any Office
in the several Counties, or were any ways suspected dangerous. And they
reported to the House the names of above threescore, which afterward at a
Conference, were delivered to the Lords, desiring, that there might be care
taken of them: especially of one Liltle living about Rachston. The Lords taking
it into consideration, dispatched a Messenger for the bringing of the said
Liltle to the House.

Sir Rohert Philips his worthy Speech in Parliament.
IF ever there were a necessity of dealing plainly and truly, now is the time.
There has bin admission of Papists, priests, and Jesuits, as if it were in
Spain or France: this increase of papists is by conivance of persons in
Authority. Nine hundred and forty persons in houses of Religion in the
Netherlands, being English, Irish, and Scots: and maintained by the papists in
England. And of this, I shall deliver the particulars, that we may frame a
Remonstrance to the King: that unless there be some better performance of his
Majesty's so many gracious Answers to our Petitions, our religion will be past
recovery.

FINIS.

