Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

THE JOURNAL OR DIARY OF A THANKFVL CHRISTIAN. Presented in some Meditations
upon NUMB. 33. 2. And Moses wrote their goings out, according to their
Journeys, by the commandment of the Lord.

By J. B. Master of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel at Barnstone in Essex.

Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord,

Psalm. 107. 43. Who has despised the day of small things?

Zach. 4. 10. Nihil tam conveniens Deo quam beneficentia, nihil autem tam
alienum quam ut sit ingratus homo.

Lactan. de ira Dei ad Donat. cap. 16. (...).

Chrysostom. Romans Hom. 18. London, Printed by E. Cotes, for Tho. Parkhurst, at
the Three Crowns over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside,
1656.

Deo plane, quod debet, retribuere nemo potest, quod tam copiose supra nos
accumulaverit misericordiam; quod tam multa deliquerimus, quod tam fragiles and
nihil sumus; quod tam plenus ille, and sufficiens sibi, nec bonorum nostrorum
egens.

Bern. Sermon. 3. De adventu Domini. Hucusque NOS Adiuvit.

1. Sam. 7. 12

Curato^em mei rerumque me^rum ex pacto Deum habeo; illi been notum est quid
mihi sufficit, and quando conduceret; hactenus non fefellit, quando dubitare
inciperem, and non simul ingratus esse inciperem.

Foxius. To the Right Honorable, truly Noble and Religious Lord Robert Earl of
Warwick, Baron of Leez, etc. And to the Right Honorable the Lady Eleanor
Countess of Warwick, His most Pious and Virtuous Consort; Such an increase of
Grace on Earth, as may bring them to fullness of Glory in Heaven.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS there is no Grace that gives more glory to God, so there is no Grace that
has Rom 4. 20.
more honor from God then Faith: Who though he does all our work for us, and
therefore should have all the glory from us; yet is pleased that Faith should
go away with the praise of that which himself Mark 5. 34.
only does. Daughter thy Faith has made thee whole, says Christ to the woman,
that by the touch of his garment received virtue Heb. 11. 29, 30.
from him and was healed. By faith the Israelites passed through the Red Sea,
as on dry ground. By faith the walls of Jericho fell down. When we know that the
Waters of the one, and the Bulwarks of the other obeyed the sovereign authority
of the Word of Gods command. Yea further, as there is no Grace that brings more
glory to God, so there is no Grace that yields more benefit to us then Faith:
It is a Grace as the most useful, so the most successful, and of the largest
capacity for our good. As thou Mat. 8. 13.
have believed, so be it done unto thee, says our Savior to the Centurion. He
that is enlarged in his faith cannot be straightned in his comfort. Through
Faith God the Father is our portion, God the Son is our pledge, God the Holy
Ghost our earnest; Heaven our home, Holiness our way, the Angels our guard, the
Saints our company, the World our servant, and the Promise under seal our
security. And what would we, what can we have more? yea such is the large
capacity of this Grace of Faith, that could we be rich in that grace, we might
have our wills even with an overplus. Oh Mat. 15. 28.
woman, says our Savior to the woman of Canaan, great is thy faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will. Luther was so strong in faith, and therefore so
powerful in Prayer, that when Frederick Myconius his dear friend was sick, he
prayed for his recovery, and used these words, Hoc peto and volo, and fiat
voluntas mea, This I ask, and this I will, and let my will be done; a while
after Myconius recovered according as he had prayed. Whereupon Justus Jonas
said of Luther, Iste vir potuit quod voluit, That man could have what he would.

Now the reasons why through faith we may have what we will, and more then we
will, are these three.

First, Because by Faith we live the best life in this world; From life to
life, how vast a distance is there? from the life of the highest Angel to the
life of the lowest Mushrome, how great a difference? 1 There is the life of
Vegetation, and that is the life of Plants. 2 There is the life of Sense, and
that is the life of Beasts. 3 There is the life of Reason, and that is the life
of Men. 4 There is the life of Faith, and that is the life of Saints. Now
according to the kind of life, such is the capacity of the creature. The life
of a Beast is more excellent then the life of a Plant, and therefore more
capable of good. The life of a Man is better then the life of a Beast; and the
life of a Saint far above the life of a Prove. 12. 26
mere Man. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, says Solomon;
and therefore more capable of good, the good of the body and the soul, the good
of this life and of that which is to come. As we have believed, so shall it be
done unto us, much faith, and much comfort, whilst we live: rich in Faith, and
rich in Glory, when we shall go hence and be no more seen.

Secondly, Because other Graces make us like unto God, as Wisdom, Holiness,
and Righteousness; but Faith makes Joh. 1. 12.
us Sons of God: As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. And if we be Sons, we are
capable of an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved for us in the heavens; For if Sons, Romans 8. 17.
Heirs, Heirs of God, and co*heirs with Christ, who is heir of all things. Such
a man is capable of being heir to an Esquire of a vast estate; not because he
is like him, but because he is his Son. Other graces make us like unto Christ,
as Humility, Zeal for Gods glory, and Love to the Brethren: but Faith makes us
members of Christ: and it is our membership, our union to Christ, our communion
with Christ, that makes us capable of all that grace and glory that he has for
us, for he is only the Savior of his body. A painted arm and a wooden leg
are like those members, but they draw no virtue from the head. It is, because
we by faith live in Christ, and Joh. 1. 16.
grow up with Christ, That of his fullness we receive grace for grace.

Thirdly, Because Faith is a grace by which we venture upon the willingness
and power of Christ to save and succor us. Every true believer is a Merchant
adventurer, whose returns must be greater then his ventures, or he cannot live;
even so it is with every believer, if God whose thoughts are above our
thoughts, should not send in to our Faith more then we come for, we should live
but Mark 2. 5.
barely. The believing Palsy man and his friends, venture upon Christ for
health; but when Christ saw their faith, by which they brake through all
difficulties (for they would uncover the roof of the house where he was, rather
then not come to him) he gave him health, and the pardon of his sins too, which
was more then they came for. The Prodigal son ventures far Luke 15 22.
upon his Fathers love, yet craves no more but the place of an hired servant;
but he is entertained as a Son, he is clad with the best robe, and fed with the
fatted Calfe; he has a Ring for his hand, and Shoes for his feet, very rich
supplies not only for necessity, but sober delight, which was more then he
desired. Jacobs sons venture into Egypt Genesis 45 25, 26.
for Corn in a time of Famine, and they return with Corn, and Money in their
sacks, yea with very good news at last, Joseph is alive and Governor of all
Egypt. Even thus it is with a believer that can in a straight venture upon God
in Christ according to a promise; his returns are often above his ventures.
Faith is the greatest gathergood in the world; for it is not only according to
our faith, but often abo ve our faith. When the prayers offai th are answered
mercies are multiplied. When Solomon through faith begged of God for a wise and
understanding heart, by which he might be able to judge his people; God gave
him wisdom, and moreover riches and honor more then any King had before him,
or should have after him, so that his return was far above his venture.

Are these things so? what an happy condition are they in then that believe in
the name of the Lord Jesus? and who would not upon these terms make it good to
their own souls, that they have obtained this precious grace of Faith? And that
they have this grace, I know no better evidence then this, That they have high
thoughts of it, and set a great price upon it. Now undoubtedly such as have a
true esteem of faith, will improve all times and talents, will employ all means
for the service of their faith, that they may abound therein. And what better
means can be used for the advancement of faith in the growth and strength of
it, then a rich treasure of experience; every experiment of Gods favor to us,
being a good prop for our faith for the future. Psalm. 74. 14.
Thou breakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces (says the Psalmist) and gave
him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness: that is, Thou (O Lord)
did overthrow Pharaoh and his Host in the Redsea: which experiment of thy
power and goodness, was as meat to the people in the Wilderness, which might
uphold their hearts in the midst of those many evils that were either feared by
them, or inflited on them in that vast, and howling desert. God has, and does,
and will, is the language, and should be the constant tone of faith amongst all
the Saints of God. So did Jacob plead with God when he was ready to meet with
his brother Esau; With my staff I passed over this Genesis 32. 10, 11.
Jordan, and now I am become two bands. Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of
my brother, from the hand of Esau. So did David argue before Saul, I slew the 1 Samuel 17. 36.
Lion and the Bear, and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them.
So did aged Paul reason, I was delivered out of the 2 Timothy 4. 7, 18.
mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and
will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and
ever, Amen. Now doubtless such as will be well stored with such a treasure of
experiments, had need keep a constant Diary by them of all Gods gracious
dealings with them.

To commend which duty to such as desire to grow in this grace of Faith, and
abound therein with thanksgiving, is (Right Honorable) the main scope of this
present Subject, which I have taken the boldness to dedicate to your Honors;
and do humbly pray that it may pass abroad under your Name and Patronage. If
any ask why I trouble the Press, that in these days is so oppressed with a
glut of Books. I answer, that it was not out of any vain humor of mine to
appear in Public, who am so far privy to mine own wants and weaknesses, that I
may truly say, not only as St. Paul, I am less then the least Ephesians. 3. 8.
of all Saints; but as Ignatius once said of himself, Non sum dignus dici
minimus, I am not worthy to be called the least: So that I could never judge my
self able to write any thing that might endure the test of your judicious eyes,
or the censure of this critical age. But indeed, that which principally hinted
to this service, was partly a desire I had to promote a common good; being very
confident that such Christians who walk much with God, and observe him in the
ways of his Providence, may be provoked to this duty, and reap much good
thereby. For without doubt, this work here commended, is very useful, though
the duty be seldom practiced, because the subject is rarely handled. It is as
untroden a path, as ever I have gone; who have had scarce a little day hole of
light to direct me, much less a Cloud of witnesses, or a Pillar of fire, or a
Star to guide me. Partly, and indeed, that which chiefly encouraged me
hereunto, was the memory of those great favors which I have received from both
your Honors; the one my most Noble Patron, Qui curat oves oviumque Magistros, A
true friend to the Church of God, and the Ministers of it. The other, my most
bountiful Benefactor. Nor would I give your Honors thanks in aurem vel in
angulo, but so publicly that I may have as many eyewitnesses of my hearty
acknowledgement of your goodness, as there may be courteous Readers of this
Book. And do presnme that if your Honors will be pleased to throw away an hour
or two in the perusal of these lines, you may be hence encouraged more and
more to observe God in the ways of his providence, and keep some memorials by
you of his goodness to you and yours; which may much increase your faith in
him, enlarge your love to him, and fortify your hearts against the evils of
these times. Confidius a Senator of Rome, one day boldly told Caesar, That the
Senators durst not come to Council for fear of his Soldiers. He replied, Why
then do thou go to the Senate? He answered, Because my age takes away my
fear. Ancient Christians should be very bold and courageous in evil days,
because they are or should be stored with much experience, which will much
increase their faith, and abate their fears. God in rich mercy to you and many
others, has added to your lives many days, and your hoary heads are a crown
of glory to you, being found in the way of righteousness; and therefore you are
by this time I hope above the fears and flatteries of all the world. Now that
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has abounded toward you both,
not only in the outward comforts of Honor and Wealth in the eyes of men, but
that which is far better, in the knowledge of God and practice of holiness
before his Saints, would make you perfect to do his will, and work in you an
increase of all those graces of his Spirit, that do undoubtedly accompany
salvation; that you may live in his fear, die in his favor, rest in his peace,
and rise to his glory; is, and shall be the prayer of

Your HONORS Much obliged, And Most humble Servant, John Beadle.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
OUR blessed Saviors caveat about what, and how we hear of Mark 4. 24.
the things written by God, as Luke 8. 18.
how to hear and read also Books written by men, is now most seasonably
needful; when many soul-sick stomachs are so 1 Timothy 6. 4. (...), vid. marg.
Isa. 7. 16.
childishly weak, they know not how to rufuse the evil, and choose the sound
and good food for souls.

To quicken then thy appetite to this savory meat, held forth in this Pious
Tract (that thy soul may eat, walk in its strength, bless God, and the dresser
of it) let me walk with thee a while in the withdrawing room of a Preface,
about some few things concerning the Author and work it self.

I presume not my single testimony to add to the credit or value of either (the
Surety should be of more note and worth then the Principal) yet my duty of
honor and love to him, my zeal and desire to advance such a design, emboldens
Prosp. de ingratis -- ^ongenitae in Christo gentis mihi castus ah alto.
Insinuatus amor proprias excedere vires Me jubct.
me beyond my ability, with a learned pious Ancient, in a subject not unlike
this, Of the ungrateful enemies of Grace, in his time, the Pelagians.

Concerning the Author of this Journall of a Thankful Christian, my knowledge*
has been above twenty years standing; we were of an intimate society and
vicinity for many years, we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the
house of God in company. He was my guide, and my acquaintance, Psalm. 55. 13, 14.
as David has it. We often breathed and powered out our souls together in Prayer,
Fasting, and conferences. When walking after the Lord in a wilderness, we had
less allowed liberty but more inward enlargednesse of Spirit. At which time he
had the happiness of a younger Elisha (not to 2 King. 3. 11.
power water on the hands, but) to be watered by the droppings of that great
Elijah, that renowned man of God in his generation, Reverend Mr. Thomas Hooker,
and has had ever since the blessing and savor of much of his spirit resting
on him, as was said of Elisha. And having Chap. 2. 15.
mentioned that Name of precious memory, Worthy Mr. Hooker, now at rest with
the Lord (Saint Hooker, I may call him as Latimer, Saint Bilney) it is a real
practice of this Christian Diurnall, to acknowledge with all hearty
thankfulness to God in Christ, before the world, that great mercy, and
unspeakable blessing, which Essex Chelmsford, this Author, my self, and many
others then enjoyed, in the labors of that Powerful, Soul-saving,
Heart-searching Minister of Jesus Christ: for which rich grace and compassion
toward us, we hope some of us shall bless and praise his glorious Name, in a
better world, to all eternity.

As for this Authors painfulnesse, and faithfulness, it is well known to all
that know him, how greatly they shined forth in him, whilst in a very small
place, and how since advanced (by the bounty of his truly Noble and Honorable
Patron, to a higher, and but necessary subsistence) they have continued and
increased; In Catechizing, Preaching on the Lords days, and working days,
holding up the use of those soul-feasting Sacraments, even unto these our
days; wherein these Wels have been either stopped up, or less drawn at; these
choice dishes, either set off the table quite, or seldom fed on, to the
leanness of many souls.

Neither is he only a Practical, but in life and practice a Preacher as in
other particulars, so in the subject of this Treatise, Thankfulness; which as
he has put forth a monument and memorial of herein to God and Man; so I hope,
his name shall live in it, and I heartily desire, thy soul and mine might live
more thankfully by it. As David toward the end of his Book of Psalms, so this
finger of Israel toward the end of his days, summons a consort of all, to
bless the Lord; for which thankfulness in so many gratulatory Psalms, some
have thought the former, and we may in charity hope the latter, a man after
Gods own heart.

Which sacrifice of Thanksgiving and Praise, exciting others also, and calling
them to it, is now the more signally exemplary in him, as his outward estate is
not overmuch, (he being rich especially in Ashers blessing, many children) and
Deuteronomy. 33. 24.
whilst he with many other burning and shining lights, once rejoiced in, yet
now are become Lamps despised, by Job 12. 5.
many at ease, and trodden out as snuffes, before God put on the extinguisher of
death.

I say now, to set himself over the Thanksgiving, and set out such a Psalm of
praise, is thankfulness in deed, and Neh. 11. 17. and 12. 8.
worthy of an Higga^on Selah. Psalm. 9. 16.

For the work it self, as Solomon of the virtuous woman, Let it praise it self
in the gates; its subject being Praise and Thankfulness, it will carry its
commendation in its Name and Title, (...)
as some Emperors, Commodus, Pius, did; a work worthy of thanks and praise.

Besides the ground (or plain song, as I may phrase it) and matter of it, the
form and descanting about it, set off with many Historical applications and
Scripture allusions, yea minding us of some duties obsolete and quite out of
fashion; all these as graces, may render this, a new song; and so not only
profitable, but more pleasurable and acceptable to the Reader.

In a word, the whole is a Pillar of 1 Samuel 7. 12. Josh 22. 34.
Praise, an Eben-ezer set up to the name of the most high God; an Ed; a Stone
of witness, both of Gods goodness to us, and of our evil and unthankfulness
against him.

Praise and thanksgiving is a service becoming the upright, proper to the
Saints, a work of pure grace when purely offered; Confessions, petitions,
nature, outward wants may excite to; but as they say of vain swearing, cursing,
it is all Devil, no profit, pleasure tempts to it; Os Diaboli, Irenaeus.
and as one of murmuring, called it the Devils mouth: so contrarily blessing,
praising is all God, such a mouth is the mouth of God; it is the service of
triumphing Saints, and spirits of men made perfect; Angelical, Heavenly, most
spiritual, and of highest divine extract. The fire must come from above that
kindles this Sacrifice. Christ alone is the Master and teacher of this music,
who only can teach it, and tune our hearts for it, Psalm. 51. 17. and 119. 7.

2. Yea it is a better blessing (a thankful praising heart) then the blessings
for which we commonly bless God; these are earthly, temporal, mostly; this is
a gift of especial grace, an unspeakable gift.

Praise compared with petitionary Prayer, that excellent piece of Divine
worship, excels it as far, as it is better to give then to receive.

3. It is the most proper homage and service to God; therefore by God styled,
Glorifying him, Psalm. 50. 23. Who though he be in his name exalted above Neh.
9. 5.
all blessing and praise; yet it suits him best to receive, and is the highest
we can give, and therefore is called, A blessing of Goa on our part; so much as
man a worm, so far the less, can bless him that is so infinitely the greater.

Vrsin. Catech.
Some Divines make the third part of Divinity, Gratitude, Thankfulness.

It Is not only to continue in eternity, the only service, when believing,
confessing, and mourning for sin shall be no more; but here in this world, it is
ever needful, as salt to every sacrifice, for all things, at all times, Ephesians.
6.

I will praise the Lord at all times, whilst I have any being, says David.

Thou art my praise, said weeping Jeremy.

Paul in sufferings above many, in Doxologies above all.

The Church consuming, saw mercy to bless God for.

Job blessed God taking away, as giving.

Jesus Christ who lived under the Cross, and died under the Curse, yet had
often, Father I thank thee, in his blessed lips.

4 It Is most profitable to our selves: as a sinful oath is fitly called a word
Ecclus. 23. 11, 12.
compassed about with death, so this blessing with life, and many blessings;
Job 36. 27.
the showers of heavenly blessings descend Ascensus gratiarum descensus gratiae.
upon the ascending of these vapors; we give for our selves in thanksgiving, as
the Italian form of begging is, Do good for your selves; we are the greatest
receivers. We manifest Gods goodness herein, but procure our own, yea bless
our selves, in blessing him.

Now this Treatise is a help to this heavenly exercise. A sacred Ephemerides,
The Annals, Chronicles of the glorious Acts of the King of glory, The Court
Rolls and Registerbook for Conscience to keep Courts by.

Which Records well kept, and diligently read, would not only procure rest (as
his Chronicles did to him in Esther) to our souls, in this restless night of
our life; and as by past bounty did cause David to return to rests in the
plural, Psalm. 116. 7. But might Psalm. 116. 7. rests. Hebr.
also stir us up to honor our deliverer, the God of our mercies and
salvations, as Ahasuerus advanced Mordecai.

This Book affords wood, call thou to God for the Lamb and fire; for this
sacrifice, the matter and heads in it are fuel for our Faith and Thankfulness.

We have our State Diurnals, relating the National affairs. Tradesmen keep
their shop books. Merchants their Account books. Lawyers have their books of
presidents. Physicians their Experiments. Some wary husbands have kept a Diary
of daily disbursements. Travelers a Journall of all they have seen, and has
befallen them in their way. A Christian that would be exact has more need, and
may reap much more good by such a Journall as this. We are all but Stewards,
Factors here, and must give a strict account in that great day to the high Lord
of all our ways, and of all his ways toward us.

This Journall is now (in our generation so ungrateful, and unmindfull of
Prove. 25. 11. Heb.
Gods judgments and mercies) a word Ps. 119. 126, 127.
in season running on its wheels. We must be holy Antipodes to sinful times.
We like froward children, either cast away what we have, if not all we desire;
or dote on what we have received, and neglect to return acknowledgement and
observance; our own glory we seek, not the glory of God that gives all.

Many earthly Lords in these days of overturning, losing their Rentals, have
lost their Quit-rents. The most high heavenly Lord Jesus Christ, is the
greatest sufferer and loser in our days, he has lost his quit-rents of Praise
and Thanksgiving from men; yea he has lost and suffered in his name, glory,
day, worship, law, government, offices, officers; well and timely then ought
his Stewards and Bailiffs to demand, Allusion to the Authors name Bedle, an
officer of a Court, a Bailiffe errant (...). v. Minshewes Dictionary. Dr.
Cowels Interpreter.
and call for by new rentals, those old Quit-rents and arrears long ago due;
which if denied, we may well fear his ^raining for his right, and taking
forfeit of all.

Satan that cunning wrastler has ^witched us, or rather bewitched us in ^ur
present age, from one side and ex^eam to another; the whole fabric of ^eligion
(which we expected to be repaired and reformed) is almost quite cast down; many
are fallen from Formality to Profaneness, from Superstition to Atheism:
which was the Prophecy Mr. Greenhams works folio p. 3.
of Worthy Mr. Greenham of these days, long since expressed in his works, when
he instanceth of a Papist that fell to Familisme, and thence to Atheism in his
days.

Many by idolizing some prescribed forms, now cast off all forms of prayer;
and too many from Cathedral chanting, are come to reject that sweet heavenly
Gospel service of singing of Psalms: yea so far from keeping a Diary of bypast
mercies, that they slight and omit daily blessing of God in their families, and
at their meals, for their daily bread and present mercies, though contrary to
Scripture precepts and presidents; as if their food suited not their stomachs
unless it were profane, (like themselves) that is, not sanctified by the Word
and Prayer.

The sacrifice of Thanksgiving was to B. Andrews Ca^ech. fol. referring to L^v.
7. 15.
be eaten on the same day, as one well notes; and in well ordered families
singing Psalms, as Prayers, has been a day^ly exercise.

It Was a grave and just reproof of a right Reverend Father in this City, Dr.
Gouge.
present with his Brethren on their days of Humiliation and Prayer, he
commended their large Confessions and Petitions, but discommended their failing
in Thanksgiving.

And 'twas well answered by another, to one complaining of many wants and
weaknesses, Be thankful, be thankful.

We look more after our privileges by Christ, then our duty we are to practice
toward him; like Tenants, not so ready with their Rents, as to see their
Covenants from the Landlord be made good to them.

But Ingratitude is a sin condemned by the light of nature; the Heathen had
their Hymns to their Gods. Lycurgus made no law against it: man in requiting
kindnesses being a law to himself.

Valor. Maxim. l. 2. c. 1.
In Athens a servant ungrateful after manumission, his Master had an action
against him, and might reduce him to bondage.

2 Timothy 3.
The unthankful and unholy go together in the Word, and are parallel with the
evil.

Unthankfulness is the grave, the hell of benefits, the curse of blessings,
Luke 6. 35. Ingrato quod denatur deperd^ur. Sen^^. Ingratitudo ^eneficiorum
perditio. V^ntusureus and siccans, etc. Bernard ^n Cantic. Sermon. 5^.
a wind that dries up mercies. Let nothing be lost, says our Savior; Bernard
applies it to favor from God.

Nor only mercies and signal works of gracious providence, but judgments,
great changes, overturnings, and the sins of the age are to be registered in
this Christian Journall, as this Author well mixes the ingredients of this
Diary.

As we have two ears, to hear the rod threatening, as the Word promising; so two
eyes, to see sins and sufferings, blessings and mercies. Some would have us
note the works and operations of God, wherein God has exceeded to them; but we
must also consider, wherein they and others have exceeded against Job 36. 9.
God in their transgressions, as Job has it; and the judgments both
spiritual Psalm. 28. 5.
and temporal of our times, else we may be equally destroyed, and sure shall
not keep a faithful Journall.

There is a book of three leaves thou should read daily to make up this
Diary; the black leaf of thy own and others sins with shame and sorrow; the
white leaf of Gods goodness, mercies with joy and thankfulness; the red leaf
of Gods judgments felt, feared, threatened, with fear and trembling.

But what needs this waste, may some say, of time and pains? it is too strict
and precise a practice, a hard saying, at least a duty too legal for Gopel
liberty.

Answ. 1. Gods law is a law of liberty to a gracious heart. None of his
Ambulandum est praeceptis per viam Regiam. B. Andrews Catech. f^l. p. 91.
commands grievous; yea and each command requires not only the duty it self,
but the help and means to that duty to be observed, as Divines generally hold.
Now this Diary is a Directory and help to praise and thankfulness; yea indeed
to the whole practical part of Religion. The Pharisee was thankful for
spiritual mercy, and our righteousness by Christ must exceed Scribes and
Pharisees, upon the penalty of the loss of heaven, Luke 18. Mat. 5. 20.

2. Nor is this imposed on all upon pain of damnation, or so exacted as the
total of all mercies, providence must Psalm. 40. 5. and 71. 15. 94.
be registered. Who can number the stars, or sands; Gods blessings, or our sins?
the most eminent of the first magnitude are to be noted down; as all our sins
are to be laid to heart, but especially the most heinous.

Qui timet esse bonus non timet esse malus.
3. If thou fear to be overstrict in practical godliness, sure without
fear thou will be soon over loose and careless: thou fear not to be strict
for thy estate and outward concernments, why art thou less careful for thy
soul? many not exact in casting up their books, they have cast them up; thy
Audit will be strict, so should thy accounts be.

4. Lastly, the ingenuity of grace in the soul, calls for thus much, not only to
endeavor what may safely carry thee to heaven, but that which may most advance
Gods glory, and thy souls prosperity and happiness.

God kept a Diary in the Creation of the world, Genesis 1. to president this
practice to us.

Mal. 3. 16.
Yea he keeps a Book of Remembrance for us that think upon his name, he numbers
our hairs, bottles our tears, writes us upon the palms of his hands, forgets
not any of our works of love to his name; Registers our names in heaven, and
shall we write down his name, works, love, in water, in the dust on earth?
Shall he lay up our dross, and not we his gold? Shall he remembering Neh. 13. 2.
us, bless curses to us; and shall we by ingratitude and forgetfulness of
him, curse his blessings to us? He has called us to inherit a blessing, and to
bless them that curse us; and shall not we bless our blessed God, that
blesses us? So much the more now as we expect and desire some settlement of
truth and peace.

Bring in your tallies of old, if you look for new mercies to be put upon your
account.

But why do I detain thee so long without in the portall of a Preface? go in,
set thee close to this divine Arithmemetick; sums are best cast up in
solitariness; retire into thy self, set thy heart on Gods ways to thee, and
on thine own ways to him. I heartily desire thy thriving in this spiritual
soul-trade.

Study, not only the notionall Numeration, Addition and Multiplication of
particulars recited and set down in this Christian Journall; but above all look
to the rule of Practice, which in this is the true Golden rule indeed.

I may say (to conclude) of this Book Verba vivenda, non legenda. Aug.
as one of the Scripture, They are words to be lived and practiced, not read
only. And as another of the 119 Psalm, Fgidius Abbot of Norimberg, Boni
Catholici sunt qui and fidem integram sequn^ur and bones mores.
They are good and true Catholics indeed who follow both sound faith and good
manners. This musical lesson of Praise and Thankfulness must be well
practiced.

Which that thou may do, both make thy Journall, and thy life and journey to
heaven, answerable to such a Journall, go to him and set out in his Dan. 8. 13.
marg.
strength, Who is the wonderful numberer, as Daniel styles him; who can teach
thee to number thy days, sins, Gods dispensations to thee and others; yea and
how to profit by all, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Way, Truth and
Life, without whom we can do nothing, and by whom we can do all things; In whom
craving thy prayers and praises for him that is less then then the least of
all his servants and mercies; yet is, and rests

Ironmonger-lane London, October. 12. 1655. thy soul-friend and servant in him
our common Savior. John Fuller.

In Reverendi viri Mr. Johannis Bedle Tractatum pium, and eruditum, viz. Grati
erga Deum animi.
Diarium.
AStronomi populo colllecta Diaria vulgant:
Theiologi haec reliquas vincit Ephemeridas.
Dat chartis loca visa suis spontaneus exul,
Alter ut incertos dirigat inde pedes:
I^inerariu^.
Ad superas Coeli (namque hic via lactea) seeds
Hinc pia men's foelix carpere discat iter.
Scribitur heu nimium, vitiatur casta papyrus,
Nugarum levium pondere praela gemunt,
Quas bis tinctorum, vel quas lymphata Trementum
Secta parit, libros jurgia dura replent.
At pietas, candorque nitent h^c Codice, pectus
Exhibet authoris pagina quaeque sui.
Quicunque inspicies, e nato nosce parentem,
Ore refert patrem. Quod docet, ipse facit.
C. G.

Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the sign of the Three Crowns,
over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
DR. Richard Sibbs his Commentary upon the Second Epistle to the Corinthians,
published for public good by Tho. Manton. in Folio.

Mr. John Cotton his Exposition on the First Epistle of John, with Doctrines,
Reasons and Uses. in Folio.

There will be shortly extant, a Book Entitled, Cathechizing Gods Ordinance,
or A short Treatise concerning that Ancient, approved and soul-edifying
Ordinance of Catechism, by Mr. Zach. Crofton Minister of the word at Buttolphs
without Algate, London; in Octavo.

Courteous Reader.
THou may expect within a short time to see published some new Pieces of Mr.
William Fenners, who was so famous when living, and his works (though he is
dead) has such a sweet (though silent) voice.

T. P.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 27. though, r. thought. p. 5. l. 22. favor, r. favors. p. 9. l.
6. put out all after the word Journies. l. 7. r. in the second verse. p. 16. l.
4. for huge, r. whose. l. 6. for are, r. if. p. 18. l. 10. and a real. p. 26.
l. 1. for praise, r. pains. p. 44. l. 17. for lanes, r. caves. p. 45. l. 3. r.
from strength to strength.

THE JOURNALL OR DIARY Of a Thankful Christian.
NUMB. 33. 2. And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys, by
the commandment of the Lord.


CHAP. I.
The Preface, wherein an entrance is made to the words, and the duty of a
Journall or Diary is propounded.

SUch is the corruption of all, even the best men by nature, that though in
their adversity they seek God early, yet in their prosperity they forget him
commonly. They that in a dark evening are glad of a little star*light, in the
day are scarce thankful for the Sun, when he goes forth in his strength. It
is observable, that the Psalmist taking notice of Gods good hand of Providence
over Travelers, Captives, Sick men, Seamen, and diverse others; repeats this
passage four times in Psalm. 107. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble.
Psalm. 107. 6, 8.
And he does as often add, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness!
Which is as much as if he had said, I know they will perform the first duty, I
wish they may not forget the latter: How many are there that on their sick
days make new promises, but being recovered, forget God, and follow their old
lusts? It is a most provoking ^in to forget God, and the great mercies he has
bestowed on them. How often did they provoke God in the wilderness, (says the
Psalmist of the Israelites) and grieve him in the desert? But how did they
provoke him? As by many other sins there mentioned, so by this ^^a. 78. 40, 42.
especially, They remembered not his hand, nor the day in which he delivered
them.

It so far provokes God, that,

1. There is scarce any other sin that God gives his people so great a charge
to take heed of, as this sin of forgetfulness: So he charged the people of
Israel, by the hand of Moses, diverse times, as Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Where having
declared what God had done for them, he adds this charge, Only take heed to
thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine
eyes have seen, and lest they Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
depart from thy heart all the days of thy life. The like charge is given
them, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. and 6. 12.
Where having told them what they were like to enjoy in the Land of Canaan,
according to Gods promises and oath; that which they never took care of, nor
bestowed cost for; he charge them to beware, lest they forget the Lord.

2. So far is God provoked by the sin of forgetfulness, that as he takes
special notice of it, so he reproves it very sharply. In Psalm. 78. where you
have an history of Gods goodness to his people, this sin of forgetfulness, is
two several times noted* They forgot Gods works, and the wonders he had showed
them, verse. 11. They remembered not his hand, nor Psalm. 78. 1^, 4^.
the day in which he delivered them from the enemy, verse. 42. In Psalm. 106.
this sin is thrice laid to the peoples charge; as, They remembered not and 106.
7* 1^* 21.
the multitude of thy mercies, verse. 7. They soon forgot his works, verse. 13.
They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt, verse. 21.
How sharply does our Savior Christ reprove his Disciples for this sin? Who,
when he bad them take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees; though he
had said that, because they had taken no bread with them: whereupon, Christ
takes notice of this sin, and reproves them for it. What, (says our Savior)
do ye not remember the Mat. 16 8, ^, 1^.
five loaves, and the seven loaves, and how many baskets ye took up? This
forgetfulness p oceeds from your gross ignorance, and your Luke 17. 17.
great unbelief. Were there not ten cleansed? says our Savior of the Lepers,
but where are the nine? There are not found that returned to give glory to God,
save this stranger.

3. So far is God provoked by this sin, that he often plagues it most severely.
So says the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah to the Isa. 17. 10, 11.
people of Israel, Because th u have forgotten the God of thy salvation, and
have not been mindful of the rock of thy strength; therefore shall thou plant
pleasant plants, and shall set it with strange slips. In the day shall thou
make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shall thou make thy seed to
flourish: but the harvest shall be an heap in the day of grief and of desperate
sorrow. Summa est, omnia mala illis provenire ex impio Dei contemptu, says
judicious Calvin on the words. The sum of all that the Prophet had said is
this: That all manner of evils were like to befall them because of their
wicked contempt of God. And who contemns God so much as he that forgets God, in
whom is all our strength and salvation? Let them sow, and plant, and fetch
their seeds and slips from a far Country, and therefore the most choice and
precious; yea let them have great success, let them flourish betimes; that is,
Initio omnia ^ibi succedant pro voto, eruntque priora soelicia ac prospera, at
postea incides in summas aerumnas and calamitates; says Vatablus on the place:
In the beginning let all succeed according to their desire; let the first
undertakings be happy and prosperous; yet afterward thou shall fall into
extreme miseries and calamities. Or as Junius, Regionem tuam colueris, and
studiosissime confirmaveris, ut certum ex ea fructum percipias, etc. Take all
care of thy Country, and strengthen it what thou can, yet in one moment the
Assyrian shall destroy all.

Luther had wont to say that three things would destroy Religion, (and if
Religion be blasted, what good can be expected?) carnal security, worldly
policy, and forgetfulness of Gods benefits. But more of this afterward.

Are these things so? How great is Gods goodness to us? How singular his
loving kindness toward us? who knowing our mold best, and how ready we are to
forget him and his benefits, has in all ages and times afforded many special
means for the helping of our dull memories; that divine favor being remembered,
Gods glory might be advanced, his judgments prevented, and our comforts
enlarged. Hence a pot of Manna Ex^. 1* 33.
must be kept in the Ark, that after ages might know and remember how God had
fed his people with Angels food. For the like use twelve stones must be set up
near the banks of Jordan, and other twelve stones in the Jo^h. 4. ^, 9.
midst of that River, that they and after generations might remember that God
had miraculously made way for the twelve Tribes of Israel, through that flood,
to the Numb. 15. 38, 39.
Land of Canaan. The same people were appointed to make fringes upon their
garments, with a ribband of blew, that they might look upon it, and remember
God and his commandments. For this purpose God set apart solemn days, and
appointed public feasts; as, the feast of Tabernacles, and Pentecost; which,
as they were typical resemblances of better things promised, so were they
memorandums of great mercies vouchsafed. For this end God has ordained
Sacraments, as that of the Passover under the Law, and this of the Lords Supper
under the Gospel; that as at the celebration of the Exodus 13. 3.
one, Israel might remember their deliverance out of Egypt; so we at the
administration of the other, might remember Christ, by Luke 1. 74.
whom we are saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us.
This Supper is not only a representing, a sealing, and a conveying sign, but
a commemorative sign. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 26.
Do this in remembrance of me, says Christ. There is no Gospell-ordinance,
whether prayer, reading, or hearing of the Word, but there is such mention made
of Christ as we ought to remember him. But this ordinance of the Supper has
this signal note of excellency stamped upon it above all, a special charge
from Christ to remember him when that is administered; Do this in remembrance of
me; for, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show, that is,
ye make a commenoration of the Lords death till he come.

Sometimes (that we may come to the subject matter intended) God appointed
Records and Registers of his mercies, Histories and Journalls of the noble acts
and loving kindnesses of the Lord to his people, to be kept and conveyed to
posterity, that the generations to come might know them, even the children that
should be born, who should Psa. 78* 5, 6.
arise and declare them to their children, Thus the Lord commanded that the
History of Amalek should be written in a Book, their malice and Gods mercy,
their war and overthrow; and it must be rehearsed to posterity, Exo. 17. 14.
that it might never be forgotten. What this Book was, we shall not much
enquire. Some say it was the Book of Jasher, mentioned Josh. chap. 10. which
was a Chronicle of the acts of the people of the Lord, which is lost. Some say
it was the Book of the Judges. Some say it was a Book of the Battails of the
Lord, mentioned Numb. 21. 14. Others, and that most probably, that it was no
other but this Book of Exodus; Junius and Calvin. But why this History must be
written in a Book is more worthy of our inquiry, and more suitable to our
purpose. And the reasons may be these two:

1. That a thankful remembrance of so great a deliverance from so malicious an
enemy, might be continued in the generations following.

2. That the people of God knowing what sentence was denounced against Amalek,
which should be executed in due time, (as it was in the Reign of Saul) might be
the better encouraged to fight against them, and through faith expect the
victory over them: And thus in this Chapter God would have the Journals of the
people of Israel from Egypt to the Land of Canaan recorded, that the great
things God had done for them by the way, might not be forgotten; for so it is
said in the Text. Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys, by
the commandment of the Lord.

In this Chapter two parts are observable,

1. An Israelitish Journall is recorded, from verse. 1, to v. 50.

2. A direction is given them, concerning their proceedings in and with the
Land of Canaan. Which is threefold:

1. That they should cast out the inhabitants, v. 52, 53.

2. That they should destroy their idols, v. 52.

3. That they should divide the Land amongst them by lot, v. 54.

The two former whereof are seconded with a most sharp threatening, that if they
did not punctually observe Gods command therein:

1. For the present, that people should prove a continual snare unto them.

2. For the future, what God had intended to these their enemies, should fall
upon their own heads: all this to the end of the chapter

In the Israelitish Journall two things are to be considered,

1. The duty is in general propounded, v. 1, 2.

2. You have an Historical enumeration of their several Journeys, in v. 2.

In which three things are to be noted,

1. The matter that stands upon record, and that is their journeys, according
to their goings out.

2. The Scribe that recorded them, and that was Moses, Moses wrote, etc.

3. The authority by which he did it; and that was the commandment of the
Lord, he had very good warrant for what he did. The first of these, namely, the
matter that stands upon record, their journeys, is that which I shall
principally take notice of.

In which Journall this is observable,

That there is not only a particular relation of the place from which, and the
place to which they journeyed, as from Rameses to Succoth, etc. but also a
singular mention is made of all the great passages of Gods good hand of
providence over them, together with their murmurings and rebellions, by which
they provoked him. All which are in this chapter employed, and some particulars are
expressed, as you may find, v. 9, 14, 38, 40. This chapter being but a short
Epitome or abridgement of the whole History. So that in the Israelitish
Journall you shall find how here God gave them bread from heaven, there water
out of the rock, in one place he delivered them from the violence of the mighty
waters; in another, from the fury of their potent enemies: Now he saved them
from the cruelty of the Egyptians, at another time from the malice of the
Amalekites; and soon after, from the sting of the fiery Serpents. To day he
gives them Manna and Quails, good food for their hungry bodies; to morrow he
delivers them his Law, with many divine ordinances and statutes, for the good
of their souls: In all their goings out he afforded them plentiful pledges of
his care of them, bounty to them, and patience toward them. Who,
notwithstanding the many grievous sins by which they provoked him, being full
of compassion, forgave their iniquities, Psa. 78. 38, 39.
and destroyed them not; yea, many a time he turned away his anger, and did not
stir up all his wrath, for he remembered that they were but flesh, etc.

By this time we are come to the Observation that is intended, and may hence be
collected, and that is this,

Doct.
To keep a Journall or Diary by us, especially of all Gods gracious dealings
with us, is a work for a Christian of singular use.

I say, of Gods gracious dealings with us, in a more especial manner; because
it is good also to observe and keep a good account of the several occurrences
of the Times we meet with, as they have reference to the Country and Nation we
live in. It is good to keep an History, a Register, a Diary, an Annals, not
only of the places in which we have lived, but of the mercies that have been
bestowed on us, continued to us all our days. This was the practice of David
the Servant of the Lord, who made a Psalm and Song in the day that the Lord
delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, Psa. 1^. titl.
and from the hand of Saul. Moses writes his Book called Deuteronomy, which is
nothing else but a repetition of the Journeys of the people of Israel, and the
great things God had done for them, in their goings out to that day. There was
scarce any thing in Israel, but was typical; their Meats, their Drinks, their
Mann^, their water out of the rock, their Prince, Priest, Prophet; their
sacrifices, their whole service; yea, the very Land of Canaan was a type of
heaven, and was not their voyage a type of our pilgrimage? their journey from
Egypt to Canaan, a sign of our passage from bondage to liberty, from
darkness to light, from a vale of tears to thee joys of heaven? See this
parallel in six passages.

1. They were brought out of Egypt with mighty hand, and we are delivered from
the Exodus 14. ^.
slavery of sin and Satan, by the arm of the Lo^d. The Creation of the world,
Sun, Moon, and Psalm. 8. 3.
Stars are the work of Gods fingers; and all the great things he does for us in
the world, Isa. 53. 1.
are but finger-work in comparison of ou^ Redemption by Christ, that is indeed
the work of his arm.

2. They had many and mighty enemi^ that stood in their way, and opposed them
The Egyptians, and the Amalekites, Sihon the King, and Og the Giant; and we in
thi^ Ephesians. 6. 12.
way fight not with flesh and blood alone, but against principalities and
powers, against the r^lers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness^ in high places.

3. They had a red Sea to pass thorough and we our temptations and trials to
pass^ ^ Tim. 3. 12.
over; for, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

4. They had a bunch of grapes in the wilderness, and we a taste of Gods
goodness^ in this present evil world. It is sometimes fair weather over head,
though foul under feet; we have peace with God, though trouble in the world.
When Joseph dealt roughly with his Brethren, yet even then they carried home
corn and money in their Sacks: As it is never so well with us, but we have
cause to be humble; so it is never so ill with us, but we have cause to be
thankful.

Exo. 12. 38.
5. They had a mixed multitude went up with them; and we have sheep and goats
in the same fold, wheat and tares in the same field, corn and chafe on the
same floor, go^d fish and bad in the same stream, Saints and Hypocrites in the
same visible Church. In the Ark amongst eight, there was a Cha^* ^ Christ's
family amongst twelve, there was a Judas; in the primitive times, amongst he
seven Deacons, there was a Nicholas. Our est Congregations are mixed companies,
(...) heaven only the Assembly shall consist of oly ones, the spirits of just
men made perect.

6. Lastly, they had a Journall of all Gods mercies, and why not we a Diary of
ll Gods gracious dealings with us? If this ast has nothing of type in it, I am
sure t has of president; for, whatever was writ^n before, was written for our
learning.

CHAP. II.
The matter whereof a Journall or Diar^ is compounded, and first National and
public.

IN the prosecution of this Subject in hand, I would do these two things:

1. Discover the materials whereof this Journall does consist.

2. Show the manner how it is to be used. For the materials, they are twofold:

1. Either National, and more public.

2. Personal, and more private.

For those that are National, and of public concernment, they may be reduced
to these five heads.

1. Take notice what Kings and Princes, what Magistrates and Governors have
ruled over us; for commonly, Such Prince, such people. They that come of the
yielding Willow, and not of the sturdy Oak (as a Marquess of Winchester had
wont to say) will yield with the Time, and ever be of the Religion of the King
their Master: They can be Pagans under Di^cletian the Heathen ^mperor, and
Christians under Constantine ^he Reformer: Such again will turn Arians under
Constantius the Heretic, Backsliders under Julian the Apostate, and with
Jovinianus ^or preferment turn Orthodox. Hence the Ancients were wont to place
the statues of their Princes and Patriots near their foun^ains; intimating
thereby, that if their Magistrates were good, they were the springheads of much
happiness to the people; but if wicked, the original of misery and mischief.
If wicked Jeroboam set up idols, 1 King. 12. 30.
Regis ad exemplum, all Israel are made to sin through his example. If Hezekiah
be forward 2 Chr. 31. ^.
in reforming Religion, so are the People. When certain Ambassadors praised the
Lacedemonian Soldiers for their good order, in being well regulated by Martial
discipline who were before mutinous and injurious; one of them answered, Nos
iidem sumus qui ut nuper, sed alius nunc nobis est Dux: We are the same we had
wont to be, but now we have another General. That Nation is happy, that can
say of their chief Governor, as one of Readiness Courtiers spoke of David, when he
commended him to his Master, He is 1 Samuel 16. 1^.
a cunning player on the Harp, a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and
prudent in matters; a comely person, and (that which made all excellent) the
Lord is with him. He is a great Soldier, and a good Scholar, like another
Caesar, that did as much by Arts as by Arms; he is a wise Statesman, and as
religious as noble; so ruling over men that he is just, ruling in the fear of
God. Goodness and Greatness, when they meet together in the Grandees of the
World, huge swelling titles in their Coyns and Charters are accompanied with
grace and godliness, are like a ring with a rich Diamond, that raises the
price of it very high. Oh! how winning and prevalent are such men's examples? He
that carries a light in a dark evening in London, seldom goes alone; and that
ship in the Navy that has the Lanthorn, and sets out the light, shall not want
followers. It is so in a good example, though given by a mean person; but if
the light of Magistrates so shine before men that they may see their good
works, how do they glorify God, and endeavor by all means to walk in those
ways? And the reason is, because Subjects study the lives of their Princes
more then their laws, and esteem their examples as current as their coin: Hence
it is, that as their personal virtues are public ornaments, so their proper
vices are a Kingdoms injuries.

2. Observe what that Religion is, that by those Magistrates is embraced, and
how the truth is countenanced or opposed by them.

Charles the Great was wont to set his Crown upon the Bible, as Canutus
sometimes put his Diadem upon the Rood, both thereby intimating, that as all
honor was due to ^d, so true Religion was the best basis for ^overnment, and
that Piety was the best ^licy. The Lions that upheld Solomon's ^rone were of
pure gold. A Princes Reli^on should be pure, not polisht; it should be ^defiled
before God, as well as pretended in e ^ight of men. And indeed the best way
(...) facilitate the affairs of State, for the best ^vantage of a
Commonwealth, is to carry (...) Religion, and seek the glory of God in ^e
first place. It is observable, that the Is^elites in their journey to Canaan,
went no ^ster, nor no farther then the Ark. And when ^ey returned from Babylon
to their own Ezr. 3. 3. 4* 10.
and, they first set up the Altar, and offered ^urnt-offerings, they kept the
feast of Taberacles, Nehem. 3.
and built the Temple before they set p the Wall. And had we in our generation
^een as wise, and observed Gods and his peo^les method; that is, first sought
the King^ome of heaven, and the righteousness there^f, then all outward good
things had Matt* 6. 33.
^een added to us. Had we sought Gods glory before our own grandeur, we had
better ^rovided for our own and the Kingdoms ^afety. It is observed, that the
Disciples at sea, (...) the absence of Christ, by reason of a storm, ^owed
slowly and dangerously; but as soon Ioh. 8. 21.
^s they willingly received Christ into the ^ip immediately, they came to the
land whi^her they intended. The most politic Pilots that ever sat at the
stern of any Common-^ealth, were never able through the depths of State to
drive on their designs with success, unless they took Christ along with
them. They that trust much to their own^ pates and policies, without an eye to
God are like Boys that stand on their heads, and fling up their heels against
heaven; as thi^ standing is dangerous to the state of the Body, so that
trusting to carnal policies, with a neglect of Religion by some, and a
contempt of real opposition against the truth by others, are as destructive to
the body of any State in the world. The Bishop of Mo^^ Pulciano told Charles the
Emperor in the Council of Trent, that it was one of the chief instructions
Pope Paul the third ga^ to his Legate, to commend to that Assembly That
Principalities cannot be preserved where Religion is lost: And it was a good
Law that (...) Danish King of this Land made, That at the general Court of
every Shire, the Bishop of t^ Diocese should accompany the Sheriff; that t^
one might countenance Gods law, the other man Much like the practice of good
Jehosaph^ whose heart was lifted up in the ways of t^ 2 Chr. 17. 8.
Lord. He sent with his Princes the Levite^ to teach in the Cities of Judah.
The Princ^ are said to teach; that is, either by the Levites, whom they did
company, count^nance, and encourage in the work; or rath^ the Princes taught
the Laws of the Land, t^ Levites the Law of God, and both did mutually help
each other.

3. Keep an account of the various and ^angeable condition of the Times in ^e
Country where we live, either for rosperity or adversity, with the fruits nd
effects of both. Omnium retum est vicissido. There are no sublunary comforts
but ^e subject to change. We have sometimes ^n-shine, and sometimes rain; we
have someme day, and sometime it is night with us. ^he Church of the Jews under
the Old Teament had sometimes War, and sometimes eace. Jabin King of Canaan
mightily opressed Israel twenty years; but the Lord iscomfited Sisera his
Commander in chief Judge. 9* 4. and 3. 15. and 5. 31.
with all his host before Baruch, and the Land ad rest forty years. How
punctual is the oly Ghost in observing the very circum^ances, not only of
person and place, but f the very time, how long they had War, nd how much
longer time they enjoyed eace? Under the reign of Solomon, that eople enjoyed
much peace. Judah and Israel ^ere many, as the sand which is by the Sea shore
(...) multitude, eating, and drinking, and making 1 Kin. 4 2^.
^erry. But in the days of Abijah his Grandhilde, Israel and Judah fought one
against ^other, so that there fell down stain of Israel ^ve hundred thousand
chosen men at that battle. challenge any man that is most verst in 2 Chro. 13.
17*
^istory, to give me a parallel.

The Church of the Jews under the Go^pel, about the time that Stephen was
stoned, hrough the heat of persecution was sca^tered abroad, throughout the
Regions of J^dea and Samaria: But when Saul became Pa^ and of a Persecuter
turned a Preacher, T^^ Act. 8. 1. and 9. 31.
had the Churches rest throughout Judea and G^lee, and Samaria, etc.

This one thing amongst other is record^ in the sacred Journall of the
Israelites sometimes they had plenty, and sometim^ they wanted bread and water;
sometim^ they had peace, and sometimes their enemi^ made war against them;
sometimes the enjoyed health, and sometimes the plagu brake out amongst them:
And thus it ha^ been in all the generations and ages (...) the world. England,
that some have call^ Terra Florida, or the fortunate Island, that, wi^
Capernaum, has been lifted up to heaven, (...) the enjoyment of peace and
plenty, the Gospel of peace, and the peace of the Gosp^ together, for many
years; so that enoug cannot be spoken upon this subject, to t^ praise of God,
the envy of our enemies, an^ the blot of our ingratitude. But we ha^ had our
changes. We have sinned away a^ our comforts. Our peace brought plenty our
plenty nourisht pride, our pride beg^ contention, our contention drew the sword
and the sword a civil sword, the sharp^ and sorest of all Gods judgments, ha^
turned our peace into war, our plenty into penury, our friends into enemies;
(...) that our blood has been spilt, and o^ treasure spent, and our glory
stained most beyond all example. Where every ^y, Mart cadunt subito per mu^ua
vulner a fratres.

In a battle betwixt Sylla and Marius, both ^omane Commanders, a Soldier
having ain one, and afterward understanding that (...) was his Brother, in
anguish of spirit ^rust his sword into his own bowels. Titus ^espastan Emperor
of Rome, wept when he ^aw the destruction of Jerusalem, and the great aughter
of the Jews, chiefly occasioned hrough their own civil dissensions; but hat
which has heightened our misery, and fear aggravated our sin very much, we grew
(...) that height of heat and bitterness, that we ejoyced over our brethren
when we obtained ny victory against them. Pliny reports this ^f the Dragon,
that fighting with the Ele^hant, he got under the belly of that mighty ^east,
where he sucked out the blood so far, ^at at last the Elephant fell, but with
his all crushed the Dragon to death. He that wins most by a civil war, will be
a great oser at the last. Philip Duke of Burgundy his emblem of a flint-stone
and a steel stri^ing one against another so long till both ^re consumed, does
lively set out the miseries of that fire that is made by domestical ^rms. A
forain enemy cannot wish us a greater mischief, nor themselves a greater
advantage, then our intestine wars. Hence the Turks use to pray unto God, to
keep the Christians at variance; which caused o^ of their Emperors to say to
his Council dissuading him from making war with the Germans, because of their
multitude and fortitude; that he feared them not, because (says he) sooner
would his fingers be al^ of a length, then their Princes be all of on^ mind.

4. Keep a Diary of the several and mo^ remarkable judgments that God has i^
our time inflicted upon notorious offende^ whether persons in high places, or
such (...) moved in a lower orb. The holy Gho^ takes special notice of such
in the Scriptures. Few men went to the grave in peace, that by their monstrous
impieti^ made war against heaven and his Church As, what became of Pharaoh the
bloody* and Achitophel the crafty? of Balaam the covetous, and Corah the
rebel? of Haman the proud, and Herod the fox? As their live were wicked, so
their ends were fearful. I^ like manner, what became of Absalom the
disobedient, and Ela the drunkard? (...) Zimri and Cosbi the unclean? of Anani^
and Saphira those liars? Were not all these taken away with a stroke in their
sin? Wha^ became of those Roman Nimrods, as Maxentius the Tyrant, and Julian
the Apostate, with others, who hunted the Saints of God to death in those ten
persecutions mentioned in Ecclesiastical Histories? How few o^ their hoary
heads went to the grave in peace?

To come nearer to our own times. What became of wily Winchester, and bloody
Bonner, with many others that ruled the roste in those Dog-dayes of Q* Mary's
reign? Few of those bloody and deceitful men lived out half their days: But
when the scumme was at the highest, it fell into the fire; for though God did
bear them up for some time in their essence, yet he would not bear them out at
all in their malice. God has leaden feet, but iron hands; though he comes
slowly, yet he strikes surely. It is good to mark the ends of men. Mark the
perfect man (says the Psalmist) and behold the upright, for the end Psalm. 37.
37.
of that man is peace. Balaam did so as wicked as he was, which made him wish
that he might dye the death of the righteous, and Numb. 23. 10.
that his latter end might be like his. In like manner mark the end of the
transgressors, for they shall be destroyed together, the end Psalm. 37. 38.
of the wicked shall be cut off; that is, they shall not dye the common death
of all men, but shall be cut off in the midst of their days. If their lives be
tragical, their deaths are seldom comicall. Zoroastes the inventer of Magic
(as some Historians affirm of him) laughed at his birth, but dyed a woeful, and
a lamentable death, being banished from his Country. Alphonsus Dyazius a
Spaniard, a rigid Papist, procured a notorious cutthroat to mur^her his
Brother John Dyazius, a sincere Protestant, because he could by no means turn
him from the truth; but the righteous Lord would not suffer such an unnatural
villainy to go unpunished; for not long after he was haunted by the terrors of
his own conscience, that being at Trent when the Council sat there, (for he
was one of the Popes Lawyers) he hanged himself about the neck of his own
Mule. How have some godly Divines taken good pains in writing the stories of
God^ judgments upon notorious malefactors, a^ Drunkards, Swearers,
Sabbath Breakers, and such like? Would others be persuaded in their generation,
to take special notice, and keep some account of such memorable accidents, the
benefit would be singular. The righteous shall see and fear (says the
Psalmist) What shall they see? That God destroyed the mighty man, that boasts
himself in mischief, that God takes him away, and plucks him Psalm. 52. 5, 6, 7.
out of his dwelling place, and roots him out of the land of the living.

A Servi^g-man being at a Tavern in Essex, and threatening to swear the
Constable out of the Town, if he came there; in a drunken fit running after one
to make him pledge him a pint of sack at a draught, fell down the stairs, and
dyed instantly, November. 1. 1626.

A Fisherman (that I knew) bringing Mackerell to a Port-town in Suffolk, where
the people (because they were new, and the first that came that year to Town)
pressing eagerly to buy them, and some against his will being entered into his
boat, he took up a stone, and swear by the name of God he would make them stand
further off, instantly sunk down, and soon after dyed.

How many in my time have I noted! Would others do the like, how would men
consider such things, and understand the righteous judgments of the Lord?

5. Finally, consider seriously, and observe very strictly, what the National
Epidemicall sin of the time and present generation may be. Where iniquity
abounds, it is hard to determine, but questionless every age has a peculiar
distemper. In times of commotion, when the bands of love are broken into
several parties and factions, as they have been lately amongst us, it is more
easily discerned.

A noble Gentleman of singular abilities, and one much employed in affairs of
State in his time (whom I knew well) advised his friends at such a time to buy
up all the Pamphlets that were printed, if of any considerable worth; for when
people fall out, they commonly speak out; and if they be once drunk with
passion, and their distempers boil to any height, the most secret venom will
swim on the top: By which means you may easily seel the pulse of the present
time, and discover what is the National and most predominant sin: and it
will be worth our praise to know it.

Which that we may the better do, let us look back a little to the generations
behind us.

1. Some times have been more notorious for drunkenness. Scaliger in his Book
de Lingua Latina, observes this of the Germans in his time, that their vivere
was bibere, not only in their pronunciation, as he noted; but in their
practice, as other well observed, who lived that they might drink.

Seneca foretold so much of some times, that men should be so drowned with this
sin of drunkenness, that plurimum meri sumpsisse virtus esset, it should be
esteemed a virtue to strive with the Brewers horse who should carry more
liquor; and with some it has been of that esteem, that not as drunk as a
Beggar, but as drunk as a Prince, has been a kind of proverbial commendation
of some.

When Aeschines commended Philip King of Macedon, for a Joviall man, who would
drink freely; Demosthenes being by, told him, that this was a good quality in a
Sponge, but not in a Prince.

Drunkenness is a sin that lays men open to all iniquity more then any sin.
Ebrietas in se culpas complectitur omnes. What sin is not Prove. 23 33.
a Drunkard subject to? Their eyes shall behold strange women, (says Solomon)
and their hearts shall utter perverse things. And a sin it is that God has
more frequently and suddenly plagued with death in the very act then any other
sin.

Edgar a King of England, observing in his time that excessive drinking
abounded in the Land, through the example of the Danes that dwelt in diverse
parts of the Kingdom; to prevent that evil, ordained that their cups they
drank in should have certain pins or nails put in them, beyond which if any
drank at one draught, he should pay so much money.

2. Some generation has been more infamous for that sin of Swearing, and that
by the name of God, even at every word here in England. Insomuch that a family
in this Land, and that no mean one, was so notorious for this sin, that they
had the name of the Bygods given them, and were so usually called.

I remember, Mr. Fox in his History of the Acts and Monuments of the Church,
reciting many evidences whereby he proved the antiquity of Priests Marriage,
sets down the copy of a Release made by William Bygod, Lord of Little Bradley,
to Henry Denardestone Clerk, and Alice his Wife; and questionless that name of
Pigot was originally the same, though in succession of time, and very wisely it
was changed: Omne peccatum suam habet excellentiam: Every sin has some
peculiar vileness, wherein it may be said to excel other. There Is not any sin
that does more plainly discover the great profaneness of the heart, as common
swearing, especially Mat. 12. 34.
by the name of God, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

3. Some times that are gone over our heads, and therefore far behind us, have
been infected with an itching humor after Superiority, wherein persons not
content to abide in the calling that God set them in, have indevoured to go
beyond their proper line, and so broke their ranks. Thus Absalom was not
content with the place of a Son, nor Hazael with the rank of a Subject, nor
Jezabel with the condition of a Wife, whose desires should be subject to her
Husband, whose right it was to rule over her. Thus the lowest of the people
under the countenance of Jeroboam would be Priests, and it was a small thing in
the eyes of Corah and his company, that God had brought them Number. 16. 9.
nigh unto himself to do service, but they must seek the Priesthood also. Thus
Jeroboam the Servant of Solomon is not contented, 1 Ki. 11. 26.
unless he may lift up his hand against his Master. How sad was that time
amongst the Scythians, who whilst they made their third Expedition into Asia,
and tarryed seven years (as Justin in his History reports) were turned out of
their beds and possessions by their servants that were left behind to keep
their cattle, and at their return were kept out by force of Arms by those
slaves who had taken their Wives, and possessed their goods. Not much unlike
that of the people of Israel, servants ruled over them, Lam. 5. 8.
and there was none to deliver them.

Caesar riding one day through a Town, was asked by one, whether there were
any striving for offices and places of honor in that place, answered that he
had rather be the chief man in that little Village, then the second person in
Rome; an itching humor it is after greatness, that has run in a blood from
Adam and Eve to this day, who were not content with their standing, but would
be as Gods, knowing good and evil: Now as the root of this humor is extreme
pride, so the fruit is confusion; first I say pride is the cause, there are
none that are so low in their deserts, but are very high in their thoughts;
even the bramble has great thoughts and high words too of his shadow, Judge. 9
15.
and it was but a shadow. Absalom, and Hazael, and Iezebel, and Jeroboam
thought they could manage the affairs of a Kingdom better then David, or
Benhadad, or Ahab, or Solomon. Every simple Cobbler thinks he can go beyond his
Last, and preach far better then his Priest: Ye Sons of Levi (says he) take
too much upon you: But the fruit of such ambition is mischief and confusion.

Some Country Pesants that behold the stars to glister in the horizon on the
top of a mountain, think if they were there they could reach the heaven, and
order the stars, but being exalted on that mountain, they are as far to seek as
before. What became of Absalom the Rebel, and Hazael the Traitor, and Iezebel
the Proud? of Jeroboam the Servant, and Corah and his company? As none did so
ill, so none sped worse, their mischief lighted on their own heads, and (like
to Phaeton) their violent dealing on their own pates. Those Scythian slaves,
though their Masters could not beat them with their weapons, yet at the sight
of their Masters rods and whips ran all away, and at last perished.

But you will ask me, What may be the sin of this time? Somewood is more apt to
breed worms, and some cloth more ready to breed moths, and some times have
their peculiar sins. But, what is the sin of this age? which is more
considerable for us, then the looking back to the times that are past.

1. Some say our great divisions, our most bitter contentions, and that amongst
Brethren, is the sin. And indeed this evil is grown to that height, that they
that should dye one for another, can hardly live one by another. Surely such
divisions amongst those that profess godliness, cause great thoughts of
heart, for the nearer the union is, the more dangerous is the breach; broken
bones are not so soon healed, nor sinews that are cut so soon knit, as great
gashes in the flesh may be cured; if a cable rope be broken, it is very hardly
tied together. If the Father and the Son, if the Husband and the Wife fall out,
they are hardly reconciled; and, as Solomon says, A brother offended Pro. 18.
1^.
is harder to be won then a strong City. We do not find that Paul and Barnabas
ever met together again after they parted asunder, Act. 15. 39.
through their sharp contention. Which made Cosmus a Duke of Florence say, We
are commanded to forgive our enemies, but we never read that we are bid to
forgive our friends. And that which makes our contention so much the more
grievous, is, that one special means that God has appointed for the uniting
of Brethren, is become a ground of the greatest quarrel. The Lords Supper is a
feast of Loves, a communion ordained to nourish union, and yet at this feast we
have found a bone of contention, and an apple of strife. And it is observable,
that when any listen to seducing spirits, and separate from this ordinance,
they grow sour and sullen to their dearest friends. Our Savior Christ
foretelling the evils of the latter days, gives this as a badge of the last
and worst, the old and cold age of the world: Iniquity shall abound, and the
love of many shall grow cold. But what is the cause of both? Many false
Prophets shall arise, and shall seduce many; and surely the difference of
judgment will ever cause a distance in affections. Firebrands though they do
not smoke more when they are out of the chimney, yet I am sure they offend
more, and may prove dangerous. The novel opinions of these times kept within
doors do too much harm; but spread abroad by the boutefewes of these times
through their burning charity are ready to set all on fire. And most people
either out of ignorance or easiness, are like foot-travellers, who when they
come to a style that stands near a gap, leave the style and go in at the
breach; take up any error that causes division, rather then take the pains to
try the spirits, to prove all things, and keep that which is good. Unity is the
highest mystery in heaven, and would be the greatest happiness on earth, could
we enjoy it* Union is from God, division from the Devil, who where he comes
with his cloven feet, separates chief friends; and surely such are factors for
hell that cause divisions, that observe Machidvel's rule, they divide that they
may rule; but surely the end of such ways will be their own confusion. The
champion Mile when he thrust his hands into the clefts of an Oak, thinking
thereby to make the breach the wider, was caught, and there held till he was
devoured by wild beasts. God grant that such envyous persons, that do sow the
tares of division, may reap the fruit of such labors, even confusion. He Jer.
32.
graciously fulfill his promise, and give us one heart and one way; He hear the
prayers Job. 17.
of his dear Son, and grant that we may be one; He turn our heart-burnings into
heart-breakings, and unite us fast together in the unity of the spirit, with
the bond of peace. This I contesse is one of the sicknesses of these times,
which alone is enough to make a gracious heart weary of his life, and long to
be at home in heaven, out of the reach of ^o mischievous an evil. Melanchthon,
when he lay on his deathbed, discovered not only much willingness to dye, but
much joy ^t the thoughts of his approaching end; and being asked by one the
reason of it, answered, that it was because he should then see Christ and his
Church above, where he was sure there was no such contentions amongst brethren,
as was here, which he often ^amented with tears. This I say is our sickness,
but yet my finger is not upon the plague sore.

2. Some peradventure will think Hypocrisy to be that sin; and indeed much
profession of Religion without the power of godliness is common in these
days, wherein men have learned the art of looking one way, and rowing another;
pretending one thing, and doing the quite contrary. These are like not only
Apothecaries boxes, that have golden titles, and nothing in them, but like
painted sepulchers, full of rotten^esse and noisome filthiness. There are
seven abominations in such men's hearts. These men are like curious pictures of
men and women, drawn to life; but if you look behind them, you may see store
of dust and cobwebs. Or, they are like to some of our Innes in Market Towns,
where you may see a Crown for the Sign, and a Beggar for the Host; an Angel at
the door, and a Devil for the Hostess: who under the glorious profession of
sanctity, dare act the ^ Ki. 10. 16.
greatest villainy. Jehu his pretense is zeal for the Lord of Hosts, but his
plot is the 1 Ki. 12. 13.
Kingdom. Ahab and Jezabel proclaim a Fast, pretending the punishment of
blasphemy, but they intend thereby to take away Naboth's both life and
vineyard. And though all hypocrites have not attained to this height of hellish
iniquity, yet they are like some children that are sick of a disease they call
the Rickets, who have great heads, and big bellies, but shrimpled hands, and
weak knees. They are men of great parts, but no gifts, not one of many are
given to good works whileft they live; and when they dye, something is given to
the poor by their Testament, but not by their Will.

It is said that Isaac dug more Wells, and found more water then Abraham;
and questionless the knowledge of most men is this latter age of the world,
exceeds that of Isa. 11. 9.
former times; The earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
that cover the earth: Nay, men's knowledge is profound, Ezekiel. 47.
like waters that came out of the Sanctuary; it is grown deeper, from the
ankles to the loins; but it is to be feared, the water^ of the Sanctuary have
put out the fire that should burn in the Sanctuary, and that our great
knowledge has quite drowned our zeal, so that all those men's religion is run
out of the heart into the head. The world 2 Ki^. 10 8.
is full of such, who are like the heads that Jehu caused to be laid at the
gate of Jezreel, a great many heads, but never an heart amongst them all. The
Toad some say has a pearl in the head, I am sure it has poison in the belly.
These speak like Cato, but live like Lucullus. Leah had bad eyes, but she was
fruitful; Rachel had a better sight, but she was barren. Our Fathers saw
less, but did more; these men profess they know God, but in works ^deny him,
being abominable, and unto every good Tit. 1. ^lt.
work reprobate; such knowledge will end in ^utter darkness, and this tree of
knowledge rob them of the tree of life. Quis non iraseatur (says St. Aug.)
videns homines ore Deum confitentes, negantes moribus? Quis non iraseatur
videns homines secuio verbis and non factis renunciantes? Who can choose but be
angry, that shall see men that confess God with their lips, and deny him in
their lives; that shall see men renounce the world, and the lusts thereof, in
Aug. in P^^. 30.
words, but not in deeds? Such men are like rogues that use to lie in the
Church porch, whilst others make it but the way to their attendance upon
divine ordinances, and religious duties. These men rest in an outward
profession of religion, and a very form of godliness, and go no further. I
wish some men were called as these be Hypocrites; or be as they are called,
solid and judicious Christians: But questionless many such are miscalled, they
have a name to live, but are dead. Like many of the Popes of Rome, if the man
were a Coward, they called him Leo; if a Clown, Vrbanus; if a Tyrant, Clemens.
Such hypocrisy is hated of all.

The Cardinal of Lorreign a bitter enemy to Geneva, and the reformed Churches,
when Bernardinus Ochinus offered him his service in writing against the
Protestants, slighted him with the greatest scorn, because he knew he had
dissembled and played the hypocrite. And Trajan that wise and worthy Emperor,
professed, that he had reason to hold himself discharged of all debts to those,
that offended more by prevarication, then they ever deserved by industry: But
yet this is not the sin.

3. There are others that will say, that Apostasy is the sin of this age; and
certainly there may be some reason for it, for we are a people given to
backsliding; and how has the secret hypocrisy of many broken out into open
apostasy in these times? These are like gallant ships with glorious titles, as
the Bonaventure, the Triumph, etc. but in a storm are ventorum *ludibrium; if
the temptation come from the fears or flatteries of the Times, they are taken
with many foolish lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition, and so
they make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience.

There are three sorts of persons that are most dangerous, I wish all to take
great heed of them.

First, such as might have been good, but are not; as, the children of
religious parents, servants that have lived much in religious families, and
people that have lived long under a powerful fruitful Ministry, but are not
bettered.

Secondly, such as seem to be good, but are not; that can transform themselves
into the shape of Saints, who have the voice of Jacob, and the hands of Esau;
that speak like the Lamb, but are ravening Wolves. Oh! how has Religion
suffered under the pretense of Religion in later times?

Thirdly, such as have been good (at least in the hopes of many) but are not.
These are trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, Jude v. 12.
twice dead, and plucked up by the roots.

The first are civil persons that have no faith, too good for the Devil, but
not good enough for God. The Lord deliver us from such, for they may prove
unreasonable, because they have no faith.

The second sort are Hypocrites, and the third Apostates, the most bitter
enemies to ^olinesse, and the power of godliness. Such was Julian the Apostate.

It is said, that tame Foxes, if they break loose, and turn wild, will do more
mischief then any. Julian was once a Christian, and a forward professor, but
turning back to Heathenisme, drew more from the Faith by fraud, then any of his
predecessors did by force. Baldwine and Bolsack turned Apostates, and were
hired by the Papists to write the Life of Calvin, and proved desperate
adversaries to the truth. Parsons and Harding had sometimes a taste of the
truth, but falling away, proved most bitter enemies to the Church of God. The
greatest enemies that any man can have, are those of his own house. He was of
the society of Jesus that betrayed him. Such Apostates are not only injurious
to others, but in conclusion are the greatest enemies to their own souls. To
fall backward is more dangerous to the body, and to apostatize is most
dangerous to the soul. What became of Julian the Apostate his Vicisti Galilaee?
which taking a handful of blood and flinging it up into the air against
Christ, told all the world that Heb. 10. 38.
his end was miserable. If any man draw back (says the Apostle) my soul shall
have no pleasure in such.

Henry the fourth, King of France, after his revolt to Popery, was persuaded by
a great Duke about him, not to readmit the Jesuits into the Land, who had been
justly banished by the State. He answered, Give me then security for my life:
and thereupon admitted them, and gave them one of his own houses for a
College; but did that secure him? certainly it did not; the Jesuits would
never trust him, for first one by their procurement stabbed him in the mouth,
and after that another to the heart, and that was the end of so great an
Apostate. And surely he that draws back from the God of truth must needs
embrace error; if from the God of wisdom, will be a fool; if from the God of
happiness, cannot but be miserable.

This is a great sin, but not that sin.

4. So that if I may take liberty to express my thoughts, with humble
submission to better judgments, I am of opinion, that not only an
unwillingnesse to submit unto, but a most violent opposition against the Kingly
government of Jesus Christ in his Church, by his own officers and ordinances,
is the sin of this present generation. It is very observable, that the offices
of Christ have met with strong opposition, some in one age, and some in
another, more apparently.

Some times have been more notorious for the opposition that was made against
his Prophetical office, as when the Circumcellians defaced and burnt the
Scriptures: So did the Papists, who made it death for any Protestant to have
and read any part of the Old or New Testament. The same grand Heretics have
made their Injunctions, Precepts, Traditions, of equal authority with the Word
of God: So did the Council of Trent at their fourth Session.

Some times have been more infamous for the opposition that was made against
the Priesthood of Christ, who made peace for us by his Death, and still
maintains our peace by his Intercession. Thus the Papists have mightily opposed
Christ's Priesthood, by their doetrine of Justification by Works, their figments
of Purgatory, works of Supererogation, prayers to Saints. Every man (say they)
must suffer for his own particular; yea, the works of one may suffice for
another: So say the Rhemists in their Annotations, Rom 8. 17. Col. 1. 24.

But these times are such as do more clearly fight against the Kingdom of
Christ; and herein cunningly they strike at the root, and undermine all his
offices, the end whereof, viz. his Kingly office, being to support the
Priesthood and Prophecy of Christ in their vigor and efficacy, that as a
Prince and Captain of salvation to the Elect, he might bring them to God. A
practical, vigorous, open opposition of Christ's Kingly office exercised in his
ordinances, was never more eminent then in these days. Wherein there are so
many Gallioes, or Gadarens; Gallioes, that care not for those things, as either
too far below their greatness, or too heavy a yoke to put their necks under;
or Gadarens, who say plainly, We will not have this man reign over us, but
desire him to depart out of the Country; who are not only an unwilling, but a
rebellious people in the day of his power.

The reverend and learned Ministers of London met together in their Provincial
Assembly, in their Vindication of this government, to use their own words, say
as much: We are not ignorant that this government has many adversaries. The
ignorant person hates it, because it will not suffer him to go blindfold to
hell; the profane person hates it, because it will not suffer him to eat and
drink his own damnation, by unworthy coming to the Lords Supper; the Heretic
hates it, because after two or three admonitions it rejects him; the Jesuit
hates it, because it is an invincible bulwark to keep out Popery; the
Schismatic hates it, because the main design of it is to make all the Saints
of God to be of one lip, one heart, and one way. And above all, the Devil
hates it, because if rightly managed, it will in a short time blow up his
Kingdom.

And indeed, hence are all our miseries and mischiefs. Church Discipline is
like the hem to the garment, rend off that, and how soon will all Religion
ravell cut to nothing? It is like the hedge to the Vineyard, if that be plucked
up, how soon will the Boar out of the Wood, and the wild beasts of the field
devour it? What a company of Heretics and Schismatics break in upon it? all
that pass by the way pluck it: Antitrinitarians, Antinomians,
Antiscripturists, Socinians, Familists, Quakers, etc. would dig up this
Vineyard by the very roots. How are Christ's ordinances despised, the authority
of the Scriptures questioned, Gods faithful Ministers misused? They were never
more learned, more pious, or more painful; and yet never more scorned and
undervalued then at this day. All Sectaries and Schismatics, though they
differ much amongst themselves, yet agree all in this, an irreconcilable
hatred of, and a bitter opposition against a godly faithful Ministry.

But it is no wonder, for if the Cartwheel turn round, it is impossible that
the spokes should stand still; if the Church and her discipline suffer under so
many turnings and changes, surely her officers can have no rest.

Now, if any ask what the reason is that this government, formerly so much
commended, so much desired, is now so mightily opposed, as the most tyrannical.

I answer: It is not because we have attained to more light then our
Forefathers had, as is pretended; but,

1. Partly, because the instruments are changed, the actors upon the stage that
oppose it are new men. It was notable advice that Benhadad's Council of War
gave him after that Ahab had beaten him in that first battle. Take the Kings
away every one out 1 Ki. 20. 24.
of his place, and put Captains in their rooms. It is an old and a most
politic device, If a design receive a check, it may easily be driven on by
changing the instruments, and has often prevailed, where God has not stepped in
and prevented it, as he did here. That which is unsufferable in a Prince, may
be commendable in a Captain. The same errors that were formerly taught, and as
generally loathed, because the broachers of them were Prelaticall, are now
embraced gladly, and swallowed down greedily, because taught by such as have a
name of Sanctity. Take away the Bishops every one out of his place, that so
mightily opposed this discipline; and set up some rare gifted men in their
room, that shall as much persecute and oppose it; and then the same people that
earnestly labored for this government, will now as violently resist it.

2. Because of the wickedness and perverseness of men's spirits, this being the
last and worst age of the world, and we are fallen upon the very dregs of time.
This government is very strict, and men's secure lives will not easily submit to
Christ's severe laws: We are become their enemies, because we tell them the
truth.

3. But chiefly, because of the cross and froward disposition of most men: If
they be commanded any duty, they peremptorily reply, There is no hope, we will
walk after our Jer. 18. 1^.
own devices, and we will every one do the imaginations of his evil heart. If
they be forbidden any thing, nititur in vetitum, they eagerly pursue what
before they stubbornly refused: Let people be denied what is petitioned, they
grow the more boldly importunate, even to a kind of violence; let their
desires be granted, they not only loath what before they liked, but grow
higher in their demands.

Whence Franciscus Sodorinus Cardinal of Preneste was heard to say to Pope
Adrian the sixth, that to grant to some people their petitions was but the way
to slight the grant, and prepare for more. How many instances may we give of
this?

When God commanded Circumcision, though under the sharpest penalties, how
unwillingly did people submit to it? The Exodus 4. 24, 26.
neglect whereof had wel-nigh cost even Moses his life. And now the Lord has
taken it away, both Jews and Gentiles will be circumcised.

Time was when Christians met in Lanes and Woods to hear the Word, even with
the peril of their lives, being wholly restrained from all places of public
meetings. Oh! how much did they desire that Temples might be granted to them!
And what cost were they at, when they had liberty given them to enjoy them! But
in our days, when we assemble freely in such public places, every thing is
too much that is bestowed on them; with Judas and Jeroboam we cry out, What
needs this waste? and, It is too much. And with what scorn and contempt do many
turn their backs against those places, and creep into corners?

The same people, when they were restrained from hearing Sermons, especially
the Sermons of some men; How did they then flock to our Congregations, as Doves
to the windows? they went from strength, notwithstanding the many penalties
they endured: But now they have liberty to attend the same persons and places,
they say, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of those ways.

Time was when Baptism was willingly and generally embraced by most, provided
that their children might not be baptized with the sign of the Cross, which
was then enjoined; but now when that offensive ceremony is removed, many of
these care not whether ever their infants be admitted into the Church by that
Sacrament or no.

Heretofore people came most willingly and frequently to the Lords Supper,
provided they might not be brought up to the Rail, at which most stumbled, and
be dispensed with as touching their gesture; but now, when what was desired is
granted, and that burden (that neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear)
is removed, they loath that spiritual Manna, and ordinarily turn their backs
upon that royal feast and company.

These people, when they were sorbidden to meet together in private, where they
used to afflict their souls before the Lord, for their own sins, and the evils
of the times, by prayer and fasting; and that notwithstanding the severest
censures of those in power, who condemned such meetings as unlawful
Conventicles; yet did meet, and that frequently, and (it is hoped) fruitfully:
Now having free liberty granted, so to assemble themselves, seldom come
together for such a purpose. Martyrs have formerly gone more willingly to the
stake to be burned, then these to this excellent ordinance, where their hearts
may be warmed and refreshed.

Even so, when this government was strongly opposed by the State, and all hopes
of enjoying it, altogether frustrate, how did our Forefathers pray for it,
preach for it, dispute for it, print for it; yea, suffer even to bonds and
imprisonment for it? Insomuch that diverse lost their liberties, and some
hazarded their lives. Amongst the rest, Mr. Vdall a learned and godly Minister,
was at a general Assizes condemned to dye for writing in defense of it: the
Story of whose Imprisonment, Examinations, and Arraignment, I have seen: Yea,
of so high account it was with some in those days, that the King of Denmark and
the King of Scots wrote their Letters in his behalf to Queen Elizabeth,
requesting that he might not suffer for that Cause: Yea, King James then King
of Scotland, in a Speech of his to the General Assembly, told them that he
blessed God that he was born in Scotland, and was a member of such a Church;
his reason was, because the Church of Scotland excelled other Churches in
discipline; England had true doctrine, but wanted true discipline. And now that
we may enjoy it, the State in a full Parliament declaring for it, men loath and
abhor it as the most tyrannical and Antichristian, and cry out, Not him but
Barabbas, and choose rather to put their necks under any heavy yoke, then
submit to this gracious discipline, formerly so much desired.

Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ advance the Kingdom of his
dear Son, that he may be Governor amongst us, that he may rule in us, and reign
over us; even he that is the Prince of peace, that came into the world with a
song of peace, that going out of the world left us a legacy of peace, whose
government is a government of peace, whose Ministers are Ambassadors of peace;
whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and all whose paths are peace. He unite
our hearts together in the unity of the Spirit, with the bond of peace. That
God that could find out a way to make peace betwixt himself and mankind, He
that can never come too late in any danger, that can never be to seek in any
straight; heal our wounds that grow so deep, repair our breaches that grow so
wide: He in his good time give us one heart, and one way, that we may fear him
for ever; for the good of us, and our children after us.

Amen.
CHAP. III.
What personal and private passages of Providence those are which ought to be
recorded in our Journall or Diary.

THus far of our National and more public concernments, that are to be
remembered: I come now to show what Personal and private occurences are to be
recorded; And they are these five that are most observable.

1. Let every man keep a strict account of his effectual calling, and of his
age in Christ; and (if it may be) set down the time when, the place where, and
the person by whom he was converted.

I know every one cannot relate it, as Paul Act. 22. 6, 7.
could, in all the circumstances: It came to pass as I made my journey, and
was nigh unto Damascus, about noon, suddenly there did shine from heaven a
great light round about me, and I fell to the ground, and heard a voice* etc.
But yet some can with 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14.
the same Apostle say, I was a persecuter, a blasphemer, and injurious, but I
obtained mercy: Joh. 9. 25.
Or, with the blind man whom Jesus cured; One thing* I know, that whereas I
was blind, now see. I was an ignorant, proud, profane ^erson, and without God
in the world, bue by his grace I am that I am. There are some ^uestionlesse
that can most punctually set down the several circumstances of their
^onversion. It was a prophecy of the times under the Gospel. It shall be said
of some ^n Babylon that they knew God, and this and that man was born there;
and of Zion, this man was born in her: Yea, The Lord Psa 87. 5, 6*
himself shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was born
there. Onesimus Phil, 10.
could tell that Paul was his Father, he could tell the time when, and the
place where he was converted, for he begat him in his bonds.

Cyprian had wont to call Caecellius, novae vitae parentem, his spiritual
Father. St. Paul Romans 16. (...)
could say that Andronicus and Junia were in Christ before him. There is a
seniority amongst the Saints. God has his elder and his younger children. It
is good to know our age in Christ.

Polycarpus could say, Thus many years have I served my Master Christ, and
hitherto has he dealt well with me. Remember this Exodus 13. 3.
day, says Moses to the Israelites. What day was that? The day that they came
out of Egypt, from the House of bondage. So I say, Remember the day wherein
God took you, not from toyling in brick and clay, but from the slavery of sin
and Satan; not from following the sheep, as he did David, whom he made a King;
but from following the world and your own unruly lusts. You keep an account of
the day wherein you were born, and why not of the day wherein you were born
again? You remember your Marriage-dayes, and why not much more the day on which
you were married to Christ? You have your Register-books for the one, and why
not Diurnalls for the other? Would you be persuaded to do thus, it might
provoke you to say as sometimes Sarah said when Isaac was born, Who would Genesis
21. 7.
have said (that knew my age) that Sarah should have given children sack? Who
that knew me in the days of my vanity and vileness, that knew me in the
School, or at the University, or when I was an Apprentice, when my life was as
full of disorder, as a toad was of poison; who would have said that Christ
should ever have been formed in me? But by his grace I am that I am, and God
has made me laugh.

Some acts of God, are acts of common providence, and so he feeds us, and
clothes us, he does as much for the creatures; for he feeds the Ravens, and
clothes the Grass. Some acts of God, are acts of special privilege; and thus
he gave* Abraham a child in his old age, and made David of a Shepherd a King.
Some acts of God, are acts of pattern; and thus he showed mercy to Manasseh,
and Mary Magdalen, and Paul* For this cause (says that Apostle). I obtained
mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, 1 Timothy 1. 1^*
^or a pattern to them that should hereafter believe ^n him to life everlasting.

Some acts of God are acts of wonder: It ^s a wonder that any soul is saved; I
am sure it is a wonder that ever God should ^hink of me, look after me, strive
with me, wait upon me, that he might be gracious to ^e; nay, it is not only
matter of wonder ^ow, but will be cause of admiration unto ^ll eternity; Who am
I, and what am I, that God has brought me hitherto! It is the ^ords doing, and
it is wonderful in mine ^yes.

Amongst many things that Beza in his last Will and Testament, gave God thanks
for, ^his was the first and chief, that he at the age of sixteen years, had
called him to the know^edge of the Truth. Let every one that can know his age
in Christ, set down this in his ^ournall.

2. Take special notice of all divine assistance, and that either in the
performance of the duties that are required of us, or in ^earing those evils
that are inflicted upon us.

For the first, we know that all our sufficiency is from God, all our fresh
springs ^re in him, and therefore all our full streams of praise should run to
him. It is our sin, and should be our shame, that though the ^xe knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Isa. ^. 3.
^^th (as the Prophet says) that is, by a common instinct of Nature, they
acknowledge that as all their provision is from him, (...) all their strength
to draw or bear is due t^ him: Yet we do not consider; that is, we do not so
know God, as to acknowledge, the as we have all from God, so all is due t^ Isa.
40. 29.
God. He it is that gives power to the ^ai^ and to them that have no might, he
encreas^ strength. But the youths shall faint and be we^^^ and the young men
shall utterly fall. If Dav^ will go out in the Name of the Lord, in the
strength and by the assistance of God, (...) ^ Sam. 17.
shall return a victor over the mighty G^ant: But if Goliath will go out against
D^vid with a sword and a spear, trusting onel^ Exodus 3. 11, 13. and 4. 10, 13.
and 5. 22. and 6. 12, 30.
to his own strength, he shall fall. Moses h^ a great charge to go to Pharaoh,
and to brin^ the people of Israel out of the Land of Aeg^ and how often does he
through unbelief cav^ at that call, as unfit for that service? sev^ or eight
times he replies upon God as unwilling, because unfit to go: But through Gods
most gracious assistance, he finished the work to the glory of God, the comfort
(...) his people, and the shame of that pro^ ^ Tim. 4 7.
enemy; aad this is recorded. I have foug^ the fight* (says St. Paul) I have
finished (...) course, I have kept the faith; and this is wri^ten down in a
book.

Secondly, assistance in withstanding vi^lent temptations, in undergoing heavy
bu^ thens, and conflicting with sundry evil^ should not be forgotten. There is
a tim^ when Kings go not forth to War, but no ^ime wherein Christians have not
some com^ate with temptations, but God either pre^ants them, or assists us in
them, and makes ^s victors over them, and gainers by them. It is written of St.
Augustine, that after his conversion to the Faith, he was much vexed with
inward conflicts; and after long strug^ing with them in the use of means, and
not prevailing as he desired, he heard a voice saying to him, In te stas and
non stas; whereby apprehending, that the way to fall was to stand in his own
strength; by faith in prayer he did fly unto God in Christ, and his tree grace,
and so obtained victory.

1 Timothy 4. 16, 17.
At my first answer (says St. Paul) no man stood by me, all forsook me; I pray
God it be not laid to their charge. But God stood by me, and strengthened me,
and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. And indeed at such a time a
gracious heart can better bear Gods stroke, then endure his absence. St. Paul
makes special mention of this: Faith is the gift of God; and amongst many
singular benefits that we have by that grace, this is not the least, It has a
singular dexterity in helping the heart at a sudden pinch; in mustering up
spiritual, and those present forces against an unexpected temptation. A lively
faith is the best leaver at a dead lift. See it in the case of Joseph, fiercely
and unexpectedly assaulted by his beastly Mistress. Many arguments are brought
in of a sudden, by which he is fenced so impregnably against her
solicitations, that he comes off more then a conqueror.

1. It is a sin (says he) against the great ^rust my Master has in me, He
has committed all into my hand, etc.

2. It is a sin against my place and dignity, There is none greater in the
house then I.

3. It is a sin against my Masters interest, You are his wife.

Genesis 39. 8, 9.
4. It is a wickedness, a great wickedness against God.

The like you shall read of David, who when he was reviled by Shimei, with
those words, Come out thou bloody man, thou man of Belial, etc. which so far
provoked Abisha, and edged his spirit against him, that he could hardly hold
his hands; yet bare all patiently, being armed against such an assault.

Three arguments are suddenly mustred up by Faith, by which he comes off with
victory.

1. My Son rebels, and he is more violent against me. My Servant takes away my
good name; my Son would not only take the crown from my head, but my head from
my shoulders.

2. The Lord has bidden him curse me, and therefore let him alone.

3. The Lord will look on me, and not 2 Samuel 16. 7, ^, 11, 12.
only do me good by this, but for this affliction.

It is good to set down every affliction we have met with in our time, and to
observe Gods carriage toward us in them, with the benefit we receive from them.

3. Remember, and for that end put into your Journal all deliverances from
dangers, vouchsafed to you or yours. And indeed, what is our whole life, but a
continued deliverance? We are daily delivered, either from the violence of the
creature, or the rage of men, or the treachery of our own hearts; either our
houses are freed from firing, or goods from plundering, or our bodies from
danger, or our names from reproaches, or our souls from snares. This being the
difference betwixt a gracious and a graceless heart; a godly man is delivered,
a wicked man is but reserved. God knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 9.
to be punished.

Jacob is delivered from the treachery of his Uncle Laban at one time, and from
the fury of his Brother at another; both are remembered.

David is delivered from the paw of the Bear, and the mouth of a Lion; both of
them are mentioned before Saul. 1 Samuel 17.


Jeremiah cannot forget the dungeon out of which he was saved; nor Daniel the
Lions den, out of which he escaped; nor Jonah the Whales belly, out of which he
was delivered. Read their Prophesies, and you shall find the stories. Mr. Beza
in his last Will bequeaths thanks unto God, that being infected with the plague
at Lusanna, and aspersed by his enemies with grievous calumnies, God delivered
him from both.

2. That being tossed up and down in the first Civil wars of France, for many
months, God had preserved him from six hundred dangers.

Our deliverances are more then we can number, greater then we can value. Who
so is wise, and will observe them, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord. Every night God sets his watch about us, and every
day he commands his Angels to pitch their tents for our safeguard. And alas,
what is all our care and prudence, without his watchful eye of providence over
Psalm. 127. 1.
us! Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain.

Genesis 7. 16.
When Noah and all his train went into the Ark, it is said the Lord shut him
in. It is good to open the door in the morning, and to shut the door in the
evening by prayer: pray when we open them, that God would dwell with us; and
when we lock up our doors, that God would shut us in, otherwise we cannot be
safe.

Take but a little notice of the preservation of our children; nay, but of one
child, and you will say that all our care is nothing without his watchful
eye. I will give you a memorable instance of a Childs deliverance who, whilst
diverse in the family, with many other friends were met together to fast and
pray, went out to a pond very much frozen, (for it was in an hard cold Winter)
either to slide, or to whip his top, I remember not which; where two holes were
made in the ice for the safety of the fish, and the taking up of water, into
one of these he fell up to the arm-holes; the child was soon mist, and search
being made, he was found there: Had the hole been wider, or he not spread out
his arms, or he not seasonably found out (for it was about the time the company
brake up) he had perished. I was then at the house, an eyewitness of that
deliverance.

Another example I shall give you of a Man.

A certain English Captain in the Wars of France, under Henry the fourth, whom
Queen Elizabeth assisted against his own subjects; being quartered in a Town
lately taken from the enemy, carried himself with that civility toward his
Landlord, as became an ingenuous Gentleman; and yet with that fidelity too, as
suited with the honor of his command in chief; that he won very much respect
from the Master of the family: Insomuch, that some time after, the enemy having
taken the Town again, beaten the Kings party, slain many, and wounded more
even unto death; at the end of the day, when the Armies were retired, the
Townsmen came out to cut throats, and to take the pillage: By providence this
Landlord before mentioned, came to this Gentleman, sorely wounded, and ready to
dye; whom he bestrides, and drawing his sword protests he would there dye,
rather then his friend should suffer any further harm: And so by the help of
others, he brought him home to his own house, where by surgery and good
diet, with all careful attendance, he recovered. This story I heard the
Gentleman relate to me and others.

Thus God creates deliverances; and indeed, preservation from danger, is
nothing else but a continued creation. There is scarce any thing in the ways
of God more remarkable then Deliverances. And indeed, it is necessary that God
should take the charge of us at all times; for our dangers are so many and
great, that none are wise enough, or strong enough to deliver us, but the Lord.

4. All the instruments, all the men and means that God has in providence at
any time used for our good, must not be forgotten: As,

1. What Parents we have had, how godly they were, and how religiously tender
they were of our eternal welfare; what care they took of us, what cost they
bestowed upon us, what prayers they made for us, what pains they took with us,
in correcting, in instructing us for our temporal and eternal good. (...) is
a very rich privilege to come of godly and religious parents, to be heirs of
so many promises which they daily laid up for us, and so many prayers that they
continually made in our behalf, is a very rich portion. The Jews would often
boast that Abraham was their Father, and Joh. 8. 59.
Moses chose rather to own him, yea though he suffered with his posterity,
then to be called the Son in law to Pharaob's daughter, and enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, Solomon keeps an account of this mercy: I was my Fathers
Son; that is, I was his darling, his beloved Son; and, I was tender and Prove. 4
3, 4.
dear in the sight of my Mother: And thus he taught me, and said unto me, Let
thine heart retain my words, etc. The like honorable mention he makes of his
Mother: The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy that his Mother gave and 31. 1,
2, 3.
him. Lemuel is a name given to Solomon, as Mercer observes upon the place. He
is called also Jedidiah, because the Lord loved him; and here Lemuel by his
Mother, because she had dedicated him to the Lord.

2. Remember what Schoolmasters we have had.

Dr. Andrews Bishop of Winchester was so thankfully affected with the care that
Mr. Mulcaster had of him whilst he was his Scholar, that when he came to great
preferment in the Church, he placed his picture over his study door.

Mr. Calvin did so far acknowledge the love and care of Miturinus Corder^^s his
Schoolmaster, that he dedicated his Commentary upon the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians to him. And Persius had so honorable an esteem of his Master
Cornutus, that he writes his fifth Satyr to him, and expresses his
thankfulness to him in very high language.

Hinc ego centenas ausim deposcere voces,
Vt quantum mihi te sinuoso in pectore fixi
Vo^e traham pura, etc.
3. What noble Mecaen^s, what bountiful Benefactor we have had, by whose cost
and kindness our good education has been furthered, and our comfortable
maintenance enlarged.

St. Augustine thankfully acknowledged, that by the liberal contribution of
Romenian a noble Gentleman, his studies in the Liberal Arts were much
cherished and advanced.

4. To conclude: It will be of singular use to put into our Diary, what Times
we have lived in, what Ministers we have lived under, what Callings we were of,
what Wealth was bestowed on us, what places of Authority and Command were
committed to us.

Plato when he was ready to dye, gave God thanks for three things:

1. That he was made a Man. 2. That he was born in Greece.
3. That he lived in the time of Socrates. Bless we God, that such a Kinsman
brought us up in our younger years, that such a Scholar was our Tutor in the
University, such an one relieved us, such a friend preferred us.

2 Timothy 1. 16, 17.
The Lord give mercy to Onesiphorus, says Paul to Timothy, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. When he was at Rome, he sought
me out diligently. The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy from the
Lord in that day; and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou
know very well. Yea, let not the meanestor lowest instrument of our good
under God be forgotten. Who has despised the Zach. 4. 10. 1 King. 17. 6, 9.
day of small things? Even a Raven may sometimes bring bread and meat to a poor
Prophet, and a poor Widow sustain a Messenger of God. A wicked Physician, or a
drunken Surgeon, may instrumentally under God save our lives. Even a cipher,
as very a nothing as it is, if joined to 10, make it 100; if added to 100,
makes it 1000. Poor despised David, that stood but as a cipher in Kings Readiness
account, and his Brothers judgment, in the name of the Lord slays Goliath, and
wrought a great salvation for Israel. The Lord Cromwell, K Henry the Eights
favorite, did not only remember Friscobald the rich Florentine, that was so
bountiful to him in his travel; but he considered a very poor man, and gave him
maintenance to his dyiug day, whose Father had given him many a meals meat.

5. And finally, mark what return^, what answers God gives to your prayers, and
set them down with a Selah, as most Deuteronomy. 9. 18. 19.
remarkable pledges of his love. Moses did so; who having fasted and prayed for
the people, who had made them a Moltencalfe, and he received a gracious answer;
writes that down* the Lord heard me at that ^ 10. 10.
time also. It seems Moses took special notice of such answers to prayer, for
he records a like passage, when God separated the Tribe of Levi for his
service, he prayed, and the Lord (says he) heard me at that time also.

Hannah did so; she told Eli that she had received a man-child from the Lord
by prayer; for this child I prayed (says she) and 1 Samuel 1. 27.
the Lord has given me the petition I asked of him.

All a Christians happiness is laid up in promises, and all those promises
hang upon the pin of prayer. The prayer of faith is the great engine of the
people of God, by which promises are made out into evidences; and such returns
of prayer should be recorded.

What grace Jesus Christ had either to do or suffer the will of God, he had by
promise, as you may see, Isa. 11. 2, 3, 4. and 42. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 61. 1, 2, 3,
4. and the good of all those promises he fetched out by prayer. He had a word of
command as well (...) 2. 8.
as we, Ask of me; and he had a word of promise, and I will give thee, etc. And
he prayed very much, he spent whole nights in prayer, and was heard in what he
prayed; and he takes special notice of it, I knew that thou hear me always
(says he to his Joh. 11. 4^.
Father, when he raised Lazarus.) In the days of his flesh (says the Apostle)
when he had Heb. 5. 7.
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears to him,
that was able to save him front death, and he was heard in the thing he feared;
and this is recorded. Now this God is our God, he will hear us and deliver us
as he has said. Undoubtedly if he give us an heart to pray, he will incline an
ear to hear; who delights as much to grant his peoples petitions, as they can
to receive his grants. As King James said once to a great Courtier, to whom he
gave a great sum of money, I am better pleased that I can give, then you are
satisfied that you may receive.

Tiberius was so in love with Sejanus his favorite, that he never denied him
any thing that he asked; he often prevented his asking by his bounty: But our
God is so willing to grant our desires, that he does not only give us what we
ask, but more then we ask, nay more then we should ask, more then we can ask or
think, and that exceeding abundantly.

Ephesians. 3. 20.
Give us this day our daily bread, is the rule by which we are directed to ask
for necessary and convenient comforts; and certainly, Prove. 23. 4.
what we may not labor for, we may not pray for; but we must not labor to be
rich.

Now though Nature is content with little, Grace with less, yet God is so
bountiful Act. 14. 17.
as to afford us exceedings; be will fill our hearts with food and gladness:
He will give us not only a house to dwell in, but a stately one; not only a
coat to cover us, but a costly one; not only a table to fit at, but a table
sal. 23. 5.
well spread, and a cup running over, and that in the sight of our enemies;
which is more then we should ask for.

So high was Roger Bishop of Salisbury in favor with King Stephen, that he
would say of him, Let that man beg of me what he will, I will grant him, though
it be half of the Kingdom; and sooner shall he be weary of asking, then I shall
be of giving.

God will give in mercy, as long as we ask in says.

When Sir Walter Raleigh asked a favor of Q Elizabeth, she said to him,
Raleigh, when will you leave your begging? he answered, When your Majesty
leaves giving. God is much more bountiful; who did not give over granting
Abraham his requests for Sodom, till he left asking; and who can tell, but
that if he had gone on, and prayed that if five persons that were righteous had
been found in Sodom, the City might have Genesis 18. 33.
been spared for their sakes, according to his request? G^n we think that God
will hear ^e young Ravens when they cry, and negct the Doves that mourn in the
valleys? hat he will hear the young Lions when ^ey roar, and forget the Lambs
that bleat ^ter the Sheep? That he will hear Hagar Genesis 21. 16, 17.
^d her Ismael, varlets and vile ones, that ^y unto him in their extremities;
and will ^e turn his back upon the tears, or stop his ^r to the prayers of his
own children that ^y unto him daily, in the name of Jesus christ? Undoubtedly
he cannot. St. Am^ose was wont to say, the better to comfort ^onica St.
Austin's Mother who prayed often ^r him, even with tears, Impossible est ut
filius ^^arum, lachrymarum periret, It is impossible ^at a Son of so many tears
should perish. As ^ng therefore as God gives us an heart to ^ay for any mercy,
let us not be out of ^eart. And why so? Because then we beg ^o more but what
God has commanded us ^o ask, and we ask no more then what he ath promised to
give, and he has promi^d no more but what he is able to perform, ^d he shall
perform no more but what he ^all have glory for, and we know his glory dear to
him.

Let me therefore advise every believing ^ul to be much in prayer, and with the
salmist to hearken what the Lord will Psalm. 85. 8.
^eak, for he will speak peace unto his people. and what returns of those
prayers they ^eet with. If they can say, for this Wife I rayed, for this
Child, this deliverance, this success I prayed, and the Lord (...) granted me
the request I put up unto hi^ Let such experiments be put upon this (...)
count, with a Selah.

CHAP. IV.
The manner how a Journall or Diary is (...) be used, and first what is to be
done (...) way of observation.

THus far of the materials whereof Journall may be compounded: No^ in the next
place I shall speak of the mann^^ how such a Journall is to be used. And he^^
in two things would be commended to the Christian Reader.

1. Rules of Observation: And, 2. Rules of Practice.
For observation take notice of these thre^ Rules:

1. Labor by faith to see and observ^ God in all things that are bestowed on
you* Kin* ^* 14.
continued to you; say as Elisha, Here is t^^ mantle, but where is the God of
Elijah? He^^ is health, and peace, and liberty; but where is the God of these
comforts? The Na^^ of God; that is, the wisdom of God, the power and
faithfulness of God, is writt^^ upon every spire of grass, upon every drop
(...) rain, in such great letters, that he that ^ns may read. Let the same
mind be in us ^at was in Jacob, the Israel of God, who when (...) told his
Wives his resolution to leave his ^ncle Laban, uses this language, God has
Genesis 31. ^.
^^ken away your Fathers cattle, and given them to ^e. And when he met with his
Brother ^sau, who asked him of the children whose ^ey were; he answered, they
are the children which God of his grace has given me. At the ^me time urging
his Brother to accept the ^esssing that he had sent him, he uses this
^rgument, I have seen thy face, as though I and 33. 10, 11*
and seen the face of God. And again, Take that is brought thee, because God
has de^^ ^ac^ously with me. He that cannot see God ^n a judgment, will never
be truly hum^le; and he that cannot see God in a mercy, ^an never be truly
thankful. Check your ^elves therefore often for this neglect, as this ^acob
did, who when in his journey to Laban ^e had in a vision a sight of a Ladder,
whose ^oot stood on the earth, and whose top did ^each to heaven, and the
Angels of God were ^scending and descending upon it, and the Lord ^ood above
it: All which was a lively disco^ery of Gods provident care of him; said, God
was in this place, and I knew it not. So and 28. 16.
^^y you, God was in this friend that relieved ^e, in this ordinance that
refreshed me, ^n this creature that comforted me, and I observed him not. There
are none of the ways of God, wherein he uses either the ministry of Angels,
or the wisdom of me^ or the strength of any creature; but God is (...) the top
of the Ladder, and orders all, though we observe him not.

We may by an eye of reason see a man is his works, though his person be not
present^ As, when we see a piece of ground well ploughed, the fences well made,
the cattle well ordered, we say, Here is a good Hu^band, though we do not see
the Farmer* When we see a house built very well, and every room well contrived,
we say, Here i^ a good Workman, though we do not see the Carpenter. And may we
not as well by an eye of faith behold the wisdom, goodness, and power of God
in his works* though he be invisible. Say you therefore* Here is so much of the
prudence of a P^^nce, so much of the policy of a State, so much of the valor
and faithfulness of a Governor; but how much do you observe of God, who rules
the hearts and ways of all men? Here is so much of the cost of a Father, so
much of the affection of a Mother, so much of the faithfulness of a Friend,
but how much of the mercy and wisdom of God?

A great Cardinal (that I have read of) writing down in his Diary what such a
Lord did for him, how far such a Prince favored him, what encouragement he had
from such a King, and how such a Pope preferred him, but not a word of God; one
^eading of it, said, This man remembered ^is friends, but forgot God. Like
another Haman, who when he told his friends, and ^eresh his Wife, of the glory
of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein
the King had pro^oted him, who had advanced him above ^ll the Princes and
Servants at the Court, and what honor Queen Esther did him, who Est. 5. 11.
^nvited him only with the King to the ban^uet, never made any mention of God.
Do ^ou rather as David, who when he had ^old King Saul how he had slain the
Lion and the Bear, said moreover, The Lord that 1 Samuel 17. 37.
^elivered me, etc. He comes over with it a^ain, rather then not mention the
Name of the Lord, and let Saul know he observed Gods great power in that
victory.

All the letters in the Alphabet, without a ^owel, will not make one word; nor
all the ^ars in the firmament, without the Sun, will make a day; nor all the
world, the profits of it, or pleasures in it, can make a man happy without God.

The Jews (some say) when they read the Book of Esther, let the book fall on
the ground, and they give this reason for that ^eremony, though they esteem it
a Canonitall piece of Scripture, yet they somewhat undervalue it, because the
word of God is not found in all the Story. Though a man have as much health,
strength, and beauty as Nature can afford him; and to that a^ much wealth,
honor, and friends, as the world can bring him; and to all these a^ much
learning as Tutors can put into him; yet if he be a man without God, he falls
in the thoughts and estimation of such as are spiritual, and can discern him,
though they may acknowledge him a very discerning man.

2. Labor by faith to see and observe all these good things in God. For as
omnia mal^ may be seen in summo malo: All evils in the world may be seen in
sin, the chief evil; as blindness, nakedness, poverty, death, hell; for he
that is ignorant, is blind indeed; he that is without God, is naked indeed; he
that has no grace, is very poor; he that is dead in sins and trespasses, is
truly dead; he that is under the power of sin, and given up wholly to his
hearts lusts, is in an he^l above ground. So omnia bona are in summ^ bono, all
good things are in God the chiefest good. All creatures may be seen in the
Creator, as all the stars may be seen in the sun. 2 Cor. 1. 3.
So the Apostle thought, who called God the God of all comfort. Honor is not
the God of comfort, nor liberty, nor health, or wealth; nor has honor the
comfort of liberty, nor liberty the comfort of health, nor health the comfort
of children or wealth, etc. But the comfort of all these Psalm. 84. 11.
may be found in God. Hence he is called our Son. He will be a Sun and a shield
to those that walk uprightly. The light and comfort of all these things may be
found in God, (...) the light of all the stars may be seen in ^he Sun: As a Sun
he gives all the light, so (...) a shield he gives all the protection to all
^en, and means of our good: The shield in ^ncient times (to which the holy
Ghost ^eems, as some think, to allude) was made ^o big, as it covered the whole
man, and all ^is armor; as appears by that speech of Ajax, to or of Ulysses,
when he contended ^im about the armor of Achilles: Opposui molem clypei,
texique jacentem.

^n his flight he came to me, and I covered ^im with my shield, and so saved
his life. So I say, as a Sun and shield all comfort is from him. Hence he that
can call the Lord his God, may call God any thing that at any time he stands in
need of. As David sometimes did, whilst compassed about with many enemies. The
Lord is my rock, and my fortress, Psalm. 18. 2.
my deliverer, my high tower, my buckler; and why so? He is my God, and in that
all. If he be my God (says a believer) he is my Father, and no father like him
for affection; if my God, (...) my Friend, and no friend like him for
faithfulness; my Physician, and none like and 41. 3.
him for skill; nay, my Bed-maker, and none can make my bed so easy as he. So
that if we lose the comfort of any creature; as, the comfort of a wife by
death, of health by sickness, of liberty by a prison, of wealth by poverty;
they may all be found in a God; who is health in sickness, liberty in prison;
yea, all things in the want of all. He that is the Alpha and Omega has said
it, Rev. 21. 7.
He that overcomes shall inherit all things: But how shall that be? I will be
(says the Lord) his God, and he shall be my Son. All comfort is divided
amongst the creatures, as by several channels, but united in God as the
fountain.

The King of Bohemia (as some have reported) when he was beaten out of Prague,
and therefore almost out of all in that Kingdom, was encouraged by some great
Commanders about him, that he had many Princes his friends and Allies, that
were potent, and would readily assist him; to which he made no answer, but
wrote the word DEVS in great letters; implying thereby, that all these must be
found in God, or they could do him no good; whence some picked out his meaning,
and found Denmark in D, England in E, Hungary in V, and the Swedes in S.

But I have read that Herod in a speech that he made in the head of his Army
that was ready to join battle with the enemy, the better to encourage his
Soldiers, had this passage: Where justice is, God is; and where God is, there
is no want of men or fortitude. God is a perfect good, as well as a solid good.
Id bonum perfectum dicitur (says Lactantius) euj nil accedere, solidum cui nil
decedere potest: That is a perfect good, to which nothing can (...) added; that
a solid, from which nothing can be spared. Hence it is, that God in wisdom and
mercy plucks these stools from under us, that we sit so securely upon, that we
may look up to him, and find that comfort in him that we lost in them. When
David's 1 Samuel 30. 6.
Captains and Commanders, that so long had ftuck so close to him, spoke of
stoning stoning him, he comforted himself in his God. When Habbakuk could
find no blossom in the figtree, nor fruit in the vines; when he could find
nothing in the fold, nor in the field, nor in the stall; yet he would rejoice
in the Lord Hab. 3. 17, 18,
and joy in the God of his salvation; because all might be found in a God. When
Micah looked upon the miserable face of the Time in which he lived, wherein
there was scarce a good man to be found nor a friend to be had, the best was
but as a b^yar, and a man's enemies were those of his own house; so that
neither the child of a man's loins, nor the wife that lay in his bosom were to
be trusted; he resolves to look up to God. Therefore I will look unto the Lord,
I will wait Mic. 7. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 7.
for the God of my salvation, there I shall find all comfort. How happy is he
then that has the Lord for his God! He is one of St. Paul's 2 Cor. 6. 10.
rich men, as having nothing, yet possessing all things. So that I shall
conclude this passage with that of the Prophet, Let not the wise Jer. 9. 23.
man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his strength,
nor the rich man in his riches, but let him that gloryeth, glory in this, that
he knows me, etc. Not the wise man in his wisdom, Satan is wiser then he,
and yet a Devil; nor the strong man in his strength, for the Horse is stronger
then he, and yet a Beast; nor the rich man in his wealth, the Earth is richer
then he, and yet he treads upon it every day; but let him that gloryeth, glory
in this, that he knows the Lord to be his God. Happy is the people that is in
Ps. 144. 15.
such a case (says the Psalmist) yea, happy is that people that has the Lord
for their God. That any of us have the cap and the knee from our inferiors, is
our privilege, but not our happiness; that any of us have the uppermost seat
in the Church, or chiefest room at a feast, is our honor, but not our
happiness; that any of us eat the fat, and drink the sweet, when others eat
ashes as bread, and mingle their drink with their tears, is our comfort, but
not our happiness; but happy is that people that is in such a case; yea, happy
is that soul that can say, The Lord is my God.

Thirdly, observe well the mediums, the choice ways and means by which all
good things are conveyed to us. It is good to know how we come by what we have.

These three ways take special notice of as most observable. All good things
come to us:

1. By Christ, savingly. 2. By the promise, certainly. 3. By the creatures,
sensibly.
1. Observe how all good things come in by Jesus Christ savingly. God gives all
good things to his through Jesus Christ. If God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him Romans 8. 32.
(...) for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Peace with him, and liberty, and riches, and honor with him, are a good portion
indeed. All things are 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
yours, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, Paul and Apollos, things present
and things to come, etc. But how come they in? Ye are Christ's (says the
Apostle) and Christ is Gods. All comes to us by Jesus Christ, as all the corn
in Egypt came through Joseph's fingers, so all comforts come to us by Jesus
Christ, who is our Mediator; who has not only by his blood purchased all
things for us, but sanctified all to us; he turns our waters into wine, and
makes our bitter waters sweet. Hence as all our duties are presented from us to
God by Jesus Christ, and therefore are accepted; so all things are conveyed to
us from God by Jesus Christ, and so are sanctified. Christ is not only our
Mediator, but our Husband also, and so we enjoy all good things with him and by
him; we have conjugal communion with him; so that we may say as Hamor and
Sechem said to their people (the better to persuade them to be circumcised, and
to marry into Jacob's family) Shall not all their Genesis 34. 23.
cattle, and substance, and every beast of the field be ours? So, if we be
married to Jesus Christ, and become one with him, shall not all be ours through
him who is heir of all? Not only his wisdom to inlighten us, and his power to
uphold us, but the world to supply us; so that if this Husband of ours he
honorable, we cannot be mean; if he be rich, we cannot be poor; and so a little
with him is a great portion, when the whole world without him is nothing. Hence
the Saints of God, out of their love to Jesus Christ, do use to set Jesus
Christ above all; his name also shall be above every name. Princes in their
Proclamations, Charters, and Grants, set their names in the beginning, on the
top, as James by the grace of God King of England, etc. Subjects do always use
to subscribe their names to their Wills, Letters, Leases in the bottom: Both
the Old Testament and the New, wherein the Will of God is contained, have the
name of God set down in the beginning, as Genesis 1.
In the beginning God created, etc. Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was Job. 1.
with God, and the Word was God, Joh, 1. 1. It is good to set Jesus Christ
above all, for he is the summa totalis of all our comforts. The Grecians set
the summa totalis of their bills of account in the top of the page, as we do in
the bottom. Christ and riches, Christ and honors, Christ and liberty is the
total sum of all we enjoy. Let us make Jesus Christ our Generalissimo,
Commander in chief, Primate, Supreme, All in all, set him above all.

1. Above all comforts and outward contents. Like those brave Germane Ladies in
a fiege; who when the Emperor at the surrender of the Town gave them liberty to
carry with them what they could, but excepted the men, who were to stand to his
mercy; left all their gold and silver, with their rich jewels, and took up
their Husbands, and carried them out with them. Let us leave all, so we may
enjoy Christ. Let 2 Samuel 19. 30.
Ziba have all (says Mephibosheth to David) so that the King return. Let the
men of the world have all the wealth, though we be impoverished; let them have
all the honor and friends, though we be disgraced and forsaken, so Jesus
Christ may rule in us, and rejoice over us, and be all in all to us.

2. Set Jesus Christ above all the men and means of any good. Men are apt to
make idols of such as have been instruments of their outward peace and
happiness: Christ will admit of no corrivals, he will be all or none. When
Tiberius the Emperor of Rome sent to the Senate, and required that the Image
of Christ might be set up in the Capitol, they returned this answer from their
Priests, that if he were set up, all the other Images of their gods must down;
if 1 Samuel 5. 4.
Jesus Christ be set up, all our Idols must fall, our Dagons will fall before
the Ark.

3. Set Jesus Christ above all your duties, parts, gifts, and abilities. Your
selfishnesse proves often your greatest prejudice. Like the viper in Paul's
bundle of sticks, which he brought in to make a fire and warm his fingers with,
would sting you to death, Act. 28. 3.
did not God in mercy prevent the mischief. If you compose your selves with
such sparks, you shall lie down in sorrow, if God be not more gracious to you.
In all your duties ^ Sam. 12. 30.
therefore it is best to do as Joa^ did, when he had won Rabbuh, he sent to
David to take the Crown; and good reason, for all the men and means, the money
and ammunition were David's. So here, all your sufficiency is from Christ, you
can do all things through Phil. 4. 15.
Christ that strengthens you. Let him therefore go away with the Crown. Be not
like proud ^st. 6. 8.
Haman, whom nothing could content, but the royal apparel, the royal horse
and crown. Christ will part with any thing to you but his crown, but his glory;
take heed of usurping that. What part or member of the body soever is used in
getting the victory, by the consent of all the head is crowned: However you
speed, let Christ have the crown.

When Caesar and Bibulus were Consuls, Caesar did all, Bibulus* did nothing,
being overawed by Caesar: whereupon the Wits of Rome would in jest subscribe
their Letters, Julio and Caesare consulibus: Do you so, if through the grace of
Christ you can bear afflictions patiently, perform duties fruitfully, pray with
heart, confess with sorrow, beg with life, hear with fruit, say, we can do all
things by Jesus Christ assisting us.

^. Observe how all good things are (...) upon you, continued to you, by the
Promise certainly. All providence to a gr^cious heart, are but as so many
fulfillings of promises. Carnal men have nothing but by common providence; but
whatever this man has, he enjoys by special promise; so that his peace is the
peace of promise, his liberty the liberty of promise, his deliverance the
deliverance of promise. Labor therefore to see every comfort you have (...) in
your Journal, conveyed to you in and by a promise. Thus did Joshua, who when
the people were settled in the Land of (...) told them, that they knew in their
(...) and souls, that not one thing had Josh. 23 14.
failed of all the good things which the Lord their God had spoke concerning
them, all was come to pass. It is good to observe how Gods judgments are
executed upon transgressors, according to his Word, and to say as Jehu did,
when the fierceness of 2 King. 9. 25, 36.
Gods wrath was poured out upon Ahab and Ji^^hel, This is the burden that the
Lord laid upon him, and this is the word of the Lord that he spoke by Elijah
the Tishbit^. When we see Ad^lt^rers brought to shame, and a morsel of ^^^ad,
say. This is according to the Word of the Lord, who has said, Whoremongers
Heb. 13. 4.
(...) adulterers God will judge. When ye see swearers, and blasphemers, and
perjured persons, punished with a stroke from heaven, say, This day is this
Scripture fulfilled in our Exodus 20. 7.
eyes, God will not hold them guiltless that take his name ^vain. But it is
far more comfortable to see all good things bestowed according to a promise,
and to be able to say as David, Psa. 1^9. 65.
Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy Word* So did
Solomon, when he sat upon the throne of his Father David, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel. who has fulfilled with his hand that which he spoke with his
mouth. And again in the same prayer, 2 Chr. 4. 10.
The Lord has performed his word that he has spoken, for I am risen up in the
room of my Father David, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the Lord has
promised. We talk much of Providence, and indeed we are apt to make
Providence to serve our turns; as Jonah, though a Prophet, and a good man,
when he was sent to Nineveh, and not willing to go upon that Embassage, but to
Joppa, and finding a ship Jonah 1. 3.
going to Tarshish, Oh surely (thought he) here is a providence, God would have
me now go rather to Tarshish, so providence leads me; and indeed this is a
great part of the Religion of our time, here was a providence, and there was a
providence; yea, a continned series of providentiall actings: but no man asks,
Where is the Precept requiring, or the Promise encouraging? He that walks by
common providence, without a special Precept to guide him, or singular Promise
to comfort him, walks by a dark (...) and will find that his successes will
prove but pitfalls in the conclusion, and will ^^ll short of an happy issue;
according to that saying: -- Careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.


But let every wise man observe how his successful proceedings are fruits of
a Promise. So did the Virgin Mary; God has helped his Luke 1. 54, 55,
servant Israel in remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke to our Forefathers,
Abraham and his seed for ever. So did Zachariah; God has raised up 69,
for (...) (...) born of salvation in the house of his servant 70,
David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy 71.
(...), that we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all
that hate us; to perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his
holy covenant. Go you, and do likewise; see how Promises run out into
Providence. As, when we see a sincere course of life blessed; say, This is
according to Gods Word, who has said, No good thing Psalm. 84. 11.
shall be wanting to them that walk uprightly. When you see the children of
honest godly parents prosper, you may see the promise that day fulfilled, which
says, The righteous walks in Prove. 20. 7.
^his integrity, and his children are blessed after him

Now that we may do this, that we may the better discern in what channel, by
what promise such a comfort flows in to us, sour things would be skilfully
attended:

1. Endeavor to sort the promises, and (...) know their several kinds. Some are
absolute some conditional; some are general, some are particular, made to
some persons; some for this life, some for the life to come. Godliness 1 Timothy
4. 8.
(says the Apostle) has the promises (...) this life, and of that which is to
come. Some promises are encouragements, as 1 Cor. 5. 20* Some are comforts, as
1 Cor. 10. 13. Some bring rewards, as Psalm. 84. 11. Some contain privileges,
as Joh. 1. 12. Tradesmen so^^ their commodities, by which they live; so should
believers promises to which they trust, and from which they have all.

2. Be sure you understand the language of the Promise. Take heed that the
Promise give not an uncertain sound, nor let the promise be a Barbarian to you.
Let the promise be cleared to you. Christ was very near Ioh. 21. 15.
to Mary Magdalen, when he appeared to her after his re^urrection, but she
thought he had been the Gardener.

As for example:

2 Cor. 6. 17.
Touch no unclean thing, and I will receive yo^. This promise is near to us,
but few underderstand what it says. Touch not; that is, be not married to your
l^sts, be not wedded to your wills, but be divorced from every evil way:
Scripture is the best interpreter 1 Cor 7. 1.
of Scripture, another text will open it: It is not good (says the Apostle) as
the case stands, for a man to touch a woman; that is, to be married.

Take another instance:

Pro. 28. 13.
He that confesses and forsakes his sins shall have mercy; that is, he that
for saketh his sins, (...) the young married woman leaves her Father and
Mother, and is joined to her Husband; that is, she leaves them in regard of
communion with him, for she must now live with her Husband, in regard of
subjection to them; for her desires must be subject (...) her Husband, and he
must rule over her: So the soul leaves his sin in regard of communion with it,
subjection to it, as formerly; and now says to Christ, as Paul did when
converted, Act. 9. 6.
What will thou have me do? How few understand the language of that promise,
Heb. 13. 5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee? Where there are five
negatives in the Original, (...). I will never never never never never leave
thee. With the Latins two negatives do more strongly affirm, with the Grecians
they do more firmly deny. That you may thus understand the language of the
promise; Let Col. 3. 16.
(...) word of Christ dwell plentifully with you; nay, in you, in all wisdom.
The good word of the Lord should be your Vade mecum, your companion, you should
have the promise always with you, as Saul his spear and his cruse of water at
his beds head. Let it lead you walking, watch with you sleeping, talk with you
waking. By this means it will be cleared to you.

3. Endeavor to understand well the extent of Promises, their latitude, and
what their boundaries are; that is, know how much they dish out unto you, how
far they will go with you: If the promise will go but a mile, do not compel it
to go twain: Some promises are made to particular persons, and will not reach
you, as the promise to Abraham of a child in his old age. Sometimes a
particular promise will go farther, Josh. 1. 5.
as that to Joshua, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Which St. Paul
makes use of as a good motive to young married persons to take heed of
covetousness, and be content; Heb. 13. 5.
For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. No good thing
shall be wanting Psalm. 84 11.
to those that walk uprightly, is a promise that must be confidered with
boundaries and limits. This shall be fulfilled in Gods time, in Gods measure,
after his manner, and by his means, and according to your capacity, secundum
modum recipientis; the head is more capable of blood and spirits then the
little finger, a Pottle-pot will hold more then a Pint: Some man can use
abundance of honor and wealth, better then you can (it may be) a low and a mean
condition.

4. Be skillful in the method of applying promises. A methodicall way is a
successeful way. Therefore, be sure you make good the main promise, and then
the rest will follow: I will be thy God, is the main promise, the sum of all
promises. Can you say as David, Thou art my God? You may say then, The Lord is
my rock, my fortress, my deliverer. Psalm. 18. 2.
Can you say as the Psalmist, I am thine? You may then say, Save me, sanctify
me, deliver and 119. 94.
me, provide for me according to thy Word. God that by promise has given us
his Son, cannot but fulfill every promise to us, according to our necessity.
There can be no limit in that love, no bound nor bottom in that bounty. If
Pharaoh will give Jacob and Genesis 45. 19, 20.
his family Goshen, the best of all the Land of Egypt, to dwell in* he will
provide for them wagons and victuals for the way. If you be justified by the
death of Christ, you shall certainly be saved by his life. So the Apostle Romans
5. 10.
argues. Primitive acts of Gods grace, are engaging acts; there was no reason
that a sinner should be justified, but there is a great deal of reason that a
justified person should be saved; if God will take you as his own, he is bound
to make you as his own for ever.

3. Observe how all those good things mentioned in your Journall, are dispensed
to you by the creatures sensibly. There is a vast and infinite distance betwixt
God and man, majesty and meannesse, and therefore we enjoy him, and receive
good from him by men and means. All things both in heaven and earth are at his
command. All Psalm. 50. 10.
creatures are his, and for our service; not only the cattle of a thousand
hills are his, ^. 95. 4.
but the strength of those hills are his also. In all which observe Gods
wisdom and goodness in this threefold choice.

1. His wisdom and goodness in the choice of the instruments. Why this man,
and that means, rather then any other? God often chooses where man leaves, and
leaves where man chooses. He is wiser then the wisest, and better then the
best. Of all the Sons of Jacob, who would have thought of Joseph, the youngest,
and sold by his Brethren; that he should have proved the instrument of
preserving his Father and his family from perishing in the famine, Genesis 50. 20.
and providing for them a dwelling place in the Land of Egypt? And yet God
made choice of him. Amongst all the Sons of Jesse, even Samuel the Seer would
not have chosen David, the youngest, and the least regarded, and therefore set
to keep the ^ Sam. 16. 13.
sheep, to be the man whom God would anoint amongst his Brethren, to be King of
Israel: And yet God made choice of him, and leaves Eliab, and Shammah, and
Abinadab, though proper persons, great Soldiers, and prime Courtiers. When
this David was sent by his Father into the Camp to visit his Brethren, none
would have judged him a fit man to encounter with Goliath, yea even Saul himself
could not believe it; Thou art not able (says he) to go out against this
Philistine, to fight with him; for thou art but a 1 Samuel 17. 33.
youth, and he is a man of war from his youth. And yet God chose him as the man
that should slay that Giant, and save Israel that day. Jethro a Midianite shall
give good counsel to Moses, and Gideon shall be fetched from Exodus 18.
the threshing floor, and made Captain General over all the forces of Israel;
he shall save them from the hands of the Midianites, Judge. 7. 7.
and that with three hundred men alone. This God does, not only to magnify
his power and wisdom, whose ways and thoughts are above ours, past finding
out; often secret, but always just; but to check the haughty thoughts of proud
man, who is ready to limit the holy one of Israel, and to conclude, that if God
go not his way to work, that cannot be effected, which is promised and expected.

It was the fault of good Melancthon, though a man of excellent parts, and very
serviceable for Christ's cause, who was extreme pensive, for fear of some sad
issues of the great meeting at Auspurge; who though very humble, yet had this
pride; his projects must like the counsels of God unerringly and unchangeably
stand, or the cause was lost; whereupon Luther wished Spalatinus his friend to
exhort him, yea charge him in his name, Nefiat Deus, that he make not himself a
god.

It was (as some have observed) the proud humor of Ferdinand Alvares Duke de
Alva, to neglect the advice of others, if beneath him, though never so good;
and would rather stumble then beware of that block that another had warned him
of, because he scorned the instrument. Such an one was Cardinal Matheo Langi
Archbishop of Saltzburg, who at the Diet of Ausburg confessed that the
reformation of the Mass was needful, that liberty of meats was convenient,
but that Luther a poor Monk should reform all, and tell them what was to be
done, must not be endured. But he that walks much with God, and observes him in
the ways of his providence, shall in his own experience find that he
receives least from those from whom in reason he might expect most, and most
oftentimes from those from whom he could expect nothing. Even the Egyptians
shall favor the Israelites, and lend them jewels of silver and gold for their
better accommodation in their Exo. 11. 13.
journey. It was the Lord indeed that gave them favor in the eyes even of
their enemies. The very Ravens in a famine shall bring Elijah food morning and
evening; and when that means fails, a poor Widow shall provide for him, when
never a Prince nor noble Lord in Israel did bear so much love to the Prophet,
as to sustain him in that extremity. Ebedmelech the Ethiopian is very kind to
Jeremiah, and through his interest with the King, works out his enlargement:
Jer. 38. 6, 7.
When his own Contrymen cast him into the dungeon, Nebuzaradan by the
commandment of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon; delivers Jeremy out of prison,
and gives him liberty to go whither he please, when Zedekiah his own King shuts
him up in Jerem. 32. 3, 39, 11.
prison. It is an excellent rule, therefore I wish all that fear God to observe
it. Use means, love prayer, and trust God; which was well employed in that
emblem of some Heathens: A man with his hand on the plow, but his eye in
heaven. There is no restraint 1 Samuel 14. 6.
with God, says Jonathan to his Armor-bearer. If there be many means, God
must bless them; if but few means, he can multiply them; if they be contrary
means, he can use them; if there be no means, he can create them, or work
without them: He it is that appoints all means of our good: He gives virtue to
those means that he appoints, he draws out that virtue that he gives, he
blesses that virtue that he draws out, and by the finger of his providence
points us to the use of those means that he will bless; and in the want of all
will work wonderfully for our good. In the Creation, God had light without Sun,
Moon, or Stars. He made the earth fruitful, and caused every Genesis 2. 5, 20.
plant to flourish when there was no rain, nor any man to till the ground, and
could find out an help for Adam that was most meet, though he could not.

2. Observe Gods goodness in the choice of the time. As God does all things
well, so he does all at the best time. The greatest things that God has done
in the world, he has done for his Church; and the greatest things that God
has done for his Church, he has done as by the most unlikely instruments, so
at the most unlikely time; and yet those instruments were the best instruments,
and that time the best time. The Egyptians had wont to picture Time with three
heads. Time past with the head of a greedy wolf, as one that had devoured much
time. Time present with the head of a crowned Lion, triumphing in the enjoyment
of the present time. Time to come with the head of a dog, fawning on that which
is to come. But all our times are in Gods hands (and in better hands they
cannot be) our time to come into trouble, our time to continue in trouble, and
our time to come out of trouble, is at his dispose. God seldom comes at our
time, always at his own. And if deliverance from dangers, success in our
endeavors, supply of our wants had come sooner or later, it had not been so
good for us. Christ is said Gal. 4. 4. ^
to be sent at the fullness of time, or at the full time; so called, because it
was just that Exo. 12. 41.
time that God had designed. Moses was sent to deliver Israel out of Egypt, at
the full time, though the tale of bricks were doubled, and their burdens
increased; and at the end of 430 years, even the self-same day as it was
promised, it came to pass that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the
Land of Egypt. Christ came to his Disciples when they were distressed by a
storm ^t Sea, in the best time, though it were at Matt. 14. 29.
the fourth Watch in the night, and they most in danger. Our extremity is Gods
opportunity to magnify his wisdom and goodness to us; when we are worst, God
is ever best; when we are at our wits end, then he makes the storm a calm, and
brings P. a. 107. 29.
us to our desired haven. When we know not what to do, he knows how to deliver.

Three persons Christ is said in the Gospel to have raised from the dead; one
was dead, but not carried out, and that was Jairus Mar. 5. 41.
his daughter. A second was dead, and carried out, and that was the widows Son
of Naim. A Luke 7. 14.
third was dead, and carried out, and buried in the grave, where he had lain
four days, Joh. 11. 39.
so that he began to stink, and that was Lazarus. All these he raised at his
own time, and that the best time. He works as wonderfully in raising converts
from the grave of sin. Some are dead, but not carried out; these are civil
persons, who are dead in sin, but more modest and moderate, whose disorders are
not so notorious, and in the public view of the world; if they be drunk, they
are drunk in the night. Some are dead, and carried out; these with Absalom will
play their pranks on 2 Samuel 16. 22.
the house top, that are almost in all evil Prove. 5. 14.
in the midst of the congregation and assembly. Some are dead, carried out, and
buried; whose filthy lives stink in the no^ strils of God and men. And yet when
Gods time is come, if he speak but the word only, Lazarus come forth, they
shall live in his sight. Even Manasseh the bloody, and Mary Magdalen the
filthy, and Paul the persecuter, shall be converted.

In all our tribulations, both National and Personal, it is good to wait on
God; who can and will at his own time deliver our persons from trouble, and
our Nation from the grave of sorrow; yea, even when Ezekiel. 37. 2. 10.
our bones are dead and dry, and scattered; he can then prophecy over us, and
cause a gracious resurrection, but we must wait till his Psalm. 123. 2.
time come, as the eyes of servants upon their Masters, until he have mercy
upon us. We are all for the time present, we would all be Masters, no servants.
Will thou now (say the Disciples to our Savior after his resurrection) restore
the Kingdom to Israel? Who answered them, It is Act. 1. 7*
not for you to know the times and seasons that the Father has put in his own
power. And it is good to wait:

Lam. 3. 26.
1. It is bonum honorandum, an honorable good. Happy are these thy servants
(says 1 Kin. 10. 8.
Sheba 's Queen) that stand continually before thee, O King Solomon. But a
greater then Solomon is here.

2. It is bonum utile, a profitable good. The longer we wait, the better we
speed. Abraham waited long for a Son, Hanna waited long for a child; so did
Zachary and Elizabeth, and had they not all a most gracious issue?

When two Monks came to King Will. Rufu^, to buy an Abbots place, and
endeavored to out-bid each other; a third Monk that came to wait on them, was
asked what he would give, and answered, Not a penny, I came to wait on him that
shall have the place: upon which he gave the waiter the place.

3. It is bonum jucundum, a pleasant thing to wait: For all Gods ways are
ways of Prove. 3. 17.
pleasantness, and all his paths are peace.

4. It is bonum aequum: It is most just that we should wait upon that God that
would Jer. 30. 18.
wait upon us, that he might be gracious unto us.

Some Historians have made this difference betwixt Charles King of Sicily, and
Fabius the Roman General; the first staid till the opportunity was past, and
so lost all; the second waited till the time came, and cunctando restituit rem,
by waiting the fittest season, he restored the Commonwealth to her former
beauty. I had fainted (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 27. 13, 14.
unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. But he adds by way of advice to others, Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart. Wait I say on the Lord. Waiting is
nothing else but faith and patience and hope lengthened out to Gods time.

3. Observe Gods wisdom and goodness to you in the choice of the measure;
just so much comfort in the creature, and no more. He it is that gives us our
daily bread, that feeds us with convenient food, that is, an allowance fitted
to our size and stature, a proportion suitable to our condition. A crust of
Gods carving is better then a banquet of our own providing. I Psalm. 37. 16.
am sure that is true that the Psalmist has taught us, A little that a
righteous man has is better then the riches of many wicked ones. Because that
little is Gods allowance. Plentiful provisions have oftentimes large bills of
account. How hard a matter is it to enjoy much, with an Omnia been! Many rich
owners are like weary Sumpter-horses, who having traveled all day under the
burden of some great treasure, at night lie down in a soul stable with galled
backs: so these at last are laid down in their graves, with galled and
distressed consciences. And if it so fall out that their spirits are quiet,
that the tears of the oppressed do not cry out against them, yet high places
are slippery, and great estates lie open to the blasts of envy and malice. It
is as great a mercy to be able to want that patiently, that God denies justly,
as to use that wisely that God bestows bountifully. Gods measure is ever best;
so much health, and no more; so much liberty, and no more; so much riches, and
no more; so much content in a wife, so much comfort in a child, so much love
from a friend, and no more. It may be our neighbor has ten talents, and we
but two, Gods allowance is ever best; beg we for our daily bread, but let God
be our carver. Joseph thought that his good old Father had been mistaken when
he laid his right hand on Ephraim's head, who was the younger; and his left on
Manasseh, Genesis 48. 18.
who was the elder. And we are ready to entertain hard thoughts of God, who
oftentimes lays an heavy hand upon his Saints, that are his firstborn, and is
very openhanded to others. I was envyous at the foolish Ps. 73. 3, 14.
(says the Psalmist) when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, when all the day
long I have been plagued, and chastened every morning. But God is wise, and
knows what is best. Some live upon their lands, and some by their labors, and
some by both; some live upon their trades, and some by alms, and some upon
their friends. God often teaches his by the want of some mercies how to value
others, and to be thankful for them, and fruitful under them. Fullness is the
bane of thankfulness, and want a good antidote against wantonness. I am sure
surfeit kills more then famine; more birds are taken with a net, then slain with
a gun. The roaring of the Canon is good Rhetoric to commend peace, and that
Spring is usually most pleasant that is ushered in by a sharp Winter. Yea
further, the meanest condition is sometimes the safest. Job on the dunghill
speeds better then Adam in Paradise. David with his sling and his stone has
better success 1 Samuel 17. 39.
against Goliath; then he could have expected in Readiness brave armor which he
had not proved. And I am sure a poor man on foot may get to heaven as soon as
the rich on horseback. God grant I may go to heaven on foot (says good Mr.
Welsh) when he saw the Bishop of London ride in all state to the Court. I have
seen a great Lord in his Coach drawn with six horses, stayed at the turning of
a street either by a Carman or a Colliar, when many a poor man on foot has
slips by, and got safe home. We are apt to think those men that have most
wealth are of best worth, and we usually call them the best men of the Parish,
and our betters. Like ignorant people that judge those Luminaries of heaven, as
the Sun and Moon, to be the greatest, because the lowest; when stellae prime
magnitudinis seem less, but are not, because higher. The things of this world
are such as commonly the best want them, and the worst have them, and they are
often reserved for their owners, to their hurt. Dantur bonis ne videantur mala,
dantur malis ne videantur summa bona: They are sometimes given to good men,
lest they should seem evil; sometimes to wicked men, left they should seem the
chiefest good things. Some have lost their fingers for their gold rings, some
their lives for their purses, others their souls for their mammon. Many Papists
in the Parisian Massacre were butchered with the Protestants for their wealth,
which made them (...) Naboth's vineyard was his greatest 1 K^. 21. 13*
^aul^, not blasphemy against God and the King. It was his land that cost him
his life. Sir. John Cornwall Lord Fanhope at his death d^rst say, that not
himself, but his brave house at Ampthel was guilty of treason. So^in told
Croesus, when he showed him his great ^reasure of gold, If your enemies Iron be
better then yours, he will carry away all your gold; and so it fell out
afterward. Silver and gold I have none, says Peter to the Act. 3. 6.
^ame man. All these things will I give thee, Matt. 4. 9.
faith the Devil to Christ. If these things were so very good, as the world
judges them to be, Peter should not have wanted them, nor would the Devil ever
have offered them. In sublimitate metus, in mediocritate quiet: A mean
condition has safety, when high places are full of fears. The poor of the Land
of Judea are spared by Nebuchad-^ezzar, Jerem. 52.
and left behind to till the land; when Zedekiah the King had his eyes put
out, his Princes slain with the sword, and the wealthy carried into captivity.
Medio^ria firma; a middle estate betwixt poverty and riches, food convenient
for us, which the Wi^e man prayed for, is the more secure, when excess has
danger. Which made Scipio Africanus say, when he was required to join with the
Priest, who prayed for more increase to the Roman State; No, our State is rich
enough, I will rather pray the gods to keep and continue what we have. How many
when they have found the^ blood too rank, have been at the char^ with a
Surgeon to let some out?

However God deal with you, whether he give you more or less, it will be your
wisdom to hold these three conclusion^ Fast:

1. Conclude, that if God did see you (...) to use more, he could and would
afford more. Are you straightned in outwar^ comforts? It is not because there
is an^ want in God, the want is rather in you^ 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8.
selves. So much God told David by N^than the Prophet; I anointed thee to be
Ki^^ over Israel, and delivered thee from the hand (...) Saul; and I gave thee
thy Masters house, and (...) Masters wives into thy bosom; and gave thee (...)
house of Israel and Judah; and if that had bee^ too little, I would moreover
have given thee (...) and such things. He says to every child of Cen. 23. 15.
his, as Ephron the Hittite said to Abraham when he came to buy the field and
the ca^^ in Machpelah, to bury his dead in; The lan^ is worth 400 shekels, but
what is that betwi^ thee and me? What are riches, and honor and peace, and
liberty? They are indeed o^ great value, but they are little betwixt yo^ and
me, who am a great God, and have given you my Son; and can there be any limits
in that love? any bounds or bottom^ in that bounty? I am a great God, and can
do more for you then you can ask or think, and that exceeding abundantly. When
one, and he a poor man, asked Alexander a penny, he told him, it was too little
for him to give; whereupon he asked a talent, he then told him, it was too much
for him to beg. But of God we may say, he loves to give above our petitions,
yea, our thoughts, and that very bountifully. Jacob confessed so much Genesis 48.
11.
to ^oseph, I had not thought to have seen thy face; and lo, God has showed
me also thy ^eed.

2. Conclude, that it is a rich mercy when your minds are conformable to your
means; and should your means come up to your minds, it might be a misery. In
every estate to be content, requires not an ordinary measure of grace; St. Paul
attained Phil. 4. 12.
to it, but he had learned so to do. It is an hard lesson, we had need to take
out that lesson betimes. Yea, it is hard to learn to be contented, to be full,
and to abound; for commonly they that have most are the most discontented
persons; and the more they have, the more they would have. He Eccl. 5. 10.
that loves silver (says Solomon) shall not be satisfied with silver; and he
that loves abundance, with increase. Whence one told Alexander, that had he
the Eastern Empire in one hand, and the Western in another, he would not be
contented. Whereas on the other side, Diogenes the Cynicke housed in his tub,
and making even with his victuals and the day together; being invited to a
great feast, could say, I had rather lick salt at Athens, then feast with
Craterus. It is ^^ported of one of the old Philosophen, that when he saw a
Prince going by, with the greatest pomp and state that might be, he said to
some about him, See how many things I have no need of. He that has food and
raiment, and is therewith content, may say with Cato, (as Aulus Gelli^ reports
of him) Si quid est quo utar ^to^; si non scio quis sum, mihi vitio vertunt,
qui^ multis egeo; and ego illis, quia nequeunt egere. I have neither house, nor
plate, nor garments of price in my hands; what I have, I can use; if not, I can
want it: Some blame me, because I want many things; and I blame them, because
they cannot want. And it is not strange that herein a Heathen should go beyond
a Christian.

3. Conclude that God has many ways to throw these things in upon you, if he
see them good for you; and as many ways to take them from you, if he perceive
they prove hurtful to you. He that can bless a little, can blast a great
deal. He can raise you up on high, and bring ^ob 42. 12.
you down again. Job one while was the greatest man in all the East, and in a
short time stripped of all; and again, the Lord blessed the latter end of Job
more then his beginning; who gave him twice as much as he had before. You are
but Tenants at will to the great Landlord of all the earth, and all you have
are but movables. To be ble to bear extremities of heat and cold, ^iscovers a
strong constitution; such were ^^r Henry the fifth, King of England, and (...)
Adolphus King of Sweden; of whom (...) is reported in the History of their
Lives and Wars, that no weather, of heat, or ^old, or wind, or storms, came
amiss to them. I am sure it is an argument of a ^ery gracious heart, that is
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, to be able to bear
comfortably several con^itions, even in their extremes. This may be seen in
Joseph, who of all the twelve Patriarchs is only mentioned with honor amongst
those famous believers in Heb. 11. To day he is his Fathers darling, the Son of
his love, and none greater in that family then he, to morrow he is sold for a
slave by his own Brethren, and carried into Egypt. Now he is advanced by
Potiphar, one of the prime Peers of that Kingdom, and none greater in that
house then he: By and by a jealous Husband at the complaint of his beastly
Mistress, casts him into prison, where the irons entered into his soul: Not long
after that he is advanced by King Pharaoh to great honor, even as high as
Subjection could permit, or Sover^ignty endure; for only in the throne the
King would be above him. And in all these turns and changes Joseph kept his
integrity. In the Country, and in the Court; in the Prison, and at the Palace,
Joseph was sincere and faithful; neither did his low estate deject him, nor
the high sail of honor and greatness overwhelme him, but he kept upright in
both. Now as affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble Job
5. 6.
spring out of the ground, as Eliphas told Job; but from on high: So promotions
come neither from the East, nor from the Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge; he puts down one, and
sets up another.

CHAP. V.
The manner how a Journall or Diary is to be used, according to the rules of
Practice.

AND thus far of the rules of Observation. We come now to the rules of
Practice, which are to be followed, for the better improvement of such a
Journall or Diary; and they are these twelve.

1. Look often into this Journall, and read it over: Of all employments in the
world, a studious is the most ingenuous; wherein the understanding, judgment,
and memory, the most noble faculties of the soul, are principally employed: Of
all studies he ^tudy of History seems to be most excelent: Hence even the
Scripture it self is for great part Historical; that the hearts of people
might be the better taken with it, and ^elight in it: Of all Histories, the
History of men's Lives is the most pleasant: Such History, amongst many
commendations that may be given to it, this is not the least, that it can call
back Times, and give life to those that are dead; and like a Landscape give a
lively discovery of the actions of the Grandees in former ages. But of all
Histories of Lives, should think, the History of a man's own Life (even out of
common principles of self-love) must needs be most acceptable. To be able to
read our Lives even from the womb to this present moment; from the cradle,
within some few days of the grave, would surely be a study as profitable as
delightful. It seems that Jacob had some skill in the art of memory, though he
wrote not such a story; who when he prayed unto God that he might be delivered
from the hands of his Brother Esau, that he might the better prevail with God,
he argues from the experience he had of his former goodness, and gives him a
brief narrative of his life, in some particular passages of providence; With my
staff I came over this flood Jordan, Genesis 32. 10.
and now I am become two bands. And questionless this duty was taught every
Israelite, who when they came yearly to offer their basket of first fruits to
the Lord, did use to run over a short history of their Fathers lives (wherein
their condition had D^^t. 26. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
been wrapped up) in these words: A Syri^n ready to perish was my Father, and
he went down into Egypt, and so journed there with a few, and became there a
Nation great, mighty, and populou^: And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and
laid upon us hard bondage; and when we cried unto the Lord God of our Fathers,
the Lord heard our voice, and brought us out of Egypt into this Land, etc.
Est. 6. 1, 2.
It is reported of A^ashuerosh, that one night when he could not sleep, he sent
for the Book of the Chronicles of his own Kingdom, and they were read before
him: Now of all the parts of that History, that which concerns things done in
the time of his Reign was principally chosen; wherein was written what good
service Mordecai did him in discovering the treason of Bigthan and Teresh
against him, which probably was most acceptable to him, as may appear in the
sequel in that History.

Tamerlane the most victorious Emperor of the Tartars, the night before he
sought that fatal battle with Bajazet the Turkish King, having cast himself
upon a rich carpet in his pavillion, called for a Book, wherein was contained a
history of the Lives of his Ancestors; which he used often to read for this
end, that he might the better imitate that which was worthily done by them, and
learn also to decline such dangers as they by their over fight had fallen into.
And surely such Histories of our Fathers are but next door to our own, and may
provoke us to look into our own lives with more care and caution. And I am
assured, to read a story of our own lives, would be a study (next that of the
holy Scripture) as pleasant and profitable as any.

2. When you have read over this Journall, and seen what you have, cast up also
all your wants, and see what at present you stand in need of. When Israel and
his family went down into Egypt, it was fair weather all the way, they had
rich provision for their journey. Joseph his Son came out to meet him in great
state, and they were received into Goshen, the best of all the Land of Egypt:
But when Israel went out of Egypt toward Canaan, they met with many stor^^^,
their wants were great, their enemies mighty, their dangers grievous; a red
Sea, a howling Wilderness, bloody Amalekites, and fiery Serpents were in their
way. So falls it out with any Christian; who, though whilst he walked in the
broad way, that leads to more then an Egyptian darkness and bondage, he had
no cause of complaint, but all went well with him; yet when he set his face to
heaven, and walked in that narrow way that leads to life, then found that his
wants were many, and his temptations great. The best, even in the midst of
their abundance, have their just complaints; and he that has most, has not
all. One man has wealth, but no honor, he is under a cloud; another has
wealth and honor, but not a days health scarce in a month; a third has all
these, but not a child. The life of the best is like a shuttle-cock kept up a
while betwix^ two battle-dores, and at the last falls to the ground: Betwixt
prosperity and adversity, good days and evil, light and darkness, our lives
run on, and at the last we are laid in the grave.

The Germans have a proverbiall saying of the three Princes Electors, that the
Pal^sgrave has the honor, Brandenburg the land, but the Duke of Saxony the
money. Genesis 2. 17.
No man has all. Even Adam in Paradise was taught to want something, he must
not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and Josh. 1. 1, 2, 7, 13, 15.
evil. Moses, one of the five grand favorites of heaven, called in one chap.
five times the servant of the Lord. And to be a servant of God is a great
honor; Deo servire regnare est, To serve God is to reign. And yet Moses must
not go into the Land of Canaan, though he begged hard for it: Let it suffice
Deuteronomy. 3. 25.
thee, (says God to him) speak no more to me of that matter. I know no man
that enjoys that abundance of all good things, but I may say to him as our
Savior to the Mar. 10. 21.
young man in the Gospel, One thing thou lackest. If the possession of many
things make us proud, God knows how by the want of one thing to keep us humble.
Oh be sure that one thing be not that one thing necessary; namely, faith, by
which we may see God in all, enjoy God with all, and love God above all.

3. In the midst of all our wants, reckon how many ways those wants are
supplied with other comforts. God usually makes us a good amends, as David said
to Abisha, when Shimei railed on him; It may be God 2 Samuel 16. 12.
will requite me for this cursing this day. If Adam may not eat of the fruit of
the tree Genesis 2. 16.
in the midst of the Garden, yet of the fruit of every tree in the Garden
besides he might freely eat. If Moses may not go into the Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
Land of Canaan, yet his body shall have the most honorable burial that ever
man had; the Lord buried him, and no man knows of his sepulcher unto this day,
and his soul went to heaven, which was far better. If we be straightned in
outward comforts, and enlarged with spiritual graces; if we be weak in body,
and strong in the Lord; if poor in the world, and rich in faith; if forsaken of
friends, and God stands by us, we have no great cause to complain.

Travelers into forain parts will tell you, that those Countries that are most
Paganish, are most stored with gold and silver, and that those lands that are
without those rich mines, have more of the knowledge of Christ and his ways.
One man has little to live upon but his labors, but he has a very strong and
healthy body. Many times the poorest men have most children, which some esteem
a great blessing, though others look upon it as a burden, and put it into the
bill of charges. Even Est. 5. 11.
Haman, when he boasted before his wife and friends of his great wealth and
honors, reckons the multitude of his children amongst his great preferments. If
one child be a blessing, then ten children are ten blessings. Ps. 127. 4, 5.
Children of youth (says the Psalmist) are like arrows in the hand of a mighty
man; happy is the man that has his quiver full of them. And certainly many a
man would willingly part with half his estate for the fruit of the loins and
womb. If God send mouths, Deuteronomy. 33. 24, 25.
he will provide meat. Ashur's blessing was children, but God will provide for
him and them. Ashur shall be blessed with children* (says Moses) but let him
be acceptable to his Brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil; his shoes shall
be iron and brass; and as his days be, so Genesis 49. 20.
shall his strength be: His bread shall be fat, (says Jacob) and be shall
yield royal dainties. Every child that comes into the world, commonly has
two breasts.

The like may be said of any other wants, and the several ways by which God is
pleased to supply them very graciously to his; yea, sometimes to those that are
without. It is said of Galba the Emperor of Rome, that he had a crooked body,
but a good head; insomuch that one said of him, Ingenium Galb^ male habitat:
Galbo's great wit had but an homely habitation. Aesop was much deformed, but
very wise; and Erasmus, a plain man, but a great Scholar. Such a man (and
blessed be God there are many such) is but one story high in the world; but a
very godly man, and high in Gods favor, and esteem of all his people.

To conclude, could any man live the days of Methuselah, and should all his
way lie by Weeping-crosse; God reconciled in Christ, with the enjoyment of
heaven at the last, would make amends for all.

4. Take great notice of the singular peculiar excellency of all Gods
dispensations toward you above the world. Your waters are become wine, your
gleanings are better then the vintage of the world. God Heb. 12. 7.
deals with you as with Sons; the Servant shall have his wages, and it may be
a livery, but the Son shall have better: He is the Savior of all, but
especially of them 1 Timothy 4. 10.
that believe. Every passage of providence toward you, if you be the Lords,
has something more special in it. God has choice mercies for a chosen
generation, peculiar favors for a peculiar people, hidden comforts for his
hidden ones; that which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into a
carnal heart to conceive.

See this made good in three passages.

1. Such have ever what the world has, and something more, an overplus; the
meanest Christian may vie comforts with the greatest men of the world, as Paul
sometimes 2 Cor. 11. 22, 23.
with the false Apostles. Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am
I. Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I. Are they Ministers of Christ? I am
more; in labors more abundant, etc. So a gracious heart: Are the men of the
world honorable? So am I that am a Son of God, and a partaker of the divine
Nature. Have they friends? So have I, that have union to, and communion with
Jesus Christ and his members. Are they rich? So am I, that am rich in faith,
and an heir of heaven; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet
possessing all things; as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing. I can take more
content in my tears, then they in their days of jollity. Have they health,
peace, liberty, money? I am more; in comforts more singular, in promises more
abundant. God deals with his and the world, as Joseph dealt with Genesis 43. 34.
his Brethren; their sacks were all filled, and their money put into their
sacks. But Benjamin and 45. 2.
shall have the silver cup, which proved a pledge of love at the last. All are
bountifully feasted, but Benjamin's mess is best. God is good to all, but his
own shall have something over and above; riches, and the God of riches; honor,
liberty, health, and a good right to them, with a gracious use of them; which
the world never had. And not only so, but in that salvation wrought for
mankind, by the death of Jesus Christ, Gods own people have something more
then others; according to that of the Apostle, He is the Savior 1 Timothy 4. 10.
of all men, especially of them that believe. He saves all; that is, from that
inevitable ruin the sin of Adam had involved them in, and making them salvable
upon conditions of another covenant; so that now salvation is not impossible,
as it was before Christ, but may be offered to any man, even the Jailor, a
boisterous bloody fellow, upon condition of believing; according to the tenor
of that commission, He that believes Mar. 16. 15, 16.
shall be saved. So that a special salvation is afforded to believers. Christ
was a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. but the Savior only of his body, Ephesians. 5.
23. He redeemed all Rom 8. 29, 30.
from present ruin, but called, and justified, and glorified only whom he
knew before, and had predestined to be conformed to his Image. He saves none
thus, but those for Joh. 17. 9.
whom he prayed, and he prayed not for the world.

2. Such, even in those outward enjoyments, have something more singular then
the world; that little that a righteous man has, is better then the great
revenues of Psalm. 37. 16.
the wicked; their wealth is better, their liberty better, their honor better,
their peace better then other men's. For they have these things and mercy with
them, and a blessing upon them. They have these things, as by the same
covenant, so with the same love that they enjoy Jesus Christ, and a little
blessed is better Genesis 26. 12.
then a world enjoyed. It is said of Isaac, that he sowed his ground, and
received an hundred sold, and the Lord blessed him. He waxed great, and grew on
till he became very great; but the Lord was with him, and blessed him. Others
have a bit and a whip, a crust and knock; rich and reprobate, honorable and
damned. Abundance, and go ye cursed at the last. A little in mercy is
abundance, and abundance with blessing is Gods plenty. And indeed, he that can
bless a little, can blast a great deal. Genesis 4. 12.
If Cain till the ground, and sow his seed, the earth is cursed to him, it
shall not b^ing sorth, or yield to him her strength. Hence the word in the
Greek (...), signifies both bounty and blessing; and indeed that is truly
bounty that is thus blessed, Romans 15. 29. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 9. 5.

3. God ever gives to his own, satisfying mercies, contenting goodness. No
man but a child of God could ever truly say as Jacob did, I have enough,
Joseph is alive. My redeemer lives. There is much difference between the men
of Gods hand, that are the men of this, world, and the men of his heart; and
there is as great a difference betwixt the ^^l^ing of the belly, and the
satisfying of the ^oul* Thou fillest their bellies (says David, Psalm. 17. 14,
15.
speaking of the men that are his hand) with (...) ^id treasure; but as for me,
I will behold thy (...) in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I ^wake
with thy likeness. These outward things to the world is but a belly-^ull, and
how soon is the belly emptyed? but they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, shall be Matthew. 5. 6.
satisfied. God gives the world the worlds goods, but not the Saints goodness.
He gives the world, as sometimes he did to Israel, their request, but sends
leanness into Psa. 106. 15.
the soul; a fat purse, and a fat heart; a whole estate, and a whole heart; a
fat body and a ^ean soul; but he deals better with his own, he fulfils the
desires of them that fear him. If he afflict them, he sanctifies their
afflictions, or they are not satisfied. If he give to them, he gives them all
things that concern life and godliness, or they are not satisfied. If he
forgive them, he forgives all their iniquities, and remembers their sin no Ier.
31. 34.
more, or they are not satisfied. Hence it is observable, that the Saints of
God in the Old Testament, are ever mentioned in the Gospel with honor, but
their faults and failings never remembered. Ye have heard of the patience of Job
(says James) so have we read Jam. 5. 11.
something of his impatience, but that is quite forgotten. Ye have read of the
Faith of Abraham, of the Grief of Lot for the David, the Wisdom of Solomon,
etc. (...) their sins are not remembered in the Gospel* On the contrary, those
wicked ones whos^ 1 John 3. 12. Gal. 4. 29. Heb. 12. 16. 2 Pet. 2. 15. Jude v.
11.
names are recorded in the Old Testament, are never mentioned in the New
Testament but with some blot; as, Cain, who was of that wicked one; Ismael, the
persecuter; Esa^, the profane; Balaam, the covetous; Corah, the Gainsayer, etc.
But what says the Lord Jer. 50. 20.
of these? In those days, and at that time, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve.

5. Take great heed that the want of some one thing, do not rob you of the
comfort of all the mercies that you enjoy besides. For such is the perverseness
and waywardness of man's nature, that though some have had more, have more, and
look to enjoy more then they can either want or wish for; yet they are more
troubled with the sense of one want, then they are comforted in, or thankful
for all they have. This was not only the fault of A^ab, whom not the royalties
of the Kingdom, nor the Cities he had built, nor the Ivory house that he had
made, would content and 1 Kin. 2. 14.
comfort, unless he might have Naboth's vineyard also, which was denied him.
Nor Est. 5. 13.
was this the fault of Haman alone, who though he did what he listed, and had
what he pleased, under the favor of his royal Master; yet lost the comfort of
all, because (...) would not bow. What avails all (says he) so long as I see
Mordecai sitting in the Kings gate? but it was the fault of good ^achel, that
was able to wrestle with God; Genesis 30. 1.
who, though she had what a loving Husband could afford her, yet would die of
the ^ullens, because she had no Son. Yea, even Abraham (as some think) failed
in this, who brake out into this discontented speech before God, What will thou
give me, seeing I and 15. 12.
go childlesse? As if all had been nothing, no not Gods being his shield, and
exceeding great reward, unless God gave him a Son: Though some have thought
that his complaint reached higher, (to whom I incline) What will thou give me?
all hitherto is nothing, if I go childelesse, if Christlesse, if Saviourlesse;
for it is such a Son that I have waited for, in whose seed the Nations of the
earth shall be blessed; and it is such a Son that thou have promised me; and if
not such a Son, all is nothing.

6. Reckon often, not only what you have, and what you want, but what you may
want; cast up all hazzards. Who knows what lies in the womb of the next
morning? All the pomp of the world is but a fancy and may soon vanish.

It is said of Agrippa and Berenice, that when they came to Jerusalem to hear
Paul, Act. 25. 23.
they entered with great pomp; the word in the orig* is (...), with great fancy,
with great pomp. And how soon are affair* ^st. 7. 10.
changed in a Kingdom, or in a family? Hamo^ the great Minion in the Court of
Ahashuerosh* is hanged on that tree that he prepared for Mordecai. It has been
observed by Historians, of Tiberius, Emperor of Rome; of Mahomet the Great,
Emperor of the Turks; and of Henry the Eight, King of England; that there was
no security in their love, but that such as were highest in their favor, were
nearest to ruin. Who ever has read the stories of Bajazet and Bellizarius,
who fell from the highest pinnacle of greatness, to the lowest extreme of all
scorn and misery, but will acknowledge the uncertainty of all sublunary
comforts? Saladine the great Sultan of Egypt, and Conqueror of the East, to
show the frailty and vanity of all worldly felicity, commanded on his
deathbed, that no Princely solemnity should be used at his Funeral, more then
his shirt fastened to the point of a Lance, and carried before his dead body, a
Priest going before, and crying aloud to the people in this sort: Saladine, of
all the great riches and honor that he had in his life, carries no more with
him at his death then his shirt. A Duke of Exeter, that marry^d K. Edw. the
fourth his Sister, was seen barefoot, begging in the Camp of the Duke of
Burgundy. Hence a wiseman will cast up his hazards, and reckon upon losses,
thus. Here is a fine house, and a most pleasant habitation; but a fire may
suddenly level it even with the ground. Here is a competent estate of land,
but riotous children may spend it; here is a great sum of money, but as that
fire that came down from heaven, that consumed the sacrifice, and the wood; and
lickt up all the water in the trench about the Altar that 1 Ki. 18. 38.
Elija^ caused to be made: so sickness, or suri^yship, or long Suites in Law,
or a Civil war, may consume all. I have those comforts in wife, children,
relations, friends, that few have; but how soon death may deprive me of all, I
know not: And he died, and he dyed is the end of every man's story; and the
winding sheet of the strongest man, and the choycest friend. I have health,
strength and such personal endowments that many want; but I may suddenly by
some noisome disease, or violent distemper, be stripped of all. Yea, which is
more then all this, I have peace with God and mine own conscience; it is fair
weather over head, though foul under foot; though I meet with some trouble in
the world, yet the lamp of God shines upon my tabernacle, and the Almighty is
with me, as Job sometimes said of himself; yet I may be forsaken, and left to
my self, and the most dreadful terrors get hold of me for a time; yea, God may
write bitter things against me, and make me possess the sins of my youth; for
there is no evil of sin, but that against the holy Ghost; nor evil of sorrow,
but that of the bottomless pit, but may befall me. When Joseph dreamt of his
great preferment, he never dreamt of his imprisonment. We often look upon that
we have, but seldom consider what we do or may want.

When a great City was burnt to ashes, Seneca had this saying, Vna dies
interest inter magnam civitatem and nullam: One day makes a great difference
betwixt a great City and Dan. 4. 30, 31, 32.
none. Is not this great Babylon (says Nebuchadnezzar) which I have built for
the house of my Kingdom, and the honor of my Majesty, by the might of my
power? Whilst the word was in the Kings mouth, there fell a voice from heaven,
saying, Oh Nebuchadnezzar! to thee be it spoken, The Kingdom is departed from
thee, etc. The same hour was the thing fulfilled. Christ's prophecy of the
ruin of the Temple, and those stately buildings that the disciples showed him,
Matt. ^4. 2.
was dreadful; Verily, I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

7. In the next place, from hence study seriously the vanity of all
creature comforts, honors, pleasures, riches, friends; O quan^um est in rebus
inane! Oh how much vanity is in these things! was the saying of Perseus long
ago. By this time we are fallen upon the dregs of time, the last and worst age
of the world; and now these things run a tilt, and therefore Eccles. 1. 2.
have the less in them. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, all is vanity.
Vanitas est debitae entitat is vacuitas: Vanity is nothing else but the want of
a just entity or being.

Now, 1. A just being is a present being, but these things are often furthest
off when we have most need of them. God only is a Psalm. 46. 1.
present help in trouble, and can be with us in all places, according to that
promise to Genesis 28. 15.
(...).

2. A just being is a constant being, but these things last not, our pleasures
end in pain, our plenty in penury, our honor in contempt; The fashion of this
world passes 1 Cor. 7. 31.
away; the (...), the species, the figure, the image; like a brave picture
drawn upon the ice, that under the heat of the Sun is soon gone. God only is
from everlasting to Psalm. 90. 2.
everlasting.

3. A just being is a perfect being, that has all excellencies in it; but
these things want something still: Nihil est ab omni part beatum: Nothing here
is in every part completely happy; only God is a perfect good, and he that
enjoys him, needs no more.

4. A just being is a solid being, that has no evil in it at all; but these
things are not only vanity, but vexation of spirit. Augendicura, and
amittendimetus: A care to get, and a fear to lose, like burs, stick close to
our choycest comforts. These things at the first fight seem very good, but
better considered, are not so. Quae cito aspecta placent ea melius inspecta
displicent; as Seneca could say, They are seemingly good, but not certainly so.
Like Calipolis, a City, that at a great distance seems very beautiful; but if
you come nigh to it, answers not expectation; but God only is a solid good; he
is light, 1 John 1. 5.
and in him there is no darkness at all. He is altogether excellent.

See the vanity of these things yet further in four passages.

1. They are so vain, that all the world, the profits of it, the pleasures in
it, were it ten times better then it is, are not enough to make up one childs
portion, though a servant behind the Mill, or a dru^^^ in a Kitchen, if godly,
the eternal, almighty, alsufficient God, is but enough to be his portion: Psa.
117. 57.
Thou art my portion* O Lord, says David. This one promise, I will be thy God,
will outweigh them all.

2. They are so vain that a fancy, a conceit, a jealousy, a humor, an
ungrounded fear, will rob a man of the comfort of them all (and what are these
things without their comfort?) and make him run quite 2 Ki 7. 6* 7.
away from them, as the Syrians once did from their camp, and all their
treasure. One man will not live, because his minion will not love. Another man
will hasten to the g^ave, because his commodities are dead, and lie on his hand.

3. They are so vain, that had one man as much wealth and honor, as much
pleasure and outward content as his heart could desire, or the world afford
him, yet within 24 hours he would be weary of all, and must go sleep; God draws
the cu^t^in of the night, and hides them all from the world under that dark
canopy. Here omnium (...) est satietas, all things have their fulsomnesse, and
therefore we have day and night. In heaven no night, there we shall never be
weary of our enjoyments, but delight in them unto all eternity.

4. They are so vain, that suddenly when we least think of it, they are gone.
Good news from them is like the sound of bells in a storm; sometimes that
pleasant ring is very near, and suddenly it cannot be heard. I have seen a man
compassed about with plenty, and variety of all earthly comforts that can be
imagined, in a short time come to nothing; his honor, wealth, friends, peace,
liberty, health, beauty, posterity, attendants; like a great flock of birds,
with one shout scared quite away, and return no more; plucked all from him, and
never any more recovered. Oh! study much the vanity of all sublunary contents.
You can never have high thoughts of Jesus Christ, his promises, ordinances,
union to him, communion with him, till you have low thoughts of the things of
the world. Solomon Eccles. 1. 2.
first wrote his Ecclesiastes, before his Song of Songs; he could first say by
experience, All is vanity, before he could set it down under his own hand
that Christ was the chi^^est Cant. 5. 10, 16.
among ten thousand, and altogether lovely.

Therefore, in the next place, be very moderate in the use of these things.
Take heed you lash not out too much of your love upon them, and delight in
them. Take heed you make them not idols, left God pluck them away from you. As
it is an high point of wisdom to seek these things remisly, so it is an
argument of a great measure of grace, to use them soberly, and part with them
willingly. Quantum canis Appula tantum. Like the dog that runs by the river
Nilus, where the Crocodiles lie, and wait for their prey; but a sip, a taste,
and be gone, left they be surprised and devoured by them. Jon. 4. 6, 8.
For Jonah to be glad of his gourd was safe, but to be exceeding glad, was
sinful. And his vexation was greater in the loss, then his content was in the
enjoyment of it; his very life is now a burden to him, because his gourd is
plucked away from him. And indeed, strong affections to these things are good
for nothing, unless to breed strange afflictions: How many have lost their
dispositions amongst their advancements; because when riches and promotion
come, they set their hearts too much upon them. Magistratus virum indicat; give
a man place and power, and you may soon see what he is; those snakes of
corruption that lay hid in the cold winter of want and meannesse, will stir
abroad in the sunshine of honor and greatness.

It is reported of Pope Sixtus quintus, that before he attained the Papal
dignity, he was the most humble crouching Friar that (as my Author says) was
ever lodged in an oven; but once seated in that chair, the stoutest and
proudest Prelate that ever ware a triple crown. Some have observed, that even
Judas, before he had the Bag-office, carried himself honestly and soberly; but
afterward, he grew so covetous, that rather then he would want money, he would
sell his Master.

Oh therefore take heed that your affections run not out in so full a stream to
these things. Height of affection, as well as height of estate is dangerous.
Set not your affections Col. 3. 2.
(says the Apostle) upon things on earth. God would not take away our
affections, he would only tune them. If they be set upon these things, and not
set upon God, they are out of tune. Riches are like briars and thorns, good to
stop a gap with; but if you lay them in your beds, and set your hearts on them,
this you shall have of my hand, you shall lie down in sorrow. They are good
servants, but bad Masters. Let the world follow you as a servant, and be
thankful; but do not you follow the world as a Master, lest you prove the
greatest slaves. If riches have been thy god, make them thy slave. Serve it as
Diagoras did Hercules his image made of wood; being in an Inn, and having
nothing to seethe his broth with, made a fire with it. All these things will I
give thee, was the Devils strongest temptation, and therefore reserved to the
last place. Hopes of preferment have overcome those whom imprisonment and the
fear of the loss of all could not move. Take heed therefore, and beware of
covetousness. It is true, that temptation prevailed not against our Savior,
but it may overcome us, because we have three enemies to contend and fight
with, Sin, World, and Devil; he had but two, the World and the Devil, whose
temptations though fierce and frequent, could never prevail; because, though
like to us in all things, yet sin was excepted.

9. But above all sublunary things, take great heed you trust not too far,
depend not too much upon men; no, not those men that may have been instrumental
for your good. Isa. 2. 22.
Cease ye from man (says the Prophet) for wherein is he to be trusted? Put not
your trust in Princes, (says the Psalmist) nor in the Son of man. Neither in
this generation, nor the next, for they are all but Sons of men, and Psalm 39. 5.
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. We are apt to think that
the next man may be better, but seldom comes a better, because Phil. 3. 2.
Mat. 10. 17.
all are men. Beware of dogs, says the Apostle; but our Savior Christ says,
Beware of men; though more modest and moderate, yet if but men, they will
deceive, and peradventure persecute you. The most intimate bosom friend may
prove an Achitophel, if but a man. As you should not fear them too much, so do
not trust them Psalm. 49. 16.
too far; not fear them, though they be made rich, and the glory of their
houses be made great; for men of low degree are vanity, and and 62. 9.
men of high degree are a lie; if laid in the balance, they are altogether
vanity. All the Nations Isa. 40. 15, 17.
(says the Prophet) are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as small as
the dust in the balance. All nations before God are as nothing, and are
counted to him less then nothing and vanity. What then is one mighty man? Ten
hundred thousand times less then a drop. A drop may wet, but it cannot drown;
be not afraid of him then, will you be afraid of nothing, of a vanity, of a
drop? Neither do you trust them too far. Trust ye not in a friend, (says
Micah) put no confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from her that
lies in thy bosom. And why so? chapter 7. v. 4. Mica. 7. 4, 5, 6.
The best of them is a briar, the most upright is sharper then a thorny hedge.
And in v. 6. The Son dishonors the Father, the Daughter rises up against
her Mother, the Daughter in law against her Mother in law, and a man's enemies
are the men of his own house. Thou say (says Ratshaketh to Hezekiah) I have
counsel and strength for the 2 Ki. 18. 20*
war, but they are but vain words. Thou say, such a Prince is my friend, and
such a great man is my kinsman, but they are but vain words. For he heapeth up
riches, and cannot tell who shall enjoy them; not himself knows, much less
thou. What was Canaan the better for the Sons of Anak, or Bas^^^ for their Og,
or the Philistines for their Goliath* So, what art thou the better for thy
mighty friends? It is true, where goes the bucket there goes the rope, (as the
Spaniard has it in his proverb) the rope depends on the bucket: But if thy
friend fail, where are all thy hopes? But above all, trust no man's judgment
solely in matters of Religion; because a man of note, for great learning and
piety. I will not pin my faith upon any man's sleeve, (says Sir Tho. More)
because I know not whither he will carry it: What if a very godly man? I never
saw that Christian yet, but I might see something of a man in him; enough of
the old man in the new man to trouble the best man. Gross errors have been
maintained by good men, to the prejudice of public peace: Matthew. 16. 22.
Even Peter a good man, advised Christ not to go up to Jerusalem, but to favor
himself; and when he was at Antiocb, he dissembled, Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14.
and many of the Jews dissembled likewise with him; yea, Barnabas was brought
into the dissimulation also. When men's parts are great, their graces eminent,
their names high, and their power large, we are in danger to be biassed by
their counsels.

To conclude this passage, remember this advice one gave to his friend; it may
do you good that have much to do with men.

1. Have communion with few. 2. Be intimate with one. 3. Deal justly with all.
4. Speak evil of none.
It is somewhat singular, but I am sure very safe, to have one as our intimate
and bosom friend. Alexander had his Ephestion, and David in the Wilderness a
Jonathan, and in the Court his Hushai, called the Kings friend. Yea, even
Christ himself had John, if I may not say his Favorite, yet certainly the
Disciple whom Jesus loved above the rest. And he is a wise man that will not
put all into his Creed, that he puts up in his Paternoster; nor will show every
man his mind or his money, he may converse with. Give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's; unto God, the things that are Gods. Give faithfulness to
men, but trust in God. And I am sure, to speak evil of none, unless we have a
calling; to deal justly with all, with whom we have any dealing, will bring us
much comfort living, great peace dying, and a good report when we are gone
hence, and shall be seen no more.

CHAP. VI.
More rules of the same kind, that concern our practice.

10. IN the tenth place, when you have read over your Journall, and made such
use of it as hitherto I have showed you; ask your own hearts these three
questions: The first concerns God; the second, our neighbor; and the third,
our selves.

1. Ask your own hearts this question, What honor do I bring to God for all
this? Do herein as Ahashuerosh did, when he had Est. 6. 3.
read in the Chronicles of his time, what good service Mordecai had done him,
in discovering a treason; he asked those about him, What honor and dignity has
been done to Mordecai for all this? So do you, upon a survey of all the good
things God has vouch safed to you and yours: Hitherto the Lord has helped me;
he has preserved me from many dangers, supplied me with many comforts,
assisted me in many straights, afforded me many friends: But what honor has
God from me for all this? I live upon him, but do I live to him? I have all
from him, but do I anything for him? My ^lmes are in his hands, but are his
prai^^^ in my mouth? He is never weary I see of doing me good, but am not I
weary of doing him service? Can I say with St. Paul, His Act. 27. 23.
I am, and him I serve? He is the alpha of all my happiness, why should not he
be the omega of all my thankfulness? But may not my conscience answer as those
Servants about Ahashuerosh did concerning Mordecai, There has been nothing
done for him? Nay, have I not requited him evil for the good he has doneme?
If any spirit be grieved, it shall be his; if any day be neglected, it shall be
his; if any commandments be broken, they shall be his; if my honor be called
for, and I be reproached; if my liberty be threatened, and I be imprisoned; if
my wealth or ease be required, and I be endamaged or troubled: How hardly comes
any thing from me for God, that has done all for me? So that God may say to
me, as David sometimes complained of Nabal, the unthankful churl, 1 Samuel 25.
21.
In vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness, so that
nothing was missed of all that pertained to him; and he has requited me evil
for good. In vain have I kept your house from firing at such a time, your
family from infection at another time; your person from danger, in such a
journey; your eyes from tears, and your feet from falling, many atime; and you
have requited me evil for good. Say rather to God, as Elisha to the good
Shunamite, who had provided a chamber, and all things convenient for him; 2
Kin. 4. 13.
Thou have been careful for us with all this (...) what is to be done for
thee? Thou Lord ha^ been careful of my health, that it might not be impaired;
of mine estate, that it might not be wasted; of my name, that it might not be
reproached; of my soul, that it might not be damned: Lord, what is now to be
done for thee? Is there any thing too great, too good to part with to such a
God?

It was a brave speech of Lewis the 13. a late King of France, in a journey
near Paw, in his own Kingdom. The inhabitants understanding that he was
coming, sent to know how he would be received into the Town, and what honor
they should do to him. He asked the messengers, whether there were ever a
Church in the Town; if there were, he would enter as their King, in state; if
not, he would receive no honor in that place, where Almighty God had no house,
and therefore no honor given him. A gracious heart would think all ill bestowed
on him, if he had no spirit at all to glorify God.

Bolestaus, a King of Poland, when he was to speak or do any thing of
concernment, would take out a little picture of his Fathers, that he carried
about him; and kissing it, would say, I wish I may do nothing at this time
unworthy thy name. Say you as much, that can see God in every mercy, and enjoy
him with every favor; I wish that I who every day have tasted so much of Gods
(...) may do nothing this day to the (...) of his name; but may bless him, not
only with my lips, but honor him also with my life.

To give the same thing we receive from a friend, back again, is rudeness
amongst men; but with God, is true Religion. Hannah, after many prayers and
tears, received a Son 1 Samuel 1. 27, 28.
from the Lord, and she returned him back again to the Lord, as long as he
lived. What health, strength, peace, liberty, parts, gifts, we receive from
God, are best used, when they are bestowed on* God in his service. And there is
nothing lost this way; For he that offers God praise, glorifieth him; and to
him that orders his conversation aright, he will show the salvation of God;
that is, mighty and wonderful salvation. Which made Cardinal Wolsey, once
King Henry the Eight his Favorite, to say at his death, Had I been as careful
to serve the God of heaven, as I was to please the King of England, he would
not have left me in my old age, as this man has done.

2. Put this interrogatory to your own hearts. What good do I to my neighbor?
It is true, God has done all this for me, and he has dealt bountifully with
me; but what good do others reap by me; either my Prince or Country, the
Church or State? What good do I in the Town where I dwell, to the family where
I live? to my relations, wife, children, servants, with whom I converse; are
any of these the better for me? Even Seneca could say, Malle^ mihi male esse
quam molliter: I had rather be sick then idle, and do no good. But it is the
greatest affliction to a gracious heart, to be wholly unusefull; he had rather
not be, then be idle and unprofitable. If Moses the Servant of the Lord, can
do no good in Egypt, he will go to Midian. Every man therefore shall do well
to put this Querie often to his own heart. Of what use are my parts and gifts
of body, mind, or estate? Yea, is my very life and example sufficient to
others? How do I promote the good of my neigbour, by my alm^, prayers,
counsels, labors? It is not sufficient to say, I do no body harm. With which
plea, some are well enough satisfied: But remember what question Christ asked
his auditors; not, What are you; or, What know Mat. 5. 47.
you more then others? but, What do you? Hezekiah could make a good answer to
such a Isa. 38. 3.
question, Lord remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and have done
that which is Neh. 13. 14.
good in thy sight. So could Nehemiah, Remember me, O Lord, for good; and wipe
not out the good deeds that I have done for the house of God and the offices
thereof. Our charity should be as a running spring at our own doors, that will
not only supply our own wants, but run through our neighbors pastures, and
water the field of a stranger; yea, sometimes cross the highway, and run into
a common ditch. Whilst we have opportunity, we should do good to all, but
especially Gal. 6. 10.
to the household of faith. Yea, if our enemy hunger, give him food; if he
thirst, give him Romans 12. 26
drink; for in so doing we shall heap coals of fire upon his head.

This indeed is to have the Spirit of Christ; and, if ye have not the Spirit of
Christ, and 8. 9.
ye are none of his. Christ was a friend to his enemies, and kind to the
unkind. Jonathan 1 Samuel 18. 4.
was so friendly to David, that he stripped himself of his robe that was upon
him, and gave it him; and his garments, even to his sword and his bow. But
Christ was a better friend, who did not only lay aside his robe of majesty, but
laid down his life for us. Greater love has no man then this, that Joh. 15. 12.
he lay down his life for his friends. Christ did more, for he laid down his
life for his enemies. Ebedmeleck was very merciful to Jeremiah, that would let
down cords, and Jer. 38. 11.
old clouts and rags into the dungeon where he was, and so lift him out. Christ
did more, who would himself go down into the grave, that he might deliver us
who were dead in sins and trespasses, and thereby free us from the bottomless
pit.

It is reported of Trajan the Emperor, that he rent off a piece of his robe to
bind up the wound of a common Soldier. Christ did more, who shed his blood to
heal our wounds. Pompey the Great, that noble Roman General, being ready to
undertake a piece of Service for the State, and advised by one to desist,
because the design was full of danger, answered; Necesse est ^t ^am, non ut
vivam: It is necessary that I go, not that I live. Christ did more, for being
persuaded by Peter not to go up to Jerusalem, where he was to suffer, but to
favor himself, he was angry with him, and said, Get Mat. 16. 23.
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, thou savourest not the
things that are of God, but of Genesis 44. 33.
men. Judah was a dutiful Son to his Father, and a loving friend to his Brother
Benjamin, who was content to stay behind in Egypt, and be a bondsman to
Joseph, upon condition his Brother might be sent home to his Father. Christ did
more, who would not only be a Servant, but he would die, that we might live,
and be reconciled unto his Father.

Charles the fifth, in a great storm near Algiers, caused many brave Horses to
be thrown overboard, that the lives of a few Slaves might be saved. Jonah the
Prophet was a Jon. 1. 12.
better friend to the Mariners, who was content to be thrown into the Sea, that
the waves might be stilled, and their lives might be secured. But Christ was
the best friend of all, who was willing to be cast into the Ocean of his
Fathers fury, that we might be ^et on shore, and so pass from death to 1 Cor.
6. 17.
life. Now certainly, he that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. Ask your
own (...) therefore often this question, What good do I for others, for whom
God has done so much?

It is reported of Mr. Fox, who wrote the Book of Martyrs, that he never denied
any man that asked an alms for Jesus sake, and that he never refused anything
that was given him; not that he might enrich himself, but might relieve others,
for he gave it all away to the poor. A Student that was in want, asking Luther
some money, he bad his Wife give him some; she pleading her own necessities,
he took up a silver bowl, and gave it him. When you have an opportunity of
doing good, never plead you have many children. Gyprian had wont to say, The
more children, the more charity. And our Savioure Luke 12. 33.
counsel was to sell what we have, rather then neglect this duty of doing
good. Let him that stole, steal no more (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 4. 28.
but rather let him labor with his hands, the thing that is good. But for what
end? That he may have to supply his own wants only? No, but rather that he may
have to give to him that needs: So that there is no man under heaven, from
the highest Prince to the lowest Pesant, that may plead an immunity from this
duty of giving. The omission whereof has been as prejudicial to some, as the
performance of it has been profitable to others.

Mauritius the Emperor refusing to redeem a few captive slaves from Saladine
the Egyptian Sultan, which he might have done for a small matter, upon which
they were all slain; was afterward punished by Phocas, who in a sedition being
proclaimed Emperor by the Soldiers, caused his wife and children to be put to
death before his face, himself all the while crying out, Justus es Domine, and
recta judicia tua. But on the other side, memorable is the story of Pyrhias, a
Merchant of Ithaca, who at Sea espying an aged man a captive in a Pirates ship,
took compassion of him, and redeemed him, and with his person bought his
commodities which the Pirate had taken from him, which were certain barrels of
pitch. The old man perceiving, that not for any good service he could do him,
nor for the gain of that commodity, but merely out of charity he had done this,
discovered a great mass of treasure hidden in the pitch. Whereby the Merchant
in a very short time became very rich. At which time that Scripture was
fulfilled, Pro. 28. 27.
He that gives to the poor, shall not lack. And that other Scripture, He that
sows liberally, ^ Cor. 9. 6.
shall reap liberally. Such giving is like the pouring of a pale of water into
a dry pump, that will fetch abundance. Let us give that which we cannot keep,
that we may have that in a time of need that we cannot lose.

3. Ask your own hearts often what good you your selves get by all that God
has done for you. If thou be wise (says Solo^^^) Prove. 9. 12.
thou shall be wise for thy self. As a wicked fool has no foe like himself, so
a wise Christian has no friend like himself; who will be a gainer by every
loss, and a saver by every comfort. Physicians and Chirurgions make much of
their probatum's, and so should every Christian of his experiments. Let every
man therefore ask his own heart upon a serious survey of his Journall, thus
much: Am I bettered by all this health, and wealth, and good days; this Gospel
of peace, and this peace of the Gospel that I have enjoyed so long? It is with
these things as with the physic or diet of the body, they will leave you
better or worse then they find you. But by all these good days, rich mercies,
or sharp afflictions, do I grow into more acquaintance with God, the world, and
mine own heart; with God, and his holiness; with the world, and its vanity;
with mine own heart, and its deceitfulness; that I may trust him more, and
the world and my heart less? All grace in truth has growth. Vlterius was
Charles the fifth his Motto; by which he signified, that greater periections,
more noble enterprises, were yet daily to be endeavored after by Princes.
Christians must not stand at a stay, but with the Apostle, forgetting those
things that are behind, reach forth unto Phil. 3. 13.
those things that are before. This being a clear difference betwixt the first
Adam and the second; The old creature in the beginning, and the new under the
Gospel. The first Adam was made a man, and a holy man, all at once; but the
Lord Christ was conceived in the womb, and at the fullness of Luke 2. 52.
time was born of the Virgin Mary, and increased in wisdom, and in stature,
and in favor both with God and man. In the beginning all the creatures were
made in their full growth and strength, which made some to be of opinion, that
Mundus conditu^ suit in Autumno: That the creation of the world was in Harvest,
when all things are in their full beauty. But now we must have an egg before a
bird, a seed before a plant; a birth, and then a growth: So now every Christian
must in time grow in grace, and the knowledge of the Jesus Christ, and proceed
by degrees from says to says, from babes to grown men in Christ; and
therefore where there is no growth, we may fear there is no grace. Ask your
hearts then, Do I grow? At such a time, I had a great affliction, a long
sickness; Am I more humble since? Where there is a rod of correction, there
should be a word of correction. Judge. 8. 16.
God teaches by his rods; as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, with briars and
thorns; Psalm. 94. 12.
and blessed is that man whom God corrects, and teaches out of his law. Oh
that I could hear the rod, as well as feel it! A man of wisdom, shall see Gods
Name; hear the rod, Mic. 6. 9*
and who has appointed it. At such a time God vouchsafed me great prosperity,
much success in my calling; a long time of health, with comfort in my
relations: Am I more holy, more humble, more heavenly, more meek, more
merciful, more faithful, more fruitful in my place? Or, am I not rather
worse; more rich, and more covetous; more honorable, and more proud; more
healthful, and more wanton? But if you find that the house of David grows
stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul weaker and weaker; that your
corruptions are abated, and your graces increased, happy are you. And indeed
the higher the Sun rises, the shorter are the shadows; as in a Pyramide, the
higher you go, the less compass you find; like a flame of fire, the higher
it ascends, the purer and thinner is the flame; so the elder you grow, the
better you should be. If so, it is well. These things 1 John 5. 13.
(says St. John) I have written to you that believe, that you may believe;
that is, that you grow more and more in that grace of faith. Faith is not like
Jonah's gourd, up in one night, and down in another; but like the sound of the
trumpet on the Mount, louder and louder; or like a great bell that is long in
raising, and strikes but a while on one side; but at last is up, and makes a
great sound, and is heard a^ar off. Such was the faith of the Romans, small at
the first, but Romans 1. 8.
afterward it grew to that height, that it was spoken of throughout the world.

When Grave William the Prince of Orange died, his Son Maurice was but young;
whereupon the States were doubtful whether they should choose him their
General or no. Maurice perceiving it by his friends, wrote a Letter to them,
and in it only these four words, Tandem fit surculus arbor: A young plant at
last becomes a tree. Upon which they made choice of him; and he made his Motto
good, for he grew a brave Soldier, and proved not only a happy instrument of
their good, but a great ornament to himself and family.

I shall conclude this passage with a saying of St. Augustine. Si vis pervenire
ad id quod non es, semper displiceat tibi quod es: Si dixeris, sufficit,
periisti. If you would attain to what you are not, let it grieve you that you
are as you are; that is, no better: You are undone if you think that what you
are is sufficient.

11. In the eleventh place, Be sure that after all these questions be strictly
asked* and seriously answered, you make it your (...), your very work to be
thankful for all Gods mercies; otherwise, why do you keep such a Journall? In
every thing give thanks (says 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
the Apostle) for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. It is
ordained by the Rabbis, (as some observe, who write the History of the Jews)
that they should say a benediction, and render particular praise and thanks to
God for every benefit they receive; not only for every extraordinary mercy
that befalls them, but in every action that they do; for their meat, drink, and
every good smell; for all the precepts of the Law, and of the Rabbis; for
every new thing, and every strange thing that befalls them. And certainly,
where God is never weary of giving, his people should never be weary of
thanksgiving. God delights much in the praise of his servants. He loves a
cheerful giver, but much more a cheerful thanksgiver.

Give God thanks for all things, but especially for these four:

1. For Jesus Christ, and the unsearchable riches of Gods grace in him; which
is the fountain of all the good we enjoy, or hope to enjoy; who was by God made
sin for 1 Cor. 5. 2.
us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
He that knew no sin in the act, knew all sin in the weight. He that knew no sin
by commission, knew all by imputation. The chastisement of our Isa. 53. 5.
peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. Who made peace for his
people by his death, and maintains this peace for them by his intercession; he
died once, but he prays ever; his passion is over, but not his compassion; for
he stands between us, and all our harms, and will at last reward every one
according to his works.

Cyrus in a great expedition against his enemies, the better to encourage his
Soldiers to fight, in an oration that he made at the head of his Army,
promised upon the victory to make every Foot-souldier an Horseman, and every
Horseman a Commander; and that no Officer that did valiantly should go
unrewarded. But Christ our General Rev. 3. 21.
does promise more: He that overcomes shall sit with me in my throne; as I
overcame, and am set with my Father in his throne. He will make us all Kings.
Oh therefore be thankful for Jesus Christ. It is our sorrow, or should be our
shame, that we cannot be thankful for Christ as we ought: It is our comfort,
and shall be our happiness, that one day we shall be. Eternity of time I
confess is little enough to be thankful in for Christ, and all the rich
incomes we have with him; but endeavor whilst you are here to be thankful for
him; and certainly, he that cannot be thankful for Jesus Christ, can never be
thankful for any mercy.

2. Be thankful for afflictions. Bless God for every twig of his rod, every
drop in his cup. He holds the rod and the cup in the same hand by which he
gives you Jesus Christ* yea, he afflicts you with the same love with which he
gives you any good. Afflictions are evil, many and evil (says Father Jacob
to Pharaoh) have the days of my Genesis 47. 9.
life been. But being sanctified, they are necessary. So St. Peter, to those he
wrote his 1 Pet. 1. 6.
Epistle; now for a season (if need be) you are in (...) through many
tribulations. Even the (...) (...) ^e are sometimes like a top, that will (...)
(...) (...) ^hen it is whipped; we will not mend our pace, and r^n the ways of
Gods (...) without the rod.

Some stories say, that there was a King of Scotland, that whilst he was a
prisoner in Mortimer's hole, he scraped the History of Christ's passion in the
stone wall; which was more then ever he did in his palace. Afflictions will make
us run to God. In their affliction Hos. 5. 15.
(says God of his people) they will seek me early, that is* speedily and
instantly. Out of the depths (says David) I cried unto thee, O Lord. Deep
afflictions should raise up strong affections. The Ark was nearest heaven when
the waters of the stood were highest. Afflictions meeting with a gracious
temper, will melt the heart, and make it tender and humble; and the lowest
humility is nearest the highest majesty. A^i^^ippus the Cynicke, fell on the
ground before Dion^sius, and kissed his feet, when he presented a Petition to
him; and being asked the reason, answers, Aures habet inpedib^s: He has his
ears in his feet. Never does a poor prostrate soul, brought down to extremity,
seek Gods face with prayers and tears in vain, but meets with a gracious
answer. Now if afflictions sanctified be so good, then surely you should be
thankful for them; this being one eminent excellency that praise has above
prayer, that we may praise God for that for which we may not pray; though we
may not pray for afflictions, yet we must bless God for Job 1. 21.
them. Job did so, The Lord has taken away, Blessed be the name of the Lord.

When one came to Mr. Bradford, and told him, that if he would recant, he
should have the Queens pardon; he answered, If the Queen will let me live, I
will thank her; if she will banish me, I will thank her; if she will burn me, I
will thank her. So a gracious heart will say, If the Lord give me health or
sickness, I will thank him; if I have much or little, I will thank him; if I
live or dye, I will thank him. Ecclesiastical Histories report this of one
Servulus, who for a long time was grievously afflicted with the Palfie, his
life was a lingering death, whose daily and ordinary speech was, God be thanked.

3. Bless God every day wherein he has kept you from scandal. It is our
misery that our hearts are so vile, but it is Gods mercy that they break not
out continually to his dishonor, and the offense of brethren; that he sets
bounds to those waves of our unruly lusts, and says, Hitherto and no further.
Esteem any condition better then a sinful, and choose rather to suffer the
worst, Heb. 11. 25.
then sin in the least. Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, (and who meet with more sorrows then they?) then enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season. And where might he satisfy his lust more to the full, then
in the Court of a King? Socra^^ had so vile an esteem of sin, that he thought
it would be one of the greatest torments in hell, to be given up to those sins
that men most delighted in. Major s^^n, and (...) (...) natus, (says Se^neca)
quam ut sun (...) corpor^^ mei: I am greater, and born to greater things then
to be a slave or drudge to my body. Say to the Tempter, as Joseph Genesis 39. 9.
to his Mistress, There is none greater in the house then I; and shall I then
commit this great wickedness? Or as Nehemiah; Shall such a Neh. 6. 11*
man as I flee? Shall such a man as I be drunk, or deal unjustly, or break my
oath? These sons of Zerviah are sometimes too hard for us. These unruly
corruptions sometimes prevail over us. Our darling fin like (...) daughter,
comes out with timbrels Judge. 11. 34, 35.
and dances, with many pretty smiles and subtle reasons, and sometimes
overcomes in, and brings us low, and troubles us. We all run in a race, how few
get to the goal without a fall by the way?

There are two things that I desire daily to make the matter, not only of my
praise, but admiration. And the first is, that God has preserved from the
beginning to this day, a little flock of sheep amongst a world of Wolves, and
Lions, and Bears, that are set on mischief. And the second is, that God
maintains a little grace in life, in the midst of so much corruption that the
heart is poisoned with; a little faith, and a little humility, in the midst of
so much unbelief and pride. The reason why the Church is not wasted, is because
the Lord is their God; why this grace is not overwhelmed, and that our
corruption breaks not out every moment into most notorious scandall^, is,
because the corruption is ours, but the grace is the Lords. Has God kept you
therefore any day, that your heels have not been tript up? Forget not to bless
him for such a mercy. A notable example of such a thankful spirit we have in
David, who by the humble and prudent counsel of Abigail, being stayed from
imbruing his hands in the blood of Nabal and his family, blessed God 1 Samuel 25.
32, 33, 34.
and her that he was prevented. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel (says he to
her) which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice; and
blessed be thou that have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from
avenging my self with mine own hand, etc. In every affliction forget not to
bless God for this. It is mine affliction, not my fin. What ever the cross
be* it might have been worse, for it might have been my fin. Bless God that
either prevented the temptation, as he did for David; or assisted in the
temptation, as Genesis 39. 10.
he did Joseph, who left his garment, but kept his chastity, and chose rather
to suffer then to sin.

4. Bless God not only for what you have, and for what you want; but for what
you hope to have. All is not come that is ^^^mi^ed by the Father, all is not
come that is merited by the Son, nor is all come that (...) assured to yon by
the Holy Ghost; the best i^ ^et to come. Here joy enters into us, Mat. 25. 21*
there we shall enter into joy. Here are promises, there performances. Here is
faith* there is fruition. Here we enjoy God mediately, there immediately. In
heaven there is a Kingdom without cares, a throne without a thorn, greatness
of state without corruption of manners, a treasure without mo^^s, honor
without envy, joy without ^^ars, love without jealousy, and days without end.

A devout Pilgrim traveling to Jerusalem, and by the way visiting many brave
Cities, with their rare monuments; and meeting with many friendly
entertainments; would often say, I must not stay here, this is not Jerusalem.
So do you, in the midst of all the delicates that the world can afford you, not
only with variety, but plenty; say still of every one of them, This is not
Jerusalem, This is not heaven; these are but tents and tabernacles, all no
better then movables; our mansions are in heaven, where we shall abide for
ever. But would you be thankful (...) heaven, and do you long to be there? ^e
truly thankful then for Jesus Christ. It is Christ that makes heaven to be
heaven. He that cannot be thankful for Jesus Christ, cannot be thankful for
heaven; nay, would not go to heaven at the last. A wicked man at the day of
Judgment, might he have his Luke 16. 24, 28.
choice, would not go to heaven. Dives in hell torments, when he discoursed
with Abraham afar off, did not desire to go to Abraham, but prayed that Lazarus
might come to him, he cared more for ^ase then heaven; nor did he desire that
his five Brethren should go to heaven, but that one might be sent to them, to
testify to them, that they might not come into the place of torment. For
certainly, they that could not endure the presence of Christ with his servants
in his ordinances, will have no desire to be with him in all his glory.

In, the last place, because you may your selves come very far short of what
you should do in this great duty of thankfulness; declare to others, as
occasion is offered, what the Lord has done for you, that they may bless God
with you. It is an argument of an ingenuous spirit, to acknowledge the
courtefies of a friend; non amotis arbitris, sed clare and ut audiat hospes;
not in private, but in the presence of others: Much more is it an argument of a
gracious heart to speak of the loving kindness of the Lord before many
witnesses, that they may be provoked also to bless God. David was of this
mind; Psalm. 40. 10.
I have not hid thy righteousness, O Lord, within my heart; I have declared
thy faithfulness, and thy salvation; I have not concealed thy loving kindness
and thy truth from the great congregation. The Psalmist exhorts to this duty
very much: Sing unto the Lord, sing Psalms unto Ps. 105. 2
hi^, (...) ye of all his wondrous works. It was the Psalmist his practice:
Come and hear all ye that and 66. 16.
(...) God, and I will declare unto you what God has d^^e for my soul. Moses
the servant of the Lord did so: He told Jethro his Father in law, all that the
Lord had done unto Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians for Isreal's sake; and all the
travel that had come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them:
Which occasioned much praise unto God from a Midianite; who said* Blessed be
the Lord, who has delivered you Ex. 18. 8, 10.
out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, etc. Christ
himself commanded Mar. 5. 19.
the man whom he delivered from the legion of Devils, that he should go home
to his friends, and tell them how great things the Lord had done for him, and
had compassion on him. And indeed, to return thanks unto God for all his
mercies, is so great a debt, that we alone cannot pay, unless God give us
time; (and no less then eternity is enough.) And therefore we had need make
collection of praises from friends, that the sum may be made up the more
full. The Psalmist goes to all the creatures both in heaven and earth, and
makes a collection. Heavens, Angels, (says he) Sun, Moon, and Stars; Kings and
all people, young men Psalm. 148. 1, 2, 3.
and maids, old men and babes, praise the name of the Lord. Comemmoration
Sermons which are in use in Colleges, and some other places, are excellent:
And as there may be good use made of them diverse ways, so this way especially,
that all may be provoked to bless God for their Benefactors.

It is observable, that to beg prayers is the common complement of friends at
their p^^ting, and Ora pro nobis is the conclusion of all our Letters; but we
seldom beg praises. When do we say, I beseech you bless God for me and with
me, for such a late deliverance, for such success in mine endeavors, for such
comfort in my relations? etc. As if we served an hard Master, as if God had
been a barren heath or a wilderness to our souls, as if his service had no
profit. Whereas, there is no Matter like the Lord, no service like his; whose
very work is wages.

CHAP. VII.
An use of Exhortation, wherein Christians are persuaded to keep such a
Journall or Diary.

AND thus far shall suffice to have been spoken of the manner how such a
Journall should be used.

For the application of all, I shall only (...) such as have not been
acquainted with this duty, to set upon this work. Indeed there is a latitude in
Christianity, and the ways of God, that all do not reach. I have have an end
of all perfection (says the Psa. 119. 96.
Psalmist) but thy commandment is exceeding large. When things are come to
their perfection, to their flower, they quickly fade; (...) a Lute string* if
wound up to the highest, it breaks; but the course of holiness, and way of
righteousness, have large limits and boundaries, that many come not at. There
are sins that some seldom confess, as Sacramental sins, Sacramental
ignorance, Sacramental unbelief, impenitency, uncharitableness, etc. There
are some things they seldom pray for; Where Prove. 30. 8.
is the man who with Agur prays, Lord give me no riches? We often in prayer
press the promise, but how few at any time press the seal? wherein God is
come under the power of law, under the power of his own law; wherein all his
wisdom, power, faithfulness, goodness, and mercy is under the power of his
own law; yea, so far engaged that he cannot go back: And yet how few urge the
seal, and enter a suit with the Lord? There are some duties we seldom or never
perform. Where is the man that makes conscience of private fasting and ^rayer,
that shuts himself up in his closet, and wr^stles with God in secret, that his
Fat^^r that sees in secret may reward him openly? To conclude, how few are
there that keep a Diary by them of all Gods gracious dealings with them?

Now that I may persuade such Christians, at least, as have any abilities and
opportunities to enter upon this duty, I shall do these two things:

1. Give some directions that may be as advantages to further this service.

2. Give some arguments that may encourage and provoke thereunto, and so
conclude.

1. Therefore often remember your sinful estate, when you were in a natural
estate, and therefore in the (...) of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.
God commanded his people so to do. Remember* and forget not ^ow th^n provokedst
the Lord thy God in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 9. 7.
etc.

^phes. 2. 11, 12.
This charge the Apostle lays upon the Ephestans, Remember that you being in
times past Gentil^s in the flesh, that at that time ye were without Christ,
^liens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and st^angers from the covenants of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. God promised that his
people should do so. You shall remember your ways and your doings wherewith
Eze. 20. 43.
you have been defiled, and you shall loath your selves. Paul did so: he
oftentimes makes mention of his sinful condition before his conversion, he is
not ashamed to declare it before King Agrippa; I thought verily with my Act.
26. 9, 10, 11.
self that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth;
which thing I also did in Jerusalem, for many of the Saints I shut up in
^^ison, and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them, and I
punished them often in every Synagogue, etc. So much he tells the Corinthians,
I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
because I persecuted the Church of God. The like he declares to Timothy; I was
a blasphe^^^, a persecuter* and injurious. Yea, he was 1 Timothy 1. 13,
more then an ordinary sinner in his own eyes. Jesus Christ (says he) came
into the v. 15.
world to save sinner's* (...), whereof I am thief^ or primus, the first, as it
is in the original. He was primus, the first, non ordine, sed excellentia; not
in order of ^ime, but in the excess of wickedness, for (...) every sin has
his (...) So did Joseph 's Brethren, when he dealt roughly with them, and God
looked so mercifully on them as to afflict them for ^^n. 42. 21.
their ^in, They said one to another, we are very guilty con^^^^ing our
Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we
would not hear. And how have those old bruises, and fins of youth, being sadly
and seriously remembered, caused much brokennesse and tenderness, much care and
watchfulness in some all their days?

Them^s^^eles told his friends, when being banished out of his Country, and
most honorably entertained by the King of Persia, Per^eram nis^ periissem, I
had been undone, if I had not been thus distressed. So may many a gracious soul
say, I had fallen into hell if I had not fallen into ^in. Onesimus therefore
departed, Philem. 15.
(says St. Paul to Philemon) that thou might receive him an (...), an
eternal. So it is in the Original. And thus if our sins were heavy, Gods
mercies would be weighty, and worth the recounting. Were our fins often in our
eyes, Gods praises would not be long out of our mouths: We that see we have
deserved nothing, would be thankful for every thing; and rather then his
mercies should be forgotten, would keep some remembrances by us of Gods
goodness to us, who is every day mindful of us.

2. Remember oftne your low and poor condition. It is little peradventure that
y^^ ha^^* but was it not less? God commands his people this duty, Remember
that Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
thou wast a ser^ant in the land of Egypt. This they were enjoined to do, when
they came yearly to offer up their basket of first fruits to the Lord. Thus
they must say, A Syrian and 26. 5, 6.
ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt, and ^ojourned
there with a few, etc.

(...) King of Sicily, who was by birth but a Potters Son, would always be
served at his Table with earthen vessels, that he might ever be mindful of his
low and mean condition at first. Jacob did so* With my staff Genesis 32. 10.
I came over this Jordan: His condition was low when the earth was his bed, a
stone his pillow, and the heaven his canopie over his head; he is thankful for
this, because he forg^t not his low estate. He that well remembers what he once
wanted* will not forget to be thankful for what at present he enjoys. Humility
is a good spur to thankfulness. I have read of two garments in Scripture of
excellent use: First, the garment of humility, Be (...) with humility, (says
Peter) 1 Pet. 5. 5.
and the garment of praise. Christ is said to appoint to them that mourn in
Zion, the Isa. 61. 3*
garment of praise for the spirit of heavynesse. The under garment is commonly
plain, and of less worth, but the upper is very costly. Let humility be like
the first. It is no matter how vile we be in our own eyes; but let praise be
the upper garment. Col. 2. 7.
Be ye rooted and built up in Christ, (faith the Apostle) and established in
the faith, abounding therein with thanksgiving. He that is rich in faith, and
low in humility, will make his upper garment costly; will be abundant in
praises.

3. Labor to understand a mercy aright. Endeavor to discern the height and
breadth of a providence, weigh every benefit bestowed skilfully. The reason why
the Israelites remembered not the multitude of Psalm. 106. 7.
Gods mercies, was (says the Psalmist) because they understood not his wonders
in Egypt. Moses told them that they had seen all that the Lord had done before
their eyes in the Land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, and unto all Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4.
his servants, and unto all the land. The great temptations which thine eyes
have seen, the signs and th^se great miracles: And yet the Lord has not given
you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to bear, unto this day. It
is true, they had eyes and ears, but they wanted an understanding heart to
perceive and discern God in all. Hence it comes to pass, that as a proud man
will not be mindful, so an ignorant man cannot remember God, and be thankful.
It is good therefore not only to remember our low and sinful estate, that we
may be humble, but to understand the loving kindness of the Lord, that we may
record his favors. The reason why the Disciples forg^t what Christ had done,
done, and therefore mistook him, when he had them take ^eed of the leaven of
the Pharisees Matt. 16. 9, 10.
and Sadduces, was, they did not understand the miracles of the five loaves
amongst the five thousand; nor the seven loaves amongst the four thousand, nor
how many baskets they took up. They did not well understand, nor seriously
consider the mighty power of his divine nature, by which he did all that. You
shall do well therefore to understand a mercy fully, in all the causes,
circumstances, manner and means of working. Sometimes he works without means,
and then his works are miraculous; sometimes by weak means, and then his works
are wonderful; sometimes by contrary means, so that losses enrich us,
divisions unites us, and our routing in battle makes us conquerors; and then
his works are glorious. Hence the Lord commanded his people to understand why
he gave them that good Land, to Deuteronomy. 9. 3, 6.
possess it; not for their righteousness, for they were a stiff-necked
people, but for his Name sake, and for the wickedness of those Nations which
were driven out before them. It is not an easy matter for men to hit right o^
the true reason of Gods dispensations of mercy or judgment. Hence Samuel 1 Samuel 12. 24.
advised* the people of Israel to consider, that is, to weigh and ponder well in
their hearts what great things God had done for them. Now we all know, things
that are not known, and therefore lightly valued, are soon forgotten; when
matters that are looked at as things of price and worth, are laid up very
carefully. It is good therefore when our thoughts dwell upon mercies. Omnis
festinatio caca, swift passengers cannot be serious observers, a transient
thought is too mean for a standing mercy; one mercy enjoyed deserves more
serious thoughts then a million of miseries do one hearty tear; our mercies are
from God, our calamities from our selves. Understand this well, and consider
this seriously, and you cannot be unmindful of the loving kindness of the Lord.

4. Would you write down the great things of God in a book, that you might
never forget them? Take special notice of the actings of God in the ways of
his gracious providence, whilst they are new and fresh in memory, together
with the workings of your hearts, whilst they are so considered. Oh! what
vows, covenants, purposes, resolutions are made and entertained then? Omne
novum valde mutat, says Scaliger: New things, fresh mercies make a wonderful
change upon men's spirits for the present. Omnia subita videntur majora, says
Cicero: All sudden and unexpected passages seem very great at first fight, and
work very much upon the heart. Observe then what joy, what thankfulness, what
meltings, what resolutions: And what you do, do quickly, strike while the
iron is hot. Qui tard^ fecit, diu noluit, says Seneca: He that is slack in his
performances, was but unwilling in his resolutions. Oh! remember your first
love, when you were newly converted, and brought home to God; how zealous,
lively, active, forward, and savoury were you in the ways of God. So much the
Lord tells his people by the Prophet Hos. 2. 15.
Hosea, that at their restitution, and Gods reconciliation with them, they
should sing at in the days of their youth, as they did when they came out of
Egypt. Then sang Moses and Aaron. A converted condition is Exodus* 15. 1.
a singing condition. God takes special notice of this. I remember thee, (says
the Jer. 2. 2.
Lord of Israel) the kindness of thy youth, the lose of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Our
first works and our last works, are commonly our best works; when we begin
first to live the life of grace, and when we are ready to die, and are entering
upon the life of glory, how excellent is our marriage, how savoury our words,
how heavenly our conversation? Even so it is when we are delivered from any
great danger; when enlarged with any singular comforts, how lively, how
zealous, and how active are we? Call to mind the fifth of November, 1605. when
we were delivered from that barbarous Gunpowder-treason; how forward were we in
making laws against Papists? how severe in suppressing Jesuits? how zealous in
settling true Religion?

I^ I^ reported of the City of Berne, when first delivered from Antichrist,
when that State cast off that Roman bondage, and reformed Religion, that they
wrote the day of their Redemption upon pillars, in letters of gold. And it is
observable, that in all the ages of the Church, God has set out himself to his
people by such names and titles as were most suitable to his present
dispensations, or such as were of the last edition. And why so? But that his
late mercies might be the better considered and remembered. Hence in the
beginning he was called the most high God, the possessour of heaven and earth,
who had made all by the word of his power. Under those times Melchisedech
blessed Abraham, Blessed be Abraham (says he) of the most high God, possessor
of heaven and earth. And Abraham covenanted to take nothing from the King of
Sodom, Genesis 14. 19, 22.
and that under these terms. I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, the most
high God, possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take from a thread to
a shoe-latchet; and that I will not take any thing that is thine. Afterward,
when God entered into a covenant with Abraham and his seed, he was called the
God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. And under those titles God gave his
charge to Moses, when he sent him to bring his people out of the Land of Exodus
3. 6.
Egypt; I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob. After that he was called, the God that brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Such was the Exodus 20. 2.
preface to his law, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. And so it continued for many
generations, even until he brought them out of Babylon. And then Jer. 16. 14,
15.
(says the Lord) It shall be no more said, The Lord lives, that brought them
out of the land of Egypt: but, The Lord lives, that brought the and 23. 7, 8.
children of Israel out of the land of the North. And now under the Gospel, he
is known by this most excellent name, The God and Father 2 Cor. ^1. 3. Ephesians. 1.
3.
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And why so? But because our redemption by Christ is
the last, and the great work he has done for his Church, and most fresh in our
memories. Whilst therefore mercies are fresh, and work most upon the heart,
do something in remembrance of Gods goodness; and why not then write them
down in a Journall? A small matter (I should think) whilst the heart is warm,
and well affected with the present sense of some singular pledge of Gods loving
kindness, may easily persuade to this duty.

5. And finally, love the Lord for his goodness. If any thing under heaven
will constrain us and help forward this duty, love will. Oh! love the Lord all
ye his Saints, says the Psalmist. And indeed, none but Saints can love him. He
knocks at every door, and (as it were) pulls every man by the sleeve, and
says, Oh! love you the Lord; Let the drunkard love his cups, and the adulterer
his harlots, and the covetous person his bags; but do you that are Saints love
the Lord. Psalm 31. 23.
For, the Lord preserves the faithful, and pletifully rewards the proud
doer. When one bucket goes down, the other will come up. When Pharaoh is
drowned, Israel is saved. When Haman is hanged, Mordecai is advanced. When
proud doers are plagued, the faithful are delivered. Oh! love the Lord
therefore. And indeed, love is all that God looks at in us, and expects from
us; and where there is love, there is no lack. After so large a repetition of
the great things God has done Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
for Israel, What (says Moses to them) does God now require for all this, but
that you would love him? And indeed love is complementumlegis, the fulfilling
of the Law. Neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any thing, Gal.
5. 6.
(says the Apostle) but faith that works by love. Faith and Love are like a
pair of Compasses; Faith like one point, fastens upon Christ as the center* and
Love like the other, goes the round in all the works of holiness and
righteousness. Now certainly Love has a good memory, or would have a good
memory: What we slight, we soon forget; but what we love, we endeavor to lay up
sure in our memories. Vbi am^r, ibi animus: Where our love is, our mind is.
Where our treasure is, there will our heart be. It was the eye that made the
match. That which which the eyesees not, the heart desires not: And as love
came in by the eye, so it delights by the same door to look after that beloved
object. Such a soul that has seen God in all things, and therefore loves God
above all things, delights still to look after God in all his ways, that he
may love him more and more. Such a soul loves God as Jonathan loved David:

1. Amore unionis, with a love of union; the soul of Jonathan was knit to
David; for 1 Samuel 18. 1.
he loved him as his own soul.

2. He loved him amore complacentiae, with a love of delight; for it is said
that Jonathan and 19. 2.
delighted much in David.

3. He loved him amore benevolentiae, with a love of good will; for Jonathan
said to David, and 20. 4.
Whatsoever thy souldesireth, I will even do it for thee.

Even so does a gracious heart love God; not only with a love of union, and a
love of delight, but with a love of good will too; who says to God, as Paul at
his conversion, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Such an one Act. 9. 6*
is ready to suffer what ever may be inflicted on him; and to do what ever may
be required of him; especially, whatsoever may testify how well he remembers
God, and his loving kindness to him.

CHAP. VIII.
Several arguments propounded, by which Christians may be provoked to keep
such a Journall or Diary as has been commended.

THat such Christians as have any abilities for the keeping of such a Journal
or Diary as has been commended to them, may be encouraged thereunto, I shall in
the second place propound these four arguments.

^. Ab excellenti.
First, it is a most excellent duty, and practiced by many, whose example we
may follow: As,

1. It has been the practice even of the very Heathens, even from a principle
of common reason, who made use of white and black stones for these two ends:
One was, They gave them to persons at their arraignment before the Judges: If
any were condemned to death, they gave him a black stone; but if absolved and
set free, a white stone. To which custom the holy Ghost seems to allude, in
that Epistle to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, in these words, Rev. 2. 17.
To him that overcomes, will I give a white stone, etc. A second use of those
was, That by them they might keep an account of all the good days or evil
they had met withal in their lives. Hence Persius advised his friend Macrinus
to remember a good day so.

Hunc Macrine diem numer a meliore lapillo.
Count this day Macrine with a better stone.
2. Persons of good quality have a long time practiced this duty. How many
noble Theophilus's and Elect Ladies have such Diaries by them? But if any men
of worth be employed in the service of the State, either by Sea or Land, it is
their common practice. They that go to Sea, will tell you of their Journall
book, that on such a day they went aboard the Bonaventure, and on such a day
they weighed anchor, and fell down to Gravesend; on such a day they met with
the whole Fleet, on another day they had stormy weather, or fought with the
enemy, etc. How exactly does S. Luke set down S. Paul's Act. 27. per tot.
shipping toward Rome, how a perfect a Journall of that dangerous voyage, even
day by day. If they be employed by Land, and do either besiege a Town, or are
besieged; not a a sally undertaken, not a mine sprung, not a breach made, not a
man of note slain, not attire of Ordnance discharged, but is is every day
recorded; as you may see in that famous siege of Ostende.

But in the 3. place, God himself seems to keep a Journall by him of all the
care he has of us, the cost he bestows upon us, and the good things he gives
to us. He has a book of remembrance of every passage of providence that
concerns us. And indeed, the Scripture for a great part is little else but a
history of his goodness to his people. And that you may see that God is very
punctual in keeping account of his mercies bestowed on us, you shall find that
in the Gospel Joh. 2. 11.
of St. John, when Christ turned the water into wine; it is said, This is the
beginning of miracles that Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth
his glory. And when he healed and 4 54.
the noble man's Son; This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he
came out of Judea into Galilee. Thus God does keep an account of his mercies
bestowed on us. This is the first Magistrate, and this is the second Minister,
and this is the third affliction, and that is the fourth deliverance you have
had. And if we remember them not to Gods glory, he will remember them to our
shame; as he did 1 Samuel 2. 27, 28.
to Eli, I did plainly appear unto the house of thy Father, when they were in
Egypt, in Pharaohs house; and I did choose him out of all the Tribes of
Israel, to be my Priest, to offer upon mine Altar, and 1 Samuel 15. 17.
to burn incense, etc. The like he said to Saul by Samuel, When theu wast
little in thine own fight, wast thou not made head of the Tribes of Israel,
and the Lord anointed thee King over Israel? And how does God reckon up the
many (...) f^vors vouchsafed to David, especially in that great advancement of
him to the throne, 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8.
and delivering him from the hand of Saul? All these things are repeated to
Eli, Saul, David, for the greater aggravation of their sins; nay, Gods very
judgments executed are particularly recorded by him, as you may see in diverse
places, especially that of Amos, chapter 4. Amos 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
^. 6. to the end of that ch* his several judgments* and their
incorrigiblenesse. Does God keep a book of Remembrance, and shall we ^e without
our Journall? God forbid.

2. Ab ^que.
Secondly, it is very just and equal, that we should thus remember God, who
remembers us daily; and that not only for the supplying our wants, or
delivering us in our extremity, but also in the accepting of our persons, and
our sincere performances.

Genesis 8. 1.
1. For the first: God remembered Noah when he was in the Ark, and sent him
forth. God remembered Abraham in that great overthrow and 19. 29.
of the Cities in the Plain, and sent Lot to him, to warn him, to comfort him.
God remembered Rachel, and gave her a Joseph. God and 30. 31.
remembered Hannah, and made her fruitful. 1 Samuel 1. 9.
God remembers our wants, and supplies them; our friends, and requites them;
our enemies, and plagues them; nay, our very cattle, and preserves them. God
did not only remember Noah in the Ark, but he remembered Genesis 8. 1.
every living thing, and all the cattle. God chides Jonah for being angry for
the loss of his gourd, upon this account; Thou had pity Jonah 4. 10, 11.
on the gourd, etc. and should not I spare Nineve^ that great City, wherein
there are so many children, and also much cattle? Does God remember and take
care for oxen, and will he not much more remember his people? No, (says the
Lord) I cannot. Can a woman forget her sucking ^sa. 49. 15, 16.
child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb? Yea, they
may forget; Yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord of his people. A Mother
may break the bonds of Nature, but I cannot break the bonds of my Covenant. Why
so? Because I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands. I may as soon forget
my self, as forget thee; thy walls are ever before me. Now that which is
continually before us, we well remember. Will not God forget us? And shall not
we use all means that we may remember him? Rather then fail, chalk up his
loving kindnesses.

2. We never showed any love to God in Jor. 2. 2.
our lives, but he remembers it. I remember (says God to Israel) the kindness
of thy youth, the love of thine espousals. Sarah spoke but one good word in
that foolish fit of her unbelief, when she laughed, and slighted the promise of
Genesis 18. 12.
a Son; she called her Husband Lord; After I am waxen old, shall I have
pleasure, my Lord being old also? This one good word is not forgotten, but set
down in a book by the hand of 1 Pet. 3. 6.
Peter, Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord. Not a prayer made, nor a
tear shed, but he has a book for the one, and a bottle for the other, rather
then they should be lost. Put thou my tears into thy bottle, O Lord, (says
Psalm. 56. 8.
the Psalmist) are they not in thy book? If Gods people meet together, and pray
and speak often one to another, he hearkens and hears; that is, he does most
diligently attend to all they say; and a book of remembrance shall be written
Mal. 3. 16, 17.
of it before the Lord. Cornelius was a most devout benefactor, and the Angel
tell him, that his prayers and alms were come up in remembrance Act. 10. 4.
before God. It is a mercy that God will remember us, though it be with a rod
to correct us; but it is a rich favor indeed, if he remember us with a staff
to support and comfort us. As our remembrance of God or men is the sum of all
we do for them. Remember me (says Joseph to Phaaroh's Genesis 40. 14, 23.
Butler) that is, speak a good word for me, do me the favor as work out my
deliverance. But the chief Butler did not remember Joseph, but forgot him; that
is, he did nothing for him: Even so Gods remembrance is the summa totalis of
his goodness to us: He remembers us indeed, for he pities us, and spares us,
and pardons us, supplies us in all our necessities, and supports us in all our
extremities; he will not leave us in our straights, nor leave us in our sins;
and if we do or suffer any thing for him, he has a book of remembrance, and it
shall be written down. At the last day it is said, the books shall be opened,
and is not this one of those books? and the dead shall be judged out of those
things which were written in those Rev^ 20. (...)
books, according to their works, Jesus Christ will read to all the world the
good works of his people out of that book. I was Matt. 25. 35.
anhungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me in; ^^ked, and ye clothed me. You never did anything
for God, but he has put it down in his book; it is very just and equal then,
that what he has done for you should be written down in your book.

3. A necessario.
Thirdly, it is very necessary you should keep such a Journall, and that in
three regards:

1. In regard of the badnesse of your memory. Memoriaprimum senescit, (say
Physicians) The memory decays first; old men and dying men will tell you so;
but the memory of a benefit sooner, the memory of divine favors soonest of
all. Some things we can hardly forget, as our sorrows and our pleasures. It was
about 20 years ere Genesis 33. 1.
Esau could forget the sorrow he conceived for the loss of the blessing, and
the injury Jacob did him, in getting it away from him. and 25. 29.
And he was so mindful of his pleasures that he forgot his bread. And there be
some things we can hardly remember, ^as our faults and our friends. It was two
full years (says the story) ere Pharaoh's Butler could remember and 41. 9.
Joseph, or call his faults to mind, for which he suffered imprisonment. Many
O Lord my Psalm. 40. 5.
God (says David) are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are to (...) ward, they cannot be reckoned up in order to thee;
if I should declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered. Then
certainly, many of these mercies that God has vouchsafed to us, would quite be
forgotten, did we not keep such a Diary by us.

2. It is necessary, that thereby we prevent the great fin of forgetfulness.
To forget God is a mother fin, a root-fin. What will not that man be, what will
not he do that forgets God? He is a very wicked man. The wicked shall be
turned into hell (says the Psalm. 9. 17.
Psalmist) and all the nations that forget God. He is a proud man, and I am
sure a proud man is a wicked man. Through the pride of his countenance he will
not seek after God; God is not in all his thoughts, his thoughts are not of
him; or his thoughts are not of him; or his thoughts are, that and 10. 4.
there is no God. He that forgets God, forgets that God is. He that forgets God
is an hypocrite, and an hypocrite is a very wicked man. Consider this ye that
forget God. But who were and 50. 16, 17, 22.
they? Such as took Gods name into their mouths, and yet hated instruction, and
cast Gods words behind them. He that forgets God is a most unthankful person,
and an unthankful man is a most wicked man. Dixeris ingratum, dixe^is omnia.
Call a man an unthankful man, and call him any thing.

Eccles. 9. 14, 15.
There was a little City (says Solomon) besieged by a great King, and a poor
wise man delivered that City by his wisdom, yet no man remembered that poor
wise man. It was a wicked part to forget that man, but most wicked it is to
forget God. When Tamerlane (that victorious Emperor) had beaten Bajazet in
battle, and taken him prisoner, he sent for him, and amongst other questions,
asked him, Whether ever he were thankful to God for making him so great a
King? he answered, that he never so much as thought of him; which was a most
wicked speech of a wicked man.

3. It is necessary to prevent the great danger of forgetting God. To forget
God is a provoking sin. He that forgets God, sins not at an ordinary rate, and
therefore shall be punished not after an ordinary manner. Consider Psalm. 50. 22.
this ye that forget God (says the Lord) lest I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver you. Eli forgot God, and so did Saul and Jeroboam, they
forgot the great things God had done for them, and did not God plague them and
their posterity? Forgetfulness of God makes him rage, not only against the
work of his hands, but the sheep of his pasture. David forgot God, and so did
Solomon; and how severely were they punished? The one by his Son, who rebelled
against him; the other by his Servant, that plucked the greatest part of the
Kingdom from his posterity.

A Soldier of Philip King of Macedonia, having begged the lands of one that
had entertained him kindly, was branded with Ingratus hospes on the forehead,
to his perpetual shame. It is reported of Caesar and Alexander, two of the most
valiant Soldiers that ever the world had, that the one would never give to,
and the other forgive an unthankful man. Because (says the Lord) Pharaoh King
of Egypt says the river (that is Nilus) is mine own, I have made it for my
self, therefore will I dry up the river, and cause the fish to stink. What
became of Herod the proud? who, after his oration, Act. 1^. ^3.
and the peoples acclamation, The voice of a god, and not of a man, gave not
the glory to God; the Angel of the Lord ^mote him, and he was eaten of worms,
and gave up the Ghost. He that forgets God, is unthankful to God; and he that
is unthankful, forfeits all mercies; as the not paying of Custom forfeits all
a Merchants goods.

It is written of one Timotheus the Son of Conon a noble Citizen of Athens,
that after he had proudly said in a great assembly, Haec ego feci, non fortuna:
These things I have done, and not Fortune, (which that people adored as God) he
never prospered, but lost all the glory he had gotten.

A poor honest man meeting with a very rich neighbor in his Cornfieldsd, upon
harvest, very plentifully stored, consisting of many acres, said to him, You
have Sir a very rich crop; answered, Yea, I will have a good crop; and gave not
God the praise: Within a few days after, by a mighty storm of wind the
greatest part of his corn was blown out of the ear, and with other wet weather
it was so wasted that it came to little. If we forget God, he will forget us:
He will remember our sins, and punish us for them; but he will forget our
persons in time of trouble. To w^ch purpose I shall relate a sad story, which I
had from a good hand, in the hearing of very many; and I believe it to be very
true. A man that on his sick bed, that proved his deathbed, had one time an
extraordinary appetite, and desired something that he might eat; which being
brought to him, he did as much loath as before he longed for; and therefore
without touching any part of it, was carried away; suddenly, he called for it
again, his stomach to such provision being as strong and quick as ever; which
was done accordingly, and set before him; but his stomach rose against it, with
as great abhorrency as before. This was done a third time, upon the former
ground, and carried away again for the same reason. At last he confessed that
it was just with God so to deal with him, that never craved a blessing from God
upon his meat when he sat down at his table, nor gave God thanks when he rose
up, but forgot God the giver of all. And indeed it is just with God to forget
us in our straights, that never remember him in our enlargements. The keeping
of such a Journall would conduce much to the preventing of such an evil.

4. Abutili.
Fourthly, it is a very profitable course to have such a Journal or Diary by
us; and you know, Who will show us any good? Who will bring us any profit? is the
great question of the world, and prevails very far. Now it is profitable these
7 ways.

1. As it would be an excellent way to advance the name and honorable memorial
of some, so it would thereby much promote the good of others: For would such as
are of singular worth, and special note for their learning, piety, and
usefulness in Church or Commonwealth, be persuaded to this duty of keeping a
Journall, how easy were it for their posterity, or special friends, to write
a history of their Lives, especially so far as concerned their parents, their
birth and breeding, either in (...) University or Innes ^of Court; their great
preservations from dangers, their great preferments to places of trust, with
their employments and success in those places, and such like? Other things
might be added, as occasion is offered, from the relation of others; which as
it would much conduce to the honor of the dead, so it would very far advance
the good of those that survive them. Most people believe their eyes rather then
their ears, and walk more by patterns then they do by any rules. Mahomet the
Great, the first Emperor of Constantinople, did ever set before him the
examples of Alexander and Caesar in all his Wars, whom he labored to imitate.
And it is reported of Themistocles, that he had always in his thoughts the
victories of Miltiades, which made him unsatisfied, till he had imitated him.
Christians that have such a cloud of witnesses (not unlike the pillar of a
cloud to Israel in the wilderness) may the better be guided through the dark
labyrinths of this evil world, till they come to that Canaan of unutterable joy
and happiness, of which those worthies are now made partakers. And indeed, who
can behold their love to Gods truth, their zeal for his glory, their patience
in tribulation, their courage in a good cause, their perseverance in
well-doing, their holiness of life, their prayers, fasting, tears, alms,
temperance, modesty, heavenly*mindednesse, with their triumph at their death;
but must needs (...), stir up the grace that (...) them; stir the coals of
their servent desires, till they break out into a flame, in being followers of
those worthies as they followed Christ. The Lacedaemonians for the better
stirring up of young men to noble enterprises, used to have the statues of
their most famous Worthies, either Gown-men or Swordmen, set up in their
Senate House, with this sentence in golden letters, Si fueritis sicut hi,
eritis sicut ^i: If you will be like these for their service, you shall be like
these for their honor. Some have taken good pains in writing the Lives and
Deaths of such as have deserved well in their generations, a Work in this
regard very commendable. How many such examples would be preserved, and left to
posterity, (which otherwise were like to be lost) were this course of keeping
Diaries observed?

2. This practice would bring Christians into great acquaintance with God, and
his most gracious nature. So the Psalmist, who having fully discoursed of his
providence over diverse sorts of persons, in answering their prayers, and
relieving them in their necessities; concludes, Whosoever is wise, Ps. 107. 43.
and will observe these things, even such shall understand the loving kindness
of the Lord. Now what better way to observe such things, then by a constant
keeping of such a Journal? Thence we may discern his loving kindness.

1 Timothy 6. 17.
1. How full it is; who gives us richly all things to enjoy.

2. How free it is; who does all for us for his name sake.

Jam. 1. 17.
3. How firm it is; with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning;
whose gifts and calling are without repentance. Romans 11. 29.


And who would not endeavor by all means to be well acquainted with God, whom to
know, is wisdom indeed; to fear, is godliness indeed; to enjoy, is happiness
indeed?

3. It will from hence much enlarge our love to God; for we must needs love him
1 John 4. 19
that has loved us first, especially that has loved us thus. Certainly the
more we know God, the better we shall love him. I will Psalm. 91. 14.
deliver him (says the Lord by the Psalmist) because he has set his love upon
me; and he has set his love upon me, because he has known my name. Even
Publicans (says our Savior) will love those of whom they are beloved, by whom
they are rewarded: And shall not Christians be in love with such a God, whose
mercies Prove. 8. 17.
are more then we can number, greater then we can value? And will not this our
love to God be beneficial to us? If we love him, he will love us again, and in
his love there can be no lack, for they that seek him early Joh. 14. 21, 23.
shall find him. He that loves me (says Christ) shall be loved of my Father,
and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him. And again, If any man love
me, he will keep my commandments, and my Father will love him; and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him. Now this God has not only enough
in himself to enable him unto all this, (for he is the only wise and almighty
God) but he has also enough to incline him thereunto, for he is 2 Cor. 1. 3.
the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. Yea, he has enough to
engage him; for he is in covenant with us, and that covenant is under seal,
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for Heb. 6. 17, 18.
God to lie, we might have strong consolation.

4. It will much enlarge our hearts in kindness and compassion to our
brethren; Psalm. 16. 2, 3.
for because (as the Psalmist says) our goodness cannot extend to God, it
shall to the Saints that are 1 John 3. 14.
in the earth. And surely he that loves God, loves him also that is begotten
of God. And suc^ love to the Saints is very profitable,

1. For the present* for it is a good evidence that we are past from death to
life, because we love the brethren. He that loves not his brother abides in
death.

2. For the future; it shall be remembered and rewarded at the last day: For
Christ will say to such, In as much as ye did all this to M^tt. 25. 34, 40.
one of these my Brethren, ye did it unto me. Come ye therefore ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.

5. The keeping of such a Journall, especially if we look often into it, and
read it, over will be a notable means to increase in us that self-abasement and
abhorrency of spirit that is most acceptable in the sight of God. The more we
look upon the loving kindness of the Lord, the more vile shall we be in our
own eyes. When I consider (says David) the Ps. 8. 3, 4.
heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou have
ordained; What is man that thou art mindsull of him, or the Son of man that
thou visitest him? Alas, man is not only srail, as a creature, but filthy also
as a sinner, yet the riches of Gods grace overlooks ^all; so that God will
bestow his thoughts upon him, and visit him. We may be very mindful of such as
we do not, we cannot visit; but God will do both. David in another place and
144 3, 4.
goes a step higher, What is man that thou take knowledge of him, or the Son
of man that thou make account of him? Man is like to vanity, his days are
like a shadow that passes away. Man is not worthy that God should cast an eye
upon him, and make any account of him* and yet the highest Lord will take
knowledge of the lowest worm; Majesty will make some reckoning of meanness. Oh!
how will the serious survey of such a Journal abase the soul 2 Samuel 9. 7, 8.
before the Lord! When David did but tell Mephibosheth, what he would do for
him, and he cries out from the sense of his own vileness, What is thy
servant, that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I am? A dog; yea, a dead
dog; What more vile in the world? But when God told David how he would build
him an house, and set up his seed after and 7. 18, 19.
him; he replies, Who am I, and What am I, that thou have brought me hitherto?
And this was yet but a small thing in thy sight, O Lord; but thou have spok^n
of thy servants house for a great while to come. If God be great and good in
our eyes, we shall be little and vile in our own sight. If God be high in our
hearts, we shall be as low in our thoughts, as we are in our deserts. And this
will be for our profit; for if we be mean in our own account, God will set his
1 Pet. 5. 5.
heart upon us, and magnify us; for as he resists the proud, so he gives
grace to the humble.

6. This Journal, with a survey of all the good things God has bestowed on us,
and continued to us, will much provoke us to thankfulness. They that have but
heard much of Gods goodness, cannot be unthankful. Indeed, they that were
born deaf remain dumb; they that could never hear, can never speak. They that
could never hear the voice of the Son of God, and live, are tongue tied in his
praises: But they that have heard of him by the ear, seen him by the eye, and
every day taste of his bounty, their mouths will ever run over with
thanksgiving. Now certainly the more thankful any man is, the more
successful. As faith is the way to thankfulness, so thankfulness is the way
to thrive. It is said that Aaron had on his robe round about a Exo. 18. 34.
bell and a pomegranate; the Bell signified thankfulness; and the Pomegranate
fruitfulness. He that offers me praise (says God) glorifieth me; and to him
that orders his conversation Psa. 50. ^3.
aright, I will show the salvation of God. I will not be in his debt, but work
some great extraordinary deliverance for him Let the people and 67. 5, 6.
praise thee, O God; yea, let all the people praise thee; (says the Psalmist)
Then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God even our own God shall
bless us. Prayers get mercies, but praises keep them and enlarge them, with a
blessing; and a little blessed is better then the whole world enjoyed.

7. Such a course would very much help our faith. Every experiment of Gods
former goodness is a strong prop for our faith for the future. When Moses went
up to the Exodus 17 9.
Mount to pray for Israel, and against Amalek, he took the rod of God in his
hand. And the reason certainly was, because by that rod God had done wonderful
things for his people and against their enemies; as by that he turned the
waters into blood, by that he and 7. 20. and 5. 17. and 14. 1^.
brought frogs and lice upon the land of Egypt, by that he divided the waters
of the Red Sea. And the very fight of that rod did encourage Moses to trust in
God for the deliverance of his people, and the overthrow of their enemies; and
that from the experience of his former goodness. Now questionless the best
way to be stored with such experiments, is to keep such a Journal or Diary by
us: And who can read such an history, but must needs say, Why should not I
trust to, and depend upon such a God at all times, and for all things?

First, I say, at all times; for there is not prius and posterius in Deo; first
and last in God, as in man: He can do what he has done, Psalm. 37. 25.
I am is his name. I have been young, and now am old, was the language of
David, but not of David's God.

Secondly, as at all times, so for all things; for there is not majus and minus
in Deo, not more and less in God, he can do what he will do; he can pardon all
sins as well as one, supply all wants as well as one, subdue all our enemies as
easily as one. I cannot do as I have done, is the voice of the creature, not of
the Creator. See how Jacob reasons from experience, Genesis 4^. 1^, 16.
when he blessed Joseph's Son. The God which fed me all my life long unto this
day; The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads.

Now is not faith a profitable grace? Faith is the greatest gather-good in the
world: What need he care, why should he fear, what can he want, that is rich in
faith? For rich in faith, and rich in God, and he that enjoyes God, shall
inherit all things. By this Rev. 21. 7.
faith strengthened, and by so many experiments thus enlarged, he may erect a
monument, and say, Hitherto the Lord has helped me. Sam. 7. 12.
And thereupon look up into heaven, and thus admire at the large allowance that
is provided for him there, with the Psalmist; Psalm. 31. 20.
How great is thy goodness, O Lord, which thou have laid up for those that
fear thee! If my friend will give me such entertainmentat an Inn by the way,
how welcome will he make me when I come to his house? If earth be such, what is
heaven? If my comfort in a cottage be so great, what are the joys of those
everlasting habitations, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens,
where I shall have glory with a double hyberbole, (...) 1 Cor. 4. 17.
(...), an exceeding weight of glory. Oh! that our treasure were laid up in
heaven, that our conversation were in heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile bodies, that they may
be fashioned Phil 3. 10, 21.
like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself. Heaven will make us amends for all, but Jesus
Christ is better then heaven. Jacob's Sons met with hard measure whilst they
traveled into Egypt for food; but I am Joseph your Genesis 45. 3.
Brother, and Governor of all Egypt, did abundantly recompense them for all
their trouble. After all our sorrows and sufferings in this vale of tears; Fear
not, it is I. All power is given unto me; your Captain, your Brother, your Head
will satisfy abundantly. Phil. 1. 23.
Paul had a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better.
Riches are good, but Learning is better; Learning is good, but Grace is better;
Grace is good, but Glory in heaven is better; Heaven is good, but Christ is far
better. A picture of the globe of the whole earth, set out with all the brave
things that Sea and Land can afford, with this sentence encircling it round, To
be with Christ is far better, is a Christians emblem. Indeed Jesus Christ is a
Christians Psalm. 16. ^ls.
heaven; in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
there are pleasures for evermore. Whither he bring us, who has so dearly
bought us; to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be given by us and all
his Saints, all honor and glory, now and for evermo^e, Amen.

(...) Christianus gratulabundus.

Thankfulness A way to thrive

Exodus: 28. 34.

FINIS.
The Contents:
CHAP. I.
The Preface, wherein an entrance is made to the words, and the duty of a
Journall or Diary is propounded. page 1 To forget Gods mercies a provoking sin.
2 God is very gracious in affording means for the helping of our memories. 5
CHAP. II.
The matter whereof a Journall or Diary is compounded, and first National and
public. 14 1. Take notice what Governors have ruled over us. Ibid. 2. What
Religion was by such countenanced. 16 3. How variable the condition of the
Times have been. 19 4. What remarkable judgemints God has inflicted upon
notorious offenders. 22 5. What the National sin for the present generation
may be: It Is good to know that. 25 Some times have been more notorious for
Drunkenness. 26 Some for Swearing. 27 Some for Pride and Ambition. 28 Our
generation (as some think) most guilty of Contention. 30 Some think,
Hypotrisie. 33 Some think, Apostasy. Ibid. En^^ity against the Kingly
government of Christ in his Church is the sin of this age. 39
CHAP. III.
What personal and private passages of Providence those are which ought to be
recorded in our Journall or Diary. 48 1. Keep an account of our conversion. Ib.
2. Of all divine assistance, either for the doing of that which is required, or
the bearing of such evils as are inflicted. 51 3. All deliverances from
dangers. 55 4. All the men and means God has used for our good. 58 5. All the
returns of our prayers. 62
CHAP. IV.
The manner how a Journall or Diary is to be used, and first what is to be done
by way of observation. 66 1. Labor to see and observe God in all things. 66 2.
Labor to see and observe all things in God. 70 3. Observe the ways and means
by which all good things are conveyed to us. 74 1. By Christ savingly. 75 2. By
the promise certainly. 79 3. By the creatures sensibly. 85
Wherein observe Gods wisdom in the choice: 1. Of the instruments that are
used. 86 2. Of the the time. 89 3. Of the measure. 93
In all which hold fast these three conclusions: 1. Where God sees any fit to
use more, he can afford more. 98 2. That it is a mercy when our minds are
conformable to our means. 99 3. That God has many ways to throw these things
in to us, and as many to take them from us. 100

CHAP. V.
The manner how a Journall or Diary is to be used, according to the rules of
Practice. 102 1. Look often upon the Journal, and read it over. Ibid. 2. Cast
up all your wants. 105 3. Reckon how many ways those wants are supplied with
other comforts. 107 4. Take great notice of the peculiar excellency of all Gods
dispensations toward you, above the world. 109 5. Take heed that the want of
some comfort do not rob you of all other. 114 6. Reckon much upon what you may
want. 115 7. Study much the vanity of all Creaturecomforts. 118 8. Be very
moderate in the use of these things. 122 9. Trust not too far, depend not too
much upon men. 124
CHAP. VI.
More rules of the same kind, that concern our practice. 128 10. Ask your own
hearts 3 Questions. Ib. 1. What honor do I bring to God for all this. Ibid. 2.
What good do I to my neighbor. 131 3. What good do I reap by all for my self.
137
11. Labor to be thankful for all. 140 1. Especially for Jesus Christ. 141 2.
For afflictions. 142 3. For preservation from scandals. 144 4. For heaven. 146
12. Declare to others what God has done for you, to provoke them to bless
God with you and for you. 148
CHAP. VII.
An use of Exhortation, wherein Christians are persuaded to keep such a
Journall or Diary. 150 Directions to further this work. 151 1. Often remember
your sinful estate. 152 2. Remember your low and poor estate. 155 3. Labor to
understand every mercy aright. 156 4. Take notice of the actings of God,
whilst they are new. 158 5. Love the Lord for his goodness. 161
CHAP. VIII.
Arguments propounded that may provoke Christians to keep such a Journall. 164
1. Ab excellenti, It is an excellent duty. Ibid. 2. Ab aequo, It is very just
and equal. 167 3. A necessario, It is very necessary. 170 1. In regard of the
badnesse of our memories. Ibid. 2. To prevent the great sin of unthankfulness.
171 3. To prevent the great danger of forgetfulness. 172
4. Ab utili, It is a profitable course, and that in 7 regards. 174 1. It would
be an excellent way to perpetuate the memorial of some, and promote the good
of others. 175 2. It would bring us into great acquaintance with God. 176 3. It
would much enlarge our hearts with love to our God. 177 4. It would enlarge our
hearts with kindness and compassion to our Brethren. 178 5. It would much
increase in us selfabasement of heart. 179 6. It would provoke us to
thankfulness. 180 7. It would very much help our faith. 181


