A LETTER TO THE Earl of PEMBROKE FROM Sir EDWARD BAYNTON in Gloucester.
Showing the true manner how himself and Captain Edward Air were surprised at
Malmsbury by two Lieutenant-Collonels under the Earl of Stamfords command, upon
pretended ground, and contrary to some scandalous relations in print. With the
reasons inducing him formerly to seize upon Sir Edward Hungerford.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Creake, January 22. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Earl of PEMBROKE.
My Noble good Lord,
ON Monday night last being at Malmsbury, which is a Town under my command,
within eight miles off Cisseter, where I had drawn up 500 Men of my Regiment,
for their aid, and two Companies more upon their march; about nine of the
clock at night there came about 500 Horse, and Dragoneeres, of the Earl of
Stanfords Forces, out of Glocestershire, commanded by Lievtenant-Colonell
Furbush, and Lievtenant-Colonell Carr, his Lordship being then at Exceter, and
desired lodging of me for that night, whereupon as soon as I was certainly
informed who they were, I took order for the billeting of them, and let them
in, which as soon as I had done, they came to me, pretending a great deal of
friendship, but on the sudden seized upon me in my lodging, plundered me and
my Soldiers of all that we had, and the next morning carried me and Captain
Edward Air to Cisseter, with as much ignominy as was possible, upon two poor
Dragoneeres, although they took from me as many Horses for my own Saddle as
were worth 300 pound; within two days they carried me to this Town, where
they keep me in the same manner at this time; but I thank God, they dare
accuse me of nothing, but say, that I would not bring up my Forces to Cisseter,
which I conceive I was no way bound to do, especially, Prince Maurice his
Quarter being at Farringdon and Wantage, having there 1000 Horse, within two
Miles of Wilts; they say likewise that I had seized upon Sir Edward Hungerford,
which I had just cause to do; for besides the correspondence between him and
my Lord Seymor, which I can bring pregnant proof of, he sent twice to my
Sergeant Major, to command him to draw up my Forces to such places as he should
appoint, pretending that he had an Order from the Parliment for it, and sent to
my Soldiers to leave me, and come to him, which I could make no other
interpretation of, but that he intended to betray me; whereupon I resolved to
send him in safe custody to the Parliament, but he fled to Cisseter, and there
J do verily believe, did bribe the two Scotch Lievtenant-Colonels to perform
this exploit; for he fled out of Wilts about six weeks agone, and carried all
his Family and Goods into Somersetshire, where he does now reside, and only
comes sculking now and then into Wilts, to put tricks upon me. I have served my
Country under your Lordships and your brothers command these twenty years,
wherefore J beseech your Lordship to undertake for me, for J am resolved never
to desert the cause, but desire to appear at the Parliament with as much speed
as may be, which I hope your Lordship will further, for his sake, who will ever
be

Your most humble Servant, E. BAYNTON.
Gloucester, Jan. 15. 1642.
FINIS.

