A VINDICATION Of the Commands and Doctrine of Christ Jesus, And of his People
in their faithful Obedience to him, against all Swearers and swearing,
whatsoever according to the Scriptures of TRVTH.

With a few words unto all such Rulars Teachers and People, of what degree or
sort soever, that have a hand in Afflicting, Persecuting, and casting such into
Prisons who for Conscience Sake dare not break the Commands of Christ, nor go
out of his DOCTRINE.

And it is one Visitation and Warning more from the Lord unto them, before he
sweep the Land of Evil Doers with the Beasome of their final destruction.

And this is in love to their Souls, by a Lover of Righteousness and Truth, and
a witness against all Unrighteousness, Injustice, and Oppression.

W. B.

For the Land is full of Adulterers, for because of swearing the land mourns,
etc. For both Prophet and Priest are profane. Wherefore their way shall be
unto them, as slippery ways in darkness, They shall be driven on and fall
therein, for I will bring evil upon them even the year of their visitation
says the Lord,

Ier. 23.10.11.12. NOw seeing the great controversy at this day between the
false Christians and the true, (namely the persecuting Powers of this
Generation, and the Royal Seed and people of God called Quakers,) is about
Swearing, and Oaths, and the like matters appertaining to Religion, and
Worship of God, which are matters of Conscience, (the answer of which before
God in the day of death, is a man's eternal condemnation; or Justification and
salvation.) It therefore lies upon me at this time, to vindicate the only right
and propriety of Christ Jesus, in the Consciences of his people; and also of
his people in their faithfulness and obedience unto him; (who is the head of
his Church, and whose right alone it is to reign,) against that doctrine and
soul destroying principle, of imposing Oaths, or any other thing whatsoever,
which concerns the exercise of the soul and conscience, (which is immortal)
toward God, or any part of his worship, etc.

1. It is written in the second Epistle of John, at the nine ten and eleven
verses, on this wise, viz. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God; He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he
has both the Father and the Son, and if there come any unto you and bring not
this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed, for
he that bids him God speed, is pertaker of his evil deeds.

2. Now if any to whom this may come, should be ignorant of what this means,
or what this doctrine of Christ is, or what the word doctrine do signify, let
them take notice of what follows.

As for the word doctrine, it signifies teaching, or that which is taught, so
that the doctrine of Christ is that which he taught or does teach; and it may
be truly read thus, Whosoever abides not in the teaching of Christ, or in what
he taught, or teaches, has not God, etc. now mark, such an one that abides
not in that which Christ taught has not God, but he that does abide in what
Christ has taught and teaches, has both the Father and the Son.

3. Now the controversy being very great at this day between two sorts of
people in this Nation of England, about religious matters, for which the one do
persecute abuse, imprison, rob, spoil, and greatly oppress and afflict the
other, (namely for conscience sake, for abiding in the doctrine, and obeying
the commands of Christ) Let us therefore mark and try the difference of these
people according to the Scriptures of truth, which those persecutors themselves
profess is their rule; so by their own rule let them be tried.

4. Now the people who are thus persecuted and abused, etc. are such as abide
in the doctrine of Christ, in that which he taught and teaches, (for which
they are persecuted) and has both the Father and the Son, 2 John 9. And their
persecutors and oppessors are such as break the commands, and abide not in the
doctrine of Christ, and so has not God, (as will be proved and made manifest)
neither are they to be bid God speed, for such as bid them God speed (or side
with them) are pertakers of their evil deeds; so they that has not God, (but
are without God) are the persecuters and afflicters of them, that has both the
Father and the Son, (let all people take notice of this,) and now is the
Scripture fulfilled, [ These things will they do unto you for my names sake,
because they know not him that sent me, John 15.21.] etc.

5. Now what the doctrine of Christ is, or what he has taught, or does teach
his Friends, and Disciples to do, and to leave undone, may be mentioned in many
perticulars, but at present I may omit, but what is in my aim, as to the thing
in hand, which is about Swearing and Oaths.

6. And now that Christ Jesus did forbid his Disciples to swear, and that it
was his doctrine which he taught them not to swear at all, may be easily
proved, yea though they were such oaths and swearing as were lawful, and
commanded in Old time, and to be performed to the Lord, as may be read in the
record of Matthew. 5, Chapter 33, 34. etc. Again ye have heard that it has been said
by them in Old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto
the Lord thine Oaths: But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by Heaven,
for it is Gods Throne, nor by the earth, for it is his Footstool, neither by
Jerusalem for it is the City of the great King, neither shall thou swear by thy
head, because thou can not make one hair white or black; But let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil.

And said James a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to his Brethren,
(who wrote to the Twelve Tribes scattered abroad) Above all things my brethren
swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the earth neither by any other oath,
but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation,
Chapter 5. 12. v. bringing with him the very same doctrine which Christ taught
them, in which whosoever abides not, has not God, let him profess what he
will; for says John in his first Epistle. We are of God, he that knows God
hears us, he that is not of God, hears not us, hereby know we the spirit of
truth, and the spirit of error, clearly manifesting that such as bring not the
same doctrine with them are in the spirit of error, and that abide not therein
are not of God, but of the world, 1 John 4.5, 6. And the whole world lies in
wickedness. Chapter 5.19. So he that says I know him (or profess him) and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar, and out of the truth, and so a deceiver and
an Antichrist, dedying both the Father and the Son. Chapter 2.22.23. For whosoever
denies Christ's words and doctrine, has denied him also, and he that denies
him, denies the Father also, (not only with the lips) for the Father has
committed all power and judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father; (who said) This is my beloved Son here ye
him, Mat. 17.5. But they that break his Commandes, and abide not in his
doctrine, do dishonor him, and are contrary to him, of Antichrist, without
God, in the world, etc.

7. Object. Now some may object and say, that these Commands or Doctrines of
Christ Jesus, and his servant James, about oaths and swearing, was not to
disanul, make void, or prohibit all swearing and oaths, as Religious oaths,
(as some call them) or oaths of Allegiance, or obedience to Superiors, before
a Magistrate lawfully tendered, or the like; but vain and frivolous oaths and
swearing in their common talk, or such superstious and Idolatrous swearing and
oaths as the Phatisees used, who said, it was nothing to swear by the Temple,
but whosoever shall swear by the Gold of the Temple, he is a debtor, etc.
Against whom Christ denounced many woes, and called them Fools and blind,
Matt. 23.

8. Answ. Now first consider to whom Christ and his Servant. James did speak,
and read their words, and weigh them in the fear of God, Matt. 5.6. chapter And
thou may see that Christ spoke to his own Disciples, expounding the things
concerning the law, wherein was written, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou
shall not kill, etc. Exodus 20. And an eye for an eye, and a Tooth for a tooth,
etc. 21.14. And whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give her a writing
of Divorsement Deuteronomy. 24.1, etc. Calling the time of the Law, the Old time, in
which these things were given forth as Commandments by the Lord, as also
swearing in that time was commanded and lawful, and the oaths to be performed
to the Lord, as may be read Numb. 30.2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or
swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he
shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, etc. And in Deuteronomy.
6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall swear by his
name, And Psalm. 63. Every one that swears by him shall glory, but the mouth
of them that speak lies shall be stopped, and the Angel swore, and Abraham and
Isack swore; and in Isaiah 65.16. And he that swears in the earth shall swear
by the God of Truth (but the mouth of the liar shall be stopped) and Joseph and
David swore, and many more that might be mentioned, so that swearing by the God
of Truth in the earth was lawful in the Old time, of which Christ spoke as is
sufficiently proved, Genesis 21.24. and 26.31. and 42.15. But these things were
but for their time and season, for the Law served (and the Old time swearing
and ceremonies) till the Seed came, Gal. 3. which is Christ, the new and living
way, who says, swear not at all, Matt. 5.34. So these were no such frivelous
Oaths, neither was it only such profane or superstitious swearing, of which
Christ was here speaking and forbidding his Disciples, or such oaths as the
Pharisees used among them; But such as were to be performed (in the Old time)
to the Lord, even in the time of the Law and the Prophets, of whom Christ the
Substance is the end, to every one that beleiveth, who says, Swear not at all.

9. And again, do ye conceit or believe, that the Disciples of Jesus Christ
(whom he sometimes called Brethren, and children) were such common or profane
swearers, or did swear their common talk as you false Christians do, who
profess him and his doctrine and practice only in words and show; or do ye
think or imagine it was only the Pharisees blind Superstitions swearing, or
the like that he forbade them? If so, Then why did he mention the Old time, and
those other things of the Law, and say, Ye have heard that it has been said by
them of Old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the
Lord thine Oaths, etc. this could not be the Pharisees oaths, and swearing
then present; neither any such profane or superstitious oaths, because it
were such oaths as were to be performed to the Lord, and not at that present
time of the Pharisees, but in the Old time, of which they had heard, Matt. 5.
or can thou say that ever the Pharisees, blind swearing or foolish confused
Oaths, Mat. 23. was ever commanded by the Lord, or to be performed to him?
which I judge no man can prove.

10. But however or what oaths or swearing soever it was, of which there and
then he was speaking, and forbidding his Disciples, it was sufficient for them
then, and for the Disciples of Christ (the true Christians) now, that he has
positively commanded (which is not to be disputed by them that follow him)
saying; But I say unto you, swear not at all, seeing all power in heaven and
earth, and all judgment and authority is given and committed to him, of whom
God has said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.

And again, Hebrew. 1.1. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke
in times past unto the Fathers in the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us in his Son whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he
made the worlds, etc. Now if Abraham, I sacc and Jacob, David and Solomon,
Moses, Isaiah, or Joseph did swear, these were all but servants in the old
time, but the Son who is the heir of all things, by whom the worlds were made,
who is above the servants, by whom God speaks in these last days, the new and
living way, to whom all power is given in heaven and earth, whom all are to
hear, says, Swear not at all, and though the Angel swore, yet he is but a
servant, as he himself said to John, [See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
servant] Rev. 21.9. But Christ the Son is the Heir of all things, and has
obtained a more excellent name then the Angels, by Inheritance, Heb. 1.4. And
again, when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let
all the Angels of God worship him. verse. 5.6. etc.

12. And said Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, If an Angel from Heaven should
preach another Gospel, (or doctrine) unto you, then that which we have preached
let him be accursed; so that we are not to look at any that swore in old time,
or in days past for our example and rule, (though it be an Angel from Heaven)
contrary to Christ's doctrine and command, who says, Swear not at all.

13. For the Scripture 2 John 9. do not say, Whosoever abides not in the
doctrine of Angels, or of Isaiah* David or Solomon, etc. has not God, But
whosoever abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, and he that does
abide in it, has both the Father and the Son, for he that obeys the Son,
obeys the Father also, for the Father has committed all things unto the son,
whom he has given for a Leader and Commander to the people, and to be his
salvation to the ends of the earth, and there is no other name given under
heaven whereby men shall be saved, (Neither of Men or Angels) for he was before
Abraham was, and is greater then Solomon, and David's Lord, and higher then the
Angels, who commands, Not to swear at all, Mat. 5.

14. Object. Now if any should yet Object and say, Did not God himself swear by
himself, Heb. 6.13. And the Apostle Paul say, An Oath for confirmation among
men was the end of strife, etc. Do not this allow of swearing and make room for
oaths now among men in these days, etc.

15. Answ. That which God did in days past concerning swearing, mentioned Heb.
chap. 6. It was to confirm his promise made to Abraham and to his Seed, (and
they that are Christ's are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise, and
such are Christ's, that abide in his doctrine, and do his commands, they only
are his friends) and by way of similitude did the Apostle Paul there speak of
it (and not by command or doctrine, he that reads, let him understand) That men
by an oath did end the controversy or strife among them, and confirm the
thing about which they swore, who did swear by the Greater, as I have before
mentioned, by them in the old time, Number. 30.2. Deu. 6.13, etc. So that the
Apostle said, Because God could not find a Greater, he did swear by himself, to
Abraham, saying, surely in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I
will multiply thee, etc. This was a promise made to Abraham with an oath,
putting him out of all doubt that he would fulfill it, and so he staggered not
at it, but patiently waited till it came to pass. Hebrews 6.15.

So that this is only a Parable, showing, that if among [men] an oath did
confirm a thing, and end the strife, and that [men] did perform [their] oaths
(who did swear by the Greater, which was once commanded by Him) how much more
would the [Lord] be faithful to perform [His] oath which he swear by [Himself]
(who is the Greatest) to Abraham and to his seed, seeing he cannot lie, nor is
he a man that he should repent, but is the Righteous Judge of all the earth
(that does right) Genesis 18.25.

17. So that this is neither precept, example or command for the Christians,
the Disciples of Christ (now in these last days) for swearing and oaths, but
a repetition of what was done in times past, (the old time) to the Fathers as
he speaks, Heb. 1.1. Which was in diverse manners and at sundry times, but now
he has spoken unto us in his Son and Heir, who is before Abraham and the end
of the old time, the Law and the Prophets, who says, Swear not at all.

18. Object. But did not God swear by himself, and will not Repent, chapter 7.21.
But this seems as if God did repent; seeing now by his son (to whom he has
given all power in heaven and earth) he commands not to swear at all in these
last days, is not this repenting of what was done formerly in the old time?
etc.

Ans. No: It cannot be said (truly) here, he did Repent, seeing he has
willingly and faithfully performed and fulfilled that which he had then sworn
and promised; as in the Record of Luke 1.72.73. where it is mentioned, not for
a precept of swearing, but in thanksgiving and praises to the Lord, that he had
performed the oath which he had sworn to Abraham, by giving them light (who
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death) and the knowledge of salvation, by
the remission of their sins, etc.

But where he spoke of swearing, and will not repent, it was conserning the
disanulling of all those Priests which were made by a carnal commandment, and
of establishing Christ Jesus* His Son with an oath, to be a Priest for
evermore, after the order of Melchisedeck, (an unchangeable unalterable order)
and not after the order of Aaron, (which Priesthood was changed, and so there
was of necessity a change also of the Law, by which swearing and oaths was
commanded and tolerated) for such an High Priest (says the Scripture) became
us, who is holy harmeless, undesiled, separate from sinners, and made higher
then the Heavens, etc. For the Law makes men Highpriests which have
infirmity, but the word of the oath which was since the law, makes the Son who
is consecrated for evermore; mark the word of the oath (which was since the
Law) which God swear and will not repent, makes the Son an High Priest for
evermore, at whose mouth the Law must now be sought, as it was of the Priests
in the Old time, whose lips were to preserve the peoples knowledge, Mal. 2.7.
But now in the Son Christ, dwells all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
by whom God speaks in these last days, saying, This is my beloved son hear ye
him, etc.

21. So that you who contend and plead for swearing, and oaths, and persecute
about it, are yet in the old time and under the Law, and the old, disanulled,
changeable Priesthood, and fell into condemnation, James 5.12. and not under
grace, no Disciples of Christ Jesus, the everlasting unchangeable High Priest,
who says, Swear not at all; And so no christians.

22. And so now, ye have no covering but what is too narrow for your swearing
and oaths, nor no shadow of death or dark place to hide yourselves under, from
the light of the Son, who is now risen, and coming up to the noon day, whom God
has highly exalted, and given him a Name above every Name, that at his Name
every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things in the earth, and things
under the earth, etc. Phil. 2.9.10.

23. And so if every knee must bow to him, then must Abraham David and Solomon,
Joseph, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Angels bow their knees, (understand what
name, and what knees, of things in Heaven and Earth etc.) and all who did swear
in the Old time) to him who now says, Swear not at all, Mat. 5. which is since
the law.

24. And if ye shall yet again say or do believe that it was only profane
swearing and oaths that Christ there forbad his Disciples, even such as
drunkards and quarrellers use in their common talk or such as the Pharisees
used, as aforesaid, and not lawful or religious oaths.

25. To this I answer; If such profane oaths and swearing and such
superstitious and Idolatrous swearing, as the Pharisees and Hipocrites then
used Mat. 23. were ever commanded of God, and to be performed to him in the Old
time, then it were such oaths and swearing: But I do not read nor believe,
(nor any other true Christian) that God did ever in any age, or to any people
whatsoever, command or allow of such a kind of swearing and oaths, as the
ungodly, drunkards and profane people use in their common talk, or such as the
Hipocrites did then, or do now use, who persecute them that witness the oath
and everlasting covenant of God fulfilled, which now says to his Disciples,
Swear not at all.

26. But if it could be so proved and made manifest, yet the word or
commandment [I say unto you swear not at all,] do include (to the
understanding of the upright and reasonable) all swearing whatsoever to be
forbidden by Christ Jesus, whom all are to hear, and to whom every knee must
bow.

27. Object. But here may yet another question arise, in the unsariable
reasoning part, among people in the World, Viz. If all swearing and oaths is
now forbidden and that we must not swear at all by the command of Christ Jesus,
what then will become of all the world? One man might kill another, and steal
from another, and abuse, rob and speil their neighbors witbout restraint or
punishment, seeing men's words will not be taken, as sufficient to prove any
crime against any according to Law, without an oath, which among men does end
the strife, and is a confirmation etc.

28. To which I answer. I grant the whole world lies in wickedness, (as the
Apostle John said) and they themselves confess the same, that they break the
commands of God every day, in thought word and deed, which is also very
apparent to all whose eyes are open, and many times complain there is no health
(or truth) in them, and that they are miserable sinners: This is generally
confessed throughout Europe, and it may be throughout the whole world among the
swearers, who are still in strife and debate, and smiteing with the fist of
wickedness, notwithstanding all their oaths and swearing, it ends not the
strife among them.

29. But now mark, these are all of the world, and their teachers who plead for
swearing, and oaths, are of the world, and the world hears them, 1 John 5.19.
These are miserable sinners without truth and health, no soundness from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, (from the high and mighty to the
beggar on the dunghill) but all gone out of the way, erred and strayed from the
right way, as they themselves confess.

30, Now when these do steal one from another, or kill, murder, or rob one
another, we do not bid them refrain from swearing one against another, in that
case, because they are no christians, And what have we to do with them that are
without (as Paul said) for such God judges, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. but we direct and
inform peoples minds, and exhort them that are thus in strife and swearing,
killing and stealing, ( for which the Land mourns Hos. 4.2.3.) to come to the
Light of Christ Jesus in their consciences, and learn of him (who shows them
that these things are evil and reproves the wole world for their sins) that so
they might be taught (as his Disciples are) to deny all such ungodliness and
these worldly Lusts, (from whence the strife and swearing, wars and fightings
comes) and live soberly, righteously and godly in this present evil world, and
to do unto all men as they would have others do to them, and yet this is but
the Law and the Prophets.

31. Therefore ye should consider, that this strife, swearing and oaths is not
among christians, who obeys Christ's commands, and abide in his doctrine, but in
the world which lies in wickedness; And as says the Prophet, The wicked will
do wickedly (while many are tried, purified and made white) and none of the
wicked shall understand, Dan. 12. And such as abide not in the doctrine of
Christ, but transgresses, has not God, 2. John 9.

32. So that all these things are among them that are out of the doctrine of
Christ, who says, Swear not at all, and so are without God in the world,
having their hearts blinded, and their hearts alienated and estranged from the
covenant of promise, (which God swear to Abraham) and strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, so are none of his Disciples, whom he has taught to be
merciful, and to do to all men as they would be done unto; and when this is
done among people, where would be the killing, or stealing, imprisoning, or
persecuting, if ye were but come to this; for thou would not have another kill
thee, nor steal from thee, nor persecute thee for thy Religion and conscience;
then take heed that thou do likewise, else thou art no christian, let thy
profession be what it will, or thy Religion and worship, and outside Garments,
of what color or form soever. So that we do justly conclude, and Gods witness
in all your consciences, shall one day witness the same; That we who are out of
the swearing and strife abiding in Christ's doctrine and commands, are of God,
and has both the Father and the Son, as it is written 2 John 9. (how blindly
soever you now judge of us) and that you who are in the strife and swearing out
of the doctrine of Christ has not God, but are without God, in the world that
lies in wickedness, and have not his fear before your eyes, which is to depart
from evil, Prove. 8.13. and 16.6.

Therefore consider these things, all ye Rulers, Teachers and people, who
contend for swearing, and oaths, and cast the servants of God into your
noisome holes, and prison-houses, making long furrows upon their backs with
your Instruments of cruelty, for abiding in the doctrine of Christ Jesus; and
because they cannot break his commands by swearing, and yet you your selves
profess his name in wo^ds, and say you are christians, and that he is your Lord
and Savior and the like: Away with this hipocrisy, Gods soul loathes it, and ye
are a burden to him which he is even weary to bear, and he will shortly ease
himself of all you hypocrites who cry Lord, Lord, and do not the things which
he commands, this was the Pharisees state, the persecutors to whom the woes
from the Son of God were denounced, as they are against you at this day.

Therefore if ye will now own swearing and oaths to be lawful, useful, and
tolerable and plead for them, and persecute about them, and such things, when
Christ Jesus has expressly and possitively forbidden all swearing, (to whom God
has committed all power and judgment in Heaven and earth, to whom every knee
must bow, who is made an High Priest with an oath (which God swear and will not
Repent) since the Law and the Old time, who is the end of the Law and the
Prophets, by whom God speaks in these last days, etc.

Then confess openly before all people that ye are Jews-living in the Old time,
under the Law, and not in the new and living way Christ the end of the Law; or
that ye are Infidels, or Heathens, and no longer profes your selves christians
for shame; or take the name of Christ into your mouths for a cloak of
malitiousness but as flatly deny him to be come in the flesh with your mouth
and tongues as ye do with your works, Tit. 1.16. And that such or anylother of
his commands, are of no effect or force to you, and so deny him to be Lord, who
is the Head over all, to his Church, to whom every tongue shall confess, to the
glory of God the Father.

For if ye do still profess him or his Name in words, and that ye are his
servants, and call your selves christians or the like, and yet not obey his
commands, nor do the things which he has said, nor abide in his doctrine, but
persecute them that do, we must and shall judge you in righteous judgment, to
be abominable hypocrites, and rebellious, and disobedient both to the Father
and the Son, for God has said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him; and the Son said, Swear not at all; and John said,
Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not God.
And this is Christ's doctrine before mentioned, which he taught, In which who so
abides has both the Father and the Son.

Therefore take heed to your selves what ye do, or what ye intend to do against
such, for the Lord God of Heaven is pleading their cause, and will plead with
you all who break his commands, and teach men so, or compel men so to do; for
ye are all out of the doctrine of Christ, in the transgression (though ye can
talk of him, and profess him with your mouth and lips) and has not God, but
are without God, in the world which lies in wickedness, where ye are contending
and pleading for swearing and oaths in the old time, which ends not your
strife, which the one oath, the new and living way ends, who says, Swear not
all, Mat. 5.

So ye being without God in the world, breaking his commands, ye are not under
Christ's government; and so being out of his government ye are without his
protection, for he prays not for the world, but for them whom he has chosen
out of it; for the whole world lies in wickedness: So ye being in the
wickedness, in the Transgression, out of Christ's protection, (who has all
power in Heaven and earth) ye are in darkness, and under the shadow of death,
and in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, captivated in the
snares and chains of the Old fool, (at his pleasure) whom ye obey, and so ye
are in such apremunire (body, soul and spirit) that ye will never more get out
except ye repent with speed, and turn your minds to the light of Christ Jesus
in your consciences, and obey his commands, and abide in his doctrine, who
says, Swear not at all.

And this is the word of the Lord God of Heaven unto all you Rulers, Priests
and people whatsoever, who swear and plead for swearing and oaths, and
persecute the harmeless about it, ye are none of Christ's sheep, servants,
friends or children, but of the lineage of Cain and the old hipocrites in their
way, to whom the woe belongs, who denied Christ and chused a murderer, and so
ye are no christians.

But Christ Jesus is come, and is setting up his government, Kingdom and
dominion over all your kingdoms, and establishing his Throne upon top of all
your Thrones, whose Secpter is a Scepter of righteousness, which must rule over
all unrighteous Secpters. And to his name which is above every name, shall all
your knees bow.

If ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy
neighbor and thy self, ye do well, etc.

For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, be is
guilty of all,

Iam. 2.8. etc.
A few words more to the Rulars, Priests, Teachers and People, of what sort
soever, in this Nation of England, from the highest to the lowest, who have any
hand in persecuting the Innocent, etc.
HEar and understand all ye Rulers, Priests and Teachers of England, with all
your Officers and servants, or whomsoever else, Superior or Inferior, from the
Judge to the Jailer, or from the highest to the lowest, who have any hand, or
are in any measure pertakers against the innocent people and servants of the
Lord Jesus Christ who cannot break his commands by swearing.

This we would give you to understand, that as for us who fear and obey the
Lord; your Prisons and cruel unjust dealings, and your long furrows ye plough
upon our backs therein, is very little to us, except to the more raising and
strengthening of that life in us, which will never bow to your wills, or any
will of man by transgressing the commands of Christ Jesus; for our eyes are not
at what ye can or will, or have power permitted you to do, or at the length of
time, in which we suffer bonds under your ambitious wills, or at any other
temporal thing whatsoever; but to the Lord our God alone, who is pleading and
will plead our innocent cause for us in all your consciences: Ye if ye should
shut us up in Dungeons never so close from you, out of your sight or hearing,
yet Gods witness (as a drawn sword in your bowels) which sees in secret, shall
pierce through your heart and life, and smite you in your very vital parts for
all your wickedness against him, his way of truth and harmeless people; and set
in order before you all you ungodly deeds and blasphemous hard speeches which
ye have committed and spoken, for the eye of the pure God beholds, and his ear
of jealousy hears you in your most secret chambers, from whose presence ye
cannot always fly nor hide your counsels, though you should dig as deep as
Hell, or fly to the uttermost parts of the earth. And though you should keep us
till death in your prisons, we cannot break the commands of our Lord and
Savior, which has saved us, and will yet save and deliver us; But as for you
who profess your selves christians, consider these things. Whether he whom you
profess in words will not call you to an account for breaking his commands,
and for casting his servants and children into prisons, and keep them there,
for no other cause but for keeping the commands and abideing in the doctrine of
Christ, whom your selves profess in words and show, as the Phraisees did, Moses
and the Prophets, but opposed their life, and Crucified Christ Jesus the end
and substance of Moses and the Prophets words; Ye hypocrites, what covering or
excuse can ye have to hide or shelter your selves under, in the day of the Lord
which hastens upon you?

Its not your Acts and decrees made in the will of man that shall stand you in
steed, or save you, when the sentence is given against you, Go ye workers of
Iniquity, into everlasting torment: Nay, they shall not be able to save
themselves from the just judgment of our God, but shall receive a just
recompense for all their doings.

And as for us we choose rather to die then transgress against the Lord Jesus
Christ, or wrong our conscience in any measure by bowing to the corrupt wills
of proud and ambitious men, who are alienated from God, and would alienate us
from him also; Did we obey your requirings, or impositions in these unjust and
unrighteous things? but we desire to live always in obedience and humility
before him, though our outward man perish, through your unjust and cruel
dealings; our souls you cannot touch to defile them, neither can ye break our
peace with our God by all ye can do.

For we know the uttmost of your power and Ability, the last enemy is death,
and through the tender meacies of our God we do enjoy that life and peace, in
which we daily triumph over, death and Hell, and the gates of it; Praises and
thanks to his holy Name for ever and ever, being founded on the unmovable Rock
of our salvation Christ Jesus in whose will, life and strength, we are resolved
in patience for his truth and Namesake, to undergo the greatest punishments,
afflictions, or death, that you from the highest to the lowest, can or shall be
able, or suffered to inflict upon us. So we have fully weighed and considered
the cost to the utmost Mite.

But as for you this I tell you all, from the highest to the lowest, who have
the least hand in our sufferings (either in particular or in general) who (in
scorn) are called Quakers, you are splitting and dashing, breaking and
scattering, confounding and destroying your own selves in these things, and if
no other hand be lifted up against you, by this shall ye fall. And this is Gods
word of truth unto you which shall stand and be fulfilled. So his blessed will
be done, and in it we are well satisfied, knowing and beleiving that the Lord
whom we serve and obey, knows how to deliver them that trust only in him, and
to reserve the ungodly, to the day of judgment to be punished.

From my Prison at Harford the 10th. month 1663. where I remain a close
prisoner because I cannot swear and break the command of Christ Jesus.
Thus says the Lord, I will make Jerusalem a burthensom stone to all people,
and they that burden themselves with her shall be dashed in pieces.
The END.
Printed for W. M.


