

The Wall-Flower. As it grew out of the Stone-Chamber belonging to the
Metropolitan Prison of LONDON CALLED NEWGATE. BEING A HISTORY which is Partly
true, Partly Romantic, Morally Divine. WHEREBY A Marriage between Reality and
Fancy is solemnized by Divinity.

Written by THOMAS BAILEY, D. D. whilst he was a Prisoner there.

Omne tulit punctum etc.
He the best of all does write,
That mingleth profit with delight.
LONDON. Printed by J. G. and are to be Sold by Peter Parker at the Leg and
Star over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1679.

To the Reader.
I Always thought it possible, that a Man might find such a Liberty within a
Prison, as to the Prisoner might seem an Enlargement beyond the extent of Air:
So that the Iron-Grates thereof may be no more terrible (as Bars from
Freedoms) then the Streakes and Lineaments which the Sun draws (by the
Pensills of his Beams) over the face of Water (and their Shadows) seem
Confinements to the Fishes in the Deep: And under what Restraint can that Body
be, whose Soul has an Enlargement within her self? Whilst I was thus
Endeavoring to make the Place no Prison to my self, and laboring to sweeten
my Sufferings with Contemplations upon the Causes of my Afflictions, whereby I
found my self (like Noah's Ark) but raised so many Degrees toward Heaven by
those Waters of Affliction; but Behold! after that I had thus fallen under the
Lash of an Incensed Power, my Innocence received such a Wipe over the face by
an Unknown hand, and by a Pretender to that Side from whence I least expected
any such Stripes, that it amazed Me on the sudden, and doubtless had troubled
me not a little, had there not been more Simplicity than Error in the
Accusation. For,

A Fellow without a Name (having Collected all HIS late MAJESTY'S Works into
one Volume) set an Advertisement to the Reader before the Book, that charged
Me

1. With Wronging the late KING very much. 2. With Presumption (being but an
Obscure Person) to undertake such a Business. 3. With Relating a thing so
Broken and Imperfect. 4. With Composing most of it my self. 5. With Publishing
it diverse years after the Conference. 6. With its Non-Agreement in Matter and
Style with His MAJESTY'S other Works, and making His MAJESTY Contradict
Himself (as Hind. Pap. 5. Compared with my Pamphlet, page 116.)
Now, I shall desire the Courteous Reader to give Me leave to take this
Opportunity to wipe this Cuckow's spittle (fallen upon my other Writings) off
with my Gilliflower.

1. As to the first Article; If to lose a Thousand Pounds per Annum for His
Majesty's sake; If to lose Blood and Liberty in His Quarrel; If to vindicate
His Majesty's Cause and Works, by Writing in their Defense, and suffering such
an Imprisonment for those Vindications, be to wrong His Majesty, then I am
guilty of that Crime: Otherwise, I know not how I should deserve such an
Aspersion: Except the Particulars alleged against Me were as true as I shall
easily render them to any indifferent Reader False and Ridiculous.

2. As to the Second; Although I can lay claim to no Illustriousnesse in my
Family; yet (I think) I have enough that will defend Me from Disparagement, or
my Person from such Obscurity as the Namelesse Gentleman would blind me with,
if I only say, I came into the World upon an Account that speaks Me the Son
of a Peer of this Realm, and that my Mother was a Knights Daughter, and of an
Ancient Family.

The Father of Him who Published the Discourse that troubles the Waspe so much,
was sufficiently known, both in the King's Court and the Imperial City; and
by His Writings generally taken notice of, not only by his Native
Contrymen, but by more Kingdoms than His Sovereign Master had Scepters
over. And this Obscure Person (his Son) had the luck to be Thrice in Print,
and the Press never yet Printed any Disparagement to His Pen, nor waste to His
Paper before ever he Published that Controversy.

Neither does the Publisher thereof think the Author of that Advertisement
either a Courtier, or a Soldier, or a Scholar, or a Gentleman, or a Friend, or
an Enemy to the King: But He imagines the Fellow to be one of His late
Majesty's Upstart Friends, that knew no longer how to be His Enemy. So that the
Obscurity may not so properly belong to him, who has set down his Degree,
Name, and Dignity to his Pamphlet, as it may to his Accuser, who taxes a Person
that had all Three, and has none himself. Which Pamphlet and which Person is
already known to other Nations and Languages besides his own, and in his own
to have so much notice taken of him by the Higher Powers, as to be thought
worthy of Iron-Grates for the Royal Cause; and therefore altogether
undeserving such an Aspersion by any pretended Royallist.

3. He says my Relation was broken and Imperfect; Who doubts it? I have
acknowledged as much my self in my Epistle: It could not be otherwise; I have
related it as it was: I intended it not as a Monument of His late Majesty's
Abilities (whereby it should be thought worthy of taking place with the rest of
His Admired Works) but as an Argument of His Constancy in His Religion and
Sincerity, in resisting a strong Temptation; and I must tell this Nicholas-Nemo
that it is conceived (by better Judgments than his own) That His Majesty's
Answers (so upon the sudden) to those Objections (as broken and as imperfect as
he makes the Relation of them to be) argued more Acuteness of Wit, and
Soundness of Judgment, than any thing that ever he did upon mature
deliberation.

3. His Third Objection, is, That I composed most of it my self --

Truly, I composed it all: So did he the King's Works, but he was not the
Author of any of them: No more was I either of any of His Majesty's Answers, or
the Marquesse's Objections, Besides what I own my self.

4. He says, I published this Conference diverse years after the Conference.
Indeed it must be diverse years after the Conference, because it was not the
same, but could not be many years, because it was but Three, nor many months
after I had Liberty so to do: Which being agreed by both Parties to be kept
Private, I could not Publish, till after both their Deaths, as appears in my
Preamble to the Conference.

5. The next thing wherewith the Fellow taxes me, is, That my Relation was
broken and Imperfect. I have acknowledged it, I have confessed in my Epistle,
that it had received some Tainture by running through my Quill. I intended no
Monument Royal; Only, a Vindication from those Aspersions that were laid upon
His late Majesty, viz: That He was a Papist in His Heart, and could no way
better Vindicate His Majesty from that Aspersion, then by Publishing His
Resistance to so strong Temptations.

6. Next, He says, It Agrees not with his Style, and that I bring in the KING
contradicting Himself, as may appear (He says) by His Papers against
Hinderson, and the quoted place of my Pamphlet: and how is that? viz: In His
Majesty's Paper against Hinderson, the late King pleads the Church to be the
Judge of the Scriptures; and there I bring the King holding the Scriptures to
be their own Interpreters. But was there ever such a Sir Jarvis Simple known
as this Fellow makes himself? Either he never Read the Controversy (and so
takes it up upon trust) or else he remembers, or knows not what he reads: for
otherwise he might have taken notice that I owned that Paper (which he makes to
Contradict the King's to Hinderson) as my own, and not the King's; otherwise
then as He approved of what I writ: for, he might have remembered, that I writ
how that the King commanded Me to view the Marquesse's Paper before I brought
it to Him, and to give Him my Opinion of it, which I did in writing; which Paper
His Majesty approved of, as a sufficient Answer, and so sent it to the
Marquess: and that I said in my Epistle to the Reader, That I writ only what
the KING spoke, and that I Transcribed or Published none of His Writings. And
if I had asserted that Paper to have been an Emanation from His Pen, it had not
been a Contradiction to what He wrote to Hinderson. For, Hinderson urging upon
His Majesty the Private Interpretation as the Proper Judge of the Scriptures,
His Majesty might very well hold out unto him the Authority and Exposition of
the Church as a more Competent Judge then that which the Scripture it self
speaks against; Which was an Argument good enough against him: And when the
Marquess pressed His Majesty with the Churches being Judge of Scripture, His
Majesty might have recourse unto the Scripture, and yet there might be no
Contradiction at all: But as a Fellow in a Fools Goat may have the Privilege
to stand in the King's presence amongst Wise and worthy Men; so, this
Advertisment may not be amiss, before the King's Works.

If this be the Reward of Loyalty (like a Blind-Beare) to be whipped on both
sides, and lashed by every hand: Or like a Mastiffe to be rid by such a Jack
an. Ape and boxt on both Ears, I will have nothing to do henceforward with
State-Affaires; LOVE shall be my Theme, which is the Spirit of God and Soul
of the World, which (like Archimedes his Needle) draws all things to it self:
Love-Passions are the Hinges whereon depend the Two Leafes of that one Door of
Entrance into Eternal Life, the Law and the Prophets: the Two Heavenly Poles
of the Doctrine of Salvation are the Love of God and that of our Neighbor.
Love is that wherewith the Son of God being lifted up upon the Cross,
promised, that He would draw all Men unto Him: All other Graces put together
do but scant the Cup; but Love is the fulfilling of the Law. It is the Tree
whose Fruit is never withered, or blasted; And the Root from whence the Flowers
of all good Works and good Desires do spring. Love composes Books of
Holy-Scripture, and draws Lineaments of Beauty over the several Pages. Now
come forth thou black and sullen Spirit that carpest at my Writings, and see of
what Fraternity thou art of, whilst thou come so near that only Property of
the Devil and Damned Spirits, [Not to Love] 'I, but Momus will ask me, What
kind of Love is this, of which you treat? I answer him, That there is but one
Love in the world, but there are Diversities of Objects, [the Love of God, the
Love of Women, the Love of Money.] The Love of any thing is but one and the
same thing, though it be different in the Subject whereon it works: Amor,
Dilectio, Charitas, Zelus, are but so many Branches of that Immaculate Tree of
Life guarded by Angels, and a Sword whose Temper was of Holy flames of
Preservation, whilst the Tree of Knowledge parted with her Fruit to sinful
hands, and whose Arms received the Embracements, and entertained the Windings
and turnings of the subtle Beast: whose Branches as it bare Knowledge of Good
and Evil, so, an Excressency (contrary to its own Nature) grew out of its
own Body, which was Death.

Do we not see God and his Creatures oftentimes Corrivalls for the same young
Man's Heart? We see Heaven and Earth Competitors for the same Room and Lodging
in the heart of Man: and the Holy Ghost advising Man how he may gain
Possession of the heavenly Mansion by laying up Treasure there, that there may
his Heart be also.

What should I say more? The World, the Flesh, and the Devil are but so many
Defendents to the joint Plaintiffs of the Blessed Trinity, both contending to
whom the Heart of Man shall properly belong, and when the Scales are even, Love
is the weight of the Hearts Balance, causing it to Propend that way
wheresoever it lies. The Compass has many Points whereto its Needle may
becken and make its offer, but there is but one that is Elegible, whereby it
may find rest, and leave its Trepidation, and that is the North: So there are
many Circumferences, whereby the Affections of Men's hearts are carried further
off from one another, by how much the more they forsake their Fountaine-head;
yet there is but one Center, the place of rest and unity, where all these may
fully meet, and that is God; which God is Love; and Love thus rightly placed,
is the main prop and principal Stay and Support of Christian Religion, and
Center of Perfection.

Wherefore (my Friendly Reader) be not froward, nor so ill Composed in your
Gravity, as to condemn the Innocence of my Narrations, as Culpable of your
imaginary Crimes; The Canticles must not be blotted out of the Scriptures, to
please every Peevish and Crosse-grain'd Disposition. Will you refuse all that
Divinity of Our Savior, which he folded up in Parables? Will you despise the
Heavenly Manna, because it was gathered into Egyptian Basquets? Think not this
a Vain Story, because my Flower looks upon you with an Amorous Complexion:
for, those Illicite Passions which agilate the Minds of Infamous Lovers, my
History cries down: It is that virtuous and honest Love, which like so many
Sparks of the Divine, have framed themselves into a fiery Chariot, able to
extol an Elias up to Heaven. The Holy Writ compares God the Father to a
Husbandman: His Son [Christ Jesus] to the Heir of his Farm: the Holy Ghost
to a Sower of good Seed: The Word of God, to the Seed it self, [Corne:] The
Church to a Field: The Devils, to Crows: Hard-Hearts, to Stony-Ground. Nay,
Christ compares himself to a Thief in the Night. What if I should compare the
Almighty to Medina Coeli; The Second Person of the Deity to Periissa, Bertaldo;
To his Humanity, Aminda; To the Third Person of the Blessed Trinity, Holy
Ghost, Comforter, or Angel-Guardian, Maximanus; To the Devil, Lorenzo and
Amarissa; To Soul and Body, Berontus and Amarissa; To a Convictor between
preferment and humility, Hortensius and Pippea, to patterns of true patience
and piety; Thoron, to carnal delights, vanquished by the documents of
chastity; Maximanus his Secretary, to the Devils Servants; and Bonella, to such
as fall away from virtue? Do you not think but these Comparisons are as well
warrantable, as useful for a Christian Exercise? If you find the Pearl, let it
not be valued by the invalidity of the Shell, nor his Oriental Luster
prejudiced by the despicablenesse of its outside: Value not these Jewels by
their Cabinet; A fine Cabinet may have Counterfeits, whilst Natures Treasures
lie enclosed in that which is good for nothing but to be cast away. Think you
not but that the Rich and inestimable Jewels of Divine Love may be Comprised
within these pure and undefiled Living Chests, as well as in a Coach-mans Box?
Or Truth may not become my Parables, as well as a Cobblers Mouth? -- Leave
Carping Zoilus! If I prevail upon a Child to take some necessary Medicament in
the Pappe of an Apple, have I not done well, when Persuasions of Wisdom will
nothing work upon him? Is Virtue of less worth, for being Muffled up in an
Uncouth habit? Or Beauty blemished by the Modest Covert of a Veil? Surely not!
Nor more my Flower, of less worth, or Beauty, because 'twas set, and sprung
up, within the Barren-Confines of a Prison, and Lives shaded from Vulgar-Eyes,
by the silken Curtain of Conceit: For although it wanted the Vivifying Rays
of the Sun, either to hasten or strengthen its growth; yet abounded it with
that Excellent Temper of Heat and Moisture, which (usually) Heaven bestows on
her Favorites, to sweeten the bitter Pills of their Affliction. Take it as it
is, and though it want of its hop'd-for-Perfection, impute it to the General
distemperature of these Critical times, not the wilful Neglect, or Natural
Indisposition of him, who continues

Yours, in all Christian and Civil Observances, THO: BAILEY.

HERBA PARIETIS: OR, THE VVALL-FLOVVER. As it grew out of the STONE-CHAMBER
belonging to the Metropolitan Prison of LONDON called NEWGATE.
CHAP. I.
Rome besieged and taken by the Goths. Bertaldo and Honoria, Nephew and Niece
unto the Emperor Honorius, fly severally into Africa, where Lorenzo, won by
her Princely Comportment, treats her honorably, and afterward marries her.
Bertaldo finds out his sister Honoria. His gallant behavior at the Prince his
Court.

AT the time when Romes foundation was 1164. years standing, and after she had
been governed by an Emperor 25. years, under the name of Honorius; It
happened, that Alaricke, King of the Goths, infested Romes Territories with a
better Army then good Cause, having no pretense for what he did, but the daily
promptings of a bad Genius: For when Isidorus the Hermit (a man of great
authority amongst the Religious, and of highest estimation with the Vulgar,
exemplary both in life and conversation) met with this Enthusiastic Tyrant,
and dissuaded him from drinking the blood of Innocents, whilst there was not
the least thirst, occasioned by excitation of any heat that was between them;
he was answered by the same Alaricke, that there was a man that came daily to
him, and would not let him rest, but uncessantly persuaded him to march to
Rome, destroy her Inhabitants, and raze her walls, whom he could not in any way
resist: Which so astonished the poor Hermit, that he departed from him, with
these (only) words in his mouth, Vereor, heu vereor.

Two years the Capitol ecchoed to the Gottish Drums, before it answered to
the word Yield: Which when Necessity had once taught it how to speak so strange
a language, amongst the miserable, Honoria, Romes glory, and her Sexes wonder,
(having lost her aged Grandfather under the walls of Rome, and two younger
brothers, Nephews to the Emperor, who having not strength enough to fight
against the Enemy, wanted not Piety in attempting to bring their father off,
but were both mowed down by the same Sith, which knew no difference between
the tallest Bent, and the most tender Flowers) follows Bertaldo her elder
brother, who was fled before through a sea (which though stormy, yet) less
raging then the Tyrants fury: thus forsaking the Calabrian for the Carthaginian
shore; where like the Sun (appearing to a heathen people) she found many
Adorers, amongst the rest, Lorenzo, Prince of Carthage, and all the Territories
round about, who requited the captivity of her beauty with captivating her
Person: which he performing with a passion more impulsive then that of Love,
attended with Civility, she thus spoke unto him:

SIR,

I am nothing, more or less, then a leaf which is fallen from the tree that
made Laurels for the Roman Emperors; and tossed by a wind that has blown me
upon your coast: I perceive you are a man of some authority in these parts;
exercise that power, which may make you worthy of renown: (and not in sullying
a virtue, which belongs to Princes, which is, to defend and relieve the
distressed, and chiefly, Ladies in distress; the true point of Masculine
Nobility.) Sir, you should take me by the Minds Intellect, and not thus hold a
Lady by the wrist, overcome a Roman Dame by the Souls Dialect. I have a Mind
as much above your reach, as is your state above my misery. You may force flesh
and blood, but no more enjoy me, then if you should commit a Rape upon
Repentance; and what pleasure can you take in the fruition, when you shall find
me as cold to your desires, as is a Corpse that is new dug up out of its
grave. Sir, I dare tell you thus much, Though my locks are gray'd with hoary
frosts, and my garments blaucht throughout with these favors of the Ship; and
though these eyes, within mine head, vie Controversies with the shoes upon my
feet, which should be filled with the saltest waters; that there is a greater
Partition between you, and Honor, then all the water that the Earth's Globe
has received into its bosom, has made a separation betwixt me, and Rome: if
you intend, that, which I fear, as little, as you shall find Contentment in
the prosecution.

Lorenzo having before let go his hold, now begins to let fall his courage;
and (as if he had been Planet-strucken by some She-constellated Deity) to ask
her pardon, and to assure her, that she was not so low in her condition, as he
was high in his Resolves, to perform all acts of grace and favor in her
behalf, that should seem most agreeable to her own liking, calling to
witness all that was sacred, that he rendered himself at her disposal, as
true a Convert, as the greatest friend on earth, had cause to boast a merit.
Honoria joy'd with the good success of her own (so well bestowed) language,
bids him be constant in his resolution, and be happy. Whereupon he discovers
himself a Prince of all the Territories round about, and causing his most
sumptuous Chariot to be sent for, he seats her in it, and kneeling at the
lowest step, he begs the favor of his admittance: she bends both her body, and
discourse, to lay hold upon all the Civilities that might help him up;
applauding the exuberance of so great humanity, showed to a person, who sat
there, as a mere object of his clemency. The commanded haste, which the
Charioteere soon made, to the Royal Palace (together with the many Questions
and Answers which the King and Queen of Love made to one another) shortened the
way, that brought them to so glorious a structure, as if one of Jupiters birds
had built his nest in the Sun; which dazzled the eyes of its beholders.

The Palace was seated on the side of a hill, whereby though there were many
buildings, yet not any one obscured the rest, but all like so many yearly
children of a right Architectist, stood in so many several degrees one above
another. Before the house there glided a soft stream, smiling upon the flowery
Banks, whose depth rather received Bargemen then Navigators. All along which
River there was a fruitful Valley, that yielded a most pleasant prospect,
which a man might easily behold without losing his own eyes. Above the Palace,
a Hill, almost compassed the Seat, in form of a Moon Cressant, opening to
receive the benefit of the pleasing Zephirs, and a Grove between, answerable
to the shape and manner of the Hill. Adjoining whereunto, in proportion, was a
goodly Orchard, and next unto the House, a fair Garden, whose Platt was
contrived upon such a hanging Level, whose proclivitie was so insensible, that
you might walk upwards upon plain ground, and down again, without descent.
Upon the midst whereof, was a liberal Fountain, which was no less servient
to the Grotts for Waterworks, then to the House for use. No tunnells of any
Chimney were to be seen above the house, but the Chimneys of every Square were
so contrived all back to back, that they sent up their conveyance so close
drawn up together, that over so many several places of the Palace, there was
nothing more to be seen then so many tripartited walls, with Benches for to sit
upon, either opening to the Sun, or affording shade, from what part of the
Firmament soever the Sun should cast his Beams, as favors, or persecutions.
Upon the side of every wall, there attended the Suns motion, Dials, that took
constant notes of all the progress. At the corner of each wall, were Pendents,
and in the midst, higher then all the rest, a larger Pendent, having the
Princes Arms cut through, whose thorough light made the Chardge Sables, and
the Field, Azure, or Skie-colour; serving as well for ornament as use. Neither
was the Contrivement less beneficial, respecting the three walls sheltridge
from the four winds. The coming up to the Palace, was over a fair River, and
along a two-arched stately Bridge, between which and the Palace, was a stately
Launt, five hundred and fifty paces, with a double row of trees on both sides;
in each double row a Footwalk, wherein three might go abreast; and in the
middle a fair gravel rise for the Chariot and the Horse; which led through a
fair Park, no less enameled with store of Dear, then shadowed with the
goodliest trees; which brought you to a Building, whose contrivements were all
sons and daughters of Uniformity and Beauty.

The Prince (having showed her all that is described, and having brought her
with all his Attendant Lords and Ladies to the top of the Palace) tells her
(before them all) that all that she had seen within those walls, and all that
her eyes beheld without, should be hers, upon no other condition, but that she
should be his.

Honoria (perceiving that she was now put to act the two parts both of Modesty
and Discretion) answered him in these words:

WORTHY SIR,

In my weak opinion, you do not deal so kindly with me, as if you would have
me live: You cannot be ignorant of the danger that is in taking a poor
hunger-starved wretch, and tempting her own appetite to be her ruin, in
setting before her so many dishes, and plentiful varieties. I have been fed
with sorrow a long time, and have had no moisture wherewith I might quench my
thirsting after comfort, but my own tears; and now you cram me with delights:
what can be expected, but that I should soon surfeit with the joys wherewith
you fill a heart that is too narrow to contain the moitie of your bounty and
goodness? I see here in your presence, choice of fair and honorable Ladies,
daughters to Felicity, and right heirs to Happiness: Tell me but which you
like, and my needle shall work her such a wedding garment, as it may be
Carthage never saw the like; and this is all the favor I shall beg, or think
my self worthy of. --

She (seeing him stand amazed) urged him farther with these words (so modestly
spoken) I pray Sir, let it be so, it may be I may be thought worthy for to wait
upon her.

No, (said the Prince) they shall all attend on thee, and think themselves no
more or less happy then according to the degrees of favor that thou shall
rank them in, and their merits, at thy hands, shall purchase estimation. For
(by all that is sacred) before the morrowes Sun shall reach to its Meridian,
thou shall be mine. Do not you stand so much upon refusal, lest you make us
think, that you Romans have an art beyond us, to make your selves more
acceptable by crowning your Perfections with Humility. Come, let us go, and
what thou have not seen, that shall be thine; I Will show thee farther. --
Whereupon leading her by the arm, he delighted himself (in supposing how much
he delighted her) in showing her all his Rarities and Treasures.

All his attendants (especially they of the Female Sex) were not (as yet) more
affected with envy of her happiness, then they were pleased with the humble
manner of her behavior, until their second thoughts had placed their envies
right against her: construing that Modesty, as a piece of cunning, to attract
Honor (the more) by flying it; and to draw his love more and more toward her,
by seeming to refuse it. This night, the honorable women, by commandment from
the Prince, attended Honoria; who the next day, as their Princess, was to
command their attendance. Which day being come, the time of that day allotted
for the solemnization of so great a Marriage was at hand: when they were both
made one, with the greatest pomp and ceremony that could be devised, which I
leave to your own imaginations to supply the place of a description. But one
thing I must not omit, because it was so ominous to that, which after happened:
For at the same time whilst the Priest was joining the Hands of those whose
Hearts were one already, Blood gusht from his nostrils, and at once stained the
two maine preservers both of Knowledge and Devotion, the sacred Directory, and
the Priests lips; and made the very word which ensured the Prince his love unto
Honoria, Rubric in the Lyturgie. Which though the standers by interpreted it
as a bad Omen, yet the parties themselves, guarded with Innocence, and Thoughts
as noble as their Resolutions toward each other, disdained to understand it a
presage of evil.

No less prodigious was that of the Dishes being served up to the Bridal
Board with a noise of the Cloud-cleaving thunder of the Almighty, and with
Lightnings from the several windows crossing the meat: Which was not
construed, as a benediction, by those who did observe it; and they who were
least superstitious, were (notwithstanding) somewhat out of countenance to
behold such sad Pottents: which the Princely Bride perceiving, thus spoke unto
her better part:

MY LORD,

Why should you and I be troubled at these accidents, seeing it lies within our
power to make them nothing? If you should once speak harsh to me, that thunder
would be terrible in mine ears; neither can I fear the blasting of any
Lightning, but what may (unhappily) have its procedure from your eyes; and when
I deserve either, may I meet with both. The Priests blood dropped not upon our
hands, but upon his book; whilst these are pure and innocent, we need not
fear. Though the blood fell upon the Letter, it did not fall upon the meaning
that was between us. Be you but constant to these vows which you have made,
and it shall not lie within the power of Fate to work our prejudice.

My dear Honoria, (replied the Prince) I am glad that these things have
happened thus, since they have given thee occasion to make Superstition such a
fool. Look, my Dear, it cleares up already, thy breath has raised the Siege
that had so close begirt the enclosed fires, that sallied forth in thunder; and
thy smiles have already dispelled the Clouds that sat on every countenance.
Come, let us sit down, and better our Commons with exceedings both of mirth
and jollity. --

It happened (whilst these affairs were in agitation) that Bertaldo Brother to
Honoria, and Nephew to the Emperor Honorius, sometimes Governor of Cilicia,
(a man of admirable Prowess, and much Gallantry) one who had expressed it
sufficiently against the Goths, (having slain with his own hands Amboyolus,
Brother to Alarick, King of the Goths) escaped the Gottish Inquisition, and
concealed himself for some time heretofore in that Country) came to hear of
the good fortune which his sister met withal by flying from so sad a fate,
(where finding her fixed amongst the highest Constellations of that Firmament,
and hearing that there were Justs and Tournaments to be performed in the
afternoon in honor of the day) he engaged a rich Jewel, which he had brought
over with him, and slipped himself into the most complete Armor that the time
would give him leave, and mounted himself upon the bravest horse that money
could buy. When the Prince and Princess were seated, with all the Lords and
Ladies of the Court, he entered the Lists amongst the other Tilters (disguised
as the rest were) who therefore could not wonder at any other strangeness, but
that their number should exceed by one, they knew not who, and come amongst
them, they knew not how: wherefore he was soon accosted by the Herald, who
demanded of him what he was, and upon what Account he entered the Lists: to whom
Bertaldo gave this Answer:

Sir, I am a Stranger, that seek renown in Foreign parts, and oppotunity
offers me a purchase at your hands: I require my Match if if he be to be found
amongst the Carthaginians. Amongst the Carthaginians? (said the Herald) that
you shall soon find. And so left him, declaring to the rest, the contents, of
what had passed between him and the strange Knight: the news of so bold a
Challenge was soon brought into the ears of the highest Spectators, who
fraught with wonder, summoned all their intellectualls; out of which they chose
a Committee of Divining thoughts to make enquiries who it should be, but could
not draw up a report: the Combatants disdaining, that such a bold expostulation
should proceed from a stranger, to the disparagement of the Carthaginian
Chivalry, if not chastised for his presumption: they all strove who should
undertake him first: and not agreeing otherwise, they all resolved to cast Lots
to whose turn the Enterprise should fall; but the Prince fearing that the Lot
might fall to the most unskilful, and weakest, to undertake so high a piece of
Confidence; and so the glory of the Carthaginians might happen to be eclipsed,
commanded Cosdruball, Captain of his Guard, a man of highest eminence and
esteem in all that Country, and one that never had been foiled in point of
Chivalry, to undertake the Challenger, which was obeyed, and thus performed.

Cosdruball mounted upon a Milk-white Steed, having a silver Mane, that reached
(curling) down to his knees, with his Lance in his hand, and Sword by his
side, in gilded Armor, enters the Lists, (his horse out-noising all the
Trumpets with his neighings) and prepares himself for the Encounter, against
whom was brought Bertaldo upon a bright Bay, with black Spots over all his
body, and a white Star in his Forehead, having a goodly Mane mingled with
black and brown Hairs: Drake-neckt, mouse-ear'd, full-ey'd, and open nostrils,
pawing with one Foot upon the ground, and pricking up his Ears, as if he
delighted rather to hear, then mar the music of the Trumpets: Blowing, as if
he stomackt the delay, and waving his body up and down, as if idleness were a
greater burden to him then action: All which signs of goodness in his Horse
put Bertaldo in good hopes, that he should make his words good, which he
promised to his late Master in his behalf: who hearing his late Master speak by
way of commendation of his Horse, (he was then selling to Bertaldo) viz. That
he was a Lamb in the Stable, and a Peacock upon the Road; answered, that he
would teach him how to be a Lion in the Field.

Thus all in Armor silvered ore, with a mourning Ribbond a cross his Armor;
and a black plume of Feathers in his Helmet, with a Lance in his hand, and
Sword by his side: He sat his Horse in such a comely posture, that his
Princely Sister could not but think of him, who was the Man she thought of, her
own Brother: the signal was thrown down on the rush, like lightning upon one
another; and he that was never worsted in all his life, was now unhors'd upon
the first Encounter: Which Cosdruball, not knowing how to brook, requested that
he might run again, and try his fortune once more; which being against the
Laws of Chivalry for him that was Unhors'd to try a second Combat, was
denied it by the Herald: and his fellow Tilters (hoping to re-gaine immortal
Honor, by repairing that misfortune with a better) stickled so much against
him, that he (scorning nothing more then that the glory of vindicating the
Carthaginian honor should fall to another share) therewith was so outed of
all moderation and reason, both at once, (by a strong passion that too often
had been his enemy) that he struck at one of them, and the other four
vindicated the first: so that they all five fell upon him. Which Bertaldo
perceiving, takes part with his Antagonist; by whose assistance, Cosdruball
held long play with all the five, and two of them were dismounted, and sore
wounded in the face, and between the joints of their armor, and both of them,
by the brave Bertaldo; whose sword at the last breaking, he took one of their
horses by one of the cheeks of the bit, whose horse being tender mouthed,
reared so up an end, that it gave occasion for a lesser strength, then what
Bertaldo had, to throw horse and man backward over and over: Whereupon the
Prince threw down his Warder, commanding his Guard to part them, which was done
accordingly. But Cosdruball by this time having turned his Envy against
Bertaldo into Admiration, and his Choler into Complement, thus spoke unto him:

SIR,

You have expressed a great deal of Gallantry, both against me, and on my
behalf. Let me be so happy as to know your name, lest you make me believe some
Deity has fought this day in Armor.

Bertaldo about to reply, using the same reverence which Honoria had observed
him for to show on Horseback unto the Roman Emperor, whilst he thankt him
(upon his return) from some good service, cried out, It is my Brother, my
dear Brother, dear Bertaldo, I know it is he.

Whereat the Prince astonished, sends for them all to come before him; who
having uncased, were presented to the Royal Pair as the true instruments of
valor; But no Music affected the Royal Princess ear so much, as when she
heard her Brother speak, whom she presented to the Prince, her Husband, who
acknowledged himself much honored with his relation to a man of so great
Gallantry; offering him to be no less then what he would be, that lay within
the power of his Dominions to make him so; wherefore he bad him freely to speak
his mind, or to take some further time for his demands.

Bertaldo soon replied, Great Prince, there needs no long time to be given me
to request that at your hands, which of all other things I most desire.

Speak it then, (said Lorenzo) and upon the word of a Prince it shall be
granted presently.

Then Sir, (said Bertaldo) I desire nothing more then that you would love my
Sister.

At which words, the Prince rushes into his arms, and embracing him, told him,
That he had requested nothing, for greater love then that he bare already
toward his Sister, he could not show: But this he had gained by so great an
expression of his love to her, that he could love him no less with all his
soul, then her with all his heart. And seeing his modesty would not make
known unto him any farther desires, he was contented (for his merits sake) to
be the hardest Student, until he had found out ways to make him happy. With
such love-expressions between these two Worthies, as also between Bertaldo and
Cosdruball, the Prince and Princess, Honoria, and her brother, with variety of
delights and pastimes, Music and Dancings, the rest of the Day, and the
borrowed part of the Night, that the maine happiness could afford to lend
their expectations, seemed too small a contribution to satisfy the desires of
those who now began to wax sad with thinking how their happiness must end,
with a beginning of that felicity whereof they were no sharers, but so far
forth as they could make it theirs by fancy: The time being come, that the
Queen of Beauty must be taken by the Ministers to the throne of Love, out of
the hand of her beloved, where she might be placed by his side; she taking her
leave with a reverend, yet Prinely behavior, and went before that she might be
come to, rather then come at man: where she was no sooner laid in her bed, but
all the Honorable women fell in love with her, (except Amarissa, a fair Lady,
whose quality we shall defer to mention till the last: It shall suffice for the
present, that she was one who formerly conceived hopes of having some assurance
of the Prince's love, who sat at the beds feet, behind the Curtain, with her
face from the bed, weeping) and with no lesser sensibilities of delight, then
as if their own imaginations had metamorphosed them all to men, standing on
both sides the bed, holding Tapers in their hands, and gazing upon that lovely
object, whose so many faces cast one so out of countenance, that she made
signs with her hand that they should be gone; and then recollecting her self,
as fearing that they might judge the dismission a making haste for her Husbands
approach, her blushes forced a passage so powerfully into her countenance, that
she was feign to attempt a suppression with both her hands: And lest any of the
red should slip an appearance through her white fingers, she throws the sheet
over her head, so that their eyes forsook their object, as objects vanish from
the eyesight, when the light is gone.

Word being brought, that the Prince thought their Ceremonies too tedious, they
sighed forth their ecstasies with such a strong gale of wind, whose breath
swelled each contrary Curtain, as if by those full sails they had been
transported to themselves again; and so left her: Only Amarissa stayed
behind, unmissed, and unregarded, until such time, that the Prince with all his
Nobles entered the Chamber, who entertained him with this sad Prologue to the
Play:

SIR,

Had you no other way to step into your Nuptial bed, but by treading upon a
heart, that so much loved and honored you? to abuse a belief, that once
thought you could not err? What delight is this you take, to raise with one
hand, and destroy with the other? to fill one creature so full of joy with an
unexpected fruition, and strangle another in the-midst of all her hopes? Sir,
you did not well: There is that within you, and there be those without you,
that will not stick to tell you so: and with that she flung out of the Chamber,
in the greatest disdain, both to her Sovereign, and her bad fortune, that
could be imagined.

Bertaldo, who loved a spirit, (howsoever qualified) was mightily taken with
her, (whose comportment it seems well suited with his humor) wherefore he thus
spoke unto the Prince:

SIR,

You were once pleased to bid me ask and have; now I only ask, that I may
have this Lady, or at least your approbation and assistance.

To whom the Prince returned this quick Reply:

My dear Bertaldo, I will not only grant thee this, but assure thee, were I a
woman my self, thou should have me.

Whereat the Princely Bride raising her self up a little in her bed, said,

My Lord, I pray tell me truly, have you promised the Lady marriage, that
seemed to be so much perplexed through some unconstancie on your behalf?

To whom the Prince made answer,

Upon my word I never promised her any such thing, and I know she is more noble
then to say I did.

Oh Sir, (said the Princess) I beg that I might hear her but acknowledge what
you say, before you come between these sheets, or else I shall never enjoy you
nor my self: For I protest before all that is good, that I had rather embrace a
heartlesse, then a faithless man: And as soon shall Steel strike fire
without a Flint, as either of us can enjoy Felicity, where both have not kept
touch with mutual Loyalty.

The Prince protested again by Heaven, he never did promise that he would
marry her.

Then said the Princess, Did not you tell her that you loved her? tell me
truly; and so made her believe too much? Did you never give her any Rings or
Favors?

The Prince confessed that he had done all that.

Whereat the Princess as over-sensible of the sad condition that the poor
Lady was in, gently wiping the tears that were even ready to overflow their
banks, told him that he had done too much, to do no more; and that she
feared, that was not all.

Whereat the Prince, deeply wounded with her sorrow, told the Princess, that
he would have her sent for, and would engage her honor in testification of
that truth which he had said; and for the wrong which she conceived that he had
done the Lady, in telling her, in a general way, he loved her: or in bestowing
some particular favors upon her, he would make her this amends:

Here is Bertaldo, (said the Prince) as much in love with her, as ever she was
with me; a man every way deserving her affection, with stronger pleas of merit,
then I my self can boast of; (only he is not a Prince.) And rather then thou
should build a discontent on such foundations, he shall be Prince of
Carthage, and I will be Bertaldo: And (said the Princess) I will be Amarissa,
and she shall be Honoria. Let her be sent for. --

Whereupon the Prince commanded two of his Noblemen to go and tell Amarissa
that her company was much desired, who all this while had hid her self in a
place where she both saw and heard all that had been said, or done: And being
overcome with the Princess goodness, thinking her self by this time
sufficiently revenged, in finding Honoria (already) a partaker with her, in her
affliction, and so sensible of her own and hers, she answered that sensibility
with a deep sense of both their willingness to give her so full a
satisfaction, for so small a fault, as was neither a real wrong, nor a
complete injury: but especially by reason of those sparkles of fire which
Bertaldo's words had kindled in her breast, which began (already) to smother
under that vast load of fuel which former love had prepared for so high an
inflammation. In she comes of herself, before she was either looked for by them,
or found by their Ambassadors, upon whose approach, the Prince thus spoke unto
her:

Madam, As you have relation unto Honor, be a friend to Justice; and let no
passion prejudice the truth, that only must confess I often said I loved you,
and that I gave you pledges of my love, I have acknowledged it; but that those
pledges might not have been given as well unto a thing called Man, as unto you
as Woman, (seeing I never promised you Marriage, or gave them you in any such
consideration) I see no reason.

To which Amarissa thus replied,

SIR,

It seems I did not understand your dialect, nor the language of your gifts: I
must confess, I thought, that (being a woman) professing love to such a one,
(and I never questioned any other but what was honorable) had no other
signification, but what it seems you never meant: and your gifts, no
otherwise, then so many pledges of that love: But I am contented to be
mistaken; my griefs are now epitomized to this small Volume. I am sorry I am
not a Man, (as you took me to be) for then would I love Honoria better then
your self, and so be even with you. Wherefore be ever happy, Honoria, in his
love, and if my contentment may contribute any thing to that accomplishment,
you have it freely: Embrace him, as the Ivy does the tree, murmur together
like two Turtle-doves, and kiss as close as Cockles meet, I envy not your
happiness.

Bertaldo fired with this brave carriage, tells Amarissa that she is the
greatest Conqueror in the world, thus to rout her passions, and overcome her
self, (not knowing the means whereby she got the victory) and that if she
could love a man under the degree of a Prince, she might find happiness to
crown her desires, besides that which Princes wear upon their heads.

Amarissa made quick reply, saying,

A Woman was not taken out of the scull of Man, whereby she should so much
affect that ornament; but out of his side, that she might sit near his heart:
Where if she were once duly seated, she ought to think her self sufficiently
crowned with hearts content.

Come, Amarissa, (said the Prince) behold the Prince of Chivalrie, and the
son of Mars: sole Executor to all the goods in the Temple, of honor and of
virtue, heir to Fortune, and one to whom Fame has assigned over her right; a
man to whom the world owes more then it is able to pay: Love him, and be as
happy as thou will.

Which words the Princess seconded with these:

Love him, and you shall not lose your first love; For Lorenzo being my self,
and I yours, Bertaldo and Amarissa shall so agree in a third person, that four
shall be happy all at once. Love me, said Bertaldo, and I will teach Love it
self new delights that it never dreamt of, and make it ashamed of its old
ways, as if they were out of fashion.

As to you, Sir, (said Amarissa, applying her self to the Prince) you have
described a gallant man: And I shall no otherwise answer your Encomium of him,
then with Belief: And your words (to the Princess) with no less respect,
then in laying them to a heart that truly honors you: And in requital of your
good opinions of me, I will answer the respect with an act of the greatest
contentment to you both, that either of you can imagine; in taking my leave of
you, and keeping you no longer out of Paradise. And as to you, Bertaldo, I
shall commit you to the greatest happiness, when I leave you to your self:
And so Good night, and Happiness to you all.

Bertaldo, as if his soul were making an escape, hastened after her, with so
much respect to her, as showed but little to the Prince and Princess, (who
notwithstanding, were best pleased with the manner of his departure) and
overtakes her, before she had got half way to her Chamber, and waiting upon
her to the door, he kissed her hand, calling it his Altar: her self, his
Shrine: the place, his Chapel: and (making a low obeisance) that his
Adoration, she dismissed him only with this assurance of her favor toward
him, that in her own nature she was inclined to mercy, and hoped she should
not put him to too many prayers: And so they parted.

CHAP. II.
The disturbance that the Prince and Princess had in their rest the first
night. The pitiful Lamentations that Amynda her Genius made to the Prince.
The Invasion of the Moors. The hard shift that Periissa made to enjoy the
desired company of Bertaldo.

THe married couple had no sooner fallen into those sweet slumbers, (in one
another arms) in the Cradle, wherein Hymeneus uses to rock his paires, but a
Heart-penetrating voice gives music to their ears, (whose stops were sobs,
and air was sighs) unbound their senses, which were fastened in a True-loves
knot, and disturbed them in that soft repose, they both listened to the
Lamentation, and at the first, they both concluded, that Amarissa had come back
again, and privily conveyed her self into the room, purposely to cast so
sour a sauce into their dish. At last, they asked Who it was? and bade her
speak, saying, that they thought she had gone away fully satisfied.

I (replied the Voice) am the sad genius of now poor and miserable Amynda,
whose soul hovers in the air between Damascus and Jerusalem, and has no
rest, by reason I was accessarie to an act of high injustice. I was sometime a
servant to the High-borne Princess Cosbia, who was delivered of two sons,
one of them being a fair and goodly Child, the other seemed to be not so well
favored with natural endowments. The best favored was the youngest, the
less the elder, whom she caused to be accounted as her youngest son; and us,
to keep her counsel, which we did accordingly: so that Berontus the right
heir, was all along esteemed to be the younger brother, who (as if his
divining soul could not be contented with a lesser degree of Fortune, then
that which the God of Nature had already given him) seeks better in the worlds
wideness, while he was yet a Stripling, and Jacomius (the younger) was bred up
to all the good qualities that education could afford him, and is unjustly
likely to inherit that vast Estate which his Father left him, beside the
Dukedom that was to descend unto him after the death of his Great Uncle, (if
your mercy toward my distressed condition, and love to Justice, do not help
to set things right) acquainting him with the names, and places of the women,
and their habitations, that were at the Labor of this great Lady; she implores
his assistance for pity sake, promising him faithfully, that if he would do
this good work for her, he should never want her assistance to give him the
best intelligence for his good, or the avoidance of any evil that should
befall him.

As much as Wonder and Amazement would give him leave, he promised faithfully
to effect what she desired; the voice was heard no more, after these her last
words, What you have promised, look you do perform: Which words were no
sooner out of his mouth, but they could hear a melodious Harmony, as the
Music of the Sphaeres in comparison therewith would seem but jarring; and so
(as if it went farther and farther off, till it went so far, as past their
hearing) they were permitted to their former sweetness of repose. When as the
Prince perceiving how Sleep (that dull thief) began to steal upon him,
fearing that he might obliterate those penal notions out of his Memorandum,
starts upright in his bed, Honoria clasping him by the middle, and asking him,
What would my Love? He answers her, Sweee heart, the Blood, the Thunder, and
the Lightning, that the Priests Book, the Ears, and Eyes of all that were
observers of those Prodigies, bid me be circumspect, and omit no opportunities,
that may make Fate her self run back with all her Monsters in her arms.
Whereupon he stepped out of his bed, and only clothing himself with his
Night-gowne, he opened his door, where the Guard, which watched in the Gallery,
were so amazed, that it was a long time before his commands could be obeyed. At
the last, they lighted his Candle at the Lamp. Which done, he retires into his
Chamber, and commits all the particulars to writing, that had been told him by
his late informer. Which having done, he betakes himself to his former place
of rest, but found little there: For, scarce had Whyes, and Whithers, and What
aylst thou's, with stroakings, and expostulations, brought him into the same
predicament he was in before, but the Alarm bell rung as if the wooden wheel
had sounded mettle. The Guard without cries, Arm, Arm, Arm, Cosdruball
bounces at the door, and cries, Sir, pray open your door, I must speak with
you: The Prince starts up, the Princess pulls him down again, crying aloud, Ah!
This was Amarissas doings, gaul was under her lips, whiles she spoke so fair;
and aspes hid themselves under the leaves of her pretenses, and now sting us
ere we be aware. The Prince forcing his own liberty, leaps out of his bed,
takes his Javelin in his hand, and in his shirt, opens the door, and questions
the disturbance. Cosdruball with submisse behavior acquaints him, that
intelligence was brought to the Court that the Moors had swarmed on his
Dominion, and that the Vultrians had revolted to them, and let them in. The
Prince asked him if the Moors were at the gates? His Lieutenant Cosdruball
answered, No. But they were within 60. miles, That Is six days march (said the
Prince) I hope I may have one nights rest, and to morrow I am a servant to my
Countrymen. Cosdruball, here is my Seal, issue forth what Warrants you shall
think most sit to set the Country in a posture of defense, and to morrow I will
be in the head of the most resolute party.

He had no sooner said these words, but in comes Amarissa, with one Petition in
her hand, and another in her mouth: The first was, that Bertaldo might have a
competent Command in this Design: The second, that he might not. The first,
she said, she was bound to perform in point of Honor and Engagement. The
second, she humbly begged, as a fond lover, and preservatrix of so great a
Worthy. Then said the Princess, Let me be in a capacity of being a Petitioner
too, and beg the favor in his behalf, that it may be thus: That if my Lord
goes, he may go; and if he stays behind, that he may do so too. For neither
can there be better use made of his worth, then by preserving you: nor Amarissa
better merited then by such a preservation.

Bertaldo (entering the Chamber) cries out, Excellently well said my dearest
Sister, thy motion is honorable, and thy words are reason.

Then said the Prince, Bertaldo he shall go, and so will I: Cosdruball, you
shall be our Lieutenant, Hanno our Major, and you Bertaldo in this Expedition
shall act my Part, and I Bertaldo's. I have two suites of Armor that are both
the same, and shall make us both one, one appearance shall cast the same color
over both our Horses, our Commands shall strike Unisons in the Soldiers ears,
and our Cognizance shall be alike, lest one soul be not sufficient to enliven
so great a body. With these directions I dismiss you, for the present, till
the day gives further order. For by Heaven, were the Black and Tawny Moors now
scaling the walls of Carthage, and Terror it self making its approach under
my very walls, I would not leave this red and white, till Phoebus himself
should first rise out of his Thetis bed, and blush in my face, to look on my
preferment. Great Mars, wreake no vengeante on thy servants head for this
presumption, for thine own sake, who thy self so often have neglected thine
own affairs, to dally with a creature that was mortal, whiles I take
pleasure in delights (so lawful) with a creature that is so divine. Begone,
begone I say.

They had no sooner departed the Room, but Aminda's Genius having received no
further benefit by him, as yet, but hopes of rest by pramise, sings to him at
his window a forewarning of his approaching miseries.

Lust, Contempt, Reproach, and shame,
Mean to play the after Game.
You shall prove as Chaste as she;
She as Chaste, as Chaste may be.
But oh, where Jealousy and Fear
Brings up the Van, leads up the Rear,
Loves main body quite is routed,
And her senses all are outed.
Where love is seconded by Scorn,
The General leads up the Forlorn.
Shoot a Bird once in the Head,
The Wings will never raise it dead.
Commit not to Wolves keeping, Prince,
An Emblem of such innocence.
I have done you service now,
If to follow it, you know how.
I Have given you the fates intent,
As far as my Commission went.
The same voice which Charmed their ears, lul'd them both asleep, and sleep so
soon after admonition is not good: for rest invites the body to lie down in
her lap, whilst she picks memorialls out of his head. All was thus forgot,
Aurora, the Postillion of the morn jets by the window, at whose heels the near
horses of the Sun follow the gray with brighter color: till at last, Phoebus
himself looks in at the window; and darting his beams through the crimson
Curtain that was drawn before it, made all the bridal whiteness of the bed
look red. Sol, with his sanguine complexion glares through that false medium,
upon some part of the Princes eyes which were not closed, whilst he lay
dreaming that he was then swimming through a stream of Blood, till fresh
Alarums of the Moors bloody practices awakened him, and filled his ears with
the relation. They both started out of their bed at the contrary sides, like
two pieces of a broken Bow falling asunder, when its entirenesse was at its
full bent.

Thus the after-sports (which the Son of Hymeneus would have had) had his
further dalliances superseded, like the full-fed Child, that is patted on the
hand from playing with his meat. Fresh Alarms follow the heels of one another,
and the Highways are scoured along with posting intelligence. The Court, like
the first Chaos, (big with form) labors by Order (Midwife to Confusion) to
produce Method, (the sole life to Action) and at last brought all to good
perfection.

Periissa, (a fair Virgin, but of Parentage supposed to be somewhat
disparaging, and a Country Less, but indeed a Lady of highest extract, as
hereafter we will mention) happening to have a place upon one of the Scaffolds,
(where she beheld the brave comportment of Bertaldo) was so much taken with his
behavior and valor, that she prosecuted her desires of glutting her eyes in
beholding that face that attracted all the faculties of her maiden-soule, to
admiration of that manly figure. From thence she came to wishes, and the next
stage was Love. Her humility was such, (occasioned through ignorance of her
own worth) that she thought it a vain thing that the Daffedowne-Dilly should
be in love with the Laurel, and the Primrose with the Palm. She had wit
enough to keep her hopes at a due distance: and was not such a fool as to be
ignorant, that impossibilities would be too hard for her: Wherefore she limits
her affections to probabilities, and contents her self with competent
felicity: which she thought to be enough in conscience, if she might be, but in
a condition, without control, daily to look upon him, which she thus effected.

Having lately called into her own hands, a small portion, allotted her by her
(supposed) Father, She puts her self into Pages habit, (in which disguise,
whilst she continues, we will mention her hereafter by the name of Philoret;
and she must now be he, till he returns to her again) and tenders (now) his
service to Bertaldo. Bertaldo (being in a condition to entertain more servants
then he had leisure to find out, was much delighted with so fair an offer,
asking his Idolatresse many questions, as How, and Wherefore he desired to
serve him, rather then any other? and who had commended him unto his service?

Philoret answered him, that the commendations of his own worth, had made him
ambitious of serving such a Master.

Bertaldo told him, that he was now going to the Wars, and the harsh usage of a
Camp, would soon spoil so fair a complexion, and alter the color of the
Rose and Cherry upon his Lips and Cheeks, and turn them into pale and wanness.

Philoret replied, Might I but feed upon your leavings, and lie but at your
feet, how ever you fare, no usage would be hard.

Bertaldo stroaking his cheeks with both his hands, told him, Thou pretty boy,
I will make much of thee, and thou shall never want, be true to me.

Philoret (overjoyed) knew not what he did, so that before he was aware, he
was going to make him a Cursie, which having performed half way, remembering
himself, he fell quite down at his feet, and so converted an Error (that
would soon have been observed) into the highest observation. Whereupon Bertaldo
helps him up again, with both his hands; Philoret on his feet, fearing the
treason of his own blushes, looks him (with a counterfeited confidence) full
in the face, that joy might seem to flourish its red in his face, rather then
Mayden-colours. Thus well he acted his part in the first Scene.

CHAP. III.
The Prince of Carthage going to war, commits the protection of Honoria to
Maximanus his only Favorite, who falls in love with her, but finding himself
neglected, converts his love into extreme hatred. Plots her ruin. The
Battle with the Moors.

LOrenzo ready to set forward in his expedition, (attended with all his Heroes)
takes Honoria by the hand, and delivers her to Maximanus custody; saying, that
he trusted him with the greatest Jewel in the world: Commanding, that neither
cost, nor labor, should be spared to purchase her contentment. Maximanus
promised, that she should never have any cause to complain. Honoria, whether
her divining Soul presaged those after evils, or whether some secret antipathy
in nature, between her and her Guardian, or her unwillingnesse that her Lord
should, and she not go, began to sink down in a sound; but being held up, and
recalled to her self again, she spoke these words:

My Lord,

I know what it is to part with a Father and a Brother, but a Husband never
bade me farewell before: and to take his leave of me, to be so coursly used, as
the chance of War might give him entertainment. I know what it is to bid
adieu to such, and never see them more: but it was never wont to be thus with
me, either this love is of an higher nature, and nearer relation, or else there
is more in it then willingly I would imagine. I pray let me go with you, I
have no mind to stay behind.

Alas (replied the Prince) what should thou do amongst a company of rude
Soldiers? Stay here, and I will reach thee a Lawrel-bough with mine own hand,
and thou shall make a wreath, and give it whom thou will; and I will bring thee
home an Olive Branch, and thou shall wear it. I but in the mean time (said
Honoria) I had rather you would take away this claw of lead that gripes my
heart so sore, and squeeses out all the gladness thence. Honoria, (said the
Prince) no misfortune can befall me, whilst I am happy in thy love, which
nothing can deprive me of, but that which may lead me to a better life: And if
thou think my death any misfortune, I Will repair the loss of my Person,
with the donation of my Dominion: For here, before all these Nobles, if I fall,
there stands the Queen of Carthage. Whereupon Honoria made her last Reply: Long
may you live to enjoy that, your self; and I, you. So they both parted. She
was sorry that he was gone, he discontented that she was sorrowful. Bertaldo
taking his leave of his Sister, and the rest of the Ladies, bids her make much
of her self, she, him: That he should have a care of her Husband: And Amarissa
prayed Bertaldo that he would not be too ventrous.

The Court (thus) emptyed (almost) of all the Men, Maximanus struts among a
Company of Women, like a Major domo of a Seraglio, (though he was more Satyr
then Eunuch) yet for some while he kept on his way, laying hold on all
opportunities that might advance him to the Princess favor: which, when he
had once sufficiently obtained, he thought he had made a fair progress
toward his journeys end, disloyal lust. Good natures are seldom wanting in
retalliating good services with acknowledgements, and innocence oftentimes
engratiates her own Subjects with too many freedoms.

Maximanus had often sought occasion to give the Princess some intimation of
his meaning; but all his opportunities proved fruitless to his desires, which
were still nipt in the bud, (before he could give them breath) by the chaste
wind of her words, and Majesty of her Countenance: Which was such, as would
have still kept him in the same state of innocence, if she had not (as
unhappily, as innocently) let fall a word by chance, which (like a spark of
fire by the often clashings of discourse, like the striking together of Flint
and Steel) lighting upon the black tinder of his halfe-burnt Soul, (once
extinguished, and suppressed already by her chaste hand over him) so spread fire
(by his additionall breath) that he thought he might (in a very short time)
both touch his match, and light a candle to his hearts desires. And thus it was:

Honoria was much addicted to good Housewifery, especially in preserving
Fruits, and Distillations; well governing her Household, receiving Accounts,
etc. Maximanus, as he was very diligent to find out ways wherein (he thought)
he might please her, and best suite with his occasions, and administer
discourse proportionable to his design. One time amongst the rest, he presents
unto her, a rare and exquisite Limner; making it his request, That the Prince's
Gallery might be graced with her Picture, which was wanting: Which if it were
truly drawn to the life, would put down all the pictures there. She (as little
regarding the motion, as affected with the vanity) was, notwithstanding (by
much opportunity) drawn to give her consent (with this proviso) that she may
have the liberty to choose her own fancy in it. Maximanus thought, Reason good;
and duty, binding. Whereupon she causes this rare Artist to draw her Picture
holding Cupid between her Legs, his Bow under her Foot, his Quiver upon the
ground, with the Arrows broken, and plucking the feathers out of his Wings,
(which lay scattered about the Room) with this Motto, viz. But a Goose to a
good Huswife. And when it was perfected, she presented it to Maximanus with
these words: Now Maximanus I am at your service. Meaning no otherwise, but that
(upon those terms) she had gratified his desires. He (not reading the Motto)
understood not the conceit. She (not doubting but that he had) explained it no
farther. Maximanus (imagining that by Cupid which she held between her legs)
was Hieroglyphict the love that was between her and her husband, whose bow she
trod under her foot, and whose feathers she threw away, as slighting his
departure) thought verily, that she had done this, to let him see, that now she
had (wholly) cast her self upon his love and affections. Whereupon he said but
little, because the Limner was present, as if he had been somewhat sorry that
she had showed her self so coming before a man, that could not but take some
notice of her too much forwardness. Howsoever he was all on fire, which being
kept in, burnt the hotter: She ignorant of any, adds more fuel by her ensuing
discourse: saying unto him, Come Maximanus, you and I will go and hang it up
in my own Chamber, bidding him reward the Picture-drawer, and dismiss him,
which he did accordingly: He carrying the Picture in his hand into her Chamber,
and finding no body there, instead of setting it up, he sets it down. And thus
the Goat courted the Lamb, and the Nightraven the Dove.

Madam,

That my love was unexpressable, it might appear by my not speaking: but it
seems my actions spoke in a language that your quick apprehension understood:
But I could wish you had said nothing, and then you had performed the greatest
masterpiece of wit that ere was wrought by ingenuity, and had made a third
hand, Limne the Idea of your mind, who never knew your meaning: whereas now I
am afraid --

And as he was going on with his speech, she gave him such a look, that stopped
his speech, with swallowing down his Spittle. Asking him, What he meant by
that strange language, and insolent kind of behavior? Maximanus recollecting
his spirits, asked Honoria what she meant by that strange Picture, and familiar
way of telling him that she was now at his service? Adding, moreover, the
dismisment of the Artist, and inviting him to her Chamber, able to give a
duller apprehension, then his own, the like encouragement: Withal, acquainting
her with his conception of the Mystery. She him, with the true meaning and
purport of her Fancy: letting him understand, that if her familiarity was the
occasion of such constructions, he should have less reason (hereafter) to
mistake.

Maximanus replied (to so unexpected a cooling Card) Madame, I pray be not
offended, you cannot hate me for loving you: nor blame that love that is
attracted by such Magnetic virtue: It Is your own fault to be so Beautiful,
and none of mine, to be passive in my obedience to that power. Truly Madam, I
must needs confess, I do love you with all my heart, and have smothered my
affection a long time: But now I must tell you, that you murder me, if you deny.

Sir, Sir, said the Princess, love is your scene, but when the scene is
opened, foul lust appears, which makes you unworthy of your Princes Favor, or
my Company: With what countenance can you look him in the Face, that can be so
disloyal to him, or me, of whom you have entertained so vile conceptions? For
the Love-sake that my Husband bears unto you (in hopes of your amendment) I
will not blab your Baseness or Disloyalty: But I protest, if ever you open
your mouth again in this particular, your Master shall know into how
treacherous hands he has reposed so great a Trust: And so farewell.

Honoria being gone, Maximanus bites the lip, and swears by all the Gods it
shall not serve her turn; if fair means will not do it, foul means shall,
whom we leave hatching his own Villainies. To treat of the successes which
attended the Prince in his expedition against the Moors.

Lorenzo (Monteroing the top of an Hill with his Army, beheld the Moors drawn
up in Battalia ready to receive him) brooks no delays, but (thinking himself
as Superior, to them in Courage and true Gallantry, as he was inferior to
them in number) uncovers the Mountain head, advances toward them; and makes
up to the black-fac'd Monster through disadvantages, breaks through
difficulties, and gives them a home Charge, some of the Moors begin to stagger
and run: Whereat the General of the Moors was no more discouraged then the
Husbandman, when he sees the wind blow the Chafe away from the purer Corn.
Cosdruball, General of the Prince his Horse, routes theirs, but performs the
execution with too hot a spur: insomuch that the whole Army of the Princes
was almost Routed, and the Prince himself in very great danger, had not
Bertaldo, the Prince his alter ego, well defended his Prototype. For Lorenzo
(with his Brigade) charged into the main Body of the Enemy, hewing down all
before him, like a fierce wind, that gets into a thick wood, when as the leaf
is in the fall; which knowing not its way out again, whirles about the trees,
shaking down their leaves, clatterring their boughs one against another, so
bending their branches to the earth, till their roots came up, and bodies
down. So this son of Mars (environed within a black cloud of Moors)
thunders in the midst of them, and (like lightning) so peirced this black
cloud, till there fell showers of blood. Such was the behavior of the brave
Lorenzo.

Bertaldo having intelligence from Hanno, that the Prince was thus engaged, if
he were not lost already; and that the left wing (attempting to dis-engage him)
were all routed, with his 100. Volunteers which guarded his Person, and thought
no otherwise but that he had been the Prince; rides amongst the heartlesse and
breathless Soldiers, crying, Victoria, Victoria! Come and let us make an end
of the day, all is our own: they think him to be the Prince, and that he had
made his way through, (and so shrewdly disordered them) all follow him, and his
directions. He gives Philaret a strict charge that he should not lose the sight
of him (if it were possible) but be ready at had (with his spare Horse) if need
required; and that he should show his love unto him in that days service, and
have it ever after. The poor wretch overjoyed with the apprehension of such a
reward, converts his fear of death into hopes of merit: And having at the
beginning of the Battle taken a box of Ointment from a Captive Tawny-Moore
(wherewith the Moors used to make their Faces more black (as more Beautiful)
he colors his face as black as jet, imagining (thereby) to perform some
notable piece of service that day, in the behalf of his so much beloved,
Bertaldo: who by this time finding the Moors to stand so close drawn up, as no
ordinary force, or manner of discipline could break, or enter; draws up his
Men in form of a wedge, edged with his own personal Valor (it being
impossible that such a one, being backed by two, those two by three; three by
five, bearing the same proportion up to the very Rear, whose greater number
still followed the fewer, whilst the better-mettled fewer still made way for
the worser tempered multitude to follow, (like a well-droven wedg) riving the
bonds of nature in sunder) and those hearts of Oak, at once, both to complain
and open, till they saw the Prince (with a few survivers) like Mars himself
stand Bulwarckt in the midst of so many slaughtered Moors: and Re-intrench'd
about with his own Dead. Where the Prince and Bertaldo congratulating one
another happiness in both their preservations; both parties stood amazed to
behold two suns in the same Firmament: The Princes men were contented to take
Bertaldo as a rescuing Angel in their Sovereigns shape: and Bertaldo his men
were glad to see two Princes, who not long ago were afraid they had not one.

These two men in Mars his livery, seeing the Moors endeavoring to Sally on
either hand, resolved (equally) to divide their Forces, and Charge them
several ways. Bertaldo (in prosecuting his design) had his Horse slain
under him upon the first Charge, which had no sooner brought him to the ground,
but up comes Philoret with his spare Horse in his hand, ready to re-estate him
in his former posture: He perceiving Philoret black as the night, thought some
Moore had killed his pretty Page, and seized his horse, and clad him in his
Pages habit: whereupon Bertaldo struck at Philoret, who called upon Bertaldo to
stay his hand; but the confused noise being so great that he could not hear
him, Bertaldo gave him a slight wound upon his neck, whereat (Philoret letting
his horse go out of his hands) to lay hold on that, Bertaldo left prosecuting
Philorets revenge, by sparing the person whom he persecuted with so blind a
zeal: crying out, Black Devil, how could thou find in thy heart to destroy
so sweet a Creature? Philoret was so well pleased with the kindness of his
language, and so little troubled with the smart of his wounds, that he only
thirsted for another opportunity to do Bertaldo the like service at the same
rate, which was presently offered him: For

Bertaldo was no sooner mounted, but presently he Charges in amongst the
thickest of his Enemies, as if some wild Bull had run madding through some
Marketplace, treading down all the people as he ran along, till stopped by
Butchers, that staid his course by knocking of him down: so fell Bertaldo. Up
comes Philoret, and dismounting his horse, strides over him, and with his sword
in his hand menaces the approaching Enemy. The Moors seeing him Black, took
him to be one of their own party; and by his rich apparel to be of some
extraordinary quality; wherefore they durst not press upon Bertaldo any
further violence, whom Authority had protected: until the Prince (having quite
routed his Adversaries, and hearing Bertaldo to be so engaged) comes in (like a
raging Sea backed by the winds, that had made some new breach into the Land)
which when the fainting spirits of Bertaldoes men once perceived, they resolved
(like a dying taper) either to contract all their strength, to make one great
blaze before they went out, or else (for shame) to do their own work
themselves, before Lorenzo should come to their assistance: which they
performed so courageously, that they made the enemy give the ground that was
covered with Bertaldoes wounded body; who being set upon his feet, on the one
side by his friends, on the other by his supposed enemy, to whom he thought
himself so much beholding, that he prayed his Soldiers to use that pretty
little Blackamore well: wondering how he neglected his own liberty, and
hazarded his life to preserve his person.

Philoret was forthwith carrried out of the Battle, which was soon after
ended, and the Moors all totally routed, by the coming back of Cosdruballs
horse, who received orders to follow the execution. They all drew off the
field: and when the Prince was well got to his Quarters, and Bertaldoes wounds
had been well dressed, he requited the Princes kind Visit, with the pleasing
Story of the great kindness that the supposed Moore had showed him in his
extremity. They both resolved to send for him; and being sent for, they were
both inquisitive after the cause of his so great humanity.

Bertaldo (telling Philoret, that to his knowledge he had saved his life,
hazarded his own, and lost his liberty) desiring to know of Philoret, what
moved him to all that kindness? Philoret replied, nothing but that I had a
mind to save so brave a Man. But oh (said Bertaldo) (fetching a deep sigh) what
have thou done with that sweet-fac'd Youth thou stripp'st of those clothes?
Philoret answered, I will bring him to you ere it be long. Why? did you love
him? I did (gentle Moor) said Bertaldo. What shall I give thee for reward of so
great a Courtesy? The Prince seconding Bertaldo, bid him ask what he pleased,
and he should have it. Then said Philoret, I ask at both your hands no other
favor but that you would give me for all my service, one Basin of fair Water.

They admiring first, and afterward commanding it to be sent for; which being
brought, they both delivered it to Philoret (still wondering what he meant to
do therewith) who receiving it stepped aside, and (as if night had been washed
away by the morning dew) breaks upon them with such red and white, as Aurora
paints her Cheeks withal, after her climing up the Eastern hills. Of which,
when they had thoroughly enform'd themselves, they both strove who should
embrace him first; the Prince first caught him in his Arms, he catches at
Bertaldo, who kissed his Cheeks: And Bertaldoes arms being about his neck, he
weeps upon his hands; his merits sowing the seeds of love in the field of
Mars, his tears reaped no further benefit then of being rewarded in the Act,
which was as high as his poor heart durst go. The Prince perceiving him to
weep so fast, lets him go, fearing that he had hurt him, by embracing him with
too hard a kindness. Bertaldo enjoying a quiet possession of his so much
beloved, takes him in his Arms, and asks him what he ayl'd; he hanging down
his arms by his sides, as unworthy of such an armfull, puts by the true cause
by this excuse. I weep to think what danger you were in. I (said Bertaldo)
rejoice that thou were my preserver; assuring him that he had perserved him for
himself, as the best Master that ever any Boy was glad of. And that he would
prefer him to his own hearts desire: bidding him ask what he would have for
the present, and he would grant him his request. Then I desire (said Philoret)
in the first place, That you would never put me from you. Secondly, that I may
ever sleep at your foot.

The Prince bursting forth into admiration, cries out, What strange affection
is this of a youth toward his Master!

Philoret fearing that he had gone too far, and that nothing could sooner
deprive him of that competent felicity (which he had proposed unto himself)
then that it should be known what he was, breaks off all further expostulations
with this assurance: That as no promise could be greater then that, so no
performance could answer his desires with more delight.

Bertaldo replied, Thou art as much Master of both, as I am of thee. So
Philoret was satisfied, Bertaldo pleased, the Prince astonished.

CHAP. IV.
The Prince pursues the Moors into their own Country. News is brought to Court
of the victory, and of the Prince's leaving his Country. Maximanus pursues his
lustful desires. Lays his gins. Amarissa's kindness to Honoria, for which
she suffers.

LIke some Braggadosio insolent Ruffian, who intended an Affront to a higher
Spirit then his own, and that before his Door: And finding himself worsted by
the Defendant, quits his ground, runs his way; the other after him, chastising
that bold attempt (with reduplicated verberations) on the person of the
Offender, up to the same doors where his castigation had beginning (through a
whole street of amazed Spectators) so Basted was this Moore: so Valiant was
this Prince, both in his Own, and Enemies Country: where we leave him, and
return to our Affairs in Carthage.

The particulars whereof being brought to Carthage, Maximanus entertaines high
resolutions of perpetrating his black design, which thus he prosecutes.

Having from that time forward sought his opportunity of singling her out, at
the last he found it. At the time when Honoria (all alone) went up to the
Garret to remove and order her Quinsies, Pomegranats, and other Fruits wherein
she delighted; Maximanus comes in with a Dagger in his hand hafted toward her,
and pointed to his own Breast, speaking to her in this language:

Madam,

I have layne a long time scorching in the unquenchable flames of my desires,
fired by your Beatuty; and you have cast me no cooling water of Consent, but
oil of Denial to increase, but not to mitigate my torment: Wherefore I am
constrained to be thus charitable to my self. Either be just in your
retribution of affording love, for love, though with an unwilling mercy; or
else be merciful with this Instrument, in ridding me out of pain, by a most
pleasing Cruelty.

Honoria scarce having patience to hear so much, and having none left to hear
any more, She calls him Lustful Goat, perfidious Man, tempting Devil,
unworthy of his Masters favor, and the Trust he had reposed in him. Bids him
begone, and cool his inordinate desires with his own sighs; and quench that
fire from Hell with tears of his Repentance: for that was all the relief he
must expect from her. At which words he turns the point of his Dagger to her
Breast, and tells her, that if she would not, otherwise, that should make her;
and that which she was forced unto was not her own act. And therefore wished
her not to make any resistance, or call for the least help, as she loved her
own Lord and Life, and the welfare of his Dominions, with often inculcations,
that if she compelled him to stop her out cries with that Dagger struck through
the lunges that sends them up, he would (afterward) prove as great a Traitor
to her Lord, as she had compelled him to be a Murderer of her, and have his
desires at last, though it were but between hot and cold, life and death.
Honoria laughed in his face, and bade him look who stood behind him. And whilst
he was turning about, (to see what ambush she had laid) she whips by him; and
running by the door, clapped it too, which he opened with such speed, as men
often find who are most in haste: But had doubtless overtaken her running
down the stairs that led into the Gallery, or in the long Gallery, before she
could have reached any Company, if her own Chaste speed, and the wind together,
had not blowed off her Veil so directly toward his feet, that he was so
entangled therewith, that down he falls along, upon the ground, whereby she
got safely to her Guard of Ladies, but could not speak to them, she was so out
of breath: and when she had breathed sufficiently, she could not speak for
laughing.

In which Interim, Maximanus enters the Presence, who not a little glad to see
her so pleasant, and exceeding glad that she had not said any thing at all of
him to the Ladies, with greatest reverence he requested her that he might speak
but one word in private with her, at the window: she conjecturing his meaning
(commanding the Ladies not to stir out of the room) withdrawes her self,
where he begs, and prays her, for goodness sake, though he had deserved the
greatest evil, that she would not speak a word of what had passed between
them: Protesting before all things sacred, that he intended her no harm, but
only to put her to the utmost trial; which had not the suddenness of her
own wit taught her such an escape, she should not have been unsatisfied in
that particular; but now the truth of his intentions was wholly at the mercy of
her Belief: Promising her faithfully, that if she would forget, and forgive
this misdemeanour, he would never open his mouth unto her, in that behalf, nor
ever harbor any such thoughts within his breast. For if she did not, that
would be the way to have them both undone; and if she did, nothing should
preserve her honor more then that Engagement.

Honoria (with a severe Countenance) replied,

Maximanus, not forfear of any thing wherewith you can threaten me, but for the
loves sake my Husband bears unto you, I will pardon you, and never speak of
this offense: First provided, that you be as good as your word, in banishing
all thoughts of falling into a relapse. Secondly, That I may be in a condition
never to trust you any more. Wherefore you must give me leave to dismiss your
attendance upon my Person, till your Master returns, and your suit is granted.
I give you leave to make what excuse you can for keeping such a distance.

Maximanus seemed to be contented, and complains to her, how that he had
broken both his elboes with his fall.

Honoria burst out into such a laughter, as quitted claim to the suspicion
which the Ladies had already entertained, of what (indeed) was real. Yet
notwithstanding, as soon as Maximanus had taken his leave of the Princess,
Amarissa takes the boldness to be inquisitive after the cause of her being so
much out of breath, and his being out of Countenance at his first entrance into
the Room. Honoria (to make good her promise) told Amarissa, that they had been
both frighted by a strange kind of noise as they passed by the Hobgoblin
Chamber, at which they both fell a running; and he making more haste then good
speed, came over and over: wherefore he followed her, requesting her for Gods
sake, that she would not tell any body of it. And that he had so bruised his
Elbowes, that he knew not what to do.

O Honoria, thou had escaped a great deal of misery if thou had granted
fewer favors, or been less punctual in thy performances. But many a good man
(like the tree that affords wedges out of its self, whereby its main body is
cleft in sunder) suffers, by conferring too many acts of grace and favor, upon
objects that are incompatible with a just reception.

Maximanus now having his quietus est, disquiets himself in finding out ways
to his revenge; and in requiting so much goodness with the greatest mischief.
For he gives it out amongst his creatures, that he verily believed, that his
Mistress was naught: And that he suspected her to play fast and loose with no
baser a companion then her Gardner, (a poor harmless wretch, whom she often
took along with her into the fields to choose and gather Simples, (being an
excellent Herbalist) as well for the use of her Still, as setting what were
likeliest to grow in her own Garden, (a delight, becoming the state of
Innocence) and that therefore she had dismissed him of his Attendance upon her
Person, that she might the more freely enjoy her oportunities; but he would
observe her haunts, and she should bear his horse dash ere it were long,
though she betook her self to never so many by ways. Some out of envy,
others out of complacence to so great a Favorite, were willing enough to
believe it, though none could, until such time as a foolish mistake
(sufficient enough to create a Belief, where the mind is willing to receive
it) had in some measure conformed them to his vain imagination, and thus it
was.

Hortensius (the Gardner) waiting upon his Mistress to a flowrie bank, whose
bed (at its several seasons) as well made soft with the often risings of the
water, as comforted with the Warming-pan of the Sun, having a Diana's Grove
(like a drawn Curtain) between it and the North-East-wind, standing so
commodiously for the benefit of the Southern Clime) invited them to search
into Natures bosom, where she was likelyest to hide her greatest rarities.

To this very place Maximanus dogs Honoria, and sets Spies over her actions,
and there leaves them, (as well hoping that their willingness to be deluded,
might lay hold on some occasion to let in error through the back-doore of some
mistake, whereby some grounds of witnessing against her may be had, as also
that if any such thing were, they might add a little to it, make more) and
according to his expectation, there happened this unlucky accident (food to his
hunger, and a full draught to his revenge) Hortensius having filled his Basket,
and she her Apron with the choicest delicates; they were both comparing the
fruits of their own industry, and natures bounty, together; some mistake of the
right name of an Herb (on his part) made the Princess laugh, whereat the
supervisors thought them somewhat pleasant: Another mistake there was of the
Princess, which caused her to clap her hand upon her breast, as blaming her
forgetfulness, which caused those eves-droppers (biased with prejudicate
opinion) to cry out, Oh what a passionate expression was there! How she was
fain to pump it from the very bottom of her heart! Which mistake of theirs, the
Gardner himself somewhat improved, when he had made her such an obeisance,
whilst he was craving her pardon for his contradiction; whilst suspicion was
thus well onward on its way, a small matter helps it forward to its journies
end. For Honoria espying an Earwig ready to creep into Hertensius ear,
endeavoring to strike it off with her hand, she strikes it into his Neck; and
perceiving it to be there, thrust her fingers into his Collar to take it
thence; she laughing all the while at his not knowing what was the matter, and
wondering why she gave him such a whirret under the Ear: Of which, as soon as he
had been informed, in humble manner he makes her a low obeisance, and thanks
her for being partial in his behalf, in taking one worms part rather then
another.

So, so, (said the Ambushcado) here is fine doings indeed, we have even seen
enough, it is no marvail that honest Maximanus must not come near your Person,
lest he pry into your actions.

Some rashly wondered, saying, Who would have thought she had been such a one!
Others set their teeth on edge against the Gardener, saying, He deserved to be
hanged, and cut as small as herbs to the pot. All informed Maximanus, that they
had seen them as good as naught together.

He eager to know what, and how, and wherein, and what they had seen, and how
it was: They told him, that they had seen them court one another extremely: the
words (indeed) they could not hear well, but their actions were too too
palpable. Why, what did she do (said Maximanus?) They made answer, that she
stroakt him under the Chin, clapped his Cheeks, thrust her fingers into his
Bosom, smiled him in the Face. And how did the Gardener behave himself (said
Maximanus?) He (said they) dopt, and cring'd, and made legs all the while,
whilst she answered his reverence, with her hand patting her Breast.

Which (being so confidently related by so many witnesses) had been enough to
have made him believe (as it did too many others) that it had been so indeed,
but that his own temptations were sufficient trials of their virtue, or that
she had preferred the Gardner before him, but that he did verily believe they
invented those lies to curry favor with his greatness. Thus foolish people
standing a great way off, and seeing men and women dance, (hearing not the
music) suppose them to be all mad.

Strange Reports (like wildfire) ran up and down the Court concerning
Hortensius and Honoria; some of them got Amarissa by the ears, and held her in
astonishment. She, with a friendly Apology (full of respect) acquaints Honoria
with the business, who knew no more what to say to it, then a weaned child
knew how to draw up an Answer to a Charge of the Highest Treason. But having
recollected her self a little, she presently cries out against Maximanus,
saying, Upon her life this was his doings, and forthwith up and told Amarissa
all that had happened between Maximanus and her self. Amarissa being fully
satisfied from what Quarter this wind blew, said unto Honoria, Oh Honoria,
had thou been so happy as to have questioned him for his villainy, before
thou had been questioned by him, thou had crushed the Cockatrice in the
egg: But now, when Falsehood has once made Truth a Defendant, it has taken
away her Testimony.

Amarissa having further made known the particulars to Honoria, as they were
related; Honoria then unfolded all the Riddles, and cleared the Mistakes.
Amarissa overjoyed that she was so fully instructed to defend Honoria's
honor, satisfy the abused multitude, and question the Tyrant; She begins to
stickle in her behalf, and undeceive the misinformed, and talked of calling
Maximanus to account for his villainy.

Now began the feud, Reports join issue, Publications are brought forth, and a
day of Hearing boldly is required of the Judges. Maximanus fearing that his
Evidence would not hold water, without farther proof, stops the proceedings,
till he had got Positives to his Circumstances, which thus he labors to
obtain: He corrupts Bonella, the Prince's Waiting Woman, with store of Gold,
by the means of his chief Secretary, who also was to pretend himself a Suitor
to Bonella; she both credulous, and ambitious, swallows down the Treason,
which thus she had agreed to execute: Bonella having told Maximanus (upon his
inquiry) that ever since he was dismissed his attendance, that Honoria and
Amarissa lay together in the same bed, and that every night before they took
their rest, they drank a glass or two of Cinamond-water: Whereupon she had
direction given her, that when they called to her next for any of that water,
she should drop three drops of that receipt (which she had then given her) into
one of their Glasses, acquainting her that every drop would cast them into so
many hours dead sleep: Which when she had done, she should inform Maximanus
of it, and then leave him to act the rest.

Bonella puts this horrid Treason in execution, the very next night following,
and brings word to Maximanus what she had done; who asking her how long it had
been since she had done the feat, and how it wraught with them? she answered,
Presently, and that they were both asleep before they could get into their bed,
so that she was feign to help Amarissa to her resting place by main strength,
and that half an hour had not scarce spent its time since she had performed
the work. He dismissed her for the present, sent for Hortensius to come before
him, as to examine him upon the premises; he answers according to his
innocence, and was discharged with courteous language.

The Secretary (having his lesson given him) follows the Gardner out of the
chamber, commending him for his honest dealing, and rejoicing that he had come
off so well, invites him into his chamber, bestows wine upon him, he (little
thinking that he shook a Devil by the hand, whilst he thought he had caught
an Angel by the foot) was overjoyed to see himself so much made of. At last
he had two drops of the same ingredient, distilled into one of his cups; which
having the same operation, he was privately carried and laid in the same bed,
between Honoria and Amarissa: and there they were all three left. Forthwith
pretended intelligence was brought, that Hortensius was spied privily stealing
into Honoria her chamber, witnesses were called, they went directly to
Bonella's bedside, and demanded the key of her: She with a counterfeited
trembling produces what she had but lately given her: They open the door,
enter the chamber, approach the bed, find them all three fast asleep, with
Honoria's arm about the Gardners neck. Maximanus cries, It Is pity to wake
them, how sweetly they lie! I would my Father had made me a Gardner; what a
fine time be has of it! desiring the company to wait their pleasures a while,
knowing the time to be at hand, when that somniferous drug (that grows not any
where but under the shade of death) would wake them with a vengeance. They all
withdraw behind the Footcurtaine of the bed. At last Honoria and Amarissa both
awake much at a time, yet neither perceived that they had any body between
them. Honoria taking Hortensius to be Amarissa, and she the same to be Honoria,
both began to wonder at the light which was in the room, both their heads
began to ache, both complained to one another: Hortensius presently awakes, and
finding himself between two, asks Where am I? the deceived Innocents shreeking
out, cry, What have we here? In which interim, Maximanus and the rest discover
themselves, and cry all with open mouth, Out you foul Adulteress, to Honoria;
Out you Bawd, to Amarissa; Out you villain, to Hortensius. Hortensius he
skips out of the bed, distracted, and amazed; Maximanus tells him, that there
are his clothes, and that he knew well enough where he laid them. Hortensius
begins to speak, as well as Amazement would give him leave. Maximanus stops his
mouth, with bidding them Carry him away, and telling him, that he should speak
upon the Rack to morrow. Honoria begins to speak, like the gentle wind, when it
passes over the heads of sweetest flowers, and so delightfully carries their
fragrance into our nostrils; so pleasingly would she have breathed forth her
innocence into their ears, but could not be heard. Amarissa began to speak,
like the blustering Boreas, but was out-nois'd by thunder and exclamations. Both
were commanded to rise out of their beds, and were committed to safe Custody
for that night.

CHAP. V.
The miserable usage of Honoria and Amarissa. Hortensius rack^, and afterward
Bonella sent away to be Murdered. A relation of the particulars sent to Lorenzo.

THe next morning they were both committed so close Prisoners (to several
Wards) in a place of the Tower, not far distant from the Palace, and
appointed for Malefactors of the highest Rank and Quality. So accommodated,
that they could neither ease their minds by Complaints, (not so much as to one
another) nor express their injuries by Arguments.

All men's hearts were set against them, their ears stopped, their mouths open:
yet notwithstanding, the Heavens lowr'd, the Place mourned, the Stones wept,
the Hollow winds murmured, and their Echoes answered to every Groan. And lest
sorrow should be defective in any part, to complete all woe, their ears were
filled with the loud cries and roarings of poor Hortensius upon the Rack just
under them: who was the more miserably used, (they hoping to extort from him a
Confession to their liking out the violence of his torment) each stretch they
gave him upon the Rack, made every vein of both their hearts to ache; and their
heart strings were ready to break, as his Limbs grew more and more out of
jaynt. So great a sympathy was there in the same Innocence: As he Roared, they
Shreekt; as he left off, they were still: nothing could be got from him, but
that he was a Martyn to a chaste Bed. Still, when they had let him down, and
threatened him with a second and third Torture, he said, that he could wish that
he had patience enough to endure their Tyranny, that he might not be such a
disturbance to the good Ladies, but he had honesty sufficient not to injure
their Reputations, through the violence of any sufferings.

And in his greatest and last temptation, in the midst of cruelty, he cried
aloud, O Honoria pray for me! pray for me good Honoria! Amarissa help her! help
her Amarissa!

Honoria falls upon her knees, and prays, rises up again, and stamps with her
foot upon the ground, runs to the door, and knocks as hard as both her soft
hands would give her leave, calls out to some good body to speak to them to
spare him, and inflict what punishment they would on her. Whereupon they all
cried shame upon the the tormentors, for which shame sake (at last) they let
go the Rack.

Hortensius had no sooner his joints set, and the company dismissed, but
Maximanus enters the Prison all alone, mad with rage: And seeing that no pain
could squeeze out an acknowledgement, he was resolved to try what the terror
of Death could do; and therefore he thus spoke unto Hortensius, (holding his
dagger to his breast.)

Villain, I am resolved to have my will of thee, I know thy innocence as well
as thy self; if thou preferrest the stab that this will give thee, before a
prick of Conscience, I come to give it thee.

Hortensius bids him strike, again cries strike: strike, the third time.

Maximanus thinking with himself, that death would not do so well for his
purpose as acknowledgment, pawses a while; at last speaks thus unto him:

Come sirrah, thou shall be ruled by me, I will raise thee forth of the Mire,
and will seat thee in a place of Honor: I will recompense thy sufferings with
the choicest favors that my friendship can bestow upon thee: I will supply thy
wants with store of Riches, I find that thou have in thee the principles of a
true friend: Bend but thy resolutions to my interest, and be my self. Away
with this thing called Honesty, so like a feather in a fools cap: Let your
Conscience alone, and it will never trouble you; it will never speak if you
never examine it; and is nothing else but the Idea of a fantastic brain: Fear
first begot in men the awefulnesse of a Deity: Rouse up good fellow, what say
thou? Shall thy horse stand in my stable, or shall it not?

Hortensius (after some pause) replies,

It seems that I have read better Divinity upon the leaves of Flowers, and
Herbs, then you have read in all the folio's of your Books. No Sir, you have a
Conscience that would speak to you without examining, but you will not hear it;
and trouble you too, but that you hide your self out of those ways it would
direct you, and secure it as you have done Honoria and Amarissa. But
considering with himself, how that he might (happily) do them more service by
preserving his own life (though with a supposed villainy) rather then (by
death) to destroy the chiefest witness of their innocence, by real
Martyrdom. He was sorry that he had gone so far, and thus he endeavors to
re-collect himself.) And besides, if I should hearken to your allurements, you
your self would think me to be the basest fellow in the world, and would use
me accordingly, when you had once wrought your ends upon me. No (said
Maximanus) it is the property of those to love the Treason, and hate Traitor,
who are otherwise themselves. Vipers nere sting Vipers, though they gnaw their
way through the very bowels of their Dam: the innocent Dove can have rough
feet; and of Cruelty it self it can be said no more, then that it has rough
hands. Give me the wisdom of the Serpent, who stops his ears at the voices
of those Charmers, and carry ammunition poison with their stings, rather then
the nature of those silly Doves, and Pigeons, that can fight, and have no gaul.
It is as natural for Thunderbolts to strike, as it is for Mothers to snatch
their Children from harmes-way. It is only the contrariety of thy disposition
unto mine, that makes thee obstinate, a foolish fancy, a femall pity that
makes thee thus: It is not my fault, nor thine, to do such things as these,
it is theirs, to over-load us with what we cannot bear, and then to stand in our
way.

What smoother then the face of water? what creature runs a gentler course
then the smiling River, as it glides a long with so many pretty dimples in the
cheeks of her fair purling streams? But if a tempest rise, what more
out-ragious then the Sea? If storms give orders to Crekes and Rivolets,
Brooks and Torrents to charge both flanks of this fair troop of waters, in
their march, it swells, and makes the greater haste to dis-engage it self, by
cutting through the Van, that it may bear all down before it; so that these
outrages are not in our nature but by accident.

Hortensius, be at once both Wise and Happy.

What would you have me do? (replied Hortensius.)

I would have thee say (said Maximanus) that thou were Courted by those Ladies
to pleasures, whose temptations were above resistance. None can blame thee, but
them; Thou shall erect a happiness upon their Ruins, that shall not lie
within the power of fate to shatter. If I stand, thou stand'st; If I fall, thou
fall'st; thrown down with a wind that shall either shake the Earth, or blow
the Massy Crown from off the Princes Head, with no more then difficulty if a
Hat and Feather should stand in competition with the wind. Then said
Hortensius, Sir, I am at your service and disposal, direct me ways how I may
be useful to you.

Thus they (seemingly) agreed: Reports ran over all the Palace, that
Hortensius had confessed his fault, and accused the Ladies.

The Ladies hearing of it, were struck with horror and amazement, looked up to
Heaven, wondering that the Gods took no more care of humane Affairs. Sometimes
they could find in their hearts to turn Atheists, but those thoughts were laid
aside, with confidence that they should be vindicated in their Reputations,
though not before, yet after death.

Hortensius was highly rewarded, and promoted to high dignities, whose sudden
rising made the wiser sort, soon believe, that the Gardner had not raised that
Mount without the Devils help: All things were carried clear against the
Ladies, and Maximanus supposed by some to have performed the part of a vigilant
Scout-master; by others, of a perfidious Bloud-hound.

Bonella must now be thought upon, (as most convenient) that she should not
live; whereupon the Secretrary pretends to run away with her, (having both
feathered their nests sufficiently) to which she was willingly enough inclined,
and so by the way to murder her, which was thus far put in execution: He
attends her toward the Wood, which when he had far enough entered, tells her
what she must trust to, and what his Commands were. Whereat Bonella wept, and
asked him, Will you do it? Is your love come to this, and your profession
murder? I must confess I have deserved it, for shaking hands with such a
Tyrant in so great Villainies: But know, that his 20000 Crowns were none of the
allurements that made me to do this foul injury to such innocent Creatures: but
it was your love, and to obtain that which made me thus forgetful of all
goodness, and am I thus rewarded? Know you not that the Tyrant will not suffer
one to live, who is acquainted with his Villainy? And do you think you shall
escape at last? No, you may have the honor to go last to pot. But assure your
self, he will not leave a man to live within the compass of betraying him
with recantation. No! Do not do this, though it be justice in regard of my
self, yet it is iniquity in respect of you. I have not deserved it at your
hands, leave off this wicked purpose, and go along with me, and thou shall
never want. I have sent 600 Crowns beyond the Seas, I have a thousand hid
under the ground, that never shall rise out of the Earth if I fall to dust:
Thou have wealth enough of thy own, both together will make up a convenient
Fortune to maintain us. Or if thou did but make me believe thou lov'dst me,
to work this hellish Plot by my means; yet let me but live, and I will
bequeath that to thee, as a recompense of thy mercy toward me: otherwise,
whether I shall find a Grave, or not, that shall lie buried where it is.

The Secretary being somewhat touched with these words, (but especially being
loath to lose so much money which might be had by Craft) tells her, That the
truth was, he never intended to Marry her, but for her last request he would
grant it, upon condition that she would acquaint him where her treasure lay:
Which, upon many Oaths and Execrations that he would not murder her, but leave
her there in the Wood to shift for her self, she told him where it was, which,
when she had done (for two reasons sake: the first, That he might be as good as
his word. The second, That if she did not tell him rightly, he might know where
to find her.) He causes her to climb up an old hollow Tree, and lets her down
into the bottom of it, telling her, That there she must remain until such
time as he had found the truth of her relation. And there he left her.

Back goes the Secretary, and gives his Master an account of the business, as
performed according to his injunction, who believes it; and forthwith leads him
over a Trap-door, made for some such purposes, who not acquainted with the mode
of ordering his steps, falls down a Precipice, and there was hideously slain,
falling down upon sharp stakes, stuck in the bottom ready to receive him.
Whereupon Maximanus gives it out, that his Servant, and Bonella were both fled,
being accessaries to the foul Adultery, and that upon the Confession of
Hortensius, who takes all upon him, now that he may have all to throw hereafter.

By this time all things were fitted to the Tyrants hand, and obstacles removed
out of his way, he thinks it fit to acquaint Lorenzo with the whole substance
of the story and sends a subtle Messenger, whom he trusts with the mannagery
of this Affair: And thus he directs his Letter to the Prince.

May it please your Highness,
MY Loyalty was ever such, that it could break through the greatest
difficulties, and run hazards of the highest nature, wherein it may preserve
your Honor, though I fell my self by the rise of that. Sir, my Heart
trembles, and my Hand shakes, so that you may easily perceive a difference from
my wonted Character: whilst it acquaints you with News, as unwelcome to your
Ears, as it dropped unwillingly from my Pen. I have summoned all the faculties
of my understanding to act the part of a Discreet man in this Affair, wherein I
have found much difficulty, but I have overcome it, and present the business
to you clear as the Sun. Suspicions I valued not, neither did I weigh
Circumstances, but when Evidence brought in her two main witnesses,
Demonstration, and Confession, I thought it time to let your Highness know how
much you were mistaken in the high value you set on such a Counterfeit, as
Honoria has too palpably proved her self to be since your departure: And how
much a Bawd to her foul Lust Amarissa was. The examinations whereof, under the
known Hands and Seals of your most trusty Servants, and Loyal Subjects I have
here sent enclosed, leaving the rest of the partiticulars to his Narration: And
so expecting further orders from your Highness concerning the forementioned
Delinquents: I rest as my Duty binds,

Your Highness faithful Servant, and Loyal Subject, MAXIMANUS.


CHAP. VI.
The Prince passing by the Lady Duchess Cosbia her House, settles the
Difference between the two Brothers. A Battle fought with the Moors. Tidings
is brought to Lorenzo concerning Honoria. The Prince and Bertaldo are at
Variance concerning it. Philoret sent with Instructions. Amynda's Genius bids
them take heed.

WHen as the Carthaginian Drums had beat up a March to the tired Soldiers feet
over the Fessian Mountains (and the shrill Trumpet, with his Breath, called on
the Courageous Troops to follow) faster then the wearied Palferies could answer
to the hot spur of their fierce riders. Lorenzo might behold (in a fair
pleasant Valley) a commodious place for quartering his Army, (having a pretty
Village close adjoining, which, together with the indisposednesse of his Army
to march any further, invited his Highness resolution there to rest his
Standard) inquiring what great Personage did own so great happiness to be so
well seated. It was answered, that the Lady Paramount, to all that fruitful
Plain, and stately Building, her name was Cosbia, who espying an Army to
descend the Hills, with Colors flying, as if some curious Garden had descended
the craggy Mountains, to have given Battle to her set of Tulips. She sent to
know the cause, and dive into the meaning of such an approach.

The Messenger having delivered his Errand, was sent back with this account:
That it was Lorenzo, Prince of Carthage, who in castigation of the bold Moors
attempt upon his Confines, followed the Pursuit, and was constrained (as his
March fell out) to trouble her, and the rest of her good Neighbors with one
nights lodging; assuring her, that the demeanor both of him, and his, should
be rather like Guests, then Soldiers. The old Lady thought it policy to make a
virtue of necessity, and entertain him worthily.

Lorenzo was no sooner entered the Palace, but he called to mind Aminda, her
engagement; for he was no sooner invited to rest himself upon the Couch, by the
side of the old Beldam Cosbia, but he began to ask her how many Sons she had?
who answered, Two. The Prince desired to be acquainted with their names: she
answered, If he pleased, he might Honor them, and her, with taking notice of
their Persons, for they were both either near, or within the House. Lorenzo
demanded the cognizance of their Names: She told him, That the one was known by
the name of Jacomius, the other of Berontus. The Prince demanded which was the
Eldest of the two? The Lady (though somewhat staggered) answer Jacomius;
whereat the Prince seemed satisfied, (for the present) but after a while, the
two Brothers entering the Room, they had no sooner made their obeisance to the
Prince, but the Prince calls to mind the relation that Aminda's Ghost had
given him; whereupon he salutes Berontus with a more Princely favor then his
younger Brother, whereat the old Lady (conscious of her own injustice) was
struck with fear (the inseparable shadow of a guilty Conscience) that she had
been betrayed; and that the Army had advanced thither to no other purpose but
to vindicate the wrong which her partiallity had cast upon her lawful Heir,
and Eldest son: yet notwithstanding, she plucks up her spirits, and tells
Lorenzo, that she supposed he was mistaken, for that was her Eldest son,
pointing at Jacomius: The Prince tells her, that he believed that neither he,
nor she, were mistaken, though she thought to blind the world with such a
falsehood, as rendered her unworthy of the Cosbian name. Neither of the two young
Princes knew his meaning, Cosbia did; the Prince drew forth his Memorandum, and
gave Orders to bring before him such, and such, as were inserted in the Paper.
They were all brought before him, examined, confessing (in the midst of the
Army, as if they had been surrounded by so many Ghostly Fathers) all that had
been done, and how (at the unjust commands of the Lady Cosbia) they had
hitherto kept her unjust precepts, but now they could not withstand the truth
any longer; whereat Berontus raises up himself a thought higher then he was
before, Jacomius knew not what to think on it: Cosbia (as if some Deity had
descended from the Gods, with an Army of Intelligencers) declares the truth:
where upon by the Prince his mediation, Cosbia, her willingness, and the clear
evidence that the witnesses did give) the two Brothers were agreed. Berontus
was to be (thence forward) acknowledged right Heir (as Elder Brother) to the
Cosbian Family, and Jacomius was by consent (of all parties) to inherit the
Dukedom that was descended by their great Uncle Bomon. Supper-season caused the
Cloth to lay aside all business, so that they were at last sensible of no
other want but rest.

When time had thus put on her night-cloathes, and the night had brought
Lorenzo (thus) to Bed, Aminda, her grateful Genius, gives Lorenzo thanks and
melody, with this Song at his Chamber window.

With voice of Condensated air,
With the Thanksgiver-part of Prayer.
With a Lute, whose Back is Cloud,
Its Belly, Air: The winds aloud,
Strike the strings (at my Command)
That Is the finger and the hand.
May no Murmuring of the Woods,
No Rolling of the Water-flouds:
No Yelp of Hounds, no Howles of Wolves;
No Brayes of Asses, nor of Bulls
The Roarings may no waters breach,
Nor Crack of Thunder this night reach
Lorenzoes ears; be happy, blessed,
Composed, and sweetly take your rest.
The Prince (no less sollac'd with the Music then the gratitude of Aminda's
Ghost) sleeps soundly all night long, until the Morn threw up the Cypress
over the face of Day; about which time the Army (like a Main body that rests
senseless till it receives Orders from the Soul, how to direct its Feet and
Hands) moves upon Lorenzo his approach, and pursues the Foe. He had not
advanced his Cohorts thirty miles, but he was out-fac'd with an Army of sixty
thousand Moors drawn in Battalia, whose sole Commander was great Tomolin,
Emperor of the Abissines, whose multitudes Lorenzo no more weighes, then
manhood fears to charge through darkness: and therefore thus he animates his
Soldiers with an Oration.

Companions in Arms,

YOu see your Enemies before your faces; if ye turn your backs upon them they
are Lions, Tigers, Vultures, Devils; if ye stand stoutly to your Tacklin, they
are but Sheep, Hares, Hens, and heartlesse. So that it lies in your power to
choose whether you will have them Valiant, or otherwise: Your comportment may be
such, as may make them all Cesars, Hectors, Alexanders; and it may be such as
may render them your Slaves, Vassals, Victims, and Trophies of your Renown.
Would you this day live, or die? If you would live, the way to life is not to
stand in fear of death: and the way to die, is to meet death by flying from it.
Honor is your aim, Victory the end, Riches your reward, and a good Cause the
ground you fight upon: Fear will be your overthrow, Cowardice your shame, and
Confusion will be destruction to you all.

Wherefore let me be your Example, follow my Conduct, observe but my
Directions, and three hours time (well spent) shall crown all your desires;
thrust palms into your hands; seat joy on every Countenance; same over your
actions; fill your hearts with gladness, and your pockets with money: For by
all that is good, and all that is true, after this day, your never see Lorenzo
more, except a Conqueror.

The Soldiers shouted with acclamations of joy, crying, No man cares to live,
if Lorenzo dies; and no man fears to die in preservation of his Life and
Honor. Forthwith the Signal was given; the Carthaginians fly upon the Moors
like a strong tide, whereon Neptune rides foaming in his rage against some
black Rock, that receives the violence into its bosom: So Charges Lorenzo
through the heart of the main Body, and there with his own hands he slayes the
Standard Bearer. Bertaldo and Berontus seize the Standard; but such confusion
had their fury, and the days over-cast already cast upon them, that the Moors
(had by this time) compassed whom they knew not compassed, and the
Carthaginians kept on their way, with such like confidence, as men use to fight
withal, when they carry all before them, till such time that they had made
their way through the very entrails of the black-fac'd monster, and found
(like physic) that they had not touched the vitalls, but only purged through
the body of its Patient, leaving it more sound and active then it was before,
and themselves divided from themselves.

Whereupon Philoret finding them all at a stand, he betakes him to his old
stratagem, blacks his face, and the faces of one hundred more, which were the
flower of all the Carthaginian Chivalry, and takes Lorenzo, Bertaldo, Berontus,
Cosdruball, and Hanno, with him along, (as if they had been Prisoners) causing
the rest of that party to draw farther off, which (with the thick mists
assistance) soon was out of sight, and Orders were sent to the rest of the
Army, that as soon as ever they should hear a rumbling within the guts of the
foul Monster, they should make ruptures into the very bowels of the beast, up
to the place where they should find the Prince to be engaged. Accordingly they
act, Philoret brings in his Captives, tells the Moors, that the Carthaginian
Army is quite fled, and gone, and that in the pursuit he had taken so many men
of note, whom he brought for to present unto the Emperor, that their qualities
might be known: whereupon the Moors gave a shout that made the Skies ring:
Tomolin having received intelligence of his supposed happy fortune, sends
Commands to bring the Prisoners before him, when the Emperor sat upon his
Horse guarded with the Quintessence of all the Affrican Nobility, on whom the
supposed Prisoners, and the rest, fell like a fierce Storm; at which same
time, the several parties following their directions, this great Giant fell to
ground, as stabbed to the Heart, and maimed in all his Limbs; Berontus having
slain the Emperor with his own hands. Thus Victory put palms into these
worthyes hands, but she reserved the Bays to crown the Virgin Temples.

The day their own, and now the Country theirs, Lorenzo and Bertaldo both
conjoyne to promote the most deserving Philoret to some place of Eminence, and
Command, amongst the Soldiers, and they voted Philoret at that time Captain
of the Guard to Prince Lorenzo. Philoret amazed (with horror) at the danger of
his own merit, thus modestly refuses his preferment: I hope I have not deserved
so ill this day, as that I should now lose my place; I esteem no Dignity
comparable to my relation to Bertaldo; and when I am turned out of his service,
I shall be useless for any action. Wherefore as my ambition aims no higher,
so my desires beg this only favor, that I may be still the same. Bertaldo was
so in love with Philoret, that he thought himself miserable in the ignorance of
ways to recompense his unexpressable affections toward him, had Philoret but
said she had been a Virgin, Amarissa never had been thought on more.

CHAP. VII.
Maximanus his servant arrives at the Camp with Letters. Lorenzoe's
destruction: He falls out with Bertaldo upon it, Berontus saves Bertaldo from
danger. Philoret makes both Friends, and is sent to make Enquiry into the
business. Aminda's Ghost forwarnes him concerning Honoria.

LOrenzo had no sooner conquered the Moors but there arose a new War, and
sharp conflict within his his bosom upon the delivery of the Letters from
Maximanus; whose eyes posted so fast over the Apollogy, to come to the maine
subject of the story, that (when those quick intelligencers had informed his
injured soul) it let in such lightning (through its windows) as too soon laid
hold on that combustible material, Jealousy: that the house was all on fire
over the head of its inhabitant; then he hastes back again to the Apollogy,
and seeks for water in their iines, but meets with Oil: Sometimes he railes
upon Honoria, calling her Perfidious woman; Amarissa, Hag; Hortensius Villain:
Tears his hair, stamps upon the ground. Then standing in a calmer posture, he
says (to himself) me thinks it should not not be, sure it is impossible.
Unfolds the Letter again, flings it open; then asks (himself) if it were not
so, why should these, and these, certify thus and thus: Then falls into
another fit of raving, in which Bertaldo and Berontus find him, and happen to
enter the presence as he was venting his poisoned stomach of this foul
language: Base Woman, foul Adulteress; could she find no body with whom she
might engender, but with a Garden-toad. Whereat Bertaldo asks, what means the
Prince? What has raised so great a tempest in so fair a mind? Your fair Sister
Sir, (said Lorenzo) How (said Bertalda) my Sister? Who, Honoria? She Is not
Honoria (said Lorenzo) I say your sister Sir, who is false, and wicked, vile,
and has buried all my Glory in her dishonor.

Then (said Bertaldo) take truce with your Passions but a while, and you shall
find your self abused, and her innocent. I must desire you to forbear your
passion, and that language.

You must desire (said Lorenzo) what? for any thing that I can fear from you?
To thy face I speak it, thy Sister is a Whore.

To thy face I speak it (said Bertaldo that Lorenzo Lies.

They both drew upon one another, and Berontus laid better hold upon Bertaldo,
then Philoret could upon Lorenzo, from whom he foone had dis-engaged himself;
whereby Bertaldo had been much in danger, if Philoret had not with both his
arms entangled the feet of him, whose hands he could not hold. So that the
Prince thereby fell upon the ground, whereat he calling out, the Guard rushes
in, amazed to see so much fury, and no enemy near.

Lorenzo calls upon them to fall upon Bertaldo. Berontus desires them for to
hold their hands, assuring them, that the Prince himself would give them
thanks hereafter, and commend their disobedience.

O (said Philoret, hanging upon one of his arms) what do you mean to do? to
put out one of your own eyes? to cut off your own right hand? let me who have
been fortunate to you in some small services, be now happy, in doing you the
greatest good, in causing you to be your self, which whilst you are, there is
no higher Excellence, but now you are not: what have you received, but a
Letter? cannot Letters lie? from whom have you received it? from Maximanus, is
it not possible he may be false, and Honoria innocent? you abused, and
Bertaldoes merit requited with such an injury, that repentance can never wash
the stain out of your honor? hear more, enquire farther into the business,
upon my life Honoria is true, true to you, and undeserving the least ill
thought.

O (said Lorenzo) were that but so, I would give the world, if it were all mine.

Berontus replied, It is time enough to be thus perplexed, after that you were
assured that this were true.

I am assured (said Lorenzo) by all these testimonies, under the known hands
of my most approved Counselors.

Sir, (said Bertaldo) return to your self a little, were this true, none
should be her Executioner but my self, these hands should tear her limb from
limb, but I can no more believe it than I can believe impossibilities.

Oh Bertaldo (said Lorenzo) could I believe so too, I should think my self
herein more happy than in all my victories.

Sir, (said Bertaldo) it is but conquering your self a little, and I will
promise you a glorious victory over these Enemies both to your hearts ease, and
the tranquillity of your mind: be Lorenzo once again, and Bertaldo 's yours
for ever.

Bertaldo, (said the Prince) I pray thee forgive me, and I will hope the best:
and turning to the Messenger that brought the Letters, he asked him his opinion,
and what his thoughts were of Honoria.

Oh Sir, (replyde the subtle Curre) it is not for me to have any thoughts, or
give my opinion in a business so concerning; I was only entrusted with the
safe conduct of those Letters, to your royal hand, which when I have
performed, I have done my office: but I agree with you in my hopes of better
satisfaction.

Sir, (said Philoret) you would do well, as Maximanus has sent one with
Letters to inform, to send another with such Letters as may make Enquiry, into
the cause of those emissions.

Bertaldo gave his vote that none was more fit to be employed in that affair
than Philoret, whom they had found both active, and ingenious upon all
occasions.

Lorenzo agrees with him.

Philoret is dispatched, who, by the way, picks many causes of suspicion, out
of the Messenger, entangling him so often in his discourse, especially in
asking this Question, If Hortensius has acted such a villainy, and has
confessed it, how comes he to be so much in favor with Maximanus? and
receiving such an answer from him, vid: that favor must not last, I warrant
you shall see him come to a shameful death ere it be long. Whereat Philoret
demanded of him, What necessity there was in colloguing with such a Villain,
after such Witnesses produced, and his own confession.

Oh (said the Devils Adjutant General) Maximanus knows well enough what he
has to do. Whereupon Philoret soon gathered, that there was more to be found
out upon his arrival at Court, where we leave him on his journey, and bring
Lorenzo to his resting place: where sleep had no sooner rockt his senses fast,
but Amynda makes him start with her gratitudes of Song and melody, where she
thus begins:

To tell you wherefore I am sent,
Honoria is innocent.
And so is Amarissa too,
And you must look now what you do,
Sullie not a Princes name,
By too much credulence to fame.
Had she been otherwise to thee,
Thou had been pleased, she had been free.
But cause she is modest, chaste, and wise,
They have begun this Enterprise.
He that is easy of belief,
Runs down stairs to meet a Thief.
Where jealousie's bedchamber groom,
Fire's brought into the Powder room.
Up goes Husband, Friend, and Wife,
Crown, and honor, Scepter, life.
Lorenzo rises in his shirt, and runs up and down the room like a mad man,
raving on those false Intelligencers, calling Maximanus, Traitor; Honoria,
good; vowing to all the Gods, that he will never believe one word against her;
flings into his bed again, casts his arms abroad, and sighs out this
Pallinodium in her justification, Oh Honoria, Honoria! how much have I injured
thee! how much have thou been abused by Villains! I will recompense thy
sufferings, with a thousand acknowledgments, and expiate my offense with the
flower of my indulgence, sifted from the bran of those rude conceptions of
thee, which lay too long in common, with my better thoughts: and so he fell
into a sweet slumber, bound about the head with these resolves, where we leave
him to return to our affairs in Carthage.

CHAP. VIII.
Philoret falls acquainted with Hortensius by whom the villainy is discovered.
Pippea (a little Girl and Daughter to Maximanus his Landeresse) steals into
the Prison-Chamber where Honoria lay: the whole business discovered, and found
out by those three.

IT happened that Pippea (too gracious a Child for such a Mother, and too
little to be suspected for the managing of such a business, as she went
through with, (her age not bearing above 12 years date) Daughter to Hormunda
one of his (both) pitiful and pitiless creatures, and Landresse) stole one
day into the Princesses Chamber (all alone) being taught the way by following
her Mother thither, (as she went and came, about her linen employment) and
(having heard the diverse mutterings, that were in every month throughout the
Court) making many pretty dops, and curtchees, as if she would feign be spoke
to; or speak, if she knew how, or where to begin: which the Princess
observing, asked her, If her Mother was coming after her? to whom the little
Girl, replied, No forsooth: then (said Honoria) I warrant thee thou art come
to see how I do: whereat the little Girl fell a weeping very soarly: The
Princess asked her, why she wept? she answered, to think how much you are
wronged Madame. Poor heart, art thou sensible of my Injury (said Honoria) if
thou were capable of understanding, then thou would weep indeed. Madame,
(said this pretty heart) I understand a great deal already, and thereby am the
better prepared to understand the rest; I pray let me know how it is, I will
remember what you say, and if I can, I will help you, for all my Mother; she is
gone into the Country, and will not come home till night: I knew where she put
the key, and no body knows where I am. The Princess finding her heart much
eased by this little vent, and her complaints more to purpose, than when she
powered them against the walls; she up, and told that small Auditory, all the
several Passages, that were between Maximanus, and her self, from the very
beginning, to the end, (as is before related) and soon perceived (by the
Girls earnestness in listening to her discourse, greediness, in harkening
after more, her pertinent questions, by the way, her letting fall so many
showers of tears upon occasions, when the season of her discourse required
that moisture) that her language was not ill bestowed, and that the perspicuity
of her mind had over-match'd the number of her years; wherefore thinking with
her self what use she might make of her, in vindicating her self from that
soul aspersion, she asked the Girl, And do thou pity me? Yes indeed Madam
(said Pippea.) And would thou help me if thou could? (said the Princess.)
I with all my heart (replied the pretty thing) if I knew which way. Honoria
(who had no other thoughts, but these; nor policy, (for the present) but how
she might preserve her honor after death, and embalme her memory when she was
dead and gone) speaks thus unto that small epitomy, (wherein all her worldly
comforts were comprised) My pretty sweet Heart, if thou will do one thing for
me, God will bless thee, and thou shall never want his providence to defend
thee from all wickedness. It is this my pretty Maid, Maximanus will certainly
murder me one time or other. Whereat Pippea shreek'd aloud. Oh take heed (said
the Princess) somebody will hear you, and then you shall be sure never to see
me any more, and so I shall want my pretty Comforter. Madam, (said Pippea) will
not the same God bless you also, and his providence defend you from all
wickedness? Bless me (said Honoria) I hope he will, but defend me, it may be
not; because it may be his pleasure that I may suffer, and I am contented to
act any part that he shall put me to: in the mean time do thou but act thine
and I will pray for thee, and if I should outlive my misery, think how kind
thou have been to me. The Girl asked the Princess, What it was she would have
her do? and if it were to be done, she needed not doubt of her good will,
saying over and over again, Madame, I Will do it. Then said Honoria, I will
write a Letter which the Prince may read, when I am gone into another world,
that shall tell him, how true I have been to him, whilst I lived in this: if
thou will be so true to me, and kind in this one request, here is the key of
my Cabinet, I pray thee take it, and I will write a Letter and thou shall
conveigh it into my Cabinet, and when thou have done, thou shall bring me the
key again, and I will break it, and throw it away, and so when Maximanus
cannot open it, he will not break it open, and Lorenzo shall come to see that,
which it may be he may believe when I am dead, whatsoever he may otherwise
whilst I am alive; will thou do so much for me? Yes, replied Pippea, who wept
whilst Honoria writ this Letter.

Worthy Prince,
OF a better fortune then to be abused by a perfidious Servant, to the
destruction of his faithful Wife, and ruin to his Honor, calling his name
and wisdom into question: When I shall be Honoria in my Grave, and justified
(by the care that the Gods have over Innocents) when I am dead, who living, was
not more grieved with all the storms wherewith the revenging Tyrant vexed my
innocence, then I was troubled whilst I was alive, to think how thy injured
Soul will be overwhelmed with sorrow, when the Gods shall bring to light this
Horrid Treason, against the peace of thy inward state, as a punishment of your
too much forwardness of belief. Could I have been false to Lorenzo, it may be
I should not have been thought so, Greatness would have protected me; but
avoiding the act, I fell into the supposition of Disloyalty, whereby goodness
suffer in my behalf. Lorenzo, I forgive thee, upon this condition, that thou will not overmuch afflict thy self with too much grief, when thou shall
perceive thy Error:

Yours, and never otherwise, HONORIA.


The Letter was superscrib'd for Lorenzo, Prince of Carthage: My Honored Lord.

This Letter Honoria delivered to Pippea, who was as punctual in her
performance, as if her years had promised much discretion.

By this time Philoret is come to Court whom (having put on her maiden habit,
whereby she might be least known in being likest her self, and the better
concealed by leaving off her Disguise) we will call by her own name, Periissa,
who applies her self to Corderius (a true friend to Bertaldo, and a great
rarity in Court, an nonest man) one who was sufficiently already satisfied of
the great wrongs which Honoria had sustained through the unjust usage of
Maximanus? they two (having conferred notes together) thought fit, that he
should admit her into his house as his Maid servant, whereby she might conceal
her self the better: Thus Periissa was disguised in the propriety of her own
Habit.

Periissa Hums about the Court like an industrious Be, dwelling longest upon
that Flower where most Honney was to be gathered; amongst the rest, she finds
Hortensius his discourses (like beds) best set with flowers of Invitation for
her seeking faculty; him she Courts, and smiles upon; her, he thinks as half
his own: he asks her the question, he takes her silence for consent. She
makes use of her Servants apprehension, as a Masterpiece of Policy, telling
him, that if he would but answer her to own question truly, and solve but one
doubt really, be should soon know more of her mind: He vows performance, and
assures solution in any matter that she should propound.

Periissa soon replied, my Question is, (as you are a true Lover) whether or no
do you think that Honoria is innocent.

Hortensius fetching a deep sigh, answered, I would you were mine but half so
sure.

And looking behind him, he told her, that no place was safe for that
discourse, where stones were laid together by the power of Art, nor would he
trust Woods and Trees, but as they grew simply, and out of method: For (said
he) when the Square and Line is once drawn over them, I cannot believe, but
that (thereby) they are conjured into intelligencers; and that their Buildings
have spies in every corner. Therefore (Sweetheart) if you be pleased to repose
so much confidence in me, as to walk over the Meadows, and to trust your
self with a Faith that never blemished its professor into a place of Trust, I
will tell you (by the way, and in the trusty Groves) such things (concerning
the business, wherein you would so feign be satisfied) as shall not leave you
so much as a place for scruple.

Periissa glad of this profession, presently went along with him, where (by the
way) Hortensius opened his breast, and showed her all the secrets that were
locked up there, concerning the whole business, between Maximanus, and Honoria;
himself, and Maximanus; until such time as approaching the Tree where Bonella
perished in the Hollow (by reason of the Secretaries perishing in the Dungeon.)
Periissa (as if her divining Soul had bid her stand) makes a halt, and says,
Will you tell me then Hortensius, if these things be true, what can you expect
but to be made away at last, as the rest of his unhappy Instruments have been
already? You that Act their part, must have their Exit.

Truly (said Hortensius) I look for no other.

Why will you stay here then (said Periissa.)

Hortensius casting his Eyes up toward the top of the Trees, he chanced to
spy a Handkerchief, in which (it seems) Bonella (finding her self forsaken,
and buried alive in such a growing Coffin) had wrought her mind in Needle Work,
and bloody Characters shadowed with Death, which she in her life time (having
folded up with a double weight, both of Substance and Signification) threw up
to the place where she could not follow, which catching fast hold upon a Bough,
let fall the same friend that helped it up, that it might the better hang out
Maximanus his Villainy, as upon a Signe-post: And this was the Inscription, viz.

HONORIA IS INNOCENT, I BETRAYED HER, SHE AND AMARISSA WERE CAST INTO A DEAD
SLEEP, SO WAS HORTENSIUS, AND LAID BETWEEN THEM: NOTHING TRUE IN HER
ACCUSATION. HERE I WAS PVT BY MAXIMANUS HIS SECRETARY; AND THIS HOLLOVV TREE
CONTAINS A DEAD TESTIMONY OF A SAD TRVTH

Bonella.


Hortensius and Periissa having both read the Contents, were sufficiently
rejoiced, and furnished with ample satisfaction, they (having viewed the dead
body) both returned to the place from whence they came, both resolving to be
instruments of this discovery; in order whereunto they communed (by the way)
about the manner of the accomplishment. Periissa having brought Hortensius
privily to Corderius his house, she forthwith declares her self to Hortensius
to be Bertaldo his Page, showing him her Apparel, her Letters of Credence; and
calling upon Corderius to witness (what he thought to be) truth: Hortensius
soon quitted his amorous passion, and fell in love with the design. Corderius
presently hastens them both away, with instructions, and some other
Intelligence (relating to discoveries) which he himself had lately found out in
Honoria her behalf. So that they were both gone upon a sudden. Maximanus
missing his Engine, and guessing (rightly) that it would soon be employed
against himself: and finding a great many of strange faces, with unwonted
behaviors, daily looking upon him, thought it high time for him to look about:
wherefore placing a strong Guard of confiding men to look well to the
Princess, and keep the rest in aw, he himself makes all the speed he could to
Moretania (where Lorenzo was) and sends Post after Hortensius and Philoret (his
supposed Mistress) taking his flight as a matter of no small consequence; so
that they were both seized upon at the Ferry side (stayed too long by contrary
winds) by the Governor of Molocco, by virtue of Letters sent by Maximanus,
charging them with the Highest Treason, and so were put into safe Custody, to
attend the coming of Maximanus. Philoret then in Prison comforts up
Hortensius, and betakes him to his old Stratagem (his Box of Ointment) blacks
his Face, alters his Habit, and so conveighs away his Letters and Instructions,
together with himself (at noone day) so invisibly, as if he had carried night
about him; and so went unto the Governor himself, and preoccupies his
understanding with such seasonable truths, as his own well-furnished
abilities and dexterity could easily infuse into a man who had not been
possessed with prejudice, nor by assed with interest to either party: and so
acquainted the Governor with the hard shift that he was feign to make to come
to speak with him, before the Tyrant Maximanus should batter the Justice of so
good a Cause, with the engine of his false pretenses: whereupon he thrusts his
hand into a Basin of water, (that stood there by accident) and washes and wipes
the disguise from off his face. Whereupon the Governor said unto him, That he
had observed many to have put a Good Face upon a bad Matter, but he never had
observed any to put a Bad Face upon a good Cause before. But the news of
Maximanus his arrival, broke off all further discourse: the Governor (doing
that which he most desired) dismissed him to his Fellow prisoner, promising,
That neither of them should suffer the least injury from him, by any means
that Maximanus should attempt: And that he would see them safely brought to
Lorenzo. He was no sooner departed the Room, but Maximanus enters the house,
with such prepared Invectives, and high Accusations against Hortensius, that
had not Philoret forestal'd his market, it might have very probably betrayed
their Innocence to hard usage. But withal, Maximanus told the Governor, That
he could not stay to desire further favor at his hands, then that he would
secure them both till his return; and then he would make known unto him his
further desires concerning them. The Governor glad to hear him say so, told
him. That he would have a special care that they should be forth-comming. So
Maximanus posted away toward Lorenzo, whom after three days journey, he finds
at Mostoka, that was the Emperors Palace.

CHAP. VIII.
Maximanus comes to Lorenzo 's Court his dissimulation, he persuades Lorenzo to
go to satisfy his doubt to a Conjurer; whereupon he gives Maximanus Commission
to kill Honoria and Amarissa: the Governor of Molocco refuses to yield into
his hands Hortentius and Periissa.

News being brought to Lorenzo, that Maximanus was arrived at Court, all were
astonished at the impudence of the man, who bare himself high upon the
confidence which he had of the Prince his favor toward him: but higher upon
the strength of his own brain, which he thought) stood him at any time, in
stead of an Army, to secure him from all emnity; nor did he a little rely upon
his Oratory, able enough (in his own conceit) to entangle no small flies,
within the fine spun cobweb of his fucetious Language.

Him, the Prince sends for, with much greediness of desire to see, as also
with a longing expectation to hear what he would say of his Honoria: in he
comes, Lorenzo receives him with much respect, Bertaldo with grinding teeth, he
Bertaldo with great humanity: the Prince asked him, How he had left his
affairs in Carthage? and what wind had blown him thither? what was become of
his Honoria? commanding an account of that particular, in the first place.

Maximanus with much reverence, and more confidence speaks as follows: Sir,
if you will have me speak in a word, on my soul she is innocent: and I can no
more imagine her to be otherwise, than I can suppose the Sun's clarity, to be
guilty of the same blemishes wherewith the unconstant Moon seems spotted. The
good opinion I had of her virtue (to me) was such, that I refused intelligence
from mine own eyes, and ears. Why (said Bertaldo) what did you see or hear,
speak out your full meaning? Worthy Bertaldo, replied Maximanus, let not a
truth offend you, that proceeds from the mouth of him, who is as great an
Admirer of her worth and rare perfection, as if he were her Brother; but yet
there were strange reports, stranger evidence, and demonstration it self, was
strangest of all. What demonstration? (said Bertaldo) what reports? and what
evidence? why do thou not tell us what they were? Good Bertaldo (said the
Prince) forbear, let him speak his mind. Worthy Bertaldo (said Maximanus)
give me leave to touch this sore, as gently as I may; I do not tell you, that
I believe any thing of all that I have heard, or what was witnessed against
her, nor what I saw; but I believe that envy, and malice, have joined issue, in
the same Conspiracy; I believe the Witnesses were false, and that there was
more than honest craft used to bring these things about, and that delusion had
cast some false medium before our optic nerves, when we beheld the (supposed)
vile Hortensius, in the same Bed, between Honoria and Amarissa; of which there
are diverse Witnesses, answering the former Reports. Whereupon, Bertaldo, with
much vehemence, cries out, Thou Lie, and I Will justify it to be a Lie, were
thou a hundred Maximanus 's. To whom Maximanus (gently) replied, Worthy
Bertaldo, you need not, for Maximanus has (in this business) given himself
the Lie oftener by many times; and is ready to write her Accusation false with
no other point but what this sword shall willingly enable me a Subscriber to
her innocence, with the blood of her Accusers; but how to reconcile the belief
within me, to my outward senses, I cannot tell, if you will have me swear she is
honest, virtuous, loyal, chaste, I Will do it presently; or if (beyond belief)
you will have me say I know it to be so, I Will say, and swear that too; yet I have
eyes and ears that gave me this intelligence, and yet I could never give them
the least credit. Sir, if she be not true to you, I Will lose my life; and if I
have not seen all this, with these same eyes, I am not Maximanus.

This speech, mingled in the same headpiece, with so many truths, and
falsehoods, mysterious expressions, and downright language, Riddles and
Positives, so stupefied those two (of so near relation as Husband and Brother)
that they stood like so many senseless Statuaes, as if both their souls had
suffered one eclipse. Lorenzo first recovering, as first outed of himself,
asked Maximanus, If there were not some Witchcraft in it? or if some delusion
had not beguiled their senses? Maximanus (as if he had been overjoyed that the
Prince had found it out) returned this Answer, that he rejoiced exceedingly, to
see, how the Prince had hit the same nail on the head, that he had been
hammering at all this while; and if there were not Witchcraft in it, he durst
endure all the torments, that the shades of endless rest, with all their Hags
and Furies thereunto belonging could inflict upon those Mortals, who wilfully
do fight against the Gods.

Bertaldo began to be wonderfully pleased with this discourse, Lorenzo (not) to
be fully satisfied with his relation, and if Similitude may obtain Pardon for
the Homeliness of the Comparison, I may tell you, that these two Princes,
retired themselves, for Solitude, into several Corners, like those inferior
creatures, who having got between their teeth some huge and mighty bone (though
there be never so little meat upon it) yet run away with it into some corner or
other, there privately to gnaw upon that, which shame would not permit them to
manage (so) in Public, and at last are feign to leave it, finding their
hunger, more exasperated with toil and labor, than their bellies satisfied
with sustenance; so fruitless was their fumbling at this Gordian Knot, whilst
Maximanus laughes in his sleeve to think into what Dumps his omnipotent brain
had cast these Sons of the Almighty.

At last (watching his opportunity) he finds Lorenzo all alone, and much
perplexed, whose troubled mind he appeases with a remedy worse then the disease.

Sir (said he) what need you vex your soul with these anxieties? Know you not
that there is a Man whom all Africa admires for his rare Art, and Skill, in
representing to the inquisitive view of any man (that has a desire to know)
what things have past between mortal creatures relating to any concernment?
Has not your Victories spread your Glory over the place of his Nativity? And
will you make so little use of your Conquest, as not to lay such Commands upon
him, as will quickly solve all doubts, and set us all to rights, who are thus
bewildred in the maze and labyrinth of these turnings and windings of our
restless thoughts? Honoria deserves that you should use the means to quit
your self of these vain Jealousies and fears. For on my soul she is as
Chaste as ever the shee-turtle dove, can be unto her mate. Though I could not
stop my Ears, nor shut mine Eyes, against those things which I both saw, and
heard: I should be as glad to be satisfied my self, as you; aliis rebus
pietatem colas, we must set sorcery and witchcraft together by the ears, if
the servants play the jack, we must complain unto the Master Devil. I had
rather be brought into Paradise again, by his means, then to carry such a
Hell within my bosom for want of a little shaking hands with the Devil.
Pardon me Sir, if I venture too boldly in my advice, seeing my love cannot
endure to see you in such a storm, as is ready to make Shipwreck of all your
happiness, and to overwhelme all your glory, in the depression of the greatest
of your contentments. Whereupon Lorenzo stops his further speaking with
Embracements; crying over and over again, Honest Maximanus! how much am I
beholding unto thee? Who would have done this for me besides thy self? thou
have eased me already, let the event be what it will. I shall know the truth,
that is something; nay, that is all: For if she be true, and faithful to me, my
heart's at rest: If she be false, yet I am satisfied in this, that I cannot
wrong her whatsoere I do. Wherefore I will not endure another days torment to
gain all Africa. Prepare your self to go along with me, I will be ready this
night by ten of the Clock at the Park-gate all alone, there meet me privately;
none shall know where we have been, or what we have done.

Then (said Maximanus) what great matter is it for us to steal our Quietus est,
out of the Devils Office?

Thou say right Maximanus (said the Prince) honest, honest Maximanus, how
much am I beholding unto thee!

In comes Bertaldo whilst they were in this discourse, whom Maximanus espying,
patches up his discourse with a piece of a clean contrary color, saying: Sir,
I would not mistrust that woman to gain the world; if you do, you do your
self a great deal of wrong. Bertaldo saluted Maximanus very kindly, seeing
Lorenzo look so cheerfully, whom he hoped (by this time) to be dispossessed of
that peaking Devil, Jealousy, by some Exercisme that Maximanus had then used,
all was well, all were merry and joviall, a sine time, if it would hold: But
alas, this was but that which we call lightning before death; mirth, before
sorrow; and laughter, before destruction. The time appointed is already come,
wherein Lorenzo and Maximanus were to meet, who both kept touch with one
another (as such meetings seldom fail) they accosted (betimes in the morning
at the Caves mouth) this Mandragora (the Devils Corn-cutter) who (when he has
you by the foot, can easily tell you where the shoe wri^^^) invites them into
his Den in this language: Sons of Curiosity, why stand ye gazing in the open
air? descend, and satisfy your longings in those demands wherein you would be
satisfied, and I shall represent the naked truth before your eyes, re-acted as
at first it was. Now this Tredeskin of all natures secrets (who musters up his
rarities, and draws them up in a Parade, fitting them for service) was richly
bribed by Maximanus to present Honoria unto his view, in such unseemly postures
with Hortensius, as might well bereave him so of all his senses, that he might
easily drive him into most horrid and cruel resolutions against Honoria.

Forthwith Maximanus leads the innocent Lorenzo by the hand down into the Cave
(like the venomous Spider, who once having entangled the harmless silly Fly
within his Web, he drags him into his hole to torment, and there devour him)
who having thus wilfully forsaken the light, and condescended to those deeds of
darkness. Apollio, the Devils Engineer, takes a Cushion in his hand stuffed
with Moss, that had been gathered off of dead men's Sculs, and claps it down
into a Chair, whose seat was softened with dead men's hair, legged and armed with
dead men's Bones, and covered with their Skins: and bids Lorenzo to sit down:
Telling him, that now he is come there, he must do as the place requires.

Then he falls to his conjuring terms, and circulations, which when he had
thoroughly performed, he squeezes out of a bottle a glass of water, or juice,
that was extracted, and distilled out of no other herb, or simple, but that
which we (usually) call Jewes-eares; this he bids Lorenzo drink, still telling
him, that now he is come there, he must needs do as the place requires.

Lorenzo neither knowing what he did, nor yet what farther injunctions might be
required at his hands, once wished he had not put himself under a power
wherein he was so ignorant of the danger of the disobedience; the frighted
judgment of his brain (that then was ray'd with his own hair, standing stiff
an end, like ported feathers of some Porcupine) told him, That now he was gone
so far, it was no wisdom, and perhaps, no safety to retire. Wherefore he
drank it off, then Apollio takes the milk of the Hienna, which he held out to
him in a little cup, whose material was a dried and well wrought Toadstool,
which this Apollio called Eyebright Water, willing him to wash his eyes
therewith, not forgetting to tell him, That now he was come there, he must
needs do as the place required. Which he obeys. These two Informers thus
sufficiently corrupted, they could presently hear a fearful noise, as that of
Waters, falling down their Precipice; then another like that of Thunder;
afterward a hollow sound, resembling that which men do use to hear
immediately after Earthquakes: And at last, a rusling noise like flames of
Fire, after they have newly made their eruptions out of their mothers womb.
Apollio cries silence to the four Elements, and all obey: Forthwith they might
hear the language of Court-ships, the smacks of Kisses, the clapping of Cheeks,
and the laughing at Jests: And these so Acted to the life, that Lorenzo might
easily suppose them to be Honoria's words and laughter before he saw her. Then
he might see Honoria with Hortensius his Arms about her Neck, and hers about
his Middle, entering a loof, and after those lascivious postures that were
between them, more uncivil then fitting to be expressed: He beheld Hortensius
throwing her down against a Flowery bank, committing those non dicenda's, which
my Pen cannot be guilty of the relation; insomuch that Lorenzo's fancy was so
strong, that his imagination thought it so real, as that he drew his Sword,
and would have executed vengeance upon a delinquency that never had a being,
but in the Hiennas milk that had washed his Eyes, had not Apollio with his
black rod forbade the enterprise by a wasted prohibition over the Prince his
Head. Lorenzo cries aloud, I have seen enough, and will be revenged for what
I Have seen. Apollio Brandishes his Black Rod again, and tells him, He must see
all with patience now he is there, and be as much displeased afterward as the
cause required.

Lorenzo was now vexed that he must see more, and have (for the present) no
other subject (but a Type) to wreak his fury on: In discontent he flings
himself down into the Chair, in such disorderly method, that he brake the
legs and arms thereof, recovering himself from the fall, with bruising his
right hand, which was a good Omen, viz. that at last he should break the bones
of that delusion wherein he had seated himself by such persuasion, and recover
himself by the crush of Maximanus. Now the scene is altered, and there appears
a fair goodly Chamber, with a Rich Bed, which Lorenzo remembered (well enough)
exactly to set forth his own. Apollio with his Charming instrument draws open
the Curtains; so that Lorenzo plainly saw Hortensius (between Honoria and
Amarissa) kissing Honoria and Amarissa (with violent hands) snatching the
kisses (head and all) from the embracing Arms of (the as much Beautiful, as
abused) Honoria; together with some other Non-credenda's that were not to be
believed by any, but by such as had learned their Creed out of the Devils
Chatechisme. Lorenzo having observed too much by all: Leaves that Hellish
darkness for the Heavenly Light; and swears by the true substance of that
shadow, that he will be severely revenged upon that foul Abuse, and fair
Adultresse: saying, That this was Amarissa 's spightfulnesse toward him, to
Bawd out her revenge for his supposed for saking of her, but he would be quit
with her. Presently Signing to both their Deaths under his own Hand, written
against the Shoulder of Maximanus, that was broad enough to bear so great
injuries to others, whilst they were so narrow in his own behalf, that they
were not able to support the burden of a Chaste denial.

Thus the last Act being ended, Lorenzo having spoke the Epilogue, Maximanus
gives the Plaudite in these words:

Worthy Prince,

As long as there was any favorable possibility of beating back a belief, that
forced it self so violently upon me (you know) I did withstand it, but now I
must give way, and applaud your resolution.

Maximanus (said Lorenzo) thou art too good, and I too happy in such a Friend;
crown all thy other services with thy obedience to this one Command: look that
they do not live longer then the time that thou shall be Riding Post to
Carthage, shall defer the Execution, and that it may be the sooner done, make
haste to Horse. O Whores, and hateful pieces of Womankind, I am sorry you
have but one life apiece to lose. Make haste Maximanus, I pray thee make haste.

Sir (said Maximanus) what will you do with Bertaldo? if you do not make sure
of him, you will find a Canker in your bosom.

Maximanus (said Lorenzo) be sure I Will pare his Nails, and knock the teeth out
of his Head when first I meet him.

Maximanus, good Maximanus, (said Lorenzo) will thou make all the haste thou
can, and let me hear from thee as soon as ere thou can that they are dead.

So they both parted, the one with a laugh in his Sleeve, the other with a flea
in his Ear.

Lorenzo returning from his Purgatory, to his Palace, Bertaldo could not be
long out of his sight, but salutes him in this language: How fares the Prince?
we thought that we had lost you, none could tell what was become of you.

Lorenzo gives him this sullen reply, It may be so, what of that?

Bertaldo asked him, what was become of Maximanus?

Lorenzo told him, that Maximanus was, where Maximanus should be, about his
business.

Bertaldo (supposing that Maximanus (having engrossed him to himself all that
time of absence) had put him into this bad humor) told him, That he believed
that Maximanus had done ill Offices between him and his Sister; wishing him to
beware how he suffered himself to be abused by such an instrument.

As your Sister (said Lorenzo) who could play the Hypocrite so finely when I
was there, and the Whore so cunningly when I was gone. The truth whereof, since
I saw you last, I have been fully satisfied. You have been fully injured (said
Bertaldo) and not satisfied: by him you could not, who was unsatisfied
himself: it is he has played the Hypocrite, and is the bad Instrument that
makes this discord in the Harmony that should be between Man and Wife, Friend
and Friend. Lorenzo remember how you had once forgot your self before, and
acknowledged your own Error.

It was an Error that I acknowledged it to be so, (said Lorenzo) but now my
judgment stands on better terms.

No, on worser Grounds, replied Bertaldo.

Bertaldo lies, replied the Prince.

Whereat Bertaldo having lost all patience, told him, That neither the Guard of
his Person, nor his Conquering Army, should any longer confine his Soul from
her Enlargement; but that he durst tell him to his face, that he was unworthy
of her, and his un-princely behavior toward her undeserving of the least
perfection in her.

Whereat they both drew their Swords upon one another, and began to lay on
blows: Cosdruball and Hanno standing by would not suffer it, but laid hands
upon Bertaldo, persuasions upon Lorenzo, neither prevailing: The Prince his
Guard was called, and seized upon Bertaldo, who by Command was committed a
close Prisoner. Lorenzo still raving against Honoria and Amarissa, with no
small threatenings against Bertaldo. The night (coming on) that should have
given him rest, administers new matter of disquietnesse; for Aminda's (now)
angry Genius gives him this Curtain-lecture as a cooling Card to his
over-boyling Rage.

Nor loss of Friends, nor the sped hate
Of Enemies, shall expiate
This horrid Act that thou have done;
To slay Wife, Mother, and a Son
Thou knew'st not of. O vile intent
To Murder Three, and all Three innocent!
And Amarissa, thy true Friend, and hers:
O Cruel, Bloody, Murderers!
She suffers Martyrdom for you,
You persecute your Martyr too.
Nourish a Viper, Lick up Gaul;
Through down your Young one, Nest and all.
The Moors shall punish this thy Sin,
And sad Repentance wound within.
Lorenzo starts out of his Bed, and raves about the Room, tearing his Hair, on
whom Aminda bestows this sad farewell:

Rave on, but er't be long, you will run
Madder, to think what you have done.
Lorenzo cries out, Oh ye powers above, and ye below! why do ye rack me thus?
why do you not agree upon your Principles, and draw me (so but one way) which
you will? can no ease shelter a mind from being baited thus? or are both
powers agreed to play at Football with a mortal Creature? Then flings into
his Bed, kicks away the Clothes, pulls them on again; falls from restless
thoughts, into unquiet slumbers: And from thence, into the fearfullest Dreams,
out of which he was at last awakened with a greater Terror. For Berontus
brought Intelligence that the Moors had beaten up the Out-quarters of the
Army, appearing like clouds that hung upon the Mountains, where we leave him
for a while in his distracted thoughts of preparation against so great an Army,
to hasten after Maximanus, that we may observe how he prospers in his Affairs.

CHAP. X.
Maximanus is denied the Rendition of the two Prisoners, Hortensius and
Philoret. The Governor sends them both to Lorenzo. Maximanus coming to
Carthage, thinking to bring Honoria and Amarissa to their Trials, is resisted
by Corderius. He sends them both to be murdered privately; and the event.

MAximanus riding post to the Garrison, where he had left Hortensius and
Philoret, in as great haste demands the Prisoners of the Governor, who (as
short as he) tells him, that he is none of his Vassal, neither his Masters
Subject, and that he would send them to Lorenzo, according to their
instructions, and their own desires. Instructions, said Maximanus, I pray from
whom? I am not bound to tell you (said the Governor.) Maximanus began to smell
a Rat, and thought it high time to look about him, and to make haste with his
Execution, for fear of a Reprieve: nonsuited, he departs suddenly for Carthage,
and the Governor sends his Wards to Mauritania, and brings them partly on
their way, where we leave them, and hasten after Maximanus, whom we have now
overtaken, within the Walls of Carthage.

He was no sooner there, but he hastens on the Trial, but he is resisted by
the major part of the Nobility, and especially by Corderius, who told him
plainly, that though he was the Chief, yet he was but one, and that there were
strange rumors in the Court, that forbade those undertakings, till the Prince
returned, requiring the Prisoners more Enlargement and better Usage. Maximanus
remembering that his Commission was to kill and slay, (rather than to bring to
trial) he resolves to put it in Execution any way, and not to insist at all
upon the form; wherefore he prepares two bloody Villains to carry these two
Innocents, privily, by night, into the Wood, and there to Murder them: they
receive their Wages, and go about their work. Honoria and Amarissa (not
having seen one another many a day) now see themselves both carried (like two
sheep) unto the slaughter; they wept on one another, but were soon parted, and
dragged away by night into the Wood, (the Moon shining bright) wherein, they
were no sooner entered, but one of the Murderers told them that they must die.
With all my heart, when you please, replied Honoria, but did you know the wrong
I suffer, I know you would not do it for the world; but because it is
impossible for me, to make you believe otherwise, I will urge you no further.
Are you prepared? said one of the Villains. Alas! said Honoria, my five months
imprisonment, has been nothing else but a preparation for this end. Why, said
the other (beginning a little to relent) are you innocent? will you take it
upon your death? I do, I will, replied Honoria. Hark ye, said Amarissa, so
will I, and as sure as ye are Men, so sure are we both innocent, so sure go I
a Virgin to my Grave, so sure is Prince Lorenzo 's Bed unstained and undefiled
by the chaste Honoria. Maximanus does all this, because she would not yield to
him, in that, for which, he now destroys us both: you cannot be ignorant of
the reports in every mouth, throughout the Court, of a sleeping Drink, that
was given us, to keep us fast enough from waking, whilst the innocent
Hortensius drunk with the same brine, should senslesly be laid between us, nor
of Bonella and the Secretary (both Agents in the same design) both made away,
for fear of telling tales: you cannot be ignorant of Hortensius and Bertaldo
's Page, both sent unto Lorenzo, to acquaint him with the business, who by
this time are far enough out of Maximanus his clutches; you cannot imagine
but that Lorenzo will be shortly here, and soon enform'd of these particulars;
but (then) too late, when we are murdered by you.

Good Fellows, let me tell you what you shall do, I know, that what you do,
you do for money; follow but my advice, ye shall be rich enough, highly
rewarded, and promoted for your service, preserve us but for a while, and say
that you have murdered us; have you no friends with whom you may repose so
great a confidence? and if (upon Lorenzo's return) you do not find us
cleared and lamented beyond imagination, then come and do your office; but if
you find it, as I Am sure you shall, what thanks, what praises, what rewards
will be thought too great for such a preservation?

Navigius (one of the Villains) a Seaman by profession, began to think it
both piety and policy; the other Blood-hound cried, Let Us do our work, we
came not here to hear them prate. But hark you, (said the other to his Fellow)
suppose that all this be true, I assure you there are a great many that do
believe it. Suppose you are Fooled, (said the other) with a Woman's tears and
language, must I be so too? True or false, I Will do as I was commanded: and
forthwith draws his Sword, and was falling to his work. Which the other
perceiving, draws too, and bids him hold a little, the two Innocents get
behind the Seaman: the other swearing, that he would come at them, or he would
make his way through Navigius his sides. The Seaman (partly with choler,
partly with pity, and partly with a kind of sense of honor, how brave a
thing it would be for him to be the Preserver of those two Ladies, and have all
the glory to himself) undertakes their quarrel, they both fight, and Amarissa
perceiving that their Friend was likeliest to be worsted, she takes off her
Scarf and ruffles it up in a heap, and throws it in the others eyes, whilst
the Seaman runs him through the body, that down he fell, and dyed
immediately. Whereupon the two Ladies (like two Hens that cluck about their
fighting Cock after that he has got the victory) applaud his Valor, he
Amarissa's Policy, and tells Honoria, how that he was a Seaman by his
profession, and that he was Partner of such a Ship, that rode in such a Bay,
that was not very far off, and how that the wind stood fair for the Island
of Majorca, and that thither he would carry them, where they should expect for
better fortune. They were ravished with joy, for this good news, calling upon
him to make haste, thinking themselves beholding to the Moon who first gave
them light, to be their assistant, and then went down, as conniving at their
departure.

They were both shipped, and under sail, the sails carried them upon their
wings, to their desired Harbor in the greater Island of Majorca, but it is
impossible for a Dark gray ever to make a True blew, so the Gallantry that was
worded into this man, could not but a little favor of the caske wherein it was
infused, for as he stumbled upon an act of honor, so he tripp'd in his through
pace to true magnanimity and Gallantry, for he was no sooner landed in the
Island, but he offers up their beauties to sale and prostitution, for base
lucre sake: Honoria is soon bought by Thoron, great Commander of the Island;
Amarissa perceiving which way she was going, betakes her to the wit that never
failed her in her extremity, telling her Chapman that if she must be sold she
must obey, and that there was a rich and wealthy man, who was an inhabitant in
the Isle Minorca, who was a great Suitor to her formerly for a piece of some
Dishonesty, and that he offered her a thousand Crowns for her Virginity; the
latter I have still, (said she) the former is at your commands, if you do but
bring me thither; if you cannot make more of me here, I hope you will think it
wisdom to carry me thither. This Gentleman (whom she meant, and whose name was
Castriot) was her own Uncle, thither she deludes this Asinego to the
preservation of her own Honor, and Honoria's; for he had no sooner brought
her thither, but she tells her Uncle the whole story, who did him no hurt for
the good-sake which he had done, and no great good for the evilsake which he
intended. Castriot presently writ to Thoron (his great acquaintance and
special friend) what Civilities he should use to a Person of so great quality
as was Honoria, who had not as yet discovered her Condition unto Thoron (being
(craftily) told by Navigius, that if she did reveal her self, she should
certainly be betrayed into Maximanus his Custody by Thoron, who two were all
one) and yet preserved her self from his contagion by this stratagem. She
pretends her self to be a Maid, and begs hard, that his pleasure might be
suspended but for three days; the third day being come, she entreats (for
modesty sake) that he would meet her in the dark; he grants her request, and
all, to obtain her good will, as well as her self; he appointed her the place
where she should go, which was, to a spacious Room, where was no light at
all; he follows her, who had slipped off her shoes against his coming, who
(entering the Room) asked her where she was? she answered, here my Lord: he
advancing toward the voice, she traverses her ground, and was not to be found;
he asked her again, where art thou? she steps aside again, and said, I am
here, why don't you come? why where, said Thoron: Here I tell you, said
Honoria: still waving his approach till she had kept him in that posture two
long hours, till at last he was glad that he had found the door, and shutting
her in, he fetches a candle, which he brings with him in his hand, and enters
the Room the second time, asking her, why she used him in that manner? To let
you see (replied Honoria) what a vanity it is that you hunt after; Beauty is
but skin deep, and that skin you could not tell how to touch without being
beholding to so poor an accessory as the light of a Candle: Cotton, and
Tallow, are fine ingredients, to be of the Essence of your amorous Passion;
for, you see without them, you were as far from laying hands, as eyes upon
the object of your delight, which is not so much real, as it is imaginary; nor
is it so much as valuable by imagination neither, but by accident, like glass
or ice, that have no luster in themselves, but by reflection of a second cause:
Alas! this thing which you call Beauty wherewith you men are so transported, is
but differenced from Deformity, like the glistring rays of Steel and Iron,
that is still the same in substance, worth, and quality, with that which is but
rusty: Alas! what is this inconsiderate thing called Beauty? a thing not
qualified with so much virtue as are several stones, salt water, or rotten
wood: Nay, the beautifullest outside of Womankind has not those privileges,
that nature has bestowed upon the scales of fishes, or the eyes of catts, all
these have their excellencies visibility in the dark, but you could neither
see, nor find, nor touch, nor take your pleasure, but by some other means,
which was neither in your self, nor me; wherefore if you will be rightly in
love, be not in love with Accidents, but with that substance, to which light it
self is but a shadow. The soul that forsakes the Divine love, and gives it to
the Creature, is like the silly Chicken, who having lost his parent, follows
after the next creature that it meets withal; your love is but misplaced; Oh!
how admirably would you love the Gods? how well bestowed were that affection?
yet I will not deny but that there is a lawful, and true love proper between
Man and Woman; but withal, there is an idoneity in placing that affection, it
must not be fixed upon an illicit object, such a one, as I am to all mankind,
that are affected with the awefulnesse of a deity, having vowed my self, a
Vestall Virgin: Wherefore make your retreat as honorable as you can, and let
your behavior be such, to your poor Servant, as becoming the honor of your
Ancestory, and a pattern of true piety, and virtue.

Thoron fell from being in love with her person, to be much affected with the
rare perfection of her mind; And as well becoming the imitation of a true
Convertite, he gives himself to resignation in those things, which her divine
Reasons had fore-dictated unto him, bidding her henceforward to fear no worse
events but what her own Commands should lay upon him, and the rest that then
were under his Authority.

But there happened a very merry passage (occasioned by Thoron's familiarity
and so much courting of Honoria) between the said Thoron and his Wife Armena,
who being a Woman of a high Spirit, and one that had formerly got the mastery
of two Husbands, and had oftentimes bid fair for this, but found that the god
Mercury was not to be made of every piece of wood, and that this was of too
cross-grained a disposition for all her art and tools to engraven a similitude
of any of the former out of either of the originalls, for this was a notable
man at curbing a woman, howsoever the often attemptings hereof had been the
occasion not only of much difference, but oftentimes of some hard usage
toward Armena, which at this time (by reason of Thoron's daily addresses and
supposed intimacy with Honoria, together with her disdain and jealousy
thereupon) was much aggravated, for she drew upon her self heapt measures of
his rage and fury, for he was no less liberal with his tongue in his unseemly
language against her, but his hands were also somewhat heavy upon her, which he
had no sooner performed, but she vowed she would be revenged, calling him,
Coward and base Fellow to strike a Woman, telling him, that it is pity but
that there should be a Law to make it death to any one that should strike a
Woman that had never struck a Man (which words sunk the deeper into his
cogitation, being so well fastened to the weight of his own guiltiness)
bidding him look to it, telling him, that if she could not get Men and Women
enough to take her part, she would set Dogs upon him but she would be revenged,
and never would put up so foul and unmanlike an affront upon a Woman of her
quality: and forthwith flung out of the room.

Thoron knowing her high spirit, great friends, and remembering how (most
commonly) she used to be as good as her word, believed no less, but feared as
much; he could wish it undone, but could not tell how to help it: would fain
have been friends with her, but knew not how: she cast about, in what manner
she might load her vengeance on his back, yet not break it, 'cause some
trembling in his joints, but break no bones; her fury rather inventing some
witty stratagem of revenge, than consulting with any malice that was
implacable; she (diving into her Husbands disposition, and finding it but of
somewhat an inferior alay in point of magnanimity) resolves upon an adventure,
no less answerable to the fullness of her satisfaction, than innocent in the
prosecution thereof, and thus she lays her plot: she sends to Fanor, one in
whom she reposed much confidence, and knew to be one whom Thoron had a good
opinion of, him she acquaints with the falling out between her and her Husband,
pretends a great desire to be reconciled: Fanor was very desirous to perform
so good an office between them; she prevents his seeking brain, with what she
had prepared out of her own invention, and thus far she acquaints him with her
design. Fanor (says she) I think I need not tell you of the difference that
is between my Lord and I, he abused me, and gave him as good as he brought; yet
howsoever it is not fit that Man and Wife should continue long at such a
distance, I believe he would be willing enough to be reconciled, but his
stomach will not come down; and I could find in my heart to kiss and be
friends, but I cannot abide to seek to him, so that the strife between us two
is only this,

I stout, and thou stout,
And who shall carry the dirt out?
Wherefore, honest Fanor, I would have thee do thus, Invite us both to Supper,
and some others, whose company thou know will be most pleasing to him, (I
will be at all the Charges) and let me have the best Music that may be had for
money. Here Fanor began to interrupt Armena, saying, Madame, by no means, you
both have not been so sparing in your obligations, nor your benefits so
slenderly performed in the behalf of your humble Servant, as that he should not
be as willing as able to deposit such a pledge of gratitude without any such
Indentures. No, no, good Fanor, (said Armena) it must not be so, I must have my
will, the reasons you shall know hereafter, and the house and managery of the
whole business you shall leave to me: do you go and invite him, and tell
him, that your intention is to do the like to me, and then let me hear what
he says, and you shall know more of my mind hereafter.

Away goes Fanor to Thoron, and acquaints him with his desires. Thoron, glad of
this opportunity, tells Fanor, that He could not have done him a greater
pleasure, for at this time (said Thoron) there is a little falling out between
me and my Wife, and a third place and strange company will be the only means
to take away that strangeness that is between us, where both of us shall be
apt to fall into our former familiarity through shame that any notice should be
taken of its being otherwise, lest it be a shame unto us both; and where
merriment may happily put her into a good humor: but do thou think thou can
prevail with her?

Leave that to me, (said Fanor) on my life she shall go with you. I pray thee
do, said Thoron.

Away went Fanor to Armena, and acquainted her with all that had passed between
her Lord and him.

Armena insinuates her design to Fanor's approbation, which thus she put in
execution: The time being come when it was time to go, and Thoron already
mounted in his Caroach, word was brought the Lady Armena that my Lord staid for
her; she begins her small revenge with letting him wait a little: yet ever and
anon sending him word that she was coming, making her tiring of his patience
to act the first part of her Comedy; at last she comes handed by Fanor, and as
she drew near the Caroach, Thoron would feign have spoken to her, if he knew
how; and angrily, if he durst: Come, come, was all he said: those two words (he
thought) bated not one inch of his spirit, and yet he insulted not a little
(inwardly) that they were such words, and so spoken, as might very well imply
an indignation: but Armena being ready to step into the Caroach, beheld him
with such a sprightly countenance, and piercing eye, that his dull ones (as if
two bullets had been fixed in clay) informed his timorous soul, that they
beheld armed men in woman's eyes: whereupon, he bethought himself of an
honorable retreat (if he should be charged with any hastiness of speech, or
roughness of language) and how he might safely bring those two words off
again (if occasion served) with the safe conducts, of excuse, and kindness.
But, Armena fearing to spoil the game she was now playing with too much
forwardness, resolved, to use no other castigation for the present, but her
looks: wherefore, without speaking a word unto him, she ascends the Caroach.
Thoron, that he might, and might not seem to help her up, reaches out his hand,
but never so much as touched her; he thought he could do no less than what
she found to be nothing at all. The time which the Caroacheer allowed himself
for setting forward seemed tedious to them both, whilst neither of them knew
how to behave themselves to one another, otherwise then in settling themselves;
which they were both longer about, then either of them needed, protracting the
time with such antic behaviors, until the language of the whip, caused the
wel-manag'd horses, to make stones, and wheels, supply the place of oratory,
until such time as they came to the place where they were to light; and then
they were to seek again. Thoron first descends the Caroach, after him, Fanor:
whom, when Thoron had espied almost engaged in the service of leading his Lady
by the arm, he made a kind of offer as if he would (if Fanor had not) have
been so kind. Armena seeing the respect she looked for, approaching a far off,
waves the former; and expects the advance of her Husbands courtesy: he so far
on in his way, knew not how to recall himself, but goes through with it, and
leads her by the arm, through a Court which (on both sides in the paved walks)
was filled with some of his acquaintance, but all her friends: who saluted them
both at a distance, and no more, (as she had laid the plot) up stairs he
leads her, Fanor leaves them both, into a spacious goodly Room she brought
him, no body there, the saying of the cloth, the many trenchers, and napkins,
spoke many Guests; but his expectation wondered at the solitude, and her
silence, (together with the fear of what he saw without) had put him into such
a perplexity that it made such a throng of confused thoughts within his breast,
that when he strove to give them air, they wedged themselves so in the door of
utterance, that a word could not come forth.

Now you must understand that Armena had so laid the plot that the Musicians
(our of a Music Room over head invisible) had Command given them, that as
soon as ever the Lady Armena should speak the word DRAW, that then they were
to strike up: and (for the greater Terror sake) the Lesson, which was called
the BATTLE; and thereupon a mighty noise and bustling was heard at the back
Door and Entry that led into the Dining Room; with some other preparations and
performances requisite to the design she had in hand. All things thus in a
readiness, and his body sufficiently prepared for the operation of such
Physic, she thus begins to act her part:

My Lord,

You know who I am; neither am I ignorant of the uttermost of your Worth and
Merit: you know upon what terms you took me, and what you promised, and how
you have abused me, contrary to all Faith and Honesty, contrary to all Civility
and Manhood: think you that my Fathers Daughter can put up such injuries as
these at Thorons hands?

No Sir, you shall now know, that you are in my power, and find that I can use
you according to your demerits. Draw (said Armena) forthwith the Music struck
up, immediately whereupon there was heard such a noise of clattering of Armor
together, clashing of Swords one against another; such duplications, and
re-duplications of Blows: And to complete all Terror, a most fearful noise
of many verberations, and re-verberations of so many stripes (as it were) of
Cudgels over the shoulders of unarmed Men. Armena in the next room having
placed ten lusty Fellows (at the same time) to be there beating the dust out
of a piece of Hangings; And to make the Fury the more formidable, she had
ordained certain men to dash huge and mighty Earthen Pitchers against the
wall, as if men's Brains were beating out, and the pieces of their Sculs flying
about the room. In which interim (in several places) high words were at
Variance; Vehement language in hot Skirmish; Down with him says one; Enter,
enter, says another; Hold, hold, says a third; We will have him says a
fourth. All this while Thoron stood in a maze, Armena with her Arms a kimbo,
laughing in his face all the while; but at last, when the Terror had made its
approach up to the very Door, and they all cried, Fall on, fall on, fall on,
(as if the Assasinats had got the victory) away runs Thoron down the stairs,
(the only way from whence appeared (as yet) no horror) Armena after him, when
behold! he was not half way down the stairs, but he beheld men all in Armor,
with ported Halberts at his breast: Thoron makes a stand, and by this time the
Furious Bustle was got into the Dining Room, as if it threatened an execution
into attomes. Armena finding her Husband by this time in a sufficient ecstasy,
cried to him, My Lord, my Lord, you have no way in the world to save your Life,
but to throw your self upon my mercy, and ask me forgiveness.

That joyful word, and comfortable saying, opened his Mouth; who, upon his
knees, cries unto her with elevated and wrung hands together, Dearest Love,
good Wife, sweet Armena, spare my life but this time, and I will never offend
thee more! O speak to them Armena! speak to them good Armena! Lot them not come
up, keep them from coming down; I will deserve your mercy, and you shall have
your will for evermore.

Armena having brought her Design to full perfection, called him to her,
saying, Come hither, come hither my Lord, quickly, quickly, quickly. Thoron
rises up, and asks her where? Where for the love of God? Here (said Armena)
Lie down here (placing him in a corner of the Stairs, close behind her)
whilst she beckons with her Hand, (which was the Sign that they should be
gone) who being vanished by degrees, she bids him get up, and follow her, and
fear nothing (being very desirous to make as short work with him as she could,
he smelt so strongly of the running disease) he follows her with his Eyes
wandering about, lest any part of the Enemy should lie in Ambush, and surprise
him, before he could call for succor to Armena; and never thought himself safe
until she had brought him under Lock and Key, where she read him this Lecture:

My Lord,

You see how that you are more afraid then hurt, and that there was more Sport
then Harm in my Revenge: You see I can play with you and yet not hurt you;
and, if it be not your own fault, you shall find, that I can Jest with you, and
Shame you not. For I protest unto you, there is none of all those
Swash-bucklers, or Halbertiers, that knew the least particular of my intention;
neither have any taken notice of your fear, nor is it possible they should know
that it was any trick of mine, neither was there any intention to do you the
least hurt. And upon my Honor, Fanor (himself) was no more privy to this plot
then the Sucking Child: For it was I (that had a mind to be friends with you)
who caused him to invite us both unto a Supper; I am at the Charges of the
Feast, I ordered the business; this was to be but the beginning of a Masque,
whereby (as it were) the scene of blustering Mars was opened, next whereunto
Peace is to appear with all her plenty in her Arms, placing her several
Dishes upon the Table. Fanor I sent away on purpose (upon an Errant) that he
should not take notice of my design; now, if you can keep your own council,
and use me well; that is to say, let me have my will, for I will have it, you
shall never be disgraced for all this: otherwise I will show you twenty such
tricks as these.

Thoron (about to commend her wisdom, assure her of performance of her
desires, and to Embrace her in his Arms) brought such a scent along with him,
that she could not but take notice of it, and offer him her assistance, (as
far as it was fitting) wherefore she told him, (merrily, and smiling upon
him) My Lord, I know you have bewrayed your self most abominably, and there is
a necessity in it, that I must stand your friend, or else all the wit in both
our pericraniums will not be able to keep this a secret. Therefore I will tell
Fanor that you and I intend to lie in his House all night, and I Will send home
my Woman for clean Linen, and so you may shift your self; and if you can make
your self clean, I can keep your council. Thoron confessed all, and prayed her
to be as good as her word, but especially in keeping his Council in every
particular, assuring Armena that she should find him a very good Husband from
that time forward: things being performed on her part she ordering the
business as she promised, brought him (though somewhat late) sweet and clean,
hand in hand, lovingly together, into the Dining Room amongst all the Company,
whose no notice taking of any such matter; nor laughing or jeering at any such
thing, (as indeed they had no cause, such was their ignorance) very much
confirmed and consolated the poor man, who was fully satisfied with this
belief, that all had been true that had been assured unto him by his Wife: But
Armena upon this hold, Reigned as Lady Governesse ever after.

CHAP. XI.
A discourse between Fanor and Armena, concerning Man and Wife, how either may
obtain the sovereignty of each other.

FAnor (perceiving the sudden alteration and submisse behavior of Thoron
toward his Wife Armena, together with some other circumstances) collected a
great many particulars conducing to a perfect knowledge of the means, whereby
Armena had obtained that Sovereignty over her Husband, which as good as known,
she as good as acknowledged, which was the occasion of some discourse between
them two, concerning achievements of that nature. For Armena was of opinion,
That there was never a Woman in the world, but might have her will of her
Husband, and do what she would with him, except she were a fool (let him be of
what disposition he could be of.)

How is that (said Fanor?) That were a Doctrine that would find many Disciples
if you could teach it them.

Truly (said Armena) I can teach it you.

With all my heart (said Fanor) I would willingly learn it, that I might teach
it to my Mistrisse, whereby she might become an excellent Wife.

O (said Armena) she will never learn it of you, it must be taught her by one
of her own sex, that she may learn it from her.

How is it I beseech you Madam?

A wise Wife (said Armena) must pry into the inclination and disposition of
her Husband, observe his humors, inform her self of what temper he is made,
otherwise she gives battle before she knows how the enemy lies: many a
foolish Woman has lost the day for want of this forecast: if she perceives him
to be of a Noble constitution of mind, and magnanimous spirit, then (whatsoever
hers is) let her submit to him: and then (as a flint is sooner malleable that
receives its strokes upon the yiedling cushion than upon resisting iron, so
the stoutest heart, mollifies and relents, upon the softness of a disposition,
that hardens, where it meets with opposition.

Or like a fiddle-stick Madame, (said Fanor) which though you sit upon it with
all your weight, upon a hard bench, yet it will not break; but if you lay it on
a feather-bed, and so repose your weight upon it, it will break immediately.

Come, come, you are a wagge (said Armena) I speak nothing but reason, Mars his
Men, have minds, like Mars his Livery; and are of the same nature of the Buffe
they wear: through which a Straw may insinuate it self, when the sharpest
edge or point can neither cut nor enter; through which the mildness of a
breath can puff the fierce flame of an incensed Taper out, which full-chopt
Boreas (with his keenest breath) can never pierce. A noble mind will foster up
those pleasing submissions of a Wife, with such condescentions, as shall be
encouragements to a good subject: whereas contention between such high Spirits,
is like Brimstone, mingled with Coal and Peter, whereof such a composure is
soon made, as with the additament of the least heat, the whole frames, piles,
and building, which have been erected upon no less firm foundation then
sacred vows, and conjugall affections have been oftentimes blown up, and have
returned no greater benefit to their Parents, then Noise and Terror.

But if she finds her Husband to be a poor spirited man, then let her put hard
(a Gods Name) for no small share in the Government. Then let her make her self
(if she can) a Free state, her husband, but her Duke of Venice. She does but
like those Indian Women, who carry their Heads in their Bosoms: such a Man will
be glad to do any thing for quietness sake like dying man, whose spirits being
spent, and weak, says I to every thing, to avoid troublesomnesse) whereas the
want of these inspections and prosecutions, is the occasion of all the
combustions that are twixt Man and Wife.

There is no way to make an abject mind become a monster, but by humouring of
it; and if you sacrifice complacencies to such a poverty, you make him a Tyrant.

Madame, (said Fanor) your Ladyship speaks in extremes, but what would you do
if you had an indifferent Man to your Husband?

Truly Fanor, (said Armena) I have often prayed against such a one, and have
often requested of the God of Marriage, that he would give me either a wise
Man, or a Fool to my Husband; for, I ever thought, that if I had a wise
Husband, he knew how to govern me; or, if a Fool, I knew how to order him: but
I speak not (Fanor) of greater or lesser capacities of wit and understanding,
which allow a mean; but of high or vulgar spirits which admit no medium; for,
the enquiries (I mean) which we make into the disposition of a Man, is to know
of what mettle he is made, whether of base, or noble? not of what ingenuity he
is of, or how many degrees he has taken in that excellence; for Nobleness is
either higher or lower, according to the several occasions it has to work
upon; but still we are not to consider them as distinct Species by their
several occurrences, but as one and the same kind, and altogether one noble
nature; and the latter (being a contrary quality and base temper of the blood)
we never examine of how inferior an allay it is, which also seems to us more
or less, according to the several accidents it meets withal, yet still we
must total the particulars under the notion of Ignoblenesse; so that in this
consideration, there is no place left for Indifference to act her part, and
these two leafes of the same door have never a wicket to let a sneaking
disposition creep between them; either he must be a brave Gallant Man, or else
some faint-hearted cowardly Companion; and if he be but either of these, I can
play my game to my own advantage.

But all this while Madame, (said Fanor) you suppose the wisdom altogether in
the Wife, what if the Husband were a wise Man? may not he tame, rule, or have
his Wife at his beck of whatsoever spirit she were of?

I have granted you that already said Armena) my Argument holds good from the
lesser to the greater; but Man's wisdom must not be there exercised in the
observation of humors, or discerning of spirits, but in the well management of
the power of his dominion: for both Civil and Divine Laws have given such a
sovereignty to men over their Wifes, that they oftentimes lose their
Prerogatives by seeking to gain that by Reason which is theirs by Authority.
He that gives a Woman leave to argue the case with him, does but like a foolish
Gamester, that lends a needy fellow money to play against himself. For though
the matter be never so just on her side concerning which they may contest, yet
the cause cannot be but unjust on her part, in regard it is Contestation, which
ought not to be. I would have a wise man to admit his wife his Counselor, but
not his Opponent: to help him to find out the truth of things, but not to
strive for victory in the Argument, or carry more sail then ballast in her
words. That man who seeks to over top his wifes high Spirit with a higher, is
but like a King who condescends to receive satisfaction from a Subject, by
fighting a single duel when he may have his will by his Prerogative. He that
answers the nimblenesse of his wifes tongue with the volubility of his own,
does but justify the war by giving quarter: nothing makes this subject
sooner rebel, then when she sees her Emperor knows not how to Command. I
tell thee Panor, there is not a disease in Wedlock, but the Husband is a fool,
if he be not a Physician able enough to cure it.

Fanor, it may be you think I speak against my self, and the privilege of my
Sex, I protest I do not: I had two Husbands before I had this, and I never
received such contentment in wholly having my will of the one, as I was pleased
in being altogether at the others Command: The gracefulness of whose rule and
government, made my obedience (always Honorable, whilst the necessitated (yet
pleasing) encroachments over the others right, made me (oftentimes) ashamed of
the usurpation. Wherefore I always prayed, that if ever I married again, I
might have a Husband that was either a Fool, or a Wise man, that having a Fool,
I might know how to order him; and if a Wise man, he may know how to govern
me. But by my troth Fanor, I have (now) met with a Man that is neither one or
other; wherefore I knew not how to deal with his folly, but by playing the
Fool; nor how to answer his share of wisdom but by a piece of policy. Hereupon
Company came in, and ended the Dispute.

Thus we leave Honoria a Conqueror by the force of Eloquence, Amarissa
prevalent, by the power of her own wit, both happy by the hand of Providence,
and a third climing the degrees of excellence, up the steps ascendent to the
throne of ingenuity, and return back again to Maximanus; who hearing no news
of his two Womenslayers, nor that any other flesh was to be found in the
intended Shambles of the Forest, but the slaughtered Carcass of one of his
own Butchers, he began to mistrust that all was not well, which he endeavored
to repair with the greatest of all Evils, viz. Open Rebellion, in order
whereunto, he seizes upon all Forts and Magazines, and converts them to his
proper use; The affrighted Royalists gather themselves into a necessitated
Body, where we leave them both like a pair of Cocks pecking at one another,
till a third comes in, and so makes two to one, till one makes none of two, and
three brings all to nothing.

CHAP. XII.
Lorenzo is beaten by the Moors. Hortensius and Philoret meet Lorenzo after
the discomfiture, and deliver their Message. Lorenzo and Bertaldo made friends.
The Battle between Maximanus and Corderius. Lorenzo and Maximanus. Maximanus
slain in Battle.

LOrenzo fighting without his right hand, Bertaldo, (whom he scorned to make
use of) was sorely Discomfited by the Moors; in which Battalle he lost
Cosdruball and Hanno, with many others of his prime Commanders, (with 7000. of
the Carthaginians) Berontus (of all his Heroes) he came off, making good the
Rear, until the Defeated Army had recovered a Pass upon the River Undi, whose
Bridge Berontus caused to be broken down. For Berontus (as the rest) flying
with his Keepers (about him) danger and necessity made him theirs, and his
confiners sole preserver: For he made good the Bridge with his own naked body,
(like a black Rock standing in defyance against an Ocean) until the Pioniers
thinking by degrees to fall the Bridge, behind him, ore-threw the Arch; so that
all fell down at once, whose propitious stones, favored Berontus, doing
execution upon his enemies, but none upon himself; from whom he swam safely to
his own bank side, where he found no less a Friend to help him up then
Lorenzo, who had been more his own then his Enemy.

Thus the fates ordained, that valor and disaster should agree together, to
necessitate a friendship between these two, when other means could not
prevail, to cause them to shake hands with one another. So he secured the
Prince from further prosecution, and Lorenzo him, from future mis-conception,
where Hortensius and Philoret met the Prince: at whose first sight Lorenzo was
much divided between the two passions, of Love and Hatred, having seen so much
Gallantry in the one, and heard of so much Baseness in the other, whom he
thought (notwithstanding) so much the better of (as to forbear all expressions
of dislike for the present) because he saw him coupled with so known a Worthy.

But when he had once heard them fully declare themselves (with all the
Circumstances attested under the hands of so many of his trusty Friends and
Counselors, but especially when he saw and read the Handkerchief) oh how he
was nettled and stung to the quick! oh how he was mad with himself for what he
had done! and knew not which was better for him to believe, or not give credit
to what they said: Philoret he could not mis-believe; Hortensius he durst not,
whose sufferings, and whose merits, pleaded a better reception; Shame would
have forced an incredulity upon him, but Honor and Justice made him doubtful
which of either he should entertain with highest Courtesy; but nothing
troubled him so much as what was become of Honoria and Amarissa, and how he
should look Bertaldo in the face, for the wrong wherewith he had prosecuted
such a noble Friend, and feared he had caused already to be executed upon his
Sister: This made him quite besides himself. He sends for Bertaldo, who
entering the presence he thus be-speakes his patience:

Bertaldo,

I fear me I have undone my self, I pray thee do not make any Reply, lest
thou prick'st a heart that bleeds too fast already: I have a great many things
to tell thee, but I cannot speak: And thereupon he leaned upon Bertaldo's neck,
and wept upon his bosom, saying, Pity me, and be not angry, I will deserve
thou should do both.

Bertaldo (whose eyes were still upon Philoret, deserved by her wishly looks on
him) makes him this short answer (longing to parle with his lovely Page) Sir,
whatsoever your perplexities may be, I advise you to make haste to Carthage,
that you may prevent the mischief, and (if possibly) supersede your Error.

Oh Bertaldo (said Lorenzo) thou pourest Oil into my wounds, and take away
the smart with that same word. Let there be orders given to march this night,
I Will go my self.

Bertaldo lets him go, that he might stay and commune with his (unknown)
Idolatresse; who upon his approach, was so full of joy, that he knew not how to
behave himself; whereof Bertaldo took such notice, that he answered his Jollity
with asking him twenty Questions one after another; he, his frolic, with
answering, he knew not what. At last withdrawing themselves toward a more
serious discourse, after that Bertaldo had heard Philoret (deliberately) relate
unto him all that had happened, he clapped his hand upon his breast, and abruptly
parted from him. Poor Philoret began to be a little dejected at the manner of
it, but Bertaldo (recollecting himself) made him amends by giving him a double
portion of respect, so that pleased he was: Hortensius glad that he had struck
in with such a Favorite, all the Courtiers giving them Cap and Knee, (as they
went along) as Courtiers use to do to those whom they see graciously received.

No other noise at Court but of removal, no other news in the Camp but of a
present March; six days brought them within the sight of Carthage: and the two
Armies facing one another, viz. Maximanus and Corderius.

Maximanus his Men (like good stomachs, (having but a proportionable allowance)
have not (as yet) their Appetites whetted with fear of having too many Feeders
upon so small a Pittance: But upon the approach of Lorenzo's Forces, they fall
too, putting all their hands together in the Dish (slising it away) for fear of
the new comers Mouths. So was Corderius Army soon devoured by Maximanus,
making such haste to give him Battle before Lorenzo should come to his
Assistance. Corderius fled with his scattered Troops to meet Lorenzo, whom
Maximanus durst not pursue too far (for fear of being met with (by Lorenzo)
out of order) Lorenzo wondered first to see two Armies Face, then Fight, and at
last Pursue each other. At length satisfied his seeking brain by a full
relation of all that had happened, by Corderius; whose presence, and Commands,
soon rallyed the breathless Soldiers, whose panting Royal Hearts left their
trepidations like the Needle, whose point, when it once finds the northern
Pole, moves no more, then does the Center: so were these Soldiers calmed.

Corderius presently applies himself to the Prince, and desires that his men
might be commanded by Bertaldo's better conduct.

No (said Lorenzo) they shall be commanded by no other then my self, and
Bertaldo shall command the Army. Which Bertaldo modestly refused; but Lorenzo
told him, that as nothing would encourage those new-raisd men, and re-inliven
them, more then his own presence; so nothing would be more acceptable to the
soldiery then his Conduct. Berontus he commanded the Forlorn Hope.

Maximanus by this time (observing the orderly advance of Lorenzo's
over-numerous host) begins to think his Army all forlorn, but howsoever he
was ambitious, (though the fates had given him a villainous part to act) to act
it well; that he might have a glorious Exit. His followers for the most part
(all desperate and) involved in the same guilt, were resolved to do so too; so
that there was a fierce battle fought, between courage and desparation.

Berontus beats their Forlorn, up to their main Body: whereupon he receives
orders from Bertaldo, to draw off, and join with the Prince, fearing that the
Prince (if hard beset) might not be so well defended by his new-raised men.
Lorenzo because he would not discountenance his Confidents, bids him stand as a
reserve to his maine Body, which was done accordingly. Maximanus falls on so
furiously, that he follows his thrown darts so close, that he comes to handy
strokes, fighting under their flying shadows, but finding that he had mistaken
his aim, and that Lorenzo commanded not the party, he gives orders for fresh
forces to come up, and bids them undertake those striplings, telling them, he
was deceived, and must go and seek Lorenzo out, and fight with men of valor.

Opinion (which the world is guided by) made them but striplings in their
hands, indeed, for a long time, until Bertaldo's prowess taught them how much
they were deceived, whilst Maximanus with his men fall upon Lorenzo's, with
reduplicated strengths of madd men, bearing down all before them, till
Berontus checked their fury, with his well-brought-up reserve, and saved Lorenzo
with the same hand that felled the desperate Maximanus to the ground, thereby,
so disheartning all the rest, that they soon betook themselves to flight,
Bertaldo having done the like unto his Enemies.

Thus whilst there appeared great serenity in every face, all might behold a
Cloud in Lorenzo's countenance; and perceive a war within his breast;
occasioned by the last gasping words, which Lorenzo heard Maximanus utter, with
his Breath: for Maximanus (lying bleeding upon the ground) desired that he
might speak unto Lorenzo before he should expire. Whose words were these.

Unfortunate Lorenzo! Master to a more faithless servant! had not thy favors
been so great, I had not been so wicked. Honoria was innocent of all she was
accused, I played the Knave, and you the Fool: so stretched his limbs and dyed.

Lorenzo at first, would have had him (if possibly) preserved; but seeing his
hateful soul had made an escape, he revenged himself upon his senseless
body, vexing himself, that it had not life, to answer his indignation with
sensibility; never was there such a dying blow given to a Victor: the word
Fool, troubled him not so much, as the word Innocent; nor Innocent, so much as
the word was, which put him in despair of her being alive. Never was there
such a sad Conqueror as this Lorenzo, whom the Sun beheld, bringing with him
night in his Countenance to Carthage, after that he had won the day.

The men were all disbanded, whilst an Army of unruly thoughts, and cares,
mustered within his bosom. Bertaldo (who himself almost over-set with sorrow,
yet seeing his so great) bears him up with Comfort, telling him that none can
say (for certain) what is become either of Honoria or Amarissa, none saw them
dye: but many eyes have seen one of the intended Executioners, dead in the
place of Execution: why might not the Gods protect their Innocence, by
unexpected means? why should we not hope they did, seeing they were Innocent;
and we hear nothing to the contrary? why may not one of these Villains
appointed for the slaughter (mollifyed into gentleness, by Honoria's sweet
behavior, and overcome by Amarissa's sprightly Carriage) slay that Brother in
evil, and preserve them both himself? It is but early day, I warrant you, you
shall hear more hereafter; come, pluck up a good Courage.

Oh (said Lorenzo) I think (Bertaldo) thou will raise me to life, when I am
dead; if this should be, I will serve the Gods (for ever) with reduplicated
adorations; and I will recompense their sufferings with a thousand newfound
ways to expiations, whereto, repentance her self yet never found the way; and
should but one of those men, do as thou Imagin'st, I would fill him as full of
happiness, as his Capacity could hold; I would 'twere true Bertaldo, on that
Condition that I gave thee Carthage for thy prophecies reward.

Come Sir, replied Bertaldo, it is neither sorrow, nor Language, nor wishes, nor
woulds, that must help us: send out several ways to hearken after them, I Will
seek up toward the Mountains, let Berontus beat about, toward the Seacoast,
if Sea, or Land, can give us any intelligence, we will not be ignorant, what is
become of them. They both took their several ways for search.

CHAP. XIII.
The fantastical Wooing, Humoursome Wedding, and Platonic love that was
between Corderius and Fortunata. Prickette his mischance by the way.

WHilst these things were in agitation, I shall acquaint you with a pretty
passage which happened between Corderius and Fortunata, Niece, and Woman to a
Lady that was called Besanca, in his Travailes with Bertaldo, in search of the
Ladies.

You must understand Corderius to have been a Rich Merchant, and an old
Batchelour, about the age of Fifty: And one, who for his Wisdom, and Loyalty,
was worthily received into Prince Lorenzo his Counsel of State: him, Fortune
did begin to frown upon, having lost certain Ships at Sea of inestimable
value, insomuch that he was unwilling to venture any more substance upon that
hazard: and therefore resolved (to withdraw his hand from so cheating a
Lottery, as Fame (the false Trumpeter of the world) who encouraged so many
Adventurers to return home by Weeping cross (harkening to her enticement) and
yet could never boast successefulnesse but over a few) and to lead a private
life, and to enjoy the remainder of his days with such contentment, and true
felicity, as the rest of his great Fortunes (that were not loseable by being at
stake) would give him leave. The delight was departed from him, wherein he
(formerly) reposed felicity, in making Hundreds, Thousands: and Fifties,
Hundreds: by multiplications of smaller sums. He changed his itching desire,
that was in the act of getting, for the true contentment that was to be found
in making use of what he had got: And thus he found himself at last by
beginning to be a loser.

But all the delights of Eden could not make a Paradise (he thought) without a
Companion that should be meet for him. But then he began to think with
himself, that he had so over-slipt his time, and that he was now grown so Old,
that he was scarce meet for a Companion; that his Gray hairs were no good
reposure upon a Green Bed. And that Nature had made him none of her Favorites,
and Age had put him further out of Countenance.

Yet he comforted himself a little (allowing his resolution this Cordial) that
he was not so wondrous Old, as that he needed to despair of possessing a
Mistress, with a conceit of sufficient happiness, in being such an Old man's
darling: And that her Poverty (by the means of his Riches) would procure in
her breast a dispensation for his Silver hairs. And that, if he thus took a
poor Gentlewoman upon Alms, (though she could not, as yet, love him, yet) she
might be glad to have him, and think her self happy (bringing nothing with her
but Love) to meet with such a one, though he have nothing else but means to
maintain it.

As Corderius did (heretofore) beat about the Country to find out a Virgin that
should be thus qualified (being in all his other actions a notable Humorist)
viz. Very well borne, Excellently bred, Indifferent Handsome, and Miserably
poor, but never could find a similitude to his Fancy that ran upon all (these)
Four, before such time as (attending upon Bertaldo in this itinerary
progression) he met with such a Counter-part to his own indenture, that fitted
him, as if occasion had taken measure of his mind. For Corderius and his Horse
differing in terms of ability to Advance; the Rider, (through his Man's
default) feeding his dumb Porter with a Spur, instead of Provinder, (what with
faintness, and the loss of one of his Shoes) the poor Hackny made a Hault
all upon a sudden, without staying for the word from his Commander; insomuch
that Corderius was by degrees so left behind, that he grew from being out of
sight, to be out of hope of overtaking his Companions. Whereupon he set up his
rest in a small Village, at the feet of one of the Fessian Mountains.

This Cavalliers Caball was unwilling to clime, when he could not go, with a
bare Foot, and an empty Belly. Insomuch that poor Corderius must be left behind
in a poor Inn. Highway accidents must be borne withal, his bad fortune was
bettered with this one comfort: his Landlord was a Good fellow, and cheered him
up, (who finding his Host a fit receptacle for discourse that went no higher
then a Merry Tale, or so forth) so he drove away the time with making his Host
believe, That his Travel was to no other end, or purpose, but what he had a
long time sought in vain, viz. such a Mistress as is before expressed.

The Good man of the House presently answered his intended Mirth with a
profferr'd reality of accomplishing his desires. For (said he) here within our
Neighborhood there is one who is thus and thus Virtuous, so and so Poor, thus
highly Borne, so excellently Bred, known by the well-boding name of Fortunata;
and if it please you, you shall have a sight of her, and if you can win her,
wear her. Corderius began to think, that this savoury dish was not so ready
cooked to his own pallat without some spice of Divine Providence: Wherefore he
resolves to make an assay, and though he be crossed in finding another man's
Wife and Mistress, yet he hoped he might be blessed by a chance medly, whereby
for himself (in the same person he may meet with both. Corderius (waving the
proffered service of his Intelligencer) takes notice of the Name, and Place,
with directions of the Way; and pins his instructions upon his Sleeve: And
having written a Love-letter, (to the Idea of his mind) he makes himself the
Bearer; who (having as sufficiently informed his Eyes of an apparent truth, as
formerly he filled his Ears with a true relation) delivers unto Fortunata the
most acceptable present of an unfeigned Lover, viz. his own heart, with his
own hands.

Fortunata (perusing the letter, and observing the contents; and finding no
name to it) looked over her shoulder, to see if there were any that took notice
of the nonplus she was in, by reason of such an exoticke and ononymous way of
writing (as he had framed) and there presented to her own hands: then she
looks him full in the face, as upon some abusive foot-post that was hired to
play the fool with her, and thus she rates him for it.

Fellow, what have thou brought me here? a paper full of Noune Adjectives
without a Substantive? and a letter without a name? what does he think that
sent thee, that I am good at explaining Riddles? Madam said Corderius, if you
vouchsafe me but the honor to take a turn in the Garden, my business is not to
Usher you into any of it is Closer walks: but to such as are within sight, of
all the glass eyes that are in the face of the whole house: and there if you
are good at Questions, and Commands, you shall find me ready with Answers, and
Obedience.

Fortunata (perceiving his Language to bespeake a mistake in her) condescended
to his request, and walked with him into the Garden, where, as soon as she had
brought him, she demanded of him the reason why the letter had no name?

Corderius replied that it needed not; when his own hand was to the letter
whilst he gave it her. I cannot read your hand said Fortunata. Be pleased to
read my heart (said Corderius) in the two folios of my unfeigned lips, which
assures you, that I love you, and have loved you long; have travailed a great
many Miles, and I have been a suitor to you many Years: and though it seems
never so strange to you, yet let my words find credit (for truths sake) and be
the happiest Woman in the world.

These words (spoken with such a grace, attended with so much gravity, and
proceeding from such a presence) fraught Fortunata not only with wonder, but
Confidence; not so much out of the manner, as matter of his discourse; that
there was something in it, extraordinary, that promised a reality, and good
meaning in the man: wherefore she desired to know his name.

Corderius told her, that she that must be his Wife, must never know that,
until she be so.

Fortunata desired to know what Countryman he was?

Corderius told her, that that was another secret which must not be known, and
to cut you off from all those ordinary demands of Women in your Condition (said
Corderius) Lady you must know, that that Woman which carries my Wives eye in
her head, must look no further then my self: for if I should tell you my name,
what Countryman I am, who sent me hither, what means I have to Maintain you,
etc. It may be you would, or would not have me, for this, or that respect:
wherefore Madam I shall never ask you but these two questions, First, Can you
Love? Secondly, Can that Love have any Influence upon my person? I neither
think my self so amiable, or my Condition so inviting, as to deserve the
complement of an entire affection: but if you can find in your heart to Marry
me, I ask no more, I Will find cause enough (for ever) to banish all repentance
from your heart: so that reason shall find no fault in your election. Weigh my
words as seriously as you can, I have no ends upon you but what are Honorable,
and Just: Portion, I ask none; Proportion, and Comeliness, I see; your
Parentage, and Piety, I hear of: And of this you may assure your self, had you
a Fortune of your own, able (but) to have bought the Clothes upon your Back,
you could not be my Wife. And one thing more I must tell you, I must have your
speedy Answer.

Fortunata thought it not convenient, that her consent should be obtained upon
the first blush, yet her Color (as if it went on Errants to her
intellectualls, to know the meaning, of so strange (yet effectual) manner of
Wooing, and returning again into her Cheeks with so fresh a dye, as if it had
made have in it is return) gave him some private intelligence, that her faint
heart, was ready to yield up her Maiden garrison, upon the first summons; but
that her modesty mutinyed against its higher officer: and would not suffer so
regular fortifications to be so soon slighted by such a loving Enemy:
wherefore, she desired longer time to consider of what he had said, and she
would return him an answer worthy of his respect.

Corderius told her bluntly, it must not be; and that he would neither be
beholding for a Wife to time, persons, or second thoughts: and that she was at
her own disposal to choose a Husband, whose condition was but servitude: And
that the ignorance of all worldly respects (that must give him a Wife in
Marriage) needed not consideration; and the Poverty that should bring him a
Bedfellow did not deserve the advice of Friends. This was his humor, and that
if she would take him upon those terms, Happiness should be her jointure;
Contentment the life she should lead; and Sufficiency, her constant
maintenance. More then that, she that is to be his Wife, should never know
before she were his; and if she were ordained his Spouse, she would be
satisfied with that assurance.

Fortunata took occasion by the Fore-top, fearing it would be bald behind; and
thought it better wisdom to lay hold of an opportunity that might advance
her, though to an unknown Estate, then to be constantly wedded to even
reckonings at the years end: Wherefore she thus resolved upon the question.

Sir, whose Name I know not, whose Country I must not know, whose Estate, is, I
know not what, who means to carry me I know not where, I am yours I know not
how. And with that word, Corderius opening his Arms to receive her into his
Bosom, Fortunata falls upon his Breast; and (weeping) clings so close unto
him, as if a bleeding Vine had been tackt unto some stately Frontispice, whose
tears Corderius soon wiped off, (drying her Bedewed cheeks) with this breath
of comfort: Lady, if you knew your own happiness, you should find you have
no cause for what you do, except you wept for joy.

Fortunata (having fully consented that Corderius should break a Bridal Cake
over her head) hastens to her Lady-Aunt, and Mistress; and with a cleared up
countenance, tells her, That she is come to take her leave of her.

Why, whither art thou going? (said her Mistress.)
I am going to me be Married (said Fortunata.)
To be Married! (said her Aunt) I prithee to whom?
Truly Madam I cannot tell you (said her Neice.)
What is his name? (said the Lady.)
I do not know (said Fortunata.)
How comes that about? (said the Mistress.)
He would not tell me (said the Maid.)
Whither does he mean to carry thee? (said Besanca.)
He will not tell me (said Fortunata.)
Art thou in earnest? (said the Lady.)
Yes forsooth (said the Waiting Gentlewoman.)
Art thou not out of thy wits Girl? (said Besanca.)
Madam, I hope not (said Fortunata) I Will have him, and if it please the fates,
if there were no more men in the world.

The Girl is bewitched upon my life (said Besanca) what has he done to her?
where is this fellow? let me speak with him. Away she flies upon Corderius, and
in furious manner begins to expostulate the case with him, whose pretty kind of
answers no less satisfied the Lady, then (with much probability) that her
Niece was likely to clime up to some preferment, through some fantastical
Staircase. Wherefore after many doubts resolved, she gives consent (with this
proviso) that Favorinus, her own Brother, should go along with her, (together
with a servant of the Ladies, called Prickette, who should see them married,
(for he was resolved to carry her away with him presently, she, as resolute to
be gone) up he takes her behind him on Horseback, without any more
circumstance. He is a Prince, and his Humor must be obeyed. Farewell Aunt: God
b'y Cosen. Look to your Sister (said Besanca.) I warrant you (said Corderius)
all shall be well enough, take you no care. They shake hands at one another,
and cry Da, Da; and this was all the solemnity of their departure.

They had not advanced seven miles onward in their journey, but they lost their
way: and the night overtaking them, they were bewildred in a Forest; at last
they met with a Forresteer, who brought them to a poor Inn, where they were
glad to set up their rest for that night, where there were but two spare Beds
for three persons: who all three willingly would have layne by themselves, but
Corderius, and Favorinus were contented for one night, to make a hard shift
together; but Prickette was to shift for himself.

When Fortunata (with as much civility as the place would (then) give leave)
was attended to her Chamber, (rites being done that were required by the Laws
of Courtesy) Corderius and Favorinus, refreshed themselves (after Supper) with
better entertainment, then they imagined the house had afforded, viz. a Cup of
old Brisk Corisca Wine: which had been transported out of Italy: Prickette
having lickt his lips sufficiently of some of the Wine, (whilst he attended
upon his Masters) when they were gone to Bed, at once he inflames both the
reckoning, and himself, with too many hairs of the old dog; the good woman of
the house (to egg him on to further expenses) made him believe, that he should
have a Bed, (or else it should go hard with her) and rather then he should be
destitute of a lodging, that she and her Husband would sit up all night.

Prickette grew from being overcome with kindness, to be so much overcome with
drink, that he could neither go, nor stand, nor see, nor speak: wherefore mine
Host, and his Wife (perceiving him to be but a Dumpling, a thick short chub, or
lump of Flesh, not above three Horse-loaves high; and considering the condition
he was in) changed their resolution (having found out a new invention for him)
up they carried him to the top of the house by maine strength, where in the
Cock-loft there was a Child's Cradle made of boards; and having made him a Bed
therein of a Bolster, and laid on two short Towels, instead of a pair of
Sheets; and their Daughters Bone-lace Cushion instead of a Pillow, with two
old Petticoates: for a Rug and Blanket; they stripped off his clothes, and laid
him in this bed, with a child's Rattle stuck in at one of the sides to keep up
the clothes, which the Host, (as merrily disposed as his Wife) observed, and
said unto her, Nay Wife, if thou stick'st up a Rattle on one side, I Will hang up
the Bladder with the three blew Beans on the other, (setting a Chamberpot very
orderly by his Bed side that was half full already) and there they left him.

Prickette (lying with his Legs crumpting up (for want of room) not being used
to be abridg'd of his full length) chanced (in his sleep) to be so sensible of
his disease, that he thrust out his Legs half way over the edge of the foot
board, and so he lay for the most part of the night, until such time, as
(being awaked with the pain, which had got into the small of his legs, and the
cold that had struck into the soales of his feet) he pulled in his stumps) like
a pair of touched Snails horns) so that he lay at pretty ease for a while,
until such time as his over-strech'd, and ful-fill'd Bladder called upon him
for a remedy by evacuation: Prickette reaches one of his arms over the
supposed bed side to search for a Chamber Pot, whilst the Cradle rowles (which,
together with the turning of his unsettled Brain, caused his fancy to imagine)
as if he had been falling down the precipice of some huge Mountain; and the
motion of the small Pebles within the Rattle, and the Beans within the
Bladder, caused his imagination to conceive so many loose stones falling out of
their places; and his fingers (by reason of the swag of the Cradle) dashing
upon the surface of the lake that was in the unemptied vessel, the poor
innocent verily believed, that he had popt his hand into some bottomless
River. Prickette endeavoring to recover himself up again, gives such a
spring, that it was twenty to one, but on the contrary side, the cradle had
come over, and over: but there happened a greater mischance then all this, and
a more cause of terror: for the Cat, lying asleep upon the ground, on the other
side of the cradle, one of the theorbo's underneath it, pressed so hard upon
the Cats tail, that (Prickette having no other means to save himself from
that overthrow but the use of his other arm) the asperous vermin, sets all
the venomous nails that were upon all four, (together with both rows of the
pointed needles within her jaws) into his trembling flesh: making such a
hideous outcry, that all the hags and furies, (nimphs to the Stygean lakes)
could never have given so fierce an alarm to the poor man's quarters, as that
had done.

Prickette all amazed lies for a long time rocked by Counter-poises; until
experience (at last) having taught him the art of ordering his maine body in
full quietness; selfe-security, had made him so cautious, that he began to be
very wary, of what side of his mouth he carried his tongue, for a long time he
lay still, (wondering where he was, what he was in, and how he came there) at
last an Ass, a creature (whose voice (of all others) he never had been
accustomed unto) brayed, just under his window: which hideous noise, he took
to be no other, then the Devils language: whereat (forgetting all his former
terrors) he gave such a spring (out of the Cradle) as if he had a mind to have
leaped out of his Skin, rather then out of Bed, and came to ground sooner, by
forty fathomes falling, then he did expect. Up he gets upon his feet, thinking
himself well enough yet, but knew not how long it would continue; he orders
his steps, with expectations of such ruggedness, and fear of precipices, that
the evennesse of the floor, oft-times became his stumbling block; at length he
became Master of his senses, though he knew not how to employ his Servants: for
he had no light, and could hear no noise, only he groaped for understanding,
and found sufficient in the dark, to inform his recollected Spirits, that he
was in some lodging within the Inn; but he verily believed it was an Enchanted
Chamber: wherefore he made all the have out of it, that he could, and spread his
fingers upon the Wall sides, as if he had been playing upon the Virginalls; at
last he found the door: which being but latch'd, he easily opened, and descends
the stayres: but whither they led, he knew not: neither did he care, so that
they gave way for his removal from the place wherein he was.

At last he stumbled against Fortunata her door; bounce goes his head and
shoulders against the Wainscot: Fortunata (awaked with the noise) wakens all
the house, with Crying Thieves, Thieves: Brother rise: call up the Gentleman:
where are you? Knocks with her Bedstaffe upon the boords, and throws it against
the wall.

Corderius starts out of his Bed, and calls for Candles: Favorinus flies from
his nest, and draws his sword: up comes the good man and Wife, with lights in
their hands, all were sore amazed, and Prickette most of all: whom they all
found sneaking by the Gentlewomans door. What do thou here? (said Corderius)
Sirrah, what is the matter? (said Favorinus) what would thou have? I would have
nothing (said Prickette) but quietness: quietness with a pox to you, (said
Corderius) what do thou do up at this time of night? Indeed if you would
know the truth out (said Prickette) the Bed was too short for me, I could not
sleep. Whereupon they all fell into such a laughter, (in fancying what kind of
bed that must needs be, that should be too short for him) as put the good
Gentlewoman, out of the fright she was in: but nothing could moderate the fit
of laughter, that the good man and woman of the house had set up (knowing how
they had served him) back they returned to their Chamber, and put on their
clothes: by which time the day did break upon them: And as soon as Fortunata
was up and ready, in they come, and bring Prickette to answer for himself,
telling her the manner, and form, how they found him at her Chamber door; she
them, that she knew not what to make of it, but that Prickette intended a
forcible entry.

Prickette declared to the world, that he intended no hurt, neither that he
knew whither he was going, only he had a mind to rise, and come down the
stairs, because he could not sleep in his bed, it was so short for him.

And what meant you (said Fortunata) by bustling at my door? Did you think my
bed would be longer for you?

No Madam (said Prickette) I stumbled against the threshold, and hit my head
against the door, that was it that made such a noise.

For Heavens sake (said Fortunata) let us go see this bed that is so short for
him. The people of the house were sent for up to show them this sight, (for
Prickette could not tell where it was) when the Landlord, and the Landlady were
sent for, and understood their pleasure, they so fell into their old fits of
laughter, that for a long time they could not speak a word, but hold their
sides; and as their breath would give them leave, out comes a Cradle, by and by
the Rattle, then the Bladder; neither were they more filled with Laughter, then
Prickette was with Wrath all the while: who having lost all patience, curses
them to the pit of Hell, swearing, That he lay in no Cradle; neither did he
know what they meant by Rattles, or Bladders: a couple of base unmannerly
people they were, and so they showed themselves. The Gentles were pricked
forwards (by the two spurs of such extremes) Mirth, and Madness, to inform
themselves of the true cause of both. Up they all went to the Cock-loft, where
they found the Cradle, the Rattle, the Bladder, the Bed and Bolster, the
sheets, the Coverlet and Blanket; the humor was so good that they all fell
into such an universal fit of laughing, that Prickette (himself) was not an
exception in that general rule, who by that time (being as merrily disposed as
the rest) made up the Story with telling them the conceit of his falling down
into a River, the removal of the loose Stones, the disaster he received by the
Cat (showing them the scratchings, and bitings, upon his hand) the fright that
the Braying of the Ass had put him into, in manner and form as is before
expressed, which was Mirth enough for all that day, and the next following;
wherewith, (together with diverse other Sports, and Pastimes, that Prickette
made on the way) they thus merrily arrived at Carthage.

Whose walls they had no sooner entered, but Corderius seeks an obscure lodging
where he might be least known; and delivers into Fortunata's hands a purse of
Gold, entreating her Brother Favorinus, to accompany his Sister to the Burse,
where she might furnish her self with such necessaries (of all sorts) as were
expedient for her use, and suitable to the occasion, whilst he went and bought
materials for her Wedding Garments; and provided her such a necessary
instrument (to her mind) as should take measure of her body, and fit each
several dimension. Both parties engage according to their designs, and
Corderius comes back fraught with cloth of Gold and Silver, as the return of
his Adventure. But Fortunata was so sparing in exhausting the Well (the
liberality of whose spring she was so ignorant) that (her modesty was such) she
would not purchase those additaments to grace an Ornament, at a higher rate,
then the darkness of her condition, and the obscurity of her lodging would
speak as commendable: which, when Corderius did behold, he wrapped them up in a
bundle, and bestowed them upon Ribana (her new recommended Chambermaide)
saying, He would rigge up his smallest Pinace with far better tackling; but
his Vice Admiral, Fortunata, her top, deserved more Gallantry. And forthwith
led her to the place where she might exchange her Money for the Choicest
necessaries: And there left her to be attended to her Lodging by Favorinus, and
her two servants, Prickette, and Rivana, whilst he takes the nearest way that
brought him to the Court, where he presents his service to the Prince, and
acquaints his highness with the manner how he lost his Company: But losing
them, he partly found what he looked for, thereby he lighted upon certain
intelligence, that gave him a relation how that Honoria and Amarissa were
alive; and that by all Circumstances it could be no other but them two, whom
report gave out to have taken Shipping at the Bay of Duno; departing there with
as favorable a wind, as they had been driven a Ship board, by the storms of
persecutions: And that he would pawn his life that he should suddenly hear
good tidings of them.

Lorenzo was so transported with joy, and his mind elevated by hope, seeing so
much Confidence proceeded from so serious a man, that he vowed one minute
should not pass, longer then the time required, for drawing up his patent, but
that he would sign him one of his Nobles: which was done accordingly. So that
back comes Corderius to his Mistress, with a Lordship on his back, before he
had laid out any riches upon his clothes: but she must not know any thing yet.
But now the time is come that high fancy must delight it self in the triumph
of humility, and that a conjuncture between faith and hope must be made with
charity. Corderius (as glorious as the Sun) hands Fortunata (eclipsing
Cinthia in her greatests majesty) to the place of Union.

But Fortunata could not but wonder that no friend of his appeared to solemnize
their wedding, and not so much as a dinner provided, and that no other (or
more) witnesses, were prepared, for the ceremony, then the good man of the
house, and his wife, with their children at their heels, and a few mean and
homely servants; she could not but admire that his compleatnesse in all other
respects, should want the correspondent of a Chariot; but that her
wedding garment should be a golden besome, to sweep the dust in the streets,
until it arose in their faces, as if it had a mind to tell them, what they
were; but she that had consented to marry him in a humor, was contented with
the humor of his Marriage: and coming within the consecrated walls, standing
upon holy ground, thy plighted their trothes to one an other, by the
ministration of the sacred hands of him, whom holy Order had set apart (as
clean) to the performance of those Rites and Ceremonies: Thus (tied in a true
loves knot) hand in hand they took their leaves of the holy man, and the place
of holiness: and were no sooner entered the Porch, but they might behold the
most magnificent Chariot that could be carried upon wheels, and the bravest
horses, that ere were fastened to a pole; with a Charioteer, and footmen,
belonging thereunto, all in the same livery, which promised Majesty, rather
then nobility to be in the owner, Corderius took occasioned to stand and gaze a
while upon so fair an object: at last, he asked his bride how she liked that
Chariot? who having run division upon the several Sumptuosities belonging
thereunto, and praised the goodlinesse that she had (worthily) spied in the
horses, and commended the Color, and trimming of the livery: she warranted
that they belonged to some great man, and wondered whose they were. Corderius
told her that she should know that presently, and asking the Charioteer (who
had his lesson given him) whose Chariot that was? he made answer (with much
reverence) that it was the Lady Fortunata her Chariot, Wife to the Lord
Corderius. Madam (said Corderius) I cry you mercy, it is your Chariot, I pray
will you ascend it, and take me with you. Fortunata hung back and blushed, like
the redness of the morn, that betokened a more prosperous wind, then what
should need, to fill her sails: but all this would not help her no otherwise
then sooner up, where she might take possession of her own; where she sits not
so much elated in her own mind, as depressed under the burden of her
oppression of the great danger that is in over-merit.

The well-manag'd horses pride it along the streets, with the newmade-happy
pair, until they rested at the door of Corderius his proud building: whereat
were standing all his friends and kindred, to welcome the bride to the
well-furnished habitation which she was bid to call her own; and all within
it, hers: feasting and music, and dancing, had no sooner begun to outweare the
day, but Corderius commanded four other Horses that wore the same natural
colored livery on their backs, to be added to the former pair; and invited
his Fortunata to take the air, and notice of a Country House, that had a Bed
to bid her welcome to, and a Tenant to be her Bedfellow.

Fortunata sighed, and said unto Corderius, Sir, you know in what a poor
condition you found me, and I see, into what an ocean of felicity you have
lanch'd so mean, and weak a vessel, as my self: spare your prosecution of
me with further favors, till I have digested these; for, one may be as well
overwhelmed with too much joy, as blinded with too much light.

But Corderius (like those Women who will never be married to any Man till they
have seen him once in Drink) was resolved, never to let her rest from
receiving expressions upon expressions of Affection, till he saw her thoroughly
intoxicated with kindness, that he might see what humor she was in; wherefore
a whole row of Coaches attended the Bride and Bridegroom to Mount-pleasant,
which was the name of his Country House: where he had no sooner lighted, and
entered the House, but he caused the Lawyers to produce the Writings, where (in
the presence of Favorinus and many other substantial Witnesses) he made that
House (with ten thousand Crowns per annum thereunto belonging, by sealing and
subscribing thereunto) her Jointure, and delivered the Deed unto Favorinus, her
Brother, to be kept to her use.

Fortunata was astonished with admiration, and so overcome with kindness, that
she could not speak one word. This dumb oratory pleased his fancy beyond the
expression of any eloquence; and which of the two were ravished with greater
delight (he to see his design take so well; or she, to find her hopes so
far out-gone by realities) is hard to imagine.

At length he invites them all into his Garden (the delightful'st of any that
ever she had seen) and asked her, how she liked it?

Who answered him, how could a poor Woman be otherwise than pleased, to be
taken out of an Almes-house, and made the Mistress of a Palace, and Lady of
such a Manor? And with those words, she began to water the Garden, with her
tears: and drew him aside into the next Arbor, where her (mind by the
benefit of that little vent) powered forth a resentment of her sad condition
through want of merit, answerable to his benignity.

Which being performed with so much sweetness, and ingenuity, he removes the
weight that lay so heavy on her heart, with this assurance, that there was that
thing, within her power, to grant, that if he could be but so happy as to
obtain it at her hands (and it was but what was just and honorable) it would
(in equal balance) outweigh all his benefits.

Then Sir (said Fortunata) be sure it shall be granted; and you happy: what is
it, good my Lord?

You shall know (said Corderius) in due time, in the interim I make it part of
my request unto you, that you will rest satisfied till you hear further.

In fine, time has out-gone the day, and the well-spent-time of night calls
upon the new-married Couple to haste to Bed:in Bed they are, the Bride-chamber
cleared; which was no sooner performed, but Corderius conjures her by all the
Love she thought was due to him, to tell him, whether or no she thought her
self happy at that instant?

Fortunata, (after some pause) told him, That she thought her self the happiest
woman in the world, if she had where withal (in her self) to answer that
felicity. For she thought there could be no true happiness where permutation
of desert was wanting.

Why then (said Corderius) Fortunata, know, that thou art miserable, but thou
may be happy; and both these contrary qualities lie within thy power to sour
or sweeten thy whole life withal.

Let me know it quickly then (said Fortunata) and I shall not be long a choosing.

Then thus it is (replied Corderius.)

When I was a young man, and first went out to Sea, as an Adventurer, we
suffered Ship wrack: all but my self were drowned, and I preserved by a
miraculous accident; all but the very top of the main Mast were swallowed up in
the Quicksands, and devouring Seas; up to which top I got, and seeing no hopes
of life, but a terror spread before mine eyes, as broad as the Horison, I
vowed unto the Gods, that if they would manifest their power in my
preservation, I would answer the mercy of their deliverance, with the most
Holiness of life, and Integrity of living, that lay in the utmost endeavors
of a Mortal creature: In order whereunto, I vowed Virginity for ever. I scarce
had ended my Prayers and Fowes to the Almighty, but through the salt water of
mine eyes, I could behold (riding upon the Maine) afaire and stately Ship
making toward me, which (approaching nearer and nearer to me) at last took me
up: And I have kept my promise hitherto, and must keep it to my grave: I have
done all the good that lay in my power; I have been a Father to the
Fatherless, a Husband to many a Widow: I have helped many to their Right, that
suffered Wrong; the Divine providence has made me an Instrument in doing many
good Offices; but especially, I glory in being a means whereby the chaste
Honoria, and deserving Amarissa, were not by the Tyrant brought to Trial; and
by which means (I hope) she is preserved; yet I saw no reason why I might not
Marry, if I could meet with one that would be partner with me in my Vow: I saw
no reason why two might not enjoy the freedoms and familiarities that are
between Man and Wife, only as they are divine and rational Creatures: that
is, to contemplate the Deity, and goodness of the Gods; to joy in one another
company, to discourse together, to embrace, to seal to such payres of
indentures, as the Cockles shall not be more just in their rejoyndure, to make
such impressions on those depressed supplements, which the Bee's-wax for soft,
or sweetness, or the red for color, is not comparable; to fall asleep by such
a vestall fire, that nere goes out, and never burns; to recover our selves (so
often) from being so many times the images of Death, and find so many lives
renu'd, by loves assurance of its immortality; leaving that other consideration
to those Sensitives that have not understanding: thy consent to this, O
Fortunata, would cause me no less to adore thee as divine, than keep me
(still) in favor with the Gods: all those steps of honor to which I have
advanced thee so many degrees above thy self, were but engagements to thy
complacence herein. Now am I to expect my doom, or such a return of my
adventures, that uncovered rocks of Diamonds, or the messeraick and big swollen
veins of the earths golden oar, wide opened, could not afford me more
contentment or requital for all my obligations.

Fortunata (having heard him all the while with an attentive ear) whose
consentig heart (as if its pantings had kept time to the music that he made)
answered:

My ever honored Lord, more to be esteemed for this, than all the merit that
lies within the power of Man to prosecute an engagement: Now (and never till
this time, do I find my self in a (possibility of being happy or) way of
answering, all those accumulations of benignities, with a power of recompense:
you have my full consent herein, and could you read my heart, you would find it
all composed with nothing else but so many Amens to every word you have said:
why did you make so great a doubt of my Consentment? what can more resemble the
celestial fires than when flames do meet, without the smutty contagion of
bituminous materials? that love, that is set on fire, by combustibilities,
which foul the hands of their own Makers, have no other flames but burning
smoke, which vanishes with the death of its own parents; whilst the love
that Corderius talks of, and is here confirmed, by me by an act of
participation to thy vows for ever (so pleasing to the gods) seems to be so
immortal, as if (Promethean like) we had stolen fire from heaven to burn an
everlasting sacrifice; No, Corderius rest satisfied (if this be all) that the
worlds variety could never have fitted your humor so well as Fortunata shall.

Then (said Corderius) I am happy indeed.

So am I, said Fortunata.

Both cried, Both of us are blessed in one another. Both slept in one another
arms, whilst Aminda's Genius (for Honoria her sake) bestows this SONG upon
them:

THus the flower of love twixt Man
And Woman's sifted from the bran:
Thus fine garden-beds are made;
When aside, the rubish 's laid:
Thus sweet herbs, and fragrant flowers,
Unpluckt, look fresher; and are ours,
And as much at our command,
As if they withered in our hand:
Where love in chaste-preserves is met,
Flowers, in water-pots are set:
And live, and have as sweet a breath,
As if, they rooted, in the earth:
Thus (as in Limbecks) spirits of love
Ascend, to descend, from above:
And fill two continents from thence,
With a most pleasing quintessence:
And where the bodies of such souls do meet,
They well may sweeten, but never foul the sheet.
CHAP. XIV.
Prickette falls in love with Rivana. They agree upon the time of their
Marriage; but have not the patience to stay till the time appointed. They are
prevented in their design; and the manner how.

PRickette having been an earnest Suitor to Rivana for her good will: at last
he obtained his desires, to Marry her; but, before the time appointed, they had
agreed to be anticipatious in the business, and too too forward in giving one
another benevolences, before they were due: for the effecting whereof, time and
place were appointed: Rivana was the first Champion that appeared in the field.
Prickette met with some good Fellows by the way, that foreslow'd his march,
and retarded his appearance to the Court of Venus.

Rivana and her Hostess (having given him over for a lost man) were once
resolved to wait his leisure no longer; but Rivana (something more confident of
his performance than the other) was willing to spinne out a little more time,
and busies her self in making a Sack-posset against his coming: the Posset was
made, but no Prickette; patience was quite worn out, and expectation began to
be out of season: wherefore Rivana takes the Sack-posset, and sets it upon the
cubberds head, and covers it with a trencher and napkin, and sets the candle by
it, takes her leave of her Hostess, and prepares her self for bed, putting
the door only too, for fear her Sweetheart should find any difficulty in
his approach, if he should happen to come late, or she, disturbed to let him
in, if it should be locked, or bolted: late brought all to bed, that were in the
House.

Now you must understand, that in the evening, before this happened, that a
Bearward had brought three lusty Bears to town, and had taken up quarters for
them in the same Inn, lodging them in a little Stable that happened to be just
underneath the Chamber where Prickette and Rivana had intended to be very
superlative in the degrees of happiness.

But it happened that Rivana was no sooner got into her bed, but one of the great
Bears, senting the steame of the Posset, broke loose, and happened to pull down
a whole pane in the wall, that opened at the foot of the staircase, that led
up to Rivana's lodgings: up stairs climbs the Bear; Rivana, hearing somebody
coming up, was in good hope it had been her Sweetheart, though she thought
the party came up somewhat heavily, and trod (though not more gently, yet)
more softly then Prickette was wont to do; which she conjectured to be,
because (it may be) he was in the dark, and had no body to light him up the
stayres: and it would be otherwise as soon as he should come into the light.
[ENTER BEAR. -- ] Rivana (perceiving so ugly a creature coming in upon all
four, winding with his Nose, and twinkling with his Eyes) she sinkes down into
her Bed, and falls a praying, but durst not cry out, for fear she should give
the Devouring creature notice of her being there: But Tears, which had so
little way to fall, and fell so softly, and trembling, that could make no noise
upon a bed of Down, she makes use of sufficiently, to express the woefulness
of her condition, and the greatness of her fear; which was presently
augmented and multiplied upon her, like numbers in Arithmetic: for the Bear,
(senting the posset) rises up an-end, and with his fore paws, rests upon the
Cubberd, and nuzzles the trencher that covered the Posset off of the Goblet;
and thrusting his snout into the hot-kept-liquour, he so burnt his nose, that
he made a most fearful noise; and endeavoring to leap down, his Nails so
stuck in the Cubberd-cloath, that down comes the Sack Posset about his Ears,
the Candle into his Eyes; which the melted tallow, (together with the hot
Liquor) had so got into, and made them so smart, that it caused him to Roar, as
if all the Devils in Hell had been in the room: All this while the Bears
Claws were not dis-ingaged from the Cubberd-cloath, nor the Cloth from what
it covered; so that at last (with the Bears striving) downs comes the great
Canopied-cubberd, and all upon the Bear, so that the Bear began to be worse
afraid, and more hurt, then the terrified Rivana, who laboring to dis-ingage
himself from the weight that was upon him, (the Candle all this while lying
upon the ground, still blazing) the Bear (at last) intch'd and intch'd so near
unto the flame, that it set all the hair upon the Bears back on Fire; whereat
the Bear set out a wider throat then all the Baitings that ever he had, could
force him to: Rivana (hearing a great deal of noise besides what the Bear made,
and received no hurt as yet) thought that some body had come in unto her
rescue, as was ordering the Bear, and that the Bear Roared so by reason of some
correction; wherefore she took the boldness to peep out of the Bed, to see
whether it was so, or not: but when she perceived a thing all on Fire, and
another thing over it, stirring up and down the room, she began to be afraid
of the Devil worse than of the Bear: wherefore she flings the Clothes over
her head again, and falls to making Vows, That if ever she were delivered from
that just Judgment, that was upon her for that unlawful Assembly, she would
never violate the old Laws and Customs of her devout Ancestors by such deeds
of Anticipation. Whereupon the Bear (dis-ingag'd of his Toil) left Roaring;
the Candle and the Hair went out, all was quiet; the Bear fell to licking up
his Posset all about the room; but there happened to be so much Sack in the
Posset, (to which the Bear had not been accustomed) that his Brains were
intoxicated; who (wanting a place to repose his giddy brain) skip-frogs up upon
the Bed, and lays him self down half on, and half off the miserable
Rivana. The Bearward (hearing the noise) was rising out of his bed, to know the
cause of their unrulinesse; but perceiving them to be quiet, went to bed again.

By this time Prickette knocks at the door; the old Woman aketh, Who Is there?
Prickette cries, it is I. Who are you? (said the Hostess) it is I, Prickette,
don't you know my voice? you know my business well enough. It Is you? (said the
Hostess) is this a time anight? well, I come: she slips an old Petticoate over
her shoulders, and comes to the door, and lets him in, telling him, that he was
a fine man (indeed) to have a Sweetheart! if she were as she, she would make
him stay the good hour, and if there were a year to the end out.

Well, well, (said Prickette) get you to bed, trouble not your self: where is
she? is she in the Chamber I bespoke? I, I, she is there (said the Hostess) can
you find the way in the dark? there is a light in the Chamber, and a
Sack-posset provided for you: O! you are a sweet Youth y-faith, y-faith, she is
but too good for you.

Good night, good night old Woman, (said Prickette) you prate you know not
what; too good for me! who is too good for me?

Up the stairs comes Prickette, and finds the door open; but seeing no light
in the Chamber, he asks her, What are you in darkness? he had not advanced
three steps into the room, but what with the slipperinesse of the boords, by
reason of the Sack-posset, and the licking of the Bears tongue, down comes
Prickette all along; up again he gets upon his legs, but had not made one
step nearer the bed, but over the cubberd comes poor Prickette, hurts his
hands, and breaks his elbowes; lies still awhile, and asks, Where am I? what
have we here? what is here to do?

Rivana heard a Man's voice, but was afraid there had been another Bear: at
last he gets up, and was resolved to order his steps more warily; at length he
lays hold upon one of the Bed-posts, then he thought himself safe enough, and
that he had her sure; when behold! opening his arms to embrace his beloved,
and his mouth, to bestow this pleasing language upon her, viz: Ah my
Sweetheart! I hope thou will not be angry with me for staying so long; in
troth I could not help it: and therewith falling down upon the Bed, to take
his Mistress in his arms, he embraced the Bear; who being awaked with his
kindness, roared him forth such a Curtaine-lecture, as I think never any such
Delinquent was so miserably served before. Prickette recoiles, forsaking his
station with such violence as the rocks and stones do use to make when they
are moved out of their places, when hell finds out a new mouth, by some
eruption, out of the earth: so that (forgetting his stumbling block, that lay
in his way) he breaks his shins against the cubberd, and over and over he
tumbles, being most miserably tormented; in which agony (knowing not what he
did) mistaking his way in the dark at the bottom of the stairs, in stead of
going out at the door, he runs into the broken place in the wall that the Bear
had made, and so stumbles upon the other two: [BA-A] cries one of the Bears:
[BA-A, BA-A] cries the other two. Prickette (imagining no less but that flying
from one, he had fallen into hell, amongst all the Devils, scrambles (he knew
not how) from between them, and so got loose from both, and recovers his feet,
but durst not make any other use of them than standing upon them: so
unfortunate had his motion been unto him of late, that still he ran into
further mischief, till at last the Bears unrulinesse made him venture farther
off the danger; so that he got close to the manger, then he knew where he was;
up he gets into it, and (for his greater security sake) climbs up into the
rack. The Bearward (hearing a second alarm, rises) out of his bed, and came
to see what was the matter, where he soon espied one of his Bears missing,
and the wall broke down, where she had got out, presently he raises the house,
saying, He was undone, one of his Bears was broken loose, and was got away. Up
they all rise, unchaine the Dogs, search for the Bear, enter the Stable, see
where the Bear broke out; which whilst they were viewing they could hear a
voice from the rack-side, saying, Do you hear, do you hear, I know where
your Bear is with a pox to you: They looked up, and spied Prickette amongst
the rack staves: They asked him, Where? where I pray now? Where (says
Prickette) I know where well enough, but look that your Bears be safe and
I Will come down and show you. They securing him from all danger, he descends
from his pallisadoes, and directs them up into his Mistresse's Chamber, giving
the Bearward, and the Dogs leave to go before him; who find the Bear fast
asleep in Prickette his place; so that with much convenience, they got the
string into the ring, and pulled the Bear from off the Bed. Prickette turning
down the bed to see what was become of his Sweetheart, there ascended such a
wreake of baked, and boiled, and stewed, and roast-meat, that his stomach was
quite turned; so that he had no appetite to his former dainties. She cries out
to him, Prickette, begone; get thee hence, thou come not near me: I will have
nothing to do with thee, e'ne stay the time. So they both concluded to wait
the leisure when unlawfulness should be less attended with so heavy
judgments, and Prickette departed with the Bear, Dogs, and Bearward out of the
room to seek another lodging.

CHAP. XV.
Lorenzo his sad condition at Court. Berontus meets with Navigius; by whom he
informs himself of all the business concerning Honoria. He carries the glad
tidings to Lorenzo. Bertaldo and Berontus sent to the Ladies. A Storm at Sea.

NOw we must return to Lorenzo, who all this while remained (you will say) in
a very sad condition, when a Prince in his own Court shall hunt for favorable
looks from his own Subjects, and find never a one; for, all the Courtiers
beheld him, with such sullen aspects, as if Saturn at that time, had animated
the Court, with one surly Genius; so great power had the force of justice over
the instruments of iniquity, whom we must also leave (as soon as we have looked
upon) in his melancholy dumps to bring back the fortunate Berontus in his
happy adventures; for, he had scarce reached within three leagues of the
Seashore, but he met with Navigius the Seaman, who had been the Preserver of
both the Ladies, who (having not wit enough to believe that the surplusage of
his merit, exceeded the offensivenesse of his default) upon the approach of so
Courtly Gallants (hearing the Rumors that had spread about the Country
concerning Lorenzo's Conquest, and Maximanus's Death) was afraid of every
Butterflies being a Courtier, making inquisition for Honoria and Amarissa, or
after any one that had but a hand in that Delinquency; for which reasons he
thought himself no small Fool, and that (he thought) he knew not how to
answer the sale of such Commodities; so that he looked so ghastly, shook so
fearfully, and stood so amazed in every respect, that Berontus could not but
take special notice of him: Wherefore he asked him, What ayl'st thou Fellow?
and finding him speechless, he thought some extraordinary matter, to be the
occasion, of that ecstasy; and considering the business he went about, he
thought it worthy of his farther inquiry: wherefore, he caused one of his
Attendants, to take him up behind him, and bring him along with him to the next
resting place: The Fellow, (thinking, that he had been carried all this while
to hanging, (still measuring the 'depth of their science by the guilt of his
own conscience) as soon as ever he was brought to Examination, he cried out,
Oh Master! save but my life, and I will tell you all.

Berontus replied, answer me but to one Question and thou shall not die, Is
Honoria living? or can thou tell what is become of her?

Navigius answered, she is alive, and well.

And Amarissa too? replied Berontus.

She Is well, and lusty, (said Navigius.)

What is become of them? (said Berontus.)

Navigius told him all the Passages of the whole story as was before related.

Whereat Berontus was so overjoyed that he hugged him in his arms, bidding him
not to be afraid of any thing, since they were living; telling him, that his
merit, in their preservation, was so great, that small faults would not be
looked upon: Both (overjoyed) made haste to Carthage, where the night before
these glad tidings were brought to Court: Lorenzo (not thinking himself worthy
of the Attendance that pulled off his Shoes as he went to bed) was no sooner
in bed, but he was saluted with Amynda's Genius with these glad tidings:

Now thou'st suffered for thy folly,
Cease further to be Melancholy:
Thy repentance is accepted,
And thy prayers no more rejected:
Honoria she is safe, and sound,
Better so, than under ground:
Amarissa' as well as she,
Even as well, as well may be:
To morrow when you find it thus,
Forget Amynda, hey for us!
But if you do, then find you shall,
A worser evil will befall.
Lorenzo starts upright in his bed, and cries out, Oh Amynda! stay awhile; stay
I pray thee good Amynda, be not inexorable: what would thou have me to
speak? and I vow Obedience to thy Commands; I will not swerve a tittle from
thy precepts, give me Honoria and command my life.

Amynda being overcome with his remorse, and full intentions of amendment,
answers his desires.

Then all that I would have you do,
Love Honoria; and be true:
(And Amarissa, for her sake)
Love you would better give then take:
Now lie down and ben't perplexed,
Observe what I shall tell you next.
Lorenzo falls into a sweet sleep, until the morning-watch awaked him with
their answerings to Berontus his importunities of opening the Gates; who was so
transported with his fraught, that he thought it much, that wood, and iron,
should make his lading dance attendance.

Lorenzo thus awakt, and remembering the good tidings overnight, he thought they
were so good, that he began to be afraid they were too good to be true. Thus
the Devil, after we have overcome all his temptations, throws his last Dart,
and seeks to poison us with infidelity, like the Ship that has escaped so
great Enemies, and so many Shipwracks, at last perishes in the Harbor.

But whilst he was in this great danger, by reason of so many Rocks and
Shelves: Berontus (like a good Pilot, comes to guide him safely into the
Harbor) at whose first sight, Lorenzo reads comfort in his looks; and asks
him if he has heard of his Honoria, (anticipating his relation with his
confidence) in these words:

I know, that if thou had not brought good News, thou woulst not have
returned so soon.

Berontus taking Nagivius by the hand, from point to point, tells him the full
relation of the whole, as has been before expressed: Which, when Lorenzo had
heard throughout, he knew not whether he should acknowledge himself more
beholding to the Hand, or to the Instrument, that made such music to his
Ears: he showered down obligations upon Berontus, as upon a Favorite that was
capable of receiving those acts of Grace: But when he came to express his
affection to Navigius, he found him so unsusceptable, that he could not love
him otherwise, then with the Love wherewith fond Ladies use to be in love with
their Lap-dogs, whose over-gladnesse at small favors, make their Mistresses
sorry that they are not rational creatures, whereby they may be more capable
of further benefits. Both in their kind were fully satisfied, the one with
princely language; the other with spitting a few acknowledgments in his mouth,
which the one received with due reverence, and good behavior; the other with
so many scrapes of his feet, and wagging of his tail.

All the Palace did ring of this good news; nothing but acclamations of joy
and gladness was heard amongst the People, every body ran to see Navigius:
Berontus was no body amongst the Vulgar, like to like enjoyed their liking; the
poor man was well helped up, from a peck of troubles, to such a measure of
admiration, and benignity. Bertaldo was sent for in Post-haste, (who returning
as suddenly.) The next thoughts that were in election, was how these two Ladies
were to be sent for, and who should be employed in that Affair. It was
determined, that Bertaldo and Berontus should be dispatched upon this Embassy;
Berontus to the Island of Majorca, to attend upon Honoria; and Bertaldo to
Minorca, to wait upon Amarissa. And this for two Reasons, to which I might
add a third.

The first was, because Berontus had been so Fortunate to bring the Good-newes,
it was thought fitting that he should have the Honor of the Employment.

The second was, That Bertaldo thought it more convenient service to wait upon
his Mistress, than his Sister.

And the third was, That Lorenzo knew Honoria would be satisfied sufficiently
to hear of her Brothers welfare at any hand, but he could not reward Berontus's
services with less respect. Two Ships were speedily prepared, the one for
Bertaldo, the other for Berontus: But all had been like to be spoiled, for the
Prince taking great affection to Philoret, had gained Bertaldo his consent,
that Philoret should stay behind to keep him Company; but there sat such a
cloud on Philoret his Countenance, as made them all fear they should have no
Fair weather after them, if he were left behind; wherefore the Prince
willingly released him of his grant.

They were all fairly Shipped; but behold, they were scarce out of sight of the
Maine-land, but their stately Ships were forced to strike Sail to angry
Neptune: who, with his awful Trident, mustered his Turbulent waves, whilst the
innumerous Tacklings served for so many Whistles to the wind, to call on
danger to her Execution, whilst the Boiling Ocean lifted up her Waves so high,
that the Masts of both the Ships charged their tops through the proud Heads of
the insulting Billows; till others (as if they had been their Friends) lifted
the Victors upon their shoulders to such a height, as their main Masts were in
danger to have fallen foul with the Celestial Spears; raking from their
restless bottomes, so much Sand, as not only discolored the green Ocean, but
also threatened a dissolution of the whole Earth into so many Attomes in the
Sea: So that no marvel, that they had quite lost one another, whilst they
were both thus likely to be lost. So that it happened (by reason of this Storm)
that Bertaldo, who was bound for Minorca, was (by the fortune of the Winds)
blown upon the Island of Majorca; and Berontus (who was bound for Majorca) was
thrown upon the lesser Island: The mistake was not so great, whilst their
Commissions were both the same.

Berontus was no sooner arrived there, but the news was brought to Castriots
house, That there was come from the Maine, the Gallantest Gentleman that ever
eyes beheld; and his business was, to enquire after a certain Carthaginian
Lady that was forced away from her own Country, and brought hither by Violent
hands.

Amarissa, at the first hearsay, conjectured it to be him who was intended,
Bertaldo, though it fell out to be him, that should be there, Berontus, though
not by order of Humane, but Divine Affairs. Amarissa saves Berontus the labor
of Enquiry, and sends him her Name, with directions where to come, if that he
knew it, or had any thing to say to her: He hastens to the place of her abode
with such a longing desire, as good News carries always with it, when it
knows it shall affect the hearer with delight. When Amarissa heard that the
same Cavalier was arrived at the Gate, she prepares her self for such
information, as her own eyes should give her, through the Glass, whether it
were the same of whom her hopes had given her some assurance: But as soon as
Berontus began to enter the Court, her hopes began to retire; but seeing him
such another goodly Personage, and having such a Manly gate, she thought the
Glass might be no true Mediator: Wherefore, desiring to be better informed,
she only opens the Casement, so far as might serve her Eyesight to sally
out; which was so met withal by his, that it was beaten in again without
receiving the least intelligence, shutting that Sally-port with such diligence,
as if an Enemy were ready to make his Entry in at the window, whilst the door
was open to let in the best of Friends.

In comes Berontus, who having saluted her, makes her amends for the mistake of
the Person, by bringing her Bertaldo in his Mouth, whose service (as knowing it
to be most acceptable) he presented in the first place, acquainting the Lady by
what accident it happened, that he was not there himself, being designed
purposely to wait on her, as his was to have attended upon the Princess,
Honoria: Amarissa was well enough pleased to hear of his Welfare, and could
have found in her heart to have expressed her fears of his being cast away at
Sea; but she smothered her affections for the present, and fell to asking how
Lorenzo did? Scarce had they made an end of all that he had, and she to say,
which took up no small proportion of time and discourse, but that a Messenger
came to Amarissa from Honoria and Bertaldo, to acquaint her, that Bertaldo was
there, how they missed Berontus, who was designed for the place where he now
was, acquainting her with the happy news of all the late Occurrences. Berontus
and Amarissa being both more at hearts-ease then when they met first. Amarissa,
who delighted in nothing more then in hearing relations of deeds of Chivalry:
and loved men for nothing more then their Prowess; and no Gallantry like that
which was showed against her deadly Enemy Maximanus: And perceiving how
sparingly Berontus had touched upon that string, and how his modesty had more
commended himself, then delighted her. She desires him to tell her the manner
how, the place where, the time when, with all other particulars concerning the
killing of that Wild-Boar, wherein she professes she could never be
sufficiently satisfied. Whereupon Berontus related unto her the whole substance
of the Story, with all the circumstances belonging thereunto, in such orderly
manner, and observance to her commands, that all the Predicaments in Logic
were but servants to his Method, and subjects to her Reason: She was so much
taken with his Gallantry, giving him many thanks for his Relation; but withal
told him, That she was most of all beholding to her self: For the best part of
his description had been left out (if she had not wrested it from him by
degrees) through his modesty, that was so wary in letting any thing slip from
him to his own advantage that concerned himself. Then she fell to the business
in Mauritania: and when Berontus had but touched upon that particular of
preserving Lorenzo by his most happy conduct, she did so conjure him not to
mince the matter, but to tell her punctually how it was (supposing himself a
third person) upon whose entreaty he declared more at large. But when he came
to speak of that particular service at the Bridge, and how fortunate a man had
been to the whole Army; and asking him who it was, and could have no other
answer from him but blushes and trancisions into other matters, Oh how Amarissa
was taken with him! she could have leapt into his mouth, and shot the Gulf to
come at that fair Harbor where there rid so brave a Man of War. But then she
recalls her self, and faces about, to the remembrance of the brave Bertaldo,
and checks her forward passion for loving a man so much, so soon, whilst all
the Berontus'es in Africa could not exceed Bertaldo, for what she had both
heard, and seen: But falling into discourse concerning his partaking with
Bertaldo, in the differences which were between him and the Prince, she falls
to loving him again; and hearing Berontus relate how stoutly Bertaldo behaved
himself, in Honoria's and her behalf, her love runs back again, and catches
at Bertaldo: nor is she wavering all this while, but constant to the true cause
of love, worth, and true Nobility: she is not so much in love with either of
their Persons, as both their valors; Berontus had slain the Giant, preserved
Lorenzo, and Bertaldo both; Bertaldo had done as brave things as these, had
possession of her heart before; at last she distinguishes betwixt loving her
house, and riding on the top of it, she resolves to love him as a wel-deserving
Friend, but Bertaldo as a dear Husband; yet notwithstanding her carriage was
so full of freedom and respect, that Berontus conceived that in his mind that
his honor would not nourish, so they parted for that night.

The next day the wind served fair for Majorca, and they were resolved to
neglect no opportunity to be together, where they might re-imbark themselves
for Carthage, and with a fair wind they joyfully landed, and were as
Sumptuously entertained by Thoron and Armena, as they were gladly received by
Bertaldo and Honoria; unexpressible was the joy that was between Honoria and
Amarissa, the love that was between Amarissa and Bertaldo, Bertaldo and
Honoria; both join hands in setting forth the praises and high Gallantry of
Berontus. Berontus joins issue with Bertaldo, and Honoria, in giving the due
Encomiums that were belonging to Philoret; who presently becomes Amarissa's
chief Favorite, as the Preserver of her life, the life of her beloved, the
Honor of Lorenzo, the Glory of the Carthaginians. Amarissa would have been in
love with Philoret, but what love invited, faith forbade; Berontus would have
been in love with Amarissa, but that honor stood between: Honoria would have
been in love with Lorenzo, but knew not how to come at him: Bertaldo had been
in love with Philoret, had he known but what he had been: and Philoret might
have been beloved by Bertaldo, had he but had the confidence: if ever there was
love in a maze, here it danced the round: you might hear of a
True-lovers-knot, but never knew of such a knot (as here was) of True Lovers.
In this loving humor they all took shipping, and were undersaile for Carthage.

CHAP. XVI.
Lorenzo found the Letter by Pippea 's means. He hears of their Arrival: goes
to meet them. The Marriage between Bertaldo and Amarissa is urged amain:
Philoret falls into a Trance upon it: Berontus is lovesick with Amarissa.
Amarissa and Bertaldo are found to be Brother and Sister. Philoret is found to
be the Duke of Medina-Coeli his Daughter. Bertaldo and Berontus are sent into
Spain and Italy, to find out the truth thereof, as the price of both their
Loves.

PIppea by this time is become a pretty Maid, having the confidence to speak
unto the Prince; she tells his Highness what she did, and that Honoria writ a
Letter, and how she conveig'd it, and where she laid it.

Lorenzo presently goes and searches the Cabinet, finds it there, and reading
it fell into a trembling, with thinking what a wound it would have been unto
his injured soul, if Honoria had miscarried, and afterward he had sound that
Letter; all this Pippea did by the persuasion of Hortensius. The Prince
marvelously commended Pippea for her piety to Honoria, promising her the chief
place of Honor about her.

The news was brought to Court, of the landing of Honoria, and the rest.

The Prince was ashamed to look his own happiness in the face, and to see,
that, which he most desired, yet he trusted to two friends to bear him out,
Honoria's goodness, and his own acknowledgment: he goes out to meet her, and
finds her in a most conventent place for gratulation; where, descending his
Chariot as she hers, he says thus unto her; Honoria, if I should question thy
pardon, I should tax thy goodness; Mercy is Lady and Empress of all the best
of Attributes, I have a great deal to say, more to confess, most of all to
acknowledge; if thou will give me time, I will take no less then all my life,
to bestow in repentance and satisfaction --

And as he was speaking further, she cuts him off with this prevention,

My Lord, I pray say no more; he is dead that was the cause of this, and in his
grave, let the memorial of all these things be buried, I am afraid you have
been too severe a Punisher of your self already, I am glad I was preserved for
no other cause --

And as Honoria was going on in her discourse, Bertaldo stops the current of
her speech (till the stream swelled so high, that her heart floated in
compassion of Lorenzo's sorrow for her sufferings) saying, You two shall take
another time, and place, when you are by your selves, then and there you can
best charm one another into beliefs, which none can question whilst you are
one another Judges, and by none attonements sooner wrought then when you are
each others Advocates: Lorenzo, be but you her Votary, and I Will undertake she
shall be your Confessor, small pittance shall serve for absolution. As Honoria
would not hear Lorenzo; nor Bertaldo, Honoria; so all the Company cried down
Bertaldo, perceiving that no better accommodation might be made, then what
should proceed from the goodness of their own dispositions, when tongues
should be as far from interposing as ears from giving audience; all was
hushed, Lorenzo takes Honoria into his Chariot; Bertaldo, Amarissa, into his;
both Berontus: all three (the generally so much beloved) Philoret, Lorenzo and
Honoria had little discourse, much handing, more kisses, many sighs; Bertaldo,
and Amarissa, Berontus, and Philoret, were all Chatt; thus they made the way
short to Carthage, where the People filled the Streets with Voices, and the
Air with Acclamations of Joy, and Gladness, for that happy meeting; in a
word, the whole business was so sweetly composed between Lorenzo and Honoria,
as if his heart had been a Jubilee, and hers a plenary indulgence.

Thus stated, as at first, they began to entertain thoughts, how they might
drive a trade of happiness between Bertaldo and Amarissa, whilst Berontus was
lovesick for Amarissa, and Philoret deadly in love with Bertaldo, yet neither
of them durst express the causes of their discontents; the one through a
supposed unworthiness in himself, the other lest he should show any defect in
worth toward so brave a friend.

Bertaldo and Amarissa both hearken to the music that Lorenzo and Honoria
caused for to sound in both their ears; at which, Berontus made as sour a
face, as Philoret lent them a deaf ear; at last Philoret singling out his
Master, spoke unto him in this manner:

Sir, You know with what a passionate affection I ever loved you, you know what
preferments I ever waved to enjoy this relation; I perceive there is an
overture of Marriage between you and Amarissa; you have oftentimes bid me ask
what I would: I never asked you any thing, but now I shall.

My dear heart (said Bertaldo) ask what thou will, and I will grant it thee.

Then (said Philoret) I only ask, that you would not Marry; I do not ask,
you would not Marry her: for, of all Women living, she is worthiest to be had.

Thy reason, good Philoret? (replied Bertaldo.)

Because I love you, (said Philoret.)

Why should thy love (said Bertaldo) prompt thee to such a prohibition?

Because (said Philoret) it is not good to part with that dear privilege of
being wholly a man's self, to be the half of another; besides, all the
pleasure I have in this world is in your love; all my ambition is to deserve
it, and all my study is how I may improve that happiness. Now when you have a
Wife, your love will be set on her, and I shall but gleane in the same field
where I formerly reapt a full Crop of Bliss: and therewith fell into a most
sudden passion and extreme weeping.

Whereat Bertaldo taking him in his arms, intended him this satisfaction, My
dear Philoret, I will Marry her, but on this condition, that she shall double,
not mitigate the love I bear to thee: Sweet Boy, had I as many Wives as
Carthage Women, they all should not be able to eclipse the least spark of the
true affection which I bear to thee, and to thy merit. Just as he had spoken
that word, there came a Servant from the Prince, desiring his company; he
clapping Philoret on both his cheeks, with both his hands, bid him be confident
that all the Wives in the world, should not draw away his affection from him,
and so left him weeping.

In which posture Berontus found him, and enquiring into the cause, and by
Philoret's answer, finding it to be grounded upon his dislike of the Marriage,
he embraces both him and his discontent, fostering it up to a full growth, as
agreeable to his humor; but all in vain: for, the Match was made, the Parties
agreed, the Time set; only Bertaldo told his Mistress, with what reluctance
Philoret resented it, and upon what grounds, desiring her to use her utmost
endeavor to dispossess him of that conceit.

Amarissa undertakes it, and sends for Philoret: who being come, Amarissa takes
him aside, and thus entreats him: Sweetheart, I understand thy love to be such
to thy Master, that thou think it will be less, when he has me; I have sent
for thee to assure thee, that it will be double; when we two are one, you must
distinguish between love, and love; it is one thing to love a Wife, and another
thing to love a Friend, or Favorite; the love of the one, no way lessens the
obligations and ties of friendships that are between the other, but rather
incloses them in bounds and fences, whereby they are not violable. Truly,
Philoret, I know thy love to be such to thy Master, and thy merits to be so
great in every eye, that were I not engaged unto Bertaldo by promise, and
obliged by honor, of all the Men that carry heads upon their shoulders, I
should love Philoret, and therefore never fear that his love should be less
to thee. Amarissa (perceiving Philoret his color to be quite gone, and a
Civil war begun already upon his cheeks, between the white Rose and the
Red) leaves off speaking, (as men leave wounding when they think the party
almost dead) when poor Philoret had fallen to ground, had not Amarissa caught
him falling, who (like some young Physician) seeing his Potion begin to work by
contraries, fears he had mistaken the right Glass, and prescribed his Patient
Poisons instead of Cordialls: so affrighted was Amarissa in applying remedies
where she was so ignorant of the disease. Philoret comes to himself, whom
Amarissa leaves, as Doctors do their Patients, when they begin to be
dangerous, carrying that sad news of irrecovery to Bertaldo, who flies to his
beloved Page, catching him up in his Arms, asking him what he ayl'd? And what
he would have? Bidding him declare his mind fully, what he would, before he
Married: or whether Honor, Preferment, Land, Riches, Money most affected him,
it should be granted; and if he doubted his Marriage would be an Obstacle to
any of these, he would never Marry until he had satisfied him in any of the
particulars.

Philoret answered him, I ask nothing, but that you would not Marry; all these
things I have forsaken already for your sake, and if you Marry I must forsake
you, and die.

Bertaldo told him, that it was but the Exuberance of his affection, which in
time may easily be remedied: telling him, That fondness must give way to
Princes Edicts.

It was decreed by Lorenzo's Command, that to morrow must be the day that
Amarissa and he must shake hands in Holy Wedlock.

Then (said Philoret) I may lie at your feet this night.

Philoret (said Bertaldo) thou shall lie for ever at my heart, as my best
friend for ever. Come, I Will call thee Page no more, thou shall be my self; and
afterward I shall let thee know, that thy fears are needless, and that thy
discontents stand upon no ground.

Thus past the night away, when in the morning there was nothing to be seen,
but preparations for the Wedding; time drawing on, the accustomed preparations
for the Solemnity, news was brought, that Berontus was very sick, and could
not attend the Ceremony; Philoret had fallen into several distempers, and fits
of soundings, (strange Preludiums to such Solemnities) Berontus his condition
was not much weighed, because not any knew the cause of his distemper; but
Philoret, his case was much resented by those who were not ignorant either of
the Malady, or the Remedy. Amongst whom Bertaldo was the forwardest (as the
most expert) Physician in feeling of his Pulse: Who coming to Philoret, said,
Thou (young man) that astonishest all men with thy Miracles, and me with thy
Love, why do thou expire so often? There must be something to hinder every
man from the perfection of a Deity. Why will thou sullie all thy former actions
with such fondness? more befitting some female weakness, than relating to such
prowess as is always resident in thy manly breast; why art thou such a jarre
to all our music, rain'st thy tears upon our joyful harvest? Come, I never
Chid thee before in all my life, nor ever thought I should; and why should I
Chide thee, since it is rather the error of love, than love of error? thou
committ'st the fault, and I Will give satisfaction; ask and have what thou will
of me; for, by all that is good, were thou capable of a nearer relation than
that of Friendship, even of that I Am going about and should ask me,
Amarissa should not stand between thee and thy Contentment. Heavens! what
confusion that word cast into his thoughts! what changeableness into his
countenance! what rain bows were tied in True lovers knots upon his cheeks! he
gave his eyes free leave to speak his mind, whilst he denied his heart the
benefit of it is own Advocate; he lets silly and unexperienced wishes, sallie
out of that strong-hold, whilst effective words and language were kept in like
conquerable Lions within their Grates; at last, (considering the confusion that
would follow his discovery, but most of all fearing the denial that his
supposed disparity would soon give check to such a Mate) his mind gave him
rather to break his Heart, than break his Mind; and chose rather to die a
sacrifice to humility, than to embroile such Lovers in discontents, to satisfy
his own desires, by such presumption; giving Bertaldo this answer, sent up by
the swellings of his Heart, no rising of any Lungs.

Bertaldo, I am contented that you shall Marry Amarissa, and enjoy her, upon
one condition, that you will only give me leave to mourn this day, and I shall
never trouble you with any more Petitions.

Bertaldo admiring at his suite, yet being used to such exotic fondness,
custom took away the strangeness of it; whereupon he gave him leave (not
thinking that he had meant any other kind of mourning, then not rejoicing with
the rest) whereat Philoret seemed to be much pleased, and Bertaldo, glad that
he had any way contented him) repaires to Amarissa, whom he confounds with the
relation, in thinking with what strange predominance his love bare sway;
however she resolves to humor him likewise for the future, and by her loving
carriage toward him to let him see his Error. But when the time drew near,
that hand in hand should join two hearts in one; Behold Lorenzo, he falls
suddenly sick, whose indisposednesse to attend the Ceremony, bequeathes the
gift of Amarissa into Holy Hands, to be delivered to Bertaldo, to the
performance of the brave Berontus: who being sick with Love, was deadly afraid
he should thereby be accessory to his own destruction; how averse soever his
mind was to the Princes deputation, yet necessity laid such strong hold upon
him, together with Bertaldo his Entreaties, and Amarissa's Courtship, that it
seemed no otherwise to him, then as if he had been compelled to act that part
with such an impulsion, as wherewith the evil destinies drive men to be their
own Executioners.

Thus all was out of order, whilst ignorance is about to join hands with
Devotion, to act unlawful things under the pretension of Holy Rites: on they
rush, as well as they may, they think no hurt, they do no good: Monstrum
horrendum inform ingens cui lumen ademptum. They enter the Holy Place, the
Priest is present, the Parties ready, the People by, the Ceremonies begun,
Berontus is called upon to do his Office; he goes about what he had rather let
alone, unwillingly willing he takes Amarissa by the hand; and when he should
deliver her to the Priest, he holds her fast, and would not let her go; and
when he should speak certain words, he declares by an uncertain kind of
speech, which had no other articulates but the weight of language, I mean his
tears; that what he did, came not from his heart, whereby seeming to serve for
no other use, then as a dumb and senseless Statue; her hand was taken out of
his, and given to another, who gave it to the Priest to be delivered to
Bertaldo, who were then, and there, publicly Married in the fight of all the
world. Never till this time, when it seemed too late, did Amarissa perceive
that Berontus was in love with her, whose pity of his condition made her sorry
that she had not known it sooner; and that sorrow caused Bertaldo to perceive a
kind of reluctance in Amarissa's countenance, as if she had not been well
pleased with what she had done, which made him not so well pleased with his
Bargain as otherwise he would have been: But behold a sad sight administered a
greater occasion of dislike, than was the former; for Philoret, overset with
Melancholy of the Blackest hue, studies a way how to improve it to the
highest. Wherefore when he perceived them all gone to the Wedding, he puts on a
Mourning Habit, and all alone goes into the room prepared for the Dinner,
where solemnity had placed two Chaires of State for the Bride, and Bridegroom,
to enthrone themselves in Majesty; Thus accoutr'd, Philoret seats himself in
the Brides Chair; and throwing his upper Garment over his shoulder, he settles
his mind to as deep a Melancholy, as either his outward Habit, or his
Posture, hung out signs: Thus under the shadow of despair sits Philoret, like
a condemned Victim pressed to death, whose inability to endure the present
pain, makes him cry more weight; until oppression made him senseless, falling
into a charitable slumber, that put him into such a pleasing dream, as in a
manner was able to quit cost to all his anxieties: He dreamed, how, that after
death, he was found to be a Virgin; and that Bertaldo loved him better dead,
than when he was alive, and that he wept over him; and that his Tears were
such an Embalmement, that he should never Rot, nor Stink; he dreamed the loose
Earth over his Grave to be transparent; so that he could see Bertaldo, and
Amarissa, strewing Herbs and Flowers over his Grave, and from their swollen
eyes, to pour such virtuall showers upon that Covering, that the Flowers
rooted, and were everlasting: whilst the bordering Willowes round his Semitary,
with lifting up their arms by a just wind, refused their Boughs to hands,
that were too forward for to pluck Materials where withal to make him
Garlands. In which interim, in comes Bertaldo, with Amarissa in his hand, with
all their Concommitants to that half solemnity, where finding Philoret asleep
in such a Posture, such a Seat, such Habit, and at such a time, it struck them
into such a dumpe, that Rain in Harvest was never so unwelcome to the greedy
Husbandman, as this sight was cause of discontent to the two Triumphants; they
all stood about him, and pitied both his sleep and waking; all fell a wondering
why asleep, why in Mourning, why in her Chair, why at that time just, when
others were in Celebration of so great Solemnity!

Lorenzo sick, Berontus he not well, Philoret so significant in his perplexity,
never was there a Wedding so like a Funeral, whilst the two subjects of that
mirth and jollity that was expected, were the chief Mourners to so many
unexpected causes of adversity: thus he remained, and thus the sad Spectators
all continued, until such time as the Prince his Sewer ushered in the Dishes
to the Bridal board; when the smell of so many several meats (like an enemy
to his repose) gave an alarm to his five senses to repair to their several
posts.

Philoret (as yet a stranger to himself) could not behold so great a luster,
as the glory of that day presented to his eyes; so that he was forced to call
in his Scouts before they had enabled him with the least intelligence.

Amarissa pressing forwards to receive an account of his well or evil fare,
(Bertaldo standing behind her) Philoret thought himself in an eclipse
(perceiving the Moon to be between him and his Sun) yet in that darkness,
he finds the way to so much sweetness, and civility, as that he took
Amarissa by the hand, and seated her in her Throne; which having done, he sinks
down dead at her very feet.

Bertaldo catches him up again, uses all the means to recall him to himself,
but all in vain: he remains breathless, no pulses beat, nor sign of life at
all: All give him for dead; he makes haste by degrees, till he becomes as cold
as earth; he is delivered into proper hands for laying of him forth: Bertaldo
weeps, whilst all were so full of sorrow, that there were no Comforters, none
sat down to eat, whilst the meat, as sympathizing with the accident, cooled
as if it dyed, losing their artificial, as he his natural heat; who can
imagine the sorrow that in general filled every particular breast? but to
conceive the vast load that lay upon Bertaldo, who acknowledged him self
guilty of the murder, by giving so deaf an ear to Philoret 's often
inculcations, that he should not Marry, and that if he did he should surely
dye: which had he but believed, all the world should not have persuaded him to
have shaken hands with any Creature living.

Amarissa began to consider with her self, how happy it had been if Bertaldo
had observed the Injunctions of his Darling; and she had known that Berontus
had been so in love with her, whom she always liked and honored; but durst
not show it by reason of her Engagement, nor he declare his mind insisting upon
terms of Honor, whom missing, all upon a sudden (as fearing that that two
Tragedies might be acted in one day) she cries, What is become of Berontus?
when behold, in comes the Messengers of the most distracting news that ever
reached ears; for, the Women who came from laying forth the body of poor
Philoret, spoke amazement by their looks, before they used a tongue, whose
eye-auditors (as if they had received some strange intelligence) asked, What Is
the matter? and how? to they knew not what.

Whilst Bertaldo impatient to be tormented long with silent Monsters, bid them
speak their minds, and tell him what it was that made them look so ghastly?

Oh! Sir, (said one of them) if you would needs know, Philoret was a pure
Virgin, and no Man.

At which word, Bertaldo tore his hair, rent his wedding garments, raved and
roared about the room, not caring what was mis becoming either a stout heart
or a manly courage, and gives himself wholly over to be swayed by Passion.

Amarissa she runs forth to view the Corpse, brings word to Bertaldo, that it
was so indeed.

Whereupon, Bertaldo could not endure the sight of Amarissa, that was the cause
of this; nor himself, that had so much doted upon her: blames the dead, then
takes all the blame upon himself, that he was such a Block-head as not to
conceive so much before, perceiving so many Symptoms of love that could not be
but Foeminine by its violence, protesting before all the Gods, that had she but
opened her mouth in the least intimation concerning any such matter, he would
have had her whatsoever she were, before any Woman living: then troubles
himself with imaginations, who it should be, what might be her name,
persuading himself it must be one of more than ordinary rank and quality:
Then mads himself that he had not known it, excusing her with attributes of
modesty, and humility; with these distractions, frenzies, and general
condolements, they passed the day, whilst the night invited, not their
maladies, to seek remedies by repose; thoughts of Coffins, dead Bodies, and
Graves, interdicted the Ceremony of the Bed; all was neglected, and what was
strangest of all, the married Couple was not only careless of themselves, but
of one another: and how could Bertaldo delight in her, when he delighted in
nothing else, but thinking how he might have been another? and how could
Amarissa joy in him, when she thought of nothing more, but how she might have
been any way happier, than in the condition she was in; whilst sorrow for what
they had done made them acceptable, repentance makes way for Amynda her
redemption; for, the time of her promised comforts, and assistant graces was at
hand, wherein she visits the sick Lorenzo, and brings him tidings of the
recovery both of his health and understanding.

Arise Lorenzo, sin no more;
You Are perfect, as thou were before;
Bertaldo 'nd Amarissa, should
They marry, blood would touch with blood;
One man begot, the same Womb bare
Them both; so near akin they are:
Whom Philoret you deem to be,
She Is Periissa, even she,
Whom you shall see alive hereafter,
The Duke Medina Coelies Daughter;
Touch and Wipe the eyes that weep,
She is not dead, but fallen asleep;
Let her have her souls delight:
Dissolve the Married Couple quite:
Let Berontus freely have,
His Amarissa: grief, a grave.
Lorenzo, like a refreshed Giant, rouzes up himself, and musters his
Disconsolates, acquainting them with the strange news that was revealed unto
him, whose misbelief he soon rectified by telling them, that they should all
know this to be true by Periissa her being not dead, but in a trance, inviting
them all as Witnesses to her resurrection, whom they all follow through so many
degrees of love: Confidence filled the Room, whilst Hope attended the touch,
that raised her up to life. Periissa comes to her self, both in name and
nature, and admires to hear Lorenzo call her Periissa; wonders to hear
Bertaldo say, Ah my Periissa! why would thou conceal this from thy beloved,
whose soul and thine were ever Man and Wife? wonders to hear Amarissa say,
dearest Periissa, you shall freely enjoy what you desire, I must not stand
between you and that Happiness. Wonders to hear Bertaldo say, that Amarissa
was his own Sister, and that the Weddingknot must be dissolved, and fastened
between them two, (meaning Bertaldo and her self) but chiefly wonders at
Honoria her calling upon Lorenzo, to give her an account how that she was sole
Daughter and Heir to the Duke of Maedina Coeli.

Like a Man that has layen long in some dark Dungeon, and is suddenly brought
into such a light, whose rays (from that resplendent sun) make such a glory
round about him, that his weak eyes are not able to comprehend so great a
luster: In such a pleasing Confusion was Periissa, so stifled was her sorrow in
the throng of so many pressing happinesses.

Like a knot of True-lovers of one another, yet all in misery, and in want, and
ready to be hunger-starved, espying the relief of some large and bountiful
portion of meat to be brought to some one of them, all rejoice alike, knowing
they shall all participate of that bounty: so did this joyful news which was
brought unto Periissa, fill with joy, and ravish with delight, all these
Companions in misery; knowing, that this viand, would be food to all their
appetites; for, (says Berontus) if this be so, then Bertaldo shall have
Periissa, and Amarissa she is free for me: then thought Amarissa, if this Knot
be dissolved, I am not so tied, but that I may enquire into the causes of
Berontus his distemper, and if occasion serve, apply fit remedies.

Each several application of these joyful tidings to their own particulars
(for the present) hindered that universal Conflux which (otherwise) would have
been amongst them, till at last the several species contributed all their
interest to make up one general gladness and Jubilee of delight, like a maine
River that being divided into several petty Channels, runs not with such a
large stream as when it was united, but meeting all into one Current again,
the several disimboguements reduce it to its former greatness.

Thus re-instated, the several instruments and voices make one harmony,
whilst the diversities of Wel-wishers lent their ears according to their
several engagements; some wished well unto Berontus, others were glad of
Periissa her good fortune, not a few were overjoyed at Amarissa's freedom, all
were transported with a ravishing delight to see Fortunes-wheele turn so
merrily: the Parties themselves thought their conditions so good, that upon the
sudden they were unwilling to own them; one was modest, and could not; another
was bashful, and durst not; a third thought her self bound, and might not; a
fourth thought himself freed, and would: This begot a liberty in the
Correllative, which example begot no less confidence in the bashful, then
encouragement in the most modest soul; all act their parts accordingly:
Bertaldo slights his Amarissa, and Courts the new raised Periissa, to life,
hope, name, and fortune: Amarissa takes it not amiss, and entertains the free
embraces of Berontus: Lorenzo and Honoria rejoice to see these promised
miracles take effect, and their wonders come to such maturity. Bertaldo presses
assurances upon Periissa; she holds off, looks strangely upon him, in her
maiden habit, and protraction draws a heavy load of insupportable impatience
after it: she looks no babies in his eyes, she sues not to be turned away, she
supplicates for no prostration at his feet, she carries all things high, (still
giving him a respect that in state becomes a Princess, of her degree, unto a
Person of such Rank and quality) he gives her all the observance that her
Majesty required, kneeled and kissed her hand, made speeches upon his knee,
prays her to be merciful, and forgive his ignorance.

She takes all to her self, and after many supplications and prayers, she says
unto him, Tell me truly, Bertaldo, do thou believe that I am the Duke of
Medina Coeli 's Daughter?

To whom Bertaldo replied, I am confident you are, and believe it verily. From
whence arises so strong faith? (said Periissa.)

Bertaldo replied, Shall I not believe Amynda 's Ghost? shall I not give credit
to Lorenzo 's relation? besides, none could do the things which thou have
done, but Coeli's offspring, wherefore I cannot stagger.

This is not enough Bertaldo (said Periissa) you must do something more for
me, I enjoyne you to repair forthwith unto my own Country, and my Fathers
house, and there inquire if they miss not a Daughter, that has these signs
upon her arm, the Sun and Moon (showing them unto Bertaldo in the sight of
all the Standers by) and saying, if thou can by thy endeavors find out such
a one, there is such a one for thee.

Bertaldo kissed her hand, presently took his leave, saying, he would not
neglect a minutes time, and hoped to return shortly, and give her satisfaction
to her demands: so departed.

Berontus finding all the clouds dispelled that were between him and his
heaven, lifts up his eyes to Amarissa; she taking Periissa for her leading
Star, takes the same course she did, and proposes to Berontus her injunction,
as a pattern for her imitation, saying unto him, Go to Rome and learn how it
was that I am Honoria 's Sister, and I am your Wife: So they were both
dispatched upon their Knight's Errantries, whilst the two task-Mistresses,
like innocent Children, who spend their time in the delightful recreation of
making Babies, acting Weddings, and Lyings in; so did these two pretty pieces
of innocence, delight themselves with making a Mock-wedding between Pippea and
Hortensius, delighting themselves with a happiness, which they were contented
should be really their own, so that it might be but representatively theirs.
And thus it was occasioned.

CHAP. XVII.
Pippea is in love with Hortensius. She expresses it to his Picture. Honoria
and Amarissa observe it. Hortensius takes her in the manner. Honoria, and
Amarissa, acquaint Lorenzo with it; who persuades them to encourage the two
Lovers in their affections.

PIppea being so highly preferred as to be Honoria her Chiefest Maid of
Honor, and Hortensius likewise a Man in no small request with Prince Lorenzo;
Pippea being first in Honor, Hortensius durst not break his mind unto her,
before such time as he lighted upon this encouragement; Lorenzo to gratify
Hortensius his merits, and sufferings, (which acts of contrition and signs of
repentance, he daily exercised in expiation of his crime, and complacence with
his Honoria) caused his Statua to be set over the Garden-dore, with this
inscription underneath in Capital and Golden Letters, viz:

THIS IS THE PORTRAICTURE OF HORTENSJUS THE PRINCES GARDENER, A FAITHFUL
SERVANT AND CONSTANT SVFFERER IN HONORJA AND AMARJSSA'S CAUSE, WHOM NO
TORMENTS COVLD FORCE TO BE OTHER WISE, NO THREATS COVLD PREVAIL UPON, AND NO
ENTICEMENTS COVLD SHAKE HIS RESOLVTION.

It happened (at sundry times) when Honoria and Amarissa went to recreate
themselves in the Garden, (with their usual Attendants) that they evermore
observed Pippea to stay behind at the door gazing upon Hortensius his Picture,
which Amarissa one time amongst the rest taking special notice of, she thus
spoke unto Honoria:

Madam,

Upon my life your Maid Pippea is in Love with Hortensius, for I have observed
her always when she comes by that Picture, she cannot enter the Garden without
a great deal of contemplation upon it.

Honoria, loving her the better for being so much an admirer of her Martyr,
replied, I pray lets go and observe her a little.

All agreed, and found out a most convenient place for observation, where they
saw Pippea laying her hand upon her Heart, and at last wiping her Eyes; and
having cleared that sky from those bottl'd clouds, she looked so wishly upon
that Type, until the thing typified came behind her, caught her in his Arms,
and asked her what she was looking upon? Pippea finding her self surprised) was
ashamed to look him in the Face; who would have been much more out of
Countenance, had she but known who were Spectatours of those amorous passions
of hers upon a similitude. This was not all the Sport that the Ladies had, for
they might hear Hortensius asking her the question why she looked so much upon
the Figure, and so little upon the Substance?

And Pippea answering him, I must go to my Mistress. Hortensius praying her
not to be so hard hearted, as altogether to turn her face to a Stone, and not
at all to rejoice the Man it represented, with one copy of her Countenance. And
she answering him again, I must be gone, the Princess will wonder what is
become of me, pray let me go. Hortensius saying, I will not let you go before
I have a Kiss of you. Pippea answering, I pray don't you stay me. Hortensius
urging, don't you stay your self, lest you should be missed. Pippea replying,
why do not you let me go then? Hortensius telling her, because you will not
give me my due. Your due (said Pippea) what is that? A kiss (said Hortensius.)
How comes that to be your due? (said Pippea.) Kisses are Loves tribute (said
Hortensius) and if you can find in your heart to say you do not love me, I
will have none. Why (said Pippea) do Maids use to Kiss, or to be Kissed?
Hortensius rectified his error with kissing her over and over again, and so
let her go. When she was got out of his reach, she turned about again, and
told him, That if it had not been for the hastes sake she made to come to her
Mistress, he should not have had it; and with that runs into the Garden.
Hortensius stayed behind, lest their familiarity should be taken notice of,
whilst the eyes that applauded his affection were in love with his Policy, and
resolved to advance his humility a degree higher.

Pippea made such haste, for fear of offending, that they were all very well
pleased, that she had not discovered them to be such Eaves-Droppers, as they
had made themselves. Pippea running toward the upper end of the Garden, they
advance from their Station. Pippea not finding them in any of the upper ends of
the Garden, upon her return (at the first) was glad to see them between her and
the door, as banishing that fear which she had conceived of her loytering
behind; but when she perceived them all to fall a Laughing, which could not be
interdicted, (though the Princess had given special Command that not any
should take the least notice of what they had seen) she was amazed; and her
Blushes came so thick into her Face, that the Blood began to grow dark in her
Cheeks; which Honoria perceiving, (and willing to deliver her from that fear)
told her, Pippea, we laugh to see that thou could not find us: but indeed,
we played the wags with thee, and hid our selves from place to place.

Pippea glad it was no otherwise, dismissed the Bloody ensigns out of so fair
a Field, and rufled up the Colors in her Cheeks: so there was no more of that
for that time.

But it happened not long after, Honoria and Amarissa to have some private
discourse, both perceiving Hortensius and Pippea to be deeply in love with one
another, (themselves being sensible of the smart of Love) and that neither of
them durst show, or effect the thing they most desired: These two merciful
Ladies were resolved to be charitable, and went, and made the Prince acquainted
therewith, who was not only glad of opportunities, whereby he might gratify
his Honoria, but was exceedingly glad to act any thing that might be pleasing
to so great instruments of such universal happiness: Presently bids them
forward what they had taken such notice of to be begun, and encourage the
parties to proceed in their Commencement, to give their hopes some air, and to
help their love to wings; and that they should be both Honorably provided for.

Honoria having received these instructions, sends for Pippea, and questions
her in private concerning the Love that was between her, and Hortensius; but
perceiving her Maid begin to Blush, she anticipates her Crime, by her
preventing Grace, and Favors toward her, with telling her how she knew it,
and what she had observed with her own Eyes, besides what she heard: This
saved her from the sin of telling an untruth (which was upon the terms of
breaking its prison) and gave her leave to turn a flat denial into a laudable
excuse, saying:

Truly Madam, I confess I love him, so must all that love you, amongst whom I
have a little more reason then the rest, because we were fellow-Agents in the
work of your Deliverance. Truly Madam, I could not choose but behold his
Picture; and when I look upon it, I can but envy his happiness.

Why did thou smite thy breast, and weep when thou look upon it? (said
Honoria.)

Madam,

I wept (said Pippea) to think upon the misery you were in; and I struck my
breast for sorrow, that I was not abler to have done you more service then I
did, that I might have such another set up for me, to which I think no Glory or
Honor comparable.

Honoria forthwith protested, that she had deserved no less than he; and that
she did more for her Capacity, than he for his; and that she would erect the
like Memorial for her, and place it at the very entrance into her Chamber, as
Lorenzo had done for his Hortensius at the entrance into his Garden: and
performed the thing she promised. Which was no sooner done, but Hortensius
could never be from Honoria's Chamber Door, nor Pippea from the Garden
Frontispice, where they daily sacrifice Hecatombes of the best wishes to one
another Shrines.

CHAP. XVIII.
Corderius wishes Favorinus to a rich Widow. She scorns all younger Brothers.
How Favorinus got her good will at last.

COrderius and Fortunata, (whose Days were Holy, and whose Nights were
Sanctuaries, whose minds gave them to reduce their Piety, to Practice)
contented not themselves with a bare notion of Speculative Divinity, Orall
Piety, or Auricular Devotion; but they must be doing Good, and acting deeds of
Charity: for indeed, Religion is Gods Plough, whereby he Tills the Field of his
Church, whereby that Field is made a fit receptacle to receive the Seed of the
Word. This Plough goes not forward (only) by looking before us, but by putting
hands unto it also; and bending the several parts of the body in a Devout
posture to fungifie their several Offices, leaving the two maine Props, and
Supporters of the whole, not to go before the hands, but to thrust them
forwards. Thus Religiously-minded were those Purer ones; not to wear the palms
without the Crown of virtue; Charity: and not to suffer Charity to begin in a
wrong place, but where it should begin, at home: Wherefore (being themselves
advanced to Wealth and Honor) they entertained thoughts how they might
prefer their poor Brother Favorinus to some good Fortune.

Corderius casting about which way he might effect his longing desires; at
last, he bethought himself of a young rich Widow, who had a bountiful Estate;
and to boot, too good an opinion of her self, who was a Beautiful, but
withal, a Scornful Lady, who constantly wore upon her sleeve a Nettle: And if
you asked her the reason why she graced that regardlesse Weed so much? she
would answer you, That she wore it not for a grace, but to disgrace and sting
away Younger brothers. This Lady, what for her Riches sake, and what for her
Beauties fame, was Courted by most men of Fortune, Comeliness, great Parts and
Excellence in all those parts, but no man was good enough for her, (so well she
thought of her self.)

Here was little hopes (you will say) for Favorinus, who was not only a
Tounger brother, but one, whose Prodigal Father, had made a Tounger brother,
of his Eldest Child: But Corderius from time to time observing a vivacity and
sprightlinesse to be (prodigiously) predominant in the well-tempered nature and
disposition of Favorinus his Brother-In-law, (whom he loved so dearly, both for
his own, and Sisters sake) that he thought him a fit instrument, either to
make this Widow his own, or else to let her know her self: he acquaints
Favorinus with the business, and disposition of the Lady; giving him these
encouragements withal, That if he would but put the best Leg forward, it
should not want Shoes nor Stockings answerable to the occasion, nor Friends to
back him; and if need required, what further might be requisite.

Favorinus replied, He that cannot swim to a Widows Bed side thus held up by
the Chin, it is pity but that he should sink for ever, and never be seen
amongst men any more.

Favorinus forthwith accoutres himself with all the necessaries requisite for a
Complete Suitor; and sends the Widow word, that at such a time he intended to
wait upon her about such a business, desiring her not to be abroad.

Bisalta, for so was the Widow named, (having Nonsuited many a brave Gallant
in her time, (who thought themselves no small fools) and wondering to receive
such a confident Message from a Man, over whose Name Fame had never blown her
Trumpet in her ears) disdained the Proposition: yet was resolved to stay at
home, though to no other purpose, but to give him an Affront; and lest her
Triumph should want Spectators, she sends for some of her Neighbors to be
there at the same time, as witnesses to the Repulse she meant to give him.
Favorinus (as confident as his own natural and acquired abilities would give
him leave) repaires to her dewlling place at the time appointed, (always
holding this for a Maxim in Loves school, That there is never a Woman in the
world, but she is to be won one way or other, if a man could hit upon the
right) and having heard, and read the many papers of Verses, and Acrosticks
upon her Name (as so many Encomiums of her beauty, and perfections; as also
what Honymouth'd Orators she had banished out of the dominion of her Beauty
with Vinegar faces) he resolved to steer another course, and (like skillful
Seamen) to lavere, and fetch compasses of winding policies to his wished point.

To the house he comes, but finds no preparations for his coming; no
Neatness extraordinary in any part thereof; he was feign to knock twice or
thrice at the Hall door before any body would come at him: at last one came,
and asked him, What he would have? who answered the Fellow (as surly) That he
would have the Widow.

If you can have her good will (said the Servant) with all my heart.

I pray thee let me have thine (said Favorinus) to speak with her.

You shall Sir, (said the Serving-man:) there was Favorinus feign to walk
twenty turns in the Hall, before the Messenger came back with invitations of
him into the Parlour: where he was no sooner entered, but he could see the Widow
in a careless habit, and as flight a posture, playing at Cards with some of
her Country-Neighbours; yet upon his approach she rises from the boords-end,
and meets him as little a way as she could (glad to see the Man in so fine
clothes whom she meant so finely to abuse.)

Favorinus (with so graceful a Congie, as no education could find fault
withal) almost upon her lips, recovers himself by degrees, (giving her such a
scornful look as could have no other language, but, how near was I unto the
touch of so great deformity! is this the beauty that is so much talked of? a
very Dowdie! an arrant Pusse! all this did he speak without a word, and more
than this did she conceive by that one look) and (dividing a few jeering
smiles amongst her Gossips) departs her presence, in the greatest disdain that
can be imagined.

One of her Gammers cries, What is this a Showter?

Another cries, Out upon him.

A third cries, The Gods forefend, that I may never have to do with any such
Showters, what? not kiss her, when he was so near to her? if I were as you ha
should never have a kiss on me though a wod never so feign.

But Bisalta (seeing her self so highly contemned before so many Witnesses,
which was no small aggravation to her discontent) swelled (like a toad, stung
in the forehead, by some spider, whose poison is of a hotter nature than his
own) until (not only) the laces of her Bodize burst in sunder, but her
big-swolne heart cried room, as if those bounds of nature had not been ribs
sufficient, for so weak a vessel. She vows (within her self) to be revenged,
and to make him see his error, though the price of her experiment be no less
than her self and all her fortunes; she thinks if she does not make this Man
recant, she does nothing; and proposes the gaining of this Man's love as a work
answerable to her magnanimity, but she knows not his name, nor when she shall
see him again, whether ever or never; she tells her Neighbors that she will
bring them to the Gate, her meaning was, to see whether she could lay eyes upon
him again, and find some opportunity to speak to him, or happily come to the
speech of some of his Attendants, that she might know his name: but she came
out time enough to see him take Horse, which was brought unto him by a Lacquoy,
richly habited; having two Pages standing bare to him in sumptuous apparel;
the one having a Hawke upon his fist, the other uncoupling his Spaniels.

Favorinus lays his hand upon the pummil, and vaults up into the saddle with
such a grace and clean activity, sitting his Horse (whilst he curvetted) in
such a comely posture, as if Horse and Man had been but one body.

Bisalta by this time was come down to the place, which he must needs pass
by, and so by her; who (when he came near unto her) as if she had dopd and
curchied so much unto him, that he could not do otherwise, bestowed this
regardlesse language upon her:

Widow, if my Game lead me this way again, I will make bold to call for a Cup
of Drink.

Joy spread its colors in her face, she makes more than ordinary obeisance,
and assures him more than ordinarily, that he should be welcome.

He slighting her extraordinarily, turns away from her, and calls upon his Men
to come away.

She calls upon one of them to stay a little, and tell her, who his Master was?

The Page (with his Hat upon his head, as if he had been good enough for her)
answered the Lady, that his Masters Name was Favorinus, Son to Favorinus,
Knight of such an Order, and Brother to Fortunata, Wife to the Lord Corderius;
and so made haste after his Master without any more expostulation.

She took sudden leave of her Neighbors, and presently returns to her own
house, and within her self, and there begins to commune with her own
thoughts, what it might be, that was the cause of his so great dislike in her?
she presently ran to her glass, (fearing that her face might be smutted, or
that that dress might not be so pleasing, or that her head was not well
dressed; she calls up her Maid, commanding her to bring her such a Head-dresse,
to dress her head so and so, to bring her such and such Garments for her
wearing; every hair of her head is set in print, and she makes twenty faces in
the glass one after another forty times over that she might see which of them
was most becoming; one she found out which pleased her better than all the
rest, and that she was resolved to keep till he came back; then she was afraid
he would not come back at all; then she sends her Servants one this way,
another that way, some to hearken if they could hear the cry of any Hounds,
or quest of Spaniels; others whether they could hear any Hawks bells, or
lurings after the Hawke; her Maids she imployes in pulling the coverings off
of the stools and chayres, the cases off the Couch and Hand-irons, some in
rubbing the boords with sweet and green herbs, othersome in fetching down the
best Cubberd and Table-cloathes: the Woman was stark wild for the Man: at last
she sits her self down, and thinks with her self what a gallant Man he was,
a Knights Son, a Lords Brother-in-law, a Lord that is most in favor with the
Prince; Fortunata's Brother, (who is cried up for such a beauty) and she
waranted her self that he was a Man of some great power and estate by his
retinue, Oh that this Man would come (thought she) and like me! I would not
have such a slur put upon me to be mislik'd for the world, this was the first
man that e're mislik'd me since I was worth the having, and this shall be the
first Man that shall have me if he likes me.

She had no sooner set her mind and house in order, but one comes (running in)
and tells her, The Gentleman is at the door, but will not light.

She runs out as fast, and prays him, that he would be pleased to alight
from off his Horse, and rest himself awhile, he should be very welcome.

Favorinus tells her, he cares not and if he does: alights off his Horse, never
salutes her; walks in by her, gives her never a word: by that time he was come
into the Parlour, he perceives both House and Housewife trimmed up to bid him
welcome; he calls for a Glass of her cooler Wine.

She entreats him to sit down, and seats her self over against him, to her
best advantage, and the lights shaddowings.

Favorinus perceiving all, and looking a long time very steadfastly upon her, at
last he told her, that now he had looked more warily upon her physiogmony, she
was an indifferent handsome Woman, but wished her, not to be too proud, for
that was all: even handsome enough to make a Wife, and that was all that could
be said of her.

She (more glad of that under -word from him, than of all the Hyperbole's that
had been given her by his Betters, said, desiring to improve his good opinion
of her, by taking that as a courtesy from him which would have been an injury
from another) gives him this answer, You are pleased to attribute a perfection
to me above my merit; for, that is the highest degree of natural endowments,
if there be sufficiency thereof inherent in any Woman to prefer her to that
state and condition, with what greater privilege can Nature adorn her
chiefest Favorites, than with capacity to attain to that which is the end of
their Creation; but, as I like you in that you have not trod in the beaten-road
of common Flatterers, so I must tell you, you have trod beside the path which
leads to verity; for, I fall short of those demerits which you speak of,
witness your own judgment.

Favorinus looks into the Garden, and asks her, if that Window were not a Door
that opened into those Walks?

Bisalta said, Yes: and opened it immediately, which gave them both leave (a
breast) to change the closer for the open air.

Favorinus measuring the Gravel-walke with his paces awhile, at last he makes a
stand, and with his Cane in his hand makes a Circle upon the ground, enclosing
himself as a tittle in that round [] where he thus speaks unto his Widow,
Madame, thus it is in short, now I am to be had; but if ever I step one step
out of this Circle, if there were no more Men in the world, no Woman alive
should have me.

And as he was going to step out of the round, she bids him, Hold; asking him,
Sir, shall I not speak in vain? will you not refuse your self my Husband, if
I should now say, I am your Wife?

Favorinus engages his Honor, that she should not, if without any delays she
gave her full consent, and took him whilst he was in the humor.

Then (said Bisalta) Sir, I am yours, and all my Fortunes as much at your
disposal as my self.

Agreed (said Favorinus.)

And pulled her within the line of Communication, where they plighted their
Troths to one another, calling their Servants to stand by as Witnesses, and the
Gods to sit in presence; where we must leave them for a while, to trace the
Successes of Bertaldo and Berontus in their Adventures.

CHAP. XIX.
Bertaldo arrives at Spain. He is entertained by the Duke of Medina Caeli. His
Valarous behavior in the Battle against the Moors: the Duke acknowledges
Periissa to be his Daughter, and bestows her upon Bertaldo. He heads the
Alpian Bandits, and helps Berontus to overthrow the remainder of the Goths.
Amarissa found to be the Sister of Bertaldo.

AS to the first, Bertaldo had no sooner arrived at Porto Sancta Maria, and
acquired convenience for his comportment to Cogolludo, the Duke of Medina Coeli
his Mansion house, in the Kingdom of Toledo, but he could hear how that all
Spain was up in Arms; and then upon the general design of Expulsing the
Moors. It rejoiced Bertaldo exceedingly, that occasion was given him, of
meriting the acquaintance of that truth, the invention whereof was his sole
employment. Wherefore, without any other expostulations with him (for the
present) he tells him who he was, and that he came to offer his Service in this
Expedition: and withal, let him not be ignorant how it had been his Trade: And
(as modestly as he could) told him, with what Successes his good Fortune had
been Crowned in former Victories against that Nation.

Coeli makes it known unto him how much he acknowledged himself Honored with
that tendure; and although the Ancient Family of the Cerda's acknowledged him
to be the Chief, and his Blood no less Royal, than the Potent Kings of
Castile have acknowledged his descent; yet he must submit to him that writ
himself Newphew to the Emperor of the World; and that he should not only
Command him, but bespeak his own Commands.

I here intend no description of Battles, or to speak, [COMME UN CLERC DES
ARMES] it shall suffice, that Bertaldo had such a Command as deserved his
Conduct, and fitted his mind; wherewith he behaved himself so Gallantly (in
that Bloody and last day of Battle, that ever was fought between the daring
Spaniards, and the most Barbarous and Bloody Moors) that he not only got
immortal Honor (especially in that days Service) to the amazement of those
Gallant souls, (I mean the Spaniards) who are never sparing in giving Worth
(the just reward of praises) in what Countryman soever the desert is found, and
as wary in putting Palms into their own natives Hands where they are claimed,
but with the least doubt of merit) having once rescued their King from eminent
danger, twice thrust his Lance through the maine body of the Tawny Monster;
and at last, when Coeli's Son had lost his life in the Cause, and by his death
had gained his Friends the Victory. Bertaldo would not suffer the sacrifice to
be of none effect; but gave the Moors (quickly) to understand, that his Blood
was Poison to their hopes, Gaul and Vinegar to their Thirst; and every drop,
Periods to their Successes.

Thus Spain formerly lost by Lust, and entered by these Moors, in at the sides
of a lascivious ravisher, was Re-instated by means of a Chaste Virgin.

Bertaldo having acted his part so well, Coeli was not backward to Honor him
with the highest respects that could be imagined, among the rest he expressed
upon occasion a great deal of willingness to serve his merits.

Bertaldo replied, That it lay in his power to do him that Courtesy, that
would be the most acceptable favor of any thing that lay in his power to
grant, or his, to ask.

Coeli asked him what it was, and told him it should be granted?

I ask you nothing (said Bertaldo) but that you would give me truth.

Coeli bid him only ask and have, find and take.

Then I ask you upon your Honor: Had you not a Daughter who was called
Periissa, marked with the Sun and Moon upon her Arm? Have you not put this
Daughter from you? was she not carried into a strange Country? and will you not
re-call her back again? or how long do you intend she shall be forsaken?

Coeli admires the perspicuity of that Mystery, and tells him, That for truth
sake he would not dececeive him, and for his promise sake he would not utterly
relinquish her; telling him moreover, he did it but to humble the Mother that
bare her, and to lead his Child through adversity, that she might attain to
that perfection of humility, of which he hoped by this time she was mistress
of: assuring him, that though she seemed to be out of his sight, and he might
seem to hide his face from her, yet his providence was never wanting in the
supply of such necessaries as were expedient for her, though she knew not
whence they came, and that now the time was come for her recallment; her only
Brother being dead, and she all the Children he had living.

But Bertaldo (said the Duke) how came you to understand all this?

Only by hearing, seeing, and believing (said Bertaldo) by harkening to
Adminda's voice; by seeing the Signs and Wonders upon her Arms, and by
believing both.

Coeli asked him, Have you not brought a Petition with you, as well as a
Narration?

Bertaldo said I have, and it is soon said. I desire your Daughter.

Coeli replied, and it is as soon granted: She is yours, and all that Coeli
has to give; but you must have her upon this one condition.

I will perform it what ever it be, if it be possible (said Bertaldo.)

To which Coeli made no other reply but this: Thus possible it is, you must
lose no time in the accomplishment of your own desires.

That I may not (said Bertaldo) I take my leave to be obedient to your
Commands: so departed: and finding that Prince of the Air to blow contrary
winds in the full face of his design, he feared it would be construed
negligence to attend that favor: wherefore he crossed the Perenean and Alpian
Mountains to overcome a difficulty, and the better to cross that
Mediterranean, that denied him passage all along; where behold this faithful
diligence made him fortunate in an exploit beyond his expectation; for,
Berontus having arrived at Rome, about the time that the fatal hour of the
Goths destruction was drawing on, being entertained under the Emperor
Honorius, and having conditions answering his dignity, he happened to be an
instrument whereunto the glory of that day owned its chief acknowledgment; so
that the Emperialists having twice beaten the Goths in two several Combats;
at last, the Eagle with her large-spread-wings made these Tramantanean birds
fall upon the Italian earth, and lie full low at the feet of her own Alps;
Alarick perceiving himself thrice worsted, and at last necessitated to seek
unto the Streights mouths to be received into their protections; the Alpian
Bandites (together with all the Inhabitants of the White Region, and Travelers
in that Galaxie or Milky-way of Heaven-treaders under their feet, those
cloud-over-topping, sky-threatning, and heaven-aspiring parcels of earth)
hearing of this news, (like so many black Ravens, Kites, and Crows, assembled
themselves in expectation of the fall of some sick and dying beast) were thus
prepared to watch their opportunities, how they might make a prey of the
remainder of this bleeding Army; but their Tumults wanted policy and good
conduct, which could not be wanting as soon as Bertaldo was come amongst them;
who hearing the news, offered his service. They knowing the Man, were more
glad than willing to be commanded by him: he disposes of them in such a manner,
as they proved such a Remora to the Ship of their proceedings, that it was
soon overtaken by the pursuing Enemy, who being van'd and reared with Enemies
alike, flankt on both sides with invincible Rocks and Mountains, they were all
there slain, taken Prisoners, and made a prey to those, who were not enough to
reap the benefit of so great a harvest.

Berontus wondered who it should be, that should stop so fierce a torrent, and
give battle to despair. Bertaldo wondered who it should be that should fall
on with such a maine: and who should these two be, but the two devoted Servants
to true Piety and Virtue, able at any time to conquer more than Men, and to be
more than Conquerours.

They saluted one another, having time enough upon their march between that and
Rome, to recite all their several passages to one another, who were both
confident, that their endeavors derived their successes from the prayers of
Innocents.

Both of them resolving upon the way to beg that boon of the Emperor, upon
their first arrival, to know of Honorius how Amarissa was his Niece, and
Bertaldo's Sister? but their thoughts were more resolved than their resolution
was requisite; for, the whole business concerning Amarissa was generally
known amongst the Romans, before Berontus his return to Rome: and thus it
came about. Flaccus, Brother to the Emperor Honorius, had a pretty Daughter
who was bewitched, being a Child at Nurse, into extreme deformity, who
fearing the perpetuity of that Enchantment (which was but for a time) he
forthwith made his Brother the Emperor acquainted with the disaster; who
unwilling that such an ey-sore should be visible upon so unblemisht a race of
humane kind, as he supposed his own to be, advised his Brother to send her
away into some foraine Country, and to give such a sum of Money with her, as
some selected one for the same purpose would be glad of; who thereby might
think themselves sufficiently engaged, as well for secrecy, as maintenance.
Accordingly Flaccus found out a fit instrument to work upon, one Galeas, a
needy Seaman, belonging to Cheru a poor fishing-towne upon the coasts of
Africa, within six leagues of Carthage, where Amarissa was fostred up under
the wel-enabled and vigilant care of Galeas Wife seven years; at the end of
which term, the Spell having lost its virtue, Amarissa came to her former
feature, and her Princely countenance received its proper lineaments of
majesty, which together with the pregnant wit wherewith she was more than
liberally endowed by the gifts of nature, so wrought upon her Nurse, that she
was more tender of her than of any of her own Children; so tender that she
never revealed that secret unto her, as her being not her own: and riper
years making her more capable of further knowledge, and enabling her with more
cunning to get out more, her Nurse at last confessed unto her, that she was some
great Man's Child, but she could not tell her whose, in regard that her Husband
was cast away at sea, before she had got the rest out of him, withal showing
her the Mantle wherein she was delivered unto her Husband; whose no less
antiquity than richness with its curious wrought (yet worn out) Ensigns of
majesty, spoke it a cast Ornament out of some Princes Wardrobe; this was all
the Card, wherein she could possibly read her Pedegraee, this was all the
Records whereby she could come to the knowledge of her Ancestors: the dry
Nurse had nothing more to say, but that she knew no more, and wished she could
do her any service, whereby she might attain to the knowledge of her own
Parents.

Amarissa climbing up apace to the years of discretion, this tender Sapling at
the first bearing, yielded these fruits of Policy, grafted upon the stock of
her own invention; For, (said she) unto her Nurse-Mother (for so she always
called her) I have heard you often say, that your Husband had received me at
the hands of a Roman Matron; more than that, either he could not say, or would
not tell you; it will not avail us (now) to be inquisitive after that matter,
since he is dead who only could decide the business; but this I would feign
supplicate to your indulgent care and love that is always exercised in my
behalf a Cross the Seas, go to Rome, carry the Mantle with you, and see who
will own it, know whose Arms they be, what the signification of those
Hieroglyphics are: and when you have informed your self as much as you can,
or can thereby come to the knowledge of whose it was, tell them how that Mantle
wrapped a little Child that was enchanted by some Sorcery or Magic Spell, whose
craft has now lest working the Castaway is Fourteen years of age, and has her
growth, limbs, and lineaments, with features which they may behold without
regret, if they would be pleased to own their Child.

Gans^la (for so the Nurse was called) was mervailously taken with the Exploit,
infinitely commending her wisdom and advice, but commends her most of all by
putting it in execution: Beyond Sea she goes, she and her Mantle; to Rome she
comes, up and down the street she trapes, showing it to this body and to that;
at last she was taken upon suspicion of Felony, clapped up in Prison, brought to
her Trial, where Flaccus himself sitting upon the Bench, heard her relate (in
her own defense) all the particulars as is before expressed, stands her Friend,
and stickles so much in her behalf, that her Tale was credited; but he would
not own the Mantle, which he caused to be taken from her, nor the Child he
would not send for; so great a power has shame over delinquency, rather
(against the bonds of nature) to run into a twofold Error, than acknowledge
one: yet nature wrought this effect in him, he sends for the Woman privately,
and communes with her, at a distance, concerning Amarissa; satisfies him self
fully in the business, commends her for her good will and care, rewards her
highly, tells her nothing, but advises her to counsel her fosterChild to be
contented with her condition until such time as opportunity should serve, and
sit season give her information whose she was: For his own part he was a
Friend, that would not let her want so long as she could be silent, sending her
such a sum of money as he cared not who took notice of; but withal,
enclosing within a Cabinet sealed up, and boorded about, wherein was enclosed
jewels of inestimable value, with this Letter in it:

AMarissa,
you must not know from whence this comes, nor who it is that sends it you;
upon this Condition you shall never be without continual supplies: want not
Patience, and you shall never want; be obedient to Necessity for a while, and
Contentment shall crown your desires hereafter with the knowledge of what you
are, and who it is that writes so like

A Friend


This Letter was thus superscrib'd, For the forlorn, yet acceptable AMARISSA.

With these Instructions and satisfactions Ganzala returned to Africa,
delivers Amarissa her mind together with the Money she was entrusted with, who
thought she had delivered all, together with the Cabinet, which she took to be
no more than an ordinary Box; which when Amarissa had opened (all alone) having
observed that policy stamped upon the Seals, she found no less treasure (of
inestimable value) in the Cabinet, than a Cabinet in the Letter, beyond all
estimation both for secrefie and counsel, whose private boxes she was not able
to find out. Thus far satisfied (as it was enough at once) she rests
contented, rather pleasing her self with present hopes of future revelation
(in its due time) then tormenting her self with preposterous scrutinie into
the seldome-solid grounds of anticipation, she went as far as reason would
give her leave, and commands what common sense witnesses to be within her
power, she gave her self what Education money would purchase, and wore as good
clothes as price could reach, when both had made her a Companion for the best,
she thought her self beholding to those for her acceptance who were beneath her
equals, by valuing others Jewels she came to know the price of her own, at
last (having more than ordinary parts) there was more than ordinary notice
taken of her perfection, insomuch, that she was presented (as a special
rarity) to the old Princess, who dying, Prince Lorenzo entertained as the
greatest beauty, till Honoria her over matching and comely feature let him
know, that there was a beauty surpassing that, which could not be excelled but
by her own flesh and blood, where having brought her off and on Lorenzo's
love, in and out of Bertaldo's arms, we will make her amends in making haste
to place her in Berontus's bosom, and agree all Parties, after that we have
brought Bertaldo and Berontus home from Rome.

After three years time had made Honorius's condition no less desperate than
his whole Empire shaken by that terrible invasion of the Goths, it fortuned
that Flaccus (having received his deaths-wound and in the Enemies custody)
desired the privilege of his barbarous Enemy, that he might be permitted to
write a Letter to his Brother the Emperor? which being granted unto him, his
dying-hand set pen to paper that writ this Letter to Honorius:

Brother,
I Acknowledge a judgment of non-prosperity befalne me, ever since I took^
your counsel of abandoning my own Child in her affliction, whom I should
have rather cherished than forsaken, and now punishment has overtaken my
offense, I fear me the like has befalne you for your advising me thereunto, I
doubt it will never be happy days with you, until you have rectified this
Error. Amarissa she is well, she lives in Cheru, within six leagues of
Carthage, the Woman's name is Ganzala with whom she lives, the Mantle wherein I
sent her away is in my house; the Lord Chief Justice of the Bench will relate
unto you the whole story when you show him the Mantle, tell him of the Affrican
Woman that was questioned before him for a Felon, and show him my Letter: I can
write no more, but find my self disposed more and more to bid you farewell,

FLACCVS.


Flaccus dying almost with the pen in his hand, the Gothish King perceiving the
contents of the Letter, and nothing desirous to contribute the least assistance
to the removal of any judgments from over his head, whose destruction was his
design, concealed the Letter: such fallings short are men incident to meet
withal, who procrastinate their amendments, and leave their good Deeds to be
performed by their Executors.

But Berontus, Amynda's Favorite, Fortune's Minion, Fortitudes Pillar, and
Heir to Justice, must bring all these things to light; for, in the first
Battle that ever he struck with the Emperor against the Goths, he seized
the Gothish Kings Pavilion, wherein amongst other Papers, after that Berontus
had received Orders to prosecute the Goths, the Emperor (at leisure) found
this Letter, sent for the Justice, showed him the Letter, viewed the Mantle,
wherein were scarce (distinctly) perceived the Emperors Arms, the
black-spread-Eagle, who had lost its color, very little of whose body could be
perceived, only the head and part of both the wings might be discerned, the
border round about it quite worn out, only the titulary Letters were plain
and legible: In a word, by that time Bertaldo and Berontus were returned to
Rome, being received as triumphantly by the Emperor, as joyfully by the
People, they were entertained with revelations, for all things were made ready
to their hands, there needed but little examinations where confessions were so
plain, records so evident, and witnesses so palpable in their demonstrations:
but to make haste to Carthage.

CHAP. XX.
Bertaldo and Berontus return to Carthage with joyful Tidings. Bertaldo is
Married to Periissa. Berontus to Amarissa. Favorinus to Bisalta. Hortensius to
Pippea. Prickette to Rivana. Lorenzo and Honoria, Corderius and Fortunata,
Thoron and Armena Solemnize the Wedding.

BErtaldo and Berontus, the one having received many Favors from his Royal
Uncle; the other Acknowledgements that he was his Nephew, like two skales
equally poised by the hand of Justice, (one filled with Weight, the other with
Value) both return to Carthage, where we imagine them unloading themselves (of
the glad Tidings that were such Burdens to them) till they had thrown them off
their retentive faculty into their Mistresses ears.

Have you seen, or can you imagine, how an Usurer welcomes full Bags of Gold
(in their telling) when they are paid unto him (with all their interest) out of
some desperate Debt? So satisfied were the expectations of these Votaries, with
the Relation that they made, and the good Account that they had given them in
every particular.

Never before this time were all the Blockers knocked out of the way for the
well-delivered Bowl (fairly) to take its course, Court and Kiss its
Mislresse, sent from the never-erring hand of Providence.

Bertaldo takes Periissa by the Hand, and thus speaks unto her: Periissa, the
Blessing of Heaven, the Joy of the whole Earth, the Fruit of Paradise, natures
Excellency; the Ornament of Humility, the Mirror of Chastity, the Ne plus
ultra, to the degrees of Love; whose Merit is above my Recompense! constancy
denies an imitation, whose value has no Price! whose self so good, that
Flatteries can neither hurt, nor Hyperboles reach! How happy am I in answering
thy so well -contrived affections with a complete furniture for so fair a
room! here let me take a Chamber for eternity, and let no time out me from
possession of this Happiness!

Periissa answers this Speech with admiration, and looks answers before she
speaks; at last she finds the door of utterance.

Bertaldo (said Periissa) how happy has my supposed unworthiness made this
equality between us! how great a friend has my despair been to this our
Union! None can rejoice at the comfortablenesse of Fire, but he that comes out
of the Cold; none can be glad of Meat, but he that is a Hungry; and none can
slack his Thirst, but he that was a-dry: Colors cannot be better commended
than by their contraries; nor Miracles more taken notice of, than by
impossibilities. Wherefore the wise Creator in manifesting his omnipotence,
raised a glorious Light from Darkness; drew Method from Confusion; Order from
the Chaos: and at last, composed a Firmament of the weakest of all elements.
Such a pattern has Bertaldo followed; now he has raised his Periissa from
such weak hopes, to so firm a confidence, whilst she was in so dark a
condition, to shine with so bright a Luster in his Eyes; and through
impossibilities to cut out, and plain away for my accession to this Throne:
Wherefore, ever let my chiefest care to please you be my Crown; and all my
Passions, my Subjects.

Whilst Bertaldo and Periissa were courting one another, and both
congratulating their good Fortune; smiling upon the Stars that showered down
their choicest influence upon their Heads: Berontus and Amarissa thus all the
while bestowed themselves in their behavior and language. Berontus took his
Amarissa by the hand, whose sprightly behavior answered the tacture, with like
affection, as when good conceits meet with quaintest wits; whereby it becomes a
hard matter to discern whether of both are better pleased, the giver, or
receiver. Both these make one pastime, these both one happiness, and thus he
speaks unto her:

Amarissa, the maine engine from whom the wheel of Fortune borrowes its motion;
the Ball whom Envy tosses above its own head by spurning at it; the Vine that
gives it self its education, and can exhale nourishment out of its own body
without the usual, and outward bark of Parents: how pleasing are the
remembrances of those things which were so hard to suffer? how contentfull are
the achievements which break their way through difficulties? was ever Love
unfettered so as mine has been? were ever Hearts unchain'd as ours? was there
ever so fast a Knot untyed before? did ever any Act pass so far beyond all
hope?

Amarissa, there is a Joy that may be expressed, there is a Joyfulnesse that
can hardly be uttered; but the gladness that affects me in having you, has no
Language: wherefore all must now lie at the mercy of your belief; believe but
half of that that is, and your belief surpasses all imagination. To which
Amarissa replied,

Berontus, in answer to your Metaphors and Compellations, I could call you
Heir to Justice; Amynda's Favorite, Fortitudes right Hand, Fortunes Minion,
the Peoples Darling: But I conceive more felicity in saying, My Berontus, which
includes all that can be said: And for your doubt of my belief, Alas! I have an
Inmate in my breast, that leads my Faith by the hand, like a Child, and shows
me all the secrets of your Heart: No Berontus, thou have met with room enough
to hoard up all thy store of Merit, if thou think the place worthy of it.

Whilst Bertaldo and Periissa, Berontus and Amarissa were geminating Hearts and
Souls, Hortensius and Pippea standing at a distance, ape one another into
their similitude and likeness; Hortensius takes Pippea by the Hand, who
receives his Courtesy with such a kind of Laughter, as Country Lasses cannot
choose but make when they first ride in Chariots, which has not its proceedence
from ridiculousnesse, but from a mixture of joy and bashfulnesse, to see
themselves so highly graced above their merits, and thus he spoke unto her:

Pippea, Why may there not be as much sincerity and affection expressed by
sticking a Cowslip or a Gilliflower within thy breast, as there can be either
in the choicest Tulip, or the most fragrant Rose? as they are not altogether so
beautiful and delightful to some of the senses, so they offend none; whereas
the high-priz'd Tulip has no savor, and the sweet Rose grows upon such
Prickles as oftentimes offends the touch, often causing the same fingers to
bleed soarly that plucked them from their stalks.

Why talks my Hortensius thus to me? (said Pippea) there are Ladyesgloves,
Silver-haire, and Marigolds to be found in the Common-fields, which are not in
Ladies gardens; let them plume the corners of their beds with gilded-feathers,
whilst we border ours with daysies and everlasting.

Whilst these three pair of Lovers were courting one another, Lorenzo and
Honoria could not use any language for harkening to what they had said, nor
other behavior for observing theirs: both were exceeding glad to see the corn
so fluster upon the ground that was sowed by their hands, and come to such
maturity as required their sickle to be thrust into their harvest, that should
cut down the loose ears that were open to further discourse, that they might
be bound up in the band of unity: wherefore Lorenzo and Honoria appoint the
time of Marriage, and that, no longer then the day that followed; they send for
the Heralds, and asked their advice about the manner of the solemnity,
charging them, that it might be performed with the greatest state and
magnificence that lay within the power of art and cost to set it forth.

The Heralds answered, that all things were in a readiness, that preparation
it self could set in order; but there was one thing requisite, which if it
could be effected, nothing could more conduce to make it solemn, viz: that
these solemnities might have their shadows, and these paires their seconds;
which (they said) might be easily done if they intended Marriages between
Favorinus and Bisalta, Hortensius and Pippea might have such accelerations as
they might all meet in parallels upon the same day.

The proposition pleased the Princes well, and the Ladies most of all; it was
so ordered by Lorenzo, whose commands plained all difficulties, and cut off all
delays: The Parties were sent for; sent for, came; no sooner there, but all
agreed: Corderius made a motion to all the Company, that to his knowledge there
were a Couple to be Married, and the time appointed was but the day after the
morrow whereon these solemnities were to be performed, he saw no reason but
that they should take them also into the number that the Temple might be full:
They all consented, and were earnest to know who they were? and being told
them, who should it be, but poor Prickette and Rivana; joy, and mirth, and
willingness, were expressed all at once for his reception: A Herald at Arms
was sent to Prickette to summon him to the Wedding, and to command him to be
ready on the morrow with his Sweetheart, to be Married with the rest.

The Heralds having ended their debatements concerning the particular
Ceremonies, it was concluded, that Bertaldo and Berontus should have Banners
carried before them, wherein were curiously represented all the famous deeds of
Chivalry that had been performed by those Heroes, when they most quenched their
thirsting after fame, and so they were to make a most solemn procession up to
the Temple of Virtue; and through it, to the Temple of Honor; where such
unions were to be made as divided themselves into halves to be wholly one
another: But, as for Favorinus and Bisalta, Hortensius and Pippea, whose
utmost merits aimed at no higher perfection than morallity, their ascendent was
to be no higher than to the Temple of Virtue, and there to consummate their
Vows, where the total sum of all their merits would not arise in their
particulars to any terms of Honor: But, Prickette and Rivana they were to
go no farther than to the portch of the Temple, there to content themselves
with compatible solemnities.

This Conclusion, was no small occasion of much distraction; for, Bisalta (a
Woman of a high spirit) was not a little displeased that she should wed her
self to a Man of no achievements, and to one that could not lead her up the
steps of Honor, so that at last she began to swell bigger with scorn than
when he scorned her first: and thus she openly expressed her discontents before
all the Company, Must I bestow my self, and smile a fortune upon a Man that
can answer my deserts with no higher advance to than set me down at Virtue's
feet? whose Temple as it is a thorow-fare to Honors, I like full-well; but as
it is a confine, I like the Seat no more than if he had sat me upon the Stool
of sad Repentance. I thought (when I saw him first (active as lightning) get up
upon his flying Horse) he had been able to have plucked bright Honor from the
pale-faced Moon; but now, I see, that Hares and Partridges, were the Trophies
of his greatest Victories: she could be no more contented with that beggarly
glory, than Eagles could make it their repast to catch at Flies.

Nor was this all, for Pippea takes her Sweetheart Hortensius aside, and tells
him, Hortensius, thou art an honest man, but that is all: what a fine thing it
would have been if thou had done some famous act whereby we two might have
been Married in the Temple of Honor with Bertaldo and Periissa, Berontus and
Amarissa? I love thee well already, but if thou had been a martial Man, Oh
how happy should I have been!

Why (said Hortensius) what is that to love? why should Women be so much in
love with bloody hands?

Oh (said Pippea) they are not bloody except they be stained with unlawful
blood! he that knows how to conquer Men, knows how to defend a Woman's honor:
who would Marry a Milk-sop? Hortensius, can thou not do one gallant exploit
or other, and let Marrying alone for awhile? I would feign be Married in the
Temple of Honor, I will promise thee that I will love thee twice as much, and
do any thing for thee that thou will have me do.

Hortensius (put off and on two such businesses as neither liked him) was not a
little troubled: yet he was contented enough to make a virtue of necessity, and
climb to Honor through that ascent, but he wanted an opportunity, which was
presently offered him, for behold, Whilst these affairs were in agitation,
there came a hot and stinging alarm to the Court, that young Towolin, Emperor
of the Abissines, had invaded the Dominion, and entered far into the Country
with a mighty Army, in pursuance of his Fathers Quarrel; this sudden news
locked up the Temple gates, and took their resolutions off the hinges: for,
neither of those two Worthies thought it gallantry to creep to happiness
between a pair of sheets, whilst the Enemy had colors flying in the field
that invited them to honor and safety: and Periissa perceiving how
Planet-strucken Favorinus and Hortensius were through want of merit, (to answer
the expectations of their envious Mistresses) she encourages them to
resolutions that should wrest the wreath of Bays out of the hand of fame, and
with as much ease as if she had been a Child had held it in her hand.
Favorinus and Hortensius, fired with hope, and filled with confidence, knowing,
that a better School Mistress could not direct them in that discipline, were
resolved to follow her instructions whatsoever they were, verily believing,
that nothing could be found impossible or difficult that she called easy;
wherefore they desired her to lay her commands upon them, and to acquaint them
with the design, and she should see that the fault should not lie in them, but
(if any were) in her who was never faulty. She declares it to them, (which we
will forbear to express till the act shows) they like it well, all was in a
readiness; the Army is drawn out and face each other: who but Favorinus, and
Hortensius! all the common Soldiers, and inferior Officers, admire to see
them sent to; and running in and out so often to and from the Council of
War; some jearingly asked one another, If Favorinus had e're a Hawke to fly?
Others said, If there were but a Hare in his way, how bravely would he charge
the Enemy, with a cry of Dogs? Others jear'd Hortensius, and asked, What have
we to do with this Gardener here? what? is he sent for to the Council of
War? Others answering, that sure he was sent for to line the hedges: Others
saying, If all yonder Regiments were but so many private Bushes, how bravely
would he top their heads with his Garden shears! Thus idle Courtiers, and
upstart Favorites, must be contented to be jeered when they are out of their
clement, the courted, till they have made themselves famous by some exploits,
and then they stop the mouths of their Adversaries.

But to the business it self, Favorinus and Hortensius, according to Periissa
her directions, black their hands and faces with an unguent which she had given
them, and so under a twofold darkness of night and hue, repair to the
Enemies Camp, and never left moving from place to place until they came to the
Emperors Tent; where watching their opportunity (when the Emperor was least
attended) they entered the Pavilion, where Favorinus, slayes the Emperor; and
Hortensius, the Standard Bearer; together with the Emperor's Page; which were
all the heads, that the Tent ore-covered at that instant: the chief whereof
Favorinus cuts from the body, and Hortensius takes the Standard in his hand, as
Favorinus did the head, wherewith they both mounted on Horseback, exhorting the
Soldiers to stand to their Arms, crying out, the Enemy is upon us! the
Officers and Soldiers (taking them to be some of the chief Commanders, but
could not inform themselves in the dark, they standing not still to give
information) take the alarm: Trumpets sound to Horse, the Drums beat. Lorenzo,
by this disorder, knew that the work was done; and (according as they had laid
the design) fell upon the Moors; who running to their Emperor to receive
Orders, found him without a head; by reason of which confusion, the
Carthaginians soon devoured that headless Monster, as if so many hounds had
seized upon a new-falne stagge: thus was that great Army soon dissolved by the
two constant Followers of Periissa her direction; who returning from the
Wars, Favorinus being poetical given, strains his Genius that way to frame
these Verses in honor of his Directresse:

The floating ship, is governed by the card;
The Architect, must have his square at hand;
The glittering buckler, does the Soldier ward,
(Although assaulted by a mighty band)
Whilst breathing I remain, Periissa, she
A Card, Square, Buckler, and a Shield shall be.
A card, which me directs, to heavens coast;
A square, to govern all my actions by;
A buckler, to defend me from an host:
Then shall I Devil, world, and flesh, defy:
And though to them (at first) I seem to pray,
Yet doubt I not, but I shall win the day.
Now the Marrriages run on wheels, and the complete Armor must give way to
wedding Garments; Gantlets must be thrown aside to put on wedding Gloves, and
plumes of feathers bend whilst head-pieces do vail to bonnets stuck with
bridal-favors. Now all must into the Temple of Honor; Favorinus must have the
black head of the dark Emperor, carried before him: Hortensius the Standard
that he took; all was air, and light, and fire, and suns, and moons, and
stars: only Prickette and Rivana they were dull, and earth, and heavy;
having no merit to lay claim to Virtue or Honor, they were (likely) to lose
their shares in the glory of the day.

Wherefore, Rivana told her Sweetheart (plainly) that She would not be Married
in a Portch, she saw no reason but that he was as good a Man as Hortensius, and
if he was not, it was his own fault, he might have been if he would: why did
he not go into the Wars, and do as he did? for her part, she hated a Man
that was good for nothing: and if he would needs Marry in a Portch let him get
one that would, for she would not be made a laughing stock for the best of them
all. Oh that she were a Man she would have been Married in the Temple of
Honor, or else she would have been wedded to her grave!

This Speech made Prickette soarly lament and repent that he had been so
negligent in laying hold of opportunities (when they were offered him) to have
done some glorious act whereby he might be famous.

He considers with himself, and repaires unto the Herald, and lays before him
the misery of his condition, offering him a large sum of money, if he could
find out some way, or plead his case so, that he might be Married in the
Temple of Honor, or else he was sure to lose his Mistress for ever.

The Herald told him, that there was no way except he could fight a Duel with
some known Worthy, and so come off with honor, and in such a case he had a
private conveyance where he could show him how he might convey his Mistress
into the Temple, and there when he was once got in, it was the manner of the
place, that none should be excluded; and he would plead the privilege of the
Temple in his behalf if need required.

Prickette did not like the Proposition very well, yet that was all he could
get of the Herald: away he goes, telling him, that he would see what he could
do, resolving to be quarrelsome with any living soul that should give him
(but) the least occasion; for, he was resolved not to endure that life
whatsoever came of it: up and down he goes seeking occasion, where at last
under the walls of Carthage he lights into a grot, where one Hamon (a notable
Kill-cow and noted Dueller, and one who had formerly put an afront upon him)
was drinking and making merry with some others of his Companions: Prickette
comes in, and tells them, he was disposed to be merry.

The Company answered him, that they were disposed to bid him welcome.

But Hamon looked something surly upon Prickette, and he upon Hamon.

At last when wine had begun to ripen both their humors, Prickette begins to
vapor.

Hamon tells him, that lesser sail would serve his vessel.

Prickette answered him, That if that displeased him he would set up more, and
yet not over-set, for any big wind his words could make.

Hamon perceiving him to grow so fast upon him, asked him, if he remembered such
a time, when he put such an Affront upon him?

Prickette told him, That he remembed it very well, and therefore he took this
opportunity to question him for it.

Hamon told him, he took a very ill time to question him, when it was Night;
and that he doubted he would not be so valiant in the Morning.

Prickette told him, That if he thought so, he would fight with him presently,
it was as dark for the one as the other, happy man be his Dole. But the Company
would not suffer them: and Prickette found many friends, because he was a
Courtier, and one that might be made some use of; wherefore Prickette pretended
a willingness to be reconciled, that he might enjoy his opportunity to whisper
Hamon in his Ear; who had his desire, and privately challenged Hamon to come
out, and fight with him; telling him, That he would take an occasion to go
out, as if he meant to turn his face to the Wall, and then he should come
after him, and they would have a Crash. Hamon consented to it, out goes
Prickette, and climes up to the top of a Rock, whereon the foundation of the
City-wall was laid; after him comes Hamon (no man suspecting any such matter)
and draws his Sword, and asks Where art thou? Now Prickette had him between
him and the light, so that he could easily discern him; but Hamon (newly come
out of the light, and having it behind him) could not see before him: So that
he still cried, Where art thou? Where is this Fellow? Prickette still cried,
Here: Why don't you come on? Until such time as he had got him just under him,
and then he leaps upon his Neck and Shoulders, and bears him to the ground;
puts his Shoulder out of joint, Disarmes him; cries aloud, Call for mercy (thou
Villain) or I will be the death of thee.

The Company hearing a noise, all run out with Candles in their hands, and
there they find Prickette upon the Giant: They all take him off of him. Hamon
cries, O I am soarly bruised, and my Bones are out of joint! Sirrah, had it
been in the day thou should never have done this: I protest I saw him not,
but he came upon me all of the sudden, I knew not how, nor which way. O my
Arm! my Shoulder is out of Jont, my Neck is Bruised, my Head is Broken! Who
would have thought there had been so much strength in such a little Urchin!

Prickette told him, That if he thought the Night had been any disadvantage to
him, he should do well to take the advantage of the Day, he would answer him.

No (said Hamon) I think you have given me enough for all the days of my life.

All began to admire Prickette, every body thought Prickette a Gallant Man; who
but Prickette was cried up for a daring fellow. Prickette repaires to the
Herald, brings his witnesses, tells him what he had done: The Herald bids him
leave the management of the rest to him, and bring his Rivana along with him,
much about the time of the Solemnity, and he would conveigh them a way where
they should not need to go through the Temple of Virtue, but pass through the
Prerogative, into the Temple of Honor.

Now because I will not end my story with relations of Wedding Garments, or
suffer my pen to be so near of kin to feathers in a bed as to write their
happinesses upon its Sheets, I shall only bring these Worthies into the sacred
Temple, and there leave them in a place of glory and honor, into a place that
was all light and had no windows, such a light as received its luster from the
flames of hearts and melting souls burning in the fire of love, which were
upon and under the Altar, whose Quire was paved with precious Stones, where
Diamonds were set in Characters, whereby Letters of Light were so composed that
every foot that gave a step made impression upon Eternity. In the midst of
which Temple there was a sea of bliss, and Angels moving upon the face of the
water, whose oars were wings and boats ubiquities, and every stroke that
plash'd upon those waters of life gave both life and music: all the Temple was
covered over with representations of the Triple Deity (by whom Ovid swore)
curiously done in Mosaic work with the bright and shining scales of Fishes
taken out of that sea, all three supporting the same Looking-glass with their
right hands, wherein were to be seen pleasures, and round about it written the
word FOR EVERMORE. Into this glorious Temple the Heralds lead these loving
Paires, and placed them in their several seats of rotten, but now shining
wood; upon one side whereof was written Mortallity; and upon the other,
Corruption upon arms whose hands laid hold upon the seats, as if they were
ready to tear them in sunder. After that the high Priest had made an end of
offering, and performed the holy Rites, there descended from above a Commission
and a Pen which an Angel received and delivered it into the high Priests hands,
who presented both to Periissa; which Commission was that that Pen should
write, I Am before Mortallity, and In before Corruption: so the same power made
the same hands as stays to secure their blessed state, which formerly had been
the causes of their dissolutions: And thus we end our History with the heavenly
Choristers, singing this Antheme:

THus at last the lost Sheep's found,
Thus humility is crowned;
Thus the patience of three
Has got a threefold victory;
Thus pure chastity can say,
It triumphs in the latter day;
Thus true fortitude is blessed,
B' assurance of eternal rest;
Thus stained innocence has right,
The black falls off, she is all in white;
He that of merit wants a stock,
Conquers (thus) climbing up the rock;
Be ever happy in this pleasure,
Time has thrown away his measure.
Who a good conscience wou'n't keep fast,
To be rewarded, thus, at last!
FINIS.

