THE PRACTICE OF PIETY: Directing a Christian how to walk, that he may please
God.

Amplified by the Author.

Piety has the Promise.

1 Timothy 4. 8. London, Printed for Edward Brewster, 1695.



Lately Printed a very useful Book: To be sold by Edward Brewster, at the
Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard. viz.
THE Mirror of Martyrs, First and Second Part, lively Expressing (in a short
view) the force of their Faith, the fervency of their Love, the wisdom of their
Sayings, the patience of their Sufferings, etc. with their Prayers and
Preparation for their last farewell;

As also,

Exercitations and Meditations etc. wherein the chief Duties of the Christian
Religion are opened and applied; By Samuel Tompson. M. A. late of
Magdalen-Hall, Oxon.

TO THE High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of WALES.
CHrist Jesus, the 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Prince of Princes, bless your Highness with length of Days, Rev. 12. 13.
and an increase of all Graces; which may make you truly prosperous in this
life, and eternally happy in that which is to come.

Jonathan shot 1 Samuel 20. 20.
three Arrows, to drive David further off from Saul 's fury: And this is the
third Epistle which I have written to draw your Highness nearer to God's
favor, by directing your heart to begin (like Josiah) in your 2 Chronicles. 34. 3.
youth to seek after the God David, (and of Jacob) your Father. Not but that I
know, that your Highness does this without mine admonition; but because I Qui
monet ut facias, quod jam facis, ipse mone^ do Laudat, and hortatu comprobat
acta suo. 2 Cor. 8. 7.
would with the Apostle have you to abound in every grace, in faith and
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to Gods Service and true
Religion. Never was there more need of plain and unfeigned admonition: for the
Comic, in that saying, seems but to have prophesied of our times, Obsequium
amicos, veritas odium parit. And no marvel, seeing that we are fallen into the
dregs of Time, which being the last, must needs be the worst days. And how can
there be worse, seeing Vanity knows not how to be vainer, nor Wickedness how to
be more wicked? And whereas heretofore those have been counted most holy, who
have showed themselves most zealous in their Religion; Matthew. 15. 1.
they are now reputed most discreet, who can make the least profession of their
Faith. 2. Tim. 2. 4.
And that these are the last days, appears evidently; because the security of
men's eternal state has so overwhelmed (as Christ foretold it should) all
sorts: that most who now live, are become lovers of pleasures, more than lovers
of God: and of those who pretend to love God, O God! what sanctified heart can
but bleed, to behold how seldom they come to prayers? how irreverently they
hear God's Word? what strangers they are at the Lord's Table: what assiduous
spectators they are at Stage Plays? where (being Christians) they can sport
themselves to hear the Vassals of the Exemplum accidit* mulieris, Domino test,
quae Theatrum adiit, and inde cum daemonio ^^diit. Itaque in exorcismo cum
oneraretur immundus spiritus quod ausus est fidelem aggredi: constanter and
justissime quidem (inquit) feci: In meo eam inveni. Tert. de spect* lib. cap.
26. Therefore Tert. in cap. 6. calls the Stage, Diaboli Ecclesiam, and
Cathedram postilentiarum.
Devil scoffing religion, and blasphemously abusing Phrases of holy Scripture
on their Stages, as familiarly as they use their Tobacco-pipes in their
bibing-houses. So that he who would now ^days seek in most Christians for the
power, shall scarce almost find the very show of godliness. Never was there
more sinning, never less remorse for sin. Never was the Judge Jam. 5. 9. Rev.
11. 20.
nearer to come, never was there so little preparation for his coming. And if
the Bridegroom should now come, how many (who think them selves wise enough,
and full of all knowledge) would be found foolish Virgins, Matthew 25. 8.
without one drop of the Oil of saving Faith in their Lamps? For the greatest
Wisdom of most Men in this Age, consists in being wise; first, to deceive
others, and in the end to deceive themselves.

And if sometimes some good Book haps into their hands, or some good motion
comes into their heads, whereby they are put in mind to consider the
uncertainty of this life present; or how weak assurance they have of eternal
life if this were ended: and how they have some secret sins, for which they
must needs repent here, or be punished for them in Hell hereafter; Security
then forthwith whispers the Hypocrite in the Ear, that though it be fit to
think of these things, yet, It is not yet time; and that he is yet young enough
(though he cannot but know, that many millions as young as himself are already
in Hell, for want of timely repentance.) Presumption warranteth him in the
other Ear, that he may have time hereafter, at his leisure, to repent: and that
howsoever others die, yet he is far enough from death, and therefore may boldly
take yet a longer time, to enjoy his sweet pleasures, and to increase his
wealth and greatness: And hereupon ( like Solomon's sluggard) he yields himself
to a little more sleep, Prove. 6. 10.
a little more slumber, a little more folding of the hands to sleep, in his
former sins; till at last Despair (Security's ugly hand maid) comes in unlooked
for, and shows him his Hourglass; dolefully telling him, that his time is
past: and that nothing now remains but to die, and ^e damned. Let not this seem
strange to any, for too many have found it too true; and more with out more
grace, are like to be thus soothed to their end; and in the end, snared to
their endless perdition.

In my desire therefore of the common salvation; Jude ver. 3.
but especially of your Highness's everlasting welfare, I have endeavored to
extract (out of the chaos of endless controversies) the old Practice of true
Piety, which flourished before these Controversies were hatched: which my poor
labors (in a short while) come now forth again, the 42. time, under the
gracious protection of your Highness's favor; and by their entertainment seem
not to be altogether unwelcome to the Church of Christ. If to be pious, has in
all ages been held the truest honor: how much more honorable is it, in so
impious an age, to be the true Patron and Pattern of Piety? Piety made David,
Solomon, Jehoshaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Zerubbabel, Constantine, Theodosius,
Edward the VI. Queen Elizabeth, Prince Henry, and other religious Princes to be
so honored, Eccles. 7. 1.
that their Names (since their deaths) smell in the Church of God like a
precious oynment, Eccles. 4. 21.
and their remembrances sweet as honey in all mouths, and as Music at a
Banquet of Wine: when as the lips of others who have been godless and
irreligious Princes, do ^ot and stink in the memory of God's People. And what
honor is it for great Men to have great Titles on Earth, when God counts their
names unworthy to be Luke 10. 20.
written in his Book of life in Heaven? Rev. 17. 8.


It is Piety that embalms a Prince his good name, and makes his face to shine
before Men, and glorifies his soul among Angels. For as Moses his face, by
often talking with God, shined in the eyes of the People, Exodus 34. 29, 30.
so by frequent praying ( which is our talking with God) and hearing the Word,
( which is God's speaking unto us) we shall be changed from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3. 18.
by the Spirit of the Lord, to the Image of the Lord. And seeing this life is
uncertain to all, (especially to Princes) what argument is more fit, both for
Princes and People to study, than that which ^eacheth sinful man to deny
himself by mortifying his corruption* that he may enjoy Christ, the Author of
his salvation: to renounce these false and momentary pleasures of the world;
that he may attain to the true and eternal joys of heaven: And to make them
truly honorable before God in Piety, who are now only honorable before Men in
vanity? What charges soever we spend in earthly vanities; for the most part,
they either die before us, or we shortly die after them: But what we spend like
Matthew. 26. 13.
Mary in the Practice of Piety, shall remain our true memorial for ever. For, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Piety has the promise of this life, and of that which shall never end. But
Principibus ad salutem sola satis vera est pietas, absque illa vero nihil est
vel exercitus, vel Imperato^is fortitudo, vel apparatus reliquus Zozom. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 9. c. 1.
without Piety there is no internal comfort to be found in Conscience, no^
external Peace to be looked for in the World, nor any eternal happiness to be
hoped for in Heaven. How can Piety but promise to her self (...) zealous Patron
of your Highness being the sole Son and Heir of (...) gracious and great a
Monarch who is not only the Defender of the Faith by title, but also a Defende^
of the Faith in truth, as the Christian World has taken notice by hi^ learned
confuting of Bellarmine ever spreading Heresies, and his suppressing in the
blade of Vorstius' s Athean blasphemies? and ^ow easy is it for your Highness
to equal (if not exceed) all that were before you in Grace and Greatness? if
you do but set your heart to seek, and to serve God, considering how
religiously your Highness has been educated by godly and virtuous The
Honorable Sir Robert Carry Knight, and the religi^^^s Lady Carry his Wife. Mr.
Thomas Murray* Sir James Full^rton.
Governors and Tutors: as also that you live in such a time, wherein God's
Providence, and the King's Religious Care have placed over this Church ( to the
unspeakable comfort thereof) another venerable Jehoiada* 2 Chronicles. 24. 16 The
gracious Archbishop^ of Cant (...).
that does good in our Israel both toward God and toward his House: of whom
your Highness at all times in all doubts may learn the sincerity of Religion,
for the Salvation of your inward Soul; and the wisest counsel for the direction
of your outward state: And to excite you the rather, to the zealo^s Practice of
divine Piety; often suppose with your self, that your Highness hears your
Religious Father James, speaking unto you, as sometimes holy David spoke to his
Son Solomon: 1 Chr. 28. 9.
And thou Charles my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: i^ thou seek him, he will
be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

To help you the better to seek and serve this God Almighty, who must be your
chief Protector in life, and only comfort in death: I here once again, on my
bended knees, offer my old Mite new stamped into your Highness's^ hands: daily
for your Highness offering up unto the most High, my humblest prayers; that as
you grow in age and stature, so you may (like your Master Christ) increase in
wisdom and favor with God and all good men. This suit will I never cease: in
all other matters I will ever rest,

Your Highness humble Servant, during life to be commanded, JEWS BAILY

AD CAROLUM PRINCIPEM.
Toll Malos, extolle Pious, cognosce Teipsum;
Sacra tene, Paci consule, disce pati.
ADVERTISEMENT.
This Book being now exactly Corrected, and purged from many Thousand Faults,
which have escaped former Impressions, is now also printed in a fair large
Roman Character, for the Use and Benefit of Aged Persons; and to be sold by
Edward Brewster, at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1695.

The 42. Edition.

TO THE Devout Reader.
I Had not purposed to enlarge the last Edition, save that the importunity of
many devoutly disposed, prevailed with me, to add some points, and to amplify
others. To satisfy whose godly requests, I have done my best endeavor, and
withal finished all that I intend in this argument. If thou shall hereby reap
any more profit, give God the more praise: And remember him in thy Prayers, who
has vowed both his life and his labors, to further thy Salvation as his own.
Farewell in the Lord JESUS.

THE CHIEF CONTENTS Of this Book.
1. A Plain description of God, in respect of his Essence, Persons and
Attributes, so far as every Christian should competently endeavor to learn and
know: with sundry sweet Observations and Meditations thereupon. Page 4 2.
Meditations setting forth the miseries of man in his life and death, that is
not reconciled to God in Christ. 37 3. Meditations of the blessed state both in
life and death, of a man that is reconciled to God in Christ: Wherein thou
shall find not a few things worthy the reading and observation. 63 4.
Meditations on seven hindrances, which keep back a sinner from the Practice of
Piety; necessary to be read of all, but especially of carnal Gospellers in
these times. 104 5. How to begin the Morning with pious Meditations and
Prayers. 138 6. How to read the Bible with profit and ease once over every
year. 143 7. A Morning Prayer. 217 Another shorter Prayer for the Morning. 157
Another brief Morning Prayer. 161 8. Meditations how to walk with God all the
day. 162 Especially how to guide thy Thoughts. ibid Thy Words. 168 Thy Actions.
173 9. Meditations for the Evening. 185 10. An Evening Prayer. 189 Another
shorter Evening Prayer. 195 11. Things to be meditated upon, as thou art going
to bed. 198 12. Meditations for a godly Householder. 200 13. A Morning Prayer
for a Family. 203 14. Holy Meditations and Graces, before and after dinner and
supper. 209 15. Rules to be observed in singing of Psalms. 215 16. An Evening
Prayer for a Family. 217 17. A Religious Discourse of the Sabbath Day, wherein
is proved that the Sabbath was altered from the seventh to the first day of the
week, not by humane ordinance, but by Christ himself and his Apostles: that the
fourth Commandment is perpetual and moral under the New Testament, as well as
under the old. And the true manner of sanctifying the Sabbath Day is described
out of the Word of God. 222 18. A Morning Prayer for the Sabbath Day. 267 19.
An Evening Prayer for the Sabbath Day. 282 20. Meditations of the true manner
of Fasting, and giving of Alms, out of the Word of God. 287 21. The right
manner of holy Feasting 303 22. Holy and devout Meditations of the worthy and
reverent receiving of the Lord's Supper. 305 23. An humble Confession of sins
before the holy Communion. 330 24. A sweet Soliloquy to be said a little before
the receiving of the holy Sacrament. 345 25. A Prayer to be said after the
receiving of the holy Sacrament. 353 26. Meditations how to behave thy self in
the time of sickness. 363 27. A Prayer when one begins to be sick. 365 28.
Directions for making thy Will, and setting thy House in order. 371 29. A
Prayer before the taking of Physic. 375 30. Meditations for one that is
recovered from sickness. 386. And a Thanksgiving. 390 31. Meditations for the
sick, taken from the end of God's chastisements. 394. 32. Meditations for one
that is like to die. 396 33. A Prayer to be said of one that is like to die.
399 34. Comfortable Meditations against despair. 402 35. Directions for those
who come to visit the sick. 415 36. A Prayer to be said for the sick by those
who visit him. 418 And choice Scriptures to be read unto him. 421, 422 37.
Consolations against impatiency in sickness. ibid. 38. Consolations against the
fear of death. 425 39. Seven sanctified Thoughts, and so many spiritual Sighs,
fit for a sick Man that is like to die. 429 40. Of the comfortable use of true
Absolution, and receiving of the Lord's Supper, to the faithful and penitent,
before they depart this Life, if they may conveniently be had. 435 41. The last
speech of a godly Man, dying. 444 42. Meditations of Martyrdom; wherein is
proved, that those who die for Popery cannot be Christ's Martyrs. 445 43. A
Divine Colloquy betwixt Christ and the Soul, concerning the virtue and efficacy
of his dolorous Passion. 452 44. The Soul's Soliloquy unto Christ her Savior.
461
THE PRACTICE OF PIETY.
Directing a Christian how to walk, that he may please God.
WHo ever thou art that look into this Book, never undertake to read it;
unless thou first resolvest to become from thine heart, an unfeigned
Practitioner of Piety. Yet read it, and that speedily, lest before thou have
read it over, God (by some unexpected death) cut thee off, for thine inveterate
Impiety.

The Practice of Piety consists 1. In knowing 1. The Essence of God, and that
in respect of 1. The diverse manner of being therein, which are three Persons.
1 The Father. 2. The Son. 3. Holy Ghost.
2. The Attributes thereof, which are either Nominal or 1. Absolute, 1.
Simpleness. 2. Infiniteness.
2. Relative, 1. Life. 2. Understanding 3. Will. 4. Power. 5. Majesty.

Real,

2. Thy own self in respect of thy state of 1. Corruption. 2. Renovation.

2. In glorifying God aright 1. By thy life, in dedicating thy self devoutly to
serve him, Ordinarily, 1. Privately, in thine own Person. 2. Publicly, 1. With
thy Family every day. 2. With the Church on the Sabbath day.

Extraordinarily, by Fasting. Feasting.

2. By thy death, in dying 1. In the Lord. 2. For the Lord.



Unless that a Man does truly know God, he neither can nor will worship him
aright: for how can a Man Tum Deum amare libet, cum persuasum habemus ipsum
esse optimum maximum, ubique praesentem, omnia in nobis efficientem, eum in quo
vivimus, movemus, sumus. Bucer in Psalm. 115.
love him, whom he knows not? and who will worship him, whose help a Man
thinks he needs not? and how shall a Man seek remedy by Grace, who never
understood his misery by Nature? Therefore says (the Heb. 11. 6. Danda
imprimis opera est, ut Deum norimus, quotquot foelices esse volumus. Quid
noscis si teipsum nescis?
Apostle) He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him.

And for as much as there can be no true Piety, without the knowledge of God;
nor any good practice, without the knowledge of a Man's own self: we will
therefore lay down the knowledge of God's Majesty, and Man's Misery, as the
first and chiefest grounds of the Practice of Piety.

A PLAIN DESCRIPTION OF THE Essence and Attributes of GOD, out of the Holy
Scripture, so far forth as every Christian must competently know, and
necessarily believe, that will be saved.
ALthough no Creature can define what God is, because he is Psalm. 14. 3. 3.
incomprehensible, and 1 Timothy 6. 16.
dwelling in inaccessible light: yet it has pleased his Majesty, to reveal
himself in his Word unto us, so far as our weak capacity can best conceive him.
Thus:

God is that Deuteronomy. 14. and 4. 35. and 32. 39. and. 6. 4. Isa. 45. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1
Cor. 8. 4. Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
one Joh. 4. 24. 2 Cor. 3. 17.
spiritual and 1 Kin. 8. 17. Psalm. 147. 5.
infinitely Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
perfect Exodus 3. 14.
Essence, whose Being is 1 Cor. 8. 6. Act. 17. 25. Romans 11. 36.
of himself eternally.

In the Divine Essence, we are to consider two things. First, the diverse
manner of being therein: Secondly, the Attributes thereof.

The diverse manner of being therein, are called Heb. 1. 3.
Persons.

A person is a Joh. 1. 1. and 5. 31, 37. and 14. 16.
distinct subsistence of Col. 2. 9. Joh. 14. 9.
the whole Godhead.

There are Genesis 1. 26. 3. 22. and 11. 7. Exodus 20. 2. Hos. 1. 4, 7. Isa. 63. 9.
10. Zach. 3. 2. Hag 2. 5, 6. 1 John 5. 7. Mat. 3. 16, 17. and 28. 19. Joh. 14.
26. 2 Cor. 13. 13.
three Divine Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: these Three
Persons are not Three several Substances, b^t Three distinct Subsistences; or
Three diverse manner of Beings, of Singula. sunt in singulis, and omnia in
singulis, and singula in omnibus, and unum omnia. Aug. lib. 6. de Trin. cap.
ult.
one and the same substance, and Divine Essence. So that a Person in the
Godhead, is an individual understanding, and incommunicable Subsistence,
living of it self, and not sustained by another.

In the unity of the Godhead, there is a Genesis 1. 26. and 3. 22. and 11, 7.
Isa. 6. 8.
plurality, which is not accidental, (for God is a most pure act, and admits no
accidents:) nor essential, (for God is one Essence only) but Personae
Divinitatis distinguuntur personaliter, sive (...).
personally.

The Persons in this one Essence are but three. In this Deus est in divise unus
in Trinitate and inconfuse trinus in unitate. Justin.
Mystery there is alius and alius, another and another: But not aliud and
aliud, another thing and another thing.

The Divine Essence in it self is neither divided nor distinguished. But the
Three Persons in the Divine Essence are distinguished among themselves Three
manner of ways.

1. By their Names. 2. By their Order. 3. By their Actions.
1. By their Names, thus:
THE first Person is named the Father; first, in respect of his Mat. 11. 27.
Mat. 3. 17.
natural Son Christ: secondly, in respect of the Elect, his Isa. 63. 16. Ephesians 3.
14, 15.
adopted sons; that is, those who being not his sons by Nature, are made his
sons by Grace.

The second Person is named the Prove. 30. 4.
Son because he is Psalm. 2. 7.
begotten of his Heb. 1. 3. Phil. 2. 6.
Father's substance, or nature; and he is called the Word: First, because the
Basil. sup. 5. Joh^n. Sicut men's cogitando in seipsam reflectitur, and (...)
internum gignit: ita men's illa aeterna, quae est Deus pater, in seipsam
intelligendo reflexa (...) aeternum modo ineffabili genuit: Et sicut exterior
(...) interioris effigies quasi est: ita aeternus ille (...) aeterni Patris
imago est, and majestatis character. Heb. 1. 3.
conception of a word in man's mind, is the nearest thing, that in some sort
can shadow unto us the manner how he is eternally begotten of his Father's
substance: and in this respect he is also called the wisdom of his Father,
Prove. 8. 12. Secondly, because that by Joh 1. 18. Iren. l. 4. c. 14.
him, the Father has from the beginning declared his will for our salvation:
hence he is called (...), quasi (...) the Person speaking, with, or by the
Father. Thirdly, because he is the chief Act. 10. 43. Heb. 1. 1. Luke 24. 27.
Joh. 5. 45. Act. 3. 22, 23, 24.
argument of all the Word of God; or that Word, whereof God spoke, when he
promised the blessed See^ to the Fathers, under the Old Testament.

The Third Person is named the Isa. 63. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
Holy Ghost: First, because he is 1 John 4* 13. 2 Cor. 3. 17.
spiritual without a body: secondly, because he is spired, and, as it were,
breathed from both the Joh. 20. 21, 22. Gal. 4. 6.
Father and the Son, that is, proproceedeth from them both. And he is called
holy, both because he is 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
holy in his own nature, and also the immediate 2 Cor. 3. 18. 1 These. 5. 23. 1
Pet. 1. 2.
sanctifier of all God's Elect people.

2. By their Order; thus,
THe Persons of the Godhead are either the Father, or those which are Origo
essentiae in divinis n^ll^ est: origo personarum locum habet in Filio, and
Spiritu sancto, Pater enim est prior Filio, non tempore, sed ordine^ Alst.
of the Father,

The Father is the Mat 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7.
first Person in the glorious Trinity, Ideo dicitur Pater, (...) and (...),
having neither his being nor beginning of any other, but of himself begetting
his Son, and together with his Son, sending forth the Holy Ghost from
everlasting. The Persons which are of the Father, are those, who in respect of
their personal existence have the whole Divine Essence, eternally communicated
unto them from the Father. And those are either from the Father alone, as the
Son; or from the Father and the Son, as the holy Ghost.

The Son is the second Person of the glorious Trinity, and the only begotten
Son of his Fa^^^, not by Grace, but by Nature; having his Filius Dei (...),
quoad essenti^m, absolut^m, est quidep^ a ^^ipso and (...) sed ratio^e (...),
sive ess perso^alis per at^^nam g^nerationem a Patre existit: ideoque non est
(...). John 6. ^8. 27. John 5. 19. Mic. 5. 1. Joh. 1. 1.
being of the Father alone, and the whole being of his Father, by an eternal,
and incomprehensible generation: and with the Father, sends forth the holy
Ghost. In respect of his absolute Essence, he is of himself, but in respect of
his Person, he is by an eternal generation, of his Father. For the Essence does
not be get an Essence, but the Psalm. 2. 7. Heb. 1. 5. Aliud est habere
Essentiam divinam a seipso: and habere essentiam divinam a seipsa existentem:
remota enim relatione ad Patrem sola restat Essentia quae est a seipsa: hinc
Filius dicitur princi^atus non essentiatus. Th. Sum* page q. 33.
Person of the Fath^ begets the Person of the Son, and (...) he is God of
God, and has from his F^^ther the beginning of his Person and O^^der, but not
of Essence and Time.

The Holy Ghost is the third Person of (...) blessed Trinity, Joh. 15. 26. Joh.
16. 15. Therefore Romans 8. 9. The Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Christ.
proceeding and sent fort^ equally from Spiritus S. ^ Pat^e and a Filio
procedit, tanquam ab uno and eodem principio, in duabus tantum personis
subsistente, non autem tanquam a duobus ac diversis Principiis.
both the Father and the Sword^ by an eternal and incomprehensible spir^^tion:
For as the Son receives the who divine Essence by generation; so the h^ Ghost
receives it wholly by spiration.

This Order betwixt the three Person appears, in that the Father begetting, mu^
in order be before the Son begotten; an^ the Father and Son, before the holy
Gh^ proceeding from both.

This Order serves to set forth unto two things: First, the manner how t^
Trinity works in their external ac^^ons: as that the Father works of
himself, by the Son and the holy Ghost; t^ Son from the Father, by the holy
Ghos^ and holy Ghost, from the (...) and (...) Son. Secondly, To distinguish
the (...) and immediate beginning, from whi^ those external and common actions
flow. Hence it is, that forasmuch the Father is the fountain and original the
Trinity, the beginning of all ext^^nal working; the Hinc Dei men saepe in
scripturis Patri (...) tribuitur, Joh. 14* Romans 8. 3. 1 Cor. 8. 6* 1 Cor. 15.
24.
Name of God in re^tion, and the title of Creator in ^ Creed, are given in a
special manner to the Father; our Redemption to the Son, and our Sanctification
to the Person of the Holy Ghost, as the immediate Agents of those actions.

And this also is the cause, why the Son, as he is Mediator, refers all
things to the Mat. 11. 25, 26, 27. Joh. 5. 19, 20* 21, 22, 23. Joh. 11. 41, 42*
Joh. 12. 49.
Father, not to the Holy Ghost; and that the Scripture so often says, that we
are 2 Cor. 5. 18, etc.
reconciled to the Father.

This divine Order or Economy excepted, there is neither first nor last,
neither superiority nor inferiority among the Three Persons, but for nature
they are co-essential, for dignity coequal, for time coeternal.

The whole divine Essence is in every one of the Three Persons; but it was
incarna^ed, Incarnatio verbi propri^ non Patri^ec Spiritui sancto, nisi (...)
compe^it. Damas. 1. de o^tho. sid. c 13. Implevit carnem Christi Pat^r and
Spiritus S. sed maj^stat^no^ susceptione. Aug. sermon. 3. de Temp. Joh. 3. 16.
Romans 8. 12. and 5. 8, 10. Hoc mirum foedus semper men's cogit^t, uno hoc tu ne
^ubita foedere parta salus. Melan.
only in the Second Person of the Word, and not in the Person of the Father, or
of the holy Ghost, for Three Reasons.

First, That God the Father might the rather set forth the greatness of his
love to Mankind, in giving his first and only begotten Son, to be incarnated,
and to suffer death or Man's salvation.

Secondly, Ut. q^i erat in divinitete Dei fi^^s, ficret in humanitate hominis
filius, neunomen filii ad alterum ansiret, qui non esset aeterna nativitate
filius. Aug.
That he who was in his Di^inity the Son of God, should be in his Humanity the
Son of Man: lest the Name ^f Son should pass unto another, who by ^is Eternal
Nativity was not the Son.

Thirdly, because it was Congruebat filium assumere humanam naturam, ut haec
persona quaeest substantialis imago aeterni Patris restitueret imaginem Dei in
nobis corruptam. Athan.
meetest that that person who is the substantial Image of his eternal Father,
should restore in us the spiritual Image of God, which we had lost.

In the Incarnation, the Godhead was not turned into the Manhood, nor the
Manhood into the Godhead: but the Godhead, as it is the second Person, or
Word, assumed unto it the Manhood, that is the whole nature of man, body and
soul; and all the natural properties and Heb. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 4. 15.
Infirmitates merae privationis, non pravae dispositionis.
infirmities thereof, sin excepted.

The second person took not upon him the Humana natura est distinctum
individuum a natura divina, etsi non sit distincta Persona. Keck. Syst. Theol.
lib. 3. p. 119.
person of man, but the nature of man. So that the Uniti Hypostatice Deum and
homiem, nihil est aliud quam naturam humanam non habere propriam existentiam,
sed assumptam esse a Verbo aeterno, ad ipsam verbi subsistentiam. Bellar. de
incarnat. ^ib. 3. cap. 8.
humane nature has no personal subsistence of its own, (for then there should
be two Persons in Christ;) but it subsisteth in the Word, the second Person.
For, as the soul and body make but one person of Man; so the Godhead and
Manhood make but one Person of Christ.

The two Natures of the Godhead and Manhood are so really united by a personal
union, that as they can never be separated asunder, so are they never Salvis
and distinctis manentibus proprietatibus natu^ae tam assumentis, quam assumptae.
confounded; but remain still distinguished by their several and essential
properties, which they had before they were united. As for example; the
infiniteness of the divine is not communicated to the humane Nature; nor the
finiteness of the humane, to the divine nature.

Yet by reason of this personal union, there is such a communion of the
properties of both Natures, that that which is proper to the one, is sometimes
attributed to the other Nature. As that God Act. 20* 28
purchased the Church with his own blood: And Act. 7. 31.
that he will judge the world by that Man whom he has appointed. Hence also it
is, that though the humanity of Christ be a created, and therefore a finite and
limited Nature, Dr. Field of the Church, book 3. c. 35.
and cannot be every where present, by actual position, or local extension,
according to his Secundum esse natural Christus non est ubique.
natural being: yet because it has communicated unto it the personal
subsistence of the Son of God, which is infinite, and without limitation; and
so is united with God, that it is no where severed from God; the body of
Christ, in respect of his Secundum esse perso^a le Christus est ubique.
personal being, may rightly be said to be every where.

3. The Actions by which the Three Persons be distinguished.
THe actions are of Two sorts; either External, respecting the creatures; and
those are after a sort common to everyone of the three persons: In operibus ad
ext^^^ (...) personae o^^^rantur sim^d servato ordine personarum in operando.
or internal, respecting the persons only amongst themselves, and are
altogether incommunicable.

The External and commu^icable Actions of the Three Persons are these:

The creation of the World, peculiarly belonging to God the Father: The
redemption of the Church to God the Son: And the sanctification of the Elect to
God the holy Ghost. But because the Romans 11. 36.
Father created, and still governs the world by the Son in the holy Ghost,
therefore these external actions are indifferently in As redemption, Act. 20*
28. and sanctification, 1 Pet. 1* 2. to the Father, Creation, 1 Jon. 3. and
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 2. to the Son Creation, Psalm. 33. 6. and Redemption,
Ephesians. 4. 30. to the Holy Ghost. Jointly all to each, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Opera
Trinitatis ad extra indivisa, ad intus divisa. Perio^ae nomen* non est aliquid
ab essentia abstractum, ac separatum. Fai^s These. disp. 2. Persona est ipsa
essentia divina contracta ad certum and peculiarem subsistendi modum. Zanch.
Persona gignit and gignitur: Essentia nec gignit, nec gignitur, sed
communicatur. Alsted.
Scripture, oftentimes ascribed to each of the Three Persons, and therefore
called communicable and divided Actions.

The internal and incommunicable Actions, or Properties of the Three Persons
are these:

1. To beget; and that belongs only to the Father: who is neither made,
created nor begotten of any.

2. To be begotten, and that belongs only to the Son, who is of the Father
alone, not made, nor created, but begotten.

3. To proceed from both: and that belongs only to the holy Ghost, who is of
the Father and the Son; neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.

So that when we say, that the Divine Essence is in the Father unbegotten; in
the Son begotten; and in the holy Ghost proceeding; we make not Three Essences,
but only show the diverse manners of subsisting, by which the same most simple,
eternal, and unbegotten Essence subsisteth in each Person: namely, that it is
not in the Father by generation: that it is in the Son communicated from the
Father by generation: and in the holy Ghost communicated from both the ^ather
and the Son by proceeding.

These are incommunicable Actions; and ^o make, not an essential, accidental,
or ^ational, but a real distinction betwixt the ^hree persons. So that he who
is the Father ^n the Trinity, is not the Son: He who ^s the Son in the Trinity,
is not the Father: He who is the holy Ghost in the Tri^ity, is neither the Son,
nor the Father, ^ut the Spirit, proceeding from both; though there is but one
and the same Essence common to Quum unum cogito, trium incomprehensibili luce
involvor. Nazian
all three. As therefor we believe, that the Father is God, he Son is God, and
the Holy Ghost is God: ^o we likewise believe that God is the Father, God is
the Son, and God is the Holy Ghost. But by reason of this real distinction; the
Person of the one, is not, nor ever can be, the Person of the other. The three
Persons therefore of the Godhead, do not differ from the Essence, but Quamvis
persona cum Essentia non sit omnino id^m, non tamen ab ^a est omnino aliud.
Diff^rt enim non numero, quia s^^ in divinis fo^et quaternit^s; non^re, quia
essentia de personis praedicatur, sed formaliter, (...), sive ratione
ratio^inante: Essentia divi^ a non differt a p^rso^is, ut res a rebus, sed ut
res a suis modis, ^am in D^o non est res and res, sed res and modus r^i.
formally: but they differ really one from another, and so are distinguished by
their hypostatical proprieties. As the Father is God, begetting God the Son:
the Son is God, begotten of God the Father: and the holy Ghost is God,
proceeding from both God the Father, and God the Son.

Hence it is that the Scriptures use the name of God two manner of ways: Either
Essentially, and then it signifies the (...). ^omen Dei sentialiter ositum* ^n
minus ^^lium and ^piritum ^anctum, (...) pa^rem ^^signat*
three Persons conjointly; or (...) Sacranentum ho^ ^enerandum ^on scrutandum,
quomodo ^luralitas ^ic in unitate ^ unitas in ^luralitate. Scrutari hoc
temeritas est, credere pietas, nosse vero vita aeterna. Bern.
Personally, and then by a Synecdoche it signifies but one of the three
Persons in the Godhead. As the Father, 1 Timothy 2. 5. or the Son, Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 16. or the holy Ghost, Acts 5. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 16.

And because the Divine Essence (common to all the three Persons,) is but one,
we call the same, Unity. But because there be three distinct Persons in this
one indivisible Essence, we call the same Trinity Neque ad loquendum digne de
Deo lingua sufficit, neque ^d percip^end^m intellectus p^evakt: magis ergo
glorificare nos convenit Deum, quod talis est, qui and intellectum transcendit,
and ognitionis initium saperat. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. Heb.
So that this Unity in Trinity, and Trinity, in Unity, is a holy De Deo loqui
etiam vere periculosissimum est. Arnob.
Mystery: rather to be religiously adored by faith, than Ling^a, mente, and
cogitatione horresco, quoti^e de Deo sermonem habeo. Naz.
curiously searched by reason, further than God has revealed in his Word.

Thus far of the diverse manner of being in the Divine Essence: now of the
Attributes thereof.
ATtributes are certain descriptions of the Divine Essence, delivered in the
Scriptures, according to the weakness of of our ^ondescendit nobis Deus, ut nos
consurgamus ^i. Aug. de pec. c. 11.
capacity, to help us the better to understand the nature of God's Essence, and
to discern it from all other Essences.

The Attributes of God are of two sorts, either nominal or real.

The Nominal Attributes are of Three sorts: 1. Those which signify God's
Essence: 2. The Persons in the Essence. 3. Those which signify his Essential
works.

Of the first sort, is the Name Exodus 15. ^ Ab Havah vel Hajah, Esse: nam ita
Deus est ^s^ipso, ut si^suum ^sse ^. (...). Omnes huj^s non* i^is lit^ rae sunt
spiritales, ut denotetur Deum esse spiritum. P. Mart. loc. com cap. 11. P.
Mon^an. de arc. sermon. c* 1.
Jehovah or rather Jehovah non habet plurale, and i^^scripturis sol^vero Deo
tri^buitur.
Jehueh, which signifies eternal being of himself; in whom being without all
beginning and end, all other beings both begin and end, Isa. 42 8. Psalm 83. 18.
God tells Moses, Exodus 6. 3. That he was not known to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
by his Name Jehovah. Not but that they knew this to be the Name of God: (for
they used it in all their Prayers) but because they lived not to see God Locus
Exodus 6. 3. int^l^ ge^dus est de gradibus ^ivinarum p^^^factionum. Ge^. loc. 3.
de Not Dei. Ex usu scripturae res tunc dicuntur ^e^i, quando fiunt manifestae:
Sic dicitur, Spi^itus Sanctus nondun erat, id est, nondum innotuerat, Alsted.
Lex Theol. cap. 2.
effecting indeed, that which he promised them; in graciously delivering their
^eed out of Egypt, and in giving them the real possession of Canaan's Land; and
so to be not only God Almighty, by whom all things were made; but also
performing indeed to the Children, that which he promised in his word to the
Fathers, which this Name Jehovah especially signifies. And for this cause,
Moses calls God first Jehovah, when the universal creation had its absolute
being, Genesis 2. 4. And this Admirable Name is graven on the Decalogues forehead
which was pronounced upon the Israelites deliverance, to be the Rule of
Righteousness: after which they should serve their Deliverer in the promised
Land.

This Name is so full of Divine Mysteries, that the Jews hold it a sin to
pronounce it; but if it be Quod licet scribere, effari cur non liceret? Theod.
in Epit.
no sin to write it, why should it be unlawful to pronounce it?

This holy Name of God teaches us:

First, What God is in himself, namely, E^s aeternum (...) ^ons est (...).
an eternal being of himself.

Secondly, How he is unto others, because that from him all other Creatures
have received their being.

Thirdly, That we may confidently believe his promises: for he is named
Jehovah, not only in respect of being, and causing all things to be; but
especially in respect of his gracious promises, In promissionibus Jehovah est
(...).
which without fail he will fulfill in his appointed time, and so cause that to
be, which was not before. And so this Name is a golden pledge unto us, that
because he has promised, he will surely upon Isa. 55. 7.
our repentance forgive us all our sins; at the time o^ death, Joh. 12. 26.
Joh. 14. 2, 3.
receive our Souls; and in the resurrection Job* 6. 40. Joh. 11. 5.
raise up our Bodies in glory to life everlasting.

The second Name denoting God's Essence, is Ehejeh; but once read, Exodus 3. 14
of the same root that JEHOVAH is: and signifies. I AM, or I WILL BE* for when
Moses asked God by what Name he should call him, God then named himself, Ehejeh
Asher Ehejeh; I am tha^ I am: or I will be that I will be: signifying, that he
is an eternal, unchangeable Being: for seeing every Creature is temporary and
mutable; no Creature can say, Ero qui ero, I will be that I will be. This name
in the New Testament is given to our Lord Christ, when he is called Alpha and
Omega; The beginning and the ending, (...).
which is, which was, and which is to come; The Almighty, Apoc. 1. 8. For all
time past and to come, is aye present before God. And to this name, Christ
himself alludeth, Joh 8. 58. Before Abraham was, I AM.

This Name should teach us likewise to have always present in our minds our
first Creation, present Corruption, and future Glorification; and not content
our selves with I was good, or I will be good, but to be good presently; that
when ever God sends for us, he may find us prepared for him.

The third name is Jah, which as it comes of the same root, so is it the
contract of Jehovah, and signifies Lord, because he is the Deus est causa
causarum and Ens^entium.
beginning and Being of Beings. It is a Psalm. 68. 19 Psalm. 101. 18. Psalm. 106.
1, 48. Ps. 111. 1, etc. Ps. 112. 1, etc. Psalm. 113. 1, 9. Psalm. 115. 17, 18.
Psalm. 116. 19. Psalm. 118. 5, 14. Psalm. 125. 34. Junius in Eirenico.
name for the most part, ascribed unto God, when some notable deliverance or
benefit comes to pass according to his former promise: and therefore all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth, are commanded to celebrate and praise God in
this Name Jah.

The fourth is (...), Lord, used often in the New Testament: for (...), or
(...), signifies I am. Hence (...), signifies the first Essence of a thing,
or authority, when it is absolutely given to God, it answers to the Hebrew
name Jehovah, and is so translated by the seventy Interpreters: for God is so a
Lord, that he is of (...)Polan. Synt. Theol. 1. 2 c. 6.
himself Lord of all. This Name should always put us in remembrance to Mal. 1.
6.
obey his Commandments, and to fear his Judgments, and submit our selves to his
blessed Will and Pleasure, saying with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18.

The fifth is (...), God, 600 times used in the New Testament: and of profane
Wri^ers commonly. It is derived Plato in Cr^^ylo. Hin^^^ll ^d Virgil. Deum
namque ire per omnes Terrasque tractu q^e maris. Zanch.
(...), because he runs through and compasses all things: or (...), which
signifies to burn and kindle: for God is Light and the Author both of Heat,
D^use ^^ux. (...).
Light, and Life, in all Creatures, either immediately of himself; or mediately
by secondary causes. This name i^ used either improperly, or properly.
Improperly, when it is given either figuratively, to Magistrates, or falsely to
Idols. But when it is properly and absolutely taken, it signifies the Eternal
Essence of God, being above all things, and through all things: giving life and
light to all creatures, and preserving and governing them, in their wonderful
frame and order. God sees all in all places: Let us therefore every where take
heed what we do in his sight.

Thus far of the names which signify God's Essence.

The name which signifies the Persons in the Essence, is chiefly one, Nomen
Elohim est personarum (...). Alsted.
Elohim.

Elohim signifies the mighty Judges: it is a name of the plural number, to
express the Trinity of Persons in Quum Elohim de una persona dicitur,
Synecdochice dictum est, propter Essentiae unitatem. Junius.
Unity of Essence. And to this purpose the holy Ghost begins the holy Bible
with this plural Name of God, joined with a Verb of the singular number; as
Elohim Bara, Dii creavit. The like you may read, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Josn. 24. 19.
The mighty Gods, or all the three Persons in the Godhead, created. The Jews
also note in the Verb (...) Bara consisting of three Letters, the mystery of
the Trinity, by (...) Beth, Ben, the Son: by (...) Resh, Ruach, the Spirit, by
(...) Aleph, Ab, the Father. But this holy mystery is more clearly taught by
Moses, Genesis 3. 23 And Jehovah Elohim said, Behold, the Man is become as one of
us. And Genesis 19. 24. Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha, b^imstone and
fire from Jehovah out of Heaven: Sic Marcus Arethusius in Smyrnensi concilio
sancte exposuit. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 30.
that is God the Son, from God the Father, who has committed all judgment unto
the Son, John 5. 22. See Psalm. 33. 6. Isa. 6. 8, 9, 10. The singular number of
Elohim is Eloah, derived of Alah, he swore; because that in all weighty causes,
when necessity requires an Oath to decide the Truth, we are only to swear by
the Name of God which is the great and righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth.

This Name Eloah is but seldom used, as Hab. 3. 3. Job 4. 9. Job 12. 4. and 15.
8. 36. 2. Psalm. 18. 32. Psalm. 114. 7. Once it has a Noun plural joined to it,
This pla^e well urged, had grinded Arius in pieces.
Job 35. 10. None says, Where is Eloah Gosai, the Almighty my Maker? to note
the mystery of the eternal Trinity. Many times also Elohim, the plural number,
is joined with a Verb singular, to express more emphatically this Mystery, Genesis
35. 7. 2. Sam. 7. 23. Elohim Kedoschim Hii, Dii sancti ipse.
Josh. 24. 19. Jer. 10. 10. Elohim is also sometime Tropically given to
Magistrates, because they are God's Vicegerents, as to Moses, Exodus 7. 1.
Jehovah said unto Moses, I have made thee Elohim to Pharaoh, that is, I have
appointed thee an Ambassador to represent the person of the true three one God,
and to deliver his message and will unto Pharaoh. As often therefore as we read
or hear this name Elohim, it should put us in mind to consider, that in one
divine Essence there are three distinct Persons, and that God is Jehovah Elohim.

Now follow the Names which signify God's Essential Works, which are these
five especially.
1. EL, which is as much as the strong God, Hence Ei in Hebrew, as Mat. 27. 46.
and Eloi in the Syriack, as Mar. 15. 31. does signify my God. 2 Chr. 32. 8.
and reaches us, that God is not only most strong, and fortitude it self in
his own Essence: but also that it is he, that gives all strength and power to
all other Creatures. Therefore Christ is called, Isai. 9. 6. El Gibbor, The
strong most mighty God. Let not God's Children fear the power of enemies, for
El our God is more strong than they.

2. Shaddai, The 70 t^rns it (...); It is derived of Dai sufficiency, and the
Relative (...), the same that (...), or of S^ad, a Dug, because God feeds his
children with sufficiency of all grace, as the loving Mother, the Child, with
the Milk of her Breasts,
That is, Omnipotent. By this Name, God usually styled himself to the
Patriarchs, I am El Shaddai, the strong God, Almighty. Because he is perfectly
able to defend his servants from all evil: to bless them with all spiritual and
temporal blessings, and to perform all his promises which he has made unto
them for this life, and that which is to come. This name belongs only to the
Godhead, and to no creature, no, not to the humanity of Christ. This may teach
us with the Patriarchs, to put our whole confidence in God, and not to doubt of
the true performance of his promises.

3. A name compounded of Ai, My, and Adon, Lord. ^don derivatur ab Eden, basis,
quia Deus est fundamentum and susten^ator omnium creaturarum. Hinc Adon,
Dominus, cui rei domesticae cura incumbit, and ei tanquam columnae innititur.
Quando de creaturis usurpatur Adonai, est Iod cum p^tach: sed de Creatore cum
cametz. Ab Adonai manasse videtur Ethnicorum (...).
Adon^i, My Lord. This name, as the Masorets note, is found 134* times in the
Old Testament. Analogically it is given to Creatures, but properly it belongs
to God alone. It is used, Malach. 1. 6. in the plural number, to note the
mystery of the holy Trinity. If I be Adonim, Lords, where is my fear? Adoni the
singular: Adonim the plural number. This Name is given to Christ, Dan 9. 16.
Cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for Adoni, (the
Lord Christ) his sake. The hearing of this Holy Mame, may teach every Man to
obey God's Commandments, to fear him alone, to suffer none besides him to reign
in his Conscience, to lay hold (by a particular hand of faith) upon his Word
and Promise, and to challenge God in Christ to be his God, that he may say with
Thomas, Thou art my Lord and my God.

4. Helion, that is, most high. Psalm. 9. 2. Psalm 91. 9. and 92. 9. Dan. 4. 17,
24, 25, 34. Act 7. 48. This Name Gabriel gives unto God, telling the virgin
Mary, that the child which should be born of her, should be the (...). So the
Devil styled Christ the Son of God the most High, Luke 8. 28.
Son of the most High Luke 1. 32. This teaches, that God in his Essence and
glory exceeds infinitely all creatures in Heaven and Earth. Secondly, that no
Man should be proud of any earthly honor or greatness. For what is earthly
greatness, compared to God's Highness?
Thirdly, if we desire true dignity, to labor to have communion with God in
grace and glory.

5. Abba, a Syriack Name, signifying Father, Romans 8. 15. This is sometimes used
Essentially, as in the Lord's Prayer. Secondly, Personally, as Mat. 11. 25. For
God is Christ's Father by Nature, and Christians by Adoption and Grace. Christ
is called the everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. because he regenerates us under
the New Testament. God is also called (...). Of whose substance the light of
the Sun is but a shadow.
the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. because God dwells in inaccessible light,
1 Timothy 6. 16. and is the Author, not only of the Son's light, but also of all
the light, both of natural reason, and supernatural grace, Joh. 1. 9.
Which lighteneth every Man that comes into the World. This name teaches us,
that all the gifts which we receive from God, proceed from his mere Fatherly
Love. Secondly, that we should love him again as dear Children. Thirdly, That
we may in all our needs and troubles, be bold to call upon him as a Father, for
his help and succor. Thus should we not hear of the sacred names of God, but
we should thereby be put in mind of his goodness unto us, and of our duties
unto him. And then should we find how comfortable a thing it is, to do every
thing in the Name of God. A phrase usual in every man's tongue: but the true
comfort thereof (through ignorance) known to few men's hearts.

It is a great Wisdom, and an unspeakable matter for the strengthening of a
Christian's Faith, to know how in the mediation of Christ, to invocate God by
such a Name, as whereby he has manifested himself to be most willing and best
able to help and succor him in his present need or adversity. The ardent
desire of knowing God, is the surest testimony of our love to God, and of Gods
favor to us. Psalm. 91. 14, 15.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deilver him; I will set
him on high, because he has known my name: he shall call upon me, and I will
answer him, etc. And it is a great strengthening of faith, with understanding
to begin every action in the Name of God.

Thus far of the nominal Attributes.

The real Attributes are of two sorts: either absolute or relative.

The absolute Attributes are such, which cannot in any sort agree to any
Creature, but to God alone.

These are two: simpleness and infiniteness.

Intelligentiae habent aliquid simile materiae, aliquid simile formae. Solus
Deus simplex est, in quo nihil in potentia, sed in actu omnia, imo ipse purus,
primus, medius, ultimus actus. Scal. Exerc. 6. Sect. 2. Just. Martyr. qu. 129.
ad Orthodoxos.
Simpleness is that whereby God is void of all composition, division,
multiplication, accidents, or parts compounding, either sensible, or
intelligible: so that whatever he is, he is the same essentially.

It hinders not God's simpleness that he is three: because God is three, not by
composition of parts, but by co-existence of Persons.

Intelligentiae, cum sint entia alia ab infinito ^nte, finita esse necesse est:
nam, duo infinita nequeunt esse* neque in natura, neque extra* naturam. Essent
n. duo principia prima. Scal. Exerc. 359. Sect. 3.
Infiniteness is that whereby all things in God are void of all measure,
limitation, and bounds above and beneath, before and after.

From these two do necessarily flow three other Absolute Attributes.

1. Vnmeasurableness, or ubiquity, whereby he is of infinite extension, Acts 7.
48. Psalm 145. Job 11. 7, etc. 2 Chronicles. 2. 5, 6. Psalm 139. 5, etc. Jer. 2^.
23, 24. Deus est ubique, non ita ut in dimidia part sit dimidius, aut tanquam
in majore part major Dei pars sit, in minore minor; sed ubique totus, and in
seipso totus est. Aug. Deus est intellectualis Sph^ra, cujus centrum est
ubique, circumferentia vero nusquam. Trism.
filling heaven and earth, containing all places, and not contained of any
space, place, or bounds, and being no where absent, is every where present.
There are four degrees of God's ^resence: the first is universal, by which God
is repletively, every where; inclusively, no where.

Secondly, Special, by which God is said to be in Heaven, because that Psalm.
19. 1. Hos. 2. 21.
there his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, is in a more excellent manner seen and
enjoyed: as also because that usually he does from ^hence pour forth his
Blessings and Judgments.

Thirdly, more special, by which God 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
dwells in his Saints.

Fourthly, more special, and altogether singular, by which the whole fullness of
the Godhead Col. 2. 8.
dwells in Christ bodily.

2. Unchangeableness, whereby God is void of all change, both in respect of his
Romans 1. 23. Isa. 44. 28. Psalm 102. 27, etc.
Essence and Rev. 1. 8. 1 Samuel 15. 29. Number. 23. 19. Mal. 3. 6. Romans 11. 29. Jam.
1. 18. Poenitentia cum de Deo enunciatur, non affectum in Deo, sed effectum Dei
in hominibus significat. Alsted.
Will.

3. Eternity, whereby God is without beginning of days, or end of time; and
without all bounds of Isa. 44. 6. Jam. 5. 19. Dan. 6. 26. Heb. 12. Rev. 4. 8.
Creaturae quaedam aeternae sunt a posteriori: a priori solus, Deus est
aeternus. Alsted. Lex Theol. cap. 2.
precession, or succession.

Thus far of the absolute Attributes; now of the relative, or such which have
reference to the Creatures.

Those are five.
1. Life. 2. Understanding. 3. Will. 4. Power. 5. Majesty.

1. THe Life of God is that, by which, as by a most pure and perpetual Act, he
not only lives of himself, but is also that ever and overflowing Fountain of
life, from which all Creatures derive their Act 17. 25 28. Act 14. 15. Psalm.
42. 2. Psalm. 36. 19. Joh. 5. 26. Heb. 3. 12.
lives, so as that in him, they live, move breath, and have their being. And
because only his Life differs not from his Hence it is that as God is called of
the Hebrews E^heie, so likewise Echeie: and as of the Grecians, (...), so also
(...): and of the Latins, primum ens, so also primum vivens: for to be, and to
live is a ^one and the same in God.
Essence therefore God is said only to have Immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16.

2. The Understanding, or Knowledge of God, is that whereby (by one pure act)
he most perfectly 1 Kin. 8 39 Psalm. 44. 21. Ps. 139. 1, etc. Jer. 17. 10. and
20. 12. (...) 1^. 15. Act 1. 24. Heb. 4. 12. Romans 11. 33. and 6. 17. 1 Timothy 2.
19. Mat. 7. 12.
knows in himself all things that ever were, are, or shall be: Yea, the
thoughts and imaginations of Men's hearts. This Knowledge of God is either
general, by which God knows simply all things eternally, the good by himself,
the evil by the good opposite to it; imposing to things contingent, the Lot of
contingency; and to things necessary, the Law of necessity. And thus knowing
all things in, and of himself, he is the cause of all the knowledge that is in
all, both Men and Angels. Or secondly, special, called the knowledge of
approbation, by which he particularly knows, and graciously acknowledges
only his Elect for his own.

Intellectus, scientia, and sapientia in Deo non disting^untur, Til^n. N^m
s^pientia in ^omine est habitus intellectui impressu, qui de Deo di^i n^n
debet, cuj^s, intellectus est ipsa sapientia, Keckerm. (...). Hes. lib. (...).
Sap. Hence the Platonicks term God (...), all-eye, seeing all.
Understanding also contains the Wisdom of God, by which he most wisely created
all things of nothing, in number, measure, and weight, and still rules and
disposes them to serve his own most holy purpose and glory.

3. The Will of God is that, whereby of 1 Timothy 2. 5 Romans 9. 19. Ephesians. 1. 5.
necessity he wills himself, as the sovereign good: and (by willing himself)
wills most Deus voluntate sua cuncta constituit Trism in 4. Dial. Plin. Hinc
Orpheus Deum vocat necessitatem, ratione sc. inferiorum, quod omnia ipsi parere
c^gantur.
freely Voluntas Dei semper impletur, aut de nobis, aut a nobis. De nobis
impletur, sed tamen non implemus eam, quando peccamus; a nobis impletur, quando
bonum facimus. Aug. Ench. c. 100 To. 9. 11, 13 Jam. 1. 21.
all other good things which are out of himself.

The Will of God, though in it self it be but one, as in his Essence, yet in
respect of the diversity of Objects and Effects, it is called in the Scriptures
by diverse names, as, 1. Love, whereby is meant God's eternal 1 John 3. 1.
good Will, whereby he ordains his Elect to be freely saved through Christ,
and Psalm 45. 7.
bestows on them all necessary graces for this life, and that to come, Genesis
4. 4.
taking pleasure in their persons and services. 2. Justice Norma justitiae
divinae est Dei voluntas. Quia enim vult, ideo est justum; non quia justum,
ideo vult, Ephesians. 1. 11.
is Gods constant Will whereby he Romans 2. 5. 2 These 1. 6, etc. 2 Timothy 4 8.
Deuteronomy. 7. 9, 10.
recompenseth Men and Angels, according to their works, Deus principium and
^inem and media rerum omnium tenens, rectaque linea ^^edens e vestigio habet
(...) divinae legis vindicem, simul ut quicquam Sanctionism ejus praetermissum
est. Aristot. lib. de mundo.
punishing the impenitent according to their deserts, called the justice of his
wrath: and Romans 9. 15, 16. Ezekiel. 16. 6.
rewarding the faithful, according to his promises, called the justice of his
Grace. 3. Mercy, which is Psalm. 103. 8, etc. Tit. 3. 4. Semper invenies Deum
benigniorem quam te culpabiliorem. Sermon. 11. Bern. Vindictae gladium,
misericordiae oleo semper acuit. Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 3.
God's mere Good Will, and ready affection to forgive a penitent sinner,
notwithstanding all his sins and ill deserts. 4. Goodness, Psalm. 1 45. 7, 9,
16. Mat. 16. 17. In creaturis multa inveniuntur bona, ergo Creator multo magis
est bonus. Imo (...), ipsum bonum.
whereby God willingly communicates his good with his Creatures: and because
he communicates it freely, it is termed grace. 5. Truth, whereby Josh. 13. 14.
Psalm. 149. 6. Number. 23. 19. Veritas est harmonia tum intellectus and verborum
cum rebus, tum etiam rerum ipsarum cum Idci^ in mente divina. Keck. Veritas Dei
in verbis, fides Dei dicitur, quod certo fiant, quae ab ipso dicta sunt. Item
constantia, quiasententiam non mutat. Polon.
God wills constantly those things which he wills: effecting and performing
all things, which he has spoken, in his appointed time. 6. Patience, whereby
God willingly forbeareth to punish the wicked, so long as it may stand with his
justice, and until their 2 Pet. 3. 9. Romans 2. 4. Genesis 5. 16.
sins be ripened. Ad poenam tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox.
Sed pensare solet vi graviore moram.
7. Holiness, 1 Pet. 1. 5. 1 These. 4. 3. Heb. 12. 14. Mar. 15. 9. Quanta
sancitias Dei, ad cujus aspectum sancti Angeli oculos pro sua tenuitate alis
velantes clamant, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Jehovah Zabaoth! Isa. 6. 23.
whereby God's Nature is separated from all profaneness: and abhors all
filthiness: and so being wholly pure in himself, delights in the inward and
outward purity and chastity of his servants, which he infuseth into them. 8.
Anger, Psalm. 106. 23. 29. 40, 41. Number. 25. 11. Ira Dei non est aliud, quam
voluntas puniendi. Aug. 15. de civit. Dei, cap. 15. Ansel. lib. 7. cap. 6. Cur
Deus Hom. Furor and ira in Deo non passionem mentis, sed ultionis acerbitatem
notant. Carth. in Apoc. 19.
whereby is meant God's most certain and just Will in chastening the Elect, and
in revenging and punishing the Reprobate, for the injuries they offer to him
and his chosen: and when God will punish with rigor and severity, then it is
termed Wrath 1 Cor. 19. 2.
temporal to the Elect, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
eternal to the Reprobates.


4. The Power of God is that whereby he Genesis 17. 1.
can simply and freely do whatsoever he will, that is agreeable to his nature:
Psalm. 115. 3.
and whereby (as he has made, Mat. 11. 26.
so) he still rules heaven and earth, Ephesians. 1. 11.
and all things therein. Mat. 8. 2.
This Almighty power of God is either absolute, by which he can will, Deus
potest omnia quae contradictionem non implicant. Aqu. 1. qu. 25. art. 3, 4.
Omnipotentia ex^ludit omnes d^fectus, qui sunt impotentia, s^u, p^sse mentiri,
mori, peccare, etc.
and do more than he wills or does, Matthew. 3. 9. and 20. 53. Romans 9. 18. Or
actual, by which God does indeed whatsoever he will, and hinders whatsoever he
will not have done, Psalm. 115. 3.

5. Majesty is that, by which God of his own absolute and free authority 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. 2 Samuel 7. 22. Rev. 5. 12, 13.
reigns and rules, as Lord and King, over all Creatures visible, and
invisible* having both the right and propriety in all things: as 1 Chronicles. 29.
14. Hinc Deuteronomy dicitur (...).
from whom, and for whom, are all things: as also such a plenitude of Power,
that he can pardon the offenses of all whom he Romans 9. 15. Joh. 4. 11.
will have spared; and subdue all his Enemies, whom he will have Luke 19, 17.
Psalm 2. 9. Psalm 110. 1.
plagued and destroyed, without being bound to render to any Creature a reason
of his doing: but making his own most holy and just Will, his only most perfect
and eternal Law.

From all these Attributes arises one, which is God's sovereign blessedness or
perfection. Blessedness is that Deus est Schaddai siv^ (...) non solum quia
ipse nihil desiderat, sed etiam quia nihil in eo desiderari potest. Creaturas
fecit perfectas in suo quasque genere, ^rgo ipse perfectissimus est in se and
per se. Scal. Exerc. 146. Section 2.
perfect and unmeasurable possession of joy and glory, which God has in
himself for ever: and is the cause of all the bliss and perfection, that every
creature enjoys in its measure.

There are other Attributes figuratively and improperly ascribed unto God, in
the Holy Scriptures, as by an Anthropomorphosis, the members of a man, eyes,
ears, Nostrils, mouth, hands, feet, etc. or the senses and actions of man, as
seeing, hearing, smelling, working, walking, striking, etc. By an
Antropopatheia, the affections, and passions of a man, as gladness, grief, joy,
sorrow, love, hatred, etc. or by an Analogy, as when he is named a Lion, a
Rock, a Tower, a Buckler, Mark. 14. 61.
etc. Whose signification every See Master Wilson's Dictionary of the Bible,
most profitable for this purpose.
Commentary will express. Act. 17. 25. Romans 11. 35. 36. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Matthew.
25. 34. Jam. 1. 17.


Of all these Attributes we must hold these general Rules.
NO Attribute can sufficiently express the Essence of God, because it is
infinite and ineffable.

Whatsoever therefore is spoken of GOD is not GOD; but serves rather to help
^ur weak Understanding, to conceive in ^u^ Reason, and to utter in our Speech
^he Majesty of his Divine Nature, so far as ^e has vouchsafed to reveal
himself unto ^s in his Word.

2. All the Attributes of God belong to very of the three Persons, Attributa
omnia propter (...), singulis divinitatis personis competunt.
as well as to the Essence it self, with the limitations of a ^ersonal
propriety. As the mercy of the Father is mercy begetting; the mercy of the ^on
is mercy begotten; the mercy of the H. ^host is mercy proceeding, and so of the
rest.

3. The Essential Attributes of God dif^er not from his Essence, because they
are ^o in the Essence, that they are the very Essence it self. In Deo nihil
est, quod non ^it ipse Deus. Zanch.
In God therefore there ^s nothing which is not either his Essence ^r Person.

4. The Essential Attributes of God dif^er not Essentially or Really one from
another (because whatsoever is in God, is ^ne most simple Essence, and one
admits no ^ivision) but only in our reason and under^^anding, which being not
able to know ^arthly things by one simple Act, without ^he help of many
distinct Acts, must of ^ecessity have the help of many distinct Acts to know
the incomprehensible GOD. Therefore (to speak properly) there are ^ot in God
many Attributes, but Omnia in divinis sunt unum. ibi non ob^^^ (...) oppositio^.
one only, which is nothing else but the Divine Es^ence it self, by what
Attributes soever you all it. But in respect of our reason, they ^re said to be
so many different Attributes, for ^ur understanding conceives by the name of
Attributa Dei omnia ita in ipso sunt ut sint ipsum: ita insunt, ut nihil
antecedat, nihil subsequatur, sed ex intellectione nostra (quae tanquam umbra
illis est) alia aliis prius animo comprehenduntur. Scal. Ex. 365. Sect. 6.
mercy, a thing differing from that which is called justice. The Essential
Attributes of God are not therefore reall^ separate.

5. The Essential Attributes of God are no parts or qualities of the Divine
Essence nor Quae de Deo dicuntur. (...) Relatione ad creaturas and sic secundum
accidens, non exprimunt mutationem in divina essentia, sed in creaturis factam.
Negantur ergo de Deo accidentia realia, non autem praedicam accidentalia.
Accidents in the Essence, nor a Subject: but the very Omnia quae in Deo sunt,
ita insunt, ut sint ipse De^^
whole and entire Essence of God. So that every such Attribute is no aliud and
aliud, another and another thing but one and the same thing. There are
therefore no Quantities in God by which he may be said to be so much, and so
much, nor Qualities by which he may be said to be such and such: but Essentia
Divina identificat sibi omnia quae sunt in divinis. Bi^^ sup. 1. Sent. d. 1. q.
5.
whatsoever God is, He is such, and the same by his Essence. By his Essence he
is wise, and therefore Wisdom it self: By his Essence he is good and therefore
Goodness it self; by his Essence he is merciful, and therefore Mercy it self:
By his Essence he is just, and therefore Justice it self, etc. In a word, God
is great without quantity; good, true, and just without quality; merciful
without passion; a^ act without motion; every where present without sight;
without time, the first, and the last: the Lord of all Creatures, from whom all
Exhibet omnia, accipit nihil. Ipsum igi^ bonum est Deus ipse semper. Tris.
Sermon. 2. Plin.
receive themselves, and a^ the good they have; yet neither needed nor
receives he any increase of goodnes^ or happiness from any other.

This is the plain description of God so far as he has revealed himself to us
in his Word

This Doctrine (of all other) every true Practitioner of Piety must competently
know and necessarily believe, for four special uses.

1. That we may discernour true and only God, from all false Gods and Idols;
for the Description of God is properly Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Jer. 10. 25.
known only to his Church, in whom he has thus graciously manifested himself.

2. To possess our hearts with a greater awe of his Majesty, whilst we admire
him ^or his simpleness and infiniteness; adore him for his unmeasurableness,
unchangeableness, and Eternity; seek wisdom from his under^tanding and
knowledge; submit our selves to his blessed will and pleasure; love him for his
love, mercy, goodness, and patience; trust to his word because of his truth;
fear him for his Power, Justice, and Anger, reverence him ^or his Holiness, and
praise him for his Bles^edness, and to depend all our life on him, who is the
only Author of our Life, Being, and all the good things we have.

3. To stir us up to imitate the Divine spirit in his holy Attributes, and to
bear in some measure) the image of his Wis^om, Love, Goodness, Justice, Mercy,
Truth, ^atience, Zeal, and Anger against sin, that ^e may be wise, loving,
just, merciful, true, ^atient, and zealous, as our God is.

4. Lastly, That we may in our Prayers and Meditations, conceive aright of his
Di^^ne Majesty, and not according to those ^^oss and blasphemous imaginations
which naturally arise in Men's Brains: as when they conceive God to be like an
old Man sitting in a Chair; and the blessed Trinity to b^ like that tripartite
Idol, which Papists have painted in their Church-Windows.

When therefore thou art to pray unt^ God, let thine Heart speak unto him, as
t^ that Psalm. 90. 2.
Eternal, 1 Kin. 8. 27.
Infinite, Genesis 17. 1. Job 15. 25.
Almighty, Isa. 6. 3.
Holy Rev. 4. 8. and 15. 4.
Wise, Romans 11. 33. and 16 17. Deuteronomy 31. 4. Psalm. 145. 27.
Just, Psa. 103. 11. and 145. 8, 9.
Merciful, Joh. 4. 24.
Spirit, and mo^ Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
Perfect, 1 John 5. 7. Mat. 3. 16. Mat. 28. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
indivisible Essence of three sever^^ Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; w^
being 1 Kin. 8. 27. Jer. 23. 24.
present in all places, Dan. 4. 32*
rules Heaven and Earth, understands 1 Kin. 8. 30. Jer. 17. 10. Acts 2. 24.
all men's heart knows all men's miseries, and is only able bestow on us all
graces which we want, and deliver all penitent sinners, who with faithf^ hearts
seek (for Christ's sake) his help out all their afflictions and troubles
whatsoever.

The ignorance of this true knowledge of God, makes many to make an Idol the
True God, and is the only cause w^^ so many do profess all other parts of God
Worship and Religion, with so much irrverence and hypocrisy; whereas if they
d^ truly know God, they durst not but co^^ to his holy Service, and coming,
serve hi^ with fear and reverence; for so far do a Man fear God, as he knows
him; a^ then does a Man truly know God, wh^ he joins practice to speculation:
And the is,

First, When a Man does so acknowled and celebrate God's Majesty, as he (...)
revealed himself in his Word.

Secondly, When from the true and li^^ sense of God's Attributes, there is bred
in ^ Man's heart a love, awe, and confidence in God; for, says God himself, If
I be a Father, where is my honor? If I be a Lord, where is my fear? O taste
and see, Psalm. 34. 9.
that the Lord is good, says David. He that has not by experience tasted his
goodness, knows not how good he is. 1 John 2. 4.
He (says John) that says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a liar, and the truth is not ^n him. So far therefore as we imitate (...) in
his Goodness, Love, Justice, Mercy, Patience, and other Attributes, so far do
we know him.

Thirdly, When with inward groans, and ^he serious desires of our hearts, we
long ^o attain to the perfect and plenary know^edge of his Majesty in the life
which is to come.

Lastly, This discovers how few there ^re who do truly know God; for no Man
knows God, but he that loves him; and how can a Man choose but love him,
being the sovereign good, if he know him; seeing the Nature of God is to
enamour with ^he Love of his Goodness? And whosoever ^oveth any thing more than
God* is not worthy of God: and such is every one, who ^ettles the love and rest
of his heart upon any thing besides God. If therefore thou ^^ost believe that
God is Almights, why ^^ost thou fear Devils and Enemies, and not confidently
trust in God, and crave his help in all thy troubles and dangers? If ^hou
believe that God is Infinite, how dare thou provoke him to Anger? If thou
believe that God is simple, with what Heart can thou dissemble, and play
the Hypocrite? If thou believe that God is the sovereign Good, why is not thy
heart more settled upon him than on all worldly good? If thou do indeed
believe that God is a just Judge, how dare thou live so securely in sin,
without Repentance? If thou do truly believe that God is most wise, why do
thou not referr the Events of Crosses and Disgraces unto him, (...) knows how
to turn all things to the best unto them that love him? Romans 8. 28.
If thou art persuaded that God is true, why do thou doubt of his promises?
And if thou believe that God is Beauty, and Si te habeam solum, sane ruat
ardu^s a^ther, tellus r^pta suo dissiliatque loco.
perfection it self, why do not thou make him alone the chief end of all thy
Affections and Desires? For if thou love Beauty, He is most fair; if thou
desire Riches he is most wealthy; if thou seek Wisdom, He is most wise.
Whatsoever excellency thou have seen in any Creature, it is nothing but a
sparkle of that which is in infinite Creata omnia perfectius sunt in Deo quam
in seipsis. Dion. de Divin. c. 8.
Perfection in God: And when in Heaven we shall have an immediate Communion
with God, we shall have them all perfectly in him communicated unto us. Briefly
in all goodness, he is all in all. Ama^unum illud bonum in quo omne bonum, est
and sufficit. Ansel. in Prof. c. 25.
Love that one good God, and thou shall love him in whom all the good of
goodness consists. He that would therefore attain to the saving knowledge of
God, must learn to know him by love. For God is Love, and Ephesians. 1. 19.
the knowledge of the Love of God passes all knowledge. For all knowledge, 1
John 4.
besides to know Kem. de im. Christ. c. 1.
how to love God, and to serve him only, is nothing upon Solomon's credit, but
Eccles. 1. 17.
vanity of vanities, and vexation of spirit.

Kindle therefore, O my Domina, immo dominus charitas. Bern.
Lady, nay rather, O my Lord Charity, the love of thy self in my Soul;
especially, seeing it was thy good pleasure, that being Romans 5. 9. 10.
reconciled by the blood of Christ, John 17. 3. 22.
I should be brought by the knowledge of thy grace, to the Communion of thy
glory, wherein only consists my sovereign good and happiness for ever. 1 Cor.
15. 3.


Thus by the light of his own word we have seen the back parts of JEHOVAH
Elohim, the eternal Trinity, whom to believe is saving faith and verity, and
unto whom from all Creatures in Heaven and Earth be all Praise, Dominion, and
Glory for ever. Amen.

Thus far of the Knowledge of God; now of the Knowledge of a Man's self. And
first of the state of his misery and corruption, without renovation by Christ.

Meditations of the misery of a man not reconciled to God in Christ.
O Wretched man! Damnatus antequam natus. Aug*
where shall I begin to describe thine endless misery? who art condemned as
soon as conceived: and adjudged to eternal Death, before thou wast born to a
temporal Life^ A beginning Indeed I find, but no end of thy miseries. For when
Adam and Eve being created after God's own Image, and placed in Paradise, that
they and their Posterity might live in a blessed state of Life Immortal, having
dominion over all earthly Creatures, and only restrained from the Fruit of one
Tree, as a sign of their subjection to the Almighty Creator, though God forbad
them this one small thing under the penalty of eternal Death; yet they believed
the Devil's Word before the Word of God, making God (as much as in them lay) a
Liar. And so being unthankful for all the benefits which God bestowed on them,
they became malcontent with their present state, as if God had dealt
enviously or niggardly with them, and believed that the Devil would make them
pertakers of far more glorious things than ever God had bestowed upon them; and
in their pride they fell into High Treason against the most High, and
disdaining to be God's Subjects, they affected blasphemously to be Gods
themselves, Equals unto God. Hence, till they repented, (losing God's Image)
they became like unto the Devil; and so all their posterity, as a traitorous
brood, (whilst they remain impenitent like thee) are subject in this life to
all cursed miseries, and in the life to come, to the everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

Lay the aside for a while thy doting vanities, and take the view with me of
thy doleful miseries, which duly surveyed, I doubt not but that thou will
conclude, that it is far better never to have Natures Being, than not to be by
Grace a Practitioner of Religious Piety.

Consider therefore thy misery. 1. In thy Life. 2. In thy Death. 3. After Death
in thy Life.

1. The miseries accompanying thy Body.

2. the miseries which deform thy Soul.

In thy Death, The miseries which shall oppress thy Body and Soul.

After Death, The miseries which overwhelm both Body and Soul together in Hell.

And first let us take a view of those miseries which accompany the Body
according to the four Ages of thy Life.

1. Infancy. 2. Youth. 3. Manhood. 4. Old Age.

Meditations of the Miseries of Infancy.
WHAT wast thou, being an Infant but a Brute, having the shape of a Man? Was
not thy body conceived in the heat of Lust, the secret of shame and stain of
Original Sin? And thus wast thou cast naked upon the ^arth, all embrewed in the
blood of filthiness; (filthy indeed, when the Son of God, who disdained not to
take on him Man's Nature and the Infirmities thereof, yet thought it
unbeseeming his Holiness to be conceived after the sinful manner of Man's
Conception) so that thy Mother was ashamed to let thee know the manner thereof;
what cause then have thou to boast of thy Birth, which was a cursed pain to thy
Mother, and to thy self the entrance into a troublesome life? the greatness of
which miseries, because thou could not utter in words, thou did express (as
well as thou could) in weeping tears.

2. Meditations of the Miseries of Youth.
WHat is Youth, but an untamed Beast; all whose Actions are rash and rude, not
capable of good Counsel when it is given, and Ape-like, delighting in nothing
but in Toys and Babies? Therefore thou no sooner beganest to have a little
strength and discretion, but forthwith thou wast kept under the Rod, and fear
of Parents and Masters: as if thou had been born to live under the Discipline
of others, rather than at the Disposition of thine own will. No tired Horse was
ever more willing to be rid of his Burden, than thou wast to get out of the
servile state of this Bondage. A state not worthy the Description.

3. Meditations of the Miseries of Manhood.
What Is Man's Estate but a Sea, wherein (as Waves) one trouble arises in the
neck of another; the latter worse than the former? No sooner did thou enter
into the Affairs of this World, but thou wast inwrapped about with a cloud of
miseries. Thy flesh provokes thee to lust, the world allures thee to pleasures,
and the Devil tempts thee to all kind of Sins; fears of Enemies affright thee,
suits in Law do vex thee, wrongs of ill Neighbors do oppress thee, cares for
Wife and Children do consume thee, and disquietness betwixt open Foes and false
Friends do in a manner confound thee: Sin stings thee within: Satan lays snares
before thee. Conscience of sins past doggeth behind thee. Now Adversity on the
left hand frets thee, anon Prosperity on the right hand flatters thee; over thy
head GOD's vengeance due to thy sin, is ready to fall upon thee; and under thy
feet Hell's Mouth is ready to swallow thee up. And in this miserable estate
whither will thou go for rest and comfort? The House is full of cares, the
Field full of toil, the country of rudeness, the City of Factions, the Court of
Envy, the Church of Sects, the Sea of Pirates, the Land of Robbers. Or in what
state will thou live? Seeing Wealth is envied, and Poverty contemned; Wit is
destru^ted, and Simplicity is derided; Superstition is mocked, and Religion is
suspected; Vice is advanced and Virtue is disgraced O with what a body of Sin
art thou compassed about in a World of Wickedness? What are thine Eyes but
Windows to behold Vanities? What are thine Ears but flood gates to let in the
streams of Iniquity? What are thy Senses, but matches to give fire to thy
lusts? What is thine Heart but the Anvil, whereon Satan has forged the ugly
shape of all lewd affections? Art thou nobly descended, thou must put thy self
in peril of Foreign Wars, to get the Reputation of earthly honor; oft-times
hazard thy life in a desperate Combat, to avoid the aspersion of a Coward. Art
thou born in mean estate? Lord! what pains and drudgery must thou endure at
home and abroad to get maintenance? and all perhaps scarce sufficient to serve
thy necessity; and when (after much service and labor) a man has got
something, how little certainty is there in that which is gotten? seeing thou
see by daily Experience, that he who was rich yesterday, is to day a beggar;
he that yesterday was in health, to day is sick; he that yesterday was merry
and laughed, has cause to day to mourn and weep; he that yesterday was in
favor, to day is in disgrace; and he who yesterday was alive, to day is dead:
And thou know not how soon, nor in what manner thou shall die thy self. And
who can enumerate the Losses, Crosses, Griefs, Disgraces, Sicknesses and
calamities, which are incident to sinful man? To speak nothing of the death of
Friends and Children, which ofttimes seem to be unto us far more bitter than
present Death it self.

Meditations of the Miseries of Old Age.
WHat is Old Age, but the receptacle of all Maladies? For if thy Lot be to draw
thy days to a long date, in comes old bald-headed Age, stooping under dot age,
with his wrinkled Face, rotten teeth, and stinking breath, teasty with choler,
withered with dryness, dimmed with blindness, obscured with dea^ness,
overwhelmed with sickness, and bowed together with weakness, having no use of
any Sense but of the Sense of pain; which so racketh every member of his body,
that it never eases him of grief till it has thrown him down to his Grave.

Thus far of the Miseries which accompany the body. Now of the Miseries which
accompany chiefly the Soul in this Life.

Meditations of the Miseries of the Soul in this Life.
THE Misery of thy Soul will more evidently appear, if thou will but consider.

1. The felicity she has lost. 2. The misery which she has pulled upon her
self by sin.
1. The felicity lost, was first the Fruition of the image of God, whereby the
Soul was like unto God in Col. 3. 10.
knowledge, enabling her perfectly to understand Romans 12. 2
the revealed Will of God. Secondly, True holiness, by which she was fre^ from
all profane error. Thirdly, Righteousness, whereby she was able to incline all
her natural powers, and to frame uprightly all her Actions, proceeding from
those powers: With the loss of this Divine Image she lost the love of God, and
the blessed Communion which she had with his Majesty, wherein consists her
life and happiness, if the loss of Earthly Riches vex thee so much, how should
not the loss of this Divine Treasure perplex thee much more;

2. The misery, which she pulled upon her self, consists in two things: 1.
Sinfulness. 2. Cursedness.


1. Sinfulness is an universal corruption, both of Her Nature and Actions: for
Her Epes. 2. 3. Genesis 6 5.
Nature is infected with a proneness to every sin continually, the Romans 12. 2.
Ephesians. 4. 17.
Mind is stuffed with Vanity, the 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Understanding is darkened with Ignorance, the Phil 2. 3.
Will affects nothing but vile and vain things: All Her Romans 3. 12.
Actions ^re evil; yea, this deformity is so violent, that oftentimes in the
regenerate Soul the Appetite will not obey the government of Reason and the
Will wandreth after, and yields consent to sinful motions. How great then is
the violenc^ of the Appetite and Will in the Reprobate Soul, which still
remains in her natural corruption! hence it is, that thy wretched Soul is so
deformed with Sin, defiled with Lust polluted with Filthiness, outraged with
Passions, overcarried with Affections, pining with Envy, overcharged with
Gluttony, surfeited with Drunkenness, boiling with Revenge, transported with
Rage, and the glorious Image of God transformed into the ugly shape of the John
8. 44
Devil, so far as it once Genesis 6. 6.
repented the Lord that he ever made Man.

From the former flows the other part, of the Soul's Miseries, called Deuteronomy. 27.
36
Cursedness whereof there are two degrees. Gal. 3. 10.
Psalm. 119. 21


1. In part. 2. In fullness thereof.
1. Cursedness in part is that which is inflicted upon the Soul in life and
death, and is common to her with the Body.

The Cursedness of the Soul in Life is the wrath of God, which lies upon such
a Creature so far, as that all things, not only Calamities, but also very Romans
2. 4, 5. J^^. 28. 13.
Blessings, and Isa. 28. 13.
Graces, turn to ruin. Genesis 3. 8, 10. and 4 14. Heb. 2. 15.
Terror of Conscience drives him from God and his service, that he dares not
come to his Presence and Ordinances; but is Romans 1. 21, 24, 2^.
given up to the Ephesians. 2. 2. Col. 1. 13.
slavery of Satan, and to his own Lusts, and vile Affections.

This is the Cursedness of the Soul in life; Now follows the Cursedness of the
Soul and Body in Death.

Meditations of the Misery of the Body and Soul in Death.
AFter that the aged man has conflicted with long sickness, and having endured
the brunt of pain, should now expect some ease, in comes Death (nature's
slaughter-man, God's Curse and Hell's Purveyor) and looks the Old Man grim, and
black in the face; and neither pitying his age, nor regarding his long endured
dolours, will not be hired to forbear either for silver or gold; nay, he will
not take, to spare his life, Job 1.
Skin for Skin, and all that the old Man has, but batters all the principal
parts of his Body, and arrests him to appear before the terrible Judge.

And as thinking that the Old man will not dispatch to go with him fast enough,
Lord! how many darts of Calamities does he shoot through him, Stiches, Aches,
Cramps, Fevers, Obstructions, Rheums, Phlegm, Cholick, Stone, Wind, etc.

O what a ghastly sight it is, to see him then in his Bed, when Death has
given him his mortal wound! what a cold sweat over-runs all his body! what a
trembling possesses all his Members! the Head shoots, the Face waxes pale,
the Nose black, the n^ther Jaw Bone hangs down, the Eye-strings break, the
Tongue faltereth, the Breath shortneth and smells earthly, the Thro^t
^a^ti^th, and at every Gasp the Heart Strings are ready to break asunder.

Now the miserable Soul sensibly perceiv^^ her Earthly Body to begin to die;
For ^owards the dissolution of the universal Frame of the great World, the Sun
(...) be turned into Darkness, the Moon into Blood, and the Stars shall fall
from Heaven, the Air shall be full of Storms, and flashing Meteors, the Earth
shall tremble, and the Sea shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail for fear,
expecting the end of such sorrowful beginnings: So toward the dissolution of
Man (which is the little World) his Eyes, which are as the Sun and Moon, lose
their light, and see nothing but blood-guiltiness of Sin: The rest of the
Senses, as lesser Stars, do one after another fail and fall; his Mind, Reason
and Memory, as heavenly powers of his Soul, are shaken with fearful storms of
Despair, and fierce flashing of Hellfire; his earthly body begins to shake
and tremble, and the humors, like an overflowing Sea, roar and rattle in his
Throat, still expecting the woeful End of these dreadful beginnings.

Whilst he is thus summoned to appear at the Great Assizes of God's Judgment^
behold a Quarter Sessions, and Jail-deliver, is held within himself, where
Reason sits as Judge, the Devil puts in a Bill of Indictment, as large as that
Book of Zechary, Zech. 5. 2. Exek. 2. 10.
wherein are alleged all thy evil deeds that ever thou have committed, and all
the good deeds that ever thou have omitted, and all the Curses and Judgments
that are due to every sin. Thine own Conscience shall accuse thee, and thy
Memory shall give bitter Evidence, and Death stands at the Bar ready, as a
cruel Executioner, to dispatch thee. 1 John 3. 20.
If thou shall thus condemn thy self, how shall thou escape the Just
Condemnation of God, who knows all thy misdeeds better than thy self? Fain
would thou put out of thy mind the remembrance of the wicked deeds that
trouble thee: but they flow faster into thy remembrance, and they will not be
put away, but cry unto thee, We are thy works, and we will follow thee: and
whilst thy soul is thus within, out of peace and order, thy Children, Wife, and
Friends, trouble thee as fast, to have thee put thy goods in order; some
crying, some craving, some pitying, some chearing; all like Flesh-Flies,
helping to make thy sorrows more sorrowful. Luke 12. 20.
Now the Devils, who are come from Hell to fetch away thy Soul, begin to appear
to her, and wait, as soon as she comes forth to take her and carry her away.
Stay she would within, but that she feels the body begin by degrees to die, and
ready, like a ruinous House, to fall upon her head. Fearful she is to come
forth, because of those Hell Hounds which wait for her coming. O she that spent
so many days and nights in vain and idle pastimes, would now give the whole
world, if she had it, for one hour. delay, that she might have space to repent,
and reconcile her self unto God. But it cannot be, because her body which
joined with her in the Action of sin is altogether now unfit to join with her
in the exercise of repentance, and repentance must be of the whole Man.

Now she sees that all her pleasures are gone as if they had never been; and
that but only torments remain, which never shall have an end of being. Who can
sufficiently express her remorse for her sins past, her anguish for her present
Misery, and her terror for her torments to come?

In this Extremity she looks every where for help, and finds her self every
way helpless. Prosopop^^i^
Thus in her greatest misery (desirous to hear the least word of comfort) she
directs this, or the like Speech unto her Eyes: O Eyes, who in times past were
so quick-sighted, can ye spy no Comfort, nor any way how I might escape this
dreadful danger? But the Eye-strings are broken, they cannot see the Candle
that burns before them, nor discern whether it be Day or Night.

The Soul (finding no comfort in the Eyes) speaks to the Ears: O Ears, who
were wont to recreate your selves, with hearing new pleasant Discourses, and
Musicks sweetest Harmony, can you hear any news or tidings of the least Comfort
for me? The Ears are either so deaf, that they cannot hear at all, or the sense
of hearing is grown so weak, that it cannot endure to hear his dearest Friends
to speak. And why should those Ears hear any tidings of Joy in Death, who could
never abide to hear the glad tidings of the Gospel in this life? The Ear can
minister no comfort.

Then she intimates her grief unto the Tongue: O Tongue, who wast wont to brag
it out with the bravest, where are now thy big and daring words? now (in my
greatest need) can thou speak nothing in my defense? Can thou neither daunt
these Enemies with threatening words, nor entreat them with fair speeches? Alas,
the Tongue two days ago lay speechless! It cannot in his greatest extremity
either call for a little drink, or desire a Friend to take away with his finger
the phlegm that is ready to choke him.

Finding here no hope of help, she speaks unto the Feet; where are ye, O Feet,
which sometime were so nimble in running, can you carry me no where out of this
dangerous place? the Feet are stone-dead already: if they be not stirred, they
cannot stir.

Then she directs her Speech unto her Hands: O Hands, who have been so often
approved for Manhood, in peace and war, and wherewith I have so often defended
my self, and offended my Foes; never had I more need than now. Death looks me
grim in the face, and kills me: Hellish Fiends wait about my Bed to devour me:
help now, or I perish for ever Alas* the Hands are so weak, and do so tremble,
that they cannot reach to the Mouth a Spoonful of supping to relieve
languishing Nature.

The wretched Soul seeing her self thus desolate and altogether destitute of
friends, help, and comfort, and knowing that within an Hour she must be in
everlasting pains, retires her self to the Heart (which of all Members is
primum vivens, and ultimum moriens) from whence she makes this doleful
lamentation with her self.

O miserable Caitiff that I am! The doleful lamentation of the reprob^te Soul
at the point of death.
How do the sorrows of Death compass me! How do the floods of Belial make me
afraid! Now have indeed the snares both of the first and second death overtaken
me at once. 2 Samuel 22. 5.
O how suddenly has Death stolen upon me with insensible degrees! like the
Sun which the Eye perceives not to move, though it be most swift of motion. How
does Death wreak on me his spite without pity! The God of mercy has utterly
forsaken me; and the Devil, who knows no mercy, waits for to take me. How often
have I been warned of this doleful Day by the faithful Preachers of God's Word,
and I made but a Jest thereat? What profit have I now of all my Pride, fine
House, and brave Apparel? What Is become of the sweet Relish of all my delicious
Fare? all the worldly Goods which I so carefully gathered, would I now give for
a good Conscience, which I so carelessly neglected! and what Joy remains now of
all my former fleshly Pleasures, wherein I placed my chief delight? those
foolish Pleasures were but deceitful Dreams, and now they are past, like
vanishing shadows; but to think of those Eternal Pains, which I must endure for
those short Pleasures, pains me as Hell before I enter into Hell. Yet justly I
confess, as I have deserved, I am served, that being made after God's Image, a
reasonable Soul, able to judge of mine own Estate and having Mercy so often
offered, and I entreated to receive it; I neglected God's Grace, and preferred
the pleasures of sin before the religious care of pleasing God: lewdly spending
my short time, without considering what Accounts I should make at my last end.
And now all the Pleasures of my Life being put together, countervail not the
least part of my present Pains: My Joys were but moment any, and gone before I
could scarce enjoy them: My Miseries are eternal, and never shall know end. O
that I had spent the Hours that I consumed in carding, diceing, playing, and
other vile exercises, in reading the Scriptures, in hearing Sermons, in
receiving the Communion, in weeping for my Sins, in fasting, watching, praying,
and in preparing my Soul, that I might have now departed in the assured hope of
everlasting Salvation! O that I were now to begin my Life again, how would I
contemn the world and the vanities thereof! How religiously, and purely would I
lead my Life! How would I frequent the Church, and sanctify the Lord's Day! If
Satan should offer me all the treasures, pleasures, and promotions of this
world, he should never entice me to forget these Terrors of this last dreadful
Hour. But, O corrupt Carkase and stinking Carrion! How has the Devil deluded
us, and how have we served and deceived each other, and pulled swift Damnation
upon us both! Now is my case more miserable than the Beast that perishes in a
Ditch: For I must go to answer before the Judgment Seat of the righteous Judge
of Heaven and Eart^^ (...) I shall have none to speak for (...) and these
wicked Fiends, who are privy (...) my evil deeds, will accuse me, and I cannot
excuse my self. My own heart already condemns me, I must needs therefore be
dain^ed before his Judgment Seat; and from thence be carried by these Infernal
Fiends, into that horrible Prison of endless torments and utter darkness, where
I shall never more see light, that first most excellent thing that God made. I
who gloried heretofore in being a Libertine, am now enclosed in the very Claws
of Satan, as the trembling Partridge is within the griping talons of the
ravenous Faulcon, Where shall I lodge to night, and who shall be my Companions?
O horror to think! O grief to consider! O cursed be the day wherein I was born,
and let not the day wherein my Mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be the Man
that showed my Father, saying, A Child is born unto thee, and comforted him.
Cursed be that man, because he slew me not. O that my Mother might have been my
Grave, or her Womb a perpetual Conception! How is it that I came forth of the
Womb to endure these hellish sorrows! and that my days should thus end with
eternal shame? Cursed be the day that I was first united to so lewd a body: O
that I had but so much favor, as that I might never see thee more! Our parting
is bitter and doleful, but our meeting again, to receive at that dreadful Day,
the fullness of our deserved vengeance, will be far more terrible and
intolerable. But what mean I thus (by too late lamentation) to seek to prolong
time? My last hour is come, I hear the heart strings break; this filthy house
of Clay falls on my Head, here is neither hope, help, nor place of any longer
abiding. And must I needs be gone? thou filthy Carcass; O filthy Carcass, with
fare ill, fare well, I leave thee. And so all trembling she comes forth; and
forthwith is seized upon by Infernal Fiends, who carry her with a violence,
torrenti simili, to the bottomless Lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
where she is kept as a Prisoner, in torments, till the general Judgment of the
great Day. Rev. 21. 8. Jude 5. 6. 1 Pet. 3. 19.


The loathsome Carcass is afterward laid in the Grave. In which action, for
the most part, the dead bury the dead; that is, they who are dead in sin, bury
them who are dead for sin. And thus the godless and unregenerate worldling, who
made Earth his Paradise, his Belly his God, his Lust his Law; as in his life he
sowed vanity, so he is now dead, and reapeth misery. In his prosperity he
neglected to serve God; in his adversity God refuses to save him: And the
Devil, whom he long served, now at length pays him his wages. Detestable was
his life, damnable his death: The Devil has his Soul, the Grave has his
Carcass; in which Pit of Corruption, Den of Death, and Dungeon of Sorrow, let
us leave the miserable Caitiff, rotting with his Mouth full of Earth, his Belly
full of Worms, and his Carcass full of Stench; expecting a fearful Resurrection
when it shall be reunited with the Soul, that as they sinned together, so they
may be eternally tormented together.

Thus far of the miseries of the Soul and Body in Death, which is but
cursedness in part: Now follows the fullness of cursedness, which is the misery
of the Soul and Body after Death.

Meditations of the misery of man after death, which is the fullness of
Cursedness.
THe fullness of cursedness (when it falls upon a Creature, not able to bear the
brunt thereof) presses him down to that bottomless Luke 8. 28. and 16. 23
deep of the endless 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
wrath of Almighty God; which is called the Mat. 23. 33.
damnation of Hell. This fullness of cursedness is either particular or general.

Particular, is that which in a less measure of fullness lights upon the Luke
16. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Jude ver. 6, 7.
Soul immediately as soon as she is separated from the Body. For, in the very
instant of dissolution, she is in the sight and presence of God. For when she
cease to see with the organ of fleshly eyes, she sees after a spiritual
manner, like Stephen, who Acts 7. 5.
saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand: Or as a Man, who
being born blind, and miraculously restored to his sight should see the Sun,
which he never saw before. And thereby the testimony of her own Conscience,
Christ the righteous Judge, who knows all things, makes her by his
omnipresent Power, to understand the doom and judgment that is due unto her
sins, and what must be her eternal Postquam anima de corpore est egressa,
subito judicium Christi de se latum cognoscit. Aug. l. 1. de anim and ejus
orig. c. 4. Hier. Fp. ad Pannat.
state. And in this manner standing in the sight of Heaven, not fit for her
uncleanness to come into Heaven, she is said to stand before the Throne of God.
And so forthwith she is Anima damnata continuo invaditur a daemonibus, qui
crudelissime eam rapientes ad infernum deducunt. Cyril. Alex. in Orat. de exit.
anim. Matthew. 5. 34. and 23. 21. Luke 12. 20. Luke 16. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 3. 19.
Jude ver. 6. Luke 16. 24
carried by the evil angels, how came to fetch her with violence into Hell,
where she is kept as in a Prison, in everlasting pains and chains, under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day: But not in that extremity of
torments which she shall finally receive at the last Day.

The general fullness of cursedness is in a 2 Pet. 2. 9. Jude ver. 7. Rev. 11.
18.
greater measure of fullness, which shall be inflicted upon both thy Joh. 5. 28,
29. Rev. 20. 13.
soul and body, when (by the mighty power of Christ the supreme Judge of heaven
and earth) the one shall be brought out of Hell, and the other out of the
Grave, as Prisoners to receive their dreadful doom, according to their evil
deeds. How shall the reprobate by the roaring of the Sea, the quaking of the
earth, the trembling of the Mat. 24. 29. Luke 21. 24, 25.
Powers of heaven, and terrors of heavenly signs, be driven at the worlds end,
to their wits end! Oh, what a woeful salutation will there be, betwixt the
damned Soul and Body, at their re-uniting at that terrible Day!

O sink of Sin, O lump of Filthiness, (will the Soul say unto her Body) how am
I compelled to re-enter into thee, not as into an habitation to rest, but as a
Prison to be tormented together! The damn^ Soal^ apostrophe to the Body at
their second meeting.
how do thou appear in my sight like Jephthah's Daughter to my greater
torment! Would GOD thou had perpetually rotted in the grave, that I might
never have seen thee again! How shall we be confounded together, to hear before
God, Angels, and Men, laid open all those secret sins, which we committed
together! Have I lost Heaven for the love of such a stinking Carrion? Art thou
the flesh, for whose pleasures I have yielded to commit so many fornications? O
filthy Belly, how became I such a Fool as to make thee my God! How mad was I
for momentany joys, to incur these torments of eternal pains! Ye rocks and
mountains, why skip ye so like rams, Psalm 144. 4. and will not fall upon me,
to hide me from the face of him that comes to sit on yonder throne; for the
great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6. 16, 17.
Why tremblest thou thus, Earth, at the presence of the Lord, and wilt not open
thy Mouth and swallow me up, as thou did Korah, that I be seen no more?

O damned furies! I would ye might without delay tear me in pieces, on
condition that you would tear me into nothing! But whilst thou art thus in vain
bewailing thy misery, the Angels hale thee violently away from the brink of the
Grave, to some place near the Tribunal Seat of Christ, Man 13. 41.
where being as a cursed Goat separated to stand beneath on Earth, as on Mat.
25. 33.
the left hand of the Judge; Christ shall rip up all the benefits he bestowed
on thee, and the torments he suffered for thee, and all the good deeds which
thou have omitted, and all the ungrateful villainies which thou did commit
against him and his holy Laws.

Within thee, thine own Conscience (more than a Thousand Witnesses) shall
accuse thee; the Devils who tempted thee to all thy lewdness, shall on the one
side testify with thy Conscience against thee; and on the other side, shall
stand the holy Saints and Angels, approving Christ's Justice, and detesting so
filthy a Creature; behind thee an hideous noise of innumerable fellow-damned
Reprobates tarrying for thy company. Before thee Ansel. Militat.
all the World burning in flaming fire; above thee an ireful Judge of deserved
Vengeance, ready to pronounce his Sentence upon thee; beneath thee, the fiery
and sulphurous mouth of the bottomless pit, gaping to receive thee. In this
woeful estate, to hide thy self will be impossible; (for on that condition, thou
would wish that the greatest Rock might fall upon thee) to appear will be
intolerable, and yet thou must stand forth, to receive, with other Reprobates,
this thy Sentence, Rev. 6. 16, 17. Bonavent. Postil. Dom. ^. post Pent. Sermon. 2.
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels.

Depart from me] There is a separation from all joy and happiness.

Ye cursed] There is a black and direful Excommunication.

Into fire] There is the cruelty of Fain.

Everlasting] There is the perpetuity of punishment.

Prepared for the Devil and his Angels.] Here are thy infernal tormenting and
tormented Companions.

O terrible Sentence! from which the condemned cannot escape; which being
pronounced, cannot possibly be withstood: against which a Man cannot except,
and from which a Man can no where appeal: so that to the damned nothing remains
but hellish torments, which know neither ease of pain, nor end of time. From
this Judgment Seat thou must be thrust by Angels (together with all the damned
Devils and Rev. 21. 8.
Reprobates) into the bottomless lake of utter darkness, that perpetually
burns with fire and brimstone. Whereunto as thou shall be thrust, there shall
be such weeping woes and wailing, that the cry of the company of Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, when the earth swallowed them up, was nothing comparable to this
howling; nay, it will seem unto thee an Hell before thou go into Hell, but
to hear it. Into which bottomless lake after that thou art once plunged, thou
shall ever be falling down, and never meet a bottom; and in it thou shall ever
lament, and none shall pity thee; thou shall always weep for pain of the Fire,
and yet gnash thy Teeth, for the extremity of Cold; thou shall weep to think
that thy miseries are past remedy: thou shall weep to think, that to repent is
to no purpose: thou shall weep to think, how for the shadows of short pleasures
thou have incurred these sorrows of eternal pains: thou shall weep to see how
that weeping it self can nothing prevail; yea, Bonavent.
in weeping, thou shall weep more tears than there is water in the Sea, for the
water of the Sea is finite, but the weeping of a Reprobate shall be infinite.

There thy lascivious Eyes shall be afflicted with sights of ghastly Spirits,
thy curious Ears shall be affrighted with hideous noise of howling Devils, and
the gnashing Teeth of damned Reprobates; thy dainty Nose shall be cloyed with
noisome stench of Sulphur; thy delicate Taste shall be pined with intolerable
hunger; thy drunken Throat shall be parched with unquenchable thirst; thy Mind
shall be tormented to think how for the love of abortive pleasures, which
perished ere they budded, thou so foolishly lost Heaven's Joys, and incurredst
Hellish Pains, which last beyond Eternity. Thy Conscience shall ever sting thee
like an Adder, when thou think how often Christ by his Preachers offered the
Remission of Sins, and the Kingdom of Heaven freely unto thee, if thou would
but Believe and Repent; and how easily thou might have obtained mercy in
those days; how near thou wast many times to have repented, and yet did
suffer the Devil and the World to keep thee still in impenitency, and how the
day of mercy is now past, and will never dawn again.

How shall thy understanding be racked to consider, how for momentany Riches
thou have lost eternal Treasure, and changed Heaven's felicity for Hell's
misery; where every part of thy Body, without intermission of pain, shall be
continually tormented alike!

In these Hellish Torments, thou shall be for ever deprived of the beatifical
sight of GOD, wherein consists the sovereign good and life of the Soul. Thou
shall never see Light, nor the least sight of Joy, but lie in a perpetual
Prison of utter Darkness, where shall be no Order, but Horror; no Voice, but
of Blasphemers and Howlers; no Noise but of Torturers and tortured; no Society,
but of the Devil and his Angels, who being tormented themselves, shall have no
other ease, but to wreak their Fury in tormenting thee: Where shall be
punishment without Pity; misery, without mercy; sorrow, without succor;
crying, without comfort; mischief, without measure; torment, without ease;
where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is never quenched; where the Wrath of
God shall seize upon the Soul and Body, Matthew. 9.
as the flame of fire does on the lump of Pitch or Brimstone. In which flame
thou shall ever be burning, and never consumed; ever dying, and never dead;
ever roaring in the pangs of Death, and never rid of those pangs, nor knowing
end of thy pains. So that after thou have endured them so many thousand years
as there are Grass on the Earth, or Sands on the Seashore, thou art no nearer
to have an end of thy torments, than thou wast the first day that thou wast
cast into them; yea, so far are they from ending, that they are ever but
beginning. But if after a thousand times so many thousand years, thy damned
Soul could but conceive a hope that those her torments should have an end, this
would be some Comfort, to think that at length an end will come: But as often as
the Mind thinks of this word Never, it is as another Hell in the midst of
Hell.

This thought shall force the damned to cry (...), as much as if they should
say (...), O Lord, not ever, not ever, torment us thus. But their Consciences
shall answer them as an Echo, (...), ever, ever. Hence shall arise their
doleful (...), woe and alas for evermore.

This is that second Death, the general perfect fullness of all cursedness, and
misery, which every damned Reprobate must suffer, so long as GOD and his Saints
shall enjoy bliss and felicity in Heaven for evermore.

Thus far of the misery of Man in his state of corruption, unless he be renewed
by Grace in Christ.

Now follows the knowledge of Man's self, in respect of his state of
Regeneration by Christ.

Meditations of the State of a Christian reconciled to God in Christ.
NOw let us see how happy a Godly man is in his state of renovation, being
reconciled to God in Christ.

The godly Man, whose corrupt Nature is renewed by grace in Christ, and become
a new creature, is blessed in a threefold respect. First, in his Life.
Secondly, in his Death. Thirdly, after Death.

1. His blessedness during his Life is but in part, and that consists in seven
things.

1. Because he is conceived of the John 3. 5.
Spirit in the womb of his Mother the Church, and is Joh 1. 1.
born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God, who in Christ is his Gal. 4. 6, 7. 2 Cor. 9. 8.
Father. So that the Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 13.
Image of God his Father is renewed in him every day more and more.

2. He has, Col. 3. 10.
for the Merits of Christ's Sufferings, all his sins, original and actual, with
the guilt and punishment belonging to Romans 4. 8, 25.
them, Romans 8. 1, 2.
freely and fully forgiven unto him. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
And all the Romans 4. 5, 19.
righteousness of Christ as freely and fully imputed unto him: and so 2 Cor. 5
19.
God is reconciled unto him, and Romans 8. 23. 24.
approves him as righteous in his sight and account.

3. He is freed from Satan's Acts 16. 18. Ephesians. 2. 2.
bondage; and ^s made a John 20. 17.
brother of Christ, a Romans 8. 20.
fellow-heir of his Heavenly Kingdom, Romans 8. 17.
and a Rev. 1. 6.
spiritual King and Priest, to offer up 1 Pet. 2. 5. Mal. 3. 17.
spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ.

4. God spares him as a Man spares his own Son that serves him. And this
sparing consists, In
1. Not taking notice of every fault, but bearing with his infirmities, Exodus
34. Verse 6, 7. A loving Father will not cast his Child out of doors in his
Sickness. 2. No^ making his punishment when he is chastned, as great as his
deserts, Psalm. 103. 10. 3. Chastning him moderately, when he sees that he will
not by any other means be reclaimed, 2 Samuel 7. Verse 14, 15. 1 Cor. 11. 32.
4. Graciously accepting his Endeavors, notwithstanding the imperfection of his
obedience, and so preferring the willingness of his mind before the worthiness
of his work, 2 Cor. 8. 12. 5. Turning the curses which he deserved, to crosses
and fartherly corrections; yea, all Romans 8. 28.
things, all Psalm. 89. 31, 33.
calamities of this life, Psalm 119. 71. Heb. 12. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
1 Cor 15. 54, 55,
Death it self, Heb. 2. 14, 15
yea, his Luke 22. 31, 32.
very sins unto his good. Ps. 51 13, 14. Romans 5. 20, 21.



5. God gives him his Holy Spirit.

which
1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
Sanctifies him by Degrees throughout; Romans 8. 5, 10.
so that he does more and more die to sin, and live to righteousness. 2.
Assures him of his Romans 8. 16
Adoption and that he is by Grace the Child of God. 3. Encourages him to come
with Heb. 4. 16.
boldness and confidence into the presence of God. Ephesians. 3. 12.
4. Moves him without fear to say unto him, Gal. 4. 6.
Abba Father. Romans 8. 15, 16.
5. Pours into his heart the gift of sanctified Prayer. 6. Persuades him,
that both he and his Prayers are accepted and heard of God for Christ his
Mediator's sake. 7. Fills him with 1. Romans 5. 1, and 14. 17.
Peace of Conscience. 2. Romans 14. 17.
Joy in the holy Ghost, in comparison whereof all earthly joys seem vile and
vain unto him.

6. He has a recovery of his Psalm. 8. 5. etc.
sovereignty over the creatures, Heb. 2. 7, 8.
which he lost by Adam's fall: and from thence Romans 14. 14.
free liberty of 1 Timothy 4. 2, etc.
using all things which God has not 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20.
restrained, so that he may use them with a good 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. Heb. 1. 7.
conscience. For to all things in Heaven and Earth he has a sure 1 Cor. 3. 22.
title in this life; and he shall have the Plenary and peaceable Mat. 25. 34
possession of them in the life to come. Hence it is that all Reprobates are
but usurpers of all that they possess, and have no Pet. 1. 4. Act. 1. 25
place of their own but Hell.

7. He has the assurance of God's Fatherly care and protection day and night
over him; which care consists in three things:

1. In Mat. 6. 32.
providing all things necessary for his Soul and Body concerning this life, 2
Cor. 12. 14.
and that which is to come; Psalm 23.
so that he shall be sure ever, Psalm. 34* 9, 10.
either to have enough, or patience to be content with that he has. 2. In that
God gives his Holy Angels as Heb. 1. 14.
Ministers a charge to attend upon him always for his good; Psalm. 34. 7.
yea, Psalm. 91. 11.
in danger, to pitch their Tents about him for his safety, where ever he be:
Yea, GOD's Protection shall defend him as a Isa. 4. 5.
cloud by day, and as a pillar of fire by night: and his providence Job 1. 10.
shall hedge him, from the power of the Devil. 3. In that Psalm. 34. 15.
the eyes of the Lord are upon him, Genesis 7. 1.
and his ears continually open, to see his state, and to hear his complaint;
and in his good time Psalm. 34. 19*
to deliver him out of all his troubles.
Thus far of the blessed Estate of the Godly and Regenerate Man in this life.
Now of his blessed Estate in Death.

2. Meditations of the blessed Estate of a Regenerate Man in his Death.
WHen GOD sends Death as his Messenger, for the Regenerate Man, he meets him
half the way to Heaven, for his Phil. 3. 20.
conversation, and Col. 3. 2.
affection is there before him, Death is neither strange nor fearful unto him.
Not strange, because he 1 Cor. 1. 31.
died daily; not fearful because whilst he lived, he was dead; and his life was
Col. 3. 3.
hid with God in Christ. To die, unto him therefore, is nothing else in effect,
but Rev. 14. 13
to rest from his labor in this world, to go 2 Cor. 5. 6.
home to his Joh. 14. 2.
Father's house, unto the Heb. 12. 22, etc.
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, to God the Judge
of all, and to the spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the New Covenant. Whilst his body is sick, his mind is sound; for God Psalm.
41. 3.
makes all his bed in his sickness, and strengthens him with Faith and
Patience upon his bed of sorrow: And when he begins to enter into the way of
all the World, he gives (like Genesis 49.
Jacob, Moses, and Joshua) to his Children and Friends godly Exhortations and
Counsels to serve the true God, to worship him truly all the days of their
life. His blessed Soul breaths nothing but blessings, and such speeches as
savor a sanctified spirit. As his outward man decays, so his inward man
increases and waxes stronger. When the speech of his Tongue faltereth, the
sighs of his heart speak louder unto God; when the sight of the eyes fails,
the Holy Ghost illuminates him inwardly with abundance of spiritual light. His
Soul fears not, 2 Cor. 5. 8.
but is bold to go out of the Body, and to dwell with her Lord. He sigheth out
with Paul, Phil. 1. 23.
Cupio dissolvi, I desire to to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And with
David, Psalm. 42. 2.
As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God? when shall I come and
appear before God. He prays with the Saints, Rev. 6. 10.
How long, O Lord, which art holy and true? Rev. 22. 10.
Come Lord JESUS, come quickly. And when the Job 14. 5.
appointed time of his dissolution is come, knowing that he goes to his Ps.
31. 5.
Father and redeemer in the peace of a good Conscience, and the assured
persuasion of the forgiveness of all his sins, in the blood of the Lamb, he
sings with blessed old Simeon his Luke 2. 29. Ps. 37. 37. Isa. 57. 2.
Nunc dimittis; Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. And
surrenders up his Soul, as it were with his own hands, into the hands of his
heavenly Father, saying, with David, Psalm. 31. 5.
Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my Soul, for thou have redeemed me O Lord,
thou God of truth. And saying with Stephen, Acts 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. He no sooner yields up his sacred Ghost, but
immediately the Mat 18. 10. Act. 12. 15. and 27. 23.
holy Angels, who attended upon him from his Birth, unto his Death, Luke 16. 22.
carry and accompany his Soul into Heaven, as they did the Soul of Lazarus into
Abraham's bosom, which is the Mat. 8. 11. Luke 12. 28. Acts 15. 10, 11. Ephesians. 1.
10. Heb. 11. 9. 10. 16. and 12. 22, 23. Luke 19. 9. and 9. 31.
Kingdom of Heaven, whither only good Angels and good works do accompany the
Soul; the one to deliver their Ps. 91. 11. Heb. 1. 14.
charge, the other to receive their Rev. 14. 13. and 22. 12.
reward.

The Body in convenient time, as the sanctified 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Temple of the Holy Ghost, the 1 Cor. 6. 15.
Members of Christ, nourished by his Mat. 26. 26.
Body, the 1 Cor. 6. 20.
price of the blood of the Son of God, 1 Pet. 1. 19*
is by his fellow Brethren reverently laid to 1 These 4. 14. Acts 7. 6. and 8. 2.
sleep in his grave, as in the Bed of Christ, in an assured hope to Dan. 12. 2 John 5. 28, 29. Luke 14 14. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. Rev. 14. 13.
awake in the Resurrection of the Just, at the last Day, to be partaker with
the Soul of life and glory everlasting. And in this respect not only the Souls,
but the very Bodies of the Faithful also are termed blessed.

Thus far of the Blessedness of the Soul and Body of the regenerate Man in
death. Now let us see the Blessedness of his Soul and Body after death.

3. Meditations of the Blessed Estate of the Regenerate Man after Death.
THis Estate has Three Degrees.

1. From the Day of Death to the Resurrection.

2. From the Resurrection to the pronouncing of the Sentence.

3. After the Sentence which lasts eternally.

As soon as ever the regenerate Man has yielded up his Soul unto Christ, the
holy Angels take her into their Custody, and immediately Luke 16. 2.
carry her into Heaven, and there present her Heb. 1. 14 and 12. 24
before Christ, where she is crowned with a 2 Timothy 4. 8 Rev. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
Crown of Righteousness and Glory; not which she has deserved by her good
works, but which God has promised of his free goodness to all those who of
love have in this life unfeignedly served him, and sought his glory.

Oh, what joy will it be to thy Soul! which was wont to see nothing but misery
and sinners, now to behold the face of the God of glory; yea, to see Christ
welcoming thee, as soon as thou art presented before him by the holy Angels,
with an Euge, bone serve! well done, and welcome, good and faithful servant,
etc. enter into thy Master's joy. Col. 1. 6.
And what joy will this be, Ephesians. 1. 22.
to behold thousand thousands of Cherubims, Seraphims, Angels, Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, Powers? All the holy Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all the Souls of thy Friends, Parents,
Husbands, Wives, Children, and the rest of God's Saints, who departed before
thee in the true Faith of Christ, standing before God's Throne in bliss and
glory? If the Queen of Sheba beholding the glory and attendance given to
Solomon, as it were ravished therewith, brake out and said; 1 King. 10. 8.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand ever before thee
and hear thy wisdom! How shall thy soul be ravished to see her self by grace
admitted to stand with this glorious Company! to behold the Blessed face of
Christ, and to hear all the Treasures of his Divine Wisdom! How shall thou
rejoice to see so many thousand thousands welcoming thee into their Heavenly
Society! for as they all rejoiced at thy Conversion, Luke 15.
so will they now be much more joyful to behold thy Coronation: and to see thee
receive thy Crown, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
which was laid up for thee against thy coming. For there the Crown of
martyrdom shall be put on the head of a Martyr, who for Christ's Gospel-sake
endured Torments; the Crown of Virginity on the head of a Virgin, who subdued
concupiscence; the Crown of Piety and Chastity on the head of them, who
sincerely professed Christ, and kept their wedlock-bed undefiled; the Crown of
good works on the good Alms-giver's head, who liberally relieved the Poor; the
Crown of incorruptible glory on the head of those Pastors, who by their
preaching and good example, have converted Souls from the corruption of sin, to
glorify God in holiness of life. Who can sufficiently express the rejoicing of
this heavenly company, Rev. 7. 9.
to see thee thus crowned with glory, arraied with the shining robe of
righteousness, and to behold the Palm of Victory put into thy hand? Oh, what
gratulation will there be, that thou have escaped all the miseries of the
World, the snares of the Devil, the pains of Hell, and obtained with them thy
eternal rest and happiness? For there every one joyeth as much in another's
happiness, as in his own, because he shall see him as much loved of God as
himself. Yea, they have as many distinct joys, as they have copartners of
their joy. And in this joyful and blessed state, the Soul rests with Christ
in Heaven, Rev. 7. 9.
till the Resurrection; when as the number of her fellow servants and brethren
be fulfilled, which the Lord terms but a little season.

The second degree of Man's Blessedness after Death, is from the Resurrection
to the pronouncing of the final Sentence. For at the last day,

1. The Elementary Heavens, Earth, and all things therein, shall be 2 Pet. 3.
10, 12, 13.
dissolved, and purified with Fire.

2. At the 1 Cor. 15. 52.
sound of the last Trumpet, or voice of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
the Archangel, the very same Bodies, Joh. 5. 28.
which the Elect had before (though turned to Dust and Earth) shall arise
again. And in the same instant, Ezekiel. 37. 7, 8, etc.
every Man's Soul shall re-enter into his own Body by virtue of the Romans 8. 11.
Phil. 3. 10, 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
resurrection of Christ their Head, and be Romans 5. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Mat. 19.
30. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
made alive, and rise out of their Graves, as if they did but awake out of
their beds; and howsoever Tyran's be mangled their Bodies in pieces, or
consumed them to ashes, yet shall the Elect find it true at that day, that not
an hair of their head is perished.

3. They shall come forth out of their Graves, Dan. 6. 23. Par est potestas Dei
ad instituendos, and restituendos homines. Athenagor.
like so many Joseph's out of Prison, or Daniels out of the Lion's Den, or
Jonahs out of the Whale's Belly.

4. All the Bodies of the Elect being thus made alive, shall arise in that Isa,
65. 20.
perfection of Nature, whereunto they should have attained by their natural
temperament, if no impediment had hindered; and in that vigor of age, that a
perfect Man is at about 33 years old, each in their Tertul. de Resurrect. c. 6.
Hier. Epist. 27 and 61. Aug. lib. 12. de civit. Dei, cap. 17. and omnes
Theologi in 4 Sent. did. 1. 44.
proper sex. Whereunto Divines think the Apostle alludeth, when he says, Ephesians.
4. 13. Ita communiter credunt Theologi in 4. Sent. did. 44. Vide Aug. de
Civit. Dei lib. 22. c. 15. and 16.
Till we all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age (or stature)
of the fullness of Christ. Whatsoever imperfection was before in the Body, (as
blindness, lameness, crookedness) shall then be done away. Jacob shall not
halt, nor Isaac be blind, nor Leah bleer-ey'd, nor Mephibosheth be lame; for if
David would not have the blind and lame to come into his House, much less will
Christ have blindness and lameness to dwell in his heavenly Habitation. Christ
made all the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the lame to
walk, etc. that came to him to seek his grace on Earth: much more will he heal
all their imperfections, whom he will admit to his glory in Heaven. Psalm. 105.
37.
Among those Tribes, there is not one feeble, Isa. 35. 6.
but the lame man shall leap as an Heart, and the dumb man's tongue shall sing:
And it is very probable, that seeing God Created our first Parents, not
Infants, or old Men, but of a perfect age or stature: the (...), or new
Creation from Death, shall every where be more perfect than the (...), or first
frame of Man, from which he fell into the state of the dead. Neither is it like
that infancy, being imperfection, and old age corruption, can well stand with
the state of a perfect glorified Body.

5. The Bodies of the Elect being thus raised, shall have four most excellent
and supernatural qualities: For, 1. They shall be raised in Power, 1 Cor. 15.
43.
whereby they shall for ever be freed from all wants and weaknesses, and
enabled to continue without the use of Meat, Drink, Sleep, and other former
helps. 2. In Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 41. Isa. 65. 20. Aug. Ench. cap. 90.
whereby they shall never be subject to any manner of Imperfections, Blemish,
Sickness, or Death. 3. In Mat. 13. 43.
Glory, Luke 9. 31.
whereby their Bodies shall shine as bright as the Sun in the Firmament, and
which being made transparent, their Souls shall shine through, far more
glorious than their Bodies. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
Three glimpses of which Glory were seen: First, In Exodus 34. 29
Moses's Face: Secondly, In the Mat. 17. 2.
Transfiguration: Thirdly, In Stephen's Act. 6. 15.
Countenance. Three Instances and Assurances of the glorification of our Bodies
at that glorious Day. Then shall David lay aside his Shepherd's Weed, 1 Samuel
18. 4.
and put on the Robe of the King's Son Jesus, not Jonathan's. Then every true
Mordecai, (who mourned under the Sackeloth of this corrupt Flesh) shall be
arrayed with the King's Royal Apparel, Hest. 6. 4.
and have the Crown Royal set upon his Head, that all the World may see how it
shall be done to him whom the King of Kings delights to honor. If now the
rising of one Sun makes the morning so glorious; how glorious shall that Day be
when innumerable Millions of Millions of Bodies of Saints and Angels shall
appear more glorious than the brightness of the Sun! the Body of Christ in
glory surpassing all. 4. In Ubi volet spiritus, ibi ^rit and corpus. August.
Agility, whereby our bodies shall be able to ascend and meet the Lord at his
glorious coming in the Air, as Eagles flying unto their Blessed Carcass. Mat.
24. 28.
To this Agility of the Saints glorious Bodies, the Prophet alludes, saying,
Isa. 40. 31.
They shall renew their strength: They shall mount up with wings as Eagles:
They shall run and not be weary: They shall walk and not faint. And to this
state may that saying of Wisdom be referred; Wisd. 3. 7.
In the time of their Vision, they shall shine, and run to and fro, as sparks
amongst the stubble. And in respect of these four Qualities, 1 Cor. 15. 46.
Spiritualia post resurrectionem erunt corpora, non quia corpora esse desistant,
sed quia spiritu vivificante subsistunt. Aug. lib. 13. de civit. Dei cap. 22.
Psalm. 8. 5.
Paul calls the raised bodies of the Elect, Spiritual; for they shall be
spiritual in qualities, but the same still in substance.


And howsoever sin and corruption make a Man in this state of Mortality lower
than Angels; yet surely when God shall thus crown him with glory and honor, I
cannot see how Man shall be any thing inferior to Angels: For, are they
Spirits? so is Man also in respect of his Soul; yea more than this; they shall
have also a spiritual body, Phil. 3. 21.
fashioned like unto the glorious body of the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom Man's
Nature is exalted by a personal Union, into the Glory of the Godhead, Heb. 2.
16.
and individual Society of the Blessed Trinity; an Honor which he never
vouchsafed Angels. And in this respect Man has a Prerogative above them* Nay,
Heb. 1. 14.
they are but Spirits appointed to be Ministers unto the Elect: Psalm. 91. 11.
and as many of them, who at the first disdained this Office, and would not
keep their Jude ver. 6.
first standing, were for their pride 2 Pet. 2. 4.
hurried into Hell. This lesseneth not the Dignity of Angels, but extols the
greatness of God's love to Mankind.

But as for all the Elect, who at that second and sudden coming of Christ,
shall be found quick and living, the 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12.
fire that shall burn up the corruption of the world, and the works therein,
shall in a 1 Cor. 15. 51.
moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, overtake them, as it Luke 17. 31.
finds them, either grinding, in the Mill of Provision, or walking in the
Fields of pleasure, or lying in the bed of ease; and so (burning up their dross
and corruption) of Mortal make them Immortal Bodies: and this change shall be
unto them instead of Death.

Then shall the Soul with joyfulness greet her Body, The Elect Souls apostrophe
to the Body, at their first meeting in the Resurrection. Cant. 2* 14.
saying, O well met again my dear Sister. How sweet is thy Voice! How comely is
thy countenance having lain hid so long in the Clefts of the Rocks, and in the
secret places of the grave! thou art indeed an habitation fit, not only for me
to dwell in, but such as the H. Ghost thinks meet to reside in, as his Temple
for ever. The Winter of our affliction is now past; the storm of our misery is
blown over and gone. The Bodies of our Elect Brethren appear more glorious than
the Lily-flowers on the Earth: the time of singing Hallelujahs is come, and the
voice of the Trumpet is heard in the Land. Thou have been my Yoke Fellow in the
Lord's labors, and companion in persecutions and wrongs for Christ and his
Gospel sake; now shall we enter together into our Master's Joy. As thou have
born with me the Cross, so shall thou now wear with me the Crown. As thou have
with me sowed plenteously in tears, so shall thou reap with me abundantly in
joy. O blessed, ay blessed be that God! who (when yonder Reprobates spent their
whole time in Pride, fleshly Lusts, eating, drinking, and profane Vanities)
gave us grace to join together in watching, fasting, praying, reading the
Scriptures, keeping his Sabbaths, hearing Sermons, receiving the holy
Communion, relieving the Poor, exercising (in all humility) the works of Piety
to God, and walking conscionably in the Duties of our calling toward Men. Thou
shall anon hear no mention of thy sins, for they are remitted and covered, but
every good work, Psalm 32. 1.
which thou have done for the Lord's sake, shall be rehearsed, and rewarded.

Cheer up thy heart, for thy Judge is flesh of thy flesh, Dan. 9. 21, etc.
and bone of thy bone. Lift up thy head, behold these glorious Angels, like so
many Gabriels flying toward us, Luke 21. 28.
to tell us, That the day of our Redemption is come, and to convey us in the
Clouds, to meet our Redeemer in the Air. Lo, Cant. 2. 1, 3. Verse 17.
they are at hand: Arise therefore, my Dove, my Love, my fair One, and come
away. And so like Roes or young Hearts, they run with Angels toward Christ over
the trembling Mountains of Bether.

6. Both quick and dead being thus revived and glo^^fied, shall forthwith (by
the ministry of God's holy Angels) be gathered from all the quarters and parts
of the world, Luke 17. 34, 35, 36. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
and caught up together in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
shall come with him, as a part of his glorious Train, to judge the Reprobates
and evil Angels. 1 Cor. 6. 1, 3.
The twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones (next Christ) to judge the
twelve Tribes, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.
(who refused to hear the Gospel preached by their Ministry) and all the Saints
(in^ honor and order) shall stand next unto them, as Judges also, to judge the
evil Angels and earthly-minded Men. And as every of them received grace in this
life, to be more zealous of his glory, and more faithful in his service than
others: Rev. 22. 12. 2 Cor. 9. 6.
so shall their glory and reward be greater than others in that Day.

The place whither they shall be gathered unto Christ, and where Christ shall
sit in judgment, shall be in the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
Air over the Valley of Jehoshaphat, by Mount Olivet, near unto Jerusalem,
Eastward from the Temple as it is probable for four reasons.

1. Because the holy Scripture see^s to intimate so much in plain words, Joel
3. 1, 2.
I wi^ gather all Nations into the valley of Jehosha^phat, and plead with them
there. Ver. 11, 12.
Cause thy mighty one to come down, O Lord, let the heathen be wakened, and
come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge a^ the
heathen round about. Jehoshaphat signifies, the Lord will judge. And this
Valley was so called, from the great 2 Chronicles* 30*
victory which the Lord gave Near this Valley was Mount Moriah, where Abraham
sacrificed Isaac, Genesis 22. Jacob saw Angels ascending and descending on a
ladder, Genesis ^. The Angel put up his Sword, and fire from Heaven burnt the
sacrifice in Araunah 's flo^r, 2 Samuel 24. Solomon builded the Temple. 2 Chro.
3. 1. Christ preached the Gospel* sa^^ere^ his p^^^^on and (...) into his g^^
(...) in Genesis ^^.
Jehoshaphat, and his people over the Ammonites, Moabites, and inhabitants of
Mount Seir. Which victory was a type of the final victory, which Christ, ^he
supreme Judge shall give his Elect over ^ll their enemies in that place, at the
last ^ay, as all the Jews interpret it. See Zech. ^. 4, 5. Psalm 51. 1, 2, etc.
all agreeing ^^at the place shall be thereabouts.

2. Because that as Christ was therea^^uts crucified, and put to open shame; ^^
over that place his glorious Throne should be erected in the Air, when he ^^all
appear in Judgment, to manifest his Majesty and Glory. For it is meet that ^^st
should in that place judge the ^orld with righteous Judgment, where ^ himself
was unjustly judged and con^mned.

3. Because that seeing the Angels shall ^ sent to gather together the elect
from the ^^^r winds, from one end of heaven to the other; it is most probable,
that the place whither they shall be gathered to, shall be near Jerusalem, and
the Valley of Jehoshaphat; which The Sea beyond Jordan toward Tyrus cutteth the
midst of the World. And Ez^e^. says of Jerusalem, In medio gentium posui eam,
That from Si^n, as from a Cent^r, the Law should be published to all Nations,
and there all Nations shall be judged according to the Law. Romans 2. 12.
Cosmographers describe to be in the midst of the supersicies of the Earth; if
the termini a quibus be the four parts of the world, the terminus ad quem must
be about the Center.

4. Because the Angels told the Disciples, that as they saw ^cts 1. 11.
Christ ascend from Mount Olivet, which is over the Valley of Jehoshaphat, so he
shall in like manner come down from Heaven. This is the opinion of Richard. de
Villa nova Tho^ (...) 47, 48.
Aquinas and all the Schoolmen, except Lombard and Alexander Hales.

5. Lastly, When Christ is set in his glorious (...)
Throne, and all the (...)
many Thousands of his Saints, and Angels, shining more bright than so many
Suns in glory, sitting about him; and the Body of Christ in glory and
brightness surpassing them all: the Reprobates being separate and remaining
beneath upon the earth (for the right hand signifies a blessed, the left hand a
cursed estate) Christ will first pronounce the sentence of absolution, and
bliss upon the Elect: First, because he will thereby increase the grief of the
Reprobate that shall hear it. Secondly, to show himself more pro^e to (...) 28.
21.
mercy than to Judgment. And thus from his Throne of Majesty in the Air, he
shall (in the sight and hearing of all the World) p^onounce unto his Elect,
Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world, etc. Ad (...) tardus Deus est, ad praemia v^lox. Mat.
25. 34.


Come ye] Here is our blessed Union with Christ, and by him with the whole
Trinity

Blessed] Here is our absolution from all sins, and our plenary Endowments with
all Grace and Happiness.

Of my Father] Here is the Author, from whom by Christ proceeds our Felicity.

Inherit] Here is our Adoption*

The Kingdom] Behold our Birthright and Possession.

Prepared] See God's Fatherly Care for his chosen.

From the foundation of the World] O the free, Eternal, unchangeable Election
of God!

How much are those Souls bound to love God, who of his mere good Will and
Pleasure, chose and loved them, Romans 9. 3.
before they had done either good or evil?

For I was hungry, etc.] O the goodness of Christ, who takes notice of all the
good works of his Children to reward them! How great is his love to poor
Christians, who takes every work of mercy done to them for his sake, as if it
had been done to himself: Come ye to me, in whom ye have believed, before ye
saw me, J^h. 20. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
and whom ye have loved and sought for with so much devotion, and through so
many tribulations: Come now, from labor to rest, from disgrace to glory, from
the jaws of Death, to the joys of eternal Life; For my sake ye have been railed
upon, Mat. 5. 11.
reviled and cursed. But now it shall appear to all those cursed Esau's, that
you are the ^rue Jacobs, that shall receive your heavenly Father's blessing;
and blessed shall you be. Your fathers, mothers, and nearest kindred forsook
and cast you off, Psalm. 27. 10.
for my truth's sake, Mat. 19. 29.
which you maintained; but now my Father will be unto you a Father, Joh. 20. 17.
and you shall be his Sons and Daughters for ever. 2 Cor. 6. 18.
You were cast out of your lands and livings, and forsook all for my sake and
the gospels; but that it may appear that you have no^ lost your gain, but
gained by your loss, instead of an earthly inheritance and possession, you
shall poss^ss with me the i^heritance of my heavenly kingdom; where you shall
be for love, sons; for birthright, heirs; for dignity, kings; for holiness,
priests; and you may be bold to enter into the possession thereof now, because
my Father prepared and kept it for you ever since the first foundation of the
World was laid.

Immediately after this sentence of Absolution and Benediction, every one
receives his crown, which Christ the righteous Judge pu^s upon their Heads, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
as the reward which he has promised of his Grace and Mercy, ^ Pet* 5. 4.
unto the Faith and good Works of all them that loved that his appearing. Rev.
4. 10.
Then every one taking his crown from his head, shall lay it down (as it were)
at the feet of Christ; and prostrating themselves, shall with one heart and
voice, in an heavenly sort and consort say, Praise and Honor, and Glory, and
Power, and Thanks be unto thee, O blessed Lamb, who sit upon the Throne,
were killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred,
and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and have made us unto our God, Kings and
Priests, to reign with thee in thy Kingdom for evermore. Amen.

Then shall they sit in their Thrones and Orders, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, etc.
as Judges of the Reprobates, Mat. 19. 13.
and evil Angels, by approving and giving testimony to the righteous Sentence
and Judgment of Christ the Supreme Judge.

After the pronouncing of the Reprobates Sentence and Condemnation, Christ will
perform two solemn Actions.

1. The presenting of all the Elect unto his Father: Behold, John 17. 13. 14,
23, 24.
O righteous Father, these are they whom thou gave me, I have kept them, and
none of them is lost. I gave them thy word, and they believed it, and the world
hated them, because they were not of the world, even as I was not of the world.
And now, Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me; and that I may be
in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one: that the world
may know that thou have sent me; and that thou have loved them, as thou have
loved me.

2. Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, 1 Cor. 15. 24.
even the Father; that is, shall cease to execute his office of Mediatorship,
whereby as he is King, Priest, Prophet, and supreme Head of the Church, he
suppressed his Enemies, and ruled his faithful People by his Spirit, Word, and
Sacra^^^ts. So that his Kingdom of Grace over his Church in this World ceasing,
he shall (...) immediately as he is God equal with ^he Father and the H. Ghost,
in his Kingdom of Glory for evermore. Not that the dignity of his Manhood shall
be any thing diminished, but that the glory of his Godhead shall be more
manifested; so that as he is God, he shall from thenceforth in all fullness,
without all external means, rule all in all.

From this Tribunal-seat Christ shall arise, and with all his glorious company
of Elect Angels and Saints, he shall go up triumphantly in order and array unto
the Heaven of Heavens, with such an heavenly noise and music, that now may
that song of David be truly verified, Psalm 47. 5, 6, 7, 8.
God is gone up with a triumph, the Lord with the sound of the trumpets. Sing
praises to God, sing praises, sing praises unto our King, sing praises: for God
is King of all the earth, he is greatly to be exalted. And that Marriage-song
of John, Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: Rev. 19. 6, 7.
for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.
Allelujah; for the Lord God omnipotent reigns.

The Third and last degree of the blessed state of a Regenerate Man after
Death, begins after the pronouncing of the Sentence, and lasts eternally
without all end.

Meditations of the blessed estate of a Regenera^e Man in Heaven, after he has
received his sentence of Absolution, before the Tribunal-Seat of Christ, at the
last day of Judgment.
Here my Meditation dazeleth, and my Pen falls out of my hand; the one being
not able to conceive, nor the other to describe that most (...) and eternal
weight of glory (whereof all the afflictions of this present life are (...))
which all the Elect shall with the blessed Trinity, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
enjoy from that time that they shall be received with Christ, R^m. ^. 1^.
as joint heirs i^to that everlasting Kingdom of Joy. Romans ^. 17.


Notwithstanding, we may take a scantling thereof, thus:

The Holy Scriptures set ^orth (to our capacity) the glory of our eternal and
heavenly life after Death in four respects.

1. Of the Place.

2. Of the Object.

3. Of the Prerogatives of the Elect there.

4. Of the effects of those Prerogatives.

1. Of the Place.
THE place is the Heaven of Heavens, (...)
or the third Heaven called Paradise, whither Christ (in his humane Nature)
ascended far^above all visible heavens. The Bridegromes chamber, Psalm 19. 5.
which by the firmament, Mat. 25. 10.
at by an azured curtain spangled with glittering stars and glorious planets,
is bid, that we cannot behold it with these corrup^ible eyes of Flesh. The Holy
Ghost (framing himself to our weakness) describes the glory of that place,
(which no man can estimate) by such things as are most precious in the
estimation of Man. And therefore likeneth it to a great and a holy City, named
the Rev. 21. 2, etc.
heavenly Jerusalem, where only God and his people ( Ver. 24. and 27.
who are saved and written in the Lamb's book) do inhabit, all built ^ Ver. 18.
Ver. 11. Ver. 19, 20.
of pure gold, like unto clear glass, or crystal: the walls of jasper-stone,
the foundations of the walls garnished with twelve manner of precious stones,
having Ver. 21.
twelve gates each built of one pearl: Ver. 13.
three gates toward each of the four corners of the world, and at each gate
a^. Ver. 12.
Angel (as so many Porters) that Ver. 27.
no unclean thing should enter into it. It is Ver. 16.
four square, therefore perfect: the length, the breadth, and height of it are
equal, 12000 ^urlongs every way; therefore glorious and spacious. Through Rev.
22. 1.
the midst of her streets ever r^nneth the pure river of the Water of Life, as
clear as crystal; therefore wholesome. Ver. 2.
And on either side the river is the tree of Life, ever growing; which bears
twelve manner of fruits, and gives fruit every month; therefore fruitful. And
the leaves of Tree are health to the Nations: Therefore healthy. There is
therefore no place so glorious by Creation, so beautiful with delectation, so
rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation. For there the King is
Christ; the law, is Love; the honor, Verity; the peace, Felicity; the life,
Eternity. There is Light, without darkness; Mir^h, without sadness; Health,
without sickness; Wealth, without want; Credit, without disgrace; Beauty,
without blemish; Ease, without labor; Riches, without rust; Blessedness,
without misery; and Consolation that never knows end^ How truly may we cry out
(with David) of this City, Psalm. 87. 3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O th^^ City of God: and yet all these
things are spoken but according to the weakness of our capacity^ For Heaven
exceeds all this in glory, so far, as that 2 Cor. 12. 4*
no tongue is able to express, nor heart of man to conceive the glory thereof:
as witnesses S. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 5.
who was in it, and saw it. O let us no^ then do^e so much upon these wooden
cottages, and houses of mo^ldring clay, which are but tents of ungodliness, and
habitations of Sinners, (...) let us look rather, and long for this heavenly
city, Heb. 11. 10.
whose builder and maker is God, which he (who is not ashamed to be called our
God) ^ath prepared for us. Heb. 11. 6.


2. Of the Object.
THe blissful and glorious object of all intellectual and reasonable Creatures
in Heaven, is the Godhead, in trinity of Persons, without which there is
neither jo^, nor felicity, but the very fullness of joy consists in enjoying
the same.

This Object we shall enjoy two ways:

1. By a Beatisical Vision of God.

2. By possessing an immediate communion with this Divine Nature.

The Visio Dei beatifica sola est summum bonum nostrum. Aug. 1. de Trin. c. 13.
beatifical vision of God is that only that can content the infinite mind of
Man. Fecisti nos dominead te: inquietum igitur est cor nostrum, donec
req^i^^cat in te, Aug. Consol. 1. c. 1. etc.
For every thing tends to its center: God is the center of the Soul:
therefore (like Noah's Dove) she cannot rest nor joy, till she return and enjoy
him.

All that God bestowed upon Moses, could not satisfy his mind, unless he might
Ex. 33. 13.
see the face of God. Therefore the whole Church prays so earnestly; Psalm.
67. 1. and 80. 1.
God be merciful unto us, and cause his face to shine upon us. When Paul once
had seen this blessed sight, he (ever after) counted all the riches and glory
of the World (in respect of it) to be but Phil. 3. 8, 11.
dung: and all his life after was but a sighing out, ( Cupio dissolvi, Phil. 1.
23.
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And Christ prayed for all his
Elect in his last Prayer, that they might obtain this blessed Vision; ^ohn 17.
14.
Father I will that they which thou have given me, be (Where?) even where I am:
^xod. 34. ^9
To what and? that they may behold that my glory, Exodus 33. ^1 1 Cor. 13. 12.
etc. If Moses's face did so shine when he had been with God but forty days,
and seen but his back-parts; how shall we shine when we shall see him face to
face for ever? 2 Cor. 3. 1^.
and know him as we are known, and as be is? Then shall the Soul no longer, be
^ermed Mar^h, bitterness, but Naomi, beautifulness: 1 John 3. 2.
for the Lord shall turn her short bitterness to eternal beauty and
blessedness, Ruth 1. 20.

The second means to enjoy this object is by having an immediate and an eternal
Communion with God in heaven. This we have, first by being (as members of
Christ) united to his Manhood, and by the Manhood (personally united to the
World) we are united to him, as he is God: and (by his Godhead) to the whole
Trinity. Reprobates at the last day shall see God (as a just Judge) to punish
them; but (for lack of this Communion) they shall have neither grace with him,
nor glory from him. For want of this Communion, the Devils (when they saw
Christ) cried out Quid nobis tecum? what have we to do with thee, ^O Son of the
most high God? Mark 5. 7.
but (by virtue of this Communion) the pe^itent So^l may boldly go and say unto
Christ, Ruth 3. 9.
(as Ruth unto Boaz:) Spread, O Christ, the wing of the garment of thy mercy
over thine handmaid; for thou art my kinsman. Genesis 15. 1.
This Communion God promised Abraham, when he gave him himself for his great
reward; John 17. 20, 21.
And Christ prays for his whole Church to obtain it. This Communion Saint
Paul expresses in one word, saying, That God shall be all in all unto us. 1
Cor. 15. 28.
Indeed God is now all in all unto us; but by means, and in a sm^ll measure^
But in ^eaven, God himself immediately (in fullness of measure, without all
(...)) will be unto us all the good things* (...) sou^ and bodies can with or
desire. He (...) self will be salvation and joy to our souls, life and health
to our bodies, beauty to our eyes, music to our ears, honey to our mouths,
perfume to our nostrils, meat to our bellies, light to our understanding,
contentment to our wills, and delight to our hearts; And what can be lacking,
where God himself will be the Anima anim^e erit Deus. Bern.
soul of our souls? Yea all the strength, wit, pleasures, virtues, colors,
beauties, harmony and goodness that are in men, beasts, fishes, fowls, trees,
herbs, and all creatures are Non potest summus rerum conditor in se non habere
quae rebus a se conditis dedit: quemadmodum sol astris* Hugo* l. 4. de anim. c.
15.
nothing but sparkles of those things, which are in infinite perfection in God.
And in him we shall enjoy them in a far more perfect and blessed manner. He
himself will then supply their use; nay, the best creatures (which serve us
now) shall not have the honor to serve us then. There will be Rev. 21. 23.
no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in that City, for the glory of
God does light it.

No more will there be any need or use of any Creature, when we shall enjoy the
Creator himself.

When therefore we behold any thing that is excellent in any creatures, let us
say to our selves; how much more excellent is he, who gave them this
excellency? when we behold the wisdom of men, who overruled creatures, stronger
than themselves; outrun the Sun and Moon in d^scourse, prescribing many years
before, in what courses they shall be Sene^a de beneficiis, l. 2. c. 19.
eclipsed, let us say to our selves, How admirable is the wisdom of God, who
made men so wise! when we consider the strength of Whales and Elephants, the
tempest of Winds, and terror of Thunder, let us say to our selves, how strong,
how mighty, how terrible is that God, that makes these mighty and fearful
Creatures! when we taste things that are delicately sweet, let us say to our
selves, O how sweet is that God, from whom all these creatures have received
their sweetness! when we behold the admirable colors, which are in Flowers and
Birds, and the lovely beauty of Women, let us say, how fair is that God, that
made these so fair!

And if our loving God has thus provided us so many excellent delights, for
our passage through this Judge. 2. 5.
B^chi^, or valley of tears, what are th^se p^easures which he has prepared
for us, when we shall enter into the palace of our Master's j^y! How shall our
souls be there ra^^shed with the love of so lovely a God! So glorious is the
object of heavenly Saints; so amiable is the sight of our gracious Savi^ur.

3. Of the Prerogatives which the Elect shall enjoy in heaven.
BY reason of this Communion wi^h God, the Elect in heaven shall have four
super excell^nt prerogatives

1. They shall have the ^^^gdom of Heaven for their Mat. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
inh^r^tance, and they (...) be free ^ph. 2 1 Heb. 1^
De^izons of the heavenl^ Jerusalem. S. Paul (by being a free Act. ^
C^tizen of Rome, escaped whipping; but they who are once free Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, shall ever be freed from the whips of eternal torments.
Acts 22. 28.
For this freedom was bought for us, not with a great sum of money, but with
the precious blood of the Son of God,

2. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
They shall be all Kings and Priests, spiritual Kings to reign with CHRIST,
Rev. 5. 10. 1 Pet 2. 9.
and to triumph over Satan, the World and Reprobates; Romans 16. 10
and spiritual Priests, to offer unto God the spiritual sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving for evermore. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 15.
And therefore they are said to wear both Crowns and Robes. Oh what a comfort
is this to poor Parents, that have many Children! if they breed them up in the
fear of God, and to be true Christians: then are they Parents to so many Kings
and Priests.

3. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun in the Firmament,
Mat. 13. 43.
like the glorious body of Christ, which shined brighter than the Sun at Noon,
Phil. 3. 21.
when it appeared to Saint Paul. Acts 12. 6.
A glimpse of which glorious brightness appeared in the bodies of M^ses and
Elias, trans^^ured with the Lord in the holy Mount. Luke 9 31. Mark 9. 30.
Therefore (says the Apostle) i^ shall rise a glorious body, 1 Cor. 15. 43.
yea, a spiritual body; not in substance, Ver. 44.
but in quality; preserved by spiritual means, and h^ving (as an Angel) agility
to ascend or descend. O what an honor is it, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2.
that our bodies (falling more vile than a carrion) should thus arise in glory
like unto the body of the Son of God!

4. Lastly, they (together with all the holy Angels) there, keep (without any
labor to distract them) a perpetual Sabbath, to the glory, honor and praise
of the ever blessed Trinity, for the creating, redeeming, and sanctifying of
the Church: And for his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy and Goodness, in the
Government of Heaven and Earth. When thou hear a sweet Consort of Music,
meditate how happy thou shall be, when (with the Choire of heavenly Angels and
Saints) thou shall sing a part in that spiritual Hallelujah in that eternal
blessed Sabbath; where there shall be such variety of Pleasures, and satiety of
Joys, as neither know tediousness in doing, nor end in delighting.

4. Of the Effects of these Prerogatives.
From these Prerogatives there will arise to the Elect in Heaven, five notable
Effects.
1 Cor. 1. 10. Aug soliloq cap. 36.
1. THey shall know God with a perfect knowledge, of far as Creatures can
possibly comprehend the Creator. For there we shall see, Nihil no^^m in (...).
the Word, the Creator; and in the Word, all Creatures that ^by the Word were
created; so that we shall not need to learn (of the things which were road)
the knowledge of him by whom all things were made. The excellentest Creatures
in this life are but as a 1 Cor. 13. 12
dark veil, drawn betwixt God and us; but when this veil shall be drawn aside,
then shall we see God 2 Cor. 3. 16. Res verae sunt in mundo invisibili* in
mundo visibili umbrae rerum. Herm.
face to face, and know him as we are known.

We shall know the Power of the Father, the Wisdom of the Son, the Grace of the
Holy Ghost, and the indivisible Nature of the blessed Trinity. And in him we
shall know not only all our friends, (who died in the faith of Christ) but also
all the faithful that ever were or shall be. For,

1. Luke 13. 28.
Christ tells the Jews, that they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophet^, in the kingdom of God; therefore we shall know them.

2. Genesis 2. 23.
Adam in his Innocence knew Eve to be Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh,
as soon as he awaked; much more then shall we know our Kindred, when we shall
awake perfected and glorified in the Resurrection.

3. The Apostles knew Mat. 27. 33.
Christ after his Resurrection, and the Saints which rose with him, and
appeared in the holy City.

4. Mat. 17. 4.
Peter, James and John knew Moses and Elias in the transfiguration; how much
more shall we know one another, when we shall be all glorified?

5. Luke 16. 23.
Dives knew L^zarus in Abraham's Bosom, much more shall the Elect know one
another in Heaven.

6. Mat. 19. 28.
Christ says, that the twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones to judge
(at that day) the twelve Tribes, therefore they 1 Cor. 6. 2* 3.
shall be known, and consequently the rest of the Saints.

7. Saint Paul says, that at that day 1 Cor. 13. 12.
we shall know as we are known of God; and August ad I^alicam viduam. Ep. 6.
Augustine (out of this place) comfort a Widow, assuring her, that as in this
life, she saw her Husband with externa^ eyes, so in the life to come, she
should know his heart, and what were all his thoughts and imaginations. Then
Husbands and Wives look to your actions and thoughts, for all shall be made
manifest one day. See 1 Cor. 4. 5.

8. The faithful in the Old Testament are said to be Genesis 25. 35. 2 King. 22.
gathered to their Fathers; Therefore the knowledge of our Friends remains.

9. 1 Cor. 13. 8.
Love never falls away; therefore knowledge, the ground thereof, remains in
another life.

10. Because the last day shall be a Romans 2. 5. Rev. 22. 12. Eccles. 12. 14.
Romans 2. 16.
declaration of the just judgment of God, when he shall reward every man
according to his works; and if every man's work be brought to light, much more
the worker. And if wicked men shall account for every Mat. 12. 36.
idle word, much more shall the idle speakers themselves be known. And if the
Persons be not known, in vain are the works made manifest. Therefore (says the
Apostle) 2 Cor. 5. 10.
every man shall appear to account for the work that he has done in his body,
etc. See Wisdom, chapter 5. ver. 1. Though the respect of diversities of degrees
and callings in Magistracy, Ministry; and Economy shall cease; 1 Cor. 15. 24,
28.
yea, Christ shall then cease to rule, as he is Mediator; and rule all in all,
as he is God, equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost.

The greatest knowledge that man can attain unto in this life, 1 Cor. 13. 11.
comes as far short of the knowledge which we shall have in Heaven, as the
knowledge of a child that cannot yet speak plain, comes of the knowledge of the
greatest Philosopher in the World. They who thirst after knowledge, Lumen est
umbra Dei, and Deus est lumen luminis. Plato. Poly. 6.
let them long to be Students of this V^iversity. For all the light by which we
know any thing in this World, is nothing but the very shadow of God; but when
we shall know God in Heaven, we shall (in him) know the manner of the work of
the Creation, the mysteries of the work of our Redemption; yea, so much
knowledge as a Creature can possibly conceive and comprehend of the Creator,
and his work. But whilst we are in this life, we may say with Job, Job 26. 24.
How little a portion hear we of him? And assure our selves with Syracides,
that, Ecclus. 42. 32.
There are hid yet greater things than these be, and that we have s^e^ but a
few of God's works.

2. They shall love God with as perfect and absolute a love, as possibly a
creature can do. The manner of loving God, is to love him for himself; the
measure is to love him without measure. For in this life ( knowing God but in
part) we love him but in part; 1 Cor. 13. 12.
but when the Elect in Heaven shall fully know God, then they will perfectly
love God. And for the infinite causes of love (which they shall know to be in
him) they shall be infinitely ravished with the love of him.

3. They shall be filled with all manner of divine pleasures. At thy right hand
Psalm. 16. 11.
(says David) there are pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 36. 8.
yea, They shall drink (says he) out of the river of pleasures. For as soon as
the Soul is admitted into the actual fruition of the beatifical Essence of God,
she has all the goodness, beauty, glory, and perfection of all Creatures (in
all the World) united together, and at once presented unto her in the sight of
God. If any be in love, there they shall enjoy that which is more amiable. If
any delight in fairness, the fairest beauty is but a dusty shadow to that; he
that delights in pleasures, shall there find infinite varieties, without either
interruption of grief, or distraction of pain; he that loves Honor, shall
there enjoy it, without the disgrace of cankered envy; he that loves treasure,
shall there possess it, and never be beguiled of it. There they shall have
knowledge void of all ignorance; health that no sickness shall impair; and life
that no death can determine. In a word, look how far this wide world surpasses
for light, pleasures, and comforts, the dark and narrow womb wherein thou wast
conceived a child, so much does the World to come exceed in joys, solace, and
consolation, this present World. How happy then shall we be, when this life is
changed, and we translated thither?

4. They shall be replenished with an unspeakable joy; Psalm. 16. 11.
In thy pres^nce (says David) is the fullness of joy; and this joy shall arise
chiefly from the vision of God, and partly from the sight of all the holy
Angels, and blessed Souls of just and perfect Men who are in bliss and glory
with him.

But especially from the blissful sight of Jesus, the Mediator of the New
Testament, our Heb. 12. 24.
Emanuel, God made Man. His sight will be the chief cause of our bliss and joy.
If the 1 Kin. 1. 40
Israelites in Jerusalem so shouted for joy, that the earth rang again, to see
Solomon crowned, how shall the Elect rejoice in Heaven, to see Christ (the true
Solomon) adorned with glory? If John Baptist at his presence did Luke 1. 44.
leap in his mothers womb for joy, how shall we exult for joy, when he will be,
not only with us, but Joh. 17. 22.
in us in heaven? If the wise men rejoiced so greatly to find him, a Mat. 2. 10.
Babe lying in a manger, how great shall the joy of the Elect be, to see him
sit (as a King) in his celestial Throne? If Luke 2. 28.
Simeon was glad to see him an Infant in the Temple, presented by the hands of
the Priests, how great shall our joy be, to see him a King, ruling all things
at the right hand of his Father? If Luke 2. 46.
Joseph and Mary were so joyful to find him in the midst of the Doctors, in the
Temple, how glad shall our Souls be, to see him sitting as Lord amongst Angels
in Heaven? This is that joy of our Master, which (as the Apostle says)
Facilius dicerepossumus quid ibi non sit, quam quid ibi sit. Aug. de sym. lib.
3. 1 Cor. 2. 5. Mat. 25. 21.
the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart of man can
conceive; which because it cannot enter into us, we shall enter into it.

5. Lastly, They shall enjoy this blissful and glorious estate for evermore
Therefore it is termed everlasting life; and Christ says, Joh. 16. 22.
that our joy no man shall take from us. All other joys (be they never so
great) have an end. Hest. 1. 3.
Ahasuerus's Feast lasted an hundred and eighty days; but he, and it, and all
his joys, are gone. For mortal man to be assumed to heavenly glory, to be
associated to Angels, to be satiated with an delights and joys, (but for a
time) were much: but to enjoy them for ever, without intermission of end, who
can hear it, and not admire it; who can muse of it, and not ^e amazed at it?
All the Saints of Christ (as soon as they felt once but a true taste of these
eternal joys) counted all the Phil. 3. 8.
riches and pleasures of this life to be but loss and dung, in respect of that.
And therefore (with uncessant prayers, fastings, alms-deeds, tears, faith, and
good life) they labored to ascertain themselves of this eternal life; and (for
the love thereof) they Acts 2. 45.
willingly either sold, or parted with all their earthly goods and possessions.

Christ calls all Christians, Merchants, Luke 19. and Eternal Life, a
precious Pearl, which a wise Merchant will purchase, though it cost him all that
he has, Matthew. 13.

Plutarch. Apoph. Regum.
Alexander hearing the report of the great riches of the Eastern Country,
divided forthwith among his Captains and Soldiers, all his Kingdom of
Macedonia. He phaestion asking him what he meant in so doing? Alexander
answered, That he preferred the riches of India (whereof he hoped shortly to be
master) before all that his Father Philip had left him in Macedonia. And should
not Christians then prefer the eternal riches of Heaven, so greatly renowned
(which they shall enjoy ere long) before the corruptible trash of the Earth,
which lasts but for a season?

Abraham and Sarah left their own Country and Possessions, to Heb. 11. 10, 15,
16.
look for a City, whose builder and maker is God; and therefore bought no Land,
but only a place of Burial. David preferred one day in this place before a
thousand elsewhere; yea, Psalm. 84. 10.
to be a doorkeeper in the house of God, rather than to dwell in the richest
Tabernacles of wickedness. 1 Kin. 19. 4.
Elias earnestly besought the Lord to receive his Soul into his Kingdom, and
went willingly (tho in a 2 Kin 11. 5.
fiery Chariot) thither^ St. Paul (having once seen Heaven) continually Phil.
1. 23
desired to be dissolved, that he might be with Christ. St. Peter (having
espied but a glimpse of that eternal glory in the Mount) wished that he might
dwell there all the days of his life; saying, Mat. 17. 4.
Master, it is good for us to be here. How much better does Peter now think it
to be in Heaven it self? Christ (a little before his death) prays his Father
to receive him into that excellent John 17. 5.
Glory. And the Apostle witnesses, that Heb. 11. 2.
for the joy which was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the
shame. If a Man did but once see those joys (if it were possible) he would
endure a hundred deaths to enjoy that happiness but one day.

Saint Sermon. 31. de Sanctis.
Augustine says, That he would be content to endure the torments of hell to
gain this joy rather than to lose it. Ignatius (St. Paul's Scholar) Being
threatened (as he was going to suffer) with the cruelty of Torments, answered
with great courage of Faith; Hieron. in Catalog* Iren. l. 3. contra Valent.
Fire, Gallows, Beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of my members,
crushing of my body, all the torments of the devil together, let them come upon
me, so I may enjoy my Lord Jesus and his Kingdom. The same constancy showed
Eus^b. l. 4. cap. 16.
Polycarp, who could not by any terrors of any kind of death be moved to deny
Christ in the least measure. With the like resolution answered Nazian. de vit.
Basil.
Basil his persecutors* when they would terrify him with death; I will never
(said he) fear Death, which can do no more than restore me to him that made me.
If Ruth 1. 16.
Ruth left her own Country, and followed Na^^i her Mother-in-law* to go and
dwell with her in the land of Canaan (which was by a type of Heaven) only upon
the fame which she heard of the God of Israel, (though she had no promise of
any portion therein) how should thou follow thy holy Mother the Chruch, to go
unto Christ, into the heavenly Canaan; wherein God has given thee an eternal
inheritance assured by an holy Covenant, made in the word of God, signed with
the Blood of his Son, and sealed with his Spirit and Sacraments; this shall be
rhine eternal happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven, where thy life shall be a
communion with the blessed Trinity; thy joy, the presence of the Lamb; thy
exercise, singing; thy ditty, hallelujah; thy consorts, Saints and Angels;
where youth fl^urisheth, that never waxes old; beauty lasts, that never
fades; love abounds, that never cools; health continues that never
slacketh; and ^ife remains, that never ends.

Meditations directing a Christian how to apply to himself without delay, the
aforesaid knowledge of God and himself.
THou see therefore, O Man, how wretched and cursed thy state is, by
corruption of ^^ture, without Christ; insomuch, that whereas the Scriptures do
liken wicked men unto Lions, Bears, Bulls, Horses, Dogs, and such like savage
Creatures in their lives; it is certain, that the condition of an unregenerate
man, is in his Death more vile than a Dog, or the filthiest Creature in the
World. For the Beast (being made but for Man's use) when he dies, ends all
his miseries with his death. But Man (endued with a reasonable; and immortal
soul, made after God's image, to serve God) when he ends the miseries of this
life, must account for all his misdeeds, and begin to endure these miseries
that never shall know end. No creature but man is liable to yield at his death
an account for his life. The brute creatures, not having reason, shall not be
required to make any account for their deeds; and good Angels, though they have
reason, yet shall they yield no account because they have no sin. And as for
evil Angels, they are without all hope already condemned, so that they need not
make any further accounts; Man only in his death must be God's accountant for
his life.

On the other side, thou see ( O Man) how happy and blessed thy estate is
being truly reconciled unto God in Christ, in that (through the restoration of
God's Image, and thy restitution into thy sovereignty over other creatures)
thou art in this life little inferior to the Angels; and shall be in the life
to come equal to the Angels. Yea, (in respect of thy Nature, exalted by a
personal Union to the Son of God, and by him to the glory of the Trinity)
superior to the Angels; a Fellow-Brother with Angels, in spiritual Grace, and
everlasting Glory.

Thou have seen how glorious and perfect God is, and how that all thy chief
bliss and happiness consists in having an eternal Communion with his Majesty.

Now therefore (O impenitent sinner) in the bowels of Christ Jesus I entreat
thee; nay, I conjure thee as thou tenderest thy own salvation, seriously to
Consider with me, how false, how vain, how vile are those things which still
retain and chain thee in this wretched and cursed estate wherein thou live;
and do hinder thee from the favor of God, and the hope of eternal life and
happiness.

Meditations on the hindrances which keep back a Sinner from the Practice of
Piety.
THose hindrances are chiefly seven.

1. An ignorant mistaking of the true meaning of certain places of the holy
Scriptures, and some other chief grounds of Christian Religion.

The Scriptures mistaken are these.

1. Ezekiel. 33. 13, 16. At what time soever a sinner repents him of his sin, I
will blot out all, etc. Hence the carnal Christian gathers, that he may
repent when he will. It is true, whenever a sinner does repent, God will
forgive, but the Text says not, that a sinner may repent whenever he will,
but when God will give him Grace. Many (says the Scripture) when they would
have repented, were rejected, and could not repent, Heb. 12. 17, Luke 13. 24,
^7.
though they sought it carefully with tears. What comfort yields this Text to
thee, who have not repented, nor know whether thou shall have grace to
repent hereafter?

2. Matthew. 11. 26. Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Hence the lewdest man collects that he may come unto Christ
when he list. But he must know, that no man ever comes to Christ but he who (as
Peter says) Having known the way of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 22.
has escaped the pollutions of this world through the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. To Isa. 1. 18. John 6. 35.
come unto Christ is to repent and believe; and this no man can do, unless his
heavenly Joh. 6. 44.
Father draws him by his grace.

3. Rom 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. True,
but they are such, who walk not after the flesh, (as thou do) but after the
Spirit, which thou did never yet resolve to do.

4. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, etc. True,
but such sinners, who like St. Paul, are converted from their wicked life; not
like thee, who still continuest in thy lewdness. For that Grace of God, Tit. 2.
11, 12.
which brings salvation unto all men, teaches us, that denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world.

5. Prove. 24. 16. A just man falls seven times in a day, and rises, etc. [
In a day] is not in the Text; which means not falling into sin, but falling
into trouble, which his malicious enemy plots against the just, and from which
God Psalm. 34. 19.
delivers him. And though it meant falling in, and rising out of sin; what is
this to thee whose falls all men may see every day, but neither God, nor Man,
can at any time see thy rising again by repentance.

6. Isa. 64. 6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Hence the Carnal
Christian gathers; that, seeing the best works of the best Saints are no
better, then his are good enough; and therefore he needs not much grieve that
his devotions are so imperfect. But Isaiah means not in this place the
righteous Works of the Regenerate; as fervent Prayers in the name of God;
charitable Alms from the bowels of mercy; suffering in the Gospel's defense,
the spoil of Goods, and spilling of Blood, and such works, which Saint Paul
calls the fruits of the Spirit: But the Prophet making an humble confession in
the name of the Jewish Church, Gal. 5. 22.
when she had fallen from God to Idolatry, acknowledges, that whilst they were
by their filthy sins separated from God, as Lepers are by their infected sores
and polluted clothes from Men, their chiefest Righteousness could not but be
abominable in his sight. And though our best works, compared with Christ's
righteousness, are no better than unclean rags; yet in God's acceptance for
Christ's sake they are called Rev, 3. 18.
white raiment; yea, Rev. 19. 8.
pure sine linen, and shining; far unlike the Jer. 13 23.
Leopard's spots and Zech. 3. 4.
filthy garments.

7. James ^. 2. In many things we sin all: True, but God's Children sin not in
all things, as thou do, without either bridling their lusts or mortifying
their corruptions; and though the relics of sin remain in the dearest children
of God, that they had need daily to cry, Our Father which art in heaven,
forgive us our trespasses; yet Gal. 1. 15. Romans 5. 8. John 9. ^1.
in the New Testament, none are properly called Sinners, but the unregenerate;
but the Regenerate in respect of their Zealous endeavor to serve God in
unfeigned holiness are every where called Saints: Insomuch that St. John says,
1 John ^ 9.
that whosoever is born of God sins not; 1 John 5. 18
that is, lives not in wilful filthiness, suffering sin to reign in him, as
thou do. Deceive not thy self with the name of a Christian; whosoever lives
in any customary gross sin, he lives not in the state of grace. Let therefore
(says St. Paul) every one that names 2 Timothy 2. 19.
the name of Christ depart from iniquity. The regenerate sin but upon ^railty;
they repent, and God does pardon; therefore they 1 John 5. 16.
sin not to death. The Reprobate sin maliciously, sinfully, and delight there
in, so that by their good will, sin shall leave them before they leave it. They
will not repent, and God will not pardon. Therefore their sins are mortal
(says St. John) or rather immortal, Ibid.
as says St. Paul, Romans 2. 5. It is no excuse therefore to say, we are all
sinners. True Christians, thou see, are all Saints.

8. Luke 23. 43. The Thief converted at the last gasp was received to Paradise;
what then? If I may have but time to say when I am dying, Lord, Mat. 2. 27.
have mercy upon me, I shall likewise be saved. But what if thou shall not? And
yet many in that day shall say, Lord, Lord; and the Lord will not know them.
The Thief was saved, for he repented; but his fellow had no grace to repent,
and was damned. Beware therefore lest trusting to too late repentance, at thy
last end on Earth, thou be not driven to repent too late without end in Hell.

9. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And 1
John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, etc. Oh comfortable! But hear what S^. John says in the same
place; My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. If
therefore thou leavest thy sin, these Comforts are thine, else they belong not
to thee.

10. Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, grace did abound much more. O sweet! But
hear what St. Paul adds; What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin,
that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin live any
longer therein? Romans 6. 1, 2. This place teaches us not to presume; but that
we should not despair. None therefore of these Promises, promises any grace to
any, but to the penitent heart.

The grounds of Religion mistaken, are these:

1. From the Doctrine of Justification by Faith only; a carnal Christian
gathers, That good works are not necessary. He commends others that do good
works, but he persuades himself that he shall be saved by his Faith, without
doing any such matter. But he should know, that though good works are not
necessary to justification, Ephesians. 2. 10.
yet they are necessary to salvation, for we are God's workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has predestined, that we should walk
in them. Fulk Rhem* Test Ann. in Ephesians. 2. 2.
Whosoever therefore in years of discretion brings not forth good works,
after he is called, he cannot be saved, neither was he ever predestined to
life eternal, Therefore the Scripture says* that Romans 26.
Christ will reward every man according to his works; 2 Cor. 9. 6.
Christ respects in the Angels of the seven Rev. 22. 12.
Churches nothing but their works, Rev. 2. 2.
and at the last day he will give the heavenly inheritance only to them who
have done good works, Mat. 25.
in feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, etc* At that day 2 Timothy 4. 8.
righteousness shall wear the Crown. No righteousness, no crown, no good works
(according to a man's talent) no reward from God, unless it be Romans 2. 8.
vengeance. To be rich in good works, is the surest foundation of our assurance
1 Timothy 6. 15.
to obtain eternal li^e. For good works are the true fruits of a true faith,
which apprehends Christ and his obedience unto salvation. And no other faith
Gal. 5. 6.
avails in Christ, but that which works by love, and (but in the act of
justification) that faith which only justifies is Fides sola non est sola:
Fides sole justificat. ^t oculus solus videt.
never alone, but ever accompanied with good works, as the Tree with his
fruits, the Sun with his light, the fire with his heat, the water with his
moisture. And the faith which does not justify her self by good works before
men, is but a mes 2. 16.
dead faith, which will never justify a man's soul before God. But a
justifying faith Acts 15. 9.
purifieth the heart, and Acts* 16. 18.
sanctifies the whole man throughout.

II From the Doctrine of God's eternal ^hes. 5. 23 ^at. 25. 34. ^phes. 1. 4.
^ccles. 3. 14.
Predestination, and unchangeable Decree, he gathers, that if he be
predestined to be saved, he cannot but be saved; if to be damned, no means
can do any good. Therefore all works of Piety are but in vain But he should
learn, that God has predestined to the means, as well as to the end. Whom
therefore God has predestined to be saved, which is the 1 Pet. 1. 9.
end, he has likewise predestined to be first called, justified, and made
conformable to the Image of his Son, which is the Romans 8. 29, ^.
means. And the, John 15. 16.
(says St. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Peter) who are elect unto salvation, are also elect unto the sanctification of
the spirit. Nolite in Deo primum quae^ere, sed in Christo in quo si te per
fidem inve^e is, certus esto, t^ esse electum
If therefore upon thy calling thou conformest thy self to the Word and Example
of Christ thy Master, and obeyest the good motions of the Holy Spirit, in
leaving sin, and living a godly life; then assure thy self, that thou art one
of those who are infallibly predestined to everlasting salvation. If
otherwise, blame not God's predestination, but thine own sin and rebellion. Do
thou but return unto God, and God will graciously receive thee, as the Father
did the prodigal Son; and by thy conversion it shall appear, both to Luke 15.
10.
Angels and Ver. 24.
Men, that thou did belong to his Election. If thou will not, why should God
save thee?

III. When a carnal Christian hears that Man has not free will unto good, he
loses the reins to his own corrupt will, as though it lay not in him to bridle,
or to subdue it; Implicitly making God the Author of sin in suffering Man to
run into this necessity. But he should know, that God gave Adam free will, to
stand in his Magnas homo liberi arbit^ii vires cum conderetur accepit, sed eas
peccando amisit. Aug. de spirit and lit. cap. 3. Eccles 7. 29. Homo male utens
libero suo arbittio, and se and liberum suum arbi^^ium perdi^i^. Aug. Ench. ad
Laur. cap. 30.
integrity if he would; Man abusing his free will, lost both himself and it.
Since the Fall, Man in his state of corruption has free will to evil, but not
to good; for in this state 2 Cor. 3. 5. Per lapsum arbit^ii libertas in
natur^libus (...), in supernaturalibus an issa est, donec gratia r^stituatur.
we are not (says the Apostle) sufficient to think a good thought. And God is
not bound to restore us what we lost so wretchedly, and take no more care to
recover again. But as soon as a Man is regenerated, the grace of God freeth his
will unto good, so that he does all the good things he does with a free will:
For so the Apostle says, That Phil 2. 12. 13. Acti agimus The will is p^s^ve in
receiving the first grace, (...) active in all goodness.
God of his own good pleasure, works both the will and the deed in us; who
(as the Apostle expounds) 2 Cor 7. 1.
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and finish our
sanctification in the fear of God. And in this state every true Christian has
free will; and as he increases in grace, so does his will in freedom; for John
8. 36. (...) gratia. Dei eft^^itur liberum. Aug. ad Col. c* 17.
when the Son shall make us free, then shall we be free indeed, and 2 (...) 3.
17.
where the spirit of the Lord is there is liberty: for the holy spirit draws
their minds not by coaction, but by the Cords of Love, Cant. 1. 4. by
illuminating their minds to know the truth; by changing their hearts to love
the known truth; Voluntas humana non liberate gratiam consequitur, sed gratia
libertatem. Aug. le great.
and by enabling every one of them (according to the measure of grace which he
has received) to do the good which he loves; but thou will not use the
freedom of thy will so far as God has freed it; for thou do many times
wilfully (against God's Law, to the hazard of thy Soul) that which (if the
King's Laws forbid under the penalty of death, or loss of thy worldly Estate)
thou would not do. Make not therefore thy want of free will unto good to be
so much the cause of thy sin, as thy want of a loving heart to serve thy
heavenly Father.

IV. When the natural man hears that no man (since the Fall) is able to fulfill
the Law of God, and keep all his Commandments, he boldly presumes to sin, as
others do; he contents himself with a few good thoughts; and if he be not
altogether as bad as the worst, he concludes, that he is as truly regenerate as
the best. And every voluntary refusal of doing good, or withstanding evil, he
counts the impossibility of the Law. But he should learn that though (since the
Fall) no man but Christ, who was both God and Man, did or can perfectly fulfill
the whole Law; yet every true Christian, as soon as he is regenerated, begins
to keep all God's Commandments in truth, though he cannot in absolute
perfection. Thus with David, they Psalm 119. 112.
apply their hearts to fulfill God's Commandments always unto the end. And then
the Joel 2. 28, 29.
spirit of grace, which was promised to be more abundantly poured forth under
the Gospel, Zech. 12. 10.
helps them in their good endeavors, Quod jubet, juvat. Aug.
and assisteth them, to do what he commands them to do. And in so doing God
accepts their ( 2 Cor. 8. 12.
) good will and endeavor, instead of perfect fulfilling of the Law, supplying
out of the merits of Christ, who fulfilled the Law for us, whatsoever wants
in our obedience. And in this respect Saint John says, that 1 John 5. 3.
God's Commandments are not burthenous. And St. Paul says, Phil. 4. 13.
I am able to do all things through the help of him that strengthens me. And
Zachary and Elizabeth are said to walk Luke 1. 16.
in all the Commandments of the Lord without reproof. Hereupon Christ John 15.
10.
commends to his Disciples, the care of his keeping of his Commandments, as the
truest testimony of our love unto him. So far therefore does a Man love Christ,
as he makes conscience to walk in his Commandmen^s, and the more unto Christ is
our love, the less will our pains seem in keeping his Law. The Laws curse
(which under the Old Testament was so terrible) is, under the New (by the Death
of Christ) abolished to the regenerate; the rigor which made it so impossible
to our Nature before, is now to the new born so mollified by the spirit that it
seems facil and easy The Apostles indeed pressed on the unconverted Jews and
Gentiles, the impossibility of keeping the Law by ability of Nature corrupted.
But when they have to do with regenerate Christians, they require to the Law
(which is the Rule of righteousness) true Romans 15. 18.
obedience in word and deed; the Col. 3. 5.
mortifying of their members; the Gal. 5. 24.
crucifying of the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Romans 6. 12, 13
Romans 6. 4. 5. Romans 8. 11.
resurrection to newness of life, Gal. 5. 25.
walking in the spirit, 1 John 5. 4.
overcoming of the world by faith; so that though no Man can say as Christ, John
8. 46.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin! yet every regenerate Christian can say of
himself, which of you can rebuke me of being an Adulterer, Whoremonger,
Swearer, Drunkard, Thief, Usurer, Oppressor, Proud, Malicious, Covetous,
Prophaner of the holy Sabbath, a Liar, a neglecter of God's Public service,
and such like gross sins? else he is no true Christian. When a man casts off
the conscience of being ruled by God's Law, then God Romans 1. 24, 28.
gives him over to be led by his own lusts, the surest sign of a Reprobate
sense. Thus the Law, which since the fall, no man by his own natural ability
can fulfill, is fulfilled in truth, of every true regenerate Christian, through
the gracious assistance of Romans 8. 9, etc Aug ^ptat ut Pelagias agnos^at posse
legem praestari per grati^m Christi and pacem fore edicit.
Christ's Holy Spirit. And this Spirit God will Luke 11. 13. ^ames 1. 5.
give to every Christian that will pray for it, and incline his heart to keep
his Laws.

V. When the unregenerate man hears that God Deus magis ^electatur eff^^tin
quam affecta Amb.
delights more in the inward mind, than in the outward man: then he feigneth
with himself, that all outward reverence and profession is but either
superstitious, or superfluous. Hence it is that he seldom kneeleth in the
Church; that he puts on his Hat at singing of Psalms, and the public Prayers;
which the profane Varlet would not offer to do in the presence of a Prince or
Noble man. And so that he keep his mind unto God, he thinks he may fashion
himself (in other things) to the world. He divides his thoughts, and gives so
much to God, and so much to his own lusts; yea, he will divide with God the
Sabbath, and will give him almost the one half, and spend the other wholly in
his own pleasures. But know, O carnal Man, that Almighty God will not be served
by halfs, because he has created and redeemed the whole Man. And as God
detests the service of the outward man without the inward heart, as hypocrisy?
so he counts the inward service without all external reverence, to be mere
profaneness: he requires both in his worship. In prayer therefore bow thy
knees in witness of thy humiliation: lift up thine eyes and thy hand, in
testimony of thy confidence, hang dow^ thy head, and smite thy breast, in token
of thy contrition; but especially call upon God with a sincere heart, serve him
holily, serve him wholly, serve him only; for God and the Prince of this world,
are two contrary Mat. 6. 24.
masters, and therefore no man can possibly serve both.

VI. The unregenerate Christian holds the hearing of the Gospel preached, to be
but an indifferent matter, which he may use or not use at his pleasure; but
whosoever thou art, that will be assured in thy heart that thou art one of
Christ's Elect Sheep; thou must have a special care and conscience (if possibly
thou can) to hear God's Word Preached. For first the preaching of the Gospel
is the chief ordinary means which God has appointed to convert the souls of
all that he has Act. 13. 48.
predestined to be saved; therefore it is called Romans 1. 16.
the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. And where this
Divine Ordinance is not, the Prove. 22. 18.
people perish, and whosoever shall refuse it, Mat. 10. 22.
it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of
Judgment, than for those people. Secondly, the preaching of the Gospel is the
Isa. 11. 1.
Standard or Ensign of Christ, to which all Soldiers and Elect People must
assemble themselves; when this Ensign is displayed; as upon the Lord's Day, he
is none of Christ's People, that Isa. 2. 2, 3.
flocks not unto it; neither shall any drop of the Zach. 14. 1^.
rain of his Grace light on their souls. Thirdly, it is the ordinary means by
which the Holy Ghost Romans 10. 14.
begets faith in our hearts, without Heb. 11. 6.
which we cannot please God. If the hearing of Christ's voice be the chief Mark
of Christ's Elect Joh. 10. 27.
sheep and of the John 3. 29.
Bridegrooms friends, then must it be a fearful mark of a reprobate Heb. 2. 3.
goat either to neglect or contemn to hear the preaching of the Gospel. John 8.
47.
Let no man think this position foolish, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
for by this foolishness of preaching, it pleases God to save them which
believe. Their state is therefore fearful, who live in peace without caring for
the preaching of the Gospel. Can men look for God's mercy and desp^^s his
means? Luke 10. 16.
He (says Christ of the Preachers of his Gospel) that despises you despises
me. John 8. 47.
He that is of God, hears God's Word; ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God. Had not the Judge. 2. 1, etc.
Israelites heard Phineas's message, they had never wept. Had not the Baptist
preached, the Jews had never Luke 7. 32, 33.
mourned. Had not they who crucified Christ, heard Peter's Sermon, their hearts
had never been Acts 2. 37.
pricked. Had not the Ninevites heard Jonas Jon. 3. 5.
preaching, they had never repented; and if thou will not Prove. 28. 9.
hear and Luke 13. 5.
repent, thou shall never be saved.

VII. The opinion that the Sacraments are but bare signs and seals of God's
promise and grace unto us, does not a little hinder Piety; whereas indeed, they
are seals as well of our service and obedience unto God; which service, if we
perform not unto him, the Sacraments seal no Grace unto us. But if we receive
them upon the resolution to be his faithful and penitent servants, then the
Sacraments do not only signify and offer, but also seal and exhibit indeed,
the inward spiritual grace; which they outwardly promise and represent; and to
this end Baptism is called the Tit. 3. 5.
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; and the Lord's
Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. Were this truth believed, the
holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper would be oftener and with greater revere^ce
received.

VIII. The last, and not the least block whereat Piety stumbleth in the course
of Religion, is by adorning Vices with the names of Virtues, as to call drunken
carousing, drinking of healths; spilling innocent blood, Valor; Gluttony,
Hospitality; Covetousness Thriftiness; Whoredom, loving a Mistress; Simony,
Gratuity; Pride, Gracefulness; Dissembling, Complement; Children of Belial,
Good Fellows; Wrath, Hastiness; Ribaldry, Mirth. So on the other side, to call
Sobriety in words and actions, Hypocrisy; Alms-deeds, Vainglory; Devotion,
Superstition; Zeal in Religion, Puritanism; Humility, Crouching; scruple of
Conscience, Preciseness, etc. And whilst thus we call evil good, and good evil,
true Piety is much hindered in her progress. And thus much of the first
hindrance of Piety, by mistaking the true sense of some special places of
Scripture, and grounds of Christian Religion.

The second hindrance of Piety.
2. The evil example of great Persons. The practice of whose profane lives
they prefer for their imitation, before the Precepts of God's holy Word. So
that when they see the greatest Men in the State, and many chief Gentlemen in
their Country, to make neither care nor Conscience to hear Sermons, to receive
the Communion, nor to sanctify the Lord's Sabbath, etc. but to be Swearers,
Adulterers, Carousers, Oppressors, etc. Then they think that the using of these
holy Ordinances, are not matters of so great moment; for if they were, such
great and wise Men would not set so little by them. Hereupon they think, that
Religion is not a matter of necessity. And therefore where they should (like
Christians) row against the stream of impiety toward Heaven, they suffer
themselves to be carried with the multitude down right into Hell, thinking it
impossi^le that God will suffer so many to be damned: Whereas, if the good of
this world had not blinded the eyes of their minds, the Holy Scriptures would
teach them, that 1 Cor. 1. 26.
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called,
etc. but that for the most part the Mat. 11. 5.
poor receive the Gospel; and that Mat 19. 23, 24.
few rich men shall be saved. And that howsoever many are called, yet the
chosen are but few. Mat. 22. 14.
Neither did the multitude ever save any from damnation. As God has advanced
men in greatness above others, so does God expect, that they in Religion and
Piety should go before others; otherwise greatness abused (in the time of their
Stewardship) shall turn to their greater condemnation in the day of their
accounts. Potentes. potenter cruciabuntur. Sap.
At what time sinful great and mighty men, as well as the poorest slaves and
bondmen, shall wish, Rev. 6. 15, 16, etc.
that the Rocks and Mountains may fall upon them, and hide them from the
presence of the Judge, and from his just deserved wrath. It will prove but a
miserable solace, to have a great company of great Men partakers with thee, of
thine eternal torments. The multitude of sinners, does not extenuate, but
aggravate sin, as in Sodom. Better it is therefore with a few to be saved in
the Ark, than with the whole world to be drowned in the flood. Walk with the
few godly in the Scriptures narrow path to Heaven; but crowned not with the
godless multitude, Mat. 7. 15.
in the broad way to Hell. Exodus 23. 2.
Let not the examples of irreligious great men hinder thy repentance; for their
greatness cannot at that day exempt themselves from their own most grievous
punishment.

The third hindrance of Piety.
3. The long escape of diserved punishment in this life. Because sentance
(says Solomon) is not speedily executed against an evil worker; Eccles. 8. 11.
therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully set in them to do evil,
not knowing that the bou^tifulness of God Romans 2. 4.
leads them to repentance. But when his patience is abused, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
and man's sins are ripened, his Justice will at once both 1 Samuel 3. 12.
begin and make an end of the sinner; Ezekiel. 39. 8.
and he will recompense the slowness of his delay with the grievousness of his
punishment. Though they were suffered to run on the score all the days of their
life; yet they shall be sure to pay the utmost farthing at the day of their
death. And whilst they suppose themselves to be free from Judgment, they are
already smitten with the Heaviest of God's Judgments, a Romans 2. 5. (...) Cor
poenitere nescium.
heart that cannot repent. The stone in the reins or bladder, is a grievous
pain that kills many a man's body; but there is no disease to the stone in the
heart, whereof 1 Samuel 25. 17.
Nabal died, and which kills millions of Souls. They refuse the trial of
Christ and his Cross; but they are stoned by Hell's Executioner to eternal
death.

Because many Nobles and Gentlemen are not smitten with present judgment, for
their outrageous Swearing, Adultery, Drunkenness, Oppression, profaning of the
Sabbath, and disgraceful neglect of God's Worship and Service, they begin to
doubt of Divine Providence and Justice. Both which two Eyes, they would as
willingly put out in God, as the Philistines bored out the eyes of Sampson.
Judges 16. 12.
It is greatly therefore to be feared lest they will provoke the Lord to cry
out against them, as Sampson against the Philistines. By neglecting the Law,
and walking after their own hearts, they put out, (as much as in them lies)
the eyes of my Providence and Justice. Lead me therefore to these chief
Pillars, whereupon the Realm stands, that I may pull the Realm upon their
heads, and be at once avenged on them for my two eyes. Judges 16. 26, etc.
Let not God's patience hinder thy repentance; but because he is so patient,
therefore do thou the rather repent.

The fourth hindrance of Piety.
4. The presumption of God's mercy. For when Men are justly convinced of their
sins, forthwith they betake themselves to this Shield, Christ is merciful; so
that every sinner makes Christ the Patron of his sin; as though he had come
into the world to bolster sin, and not to destroy the works of the Devil. 1
John 3. 8.
Hereupon the carnal Christian presumes, that though he continues a while
longer in his sin, God will not shorten his days. But what is this but to be an
implicit Atheist? Doubting that either God sees not his sins; or if he does,
that he is not just; for if he believes that God is just, how can he think
that God, who for sin so severely punishes others, can love him who still
loves to continue in sin? True it is, Christ is merciful; but to whom? Isa.
59. 20.
only to them that repent and turn from iniquity in Jacob. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
But if any man bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
although I walk according to the stubbornness of mine own heart, thus, adding
drunkenness to thirst; the Lord will not be merciful unto him, etc. Non
delinquenti, sed peccata relinquenti condonat Deus.
O mad Men! who dare bless themselves, when God pronounces them accursed? Look
therefore how far thou art from finding repentance in thy self; so far art thou
from any assurance of finding mercy in Christ. Isa. 55. 7.
Let therefore the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to
our God, for he is very ready to forgive.

Despair is nothing so dangerous as presumption: For we read not in all the
Scriptures of above three or four, whom roaring Despair overthrew; but secure
Presumption has sent millions to perdition without any noise. As therefore the
Damsels of Israel sang in their Dances: 1 Samuel 18. 7.
Saul has killed his thousands, and David his ten thousands, so may I say,
that despair of God's mercy has damned thousands, but the Metuendum est ne te
occidat spes; and cum multum speres de misericordia, incidas in judicium. Aug.
presumption of God's mercy has damned ten thousands, and sent them quick to
Hell, where now they remain in eternal torments, without all help or ease, or
hope of redemption. God spared the Luke 23. 43.
Thief, but not his fellow; God spared one, that no Man might despair; God
spared but one, that no Man should presume. Joyful assurance to a Sinner that
repents; Latronis exemplum non est exemplum imitationis sed consolationis.
no comfort to him that remains impenitent. God is infinite in mercy, but to
them only, who turn from their sins to serve him in holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. To keep thee therefore from the hinderance
of presumption, remember, that as Christ is a Savior, so John 5. 45.
Moses is an Accuser. Live therefore, as though there were no Gospel; die, as
though there were no Law. Pass thy life, as though thou were under the conduct
of Moses; depart this life, as if thou knew none but Christ, and him
crucified. Presume not, if thou will not perish; Qui dat p^^nitenti v^niam non
dabit pecc^nti poenit^^tiam. Aug.
Repent, if thou will be saved.

The fifth hinderance of Pie^y.
5. Evil company* commonly termed good fellows: but indeed, the Devil's chief
instruments to hinder a wretched Sinner from repentance and Piety. The first
sign of God's favor to a Sinner, is to give him grace to forsake evil
companions; such who wilfully continue in sin, contemn the means of their
Calling, gibing at the sincerity of profession in others, and shaming Christian
Religion by their own profane lives. Psalm 1. 1.
These sit in the seat of the scorners. For as soon as God admits a sinner to
be one of his People, he bids him, Come out of Babylon. Every lewd company is a
Babylon out of which, Rev. 18. 4.
let every child of God either keep himself; or, if he be in, think that he
hears his Father's voice sounding in his ears, Come out of Babylon, my child.
As soon as Christ looked in mercy upon Peter, he went out of the company that
was in the High-Priest's Hall, and wept bitterly for his offense. Luke 22. 2.
David vowing (upon recovery) a new life said, Psalm 6. 8.
Away from me all ye workers of iniquity, etc. As if it were impossible to
become a new man, till he had shaken off all old ill Companions. The truest
proof of a man's Religion, is the quality of his companions. Profane
companions are the chief enemies of Piety, and quellers of holy motions. Many a
time is poor Christ (offering to be new born in thee) thrust into the Stable;
Luke 2. 7.
when these lewd companions by their drinking, plays, and jests, take up all
the best Rooms in the Inn of thy heart. Oh let not the company of earthly
sinners hinder thee from the Society of heavenly Saints and Angels.

The sixth hindrance of Piety.
6. A conceited fear, least the practice of Piety should make a Man (especially
a young Man) to wax too sad and pensive; whereas indeed none can better joy,
nor have more cause to rejoice, than pious and religious Christians. For as
soon as they are justified by faith, Rom, 5. 2.
they have peace with God, than which there can be no greater joy. Besides,
they have already the Kingdom of grace descended into their hear^s, as an
assurance that (in God's good time) they shall ascend into his Kingdom of
glory. This Kingdom of grace consists in three things: Romans 14, 17.
First, Righteousness, for having Christ's righteousness to justify them
before God, they endeavor to live righteously before men. Secondly, Peace, for
the peace of conscience inseparably follows a righteous conversation.
Thirdly, the joy of the Holy Ghost, which joy is only felt in the peace of a
good conscience; and is so great, Phil. 4. 7.
that it passes all understanding. No tongue can express it, no heart can
conceive it, Joh. 16. 24.
but only he that feels it. Verse 22.
This is that fullness of joy which Christ promised his Disciples, in the midst
of their troubles, a joy that no man could take from them. The feeling of this
joy, David upon his repentance begged so earnestly at the hands of God; Psalm.
51. 12.
Restore me to the joy of thy salvation. And if the Angels in Heaven rejoice so
much at the conversion of a sinner, Luke 15. 7, 10.
the joy of a sinner converted must needs be exceeding great in his own heart.
It is worldly sorrow that snows so timely upon men's heads, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
and fills the furrows of their hearts, with the sorrows of death. The godly
sorrow of the Godly (when God thinks it meet to try them) causes in them
repentance not to be repented of; for it does but further their salvation; and
in all such tribulation, they shall be sure to have the Holy Ghost to be their
Joh. 14. 16, 17.
Comforter; who will 2 Cor. 1. 5.
make our consolation to abound through Christ, as the sufferings of Christ
shall abound in us. but whilst a man lives in impiety, he has ( Isa. 57. 21.
) no peace, says Esaias; Eccles. 2. 2.
his laughter is but madness (says Solomon) his riches are but Heb. 2. 6.
clay (says Habbakkuk) nay, the Apostle accounts them no better than Phil. 3.
8.
dung, Luke 6. 25.
in comparison of the pious man's treasure; all his joys shall end in woes,
says Christ. Let not therefore this false fear hinder thee from the practice
of Piety. Better it is to go sickly (with Lazarous) to Heaven, than full of
mirth and pleasure with Dives to Hell. Better it is to mourn for a time with
men, than to be tormented for ever with Devils.

The seventh hindrance of Piety.
7. And lastly, Fl^res is scires unum tua temporamen^em; Rides quum non sit
forsitan una dies Th. Mor.
the hope of long life: for were it possible that a wicked liver thought this
year to be his last year; this month his last month; this week his last week;
but that he would change and amend his wicked life? no verily, he would use the
best means to repent, and to become a new man. But as the rich man in the Luke
12. 19, 20.
Gospel promised himself many years to live in mirth, ease, and fullness, when
he had not one night to live longer; so, many wicked Epicures falsely promise
themselves the age of many years, when the thread of their life is already
almost drawn out to an end. Lam. 1. 9.
So Jeremy ascribes the cause of the Jews sins and calamities to this, Lam. 1.
9.
that she remembered not her last end.

The longest space betwixt a man's coming by the womb, and going by the grave
is but short, Joh 14. 1.
for man that is born of a woman, has but a short time to live: He has but a
few days, and those full of nothing but troubles. And except the Practice of
Piety, how much better is the state of the child that yesterday was baptized,
and to day is buried, than Methusalem's, who lived nine hundred sixty nine
years and then died? of the two, happier the Babe; because he had less sin and
fewer sorrows. And what now remains of both, but a bare remembrance? What trust
should a man repose in long life? seeing the whole life of man is nothing but a
lingering death: so that as the Apostle protests. ( Quotidie morimur: quotidie
enim demitur pars vitae* and tunc quoque cum crescimus, vita decrescit. Vives 1
Cor 15. 31.
a man dies daily.

Hark in thine ear, O secure fellow; thy life is but a Isa* 2. 22.
puff of breath in thy nostrils, trust not to it. Thy Soul dwells in a house of
clay, that will fall ere it be long; as may appear by the dimness of thy eyes
the deafness of thy ears, the wrinkles in thy cheeks, the rottenness of thy
teeth, the weakness of thy sinews, the trembling of thy hands, the calendar in
thy bones, the shortness of thy sleep, and every gray hair, as so many
Summoners, bids thee prepare for thy long home. Come, let us in the mean while
walk to thy Fathers Coffin: break open the lid, see here, Job 17. 14.
how that corruption is thy Father, and the worm thy Mother and Sister: see
thou how these are? so must thou be ere long: fool! thou know not how soon,
Thy Hourglass runs apace, and in all places, Death in the mean while
waits for thee.

The whole life of man (save what is spent in God's service) is but a foolery:
Homo est fatuus usque ad 40 annum, deinde ubi agnovit se esse fatuum, vita
consumpta est. Luth.
for a man lives forty years before he knows himself to be a fool: and by that
time he sees his folly, his life is finished.

Hark, Husbandman, before thou see many more crops of Harvest, thy self shall
be ripe, and Death will cut thee down with his sickle. Hark, Tradseman, ere
many six months go over, thy last month will come on; after which thou shall
trace away and trade no longer. Hark, most grave Judge, within a few terms, the
term of thy life approaches, wherein thou shall cease to judge others, and go
thy self to be judged. Hark, O man of God, that go to the Pulpit, preach
this Sermon, as it were thy last that thou should make to thy people. Hark,
Noble man, lay aside the high conceit of thy honor, Death, ere it be long Mors
sceptra ligonibus aequat.
will lay thine honor in the dust, and make thee as base as the Earth that
thou treadest under thy feet* Hark, thou that now read this book, assure thy
self ere it be long there will be but two holes where now thy two eyes are
placed; and others shall read the truth of this lesson upon thy bare Skull,
which now thou read in this little book; how soon I know not, but this I am
sure of; Job 14. 14.
that thy time is appointed, thy Job 14. 5.
months are determined, thy Psalm. 90 1^ Dan. 5. 26. Stat sua cuique dies Virg.
days are numbered, and thy very 11. 8.
last hour is limited, beyond which thou shall not pass; For then, the
first-horn of death mounted on his Rev. 6. 8.
pale horse, shall alight at thy door; and (notwithstanding all thy wealth and
honor, and the tears of thy dearest friends) will carry thee away bound hand
and foot, as his Prisoner, and keep thy body under a load of earth, until that
day come, wherein thou must be brought forth to 2 Cor. 5. 10
receive according to the things which thou have done in the body, whether it
be good or evil. O let not then the false hope of an uncertain long life hinder
thee from becoming a present Practiser of religious Piety! God Psalm. 95. 7.
offers grace to day, Heb. 3. 7.
but who promises to morrow? P^^nitenti veniam spospondit, sed vivendi in
crastinum non spospondit, Chrysostom* Nemo tam divos habuit Faventes, crastinum
ut possit sibi polliceri, Senec.
there are now in Hell many young Men, who had purposed to repent in their old
age, but Death cut them off in their impenitency, ere ever they could attain to
the time they set for their repentance. The longer a man runs in a disease, the
harder it is to be cured; for custom of sin breeds hardness of heart; and the
impediments which hinder thee from repenting now, will hinder thee more when
thou art more aged.

A wise Man being to go a far and foul journey, Heb. 3. 13.
will not lay the heaviest burden upon the weakest horse. And with what
conscience can thou lay the great load of repentance on thy feeble and tired
old age, whereas now in thy chiefest strength thou can not lift it, but art
ready to stagger under it. Is it wisdom for him that is to sail a long and
dangerous Voyage, to lie playing and sleeping, whilst the Wind serves and the
Sea is calm, the Ship sound, the Pilot well, Mariners strong; and then set
forth when the Winds are contrary, the Weather tempestuous, the Sea raging, the
Ship rotten, the Pilot sick, and the Sailers languishing? Therefore, ( O sinful
Soul) begin now thy conversion to God, whilst life, health, strength, and youth
last: before, those Eccl. 12. 1.
years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. God ever
required in his service, the Exodus 13. 2.
first-boorn; and the Ex. 22. 29.
first fruits; and those to be ^ffered unto him without delay. So just Genesis 4.
4.
Abel offered unto God his firstlings, and fattest Lambs: and reason good, that
the best Lord should be first, and best served. All God's servants should
therefore, Eccl. 12. 12.
remember to serve their Creator in the days of their youth; and Genesis 22. 3.
early in the morning, like Abraham, to sacrifice unto God the Young Isaac of
their Age. Genesis 43. 3.
Ye shall not see my face (says Joseph to his Brethren) except you bring your
younger brother with you. And how shall thou look in the face of Jesus, if thou
give thy younger years to the devil, and bring him nothing but thy blind,
lame, and decrepid old age? Offer it unto thy Mal. 1. 8.
Prince, says Malachy. If he will not accept such a one to serve him, how
shall the Prince of Princes admit such a one to be his servant? If the King of
Babel would have young men (well favored, Dan. 1. 4.
and such as had ability in them) to stand in his palace, 2 Samuel 5. 8.
shall the King of Heaven have none to stand in his Courts, but the blind the
lame, such as the soul of David hated? Think thou when thou have served
Satan with thy prime years, to satisfy God with thy dotage? take heed l^st God
turn thee over to thy old Master again: that as thou have all the days of thy
life done his Work, so he may in the end pay thee thy Wages. Is that time fit
to undertake by the serious exercises of repentance (which is the work of
works) to turn thy sinful soul to God, when thou art not able with all thy
strength to turn thy weary bones on thy soft bed? If thou find'st it so hard a
matter now, thou shall find it far harder then. For thy sin will wax stronger,
thy strength will grow weaker, thy conscience will clog thee, pain will
distract thee, the fear of death will amaze thee, and the visitation of friends
will so disturb thee, that if thou be not furnished aforehand with store of
faith, patience and consolation, thou shall not be able either to medi^ate thy
self, or to hear the word of comfort from others; not to pray alone, nor to
join with others who pray for thee. It may be thou shall be taken with a dumb
palsy, or such a deadly senselesness, that thou shall neither remember God,
nor think upon thine own estate, and do thou not well deserve, that God
should forget to save thee in thy death, who art so unmindful now to serve him
in thy life? the fear of Death, will drive many at that time to cry, Mat. 7. 22.
Lord, Lord, but Christ protests that he will not then know them for his:
Yea, many shall then (like Esau) with tears seek to repent, Heb. 12. 17.
and yet find no place of repentance. For Man has not free will to repent when
he will, but when God will give him grace. And if Mercy showed her self so
inexorable, that she would not open her gates to so tender suitors as Virgins,
Mat. 25. 11.
to so earnest suitors as kne^kers, because they knocked too late; How think
thou that she will ever suffer thee to enter her gates, being so impure a
wretch, that never think to leave sin, till sin first leaves thee, and
did never yet knock with thine own fists upon the breasts of a penitent
heart? and justly does her grace deny to open the gates of Heaven, when thou
knockest in thine adversity, who in thy prosperity would not suffer Christ
whilst he knocked, Rev. 3. 20.
to enter in at the door of thy heart. Trust not either late repentance, or
long life; not late repentance, because it is much to be feared, lest that the
repentance, which the fear of Death enforces, dies with a man dying. And the
Hypocrite, who deceived others in his life, may deceive himself in his death.
God accepts none but free will offerings, and the repentance that pleases
him must be voluntary, and not of constraint. Not long life Nascentes morimur
sinisque ab origin pendet, Et pubescentes juncta senecta premit Manil.
for old age will fall upon the neck of youth: and as nothing is more sure than
Death, so nothing is more uncertain than the time of dying. Yea often times
when ripeness of sin is hastened by outragiousness of sinning, God suddenly
cutteth off such vicious livers, either with the sword, intemperateness,
luxury, surfeit, or some other fearful manner of sickness May thou not see,
that it is the evil spirit that persuades thee to deferr thy repentance till
old Age, Nequities vitae non sinit esse sen^m.
when experience tells thee, that not one of a thousand that takes thy course
does ever attain unto it? Let Goa's holy Spirit move thee, not to give thy self
any longer Mat. 27. 49, 50, 51.
to eat and drink with the drunken, lest thy master send death for thee in a
day when thou look not for him, and in an hour that thou art not aware of:
and so suddenly cut thee off, and appoint thee thy portion with the h^pocrites,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. But if thou love Deuteronomy. 30. 16.
long life, fear God, Prove. 3. 2.
and long for life everlasting. The longest life here, Psalm. 34. ^1 etc.
when it is come to the Period, will appear to have been but as a Psalm. 90. 9.
tale that is told, a James 4. 14.
vanishing vapor, a flitting Psalm. 109. 23.
shadow, a seeming Psalm. 76. 5.
dream, a glorious Psalm. 90 5. 1 Pet. 1* ^4.
flower, growing and flourishing in the Psalm. 90. 6.
morning, but in the evening cut down and withered; or like a Isa. 38. 12.
Weavers shuttle, which by winding here and there swiftly unwinded it self to
an end. It is but a 2 Cer. 4. 17.
moment, says St. Paul. O then the madness of Man! that for a moment of Heb
11. 25.
sinful pleasure, will hazard the loss of an 2 Cor. 4 17.
Eternal weight of glory.

These are the seven chief hinderers of Piety, which must be cast out like Mary
Magdalen's seven Devils, Mat. 16. 9.
before ever thou can become a true Practicer of Piety, Luke 8. 2.
or have any sound hope to enjoy either favor from Christ by grace, or
fellowship with him in glory.

The Conclusion.
TO conclude all: for as much as thou see, that without Christ, thou art but
a slave of sin, Death's Vassal, and Worms Meat; whose thoughts are vain, whose
deeds are vile, whose pleasures have scarce beginnings, whose miseries never
know end; what wise Man would incurr these hel^ish torments, though he might by
living in sin, purchase to himself for a time the Empire of Augustus, the
riches of Croesus, the pleasures of Solomon, the policy of Achitophel, the
voluptuous fair, and fine apparel of Dives? for what should it avail a Man (as
our Savior says) to win the whole world far a time, and then to lose his soul
in hell for ever?

And seeing that likewise thou see how great is thy happiness in Christ; and
how vain are the hindrances that debar thee from the same; b^ware (as the
Apostle exhorts) of the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 13.
For that sin which seems now to be so pleasing to thy corrupt nature, will one
day prove the bitterest enemy to thy distressed soul; and in the mean while
harden (unawares) thine impenitent heart.

Sin (as a Serpent) seems beautiful to the eye; but take heed of the sting
behind; whose venomous Effects if thou knew, thou would as carefully fly
from sin, as from a Serpent: For,

1. Sin did never any Man good: and the more sin a Man has committed, the more
odious he has made himself to God, the more hateful to all good Men.

2. Sin brought upon thee all the evil, crosses, losses, disgraces, and
sicknesses, that ever befell thee. Psalm. 107. 17.
Fools (says David) by reason of their transgressions, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted. Jeremy, in lamenting manner, asks the question;
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Lam. 3. 20.
The Holy Ghost answers him; Man suffers for his sin. Hereupon the Prophet
takes up that doleful outcry against sin, as the cause of all their miseries,
Lam. 5. 16.
Woe now unto us that ever we have sinned.

3 If thou do not speedily repent thee of thy sins, they will bring upon thee
yet far greater plagues, losses, crosses, shame and judgments, than ever
hitherto befell thee. Read Levit. 26. ver. 18, etc. Deuteronomy. 28* 15, etc.

4. And lastly, if thou will not cast off thy sin; Genesis 15. 16.
God (when the measure of thine iniquity is full) will cast thee off for thy
sin: for as he is just, so he has power to kill and cast into hell all
hardened and impenitent sinners. If therefore thou will avoid the cursed
effects of sin in this life, and the eternal wrath due thereto in the world to
come, and be assured that thou art not one of those who are given over to a
reprobate sense; Dan. 4. 27.
Let then (O sinner) my counsel be acceptable unto thee: break off thy sins by
righteousness and thine iniquities by showing mercy toward the poor: O let
there (at length) be an healing of thine error! Nathan used but one Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
and David was converted; Jonas preached but once to Nineveh, Jonas 3. 5, etc.
and the whole City repented: Luke 22. 62.
Christ looked but once on Peter, and be went out, and wept bitterly. And now,
that thou art often, and so lovingly entreated, not by a Prophet, but by Christ
the Lord of Prophets; yea, that God himself, by his Ambassadors, does pray thee
to be reconciled unto him; 2 Cor. 5. 20.
leave off thine adultery, with David; repent of thy sins like a true Ninevite,
and whilst Christ looks in mercy upon thee, leave thy wicked companions, and
weep bitterly for thine offenses. Content not thy self with that formal
Religion, which unregenerated Men have framed to themselves instead of sincere
devotion: for in the multitude of Opinions most Men have almost lost the
practice of true Religion. Think not that thou art a Christian good enough,
because thou do as the most, and art not so bad as the worst. No Man is so
wicked, that he is addicted to all kind of vices (for there is an antipathy
betwixt some vices;) but remember that Christ says, Except your righteousness
shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5. 20.
ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Consider with thy self
how far thou come short of the Pharisees in Fasting, Praying, frequenting the
Church, and in giving of Alms: Think with thy self how many Pagans, who never
knew Baptism, yet in moral virtues, and honesty of life, do go far beyond thee.
Where is then the life of Christ thy Master? and how far art thou from being a
true Christian, if thou do willingly yield to live in any one gross sin? thou
can not have a regenerated soul, though thou reformest thy self like Herod,
Mar. 6. 20.
from many other Vices. A true Christian must have respect to walk in the truth
of his heart, in all the Commandments of God alike, James 2. 10.
for (says St. James) He that shall offend in one point of the Law (wilfully)
is guilty of all. 1 Pet. 2. 1.
And Peter bids us lay aside (not some, but) all malice, guile and hypocrisies,
etc. One sin is enough to damn a Man's Soul without repentance: dream not to go
to Heaven by any nearer, or easier way than Christ has traced unto us in his
word. The way to Heaven is not easy or common, but Mat 7. 14.
strait and narrow; yea, so narrow, that Christ protests, that Mat. 19 23.
a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven* and that those who
enter are but a Mat. 7. 14. and 22. 14.
few; and that those few cannot get in but by Luke 13. 24.
striving, and that some of those who strive to enter in shall not be able.
This all God's Saints (whilst they here lived) knew well: when with so often
fastings, so earnest prayers; so frequent hearing the Word, and receiving the
Sacraments and wi^h such abundance of tears they devou^ly begged at the hands
of God for Christ's sake to be received into his Kingdom.

If thou will not believe this truth, I assure thee, that the Devil, which
persuades thee now, that it is easy to attain Heaven, will tell thee
hereafter, that it is the hardest business in the world. If therefore thou art
desirous to purchase sound assurance of salvation to thy Soul, and to go the
right and safe way to Heaven, get forthwith (like a wise Virgin) the Oil of
Piety in the lamp of thy conversation, Mat. 25. 1.
that thou may be in a continual readiness to meet the Bridegroom, whether he
comes by Death, or by Judgment. Which that thou may the better do, let this
be thy daily practice.

How a private man must begin the morning with Piety.
AS soon as ever thou awakest in the Morning, keep the door of thy heart fast
shut, that no earthly thought may enter, before that God be come in first: and
let him (before all others) have the Primitiae oris and cordi Deo off^r^^dae.
Amb in Psalm. 119.
first place therein. So all evil thoughts, either will not dare to come in, or
shall the easier be kept out: and the heart will more favor of piety and
godliness all (...) day after. But if thy heart be not (at thy first waking)
filled with some M^d^a^ions of God, and his Word; and d^ested like the Exodus
27. 20, 21.
lamp in thae Tabernacle, every morning and evening, with the Oil Olive of
God's Word; and perfumed with the sweet Exodus 30. 6, 7.
Incense of Prayer: Satan will attempt to fill it with worldly cares, or
fleshly desires, so that it will grow unfit for the service of God all the day
after, sending forth nothing but the stench of corrupt and lying words, and of
rash and blasphemous Oaths.

Begin therefore every days work with God's Word and Prayer. And offer up unto
God upon the Altar of a Psalm. 51. 17.
contrite heart, the Rom 8. 22.
groans of thy spirit, and the Hos. 13. 2.
calves of thy lips, as thy morning sacrifice, and the first fruits of the day:
and as soon as thou awakest, say unto him thus.

A short Soliloquy, when one first wakes in the Morning.
MY Soul waits on thee, Psalm. 130. 6.
O Lord, more than the Morning Watch watches for the Morning. Psalm. 67. 1.
O God therefore be merciful unto me, and bless me, and cause thy face to shine
upon me: Psalm. 90. 14.
fi^l me with the Mercy this Morning, so shall I rejoice and be glad all my
days.

Meditations for the Morning.
Then Meditate,

1. HOw Almighty God can (in the Resurrection) as easily raise up thy b^dy out
of he grave, from the sleep of death, as he has this Morning wakened thee in
thy bed out of the sleep of nature. At the dawning of which Resurrection day
Christ 2 These. 1. 10.
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and every one of the bodies of the
Jude v. 14.
thousands of his Saints (being Phil. 3. 21.
fashioned like unto his glorious body) shall shine as bright as the Mat. 13.
43. 17. 2. Luke 9. 31.
Sun. All the Angels shining likewise in their glory, the Body of Christ
surpassing them all in splendour and glory; and the Godhead excelling it. If the
rising of one Sun makes the Morning-Sky so glorious, what a bright-shining and
glorious Morning will that be, when so many thousand thousands of Bodies, far
brighter than the Sun, shall appear and accompany Christ as hi^ glorious ^ra^,
coming to keep his general Sessions of Act. 17. 31.
Righteousness, and to judge the wicked 1 Cor. 6. 3.
Angels, and all Jude v. 15.
ungodly Men? and let not any transitory profit, pleasure, or vain glory of
this day, cause thee to lose thy part and portion of the eternal bliss and
glory of that Day, which is properly termed the Resurrection of the Just. Luke
14. 14.
Beasts have bodily eyes to see the ordinary light of the day; but endeavor
thou with the eyes of Faith, to foresee the glorious light of that Day.

2. That thou know not how near the evil spirit ( which night and day like a
roaring Lion, 1 Per. 5. 8.
walks about seeking to devour thee) was unto thee whilst thou slept'st, Job.
1. 7.
and wast not able to help thy self, and that thou know not what Mischief*
he would have done to thee, had not God Joh. 1. 10.
hedged thee and thine, with his Psalm. 121. 4.
everwaking providence, and guarded thee with his holy and blessed Psalm. 34. 7.
Genesis 32. 1, 2. 2 King. 6. 16.
Angels.

3. If thou hear the Cock crow, remember Luke 22. 61, 62.
P^ter to imitate him; and call to mind that Cock-crowing sound of the last
Trumpet, which shall waken thee from the dead, and consider in what case thou
were, if it sounded now: and become such, as thou would with to be then, lest
at that day thou will wish that thou had never seen this; yea, Jer. 20. 14.
Job 3. 1.
curse the day of thy natural birth, for want of being Tit. 3. 5.
new born by spiritual grace. Galio canente suas Latro relinquit infidias, etc.
Ambr. H^xam. l. 5. cap. 25.
When the Cock crows, the Thief despairs of his hope, and gives over his nights
enterprise: So the Devil cease to tempt or attemp^ any further, when he hears
the devout Soul wakening her self with Morning-Prayer.

4. Remember that Almighty God is about thy bed, Psalm. 139. 2, 3.
and sees thy down-lying and thy up-rising, understands thy thoughts, and is
acquainted with all thy ways. Remember likewise, that his Holy Angels, who
guarded and watched over thee all night, do also behold how thou Genesis 31. 55.
and 32. 1, 2.
wakest and risest. Do all things therefore as in the awful presence of God,
and in the sight of his holy Ps. 91. 5, ^^* Acrs 12. 11
Angels.

5. As thou art putting on thine apparel, remember that they were first given
as coverings of shame, being the filthy effect of sin; and that they were made
but of the offails and excrements of dead Beasts Therefore, whether thou
respect the stuff or the first institution thou have so little cause to be
proud of them, that thou have great cause to be humbled at the sight and
wearing of them: seeing the richest apparel are but fine covers of the foulest
shame. Meditate rather, That as thine apparel serves to cover thy shame, and to
fence thy body from cold: so thou should be as careful to cover thy soul
with that Mat. 22. 11.
wedding garment, which is the Romans 13 14.
righteousness of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and (because apprehended by our faith) called the righteousness of the Saints:
Phil. 3. 9.
Lest whilst we are richly apparalled in the Rev. 19. 8.
sight of Men, Ephesians. 4. 24.
we be not found to walk R^v. 16. 15.
naked (so that all our filthiness be seen) in ^he sight of God. But that with
his righteousness (as with a Robe) we may cover our selves from perpetual
shame; and shield our Souls from that fiery cold that will procure eternal
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Mat. 22. 13.
And withal, consider how blessed a people were our Nation, if every silken
suit did cover a sanctified Soul. And yet a Man would think, that on whom God
bestowed most of these outward blessings, Luke 12. 48.
of them he should receive greatest inward thanks. But if it prove otherwise,
their reckoning will prove the heavier in the day of their accounts.

6. Consider, how God's Mercy is renewed unto thee every Morning, ^am. 3. 23.
in giving thee (as it were) a new life: ^sal. 19. 5.
and in causing the Sun after his uncessant Race, to rise again to give thee
light. Let not then his glorious light burn in vain: but prevent rather (as
often as thou can) the Sunrising, to give God thanks: and kneeling down at
thy bedside, Wis. 15. 20.
salute him at the dayspring, with some devout Antelucanum, or Morning-
Soliloqui: containing an humble confession of thy sins, the pardon of all thy
faults, a thanksgiving for all his benefits, and a craving of his gracious
protection to his Church, thy self, and all that do belong unto thee.

Brief directions how to read the Holy Scriptures once every year over, with
ease, profit, and reverence.
BUt for as much, that as faith is the soul, so reading and meditating of the
Word of God, are the Parents of Prayers: therefore before thou prayest in the
Morning, first, read a Chapter in the word of God; then meditate a while with
thy self how many excellent things thou can remember out of it.

As first: what good counsels or exhortations to good works, and to holy life.

Second what threatenings of judgments against such and such a sin: and what
fearful examples of Gods punishment or vengeance upon such and such sinners.

Thirdly, what blessings God promises to patience, chastity, mercy, alms-deed,
zeal in his service, charity, faith, and trust in God and such like Christian
virtues.

Fourthly, what gracious deliverances God has wrought, and what sp^cial
blessings he has bestowed upon them, who were his true and zealous servants.

Fifthly, Apply these things to thine own heart, and read not these Chapters,
as matters of Historical discourse: but as if they were so many Letters or
Epistles sent down from God out of Heaven unto thee: for whatsoever is w^itten,
is written for our learning, Rom 15. 4.

Sixthly, Read them therefore with that reverence, as if God himself stood by,
and spoke these words unto thee, to excite thee to those virtues; to dissuade
thee from those vices; assuring thy self, that if such sins (as thou read
there) be found in thee without repentance, the like plagues will fall upon
thee; but if thou do practice the like piet* and virtuous deeds, the like
blessi^gs shall come unto thee and thine.

In a word, apply all that thou read in H Scripture, to one of these two
heads chiefly; either to confirm thy faith; or to increase thy repentance; for
as Sustine and Abstine, bear and forbear, Epictet. dict.
was the Epitome of a good Philosopher's life, so Creed and Resipisee, believe
and repent, is the whole sum of a true Christian's profession. One Chapter thus
read with understanding, and meditated with application, will better feed and
comfort thy soul, than five read and run over without marking their scope or
sense, or making any use thereof to thine own self. If in this manner thou
shall read three Chapters every day; one in the Morning, and another at Noon,
and the third at Night (reading so many Psalms instead of a Chapter as our
Church Liturgy appoints for morning or evening Prayers) thou shall read over
all the Canonical In the Canonical Books of the Old Testament there are 931
Chapters, but distributing the 150 Psalms into 60 parts, thou shall find but
841, which being added to 260 (the number of the Chapters in the New Testament)
will amount to 1101, dividing which by three into ^65, (the number of the days
of the Year) there will remain but six, which thou may dispose of as is
prescribed.
Scripture in a year, except six Chapters, which thou may add to the task of
the last day of the year. The reading of the Bible in order will help thee the
better to understand both the History and scope of the H. Scripture. And as for
the Hos viginti duos libros lege; cum Apocryphis vero nihil habeas nego^^i: has
tantum studiose meditare Scripturas, quas in Ecclesia confiden^^r legimus Multo
prudentiores te and religiosi^res fuerunt Apostoli and primi Episcopi veritatis
duces, qui nobis e^s tradiderunt. Tu igitur cum sis filius Ecclesiae, non
transgrediaris illius terminos. Ac Vet Testamenti (ut dictum est) viginti duos
meditare libros. Cyrillus Hierosolymitan. Catechef. 4.
Apocrypha, being but penned by Man's spirit, thou may read them at thy
pleasure, but believe them so far as they agree with the Canonical Scripture,
which is indicted by the Holy Ghost.

But it may be thou will say, that thy business will not permit thee so much
time, as to read every morning a Chapter, etc. O Man, remember that thy life is
but short, and that all this business is but for the use of this short life;
but salvation or damnation is everlasting. Rise up therefore every morning by
so much time the earlier; defraud thy foggy flesh of so much sleep, but rob not
thy soul of her food, nor God of his service; and serve the Almighty duly
whilst thou have time and health.

Having thus read thy Chapter, as thou art about to pray, remember that God is
a God of Exodus 26. 36.
holiness, whereof he warns us by repeating so often, Lev. 21. 44. and 19. 2.
and 20. 7.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. And when he devoured with a sudden fire, Nadab and
Abihu, for offering unto him incense with Lev. 10. 2.
strange fire, (like those nowadays, who offer Prayers from hearts fraught
with the fire of lust and malice:) the Lord would give no other reason of his
judgment but this, I will be sanctified in them that come near me. Ver. 3.
As if he should have said, If I cannot be sanctified by them who are my
servants, in serving me with that holiness that they should, I will be
sanctified on them, by confounding them with my just judgments, which, their
lewdness does deserve. God therefore cannot abide any wilful uncleanness, or
filthiness in them, who serve him: insomuch that he commanded the Israelites,
That when they were in Camp against their Enemies, they should dig a hole with
a paddle, Deuteronomy. 23. 13, 14.
and cover their excrements: his reason is, For the Lord thy God walks in the
midst o^ thy Camp, to deliver th^e, and to give thee thine Enemies before thee:
therefore thy host shall be holy, that he see no filthy thing in thee, and turn
away from thee. If he will have Men to be so holy in time of war in the Field,
how much more holiness expects he at our hands in time of peace in our
houses? therefore says Zophar in Job: Job 11. 13, 14.
If thou prepare thine heart and stretch out thine hand toward God to pray: if
iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let no wickedness dwell in thy
Tabernacle. Isa. 1. 15.
For, as Esaias says, If there be any uncleanness in our hands, (that is, any
sin whereof we have not repented) though we stretch not our hands unto him, and
make many prayers, the Lord will hide his eyes from us, and will not hear our
prayers. Therefore before thou prayest, let God see that thy heart is sorrowful
for thy sin: and that thy mind is resolved (through the assistance of his
grace) to amend thy faults. And then having washed thy self, and adorned thy
body with appar^l which beseems thy calling, and the Image of God, which thou
bear; shut thy chamber door, and kneel down at thy bedside, or some other
convenient place, and in reverent manner lifting up thy heart, together with
thy hands and eyes, as in the presence of God, who sees the inward intention
of thy soul, offer up unto God from the Altar of a contrite heart, thy prayer
as a morning-sacrifice, through the mediation of Christ, in these or the like
words.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Most mighty and glorious God, full of incomprehensible Power and Majesty,
whose glory the very heaven of heavens is not able to contain: 1 Kin. 8. 27.
look down from heaven upon me, thine unworthy servant, who here prostrate my
self at the Psalm. 132. 7.
footstool of thy Heb. 4. 16. Dan. 9. 18.
Throne of Grace. But look upon me, O Father, through the merits and mediation
of Jesus Christ, Mat. 3. 17.
thy beloved Son, in whom only thou art well pleased. For, of my self, I am not
worthy to stand in thy presence, or to speak with mine unclean Isa. 6. 5.
lips to so holy a God as thou art. For thou know that in Psalm. 51. 5.
sin I was conceived and born, and that I have lived ever since in iniquity: so
that I have broken all thy holy Commandments by sinful motions, unclean Genesis 6.
5.
thoughts, Mat. 15. 19.
evil words, Mat. 12. 34.
and wicked Psalm. 140. 1, 2.
works Dan. 9. 10.
omitting many of those duties of Piety which thou requirest for thy service,
and committing many of those vices, which thou (under the penalty of thy
displeasure) Dan. 9. 11.
have forbidden. Levit. 26. 14, etc.


[Here thou may confess unto God thy secret sins, which do most burden thy
conscience: with the circumstances of the time, place, person and manner, how
it was committed, saying, But more especially, O Lord, I do here, with grief of
heart, confess unto thee, etc.]

And for these my sins, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
O Lord, I stand here guilty of thy curse, Dan. 9. 11.
with all the miseries of this life, Gal. 3. 10.
and everlasting torments in hell fire, Esd. 6. 13.
when this wretched life is ended* if thou should deal with me according to
my deserts. Yea, Lord, I confess, that it is thy mercy which endures for ever,
Lam. 3. 22.
and thy compassion which never fails, that is the cause that I have not been
long ago consumed. But with thee, O Lord, Psalm. 130 7.
there is mercy and plenteous redemption. Psalm. 5. 7.
In the mutitude therefore of thy Mercy, Psalm. 13. 5.
and confidence in Christ's Merits, I entreat thy divine Majesty, that thou
would not enter into judgment Psalm. 143. 2.
with thy servant, neither be extreme to mark what I have hitherto done amiss:
for if thou do, then then can no flesh be justified in thy sight, nor any
living stand in thy presence. But be thou merciful unto me, Ezekiel. 36. 25.
and wash away all the uncleanness of my sin, 1 John 1, 9.
with the merits of that precious blood, which Jesus Christ has shed for me.
And seeing that he has born the burden of that curse, Gal. 3. 13.
which was due to my transgressions. O Lord, deliver me from my sins, and from
all those judgments which hang over my head, as due unto me for them: and
separate them as far Psalm. 103. 12.
from thy presence, as the East is from the West: bury them in the burial of
Christ, that they may never have power to rise up against Col. 2. 12, 13.
me to shame me in this life, Ephesians. 2. 5. 6.
or to condemn me in the world which is to come. And I beseech thee, O Lord,
not only to wash away my sins with the blood of thine immaculate Lamb; John 1.
29.
but also to purge my heart, by thy holy Spirit, Psalm. 51. 7, 10.
from the dross of my natural corruption: Gal. 4. 24, 25.
that I may feel thy Spirit* more and more killing my sin in the power and
practice thereof: so that I may with more freedom of mind, and liberty of will
serve thee the everlasting God in righteousness Luke 1. 74, 75.
and holiness this day. And give me grace, that by the direction and assistance
of the same thy holy Spirit, I may presevere to be thy faithful and unfeigned
servant unto Mat. 24. 13.
my life's end: that when this mortal life is ended, I may be made a partaker
of immortality, and everlasting happiness in thy heavenly kingdom. In the mean
time, O Lord, whilst it is thy blessed will and pleasure, that I may continue
to spend, and end that small number and remnant of days, which thou have
appointed for me to live in this vale of misery: Psalm. 90. 12.
Teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom: and as
thou do add days unto my life; so, good Lord, I beseech thee, add repentance
and amendment to my days, that as I grow in years, so may I increase in grace,
and favor with thee, and all thy people. And to this end, give unto me a
supply of all those graces which thou know to be wanting in me, and
necessary for me with an increase of all those good gifts, wherewith thou have
already endowed me; that so I may be the better enabled to lead such a godly
life, and honest conversation, as that thy Name may thereby be glorified,
others may take good example by me, and my soul may more cheerfully feed on the
peace of a good conscience, Romans 14. 17.
and be more replenished with the joy of the Holy Ghost. And hear, O Lord,
according to my bounded duty, I give thee most humble and hearty thanks, for
all those Bessings which of thy goodness thou have bestowed upon me. And
namely, for that thou have of thy free love, according to thine eternal
purpose, Ephesians. 1. 4.
elected me before the foundation of the world was laid, Mat. 23. 34.
unto salvation in Jesus Christ: for that thou have created me after thine own
Image, Genesis 9. 6.
and have begun to restore that in me, Ephesians. 4. 24.
which was lost in our first Parents: Col. 3. 10.
for that thou have effectually called me by the working of thy Spirit, Romans 8.
28.
in the preaching of the Gospel, and receiving of the Sacrament, Mat. 22. 3.
to the knowledge of thy saving grace and 1 Pet. 2. 18* 19.
obedience of thy blessed will for that thou have bought and redeemed me with
the blood of thine only begotten Son, Rev. 5. 9.
from the torments of Hell, amd thrall of Satan; for that thou have by faith in
Romans 3. 28
Christ freely justified me, Gal. 2. 16.
who am by nature the Child of wrath: Ephesians. 1. 3.
for that thou have in good measure 1 Cor. 6. 11.
sanctified me by thy holy Spirit, and given me so large a time to repent, 1
Pet. 1. 2.
together with the means of repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
I thank thee likewise, good Lord, for my life, health, wealth, food, raiment,
peace, prosperity and plenty: and for that thou have preserved me this night
from all perils and dangers of body and soul, and have brought me lafe to the
beginning of this day. And as thou have now wakned my body from sleep; so I
beseech thee waken my soul from sin, and carnal security: and as thou have
caused the light of the day to shine in my bodily eyes; so good Lord, cause the
light of thy Word and holy Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 13.
to illuminate my heart: and give me grace, as one of thy children of light,
Luke 16. 8.
to walk in all holy obedience before thy face this day: Phil. 2. 15.
and that I may endeavor to keep faith and a clear conscience toward thee,
Act. 24. 16.
and toward all men, in all my thoughts words and dealings. And so, good Lord,
bless all my studies and actions, which I shall take in hand this day; as that
they may tend to thy glory, the good of others, and the comfort of mine own
Soul and Conscience in that day, when I shall make my final accounts unto thee
for them. Oh my God, keep thy servant, that I do no evil unto any man this day:
and let it be thy blessed will, Zach. 3. 2.
not to suffer the Devil, nor his wicked Angels, nor any of his evil Members,
or any malicious enemies, to have any power to do me any hurt or violence. But
let the eye of thy holy providence watch over me for good and not for evil: and
command thy holy Angels to pitch their Tents Psalm. 34. 7.
round about me, for my defense and safety, in me going out, Psalm. 91. 11.
and coming in, as thou have promised they should do about them Psalm. 31. 5.
that fear thy Name. For, Luke 23. 46.
into thy hands O Father, I do here commend my soul, and body, my actions, and
all that ever I have, to be guided, defended, and protected by thee: being
assured, that whatsoever thou take into thy custody cannot perish, nor suffer
any hurt or harm. And if I at any time this day, shall through frailty forget
thee; yet Lord, I beseech thee, do thou in mercy remember me. Neh. 13. 31.
And I pray not unto thee, O Father, for my self alone, but I beseech thee also
be merciful unto thy whole Church, and chosen people, wheresoever they live
upon the face of the earth. Defend them from the Rage and Tyranny of the Devil,
the World and Antichrist. Give thy Gospel a free and a joyful passage through
the world, for the conversion of those who belong to thine Election and Kingdom.

Bless the Churches and Kingdoms (wherein Psa. 51. 18, 19
we live) with the continuance of Peace, Isa. 39. 8.
Justice, Psalm. 72 15.
and true Religion. Defend the King's Majesty from all his Enemies, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
and grant him a long life in health, and all happiness to reign over us. Bless
our gracious Queen Mary, Prince Charles, the Lady Mary, the Lady Elizabeth and
her Princely Issue. Increase in them all heroical gifts, and spiritual graces,
1 Timothy 2. 2.
which may make them fit for those places, for which thou have ordained them.
Direct all the Nobility, Bishops, Ministers, and Magistrates of this Church and
Commonwealth, to govern the Commons in true religion, justice, obedience, and
tranquillity. Be merciful unto all the Brethren which fear thee, and call upon
thy name; and comfort as many among them as are sick, Jam. 5. 15.
and comfortless in body, or mind: especially be favorable to all such as
suffer any trouble or persecution for the testimony of thy truth, Heb. 11. 36.
and holy Gospel: And give them a gracious deliverance 1. Cor. 10. 13.
out of all their troubles, 2 Timothy 2. 9.
which way it shall seem best to thy Wisdom; for the glory of thy Name, the
further enlarging of the truth, 2 Corinthians. 1. 6, etc.
and the more ample increase of their own Comfort and Consolation. Hasten thy
coming, O blessed Savior, and end these sinful days. And give me grace, that
like a wife Virgin, I may be prepared with oil in my Lamp, Mat. 25. 1, 2, etc.
to meet thee the sweet Bridegroom of my Soul at thy coming; whether it be by
the day of Death, or of Judgment: and then, Lord Jesus, come when thou will;
Rev. 22. 20.
even Lord Jesus come quickly. These and all other graces which thou know
needful and necessary for me, this day and evermore, I humbly beg and crave at
thy hands, O Father: giving thee thy glory, in that form of Prayer, which
Christ himself has taught me to say unto thee. Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name, etc.

Meditations to stir us up to Morning Prayer.
IF when thou art about to pray, Satan shall suggest that thy Prayers are too
long, and that therefore it were better either to omit Prayers, or else to cut
them shorter: meditate, that Prayer is thy spiritual sacrifice, Heb. 13. 15, 16.
wherewith God is well pleased; and therefore it is so displeasing to the
Devil, and so irksome to thy Flesh. Bend therefore thy Affections (will they,
nill thy) to so holy an exercise; assuring thy self, that it does by so much
the more please God, by how much the more it is unpleasing to thy flesh.

2. Forget not how the Holy Ghost puts at down as a special note of reprobates:
they call not upon the Lord, Psalm 14. 4.
they call not upon God. Psalm. 53. 4.
And when Eliphaz supposed that Job had cast off the fear of God, Job 15. 4.
and tha^ God had cast Job out of his favor, he charge him that he
restrained prayer (...) God: making that a sure none of the (...) and a
sufficient cause of the other. On the other side, that God has promised, that
whosoever shall call on his name shall be saved. Romans 10. 13.
It is certain, that he who makes no conscience of the duty of Prayer, has no
grace of the holy Spirit in him. For the spirit of grace and of prayer, are
one: And therefore Grace and Prayer go together. Zach. 12. 10.
But he that can from a penitent heart (morning and evening) pray unto God, it
is sure, that he has his measure of grace in this world; and he shall have his
portion of glory in the life which is to come.

3. Remember, that as loathing of meat and painfulness of speaking, are two
symptoms of a sick body: So irkesomness of praying when thou talkest with God,
and carelessness in hearing, when God, by his Word, speaks unto thee, are two
sure signs of a sick Soul.

4. Call to mind the zealous devotions of the Christians in the Primitive
Church, who spent many whole nights and vigils in watching and praying for the
forgiveness of their sins; and that they might be found ready at the coming of
Christ. And how that David was not concent Psalm 55. 16, 17.
to pray at Morning, at Evening, and at Noon, but he would also Psalm. 119. 62.
rise up at midnight to pray unto God. And if Christ did chide his Disciples,
because they would not Mat 26. 40.
watch with him one hour in praying, what chiding do thou deserve, who
think it too long to continue in prayer but one quarter of an hour? If thou
have spent diverse hours in seeing a vain Mask; or Play; yea, whole days and
nights in carding and dicing, to please thy flesh; be ashamed to think a Prayer
of a quarter of an hour long, to be too long an exercise for the service of God.

5. Consider, that if the Papists in their blind superstition, do in an
unknown, and therefore 1 Cor. 14. 14.
unedifying Tongue (fit only for the Children of Genesis 11. 79. Rev. 17. 5.
mystical Babylon) mutter over upon their A superstition.
Beads, every morning and evening, so many scores of Ave-Maries, Pater-Nosters,
and idolatrous prayers: Qui filo insertis numerant sua murmura baccis. Mant.
Alphons. lib. 4.
how shall they in their superstitious devotion, rise up in judgment against
thee, professing thy self to be a true worshipper of Christ? If that thou
think these Prayers to be too long a task, being shorter for quantity than
theirs, but far more profitable for quality, tending only to God's glory, and
thy good; and so compiled of Scripture phrase, as that thou may speak to
God, as well in his own holy words, as in thine own native language. Be
ashamed, that Papists in their superstitious worshipping of creatures, should
show themselves more devout than thou, in the sincere worshipping of the true
and Joh. 17. 3.
only God. And indeed, a prayer in private devotion, should be one Vox
continuata, non concila and rupta ut battologia vitetur. Perkins de unic.
ration. conc. c. 10.
continued speech, rather than many broken fragments.

6. Lastly, When such thoughts come into thy head, either to keep thee from
prayer, or to distract thee in praying: remember that those are the Mat. 13. 4,
19.
Fowls which the evil one sends to devour the good seed, and the carcases of
thy spiritual Sacrifices: but endeavor, with Genesis 25. 11.
Abraham to drive them away. Yet notwithstanding, if thou perceivest at some
times, that thy spirits are dull, and thy mind not apt for Prayer, and holy
devotion: strive not too much for that time; but humbling thy self at the sense
of thine infirmity and dullness, knowing that God accepts the Mat 26. 31.
willing mind (though it be oppressed with the heaviness of the flesh) endeavor
the next time, 2 Cor. 8. 12
to recompense this dullness, by redoubling the zeal, and for the time present,
commend thy soul to God in this or the like short Prayer.

Another shorter Morning Prayer.
O Most gracious God, and merciful Father, I thine unworthy Servant do here
acknowledge, that as I have been born in sin, so I have lived in iniquity, and
broken every one of thy Commandments, in thought, word and deed, following the
desires of mine own will, and lusts of my flesh, not caring to be governed by
thy holy Word and Spirit: and therefore I have justly deserved all shame and
misery in this life, and everlasting condemnation in hellfire, if thou
should but deal with me according to thy Justice, and my desert. Wherefore,
O heavenly Father, I beseech thee, (for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, and for
the Merits of that bitter Death, and bloody Passion, which I believe that he
has suffered for me) that thou would pardon, and forgive unto me all my
sins, and deliver me from the shame and vengeance, which is due to me for them:
And send thy Holy Spirit into my heart, which may assure me that thou art my
Father, and that I am thy Child, and that thou love me with an unchangeable
love; and let the same thy good Spirit lead me in thy truth, and crucify in me
more and more, all worldly and carnal lusts, that my sins may more and more die
in me; and that I may serve thee in unfeigned righteousness and holiness this
day, and all the days of my life: That when this mortal life is ended, I may
(through thy mercy in CHRIST) be made partaker of everlasting glory in thy
heavenly Kingdom. And here, O Lord, from the bottom of my heart I thank thee
for all thy blessings which thou have bestowed upon my soul and body, for
electing me in thy love, redeeming me by thy Son, sanctifying me by thy Spirit,
and, preserving me from my youth up, until this present day and hour, by thy
most gracious providence.

I tha^k thee more especially for that thou have defended me this night from
all perils and dangers, and have brought me safe to the beginning of this day.
And now (good Lord) I beseech thee, keep me this day from all evil, that may
hurt me, and from falli^g into any gross sin that should offend thee. Set thy
fear before mine eyes, and let thy spirit so rule my heart, that all that I
shall think, do or speak this day, may tend to thy glory, the good of others,
and the peace of mine own conscience. And to this end I commend my self, and
all my ways and actions, together with all that do belong unto me, unto thy
gracious direction and protection; praying thee to keep both them and me from
all evil: and to give a blessing to all our honest labors and endeavors.
Defend thy whole Church from the tyranny of the world, and of Antichrist:
Preserve our gracious King from all conspiracies and treasons: grant him a long
and prosperous reign over us. Bless our gracious Queen Mary, Prince Charles,
the Lady Ma^^, the Lady Elizabeth and her Princely ^^sue: endue them with thy
grace, and defend them from all evil. Bless all our Ministers and Magistrates,
with those graces and gifts, which thou know necessary for their places. Be
favorable to all that fear thee, and tremble at thy judgments: comfort all
those that are sick and comfortless. Lord, keep me in a continual readiness, by
faith and repentance, ^or my last end: that whether I live or die, I may be
found thine own, to thine eternal glory, and mine everlasting salvation,
through Jesus Christ my only Savior. In whose blessed name I beg these mercies
at thy hands, and give unto thee thy praise and glory, in that pra^er, which he
has sanctified with his own lips, saving, Our Father which art in Heaven,
hall^^^d be thy Name, etc.

Further Meditations, to stir us up to Prayer in the Morning.
THink not any business or haste (though never so great) a sufficient excuse to
omit prayer in the Morning, but meditate:

1. That the greater thy business is, by so much the more need thou have to
pray for God's good speed and blessing thereon: seeing it is certain, that
nothing can prosper without his blessing.

2. That many a Man, when he thought himself surest, has been soonest crossed,
so may thou.

3. That many a Man has gone out of his door, and never come in again. Quem
dies vidit veniens superbum: Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem. Senec. Nescis
quid vesper serus vel^^t. Varro.
Many a Man who rose well and lively in the morning, has been seen a dead Man
ere night. So may it befall thee: and if thou be so careful, before thou go
abroad, to drink, to fence thy body from ill airs; how much more careful
should thou be to pray, to preserve thy soul from evil temptations?

4. That the time spent in prayer never hinders, but furthereth and prospers
a Man's journey and business.

5. That in going abroad into the world, thou go into a Forest full of
unknown dangers, where thou shall meet many briars, to tear thy good name; many
snares, to crap thy life; and my hunters, to devour thy Soul. It is a Field of
pleasant Grass, but full of poisonous Serpents. Adventure not therefore to go
naked amongst these briars, till thou have prayed Christ to clothe thee with
his righteousness: nor to pass through these snares and ambushments, till thou
have prayed for God's providence to be thy guide: nor to walk barefoot through
this snaky field, till having thy feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace, thou have prayed to have still the brazen Serpent in the eyes of thy
faith; that so if thou come not home holier, thou may be sure not to return
worser than when thou wentest out of door.

Therefore though thy haste be never so much, or thy business never so great; yet
go not about it, nor out of thy doors, till thou have at least used this, or
the like short Prayer.

A brief Prayer for the Morning.
O Merciful Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, I beseech thee, forgive me all
my known and secret sins, which in thought, word or deed, I have committed
against thy Divine Majesty, and deliver me from all those judgments, which are
due unto me for them: and sanctify my heart with thy holy Spirit, that I may
henceforth lead a more godly and religious life. And hear (O Lord) I praise thy
holy name, for that thou have refreshed me this night with moderate sleep and
rest. I beseech thee likewise defend m^ this day from all perils and dangers of
body and soul. And to this end I commend my self, and all my actions un^o thy
blessed protection and government: beseeching thee, that whether I live or die,
I may live and die to thy glory, and the salvation of my poor soul, which thou
have bought with thy precious Blood. Bless me therefore, O Lord, in my going
out, and coming in; and grant that whatsoever I shall think, speak, or take in
hand this day, may tend to the glory of thy name, the good of others, and the
comfort of mine own conscience, when I shall come to make before thee my last
accounts. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ thy Son's sake: In
whose blessed Name I give thee thy glory, and beg at thy hands all other graces
which thou see to be needful for me, this day and ever, in that prayer which
Christ himself has taught me, saying: Our Father, etc.

Meditations, directing a Christian, how he may walk all the day with God like
Enoch.
HAving thus begun, keep all the day after as diligent a watch as thou can,
over all thy thoughts, words, and actions, which thou may easily do, by
craving the assistance of God's holy Spirit, Romans 8. 26.
and observing these few rules.

First, for thy thoughts.
1. BE Ephesians. 4. 27.
careful to suppress every sin in the first motion Dash Psalm. 1^7. 9.
Babylon's children, (whilst they are young) against the stones Tread (Betimes)
Isa 50. 5.
the Cockatrice's egg, lest it break out into a Serpent. Let sin be to thy
heart a stranger, not a home-dweller. Take heed of falling often into the same
sin, lest the custom of sinning Qui couscientiae curam abjiciunt nec homines
reverentur nec Deum.
take away the conscience of sin, and then shall thou was so impudently wicked,
that thou will neither fear God nor reverence Man.

2. Suffer not thy mind to feed it self upon any imagination. Zach. 8. 17.
which is either impossible for thee to do, Prove. 6. 14.
or unprofitable, if it be done: but rather think of the world's vanity, to
contemn it; of death, to expect it: of judgment, to avoid it; of Hell, to
escape it, and of Heaven, to desire it.

3. Desire not to fulfill thy mind in all things; but learn to deny thy self
those desires (though never so pleasing to thy nature) which being attained, will
draw either scandal on thy Religion, or hatred to thy Person. Consider in every
thing the end before thou attempt the Action.

4. Labor daily more and more to see thine own miseri, through unbelief,
self-love, and wilful Breaches of God's Law: and the necessity of God's mercy
through the merits of Christ's Passion, to be such; that if thou were demanded,
What is the vilest creature upon earth? Thy Conscience may answer, Mine own
self by reason of my great sins: and that if on the other side thou were asked,
What thou esteemest to be the m^st precious thing in the world? thy heart might
answer, One drop of Christ's blood, to wash away my sins. And as thou tenderest
the salvation of thy soul, live not in any wilful filthiness. For true faith
and the purpose of sinning, can never stand together.

5. Approve thy self to be a true servant of Christ, not only in thy general
Calling, as in the frequent use of the Word and Sacraments; but also in thy
particular, in making conscience to eschew every known sin, and to obey God in
every one of his Commandments; like Josias 2 Kin. 23. 25. Luke 1. 6.
who turned to God with all his heart, according to all the law of Moses: and
Zachary and Elizabeth, who walked in all the Commandments of God without
reproof But if at any time through frailty, thou slippest into any sin, lie not
in it, but speedily rise out of it by unfeigned repentance; praying for pardon,
till thy conscience be pacified, thy hatred of sin increased, and thy purpose
of amendment confirmed.

6. Beware of affecting Popularity by adulation: the end never proves good; and
though attained by due deserts, yet manage it wisely, lest it prove more
dangerous than contempt. For States desire but to keep down, whom they contemn
for their unworthiness, but to cut off, whom they envy for their greatness: He
therefore is truly prudent who (considering the premises) neither affects nor
neglects popularity. But in any wise take heed of harboring a Socrates in
forum egressus, quam multis ego, inquit. non egeo! Non est ergo pauper. qui
caret, sed qui eget.
discontented mind; for it may work thee more woe than thou art aware of. It is
a special mercy, in the multitude of so many blessings, as thou do enjoy, to
have some crosses. God gives thee many blessings, lest through want (being his
child) thou should despair: and he sends thee some crosses, lest by too much
prosperity (playing the fool) thou should presume. Many who have mounted to
great dignities, would have contented themselves with Dimidium plus toto.
Hesiod.
meaner, had they known their Feriunt summos fulmina montes. Horat. Tangunt
magnos tristia fota deos. Ovid.
great dangers: affect therefore competency, rather than eminency. And in all
thy will, have ever an eye to God's will, lest thy self-action turn to thine
own destruction. Happy the Man, who in this short life is (...).
least known of the World, so that he does truly know God, and himself!
whatsoever cross therefore thou have to discontent thee, remember, that it is
less than thy sins have deserved. Count therefore Christ* thy chiefest joy, Qui
notus nimis omnibus* ignotus moritur sibi. Sen.
and sin thy greatest grief: esteem no want, to the want of Grace; nor any
loss, to the loss of God's favor: and then the coffeehouse for outward
means shall the less perplex thine inward mind. And as often as Satan shall offer
any motion of coffeehouse to thy mind, remember Saint Paul's admonition, 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8, 9.
We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain, Insaniae damnandi sunt,
qui tam multa tam anxie congerunt, qu^m ^it tan paucis opus vives.
that we can carry nothing out. And having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition. Pray therefore with wise Prove. 30. 8, 9
Agur: O Lord, give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient
for me, lest I be too full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or, lest I
be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.

7. Bestow no more thought upon worldly things than thou needs must, for the
discharge of thy place, and the 1 Timothy 6. 8, 9.
maintenance of thy estate: but still let thy care be greater Genesis 28. 20.
for Col. 3. 1, 2. Phil. 3. 20.
heavenly, than earthly things: and be more grieved for a Jos. 7. 9.
dishonor done to God, than for an injury offered to thy self: but if any
private injury be offered unto thee, Psalm. 139. 21, etc.
bear it as a Christian, with patience. Never was an innocent man wronged, but
if he patiently bare his cross, he Nobile vincendi genus est patientia: vincit.
Qui patitur: si vis vincere, disce pati. Optima injuriae ultio est oblivio,
efficit enim ut animam levet, nec magis laedat* quam si facta non esset.
overcame in the end. But thy good name in the mean while is wounded: bear that
also with patience. For he that at the last day will give thy body a
resurrection; will as sure in his good time, grant a resurrection to thy good
name. If impatiently thou fretrest and vexest at thy wrongs, the hurt which
thou do thy self, is more than that which thine enemy can do unto thee.
Neither can thou more rejoice him, than to hear that it thoroughly vexes thee.
But if thou can show, patience on earth, God will show himself just from
heaven. Pray for him; for, if thou be a good man thy self, thou can not but
rejoice, if thou should see thy worst enemy to become a good man too. But if
he still continues in his malice, and increases in his mischief, give thou
thy self unto Prayer, committing thy self, and commending thy cause unto the
righteous Judge of heaven and earth, saying with Jeremy; J^r. 11. 20.
O Lord of host that judge righteously, and triest the reins and the heart:
vengeance is thine, and unto thee have I opened my cause. In the mean while
wait (with David) on the Lord: be of good-courage, and he shall comfort thine
heart.

8. The more others commend thee for an excellent act, Ne (...) quod scis
ostentes, sed rebus te ostende site.
be thou the more humble in thine own thoughts. Affect not the vain praises of
men: the blessed Virgin was troubled when she was truly praised of an Angel.
They shall be praised of Angels in heaven, who have eschew'd the praises of Men
on Earth. Neither need'st thou praise thy self; deal but uprightly, Psalm. 49.
18.
others will do that for thee. Be not thou curious to know other men's doings,
but rather be careful that no man know any ill dealings by thee.

9. Esteem no sin little, for the curse of God is due to the least; and the
least would have damned thee, had not the Son of God died for thee. Bewail
therefore the misery of thine own state: and as occasion is minist^ed Ezekiel. 9.
4. Psalm. 69 9, 10. Mark. 3. 5.
^orn for the iniquity of the time. Pray to God to amend it, and be not thou
one of them that make it worse.

10. Lastly, Think often of the Heu fugiu^t fraeno non remorante dies.
shortness of thy life, and certainty of death: and wish rather a good life
than a long. For, Psalm. 90. 9, 10 15.
as one day of Man's life is to be preferred before the longest age of a Stag,
Non quam diu sed quam been.
or Raven? so one day spend religiously, is to be higher valued, that a man's
Fuit, non vixit. Sen. Non refert quanta sit vitae diuturnitas, sed qualis sit
administratio. Vives.
whole life that is consumed in profaneness.

Cast over therefore once every day, the number of thy days, by substracting
those that are past (as being vanished like yester-nights dream) contracting
them that are to come, (since the one half must be slept out, the rest made
uncomfortable, by the troubles of the World, Tota vita dies unus ut mirum sit
homines non exsatiari iisdem toties redeuntibus.
thine own sickness, and the death of friends:) counting Non potest praesentem
diem recte vivere is, qui se non eam quasi ultimam victurum esse cogitat.
only the present day thine; which spend, as if thou were to spend no more.

Secondly, For thy Words,
1. REmember, that thou must answer for every Mat. 12. 36.
idle word: that in Prove. 10. 19.
multiloquy, the wisest man shall over-shoot himself. Avoid therefore all
tedious and idle talk, whereof seldom arises comfort, many times Dixisse saepe
poenituit, tacuisse vero nunquam.
repentance; especially beware of rash answers, when the tongue out-runs the
mind. The word was thine whilst thou kept'st it in: it is Nescit vox missa
reverti Quam periculosum illud, Lingua quo vadis?
another as soon as it is out. O the shame, when a man's own tongue shall be
produced a witness, to the confusion of his own face!

Let then thy words be few, but advised: forethink whether that which thou art
to speak, be Nescit poenitenda loqui, qui proferenda prius suo tradidit examini
Cassiod. lib. 10. Epist. 4.
fit to be spoken: affirm no more than what thou know to be true; and be
rather Jam. 1 19. Consultius est tacere quam inepte loqui.
silent, than speak to an ill, or to no purpose.

2. Let thy heart and tongue ever go together in honesty and truth; hate 1 Pet.
2. 1. Psalm. 3. 2. Si mendacem te norint, nemo tibi credet etiamsi affirms
verissima. Arist
dissembling and lying in another, detest it in thy self, or God will detest
thee for it: for he hates a liar, and his father the Devil alike. And if once
thou be discovered to make no conscience of lying, no Man will believe thee
when thou speak a truth: but if thou love truth, more credit will be given
to thy word, than to a liars oath. Great is the possession which Satan has in
those, who are so accustomed to lying, that they will lie though they get
nothing by it themselves, nor are not compelled unto it by others. Let not
thine anger remain, when thou see the cause removed: and ever distinguish
'twixt him that offends of Odi tanquam amaturus. Prove. 6. 30. Acts 3. 17. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
infirmity (or against his will) and him who offends Psalm. 59. 3, 5. Psalm.
101. 7.
maliciously, and of set purpose: let the one have pity, the other justice.

3. Keep thy speech as clean from all obscenity, as thou would thy meat from
poison: and let thy talk be Ephesians. 4. 29. Psalm. 1. 2. Prove. 31. 26. Pii est alios
reddere pios.
gracious, that he that hears thee, may grow better by thee: and be ever more
earnest when thou Psalm. 139. 21.
speak of Religion, than when thou talkest of worldly matters.

If thou perceivest that thou have erred, persevere not in thine error: Psalm.
69. 9.
rejoice to find the truth, and Si verum audias silentio protinus reverere,
illique tanquam divinae rei assurgito.
magnify it. Study therefore three things especially; to understand well, to
say well, and to do well.

And when thou meetest with God's children, be sure to make some holy advantage
by them: learn of them, all the good that thou can; and communicate with
them, all the good things that thou know. The more good thou teach
others, the more will God still Mark 4. 24, 25.
minister unto thee. For, as the gifts of Men, by much using, do perish and
decrease: So the gifts of God, by much using, do the more grow and increase;
like the 2 Kin. 4. 2.
widow's pitcher of Oil, which the more it poured to fill other vessels, the
more it was still replenished in it self.

4. Beware that you believe not all that is told you, and that you tell not
Eccl. 3. 7. Luke 2. 19. Arcanum tibi creditum fidelius custodi, quam depositam
p^euniam.
all that you hear: for if you do, you shall not long enjoy true friends, nor
ever want great troubles. Therefore in accusations, be first assured of the
truth, then censure. And as thou tenderest the reputation of an honest heart;
never let malice in hatred, make thee to reveal that which love in friendship
bound thee a long time to conceal. But for fear of such after-claps, observe
two things.

First, though thou have many acquaintance; yet make not any thy familiar
friend, but he that truly Vera amicitia tantummodo est inter bonos. Mali nec
inter se amici sunt, nec cum bonis.
fears God: Such a one, thou never need to fear. For though you should in
some particulars fall out, yet Christian love, the main ground of your
friendship, will never fall away; and the fear of God will never suffer him to
do thee any villainy. Secondly, do nothing in the sight of a Civilem amicum sic
habeas, ut putes posse inimicum fieri.
civil friend, for which thou can not be safe, unless it be concealed, nor
any thing, for which (if just cause be offered) thou need'st fear him, if he
proves thine unjust enemy. If thou have done any thing amiss, ask God
forgiveness, and persuade thy self rather than thy friend, to Quod taceri vis,
prior ipse taceas.
keep thine own counsel. For be assured, that what friendship soever is
grounded upon any other cause than true Religion; if ever that cause fail, the
friendship falls off: and the rather, because that as God breeds among men,
Truth, Peace and Amity, that we should live to do one another good; so the
Devil daily sows falsehood, Bellum non est hominum sed (quod verbum sonat)
belluarum and cum vitiis non hominibus gerendum.
discord and enmity, Ephesians. 5. 4.
to cause (if he can) the dearest friends to devour one another. Psalm. 15. 3.


5. Make not a Irridere pium nefas: impium, immane: hominem, inhumanum.
jest of another man's infirmity: remember thine own. Abhor the frothy wit of a
filthy nature, whose brains having once conceived an odd scoff, his mind
travails (as a woman with child) till he be delivered of it. Yea, he had rather
lose his best friend, than his worst jest But if thou be disposed to be Nemo
videtur sibi tam vilis, ut irrideri merearur.
merry, have a special care to three things:

1. That thy mirth be not against Religion;

2. That it be not against Charity;

3. That it be not against Chastity, and then be as merry as thou can, only
in the Lord.

6. Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy, for thou know not what shall be
the manner of, Phil. 4. 4. Prove. 23. 17.
thine own end. But be more Valentinianus Imp. (...) liquis afficlendus esset*
aiebat (...) malli^ ad vita^^ (...) animi est alionis malis (...), and non
misereri communem naturam.
glad to see the worst man's amendment, than his punishment. Hate no Man, for
fear lest Christ loves him, who will not take it well, that thou should hate
whom he loves, Christ Romans 5. 8, 10.
loved thee, when thou wast his Enemy: by the merits therefore of his blood,
Ephesians. 2. 4.
he requires thee, for his sake, to love thine Enemy. Deny him (being a
Christian) if thou dare. He asks but forgiveness for forgiveness. The
forgiveness of 100 pence, for the forgiveness of ten thousand talents; of 60
hundred thousand Crowns, Mat. 18. 24, 28.
for ten Crowns; petty forgiveness of Man, for the infinite forgiveness of
Almighty GOD. Though thou think thine Enemy unworthy to be forgiven; yet
Christ is worthy to be obeyed.

7. When the glory of God, or good of thy Neighbor does require it; speak the
truth, Psalm. 1. 19.
and fear not the face of Man. The frown of a Prince may sometimes be the
favor of God. Nec mendacii utilitas est diuturna nec veritatis damnum diu
nocet.
Neither shall flattery still hold in credit, nor truth always continue in
disgrace.

8. Ever think him a true friend, who tells thee secretly and plainly of thy
faults. He that sees thee offend, and tells thee not of thy fault, either
flatters thee for favor, or dares not displease thee for fear. Miserable is
his case, who when he needs, has none to admonish him. Reprehension, be it
just, be it unjust; come it from the mouth of a friend, or of a foe, it never
does a wise Man harm. Reprehensio semper vel meliores vel cautiores nos teddit.
For if it be true; thou have a warning to amend; if it be false, thou have a
Caveat what to avoid. So every way it makes a wise man better or warier. But Si
reprehendi fers aegre reprehendenda ne feceris.
if thou can not endure to be reprehended, do then nothing worthy of
reprehension.

9. Speak not of God, but with Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
fear and reverence, and as in his sight and hearing. For seeing we are not
worthy to use his holy Name in our Mouths: Qui facile in seriis jurat in jocis
jurabit: qui in jocis and in mendacio. Vives
much less ought we to abuse it vainly in our Talk, But ordinarily to use it in
vain, rash, or false Oaths, is an undoubted sign of a soul that never truly
feared God. Pray therefore with David, when thou art to speak in any matter
that may move passion: Psalm. 141. 3,
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

10. Lastly, in 1 Pet. 5. 12.
praising be discreet: in Romans 12. 10.
Affabilitas and comitas sunt nullius impendii, amicitias tamen magnas
conglutinant exhibita, dissolvunt praetermissa. 1 These. 5. 26, 41.
saluting, courteous; in 2 These. 3. 5. Rev. 19. 17.
admonishing, friendly; in forgiving, merciful; in Psalm. 15. 4.
promising, faithful; and bountiful in Deuteronomy. 15. 13. 14.
recompensing good service: making not the rewards of virtue the gifts of
favor.

Thirdly, for thy Actions.
1. DO no evil, though thou might: for God will not suffer the Ps. 119. 101.
least sin (without bitter repentance) to escape unpunished. Leave not undone
any good that thou can. But do nothing without a calling, nor any thing in
thy calling, till thou have first taken 1 Samuel 30. 8.
council of God's Word, of the lawfulness thereof, and prayed for his blessings
upon thy endeavor; and then do it in the name of God, with cheerfulness of
heart, committing the success unto him; in whose power it is, to bless with his
grace, whatsoever business is intended to his glory.

2. When thou art tempted to do an evil work, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Imminet semper
occasioni suaediabolus. Greg.
remember that Satan is where his business is. Let not the child of God be the
instrument of so base a slave: hate the Work if thou abhorrest the Author. Ask
thy Conscience these two questions: Would I have another to do this unto me?
Mat. 7, 12.
What shall I answer Christ in the day of my Luke 16. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 2. 2 Cor. 5.
10.
accounts, if contrary to my knowledge and conscience, I shall do this
wickedness, and sin against him? and remember with Joseph, Genesis 39. 9, 11, etc.
that though no man sees, yet God sees all. Fly therefore (with Joseph) from
all sins, as well those that are secret in the sight of God, as those that are
manifest in the the eyes of Men. For God as he is just, without speedy
repentance, will bring thy secret sins, as he did David's to the open light, 2 Samuel 12. 12.
before all Israel, and before the Sun. Be therefore as much afraid of secret
sins, Luke 8. 17. and 12. 2.
as of open shame. And so avoid all in general, as that thou do not allow to
the self any one particular, or darling sin, Prove. 5. 8,
which the corruption of thy Nature could best agree withal: For the crafty
devil can hold a man's soul as fast by one, as by many sins: and faster by that
one which does please thee, than by all those which begin to be abominable unto
thee. And as thou de^^^est to avoid a sin; so be careful to shun the Omnis
peccandi (...) vi^enda est; (...) at peri^^^m per (...) in illo Eccl. 3,
the occasion.

3. In effecting good actions which are within the compass of thy calling,
distrust not God's Providence, though thou see the means either wanting or weak.
Judge. 7. 7.
And if means do offer themselves, be sure that they be lawful: and having
gotten lawful means, take heed that thou rely not more upon them than upon God
himself. Labor in a lawful calling, is God's ordinary means, by which he
blesses his children with outward things. Pray therefore for God's blessing
upon his own means. In earthly business, bear an heavenly mind: do thou thy
best endeavor, and commit the whole success to the fore-ordaining wisdom of
Almighty God. Never think to thrive by those means which God has accursed.
That will not in the end prove gain, which is gotten with the loss of thy Soul.
Mat. 16. 26.
In all therefore both actions and means, endeavor with Paul, to have always a
clear conscience toward God, Hic murus ahaeneus est^ nil conscire sibi, nulla
pallescere culpa. Horat. Act. 24. 16.
and toward men. Look to your selves, what conscience ye have:
For conscience shall damn, and conscience shall save.


4. Love all good things for God's sake: but God for his own sake. Whilst thou
hold God thy friend, thou need not Psalm. 118, 6, 7. Romans 8. 31. Prove. 16.
7.
fear who is thine enemy: for either God will make thine enemy to become thy
Genesis 32. 3, etc.
friend, or will Genesis 31, 7.
bridle him that he cannot hurt thee. No man is Numb. 14. 42, 43. etc.
overthrown by his enemy, unless that first his sin have prevailed over him,
and God has left him to himself; he that would therefore be safe from the fear
of his enemies, Psalm. 27. 11, 12, 13.
and live still in the favor of his God; let him redeem the folly of the time
past with serious repentance, look to the time present with religious
diligence, and take heed to the time to come with careful providence.

5. Give every man the honor due to his place; but honor a man more for his
goodness, than for his greatness. And of whomsoever thou have received a
benefit, unto him (as God shall enable thee) remember to be thankful.
Acknowledge it lovingly unto Men, and pray for him heartily unto God: and count
every blessing received from God as a pledge of his eternal love, and a spur to
a godly life.

6. Be not proud for any external worldly goods, nor for any internal spiritual
gifts. Not for external goods, because, that as they came lately, so they will
shortly be gone again; their loss therefore is the less to be grieved at. Not
for any internal gifts: for as God gave them, so will he likewise take them
away, if (forgetting the giver) thou shall abuse his gifts, to puff up thine
heart with a pride of thine own worth; and contemn others, for whose good
Almighty God bestowed those gifts upon thee. Have thou any one vertus that
moves thee to be self-conceited? thou have twenty vices that may better vilisie
thee in thine own eyes.

Be the Tu recte vives, si curas esse quod audis. Hor. p. ad Quint.
same in the sight of God, who beholds thy heart, that thou seem to be in
the eyes of Men, that see thy face. Content not thy self with Nil juv^t bonum
nomen, reclamante conscientia.
an outward good n^me, when thy Conscience shall inwardly tell thee it is
undeserved, and therefore none of thine. A deserved good name for any thing,
but for godliness, lasts little, and is less worth. In all the holy Scriptures,
I never read of an Hypocrite's repentance: and no wonder; for whereas after sin
conversion is left as a means, to cure all other sinners, what means remain to
recover him who has converted conversion it self into sin? Woe therefore unto
the Soul that is not, and yet still seems religious.

7. Mark the fearful ends of notorious evil Men, to abhor their wicked actions;
mark the life of the godly, that thou may imitate it; and his blessed Number.
23. 10.
end, that it may comfort thee. Obey thy betters, observe the wise, accompany
the honest, Psalm. 37. 35, 36, 37.
and love the religious. And seeing the corrupt nature of man is prone to
hypocrisy, beware that thou use not the exercise of Religion, as matters of
course and custom, without care and conscience, to grow more holy and devout
thereby. Observe therefore how by the continual use of God's means, thou
feel thy special corruptions weakened, and thy sanctification more and more
increased: and Isa. 58. 5, 6, Mat. 23. 27, 28.
make no more show of holiness outwardly to the world, than thou have in the
sight of God inwardly in thine heart. Psalm. 51. 56.


8. Endeavor to rule those who live under thine authority, rather by love than
by fear, for to rule by Ama and impera. Blando vis latet impetio. Aug.
love is easy and safe, but tyranny is ever accompanied with care and Qui
terret, plus ille timet: sors illa Tyranno convenit. Claud. de instit. prin.
terror. Oppression will force the oppressed to take any advantage, to shake
off the Yoke that they are not able to bear: neither will God's Justice suffer
the sway that is grounded on Tyranny long to continue. Remember that though by 1
Pet. 2. 13.
humane ordinance they serve thee, yet by a more peculiar right they are Lev.
25. 55.
God's servants. Yea, now being Christians, Philem. 16.
not as thy servants, but above servants, 1 Cor. 9. 5.
brethren beloved in the Lord. Rule therefore over Si Pericles, quoties
chlamydem indueret, apud se dicere consuevit, Attend, Pericles, quod
gestaturus es imperium in liberos Athenienses. Plut. in Apophth. Quanto magis
tu, quoties authortatem ^xercitaturus ^s apud ^eipsum, dicere deberes, Memento,
homo, quod imperium geris in liberatos Christianos.
Christians, (being a Christian) in love and mercy, like Christ thy Master.

9. Remember, that of all actions none makes a Magistrate more like God, (whose
Vicegerent he is) than doing Justice justly. For the due execution whereof:

First, have ever an open ear to the just complaints of unjust dealings.

Secondly, so lend one ear to the Accuser, as that thou keep the other for the
accused: for Qui statuit aliquid part inaudit^ alter^, aequum licet statuer^^,
haud aequ^s fuerit^ Sen. in Med.
he that decrees for either part, before both be heard, the decree may be
just, but himself is unjust.

Thirdly, in hearing both parts, incline not to the right hand of affection, or
to the left of hatred: as to believe arguments of persuasion for a friend,
before arguments concluding for a foe.

Fourthly, deny not Justice, which is Regia mensura, to the meanest Subject:
but let the Cause of the poor and needy come in equal balance with the rich and
mighty. If thou perceivest on the one side in a cause, the Judicious Sir
Francis Bacon's Essay of Jndicature.
high hills of cunning advantage, powerful combination, and violent
prosecution; and on the other side, the low valleys of poverty, simplicity, and
desolation: prepare thy way (as God does) to judgment, by Luke 3. 4, 5.
raising Valleys, Isaiah 40. 3.
and taking down Hills, equally inequality: that so thou may lay the
Foundation of thy sentence upon an even ground. In matters of right and wrong
'twixt party and party, let thy Conscience be careful, rather 2 Chr. 19. 10.
Jus dicere, to pronounce the Law that is made, secundum allegata and probata;
than Jus dare, to make a Law of thine own, upon the authority of sic volo, si
jubeo, fearing that fearful Malediction, Deu. 27. 17.
Cursed be he that removes his Neighbor's Landmark. Hab. 5. 1.
In Trials of Life and Death, let Judges, like Elohim, in justice remember
mercy; and so cast the severe Eye of Justice upon the Fact, as that they look
with the pitiful eye of Mercy upon the Malefactor, wresting the favor of Law,
to the favor of Life, where Grace promises amendment: but if Justice
requires, that Melius ut pereat unus, quam ut pereat unitas.
one rather than unity, must perish, and that a rotten member must be Ense
recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
cut off, to save the whole body from putrefying; fiat Justitia. But whilst
thou art pronouncing the sentence of judgment on another, remember that thine
own judgment hangs over thy head. In all causes therefore judge aright; for
thou shall be sure to find a righteous Judge, before whom thou must shortly
appear to be judged thy self: at what time thou may leave to thy friend this
for thine Epitaph: Nuper eram Judex, jam judicis ante tribunal Subsistens,
paveo: judicor ipse modo.

Many (I know not upon what grounds) seem to be much aggrieved with the Laws of
the Land, but wiser men may answer them with the Apostle, Nos scimus bonam esse
legem, modo Judex ea legitime utatur; We know that the law is good, if a man
use it lawfully. 1 Timothy 1. 8.
And he shall be unto me a righteous Judge, whose heart neither corruption of
bribes, fear of foes, nor favor of friends can withdraw from the conscionable
practice of these precepts. And to that rare and venerable Judge, I say with
Jehoshaphat: Be of courage, 2 Chr. 19. 11.
and do justice, and the Lord will be with the good.

10. Lastly, Make not an occupation of any recreation. The longest use of
pleasure is but short: but the pains of pleasure abused, are eternal. Prove. 21.
17.
Use therefore lawful recreation, Phil. 4. 8.
so far forth, as it makes thee the fitter in body and mind, to do more
cheerfully the service of God and the duties of thy calling. Vita brevis
opusque multum operarii pigri, and urget Pater-familias. Rabb. Apophtheg.
Thy work is great, thy time is but short. And he who will Rev. 22. 12.
recompense every man according to his works, stands at the door. Think how
much work is behind, how slow thou have wrought in the time which is past; and
what a reckoning thou should make, if thy master should call thee this day
to thine accounts. Jam. 5. 9.
Be therefore careful henceforth to make the most advantage of thy short time
that remains, as a man would of an old lease, that were near expiring: and when
thou disposest to recreate thy self, remember how small a time is allotted for
thy life; and that therefore much of that is not to be consumed in idleness,
sports, plays, and toyish vanities, seeing the whole is but a short while,
though it be all spent in doing the best good that thou can: for Man was not
created for sports, plays and recreation; but zealously to serve God in
Religion, and conscionably to serve his neighbor in his vocation, and by both
to ascertain himself of eternal salvation. Esteem therefore the loss of Nihil
est aliud tempus, quam vita, quam unusquisque tantum se amare profitetur; quum
rei nullius magis fit prodigus qu^m temporis.
time, one of the greatest losses. Ephesians. 5. 16.
Redeem it carefully, to spend it wisely: that when that time comes that Luke
16* 2.
thou may be no longer a Steward on earth, thy master may welcome thee with
an Mat. 25. 21.
Euge bone serve, and give thee a better in heaven; Psalm. 90.
where thou shall joyfully enjoy thy Master's joy for evermore.

Meditations for the Evening.
At Evening when thou preparest thy self to take thy rest, meditate on these
few points
1. THat seeing thy days are numbered, Job 14. 5.
there is one more of thy number spent: Vive memor quam sis aevi brevis. Hor.
and thou art now the nearer to thy end by a day.

2. Sit down a while before thou go to bed, and consider with thy self what
memorable thing thou have seen, heard, or read that day, more than thou saw,
heard'st, or knew before; and make thy best use of them; but especially,
call to mind, what sin thou have committed that day against God or Man, and
what good thou have omitted; and humble thy self for both. If thou find that
thou have done any goodness, acknowledge it to be God's grace, and give him the
glory: and count that day He^ perdidi diem. Tit-Vesp. Apophthegm.
lost wherein thou have not done some good. Nullus sine linea dies.


3. If by frailty or strong tentation, thou shall perceive that thou have
committed any grievous sin or fault; presume not to sleep, till thou have upon
thy knees, made a particular reconciliation with God in Christ for the same:
both by confessing the fault, and by fervent praying for the pardon of the
same. Thus making thy score even with Christ every night, thou shall have the
less to account for, when thou art to make thy final reckoning before his
Majesty in the Judgment day.

4. If thou have fallen out with any in the day, Ephesians. 4. 26.
let not the Sun go down in thine anger that night. If thy conscience tells
thee that thou have wronged him, acknowledge thine offense, and Non turpe est
veniam precari; turpe est deum aut hominem habere inimicum.
entreat him to forgive thee. If he have wronged thee, offer him
reconciliation; and if he will not be reconciled, yet do thou from thy heart
forgive him, Mat. 5. 23. But in any case presume not to be thine own revenger.
For in so doing thou do God a double injury: First, in offering to take the
Sword of Justice out of his hand, as though he were not just, having reserved
the execution of Mihi vindicta, dicit Dominus.
vengeance to himself. Romans 12. 19.
Secondly, in usurping authority over his Non est tibi jus in servum alienum,
imo in conservum tuum.
servant, without referring the cause to his hearing and censure, being his,
and thy Master. Besides, thou art too partial to be a Revenger. For if thou be
to execute revenge on thy self, thou will do it too lightly; if on thy enemy,
too heavily. It belongs therefore to God to revenge; to thee to forgive.

And in testimony that thou have freely Cui semel ignoveris, cu^a ut ille
sentiat bona fide id esse actu^ and si qua in r^ illum juvare potes, experiatur
te amicum. V^ves.
forgiven him, pray unto God for the forgiveness of his fault, and the
amendment of his life; and the next time that occasion is offered, (and it lies
in thy power) do him good, and rejoice in doing it: for he that does good to
his Mat. 3. 39.
enemies, shows himself the child of God; and his reward is with God his Father.

5. Use not sleep as a means to satiate the foggy litherness of thy flesh; Romans
12. 20.
but as a medicine to refresh thy tired Senses and Members: In vita, tempus
quod tomno impenditur, no^ est vita. Vita enim vigilia est.
sufficient sleep quickneth the mind, and reviveth the body; but immoderate
sleep dulleth the one, and fatneth the other.

6. Remember that many go to bed, and never rise again, till they be wakened
and raised up by the fearful sound of the last trumpet. But he that sleeps
and wakeneth with prayer, sleeps and wakeneth with Christ. If therefore thou
desire to sleep securely, and safely, yield up thy self into the hands of
God, whilst thou art waking: and so go to bed, with a reverence of God's
Majesty, and consideration of thine own misery, which thou may imprint in thy
heart in some measure, by these and the like meditations.

Read a Chapter in the same order as was prescribed in the morning: and when
thou have done, kneel down on both thy knees at thy bedside, or some other
convenient place in thy Chamber, and lifting up thy heart, thine eyes and
hands, to thy heavenly Father, in the name and mediation of his holy Son Jesus;
pray unto him, if thou have the gift of Prayer.

1. Confessing thy sins, especially those which thou have committed that day.

2. Craving most earnestly (for Christ his sake) pardon and forgiveness for
them.

3. Requesting the assistance of his Holy Spirit for amendment of life.

4. In Giving thanks for benefits received, especially for thy preservation
that day.

5. Praying for rest and protection that night.

6. Remembering the state of the Church, the King, and the Royal Posterity, our
Ministers and Magistrates, and all our Brethren visited or persecuted.

7. Lastly, commending thy self and all thine to his gracious custody.

All which thou may do in these or the like words.

A Prayer for the Evening,
O Most gracious God, and loving Father, Psalm. 139. 2, 3.
who art about my bed, and know my down-lying, and mine up-rising, and art
near unto all that call upon thee, in truth and sincerity; Psalm. 145. 18.
I wretched sinner do beseech thee, to look upon me with the eyes of thy mercy,
and not to behold me as I am in my self: For then thou shall see but an unclean
and defiled creature, conceived in sin, and living in iniquity: Psalm. 51. 5.
so that I am ashamed to lift up mine eyes to heaven, Luke 18. 13.
knowing how grievously I have sinned against Luke 15. 18.
heaven and before thee: For, O Lord, I have transgressed all thy Commandments
and righteous Laws, Dan. 9. 11.
not only through negligence and infirmity, but oftentimes through willful
presumption, contrary to my knowledge: yea contrary to the motions of thy Holy
spirit reclaiming me from them: so that I have wounded my conscience, and
grieved thy Holy Spirit, by whom thou have sealed me to the day of redemption.
Ephesians. 4. 30.
Thou have consecrated my soul and body, to be the temples of the Holy Ghost: I
wretched sinner have defiled both, with all manner of pollution and
uncleanness. My eyes in taking pleasure to Psalm. 11^. 3^.
behold vanity; mine ears, in hearing impure and unchaste speeches; my Isa. 6.
5.
tongue, in leasing and evil speaking; my Isa. 1. 15.
hands are so full of impurity, that I am ashamed to lift them up unto thee;
and my Romans 3. 15, 16.
feet have carried me after mine own ways; my understanding and reasoning,
which are so quick in all earthly matters, are only blind and stupid, when I
come to meditate or discourse of spiritual and heavenly things; my memory,
which should be the treasury of all goodness, is not so apt to remember any
thing, as those things which are vile and vain. Yea Lord, by woeful experience I
find that naturally, Genesis 6. 5,
all the imaginations of the thoughts of mine heart are only evil continually.
And these my sins are more in number than the hairs upon mine head, Psalm. 40.
12.
and they have grown over me like a loathsome leprosy, that from the Crown of
my head to the sole of my feet, Isaiah 1. 6.
there remains no part which they have not infected. They make me seem vile in
mine own eyes: 2 Samuel 6. 22.
how much more abominable must I then appear in thy sight? And the custom of
sinning has almost taken away the conscience of sin, and pulled upon me such
dullness of sense, and hardness of heart, that thy judgments denounced against
my sins, by the faithful Preachers of thy Word, do not terrify me to return
unto thee by unfeigned repentance for them. And if thou, Lord, should but
deal with me, according to thy justice, and my desert, I should utterly be
confounded and condemned. But seeing that of thine infinite mercy* thou have
spared me so long, and still waitest for my repentance: I humbly beseech thee,
for the bitter death and bloody passion sake, which Jesus Christ has suffered
for me, that thou would pardon and forgive unto me all my sins and offenses,
and open unto me that ever streaming fountain of the blood of Christ, Zach. 13.
1.
which thou have promised to open under the New Testament, to the penitent of
the house of David, that all my sins and uncleanness may be so bathed in his
blood, buried in his death, and hid in his wounds; that they may never be more
seen, to shame me in this life, or to condemn me before thy Judgment Seat in
the World which is to come. And for as much, O Lord, as thou know that it is
not in man to turn his own heart, Jer. 20. 23.
unless thou do first give him grace to convert; and seeing that it is as
easy with thee to make me righteous and holy as to bid me to be such: O my
God, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis. Aug.
give me grace to do what thou command, and then command what thou will, and
thou shall find me willing to do thy blessed will. And to this end give unto me
thine Holy Spirit, Mat. 28. 20.
which thou have promised to give (to the John 16. 13.
world's end) unto all thine Elect people. And let the same thy holy Spirit
purge my heart, heal my corruption, sanctify my nature, and consecrate my soul
and body; that they may become the 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
temples of the Holy Ghost, to serve thee in Luke 1. 74, 75.
righteousness and holiness all the days of my life; that when (by the
direction and assistance of thy holy Spirit) I shall 2 Timothy 4* 7.
finish my course in this short and transitory life, I may cheerfully leave
this world and resign my Psalm. 31. 5.
soul into thy Fatherly hands, in the assured confidence of enjoying
everlasting life with thee, in thine heavenly Mat. 25. 34.
Kingdom, which thou have prepared for thine elect Saints, who love the Lord
Jesus, and 2 Timothy 4. 8.
expect his appearing.

In the mean while, O Father, I beseech thee, let thy holy Spirit work in me
such a serious repentance, as that I may with tears lament my sins past, with
grief of heart be humble for my sins present, and with all mine endeavor,
resist the like filthy sins in time to come. And let the same thy holy Spirit
likewise keep me in the Unity of thy Church, lead me in the truth of thy Word,
and preserve me, that I never swerve from the same, to Popery nor any other
error or false worship. And let thy Spirit open mine eyes more and more, Psalm.
119. 18.
to see the wondrous things of thy Law: and open my lips, Psalm. 51. 15.
that my mouth may daily defend thy truth, and set forth thy praise* Increase
in me those good gifts, which of thy mercy thou have already bestowed upon me,
and give unto me a patient spirit, a chaste heart, a contented mind, pure
affections, wise behavior, and all other graces which thou feast to be
necessary for me; Psalm. 19. 14.
to govern my heart in thy fear, and to guide all my life in thy favor: that
whether I live or die, I may live and die unto thee, who art my God and my
Redeemer.

And here (O Lord) according as I am bound I render unto thee from the Altar of
my humblest heart, all possible thanks, for all those blessings and benefits,
which so graciously and plentuously thou have bestowed upon my soul and body,
for this life, and for that which is to come: namely, for mine Election,
Creation, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and Preservation
from my childhood until this present day and hour: and for the firm hope which
thou have given me of my Glorification. Likewise for my health, wealth, food,
raiment, and prosperity: and more especially, for that thou have defended me
this day now past, from all perils and dangers, both of body and soul,
furnishing me with all necessary good things, that I stand in need of. And as
thou have ordained the day for man to travel in, and the night for him to take
his rest: so I beseech thee, sanctify unto me this night's rest and sleep,
that I may enjoy the same, as thy sweet blessing and benefit. That so this dull
and wearied body of mine, being refreshed with moderate sleep and rest, I may
be the better enabled to walk before thee, doing all such good works, as thou
have appointed, when it shall please thee, by thy divine Power, to waken me the
next morning. And whilst I sleep, do thou, O Lord, who art the keeper of
Israel, that neither slamberest nor sleep, watch over me in thy holy
providence, Psalm. 121. 4.
to protect me from all dangers; Rev. 12. 7.
so that neither the evil Angels of Satan, nor any wicked enemy, may have any
power to do me any harm, or evil. And to this end give a charge unto thy holy
Angels, Psalm. 34. 7.
that they at (thine appointment) may pitch their tents round about me, for my
defense and safety: as thou have promised that they should do about them that
fear thy name. Prove. 18. 10.
And knowing that thy name is a strong Tower of defense unto all those that
trust therein, I here recommend my self (and all that do belong unto me) unto
thy holy protection and custody. If it be thy blessed will to call for me in my
sleep; O Lord, for Christ his sake, have mercy upon me, and receive my soul
into thy heavenly kingdom. And if it be thy blessed pleasure to add more days
unto my Life; O Lord, add more amendment unto my days: and wean my mind from
the love of the world, and worldly vanities; and cause me more and more to
settle my conversation on heaven, and heavenly things. And perfect daily in me
that good work which thou have begun, to the glory of thy Name, and the
salvation of my sinful soul. O Lord, I beseech thee likewise, save and defend
from all evil and danger, thy whole Church, our King Charles, Queen Mary, the
noble and hopeful Prince Charles, with the rest of the Royal Progeny, the
religious Lady Elizabeth, the King's only Sister, and her Princely Issue: keep
them all in the sincerity of thy Truth, and prosper them in all grace and
happiness. Bless the Nobility, Ministers, and Magistrates of these Churches and
Kingdoms, each of them with those graces which are expedient for their place
and calling. And be thou, O Lord, a comfort and consolation to all thy people
whom thou have thought meet to visit with any kind of sickness, cross or
calamity. Hasten, O Father the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Rev. 6. 10, 22,
23.
Make me ever mindful of my last end, and of the reckoning that I am to make
unto thee therein* Matthew. 19. 28.
and in the mean while, careful so to fo^^ow Christ in the regeneration during
this life, Luke 14. 14
as that with Christ I may have a portion in the resurrection of the just, when
this mortal life is ended. These graces, and all other blessings which thou, O
Father, know to be requisite and necessary for me, I humbly beg and crave at
thy hands, in the name and meditation of Jesus Christ thy Son, and in that form
of Prayer, which he himself has taught me to say unto thee, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc.

Another short Evening Prayer.
O Eternal God, and heavenly Father, if I were not taught and assured by the
promises of thy Gospel, and the examples of Luke 22. 61.
Peter, Luke 7. 47.
Mary Magdalen, the Luk 18. 14.
Publican, Luke 15. 20.
the Prodigal child, and many other penitent sinners; that thou art so Psalm.
103. 8
full of Compassion, and so ready to forgive the greatest sinners, who are Mat.
11. 28.
heaviest laden with sin, at what Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22, etc.
time soever they return unto thee with penitent hearts, lamenting their sins,
and imploring thy grace: I should despair for mine own sins, and be utterly
discouraged from presuming to come into thy presence; considering the hardness
of my heart, the unruliness of my affections, and the uncleanness of my
conversation, by means whereof I have trangressed all thy laws, and deserved
thy Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
curse, which might cause my body to be smitten with some fearful disease, Gal.
3. 10.
my soul to languish with the death of sin, my good name to be traduced with
scandalous reproaches, and make mine estate liable to all manner of crosses and
casualties And I confess, O Lord, that thy mercy is the cause that I have not
been long ago confounded. Lam. 3, 22.
But, O my God, Mat. 3, 6.
as thy mercy only stayed thy judgment from falling upon me hitherto; so I
humbly beseech thee, in the Col. 3. 12.
bowels of the mercy of Jesus Christ, ( Mat. 3. 17.
in whom only thou art well pleased) that thou will not deal with me Psalm. 28,
4.
according to my deserts, but that thou would Hos. 13. 5.
freely and fully remit unto me all my sins and transgressions: and that thou
would Isa. 1. 16, 18.
wash them clean from me, with the virtue of that most precious blood, which
thy Son Jesus Christ has shed for me. For he alone is the Mat. 9. 12.
Ph^sician, and his blood only is the 1 John 1. 7.
medicine that ean heal my sickness. And he is the true Joh. 3. 14.
brazen Serpent, that can cure that poison, wherewith the fiery Serpent of my
sins have stung and poisoned my sick and wounded soul. And give me, I beseech
thee, thine holy Spirit, which may assure me of mine adoption, and that may
confirm my faith, increase my repentance, enlighten my understanding, Gal. 4.
5, 7.
purify my heart, rectify my will and affections, and so sanctify me
^hroughout, that my whole body, soul, and spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
may be kept unblameable until the glorious ^oming of my Lord Jesus Christ. And
now, O Lord, I give thee most hearty thanks, and praise, for that thou have
this day preserved me from all harms and perils, notwithstanding all my sins
and ill deserts. And I beseech thee likewise defend me ^his night from the
roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
which ^ight and day seeks to devour me. Watch ^hou, O Lord, over me this
night, to keep ^e from his temptations and tyranny; and ^et thy mercy shield me
from his unappea^ble rage and malice. And to this end, I ^ommend my self into
thy hands and pro^ection, Psalm. 31. 5.
beseeching thee, O my Lord and God, not to suffer Satan, nor any of his e^il
members, to have power to do unto me any hurt or violence this night. And
grant, ^ood Lord, that whether I sleep or wake, ^ve or die, I may sleep, wake,
live and die unto thee, and to the glory of thy name, and the salvation of my
soul. Lord bless and defend all thy chosen People every ^here. Grant our King a
long and happy ^eign over us. Bless our gracious Queen Mary, with their
Princely Progeny, the ^ady Elizabeth, the King's only Sister, and ^er Princely
Issue; together with all our ^agistrates and Ministers: comfort them ^ho are in
misery, need, or sickness: good lord give me grace to be one of those ^ise
Virgins, Mat. 25. 2.
which may have my heart ^repared like a Lamp furnished with the (...) of
faith, and light of good works, to meet the Lord Jesus the sweet Bridegroom of
my soul, this second and sudden coming in glory. Grant this, good Father, for
Christ Jesus sake, my only Savior and Mediator, in whose blessed Name, and in
whose own words, I call upon thee, as he has taught me. Our Father, which art,
etc.

Afterward say,

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ; thy love, O heavenly Father; thy comfort and
consolation, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with me, and dwell in my heart, this
night, and evermore. Amen.

Then rising up in a holy Reverence, meditate as thou art putting off thy
Clothes.

Things to be meditated upon, as thou art putting off thy Clothes.
1. THat the day is coming, when thou must be as barely unstript of al^ that
thou have in the World, Nudus in hunc mundum veni, nudus quoque abibo.
as thou ar^ now of thy Clothes: thou have therefore here, but the use of all
things, as a Luke 16. 2.
Steward, for a time, and that upon accounts Whilst therefore thou art trusted
with thi^ Stewardship, Mat. 24. 2.
be wise and faithful.

2. When thou see thy Bed, let it pu^ thee in mind of thy Job 17. 13. Ut
somnus mortis, sic lectus imago sepulchri.
grave, which is now the bed of Christ: for Christ (by laying hi^ holy body to
rest three days and three nights in the Mat. 12. 40.
grave) has sanctified, an^ (as it were) warmed it for the bodies o^ his
Saints, to rest and 1 These 4. 14.
sleep in, till the morning of the Resurrection: so that now unto the faithful,
death is but a sweet sleep; and the grave is but Christ's Isa. 57. 2.
bed, where their bodies rest and sleep in peace, until the joyful morning of
the Resurrection-day shall dawn unto them. Isa. 26. 20.


Let therefore thy Bed-clothes represent unto thee the mould of the Earth that
shall cover thee; thy sheets, thy winding sheet; thy sleep, thy death; thy
waking, thy resurrection. And being laid down in thy bed, when thou perceivest
sleep to approach, say, I will lay me down and sleep in peace, for thou, Psalm.
4. 8.
Lord, only make me dwell in safety.

Thus religiously opening every Morning thy heart, and shutting it up again
every Evening, with the Word of God and Prayer, as it were with a Lock and Key,
and so beginning the day with God's Worship, continuing it in his fear, and
ending it in his favor: thou shall be sure to find the blessing of God upon
all thy days labors and good endeavors: and at night thou may assure thy
self, thou shall sleep safely and sweetly in the arms of thy heavenly Father's
providence.

Thus far of the Piety which every Christian in private, ought to practice
every day. Now follows that, which he (being an Householder) must practice
publicly with his Family.

Meditations for Household Piety.
1. IF thou be called to the government of a Family, thou must not hold it
sufficient to serve God, and live uprightly in thine own person, unless thou
causest all under thy charge to do the same with thee. For the performance of
this duty, God was so well pleased with Abraham, that he would not hide from
him his counsel. For (says God) I know him, Genesis 18. 17, 19.
that he will command his sons, and his household after him, that they keep the
way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham, that he has spoken unto him. And Abraham had 318 Men servants, Genesis
14. 14.
which were thus born and catechized in his house. With whose help he rescued
also his Nephew Lot from the captivity of his Enemies. Josh. 24. 15.
And religiously valiant Joshua protests before all the people, That if they
all would fall away from the true Worship of God, yet that he and his house
would serve the Lord. And God himself gives a special charge to all
Householders, that they do instruct their Family in his Word, and train them up
in his fear and service. These words which I command thee this day, Deuteronomy 6. 6,
7.
shall be in thy heart, and thou shall whet them continually upon thy Children,
and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him. David according to this Law, had so
ordered his Family, Psalm. 101. 6, 7.
That no deceitful person should dwell in his house, but such as would serve
God and walk in his way: Esther 4. 16.
and religious Esther had taught her Maids to serve God in fasting and prayer.
And (the more to further thy family in the zeal of religion) settle ever thy
chiefest affection on those whom thou shall perceive to be best addicted to
true Religion. This also will turn to thine own advantage in a double respect.
First, God will the rather bless and prosper the labor and handiwork of such
godly servants. For Laban perceived, Genesis 30. 27.
that God blessed him for Jacob's sake: Genesis 39. 3.
And Potiphar saw, that the Lord made all that Jeseph did, to prosper: in his
hand: yea, when innocent Joseph was cast into prison his keeper saw, Genesis 39.
22. 23.
that whatsoever he did, the Lord made it to prosper: and therefore the keeper
committed all the charge of the Prisoners into Joseph's hand. 2. The trulier a
man does serve God, the faithfullier he will serve thee.

2. If every Houshoulder were thus careful, according to his duty, to bring up
his Children and Family in the service and fear of God in his own house, then
the house of God would be better filled, and the Lord's Table more frequented
every Sabbath day; and the Pastor's public preaching and labor, would take
more effect than it does. The streets of Towns and Cities would not abound with
so many drunkards, swearers, whore-mongers, and profane scorners of true Piety
and Religion. Westminister-Hall would not be so full of contentions, wrangling
suits, and unchristian debates: and the prisons would not be every Sessions so
full of Thieves, Robbers, Traitors, and Murderers. But (alas) most Householders
make no other use of their Servants, than they do of their Beasts. Whilst they
may have their Bodies to do their service, they care not if their Souls serve
the Devil. Yet the common complaint is, that faithful and good servants are
scarce to be found. True, but the reason is, because there are so many profane
and irreligious Masters: for, the example and instruction of a Godly and
Religious Master, will make a good and a faithful servant, as may witness the
examples of Abraham, Joshua, David, Cornelius, etc. who had good servants,
because they were religious Masters, such as were careful to make their
servants God's servants.

It is the chief labor and care of most men, to raise, and to advance their
house; yet let them Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
rise up early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of carefulness, all will
be but in vain; for except the Lord build an house, (that is, raise up a
Family) they labor in vain. For God has sealed this as an irrevocable decree,
That he will Jer. 10. 25.
pour his wrath upon the Families that call not upon his name: yea, Psalm. 52. 5
God will take the wicked, and pluck him out of his tabernacle, and root him
out of the land, etc. Yea, when his Genesis 15. 16.
iniquities are full, he will make Lev. 18. 25.
the land to spue out every Canaanite. Religion then, and the Service of God in
a Family, is the best building, and surest entailing of House and Land, to a
Man and his Posterity; for the righteous Man shall inherit the Land, Psalm. 37.
29.
and dwell therein for ever.

As therefore thou desire to have the blessing of God upon thy self, and upon
thy family; either before or after thy own private devotions, call every
morning all thy family to some convenient room; and first, either read thy self
unto them a Chapter in the Word of God, or cause it to be read distinctly by
some other. If leisure serve, thou may Origin would have the word expounded
in Christian houses. Hom. 9. In Rev. Augustine says, that what the Preacher is
in the Pulpit, the same the Householder is in the house.
admonish them of some remarkable notes; and then kneeling down with them in
reverent sort, as is before described, pray with them in this manner.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, who art the only Creator and Governor of
heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, we confess that we are
unworthy to appear in thy sight and presence, considering our manifold sins,
which we have committed against heaven and before thee: and how that we have
been born in sin, and do daily break thy holy Laws and Commandments, contrary
to our knowledge and consciences; albeit that we know that thou art our
Creator, who have made us; our Redeemer, who have bought us with the blood of
thine only begotten Son; and our Comforter, who bestowest upon us all the good
and holy graces, which we enjoy in our souls and bodies. And if thou should
but deal with us as our wickedness and unthankfulness have deserved, what other
thing might we (O Lord) expect from thee, but shame and confusion in this life,
and in the World to come, wrath and everlasting condemnation? Yet, O Lord, in
the obedience of thy Commandment, and in the confidence which we have in thy
unspeakable and endless mercy in thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ: we thy poor
servants, appealing from thy Throne of Justice, (where we are justly lost and
condemned) to thy Throne of grace (where mercy reigns, to pardon abounding
sin) do from the bottom of our hearts most humbly beseech thee, to remit and
forgive unto us all our offenses and misdeeds; that by the virtue of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, thine innocent Lamb, which he so abundantly
shed ( to take away the sins of the world,) all our sins, both original and
actual, may be so cleansed and washed from us, as that they may never be laid
to our charge, nor ever have power to rise up in judgment against us. And we
beseech thee, good Father^ for Christ his death and passions sake, tha^ thou will not suffer to fall upon us tha^ fearful curse and vengeance, which thy
la^^ has threatened, and our sins have justly deserved. And for as much, O
Lord, as we ar^ taught by thy word, that Idolaters, Adulterrers, covetous Men,
contentious Persons, Drunkards, Gluttons, and such like inordinate livers,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God; pour the grace of thy Holy Spirit into
our hearts, whereby we may be enlightened to see the filthiness of our sins, to
abhor them: and may be more and more stirred up to live in newness of life, and
love of thy Majesty; so that we may daily increase in the obedience of thy
Word, and in a conscionable care of keeping thy Commandments.

And now, O Lord, we render unto thee most hearty thanks, for that thou have
elected, created, redeemed, called, justified, and sanctified us in good
measure in this life, and given us an assured hope, that thou will glorify us
in thy heavenly kingdom, when this mortal life is ended. Likewise we thank thee
for our life, health, wealth, liberty, prosperity, and peace: especially, O
Lord, for the continuance of thy holy Gospel among us, and for sparing us so
long, and granting us so gracious a time of repentance. Also we praise thee,
for all other thy mercies bestowed upon us; more especially, for preserving us
this night past, from all dangers that might have befaln our souls or bodies.
And seeing thou have now brought us safe to the beginning of this day, we
beseech thee protect and direct us in the same. Bless and defend us in our
going out and coming in, this day and evermore. Shield us, O Lord, from the
temptations of the Devil, and grant us the custody of thy holy Angels, to
defend and direct us in all our ways.

And to this end, we recommend our selves, and all those that belong unto us,
and are abroad from us, into thy hands, and Almighty tuition. Lord, defend them
from all evil, prosper them in all graces, and fill them with thy goodness.
Preserve us likewise this day, from falling into any gross sin, especially
those whereunto our Natures are most prone. Set a watch before the door of our
lips, that we offend not thy Majesty by any rash or false Oaths, or by any lewd
or lying Speeches: give unto us patient Minds, pure and chaste Hearts, and all
other graces of thy Spirit, which thou know to be needful for us; that we
may the better be enabled to serve thee in holiness and righteousness. And
seeing that all Man's labor without thy blessing is in vain, bless every one
of us in our several places, and callings, direct thou the work of our hands
upon us, even prosper thou our handiwork; (for except thou guide us with thy
grace, our endeavors can have no good success.) And provide for us all things
which thou, O Father, know to be needful for every one of us, in our Souls
and Bodies this day. And grant that we may so pass through the pilgrimage of
this short life; that our hearts being not settled upon any transitory things,
which we meet with in the way, our Souls may every day be more and more
ravished with the love of our home, and thine everlasting Kingdom.

Defend likewise, O Lord, thy universal Church, and every particular Member
thereof: especially we beseech thee to continue the peace and prosperity of
these Churches, and Kingdoms wherein we live. Preserve and defend from all
evils and dangers, our gracious King Charles, Queen Mary, the noble and hopeful
Prince Charles, with the rest of the Royal Progeny; the Lady Elizabeth, the
King's only Sister, and her Princely Issue: Multiply their days in bliss and
felicity, and afterward crown them with everlasting Joy and Glory Bless all
our Ministers, and Magistrates, with all graces needful for their places; and
govern thou them, that they may govern us in peace and godliness: and of thy
mercy, O Lord, comfort all our brethren that are distressed, sick, or any way
comfortless, especially those who are afflicted either with an evil conscience,
because they have sinned against thy Word, or for a good conscience, because
they will not sin against thy truth. Make the first to know, that not one drop
of the blood of Christ, was a drop of vengeance, but all drops of grace,
powerful to procure pardon upon repentance, for the greatest sins of the
chiefest sinner in the World. And for the other, let not, O Lord, thy long
sufferance either too much discourage them, or too much encourage their
enemies: but grant them patience in suffering, and a gracious and speedy
deliverance, which way may stand best with their comfort, and thy glory. Give
every one of us grace, to be always mindful of his last end, and to be prepared
with faith and repentance, as with a wedding garment, against the time that
thou shall call for us out of this sinful World. And that in the mean while we
may so in all things, and above all things, seek thy Glory, that when this
mortal life is ended, we may then be made partakers of immortality, and life
eternal, in thy most blessed and glorious Kingdom.

These and all other graces which thou, O Father, see to be necessary for us,
and for thy whole Church, we humbly beg and crave at thy hands: concluding this
our imperfect prayer, in that absolute form of prayer which Christ himself has
taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

After prayers, let every one of thy Household (taking in the fear of God such a
breakfast or refreshing as is fit) depart: the children to School, the servants
to their work; every one to his office, the Master and Mistress of the Family
to their callings, or to some honest exercises for recreation, as they think
fit.

The Practice of Piety at meals, and the manner of feeding.
BEfore Dinner and Supper, when the Table is covered, ponder with thy self upon
these Meditations, to work a deeper impression in thy heart, of God's fatherly
providence and goodness toward thee.

Meditations before Dinner and Supper.
1. MEditate that Hunger is like the sickness called a Wolf, which if thou do
not ^eed, will devour thee, and eat thee up; and that meat and drink, are but
as Hoc me docuisti, ut quem^dmod^m medicamenta sic, alimenta sumpturus acc^dam.
Aug. l. 10. Conf.
physic, or means which God has ordained, to relieve and cure this natural
infirmity, and necessity of Man. Use therefore to eat and to drink, rather to
sustain and refresh the weakness of nature, than to satisfy the sensuality and
delights of the flesh. Eat therefore to live, but live not to eat. A Scavenger
whose living is to empty, is to be preferred before him that lives but to fill
Privies. There is no service so Major sum and ad majora genitus. qu^m ut
t^^^cipium (...) mei corporis. Senec.
base, as for a man to be a slave to his belly. The Apostle terms such,
Belly-Gods, Phil. 3. 19. Therefore we may boldly term them, as the Scriptures
do other idols, Of Galal. which signifies man's Dung, as Ezekiel. 4. 17, 15.
Gillulim, Dungy gods, Hab. 2. 18, 19. 2 King. 17. 12. And as no one action
(God's ordinances excepted) makes a man more to resemble a beast, than eating
and drinking: so the abuse of eating and drinking to surfeiting, drunkenness
and spewing, makes a man more vile than a beast.

2. Meditate on the omnipoten^^ of God, Heb. 11. 3.
who made all these creatures of nothing: of his wisdom, who Psalm. 145. 15, 16.
feeds so many infinite Creatures through the universal World, maintaining
all their lives, which he has given them; which surpasses the wisdom of all
the Angels in heaven: and of his clemency and goodness, ^atth. 5. 5, etc. ct.
14. 17.
in feeding also his very enemies.

3. Meditate, how many sorts of Creatures, as beasts, fish, and fowl, have lost
their lives, to become food to nourish thee: and how God's Providence from
remote places has brought all these portions together on thy table, for thy
nourishment; and how by these dead creatures he maintains thee in health and
life.

4. Meditate, that seeing thou have so many Hanc ob causam Gen^les mens^s ^cras
and festa ^^inab n^. ^i^es.
pledges of God's fatherly bounty, goodness and mercy toward thee, as there
are dishes of meat on thy Table; Oh suffer not in such a place, so gracious a
God to be abused by scurrility, ribauldry, or swearing: or thy St. Austin had
written (...) his able: Quisquis amat dictis abs^nt^m ^d^re amicum, Hanc mensam
vecitam noverit esse sibi. Poss^d. de vi^a Aug.
fellow brother, by disgraceful backbiting, taunting, or slandering.

5. Meditate, how that thy Master Jesus Christ did never eat any food, but
first he blessed the Creatures, and gave Luke 9. 16. Mat. 14. 19. and 15. 36.
Mark 6. 41. and 8. 6. Luke 24. 30. Joh. 6. 11.
thanks to his heavenly Father for the same. And after his last Supper, we read
that he sung a Mat. 26. 30. Mar 14. 26.
Psalm. For this was the Commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
When thau have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God,
etc. This was the Practice of the Prophets: For 1 Samuel 9. 13.
people would not eat at their feast, till Samuel came to bless their meat. And
says Joel to God's people: Joel 2. 26.
Ye shall eat and be satisfied, and praise the Name of the Lord your God. This
also was the practice of the Act. 27. 35.
Apostles. For St. Paul in the ship, gave thanks before meat, in the presence
of all the people that were therein. Imitate thou therefore in so holy an
action, so blessed a Master, and so many worthy Precedents that have followed
him, and gone before thee. It may be because thou have never used to give
thanks at meals, therefore thou art now ashamed to begin. Think it no shame to
do what Christ did; but be rather ashamed that thou have so long neglected so
Christian a duty. Joh. 6. 9, 11.
And if the Son of God gave his Father such great thanks for a dinner of barley
bread, and broiled fish; what thanks should such a sinful man as thou art,
render unto God, for such variety of good and dainty cheer? How many a true
Christian would be glad to fill his belly with the morsels which thou refusest;
and do lack that which thou leavest? How hardly do others labor for that which
they eat, and thou have thy food provided for thee, without either care or
labor? To conclude, if Pagan Idolaters at their Feasts were accustomed to
praise their false Gods; Dan. 5. 1, 4.
what a shame is it for a Christian, (at his dinners and suppers) not to praise
the true God, in whom we live, move, Act. 17. 28.
and have our being?

6. Meditate, that thy body, which thou do now so daintily feed, must be
(thou know not how soon) meat for worms: When thou shall say to corruption,
^ob 1^ 14.
thou art my Father; and to the Worm, thou art my Mother and my Sister.

7. Meditate, how that many a Man's table is made his snare: Psalm. 69. 22.
so that through his intemperance and unthankfulness, the meat which should
nourish his body, kills him with a surfeit: insomuch, that more are killed with
this Genesis 3. 17.
snare, than with the sword. And seeing that since the Curse, the use (as of
all creatures, so likewise) of meat and drink, is unto us unclean, till the
same be 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer: and that man lives not by Mat. 4.
4.
bread only, but by the Word of God's Ordinance; and his blessing, which is
called the Lev* 26. 26.
staff of bread. Sit not therefore down to eat, Ezekiel. 4. 16. and 5. 16.
before you 1 Samuel 9. 13.
pray, Mat. 14. 19. Luke 24. 30. 2 Cor. 10. 16.
and rise not before you give God Romans 14. 6. 1 These. 5. 18.
thanks. Feed to suffice Eccl. 10. 1^.
nature, Luke 21. 3^.
yet rise with an appetite; and remember thy poor Christian Neh 5 17.
brethren, who suffer hunger, and want those good things, Amos 6. 6.
wherewith thou do abound.

These things, or some of them premeditated, (if there be not a 1 Samuel 9. 13
Samuel present) Mat. 14. 19.
lift up with all comely reverence, thy heart with thy hands and eyes, unto the
great Creator and Feeder of all Creatures, and before Meat, pray unto him thus:

Grace before Meat.
O Most gracious God, and loving Father, who feedest Psalm 10. 17.
all creatures living, which Joel 1. 10.
depend upon thy divine providence; Psalm. 147. 9
we beseech the 1 Timothy 4. 5.
sanctify these creatures, which thou have ordained for us; give them virtue
to nourish our bodies in life and health: and give us grace to receive them
soberly and thankfully, as from thy hands; that so in the 1 King. 13. 8.
strength of these and other thy blessings, we may walk in the uprightness of
our hearts, before thy face, this day, and all the days of our lives, through
Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Or thus.
MOst gracious God and merciful Father, we beseech thee sanctify these
Creatures to our use, make them healthful for our nourishment; and us thankful
for all thy blessings, through Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Another Grace before Meat.
O Eternal God, in whom we live, move, and have our being, we beseech thee
bless unto thy Servants these Creatures, that in the strength of them we may
live, to the setting forth of thy praise, and glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

After every meal be careful of thy self and family, as Job was for himself,
and his Children, Job 1. 4. lest that in the cheerfulness of eating and
drinking, some speech has slipped out, which might be either offensive to God
or injurious to man; and therefore with the like comely g^sture and reverence
give thanks unto God, and p^ay in this manner.
BLessed be thy holy Name, O Lord, our God, for these thy good benefits,
wherewith thou have so plentifully at this time refreshed our bodies: O Lord,
vouchsafe likewise to feed our souls with the spiritual food of thy holy Word
and Spirit unto life everlasting. Lord, defend and save thy whole Church, our
gracious King Charles, Queen Mary, the noble and hopeful Prince Charles, with
the rest of the royal progeny; the Lady Elizabeth, the Kings only Sister, and
her Princely issue: Forgive us our sins, and unthankfulness, pass by our
manifold infirmities, make us all mindful of our last end, and of the reckoning
that we are to make to thee therein, and in the mean while grant unto us
health, peace, and truth, in Jesus Christ, our Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

Or thus:
BLessed be thy Holy name, (O Lord) for these thy good benefits, wherewith thou
have refreshed us at this time. Lord forgive us all our sins and frailties:
save and defend thy whole Church, our King, and his Royal posterity, and grant
us health, peace, and truth, in Christ our only Savior. Amen.

Or thus:
WE give thee thanks (O heavenly Father) for feeding our bodies so graciously
with thy good creatures to this temporal life: beseeching thee likewise to feed
our souls with thy holy Word unto life everlasting. Defend (O Lord) thine
universal Church, the King, and his royal Posterity, and grant us continuance
of thy grace and mercy, in Christ our only Savior. Amen.

The Practice of Piety at Evening.
At Evening, when the due time of repairing to rest approaches, call together
again all thy Family. Read a Chapter in the same manner, that was prescribed in
the morning* Then (in holy imitation of our Lord, and his Disciples) sing a
Psalm. But in singing of Psalms, either after Supper, or at any other time,
observe these rules.

Rules to be observed in singing of Psalm.
1. BEware of singing divine Psalms for an ordinary recreation; as do men of
impure Spirits, who sing holy Psalms, intermingled with profane Ballads.

They are God's Word, take them not in thy mouth in vain.

2 Remember to sing David's Psalms, with David's Spirit.

3. Mat. 12. 43.
Practice Saint Paul's rule, 1 Cor. 14. 15.
I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also.

4. As you sing, 1 Cor. 11. 4.
uncover your heads and behave your selves in comely reverence, as in the sight
of God, singing to God, in God's own words: but be sure that the matter make
more Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
melody in your hearts, than the Music in your ear: for the singing with grace
in our hearts, is that which the Lord is delighted withal, according to that
old verse: Non vox, sed votum, non musica cordula, sed cor:
Non clamans, sed amans psallit in aure Dei.
It Is not the voice, but vow;
Sound heart, not sounding string;
True zeal, not outward show,
That in God's ear does ring.


5. Thou may (if thou think good) sing all the Psalms over in order: for
all are most divine, and comfortable But if thou will choose some special
Psalms, as more fit for some times and purposes; and such, as by the often usage,
thy people may the easilier commit to memory;

Then sing,

In the Morning, Psalm. 3. 5. 16. 22. 144.

In the Evening, Psalm. 4. 127. 141.

For mercy after a sin committed, Psalm 51. 103.

In sickness, or heaviness, Psalm. 6. 13. 89. 90. 91. 137. 146.

When thou art recovered, Psalm. 30. 32.

On the Sabbath day, Psalm. 19. 92. 95.

In time of joy, Psalm. 80. 98. 107. 136. 145.

Before Sermon, Psalm. 1. 12. 147. the 1. and 5. Part of the 119.

After Sermon, any Psalm which concerns the chief argument of the Sermon

At the Communion, Psalm. 22. 23. 103. 111. 116.

For spiritual solace, Psalm. 15. 19. 25. 46. 67. 112. 116.

After wrong and disgrace received, Psalm. 42. 69. 70. 140. 144.

After the Psalm, all kneeling down in reverent manner (as is before described)
let the Father of the Family (or the chiefest in his absence) pray thus.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Eternal God, and most gracious Father, we thine unworthy Servants, here
assembled, do cast down our selves at the footstool of thy grace, acknowledging
that we have inherited our Fathers corruption, and actually in thought, word
and deed, transgressed all thy holy Commandments, so that in us naturally there
dwells nothing that is good: for our hearts are full of secret pride, anger,
impatience, dissembling, lying, lust, vanity, prophan^ness, distru^^, too much
love of our selves and the World, too little love of thee and thy Kingdom; but
empty and void of faith, love, patience, and every spiritual grace. If thou
therefore should but enter into judgment with us, and search out our natural
corruption, and observe all the cursed fruits and effects that we have derived
from thence, Satan might justly challenge us for his own, and we could no^
expect any thing from thy Majesty, but thy wrath, and our condemnation, which
we have long ago deserved.

But, good Father, for Jesus Christ, thy dear Son's sake, Mat. 3. 17.
in whom only thou art well pleased; and for the merits of that bitter death,
and bloody passion, which we believe that he has suffered for us: have mercy
upon us, pardon and forgive us all our sins, and free us from the shame and
confusion which are due unto us for them; that they may never seize upon us to
our confusion in this life, nor to our condemnation in the world which is to
come. And for as much as thou have created us to serve thee, as all other
Creatures to serve us: so we beseech thee inspire thy holy Spirit into our
hearts, that by his illumination and effectual working, we may have the inward
sight and feeling of our sins, and natural corruptions; and that we may not be
blinded in them through custom, as the Reprobates are, but that we may more and
more loath them, and be heartily grieved for them, endeavoring by the use of
all good means to overcome and get out of them. O let us feel the Power of
Christ's Death, Romans 6. 6.
killing sin in our mortal Bodies: Phil. 3. 10.
and the virtue of his Resurrection, raising up our Souls to newness of life.
Convert our hearts, subdue our affections, regenerate our minds, and purify
our nature; and suffer us not to be drowned in the stream of those filthy vices
and sinful pleasures of th^s time, where with thousands are carried headlong to
eternal destruction: but daily frame us more and more to the likeness of thy
Son Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 29.
that in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians 4. 24.
we may so serve and glorify thee, that living in thy fear and dying in thy
favor, we may, in thine appointed time, attain to the blessed resurrection of
the just, unto eternal life. In the mean while, O Lord increase our faith in
the sweet promises of the Gospel, and our repentance from dead works, the
assurance of our hope in thy promises, our fear of thy name, the hatred of all
our sins, and our love unto thy children, especially those whom we shall see to
stand in need of our help and comfort: that so, by the fruits of Piety and a
righteous life; we may be assured that thy Holy Spirit does dwell in us, and
that we are thy Children by Grace and Adoption. And grant us, good Father, the
continuance of health, peace, maintenance, and all other outward things, so far
forth as thy Divine Wisdom shall think meet and necessary for every one of us.

And here, O Lord, according to our bounden duty, we confess that thou have
been exceeding merciful unto us all, in things of this life; but infinitely
more merciful in the things of a better life: and therefore we do here from our
very souls, render unto thee all humble and hearty thanks, for all thy
blessings and benefits bestowed upon our souls and bodies: acknowledging thee
to be that Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17.
from whom we have received all those good and perfect gifts: and unto thee
alone for them, we ascribe to be due all glory, honor and praise, both now and
evermore. But more especially, we praise thy divine Majesty, for that thou have
defended us this day from all perils and dangers^ so that none of those
judgments (which our sins have deserved) have fallen upon any one of us. Good
Lord, forgive us the sins which this day we have committed against thy Divine
Majesty, and our brethren, and for Christ his sake be reconciled unto us for
them.

And we beseech thee likewise of the same thine infinite goodness and mercy, to
defend and protect us, and all that belong unto us, this night, from all
dangers of fire, Psalm. 78. 49.
robberry, terrors of evil angels, or any other fear or peril, which for our
sins might justly fall upon us. And that we may be safe under the shadow of thy
wings, Psalm. 91. 5.
we here commend our Bodies and Souls, and all that we have, unto thine
Almighty protection. Lord bless and defend both us and them from all evil. And
whilst we sleep, do thou, O Father, (who never slumberest nor sleep) watch
over thy Children, and give a charge to thy Holy Angels, Genesis 32. 2.
to pitch their tents round about our House and Dwelling, 2 King. 6. 16, 17.
to g^ard us from all dangers: that sleeping wi^h thee, Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
we may in the next morning be awakened by thee; and so being re^reshed with
moderate sleep, we may be the fitter to set forth thy glory in the conscionable
duties of our callings.

And we beseech thee, O Lord, to be merciful likewise to thy whole Church, and
to continue the tranquillity of these Kingdoms, wherein we live, turning from us
those plagues which the crying sins of this Nation do cry for.

Preserve our Religious King Charles, Queen Mary, the Noble and Hopeful Prince
Charles, with the rest of the Royal Progeny, the religious Lady Elizabeth, the
King's only Sister, and her Princely Issue: all our Magistrates and Ministers,
all that fear thee, and call upon thy Name, all our Christian Brethren and
Sisters, that suffer sickness, or any other affliction or misery: especially
those who any where do suffer persecution for the testimony of thy holy Gospel;
grant them patience to bear thy cross, and deliverance, when, and which way it
shall seem best to thy Divine Wisdom. And, Lord, suffer us never to forget our
last end, and those reckonings which then we must render unto thee. In health
and prosperity, m^ke us mindful of sickness, and of the evil day that is
behind, that these things may not overtake us as a (...), Luke 21. ^5.
but that we may in good measure, Mat. 25. 3^. ^^.
like wise Virgins, be found prepared for the coming of Christ, the sweet
Bridegroom of our Souls. And now, O Lord, most holy and just, we co^fess that
there is no cause* why thou (who art so much displeased with sin) should
hear the prayer of sinners: but for his sake only who suffered for sin, and
sinned not* In the only mediation therefore of thine eternal Son Jesus our Lord
and Savior, we humbly beg these, and all other graces which thou know to be
needful for us, shutting up these our imperfect requests, in that most holy
Prayer, which Christ himself has taught us to say unto thee, Our Father, etc.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ; thy love, O heavenly Father; thy comfort and
consolation, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us, and remain with us this
night, and for evermore. Amen.

Then saluting one another, as becomes Christians, who are the Vessels of
grace, and Temples of the holy Ghost, let them in the fear of God depart every
one to his rest: using some of the former private Meditations for Evening.

Thus far of the Housholder's public Practice of Piety, with his Family, every
day. Now follows his Practice of Piety with the Church on the Sabbath Day.

Meditations of the true manner of practicing Piety on the Sabbath Day.
ALmighty God will have himself worshipped, not only in a private manner, by
private Persons and Families; but also in a more public sort, of all the godly
joined together in a visible Church: that by this means he may be known not
only to be the God and Lord of every singular Person; but also of the Creatures
of the whole universal World.

Quest. But why do not we Christians, under the New, keep the Sabbath on the
same seventh day, whereon it was kept under the Old Testament?

I answer: because that our Lord Jesus (who is the Mat. 12. 8. Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19.
Lord of the Sabbath, and whom the Law it self commands us to hear) did alter
it from that seventh day, to this first day of the Week, whereon we keep the
Sabbath. For the holy Evangelist notes: that our Lord came into the midst of
the holy Assembly, on the two first days of the two Weeks immediately following
his Resurrection, and then blessed the Church, John 20. 22.
breathed on the Apostles the Holy Ghost, and gave them the ministerial keys,
and power of binding and remitting sins. And so it is most probable he did in a
solemn manner every first day of the week, during the forty days he continued
on earth, between his Resurrection and Ascension (for the fiftieth day after,
being the first day of the week, the Apostles were assembled) during which time
he gave Commandments unto the Apostles, and Act. 1. 2, 3. Cyril bids us note,
that St. John does not simply set down the manner of Christ's appearing unto
Thomas, but also the circumstance of the time ( post dies octo) whence he
concludes thus, Diem igitur octavum Dominicam diem esse necesse est. Cyril in
Johan. lib. 12. cap. 58.
spoke unto them those things which appertain to the Kingdom of God; that is,
instructed them, how they should throughout the Churches (which were to be
converted) change the Sabbath to the Lord's Day; the bodily sacrifices of
beasts, to the spiritual sacrifices of Praise, Prayer and contrite Hearts; the
Heb. 7. 11, 12.
Levitical Priesthood of the Law, to the Christian Ministry of the Gospel; the
Jewish Temples and Synagogues, to Churches and Oratories; the Old Sacraments of
Circumcision and Passover, to Baptism and the Lord's Supper, etc. as may appear
by the like Phrase, Acts 19. 8. and Acts 28. 23. Col. 4. 11. put for the whole
sum of Paul's Doctrine, by which were wrought all these changes, where it took
effect. So that as Christ was forty days instructing Moses in Sinai, what he
should teach and how he should rule the Church under the Law: so he continued
forty days teaching his Disciples in Sion, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12.
what they should preach, and how they should govern the Church under the
Gospel. And seeing it is manifest, that within those forty days, Christ
appointed what Ministers should teach, and how they should govern his Church to
the world's end; it is not to be doubted, but that within those forty days, he
likewise ordained on what day they should keep their Sabbath, and ordinarily to
the works of their Ministry; especially seeing that under the Old Testament
God showed himself as careful both by his Moral and Ceremonial Law, to
prescribe the time as well as the matter of his Worship. Neither is it a thing
to be omitted, that the Lord, Act. 1. 7.
who has times and seasons in his own power, appointed this first day of the
week, to be the very day, Act. 2. 1, etc.
wherein he sent down from Heaven the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, so that
upon that day they first began, and ever after continued the public exercising
of their Ministry, in the Act. 2. 1, 4.
preaching of the Word, the Act. 2. 38, 41, 42.
administration of the Sacraments, and the Act. 2. 38.
loosing of the sins of penitent sinners. Upon these and the like grounds,
Athan, in frontispicio hom, defent.
Athanasius plainly affirms, that the Sabbath day was changed by the Lord
himself.

As therefore our Communion is termed the Lord's Supper, because it was
instituted of the Lord, for the remembrance of his death: so the Christian
Sabbath is called of the Rev. 1. 10. The Scripture of the New Testament, gives
not this honorable title to any thing, but only to the blessed Sabbath, and
holy Supper. For as he substituted the Lord's Supper in stead of the Passover,
so did he the Lord's day, in the Jewish Sabbath's ro^m.
Lord's day, because it was ordained of the Lord, for the memorial of his
Resurrection. And as the Name of the 1 Cor. 11. 20.
Lord honors the one, so does it the other: and as the Lord of the Sabbath,
by his royal Prerogative, and transcendent authority, could, so he had also
reason, to change the Holy Sabbath from the seventh day to this, whereon we
keep it. For as concerning the seventh day; which followed the six days,
wherein God finished the Creation; there was no such precise institution, or
necessity of sanctifying it perpetually, but such, as by the same authority, or
upon greater reason and occasion, it might very well be changed and altered
unto some other seventh day. For the Commandment does Wolphii Chronolog. de
Tem. l. cap. 1. p. 92.
not say, Remember to keep hnly the seventh day, next following the sixth day
of the Creation, or this or that seventh day: but indefinitely, Remember that
thou keep holy Legis substantia est sex diebus, terr^nis negotiis incumb^re;
septima, divino cultui dare operam
a seventh day. And to speak properly, as we take a day for the distinction of
time, called either a day natural, consisting of 24 hours, or a day artificial,
consisting of 12 hours, from Sunrising, to Sunsetting: and withal consider
the Sun standing still at noon, in Joshuah's time, the space of a whole day;
Josh. 10. 12, 13.
and the Sun going back ten degrees, 2 Kin. 20. 11.
( viz. five hours, almost half an artificial day) in Ezekiah's time, the Jews
themselves could not keep their Sabbath upon that precise and just distinction
of time, called at the first, the seventh day from the Creation.

Add hereunto, that in respect of the diversity of Meridians, Christoph.
Helvic. Syst. Cont. Theol. cum Judaeis c. de Sab.
and the unequal rising and setting of the Sun, every day varieth in some
places a quarter, in some half. in others a whole day: Therefore the Jewish
seventh day cannot precisely be kept at the same instant of time, every where
in the World.

Now, our Lord Jesus having authority, as Lord over the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 8.
had likewise now far greater reason and occasion to translate the Sabbath from
the Jewish seventh day, unto the seventh day whereon Christians do keep the
Sabbath.

1. Because that by his Resurrection from the dead, there is wrought a new
spiritual Creation of the World: Isaiah 65. 17, etc. Isaiah 66. 22. Psalm. 90. 2.
without which all the Sons of Adam had been turned to everlasting destruction,
and all the works of the first creation had ministered no consolation unto us.

2. And in respect of this new spiritual Creation, the Scripture says, that 2
Cor. 5. 17.
Old things are passed away, and all things are become new: Gal. 6. 15.
new Creatures, 1 Pet. 2. 10.
new People, Ephesians. 4. 24.
new men, Col. 3. 10.
new knowledge, Mat. 26. 28.
new Testament, Joh. 12. 14.
new commandment, Rev. 2. 17.
new names, Heb. 10. 10.
new way, Rev. 3. 9.
new song, Luke 5. 36, 37.
new garment, new wine, new vessels, Rev. 21. 2.
new Jerusalem, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Isa. 66. 22.
new Heaven and a new earth. And therefore of necessity there must be instead
of the old, a new Heb. 4. 9.
Sabbath day, to honor and praise our Redeemer, and to meditate upon the work
of our redemption, and to show the new change of the old Testament.

3. Because that on this day Christ rested from all the sufferings of his
Passion, and finished the glorious work of our Redemption. If therefore the
finishing of the work of the first Creation, whereby God mightily manifested
himself unto his creatures, deserved a Sabbath for to solemnize the memorial of
so great a work, to the honor of the worker; and therefore calls it mine
holy day: Isa. 58. 13.
much more does the new Creatition of the world, effected by the resurrection
of Christ, (whereby he mightly declared himself to be the Son of God) deserve a
Sabbath, Romans 1. 4.
for the perpetual commemoration thereof, to the honor of Christ, and
therefore worthily called the Lord's day. Rev. 1. 10.
For, as the deliverance out of the Captivity of Babylon, being greater, took
away the name from the deliverance out of the Bondage of Egypt: Jer. 23. 7, 8.
so the day whereon Christ finished the redemption of the world, did more
justly deserve to have the Sabbath kept on it, than on that day, whereon God
ceased from creating the world. As therefore in the Creation, the first day
wherein it was finished, was consecrated for a Sabbath: so in the time of
Redemption; the first day wherein it was perfected, must be dedicated to a holy
rest; but still a seventh day kept according to God's moral Commandment. The
Jews kept the last day of the week, beginning their Sabbath with the Genesis 2. 2.
^ev. 23. 32. N^h. 13. 19.
night, when God rested: but Christians honor the Lord better, on the Mat. 28.
1.
first day of the week, Act. 20. 7, 11.
beginning the Sabbath with the day when the Lord arose. They kept their
Sabbath in remembrance of the World's Creation: but Christians celebrate it in
memorial of the World's Redemption: yea, the Lord's Day being the first of the
Creation and Redemption, puts us in mind, both of the making of the old, and
redeeming of the new World.

As therefore under the old Testament, Exodus 25. 31
God, by the glory consisting of seven Lamps, seven Branches, etc. put them in
remembrance of the Creation, Light, and Sabbath's ^est: So under the New
Testament, Christ, the true light of the world, appears in the midst of the 7
lamp^, and seven golden candle-sticks, to put us in min^ to honor our Redeemer
in in the light of the Gospel of the Lord's seventh day of rest. Rev. 1. 13.
And seeing the Redemption, both for might and mercy, so f^r exceeds the
C^cation; it stood with great reason, thee the greater work should carry the
honor of the day. Neither does he honorable title of the Lord's Day diminish
the glory of the Sabbath; but rather, being added, augments the dignity
thereof; as the name of Israel added unto Jacob, Genesis 23. 28.
made the Patriarch the more renowned.

The reason taken from the example of God's resting from the work of the
Creation of the World, continued in force, till the Son of God ceased from the
work of the Redemption of the World, and then the former gave place to the
latter.

4. Because it was foretold in the Old Testament, that the Sabbath should be
kept (under the New Testament) on the first day of the week.

For, first, in the 110 Psalm, which is a Prophecy of Christ, and his Kingdom,
it is plainly foretold, that there should be a solemn day of assembling, Psalm.
110. 3.
wherein all Christ's people should willingly come together in the beauty of
holiness. Insomuch that no rain (of peace) shall be upon those Families, Zach.
14. 27.
that in the feast will not go up to Jerusalem (the Church) to worship the
King, the Lord of hosts. Now on what day this holy Feast, and Assembly should
be kept, David shows plainly, in Psalm. 118 which was a prophecy of Christ, as
appears, Mat. 21. 42, Acts 4. 11. Ephesians. 2. 20. as also by the consent of all
the Jews, as Jerome witnesses. For, showing how Christ, by his ignominious
death, should be as a stone rejected of the Builders, or chief Rulers of Judea,
and yet by his glorious Resurrection, should become the chief st^ne of the
Corner: he wishes the whole Church to keep holy that day, whereupon Christ
should effect this wonderful work, saying, This is the day which the Lord has
made, Psalm. 118. 24.
let us rejoice and be glad in it. And seeing that upon this day, that which
Peter says of Christ, appears to be true, That God made him both Lord and
Christ, Acts 2. 36. therefore the whole Church under the New Testament, must
celebrate the day of Christ's Resurrection. Zohar. upon Genesis fol. 21. H.
Broughton Require of Consent 49, 50, 51.
Rabby Bachay also saw by the fall of Adam on the sixth day, that on the same
day the Messiah should finish the work of man's redemption: And alluding to the
speech of Boaz to Ruth, sleep unto the Morning, that Messiah should rest in his
grave all their Sabbath Day. And he gathers from that speech, Genesis 1. on the
first day, Let their be light, that the Messiah should rise on the first day of
the week, from death to life, and cause the spiritual light of the Gospel to
enlighten the World, that lay in the shadow of darkness and death. The Hebrew
Author of the Book called, Ex H. Wolphii. Chron. de Temp. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Sedar Olam Rabbi cap. 7. records many memorable things, which were done upon
the first day of the week, as so many Types, that the chief worship of God
should (under the New Testament,) be celebrated upon this day. As, that on this
day the cloud of God's Majesty first sat upon his people. Aaron and his
Children first executed their Priesthood. God first solemnly blessed his
people. The Princes of his people first offered publicly unto God. The first
day, wherein fire descended from heaven. The first day of the World, of the
Year, of the Month, of the week, etc. All shadowing that it should be the first
and chief holy day of the New Testament. Augustir. Epist. ad Januar. 119. c. 3.
St. Augustine proves by diverse places and reasons, out of the holy Scripture,
that the Fathers, and all the holy Prophets under the Old Testament, did
foresee and know that our Lord's Day was shadowed by their eighth day of
Circumcision. And that the Sabbath should be changed from the seventh day to
the eighth, or first day of the week. And Junius, out of Cyprian, says, that
Sacramentum hoc fuit diei illius octavi quo Dominus resurrexit ad
justificationem nostram, etc. ut scribit ad Fidum Cyprianus, l. 3. Epist. 10.
Jan. in Genesis 17. 12.
Circumcision was commanded on the eighth day, as a Sacrament of the eighth
day, when Christ should arise from the dead. The Council Foro-Juliense affirms,
That Esaias prophesied of the keeping of the Sabbath upon the first day of the
week. If this Mystery was so clearly seen by the Fathers, under the shadows of
the Old Testament: sure, the God of this World has deeply blinded their minds,
who cannot see the Truth thereof under the 2 Cor. 4. 4.
shining light of the Gospel. Therefore this change of the Sabbath Day, under
the New, was nothing but a fulfilling of that which was prefigured and
fore-prophesied under the Old Testament.

5. According to their Lord's Mind and Commandment, and the direction of the
Holy Ghost, (which always assisted them in their Ministerial Office,) the
Apostles in all the Christian Churches, (which they planted) ordained that the
Christians should keep the holy Sabbath, upon that seventh Day, which is the
first Day of the week; 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
Concerning the gathering for the Saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of
Galatia, so do ye also. Every first day of the week, etc. The Syriack
translation has, Quum congr^ga^i^^ non (...) justum est, in die Domini nostri
comeditis and bibitis. The Arabian translation also has it thus: Non comeditis
and bibitis ^word, vere di^bus Domini nostri de ce^^nd Beza witnesses, that in
one ancient Greek Copy, there is read, (...) the Lord's Day, added to every
first day, etc.
When ye come together in the Church (being the Lord's Day) to eat the
Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20, 25, 26.
to remember and show the Lord's death till he come, etc. In which words note:

1. That the Apostle ordained this Day to be kept holy: therefore a divine
Institution.

2. That the Day is named the first day of the week, therefore not the Jewish
seventh, or any other.

3. Every first day of the week, which shows a perpetuity.

4. That it was ordained in the Churches of Galatia, as well as of Corinth, and
he settled one uniform order in all the 1 Cor. 14. 33.
Churches of the Saints, therefore it was universal.

5. That the exercises of this day were As the Phrase of breaking of Bread
comprehends all other Exercises of Religion, Acts 20. 7. So this Phrase of
laying by in store, comprehends all the other exercises of the Sabbath: And
why should the Apostle require the Collections to be made on the first day of
the week, but because that on this day the holy Assembly was held in the
Apostles time?
Collections for the poor (which appears by Acts 2. 42. and Justin Martyr's
testimony, Apolog. 2.) which were gathered in the holy Assembly after Prayer,
preaching of the Word; and Administration of the Sacraments; therefore it was
spiritual.

6. That he will have the Collection (though necessity) removed against his
coming, lest it should hinder his preaching: but not their holy meeting on the
Lord's Day; for it was the time ordained for the public worship of the Lord;
which argues a necessity.

And in the same Epistle, St. Paul protests, that he d^livered them none
other Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11. ^^.
or Doctrine, but what he had received of the Lord. Insomuch that he cha^geth
them, 1 Cor. 14. 3^.
that if any man think himself to be a prophet or Spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the commandments of the
Lord. But he wrote unto them, and ordained among them, to keep their Sabbath on
the first day of the Week: therefore to keep the Sabbath on that day, is the
very commandment of the Lord. And how can he be either a true Prophet, or have
any grace of God's Spirit in his heart, who seeing so clearly the Lord's day to
have been i^^^^tuted and ordained by the Apostles, will not acknowledge the
keeping holy of the Lord's day, to be a Commendment of the Lord? The Jews
confess this change of the Sabbath to have been made by the Apostles. Peter
Alphon. in Dialog. contra Judae^s, tit. 12. They are therefore more blind and
sottish than the Jews, who profanely deny it.

A^ Troas likewise St. Paul, (...), etc.
together with seven of the Chief Evangell^^s of the Church, Sosipater,
Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius, Timotheus, Tychicus, and Trophimus, and all the
Christians that were there, kept the holy Sabbath on the first day of the week,
in praying, preaching, and receiving the Lord's Supper.

And it is a thing to be noted, That Luke says not, that the Disciples were
sent to hear Paul preach, but the Disciples being come together to break bread
upon the first day of the week; that is, to be partakers of the holy Communion,
at what time the Lord's death was by the preaching of the Word showed, 1 Cor.
11. 26. Paul preached unto them, etc. And that none kept those meetings but
Christians, who only are called Disciples, Act. 11. 26. But at Philippi,
whereas yet there were no Disciples, Paul is said to go on their Sabbath day,
to the place where the Jews and their Proselytes were wont to pray, and there
preached unto them, Acts 16. 12, 13. so that it is as clear as the Sun, that it
was the Christians usual manner, to Acts 21. 4, etc.
pass over the Jewish seventh day, and to keep the Sabbath, and their holy
meetings on the first day of the week. And why does S. John call this the
Lord's day; but because it was a day known to be generally kept holy, to the
honor of the Lord Jesus (who rose from death to life upon that day) throughout
all the Churches which the Apostles planted? Which S. John called the Rev. 1.
10. Mos Christianus, etc. It is the manner of Christians, to call it the Lord's
day. Bed. in Luc. cap. 41.
Lord's day, the rather to stir up Christians to a thankful remembrance of
their Redemption, by Christ his Resurrection from the dead. And with the day,
the blessing of the Sabbath is likewise translated to the Lord's day: because
that all the sanctification belonging to this new world is in Christ, Heb. 2. 5.
and from him conveyed to Christians. And because there cannot come a greater
authority, than that of Christ and his Apostles, nor the like cause, as the new
Creation of the world: therefore the Sabbath can never be altered from this day
to any other, whilst this world lasts. Add hereunto, how the Scripture
notes, that in the first planting and settling of the Church nothing was done,
but by the special order and direction of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 11. 34. 1 Cor.
14. 36, 37. Tit. 1. 5. Act. 15. 6, 24. and the Apostles did nothing but what
they had warrant for from Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 23.

To sanctify then the Sabbath on the seventh Day, is not a ceremonial Law
abrogated: but the moral and perpetual law of God perfected. So that the same
perpetual Commandment which bound the Jews to keep the Sabbath on that seventh
day, to celebrate the World's Creation; binds Christians to solemnize the
Subbath on this seventh day, in memorial of the World's Redemption: for the
fourth Commandment, being a Moral Law, requires a seventh day, to be kept holy
for ever. And the Morality of this, as of the rest of the Commandments, is more
religiously to be kept of us under the Gospel, than of the Jews under the Law;
by how much we (in Baptism) have made a more special Covenant with God, to keep
his Commandments: and God has covenanted with us, to free us from the curse,
and to assist us with his Spirit to keep his Laws. And that this Commandment of
the Sabbath (as well as the other nine) is Moral and perpetual, may plainly
appear by these reasons.

Ten reasons demonstrating the Commandment of the Sabbath to be Moral.
1. BEcause all the reasons of this Commandment, are moral and perpetual: And
God has bound us to the obedience of this Commandment, with more forcible
reasons than to any of the rest. First, because he did foresee, that
irreligious men would either more carelessly neglect, or more boldly break this
Commandment, than any other. Secondly, because that in the practice of this
Commandment, the keeping of all the other consists: which makes God so often
complain, that all his worship is neglected, or overthrown, when the Sabbath is
either Jer. 15. 22. Ezekiel. 20 19, 20, 21, 24. Ezekiel. 23. 38. Neh. 9 4.
neglected or transgressed. It would make a man amazed (says Mr. Ex Bodin. le
Repub. l. 4. c. 2.
Calvin) to consider how often, and with what zeal and protestation, God
requires all (that will be his people) to sanctify the seventh day; yea, how
the God of Mercy, mercilesly punishes the breach of this Commandment with
cruel death? as though it were the sum of his whole honor and service.

And it is certain, that he who makes no conscience to break the Sabbath, will
not (to serve his turn) make any Conscience to break any of the other
Commandments, so he may do it without discredit of his reputation, or danger of
Man's Law. Therefore God placed this Commandment, in the midst of the Two
Tables; because the keeping of it, is the best help to the keeping of all the
rest. The conscionable keeping of the Sabbath, is the Mother of all religion,
and good discipline in the Church. Take away the Sabbath, and let every man
serve God when he lists; and what will shortly become of Religion, and that
peace and order, which God will have to be kept in his Church? 1 Cor, 14. 33.
40.
the Sabbath day is God's Market Day, for the weeks provision; wherein He will
have us to come unto him, Isa. 55. 1, 2.
and buy of him without silver or money, the Bread of Angels, and Water of
Life, the Wine of the Sacrament, and Milk of the Word to feed our souls; tried
gold, Rev. ^. 18.
to enrich our faith; precious E^e-salve, ^o heal our spiritual blindness; and
the white raiment of Christ's righteousness, to cover our silchy nakedness. He
is not far from true Piety, who makes conscience to keep the Sabbath day: but
he who can dis^ence with his conscience to break the Sabbath for his own profit
or pleasure, his heart never yet felt, what either the fear of God, or true
(...) For of this (...) speech of S. J^m. ^. 1^.
James (...) fails in one, is guilty of all, seeing therefore that God has
fenced this commandment with so many moral reasons, it is evident that the
Commandment it self is moral.

2. Because it was commanded of God to Adam in his Innocence: whilst (holding
his happiness not by faith in Christ's merits, but by obedience to God's Law)
he needed no ceremony, shadowing the redemption of Christ. A Sabbath therefore
of a seventh day cannot be simply a ceremony, but an Essential part of God's
worship, enjoined unto Man, when there was but one condition of all men. And if
it was necessary for our first Parents to have a Sabbath day, Genesis 2. 3.
to serve God in their perfection; much more need their posterity to keep the
Sabbath in the stare of their corruption. And seeing God himself kept this day
holy, how can that man be holy, that does wilfully profane it?

3. Because it is one of the Commandments which God spoke with his own mouth,
and twice Exodus 34. 1. etc.
wrote with his own fingers in Tables of stone, to signify their authority and
perpetuity. All that God wrote, were moral and perpetual Commandments, Deuteronomy. 4.
13.
and those are reckoned Ten in number. If this were now but an abrogated
Ceremony, then there were but nine Commandments; the Ceremonial that were to be
abrogated by Christ, were written all by Moses. But this of the Sabbath, Deuteronomy.
4. 2.
with the other nine, written by God himself, were put into the Ark, where no
Ceremonial Law was put, 1 King. 8. 9.
to show, that they should be the perpetual Rules of the Church, Heb. 9. 4.
yet such as none could perfectly fulfill and keep, but only Christ.

4. Because Christ professes, Mat. 5. 17.
that he came not to destroy the moral Law: and that the least of them should
not be abrogated in his kingdom of the New Testament. Insomuch that whosoever
breaks one of the least of these ten Commandments, Verse 19.
and teaches men so, he should be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven;
that is, he should have no place in his Church. Now the Moral Law commands
one day of seven to be perpetually kept a holy Sabbath. And Christ himself
expressly mentions the keeping of a Sabbath among his Christians, at the
destruction of Jerusalem, about 42. years after his resurrection. By which
time, Act, ^^. 10, 20, 21, 24, 28.
all the Mosaical ceremonies (except eating of blood, and things strangled)
were by a public Decree of all the Apostles quite abolished, and abrogated in
Christian Churches. And therefore Christ admonished his Disciples, Mat. 24. 20.
to pray that their flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day. Not in
the winter; for that (by reason of the foulness of the ways and weather) their
flight should be more painful and troublsome unto them: not upon the Sabbath,
because it would be more grievous to their hearts, to spend that day in toiling
to save their lives, which the Lord had commanded to be spent in holy
exercises, to comfort their souls. Now if the sanctifying of the Sabbath on
this day had been but ceremonial, it had been no grief to have fled on this
day, any more than on any other day of the week. But in that Christ does tender
so much this fear and grief of being driven to fly on the Sabbath day, and
therefore wishes his, to pray unto God to prevent such an occasion: he plainly
demonstrates, that the observation of the Sabbath is no abrogated Ceremony, but
a Moral Commandment, confirmed and established by Christ among Christians. If
you would know the day whereupon Christ appointed Christians to keep the
Sabbath S. John will tell you, that is was on the Lord's day, Rev. 1. 10. If
you will know on what day of the week that was, S. Paul will tell you, that it
was on every first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. 1.

As Christ admonished, so Christians prayed, and according to their prayers,
God, (a little before the wars began) warned by an Eusebius hist. Eccl. l. 3. c.
5. It is probable that this Oracle was that voice ( M^gr^nus hinc) which with
in earthquake was heard by ^ight in the Temple. ^ention^^ by Josephus, (...) l.
7. c. 12.
Oracle, all the Christians in Jerusalem, to depart thence and to go to Pella a
little town beyond Jordan: and so to escape the wrath of God, that should fell
upon that City and Nation. If then a Christian should not without grief of
heart, fly for the safety of his life on the Lord's day, with what joy or
comfort can a true Christian neglect the holy exercises of God's worship in the
Church, to spend the greatest part of the Lord's day in profane and carnal
sp^rts, or servile labor? And seeing the destruction of Jerusalem, was has a
(...). 24. 35.
(...), and an assurance of the destruction of the World, who sees not, but
that the holy Sabbath must continue till the very end of the world?

5. Because that all the Ceremonial Law was enjoined to the Jews only, and not
to the Gentiles; but this Commandment of the holy Sabbath, (as Matrimo^y) was
instituted of God in the stare of innocence, when there was but one state of
all men: and therefore enjoined to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews: So
that all Magistrates and Householders were commanded, Isa. 56. 6.
to constrain all strangers (as well as their own Subjects, and Family) to
observe the holy Sabbath, as appears by the fourth Commandment, and practice of
Nehemiah, Nehem. 13. 1^, etc.
All the Ceremonies were a partition wall to separate Jews and Gentiles: Ephesians.
2. 14.
But seeing the Gentiles are bound to keep this Commandment as well as the
Jews; it is evident that it is no Jewish ceremony. And seeing the same
authority is for the Sabbath that is for marriage: a man may as well say, that
marriage is but a ceremonial Law, as the Sabbath. And remember, that whereas
marriage is termed but once the Prove. 2. 17.
coven^^^ of God, because instituted by God in the Mat. 19. 6, 8.
beginning: the Sabbath is every where called the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
because ordained by God in the same beginning, both of time, state and
perpetuity: therefore not Ceremonial.

6. The corruption of our nature found in the Nitimur in vetitum. Hor.
manifest opposition of wicked men, and in the secret unwillingness of good men
to sanctify sincerely the Sabbath, sufficiently demonstrateth, that the
Commandment of the Sabbath is spiritual and moral.

7. Because that as God by a perpetual decree, made the Genesis 1. 18.
Sun, the Moon, and Job 9. 9. Job 38. 31. Amos 5. 8.
other lights in the Firmament of Heaven, not only to divided the day from the
night, but also to be for To distinguish 'twixt Spring and Harvest, Summer and
Winter, and to foreshew Judgments to come
signs, and for Moadim. fig. Sacred times appointed for God's holy worship
having special significations and promises.
seasons, and for One of the seven days of the week from the other.
days, and for Solar. Sabbatarian and Jubilee. Exodus 23. 11, 12.
years: so he ordained in the Church on Earth, the holy Sabbath to be not only
the appointed season, for his solemn Worship, but also the perpetual rule and
measure of time. So that as seven days make a week, four weeks a month, 12
months a year: so seven years make a Sabbath of years: seven Sabbaths of years,
a Jubilee; 80 Jubilees, or 4000 years, or after Ezekiel, 4000 cubits, the whole
time of the Old Testament, till Christ by his Baptism and Preaching, began the
state of the New Testament. Neither can I here pass over without Admiration,
how the Sacrament of Circumcision continued in the Church 39 Jubilees from
Abraham, to whom it was first given, unto the Baptism of Christ in Jordan:
which was just so many Jubilees (after Index Chr. apud An. Mundi 1968.
Bucholcer's account) as the world had continued before from Adam, to the birth
of Abraham. Moses began his Ministry in the 80 year of his age. Christ enters
upon his Office in the 80 Jubilee of the World's Age; Joseph was thirty years
old, when he began to rule over Egypt, Genesis 41. 46. and the Levites began to
serve in the Tabernacle at thirty Years old: so Christ likewise to answer these
figures, began his ministry in the Thirtieth Jubilee of Moses; and when he
began to be thirty years of age, Luke 3. 23. in the midst of Daniel's last
week; and so (continuing his ministry on Earth Three years and a half) finished
our Redemption, and Daniel's Period, by his innocent death upon the Cross. The
most of all the great alterations, and strange accidents, which fell out in the
Church came to pass either in a Sabbatical year, or in a year of Jubilee. For
example:

The seventy weeks of Daniel beginning the first year of Cyrus, After Mr. Rob.
Pont. his computation. Treatise of the last decaying age of the World,
published An. Dom. 1600. R. Pont. treat. of the last age, p. 17.
and the 3439. year of the world, contain so many years, as the world did weeks
of years unto that time: and so many weeks of years, as the world had lasted
Jubilees. Daniel's seventy weeks of years, contain four hundred and ninety
single years: the world before that time, 490 weeks or sabbaths of years.
Daniel's Period 70 weeks, the world's 70 Jubilees: so that to comfort the
Church for their 70 years captivity, which they had now according to Jeremy's
prophecy, Jer 25. 11, 12.
endured in Babylon, Gabriel tells Daniel, That at the end of 70 weeks, or
Sabbaths of years, that is 70 times seven years, or 490 years, their eternal
Redemption from Hell, should be effected by the death of Christ, as sure as
they were now redeemed from the captivity of Babylon. This period of Daniel
containing 70 Sabbaths, or 10 Jubilees of years, began at the first liberty
granted the Jews by Cyrus in the first year of his Reign over the Babylonians,
mentioned Ezra 1. 1. and ends justly at the time that Christ died upon the
Cross. From the death of Christ, or the last end of Daniel's weeks, to the
seventy and one year of Christ the world is measured by seven Seals, or seven
Sabbaths of years, Rev. 5. 1.
making one complete Jubilee. From the end of those seven Seals, the World is
measured to her end by Rev. 8. 2. and 9. 7. Napier on the Apoc. Proposition 6,
8, 9. and his Resolution.
seven Trumpets, each containing 245 years (as some conjecture, about 440 years
hence, the truth will appear:) Enoch the seventh from Alam, having lived so
many years, as there are days in the year, 365, was translated of God in a
Sabbatical year, Pont. of the last age of the World, p. 12. Buchol. 2. Index
Chr.
Moses the seventh from Abraham, as another Enoch is buried of God, but born in
a Sabbatical year of the World 2373, and in the 777 year since the Flood (after
Broughton's consent A. M. 1430. Deu. 31. Pont ibid. and S^aliger. Buchol.
Broughton's Computation) is saved* as a new Noah in a reed Ark, and lived a
builder of the Church, so long as Noah was building the Ark ^^0 years. The
promise was made to Abraham in a Sabbatical year, being the 2223 year of the
World. The sixth year of Joshua, being 2500 years from the Creation of the
World, wherein the land was possessed, and divided among the children of
Israel, was a Sabbatical year, and the Pont. p. 21. Buch. Chro. apad A. M. 2500.
50 Jubilee from the Creation of the World. At this year Moses begins his
Jubilee, by which (as with a chain of thirty links) he tieth the p^rting of
Canaan's possession to the Israelites by Joshua, to the opening of the Kingdom
of Heaven to all believers by Jesus. And so carries the Church of the Jews, by
a Jubilee some derive ^f trumpe^s ^r Ra^is (...), wherewith the Jubilee was
found^d: others from Ju^^l, a ^^ream, because they carry us to the death of
Christ, the ^uth^r of our eternal rest and joy.
joyful stream of Jubilees from the Type to the substance, from Canaan to
Heaven, from Jeshua to Jesus: for Christ at the end of M^ses's thirty Jubilees,
and the beginning of the thirtieth year of his age, at his Baptism opens
Heaven, and gives the clearest Vision of the blessed Trinity, that was seen
since the world began. And by the silver Trumpet of his Gospel proclaims,
according to the Prophecy of Isa. 61. 1. Luke 4. 18.
Esaias, eternal red^mption to all that repent and believe in him.

And the year of our Savior Christ's birth, being the 3948 of the World, was
at the end of a Sabbatical year, and the Pont. of the last decaying age of the
World, p. 12. 13. 21.
564 Septenary of the World. Moses makes the common age of all men, to be ten
times seven, Psalm. 90. and every seventh year commonly produces some notable
Expertum ^st in plerisque omnibus 63. annum cum periculo and cl^le aliqua
venire, aut corporis morbique gravioris, aut vitae interitus, aut animi
aegritudinis. Aul. Gell. lib. 1. 15. c. 7. August. in Ep. ad Caium Nepotem,
exultat se Climactera, communem saniorum omnium 63. evasisse. Bodin. de Repub.
l. 4. c. 2.
change or accident in Man's life: And no wonder, for as Hippocrates affirms,
a Child in his Mother's womb, on the seventh day of his conception, has all
his members finished, and from that day grows to the perfection of birth;
which is always either the ninth, or seventh month. At seven years old the
Child casts his teeth, and receives new. And every seventh year after, there is
some alteration or change in man's life, especially at nine times seven, the
Clymacterick year, which by experience is found to have been fatal to many of
those learned Aristotle, Cicero, Bernard. Bocace, Erasmus, Luther, Melancthon.
Sturmius.
men, who have been the chiefest Lights of the World. And if they escaped that
year, yet most of them have departed this Life, in a septenary year. Lamech
died in the year of his life 777. Methusalem, the longest liver of the Sons of
Men, died when he began to enter his 900 and 70 year. Abraham died, when he had
lived 25 times seven years. Jacob when he had lived 21 times seven years David,
after he had lived ten times seven years. So did Galen, so did Petrarch, who
(as Bodin notes) died on the same day of the year that he was born: so did the
Maiden Queen She was, she is (what can there more be said?) In Earth the First,
in Heaven the second Maid.
ELIZABETH, of blessed and never-dying Memory who came into this world on the
Eve of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin Mary; and went out of this world on
the Eve of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary. Hippocrates died in the
15th septenary. Hierom and Isocrates in their 13. Pliny, Bartolus, and Casar in
their 8 septenary. And Johannes de temporibus, Bodin. Bucholc.
who lived 361 years, died in the 53d septenary of his life. The like might be
observed of innumerable others. And indeed the whole life of a man is measured
by the Sabbath: for, how many years soever man lives here; Climax vitae
virorum fere septenariis, aut novenariis, faeminarum vero senariis definitur.
Bodin. de Rep. lib. 4. c. 2.
yet his life is but a life of seven days, multiplied: so that in the number of
7 there is a mystical perfection, which our understanding cannot attain unto.

All which Divine Disposition of admirable things, so often by sevens, calls upon
us to a continual Meditation of the blessed seventh-day Sabbath, in knowing and
worshipping God in this life: that so from Sabbath to Sabbath, we may be
translated to the eternal glorious Sabbath of rest and bliss, in the life to
come.

By the consideration whereof, any man that looks into the holy History, may
easily perceive, that the whole course of the World is drawn, and guided by a
certain chain of God's providence, Wis. 1 1. 17. Wolph. Prooem. Chron.
disposing all things in number, measure, and weight. All times are therefore
measured by the Sabbath: so that Time and the Sabbath can never be separated.
And the Rev. 10. 6.
Angel swears, that this measuring of Tempus est rerum mundanarum duratio
extrinsecus observata.
time shall continue, till that time shall be no more. And as the Sabbath had
its H. Wolph. Chron. c. 1. Tempus cum mundo coepit, and una desisturum est,
ibid.
first institution in the first Book of the Scriptures, so has it its
confirmation in the last: and as this Book does Genesis 2. 3.
authorize this day; so this day graceth the Book; in that the matter thereof
was revealed upon so holy a day; the Lord's revelation upon the Rev. 1. 10.
Lord's Day. As well therefore may they pull the Sun, Moon, and Stars out of
the Heavens, as abolish the Holy Sabbath (times meet-rod) out of the Chruch:
seeing the Sabbath is ordained in the Church (as well as the Sun and Moon in
the Firmament) for the distinction of times.

8. Because that the whole Church, by an Si quid h^rum t^to die per othem
frequentat Ecclesia. Nam hoc quin ita faciendum sit disp ^tare insol^ (...)
infani^^ est. Aug. Epist. 1 8. ad Jau.
Universal consent, ever since the Apostles time, have still held the
Commandment of the Sabbath, to be the moral and perpetual Law of God; and the
keeping of the Sabbath on the first day of the week, to be the institution of
Christ and his Apostles.

The Synod. Col part. 9. c. ^.
Synod, called Synodus Coloniensis, says, that the Lord's Day has been famous
in the Church ever since the Apostles time. Ignat. ad. Magnes.
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch living in St. John's time, says, Let every one
that loves Christ, keep holy the Lord's Day, renowned by his Resurrection;
which is the Queen of days, in which death is overcome, and life is sprung up
in Christ. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, who lived not long after him, shows how the Christians kept
their Sabbath on the Lord's Day, Origin. homilia 7. super Exodus 1.
as we do. Origin, who lived about 1^0 years after Christ, shows the reason why
the Sabbath is translated to the Lord's Day. Epist. ad Januar. (...). c. 13.
and ad Casal. Epist. ^6.
Augustine says, That the Lord's Day was declared unto the Church by the
Resurrection of the Lord upon that day. Et ex illo e^^pit habere festivitatem
suam. and by Christ it was first ordained to be kept holy. August. de temp.
ser. 251.
And in another place, That the Apostles appointed the Lord's Day to be kept
with all religious solemnity, because that upon that day our Redeemer rose from
the dead, which also is therefore called the Lord's Day.

As therefore Psalm. 87. 3.
David said of the City of God, so may I say of the Lord's Day, Aug. de temp.
ser. 152. and 154. Conc. Constable. Can. 8. Wolphios Chr lib. 1. c. 10. Must.
^ipont. post Dom. Pasc.
Glorious things are spoken of the day of the Lord: for it was the birthday of
the World, the first day wherein all Creatures began to have being. In it light
was drawn out of darkness. In it the Law was given on Mount Sinai. In it the
Lord rose from death to life. In it the Mat. 27. 52. Cedoman. Annal. An. Mund.
2515.
Saints came out of their graves, assuring that on it Christians should rise to
newness of life. In it the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles. And it is
very probable, that on the seventh day, when the Rev. 10. 7.
seven Trumpets have blown, the cursed Jo^h. 6. 13.
Jerich^ of this World shall fall, and our true Jesus shall give us the
promised possession of the heavenly Canaan.

^e that would see the uniform consent of Antiquiry, and practice of the
Primitive Church in this point, let him read Aug. ad Cas^ am. ^p. 86 and ad
Ja^^ar. 119. c. 19.
Eusebius' s Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 4 c 23, Tertullian lib. de
Idololat^^a, cap. 14. Chr^s. Sermon. 5. de resurrection Constitut. Aug Ser. de
temp. 151. and 15^ and Conc. ^. Constant. can. 8.
Apal. l. cap. 37. C^^il. in J^ham l. 12. c. ^8. Of this Ju^gment are all the
found new Writers: see ^ox on Rev. 1. 10. Bucer in Mat. 12. 1^. Gualt. in
Malach. 3. him. 23. ^ulk on the R^emish Testam. Apoc. 1. 10. Chem. Exa^^. Conc.
T^^d. par. 4. de diebus festis, Wolph. Chron. lib. 2. cap. 1. Non dubitamas
quin v^rie apud Christi^nos ^^^bathum (...) do (...) aliis, diebus (...). (...).
Armin, These in 4 praecept. and innumerable others. (...) Prae (...) in Genesis 2.
3.
Learned Junius shall speak for all: Qua^^brem c^^m dies ^^minicus, etc.
Wherefore seeing the Lord's day is both the fast of Christ ( viz. his
resurrection, and often appearing to his Disciples upon that day) by the
example and institution of the Apostles, and by the continual practice of the
ancient Church, and by the testimony of the Scripture, observed and substituted
into the place of the Jewish Sabbath: Inepte faciunt, they do foolishly, who
say, that the observation of the Lord's day is of Tradition, and not from the
Scripture, that by this means they might establish the Traditions of Men. And
again, the cause of this change is the resurrection of Christ, and the benefit
of the restoring of the Church by Christ, the remembrance of which benefit did
succeed into the place of the memory of the creation. Non humana traditione,
sed Christi ipsius observatione and instituto; Not by the tradition of Man, but
by the observation and appointment of Christ, who both on the day of his
resurrection and on every 8th day after, unto his ascension into heaven, did
appear unto his Disciples, and came into their assemblies.

9. Because that the Lord himself expounds the end of the Sabbath to be a
Exodus 31. 13, 14, etc. Ezekiel. 2^. 12, 20.
sign and document for ever, betwixt him and his people, that he is Jehovah, by
whom they are sanctified; and therefore must only of them be Ezekiel, 46. 1. 2, 3,
etc.
worshipped: and upon the pain of death charge his people for ever to keep
this memorial Exodus 35. 2. Armin. disp. Theolog. in praecept 4. These. 14.
unviolated. But this end is moral and perpetual: Therefore the Sabbath is
moral and perpetual. What Act. 10. 15.
God has perpetually sanctified, let no man ever presume to make common or
profane. Upon this ground it is, that the Commandment terms this day, the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God. And God himself calls it, his holy day. Isa. 58.
13.
And upon the same ground likewise, the Old Testament consecrated all their
Sabbaths and holy days, to the worship and honor of God alone. To dedicate
therefore a Sabbath to the honor of any creature, is gross Idolatry. For the
first Table makes it a part of God's Worship, to have a Sabbath to his honor:
so does Levit. 23. 3, 37, 38, etc. and Ezekiel. 20. 20. Neh 9. 14. the Sabbath is
put for the whole worship of God. And our Savior teaches, that We must
Worship the Lord God only, Mat. 4. 10. and therefore keep a Sabbath to the only
honor of God. The Holy Ghost notes it as one of Jeroboam's greatest sins, that
he ordained a Feast from the device of his own heart, 1 Kings 12. 33. And God
threatens to visit Israel for keeping the days of Baalim; That is, of Lords,
as Papists do of Saints, Hos. 2. 13. but says, that such forget him. And so
indeed none are less careful, in keeping the Lord's Sabbath, than they, who are
most Read H. Wolphius Chron. de. Temp. l. 2. cap. 4. p. 118. etc 7. p. 140, etc.
superstitious observers of men's holy days. The Church of Rome therefore
commits gross Idolatry.

First, in taking upon her to ordain Sabbaths, which belongs only unto the Lord
of the Sabbath to do.

Secondly, in dedicating those holy days to the honor of Creatures, which in
effect is to make them sanctifying Gods.

Thirdly, In tying to these days, God's Worship, Prayers, Fasting and Merit.

Fourthly, In exacting on these days of men's invention, a greater measure of
solemnity and sanctification, than upon the Lord's day, which is God's
Commandment: which in effect is to prefer Antichrist before Christ. Our Church
has justly abolished all superstitious and idolatrous Feasts; and only retains
a few Holy Days, to the Honor of God alone, and easing of Servants, Deuteronomy. 5.
14. though long custom forces to use the old Names, for civil distinction: as
Luke used the profane Names of Castor and Pollux, Acts 28. 11. and Christians
of Fortunatus, 1 Cor. 16. 17. Mercurius, Romans 16. 14. and Jews of Mardochaeus's
day, 2 Maccab. 15. 37.

10. Lastly, The Examples of God's Judgments on Sabbath Breakers, may
sufficiently seal unto them, whose Hearts are not seared, how wrathfully
Almighty God is displeased with them, who are wilful prophaners of the Lord's
day.

The Lord (who is otherwise the God of mercy) commanded Moses to stone to death
the man, Number. 15. 32.
who (of a presumptuous mind) would openly go to gather sticks on the Sabbath
day. The fact was small: true, but his sin was the greater, that (for so small
an occasion) would presume to break so great a Commandment.

Nicanor offering to fight against the Jews on the Sabbath day, 2 Mac. 8. 28.
was slain himself and thirty five thousand of his men.

A Husbandman grinding Corn upon the Lord's Day, Cent. Mag. de l. 12. c. 6.
had his Mill burned to ashes.

Another carrying Corn on this day, Disp. de Tempore, Ser. 117.
had his Barn, and all his Corn therein burnt with fire from Heaven the next
night after.

Also a certain Noble man (profaning the Sabbath usually in hunting) had a
Child by his Wife with a head like a Dog, Tho. Cantiprat. lib. 2. de apid.
Timpii. admiran. vindict. div. Theat. hist. Johan. Finc. lib. 3. de miraculis.
and with Ears and Chaps, crying like a Hound.

A covetous Flax-wife at Kinstat in France, Anno 1559, using with her maids to
work at her Trade on the Lord's Day, it seemed unto them that fire issued out
of the Flax, but did no harm: the next Sabbath it took fire indeed, but was
quickly quenched; but not taking warning by this, the third Sunday after it
took fire again, burnt the House, and so scorched the wretched Woman, with two
of her Children, that they died the next day: but (through God's mercy) a Child
in the Cradle was taken out of the fire alive and unhurt.

On the 13th of January, An. Dom. 1582, Stow's Abridgment, An. 1582. Discite
jam moniti Dominum non temnere Christum.
being the Lord's Day, the Scaffolds sell in Paris Garden under the People, at
a Bear-baiting, so that eight were suddenly slain, innumerable hurt and maimed.
A warning to such, who take more pleasure on the Lord's Day, to be in a Theater
beholding carnal sports; than to be in the Church serving God with the
spiritual works of Piety.

Many fearful examples of God's Judgments by fire, have in our days been showed
upon diverse Towns, where the profanation of the Lord's day has been openly
countenanced.

Stratford upon Avon was twice on the same day twelvemonth (being the
Lord's Day) almost consumed with fire: chiefly for profaning the
Lord's-Sabbaths, and for contemning his Word in the mouth of his faithful
Ministers.

Teverton in Devonshire, (whose remembrance makes my heart bleed) was
oftentimes admonished by her godly Preacher, that God would bring some heavy
Judgment on the Town, for their horrible Whilst the Preachers ^ied in the
Church profaneness, profaneness, Gain would not suffer them ^hear: therefore
when they ^ried, Fire, fire, in the street, God would not suffer any ^o help.
profanation of the Lord's Day, occasioned chiefly by their Market on the day
following. Not long after his death, on the third of April, Anno Dom. 1598, God
(in less than half an hour) consumed, with a sudden and fearful fire, the whole
Town, except only the Church, the Courthouse, and the Almshouses, or a few
poor Peoples dwellings; where a man might have seen 400 dwelling-houses all at
once on fire, and above fifty Persons consumed with the flame. And now again,
since the former Edition of this Book, on the fifth of August last, 1612,
(fourteen years since the former fire) the whole Tow^ was again fired, and
consumed, except some thirty houses of poor people, with the School-house, and
Almshouses: they are blind, who see not in this the finger of God. God grant
them grace when it is next built, to change their Market Day, and to remove all
occasions of profaning the Lord's Day. Let other Towns remember the Tower of
Siloe, Luke 13. 4. and take warning by their neighbors chastisements, fear
God's threatening, Jer. ^7. 27. and believe God's Prophets, if they will
prosper, 1 Chronicles. 20. 20.

Many other examples of God's judgments might be alleged; but if these are not
sufficient to terrify thy heart from the wilful profanation of the
Lord's Day, proceed in thy profanation; it may be the Lord will make thee the
next example, to teach others to keep his Sabbaths ^etter.

He punishes some in this life, to signify how he will plague all wilful
transgressors of his Sabbaths at the last day.

Thus we have proved, that the Commandment of the Sabbath is Moral, and that
the change of it from the seventh to the first day of the week, was instituted
by the authority of Christ, and of his Apostles. But as in promulgating of the
Law, diverse Ceremonies, peculiar to the Jews, were annexed, the rather to bind
that people to the more careful performance thereof, as to the first
Commandment, their deliverance from Egypt, shadowing their redemption from
hell; to the fifth Commandment, length of days in Canaan typifying eternal life
in heaven; to the sixth Commandment, abstinence from blood and things
strangled, figuring the care to abstain from all kind of Murder; and to the
whole Law, the Ceremony of Number. 15. 38.
Parchment lace, putting them in mind to keep within the limits of the Law. so
likewise to the fourth Commandment were added some ceremonies, which peculiarly
belonged to the Jews, and to no other people; as first, the double Number. 28. 9,
10.
Sacrifices appointed for them on the Sabbath day, shadowing how God will be
served on the Sabbath, with greater obedience, than on the week days. 2 The
Exodus 35. 2, 3.
rigid and strict ceasing from making of fire, Exodus 16. 23.
dressing of meat, and all bodily labor, both remembering Deuteronomy. 5. 16.
them of their full deliverance by Moses's conduct from the fiery Furnaces, and
slavery of Egypt, upon It was the Sabbath day, on which Moses, and the Children
of Israel sang to God, when Pharaoh and his host were drowned in the Sea, Ex.
15. See Trem. and Jun. notes on Deuteronomy. 5. 15. and on Exodus 12. 15.
that day; as also shadowing unto them the eternal redemption of their souls
from Hell, by the death of Christ. 3. The keeping of the Sabbath upon the
precise seventh day in order of the creation; shadowing to the Jews, that
Christ by his death, and resting on their Sabbath, in the grave, should bring
them rest and ease, from the burden and yoke of the Legal Ceremonies, which
neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. 10. Col. 2. 16, 17.

And howsoever in Paradise before Man's Fall, the keeping of the Sabbath on the
seventh day of the Creation, was not a Ceremony, but an Argument of perfection:
yet after the Fall, it became Ceremonial, and subject to change in respect of
the Restoration by Christ. As man's life before the fall being immortal,
became afterward mortal; and nakedness being an ornament before, became
afterward a shame; and Marriage became a type of the Mystical Union betwixt
Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. and to fulfill the Ceremonies (added for the
Jews sake unto the Sabbath) Christ at his Death rested in the Grave all the
Jewish Sabbath day: and by that rest fulfilled all those Ceremonial
Accessaries. Now as the ceasing of the Ceremonies annexed to the 1, 5, and 6
Commandments, and to Marriage, did not abolish those Commandments and Marriage;
nor cause them to cease from being the perpetual Rules of God's worship, and
man's righteousness; no more did the abrogating of the Ceremonies annexed to
the Sabbath, abolish the morality of the Commandment of the Sabbath: so that
though the Ceremonies be abolished, by the access of the Substance; and the
Shadow over-shadowed by the Body, (which is Christ) yet the holy rest (which
was commanded and kept, before either the Jews were a people, or those
Ceremonies annexed to the Sabbath) still continues as God's perpetual Law,
whereby all the Posterity of Adam are bound to rest from their ordinary
business, that they may wholly spend every seventh day in the solemn Worship,
and only Service of GOD their Creator and Redeemer; but in the substance of the
fourth Commandment, there is not found one word of any Ceremony.

The chief Objections against the Morality of the Sabbath are Three:

1. That of Paul to the Galatians, Object. 1. Gal. 4. 10.
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years, etc. But there the Apostle
condemns not the moral Sabbath, (which we call the Lord's day; and which he
himself ordained according to Christ's Commandment, in the same Churches of
Galatia and Corinth, 1 Cor. 16. 1. and 14. 37. Act. 20. 7.
and kept himself in other Churches) but he speaks of the Jewish days, and
times, and years, and the keeping of the Sabbath on the seventh day from the
Creation, which he terms shadows of things to come, Col. 2. 17.
abolished now by Christ the body; and in the Law are called Sabbaths, Lev. 23.
37, 38. Object. 2. Col. 2. 16.
but distinguished from the moral Sabbaths.

2. That of Paul to the Colossians: Let no man therefore condemn you in meat or
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new mood, or of the
Sabbath Days. But here the Apostle means the Jewish ceremonial Sabbaths, not
the Christians Lord's day, as before.

3. That of the same Apostle to the Romans, Object. 3. Romans 14. 5.
This man esteems one day above another day; and another counts every day
alike, etc. But S. Paul makes no such account. For the question there is not
between Jews and Gentiles, but between the stronger and weaker Christians. The
stronger esteemed one day above another, Romans 15. 1.
as appears in that there was a day both commanded and received in the Church
every where known and honored by the name of the Lord's day. And therefore
Paul says here, that he that observes this day, observes it unto the Lord.
The observation whereof, because of the change of the Jewish seventh day, some
weak Christians, (as many now adays) thought not so necessary: so that if men
(because the Jewish day is abrogated) will not honor and keep holy the Lord's
day, but count it like other days; it is an Argument (says the Apostle) of
their weakness, whose infirmity must be born, till they have time to be further
instructed and persuaded. Other objections are frivolous, and not worth the
answering.

The true manner of keeping holy the Lord's Day.
NOW the sanctifying of the Sabbath consists in two things. First, In resting
from all servile and common business pertaining to our natural life. Secondly,
In consecrating that rest wholly to the Service of God, and the use of those
holy means which belong to our spiritual life.

For the first.
1. The servile and common works, from which we are to cease, are generally all
civil works from the Exodus 31. 12, 13. Exodus 31. 15, etc. Exodus 34. 21.
least to the greatest More particularly;

First, from all the works of our Calling, though it were reaping in the time
of harvest.

Secondly, Neh. 13. 15. Jer. 17. 21, 22, 27.
from carrying burdens, as Carriers do; or riding abroad for profit, or for
pleasure: God has commanded that the beasts should rest on the Sabbath day,
because all occasions of traveling or laboring with them should be cut off
from man. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Romans 8. 22.
God gives them that day a rest; and he that without necessity, deprives them
of their rest on the Lord's day, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 9.
the groans of the poor tired Beasts shall in the day of the Lord rise up in
judgment against him. Likewise such as spend the greatest part of this day in
trimming, painting and painpering of themselves, like Jezabels, doing the
devil's work upon God's day.

Thirdly, Neh. 13. 15, 16, 19.
from keeping of Fairs, or Markets, which for the most part God punishes with
Pestilence, Fire, and strange Floods.

Fourthly, from studying any Books of Science, Rev. 1. 10.
but the holy Scriptures and Divinity. For our study must be to be ravished in
spirit upon the Lord's day. In a word, thou must on that day cease in thy
calling to do thy work: that the Lord by his Calling, may do his work in thee.
For whatsoever is gotten by common working on this day shall never be blessed
of the Lord: but it will prove like Achan's Gold, which being got contrary to
the Lord's Commandment, brought the fire of God's curse upon all the rest which
he had lawfully gotten. And if Christ scourged them out as thieves, who bought
and sold in his Temple, (which was but a Ceremony shortly to be abrogated) is
it to be thought, that he will ever suffer those to escape unpunished who
(contrary to his Commandment) buy and sell on the Sabbath day, which is his
perpetual Law? Christ calls such, sacrilegious Thieves; and as well may they
steal the Communion Cup from the Lord's Table, as steal from God, the chiefest
part of the Lord's day, to consume it in their own lusts. Such shall one day
find the judgments of God heavier than the opinions of Men.

Fifthly, from all recreations and sports, which at other times are lawful: for
if lawful works be forbidden on this day; much more lawful sports, which do
more steal away our affections from the contemplation of heavenly things, Isa.
58. 13, 14.
than any bodily work or Labor. Neither can there be unto a man (that
delights in the Lord) any greater delight or recreation, Psalm. 37. 4.
than the sanctifying of the Lord's day, For can there be any greater joy for a
person condemned, than to come to his Prince his house to have his Pardon
sealed? for one that is deadly sick to come to a Physician that can cure him?
or for a prodigal child that fed on the husks of swine, to be admitted to eat
the bread of life, at his father's table? or for him who fears for sin the
tidings of death, to come, to hear from God the assurance of eternal life? If
thou will allow thy self, or thy servant recreation, allow it in the six days
which are thine: not on the Lord's day, which is neither thine nor theirs. No
bodily recreation therefore is to be used on this day; but so far as it may
help the soul to do more cheerfully the service of God.

Sixthly, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
from gross feeding, liberal drinking of Wine, Romans 12. 11.
or strong Drink; which may make us either drowsy, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
or unapt to serve God with our hearts and minds.

Seventhly, From all talking about worldly things, which hinders the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, more than working: seeing one may work alone, but
cannot talk but with others.

He that keeps the Sabbath, only by resting from his ordinary work, keeps it
but as a Beast. But rest on this day, is so far commanded to Christians, as it
is an help to sanctification: and labor so far forbidden, as it is an
impediment to the outward and inward worship of God.

If then those recreation's which are lawful at other times, are on the Sabbath
not allowed; much more those that are altogether at all times unlawful. Who
without mourning can endure to see Christians keep the Lord's day, as if they
celebrated ^ feast rather to Bacchus, than to the honor of the Lord Jesus, the
Savior and Redeemer of the world? for having served God but an hour in outward
show, they spend the rest of the Lord's day in sitting down to eat and drink, 1
Cor. 10. 7.
and rising up to play; Exodus 32. 6, 18, 19.
First balasting their bellies with ea^ing and drinking; and then feeding their
lusts with playing and dancing. Against which prophanations all holy Divines,
both old and new, have in their times most bitterly inveighed. Insomuch that
Augustine affirms, Melius enim ^rare quam sal^are in sabbato. Aug. in ^it.
Psalm. 91
that it was better to plough than to dance on the Sabbath day.

Now in the Name of Almighty God, (who rested, having created Heaven and Earth)
and of his eternal Son Jesus, the Redeemer of his Church, who shall shortly
come, Act. 17. 31.
on the dreadful day of D^om, to judge all men according to the obedience Romans
2. 12, etc.
which they have showed to his commandments: I require thee, 2 These. 2. 8, etc.
who read these words, as thou will answer before the face of Christ, and
all his holy Angels at that day, that thou better weigh and consider, whether
Dancing, Stage-playing, Masking, Carding, Diceing, Tabling, Chess-playing,
Bowling, Shooting, Bear-baiting, Carousing, Tippling, and such other fooleries
of Robbin Hood, Morice-dances, Wakes, and Ma^-games, be Exercises that God will
bless and allow on the Sabbath day. And seeing that no action ought to be done
that day, but such as whereby we either bless God, or look to receive a
blessing from God; how dare thou do those things on that blessed day, on
which thou dare not to pray to God to bestow a blessing on it to thy use?
Hear this and tremble at this, O profane youth, of a profane age!

O heart all frozen, and void of the feeling of the grace of God! that having
every day in six, every hour in every day, every minute in every hour, so
tasted the sweet mercy of thy God in Christ, without which thou had perished
every moment; Yet can not find in thy corrupt and irreligious heart, to spend
in thy Masters service that one day of the week, which he has reserved for his
own praise and worship. Let men in defense of their profaneness, object what
they will, and answer what the Devil puts in their mouths: yet I would wish
them to remember, that seeing it is an ancient Tradition in the Church, Lactan,
lib. 7. cap. 1.
that the Lord's second coming shall be upon the Lord's day; how little joy
they should have to be overtaken in those carnal sports, to please themselves,
when their Masters should find them in spiritual Exercises, serving him? The
profane Wretch would then wish rather to be taken kneeling at prayers in the
Church, than skipping like a Goat in a dance. If this cannot move, yet I would
wish our impare gallants to remember, that whilst they thus dance on the Lord's
day (contrary to the Lord's Commandment) they do but dance about the pits
brink; and they know not which of them shall first fall therein. Where to being
once fallen without repentance, no greatness can exempt them from the vengeance
of that great God, whose Commandment (contrary to their knowledge and
conscience) they do thus presumptuously transgress. If then God's Commandment
cannot deterr thee; nor God's Word advise thee; Rev. 22. 11.
I say no more, but what St. John said before me, This was the last and
heaviest curse, that St. John wished spiritual Babylon.
He which is filthy, let him be filthy still.

For the second.
2. The consecration of the Sabbath's rest consists in performing three sorts
of duties. First, before; Secondly, at; Thirdly, after the public exercises of
the Church.

The Duties to be performed before the public exercises, are,

1. To give over working betimes on the Eve, that thy body may be the more
refreshed, and thy mind the better ^itted to sanctify the Sabbath on the next
day. For want of this preparation, thy self and thy servants being tired with
labor and watching the night before, are so heavy, that when you should be
serving God, Rev. 2* and 3.
and hearing what his Spirit says unto the Church for your Soul's instruction,
you cannot hold up your heads for sleeping; to the dishonor of God, the
offense of the Church, and the shame of your selves: Therefore the Lord
commands us not only to keep holy, but also to remember aforehand the Sabbath
day, to keep it holy, by preparing our hearts and removing all business that
might hinder us to consecrate it, Isa. 56. 2. etc. and 58. 13, etc.
as a glorious day unto the Lord. Therefore whereas the Lord in the other
Commandments, does but either bid or forbid; he does both in this Commandment,
and that with a special memorandum: As if a Master should charge his servant to
look well unto ten things of great trust, but to have a more special care to
remember one of those Ten, for diverse weighty reasons; should not a faithful
Servan^ that loves his Master, show a more special care unto that thing above
all other businesses?

Thus Moses taught the People over night to remember the Sabbath: Exodus 16. 33,
etc.
and it was a Holy custom among our forefathers, when at the ringing to Prayer
on the Eve before, the Husbandman would give over his labor in the field, and
the T^adesman his work in the Shop, and go to Evening Prayer in the Church, to
prepare their souls, that their minds might more cheerfully attend God's
worship on the Sabbath day

2. To possess that night thy vessel in holiness and honor, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Gen
35. 2.
that thou may present thy soul more purely in the sight of God the 1 Thessalonians.
4. 4.
next morning. 1 Samuel 21. 5.


3. To rise up early in the morning on the Sabbath day. Exodus 19. 15.
Be careful therefore to rise sooner on this day, than on other days: by how
much the service of God is to be preferred before all earthly businesses. For
there is no Master to serve so good as God: and in the end, no work shall be
better rewarded than his service.

4. When thou art up, consider with thy self, what an impure sinner thou art,
and into what an holy place thou go to appear, before the most holy God, who
sees thy heart, and hates all impurity and hypocrisy. Examine thy self
therefore before thou go to church, what grievous sins thou have committed
the week past; confess them unto God, and earnestly pray for the pardon and
forgiveness of them, and so reconcile thy self with God in Christ. Renew thy
vows to walk more conscionably, and pray for an increase of those graces which
thou have, and a supply of those which thou want. But especially pray, that
thou may have Grace to hear the word of God read and preached with profit:
and that thou may receive the holy Sacrament with comfort (if it be Communion
day) that God by his Holy Spirit would assist the Preacher to speak something
that may kill thy sin, Col. 4. 3.
and comfort thy soul, which thou may do in this or the like sort.

A morning Prayer for the Sabbath Day.
O Lord most high, O God eternal, Psalm, 92. 1, 2, 5.
all whose works are glorious, and whose thoughts are very deep: there can be
no better thing than to praise thy Name, and to declare thy loving kindness in
the morning, on thy holy and blessed Sabbath day. For it is thy Will and
Commandment, that we should sancti^ie this day in thy service and praise: and
in the thankful remembrance, as of the creation of the world by the power of
thy Word; so of the redemption of Mankind by the death of thy Son. Thine (O
Lord) I confess, 1 Cor. 29. 11, etc.
is greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and praise: for all that is
in heaven and earth is thine: Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou excellest
as head over all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over
all, and in thine hand is power and strength; and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give grace unto all. Now therefore, O my God, I praise thy
glorious Name, that whereas I a wretched sinner, having so many ways provoked
thy Majesty to anger and displeasure; thou notwithstanding, of thy favor and
goodness, (passing by my profaneness and infirmities) have vouchsafed to add
this Sabbath again unto the number of my days. And vouchsafe, O heavenly
Father, for the merits of Jesus Christ thy Son (whose glorious resurrection thy
whole Church celebrateth this day) to pardon and forgive me all my sins and
misdeeds. Especially, O Lord, Here thou may confess whatsoever sin of the
last week, clogs thy conscience.
cleanse my soul from those filthy sins, with the blood of thy most pure and
undefiled Lamb, which takes away the sins of the Joh. 1. 29.
world. And let thy Holy Spirit more and more subdue my corruptions, that I may
be renewed after thine own Image, to serve thee in newness of life, and
holiness of conversation. And as of thy mercy, thou have brought me to the
beginning of this blessed day; so I do beseech thee, make it a day of
Reconciliation, betwixt my sinful Soul, and thy Divine Majesty. Give me grace
to make it a day of Repentance unto thee, that thy goodness may seal i^ to be a
day of pardon unto me: and that I may remember, that the keeping holy of this
day, is a Commandment which thine own finger has written. That on this day, I
might meditate on thy glorious works of our Creation and Redemption, and learn
how to know and to keep all the rest of thy holy Laws and Commandments. And
when anon, I shall with the rest of the holy Assembly, appear before thy
Presence in thy House, to offer unto thee our Morning Sacrifice of praise and
Prayer; and to hear what thy Spirit, by the preaching of thy Word, shall speak
unto thy servant: Oh let not my sins stand as a Cloud, to stop my Prayers from
ascending unto thee; or to keep back thy grace from descending by thy Word,
into my heart. I know, O Lord, and tremble to think, Matthew. 13. 4, etc.
that three parts of the good seed falls upon bad ground. O let not my heart be
like the highway, Luke 8. 5, etc
which through hardness, and want of true understanding, receives not the seed,
till the evil one comes, and catches it away: nor like to the stony ground,
which hears with joy for a time, but falls away as soon as persecution
arises for the Gospel's sake: nor like the thorny ground, which by the cares
of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choaketh the Word which it
hears, and makes it altogether unfruitful: but that like unto the good
ground, I may hear thy Word, with an honest and good heart, understand it, and
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience, in that measure that thy Wisdom
shall think meet for thy glory, and mine everlasting comfort. Open likewise, I
beseech thee; O Lord, the door of utterance, Col. 4. 3.
unto thy faithful servant, whom thou have sent unto us to open our Eyes, that
we may turn from darkness Acts 26. 18.
to light and from the power of Satan unto God: that we may receive forgiveness
of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ.
And give me grace to submit my self unto his Ministry, as well when he
terri^ieth me with judgments, as when he comfort me with thy Mercies And
that I may have him in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
singular love for his works sake; because he Heb. 13. 17.
watches for my soul, as he that must give an account for the same unto his
Master. And give me grace to behave my self in the holy Congregation with
comeliness and reverence, as in thy presence, and in the sight of thy holy 1
Cor. 11. 10.
Angels. Keep me from drowsiness and sleeping, Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
and from all wandering thoughts, and worldly* imaginations: sanctify my
Memory, that it may be apt to receive, and firm to remember those good and
profitable doctrines, which shall be taught unto us out of thy Word. And that
through the assistance of thy holy Spirit, I may put the same Lessons in
practice, for my direction in Prosperity, for my consolation in Misery, for the
amendment of my Life, and the glory of thy Name. And that this day, which
godless and profane Persons spend in their own Lusts and Pleasures, I (as one
of thy obedient Servants) may make my chief delight to consecrate to thy glory
and honor, Isai. 58. 13.
not doing mine* own ways, nor seeking mine own will, nor speaking a vain word:
but that ceasing from the works of sin, as well as from the works of mine
ordinary calling, I may through thy blessing, feel in my heart the beginning of
that eternal Sabbath, which in unspeakable joy and glory I shall celebrate with
Saints and Angels, to thy praise and worship, in thy heavenly Kingdom for
evermore. All which I humbly crave at thy hands, in the name and mediation of
my Lord Jesus, in that form of Prayer which he has taught me:

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Having thus in private prepared thine own soul, if thou has^ the charge of a
Family, call all thy Household together, read a Chapter, and pray as in the
weekdays: but remember so to dispatch these private preparations and duties, as
that thou and thy family may be in the Church before the beginning of Prayers.
Else your private exercises are rather an hindran^e than a preparation. And as
thou (and thy Household) do go in all reverence toward the Church, let every
one meditate thus with himself.

Things to be meditated as thou go to the Church.
1. Psalm. 100. 4.
That thou art going to the Court of the Lord, and to speak with the great God
by prayer; and to hear his Majesty speak unto thee by his Word: and to receive
his blessing on thy soul, and thy honest labor, in the six days last past.

2. Say with thy self by the way, As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water,
Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirstest for God, even for the
living God: when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Psalm. 84.
10.
for a day in thy courts is better than a thousand other where. I had rather be
a doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tabernacles of
wickedness. Psalm. 5. 7.
Therefore I will come into thy House in the multitude of thy mercies, and in
thy fear will I worship toward thine holy Temple.

3. As thou enterest into the Church, say, Genesis 28. 16, 17.
How fearful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, this is
the gate of Heaven. 1 Cor. 14. 25.
Surely, the Lord is in this place: God is in this people indeed. And
prostrating with thy face downward, being come to thy place, say, Psalm. 26. 8.
O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy
Honor dwells: Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing therefore have I desired of thee, that I will require, even that I
may dwell in thy house all the days of my life, to behold thy beauty, and to
visit thy Temple: Verse 6.
Therefore will I offer in thy Tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing and
praise of the Lord. Harken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry; have mercy also
upon me, and hear me. Psalm. 23. 6.
Doubtless, kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord. And this is that
preparation, or looking to our feet, Eccl. 5. 1.
whereto Solomon advises us, before we enter into the House of God.

The second sort of Duties, which are to be performed at the time of the holy
Assembly.
WHen Prayers begin, lay aside thine own private meditations; and let thine
heart join with the Minister, and the whole Church, as being one body of
Christ; 1 Cor. 12. 12.
and because that God is the God of order, he will have all things to be done
in the Church with Act. 2. 1, 46.
one heart and accord: and the exercises of the Church are Chap. 4. 32.
common and public. It is therefore an ignorant pride, for a man to think his
own private prayers more effectual than the public prayers of the whole
Church. Solomon therefore advises a man not to be rash, Eccles. 5. 1.
to utter a thing in the Church before God. Pray therefore when the Church
prays, si^g when they sing, and in the action of kneeling, Ezekiel. 46. 10*
standi^g, Psalm. 110. 3.
sitting, and such indifferent ceremonies (for the avoiding of scandal, the
continuance of Charity, and in testimony of thine obedience) Cum Romam venio
jejuno Sabbato: cum hic sum, non jejuno. Sic and (...) ad quam forte Ecclesiam
veneris, ejus morem serva si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi.
Amb. consi. August. Epist. ad Januar.
conform thy self to the manner of the Church wherein thou live.

Whilst the Preacher is expounding and applying the Word of the Lord, look
upon him; for it is a great help to stir up thine attention, and to keep thee
from wandering thoughts: so Luke 4. 20.
the Eyes of all that were in the Synagogues, are said to be fastened on Christ
whilst he preached: and that Luke 19. 48.
all the people hanged upon him when they heard him Remember that thou art
there as one of Christ's Disciples, to learn the knowledge of Salvation, by the
remission of sins, through the tender mercy of God, Luke 1. ver. 77.

Be not therefore in the School of Christ, like an idle boy in a Grammar
School, that often hears, but never learneth his lesson: and still goes to
School, but pro^iteth nothing. Thou hate it in a child. Christ detesteth it
in thee. To the end therefore, that thou may the better profit by hearing,
mark;

1. The Coherence and Explication of the Text.

2. The chief Sum or Scope of the Holy Ghost in that Text.

3. The division or parts of the Text.

4. The doctrines; and in every doctrine the proofs, the reasons and the uses
thereof.

A method of all others, easiest for the people (being accustomed thereto) to
help them to remember the Sermon. and therefore much wished to be put in
practice of all faithful Pastors, who desire to edify their people in the
knowledge of God, and his true Religion.

If the Preacher's method be too curious or confused, then labor to remember.

1. How many things he taught, which thou knew not before: and be thankful.

2. What sins he reproved, whereof thy conscience tells thee that thou art
guilty; and therefore must be amended.

3. What Virtues he exhorts unto, which are not so perfect in thee, and
therefore endeavor to practice them with more zeal and diligence.

But in hearing, apply every speech as spoken to thy self, rather by Isa. 2. 3.
Act. 10. 33. Gal. 4. 14. 1 These. 2. 13*
God than by Man: and labor not so much to hear the words of the Preacher
sounding in thine ear, as to feel the opperation of the Spirit working in thy
heart. Therefore it is said so often, Rev. 2. 7.
Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit speaks to the Church. And,
Luke. 24. 32*
Did not our hearts burn within as, whilst he opened unto us the Scriptures?
And thus to hear the Word, has Luke 11. 28.
a blessing promised thereto. It is the acceptablest Romans 15. 16*
sacrificing of our selves unto God. It is the Deuteronomy. 33. 3*
surest note of Christ's Saints; the Joh. 10. 4.
truest mark of Christ's sheep; the Joh. 8. 47. and 18. ^7.
apparentest sign of God's Elect; the very blood, as it were, which uniteth us
to be the Luke 1* 21. Mark 3. 35.
spiritual kindred, brethren and sisters of the Son of God. This is the best
art of Memory for a good hearer.

When the Sermon is ended, 1. Beware thou depart not like the nine lepers, till
that for thine instruction to saving health, thou have returned thanks and
praise to God by an after-prayer, and singing of a Psalm. And when the blessing
is pronounced, stand up to receive thy part therein, and hear it, Ezekiel. 46. 10.
as if Christ himself (whose Minister he is) did pronounce the same unto thee;
Luke* 10. 16.
for in this case it is true; He that hears you, hears me: and the
Sabbath Day is blessed, because God has appointed it to be the day, wherein by
the Mouth of his Ministers, he will bless his people, which hear his word, and
glorify his Name. Numb. 6. 23, 27.
For though the Sabbath Day in it self be no more blessed than the other six
days; yet (because the Lord has appointed it to holy uses above others) it
does as far excel the other days of the week, as the consecrated bread, (which
we receive at the Lord's Table) does the common bread which we eat at our own
Table.

2. If it be a Communion-day, draw near to the Lord's Table in the
Wedding Garment of a faithful and penitent heart to be partaker of so holy a
banquet.

And when Baptism is to be administered, stay and behold it with all reverent
attention, that so thou may, First, show thy reverence to God's Ordinance:
Secondly, that thou may the better consider thine own ingrafting into the
visible body of Christ's Church: and how thou performest the vows of the new
Covenant. Thirdly, that thou may repay thy debts in praying for the infant
which is to be baptized (as other Christians did in the like case for thee)
that God would give him the inward effects of Baptism, by his Blood and Spirit.
Fourthly, that thou may assist the Church in praising God for grafting
another Member into his mystical Body. Fifthly, That thou may prove whether
the effects of Christ's death kills sin in thee, and whether thou be raised
to newness of life, by the virtue of his Resurrection: and so to be humbled for
thy wants, and to be thankful for his graces. Sixthly, to show thy self to be a
freeman of Christ's Corporation: having a voice or consent in the admission of
others into that Holy Society.

3. If there be any Collection for the poor, 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2 Cor. 9. 5, 6, 7,
etc.
freely without grudging bestow thine Alms, as God has blessed thee with
ability.

And thus far of the duties to be performed in the Holy Assembly.

Now of the third sort of Duties after the Holy Assembly.
AS thou returnest home, or when thou art entered into thy house, meditate a
little while upon those things which thou have heard. And as the clean Beasts
which chew the Cud, Lev. 11. 3.
so must thou bring again to thy remembrance, that which thou have heard in the
Church. And then kneeling down, turn all to a prayer, beseeching God to give
such a blessing to those things which thou have heard, that they may be a
direction to thy life, Psalm. 119. 11.
and a consolation unto thy Soul. For till the Word be made thus our own, and
as it were, close hidden in our hearts: we are in danger lest Satan steal it
away, Mat. 13. 19.
and we shall receive no profit thereby. And when thou go to dinner, in that
reverend and thankful manner before prescribed, remember according to thine
ability, to have one or more poor Christians, whose hungry bowels may be
refreshed with thy meat: Job 31. 17, 18.
imitating holy Job, who protested, that he did never eat his morsels alone,
without the good company of the poor and fatherless; That is the Commandment of
Christ our Master, Luke 14. 13. Or at leastwise, Hest. 9. 22.
send some part of thy Dinner to the poor, who lie sick in the back-lane,
without any food. For this will bring a blessing upon all thy works and
labors: Deuteronomy. 15. 10, etc.
and it will one day more rejoice thy Soul, Matthew. 25. 35, etc.
than it does now refresh his Body, when Christ shall say unto thee, O blessed
child of God, I was an hungered, and thou gave me meat, etc And for as much
as thou have done it for my sake to the least of these my brethren, I take it
in as good part, as if thou had done it to mine own self.

When dinner is ended, and the Lord praised, call thy If thou be a private man,
^ither perf^rm these holy d^ties by thy self or join with some godly Family in
the performance of them.
Family together, Act. 17. 11. ^eb. 5. 14.
examine what they have learned in the Sermon: commend them that do well* yet
discourage not them whose memories or capacities are weaker: but rather help
them, for their will and minds may be as good. Turn to the proofs, which the
Preacher alleged, and Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
rub those good things over their memories again. Then sing a Mat. 26. 30. Jam.
5. 13.
Psalm or more. If time permit, thou may teach and examine them in some part
of the Heb. 6. 1.
Catechism: conferring every point with the proofs of the Holy Scripture. This
will both increase our knowledge, and sharpen our memory: seeing by experience
we find, that in every Trade they who are most exercised, are ever best expert.
Heb. 5. 14.
But in any wise, remember so to dispose all these private exercises, as that
thou may be with the first in the holy Congregation at the Evening Exercise;
where behave thy self in the like devo^^^n and reverence, as was prescribed for
the holy Exercise of the Morning.

After Evening Prayer, and at thy Supper, behave thy self in the like religious
and holy manner, as was formerly prescribed. And either before or after Supper,
if the season of the year and weather do serve.

1. Walk into the fields, Psalm (...) and 19* 1, etc. and 8. 1, 3. etc. Romans 1.
19* 20.
and meditate upon the Works of God: for in every Creature thou may read,
P^esentem narrat quaelibet herba Deum.
as in an open Book, the Wisdom, Power, Providence and Goodness of Almighty
God. And how that none is able to make Isa. 40. 26.
all these things in the variety of their forms, virtues, beauties, life*
motions and qualities, but our most glorious God.

2. Consider how gracious he is, ^salm 8.
that made all these things to serve us.

3. Take occasion hereby to stir up both thy self and others, to admire and
adore his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness: and to think what ungrateful wretches we
are, if we will not (in all obedience) serve and honor him.

4. If any neighbor be sick, or in any heaviness, go to visit him. Mat. 25.
36. (...) 5. 14, etc.
If any be fallen at variance, help to reconcile them.

To conclude, three sorts of works may lawfully be done on the Sabbath Day.

^. Works of Piety, which either directly concern the service of God, though they
be performed by bodily labor: as under the Law, the Priests did lab^ur in
killing and dressing of Sacrifices, Mat. 12. 5.
and burning them on the Altar. And Christians under the Gospel, when they
travel far to the places of God's worship; Acts 1. 12. 2 King. 4. 22.
it is but a Sabbath-day's journey, like to that of the Shunamite, who
traveled from home, to hear the Prophet on the Sabbath day, because she had no
teaching near her own dwelling. And the Preacher, though he labors in the
sweat of his brows, to the wearying of his body, yet he does but a
Sabbath-day's work. Mat. 23. 17, 19.
For the holy end sanctifies the work, as the Temple did the Gold, or the
Altar the Gift thereon. Or else such bodily labor, whereby the People of God
are assembled to his worship: Number. 10* 2, 3.
as the sounding of Trumpets under the Law, or the ringing of Bells under the
Gospel.

2. Works of Charity, 1 King. 19. 8.
as to Mark 3. 4.
save the life of a man, or Mat. 12. 11*
of a beast; to Luke 13. 15*
fodder, water, and dress Cattle: to make honest Mat. 12. 1.
provision of meat and drink, to 1 Cor. 11. 22. 34.
refresh our selves, and to relieve the poor: to visit the sick, to make 1 Cor.
16. 1.
collections for the poor, and such like.

3. Works of necessity, not feigned, but present and imminent, and such as
could not be prevented before, nor can be deferred unto another day. As to
resist the invasion of enemies, or the robberies of thieves, to quench the rage
of fire; and for Physicians to stanch, or let blood; or to cure any other
desperate disease; and for Midwives to help Women in labor: Mariners may do
their labor: Soldiers being assailed, may fight; and Nuncius pr^ceps excipitur
a Sabbato. Jud. Comment. s^p. Number. 13. 3.
P^st may ride for the public good, and such like. On these or the like
occasions, a man may lawfully work. Yea, and when they are called, they may
upon any of these occasions, go out of the Church, and from the holy exercises
of the Word and Sacraments: provided always, that they be humbled, that such
occasions fall out upon that day (...); and that they take no Money for their
pains on that day, but only for their stuff, as in the fear of God, and
conscience of his Commandment.

When the time of Rest approaches, retire thy self to some private place: and
knowing, that in the state of Corruption no man living can sanctify a Sabbath
in that spiritual manner that he should; but that he commits many breaches
thereof, in his Thoughts, Words, and Deeds; humbly crave pardon for thy
defects, and reconcile thy self unto God, with this, or the like Evening
Sacrifice.

A Private Evening Prayer for the Lord's Day.
O Holy, Isa. 6. 1, 3.
Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, suffer me, who am but Genesis 18. 27.
dust and ashes, to speak unto thy most glorious Majesty. I know that thou art
a Heb. 12. 29.
consuming ^ire; I acknowledge that I am but withered Job 21. 18.
stubble. My Psalm. 91. 3.
sins are in thy sight, and Satan Z^ch. 3. 1, ^.
stands at my right hand to accuse me for them; I come not to excuse, but to 1
Cor. 21. 31.
judge my self worthy of all those judgments, which thy Justice might most
justly inflict upon me a wretched Creature, for my sins and transgressions. The
Number of them is so great, the Nature of them is so grievous, that they make
me seem vile in mine own eyes, 2 Samuel 6. 22.
how much more loathsome in thy sight? I confess they make me so far from being
worthy to be called thy Son, Luke 15. 21.
that I am altogether unworthy to have the Name of thy meanest Servant. And if
thou should but recompense me according to my desert, the Earth (as weary of
such a sinful burden) should open her mouth, and swallow me up, Psalm. 106. 17.
like one of Dathan's Family, into the bettomless pit of Hell. For if thou
did not spare the natural branches, those Angels of glorious Excellency, 2
Pet. 2. 4.
but hurldst them down from the heavenly Habitations, into the pains of hellish
darkness, to be kept unto damnation, when they sinned but once against thy
Majesty; and did expel our first Parents out of Paradise, Genesis 3. 23.
when they did but transgress one of thy Laws: alas, what vengeance may I
expect, who have not offended in one sin only, Romans 2. 5.
heaping daily un upon sin, without any true repentance, drinking iniquity as
it were water, Job 15. 16.
ever pouring in, but never pouring out any filthyness; and have transgressed
not one, but all thy holy laws and commandments! Yea, this present day, which
thou have straightly commanded me to keep holy, to thy praise and worship, I have
not so religiously kept and observed, nor prepared my soul in that holiness and
chastity of heart, as was fit to mee^ thy blessed Majesty in the holy assembly
of the Saints. I have not attended to the preaching of thy Word, nor to the
administration of thy Sacraments with that humility, reverence, and devotion
that I should. For though I was present at those holy exercises in my body, yet
Lord, I was overtaken with much drowsiness. And when I was awake, my mind was
so distracted and carried away with vain and worldly thoughts, that my ^oul
seemed to be absent, and o^^ of the Church. I have not so duly (as I should)
meditated with my self, nor conferred with my Family, upon those good
instru^ctions which we have heard and received out of thy holy Word, by the
public Ministry. For default whereof, Satan has stolen the most part of those
instructions out of my heart, and I wretched creature have forgotten them, as
though they had never been heard. And my family does not thrive in knowledge
and sanctification under my government, as they should. Though I know where
many of my poor brethren live in want and necessity, and some in pain, and
comfortless; yet I have not remembered to relieve the one with my Alms, nor the
other with Consolations: but I have feasted my self, and satisfied mine own
Lusts. I have spent the most part of the day in idle talk, vain sports and
exercises: Yea, Lord I have, etc. Here confess whatsoever fault thou have done
that day by omission or commission, and then fetching from thy heart a deep
sigh, say,
And for all these my sins my Conscience cries guilty, thy Law condemns me, and
I am in thy hand to receive the sentence and curse that is due to the wilful
breach of so holy a Commandment. But what if I am by thy Law condemned? Yet,
Lord, thy Gospel assures me, that thy mercy is above all thy works: that thy
grace transcends thy Law; and thy goodness delights there to reign, where
sins do most Romans 5. ^0.
abound. In the multitude therefore of thy Mercies, and for the Merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior, I beseech thee, O Lord (who despises not the sighings of a
contrite heart, nor desire the death of a penitent sinner) to pardon and
forgive me all those my sins, and all the errors of this day, and of my whole
life; and free my soul from that curse and Judgment which is due unto me for
them. Thou that did justify the contrite Publican for Four Words of
confession, Luke 18. 13.
and received'st the Prodigal Child (when he had spent all the stock of thy
grace) into favor upon his repentance: pardon my sins likewise, O Lord, and
suffer me not to perish for my transgressions. O spare me, and receive me into
thy favor again. Will thou (O Lord) reject me, Mat. 21. 31, 32.
who have received all Publicans, Harlots, and Sinners, that upon repentance
sued to thee for grace? Shall I alone be excluded from thy mercy? Far be it
from me to think so, for thou art the same God of mercy unto me that thou wast
unto them, and thy compassions never fail. Wherefore, O Lord, deal not with me
after my merits, but according to thy great mercy. Execute ^ot thy severe
Justice against me a sinner, but exercise thy long-sufferance in forbearing
thine own creature. I have nothing to present unto thee for a satisfaction, but
only those Bloody Wounds, bitter Death and Passion, which thy blessed Son, my
only Savior, has suffered for me. Him (in whom only thou art well pleased) I
offer unto thee for all my sins, wherewith thou art displeased. Him my
Mediator, the Request of whose Blood, Heb. 12. 24
speaking better things than that of Abel, thy mercy can never gainsay.
Illuminate my understanding, and sanctify my heart with thy holy Spirit that
it may bring to my remembrance all those good and profitable lessons, which
this day and at other times have been taught me out of thy holy Word; that I
may remember thy Commandments to keep them, thy Judgments to avoid them, and
thy sweet Promises to rely upon them in time of misery and distress. And now, O
Lord, I resign my self to thy most holy Will: O receive me into thy favor; and
so draw me by thy grace unto thy self, that I may as well be thine by love and
imitation, as by calling and creation, and give me grace so to keep holy thy
Sabbaths in this life; as that (when this life is ended) I may with all thy
Saints and Angels, celebrate an eternal Sabbath of joys and praise, to the
honor of thy most glorious Name, in thy heavenly Kingdom, for evermore. Amen.

And then calling thy Family together, shut up the Sabbath with the Meditations
and Prayers before prescribed for thy Family. And the Lord will give thee (...)
Night a more sweet and quiet rest than ordinary, and prosper thee the better in
all the labors of the week following.

Thus far of the ordinary Practice of Piety, both in private and public.

Now follows the extraordinary practice of Piety, whereby God is glorified in
our lives.
THe extraordinary Practice of Piety consists either in fasting or feasting.

1. Of the Practice of Piety in Fasting.

There are diverse kinds of fasting. First, Jejunium 1. Co^ctum.
a constrained Fast, as when men either have not food to ear, as in the 2 Kin.
6 25.
Famine of Samaria: or having food cannot eat it for heaviness or sickness, as
it befell them who where in the Act. ^^. ^3.
Ship with St. Paul. This is rather Famine than Fasting.

Secondly, 2. Physi^^^n Nihil p^riculosius habitudire corporis extr^me bona:
det^ahenda sunt ergo per jej^nium (...) fracta (...)
A natural Fast, which we under^ake Physically for the health of our body.

Thirdly, 3. ^^liticum.
A civil Fast, which the Magistrate enjoyneth for the better main^^nance of the
Commonwealth, that by (...) Fish as well as Flesh, there may be greater plenty
of both.

Fourthly, 4 ^iracul^^^m.
A miraculous Fast, as the forty days fast of Moses and Elias, the Types; and
of Christ, the substance. This is rather to be admired than imitated.

Fifthly, 5 (...)
A daily Fast, when a man is careful to use the Creatures of God wit^ such
moderation, that he is not m^de heavier, but more (...) 33. ^^ 2. 3.
cheerful, to serve God and to do the duties of his calling, This is especially
to be observed of ministers and ^rov. 31. 4, 5.
Judges.

Sixthly, 6. Religio^^^.
A religious Fast, ^ Cor. 6. 4, 5.
which a man voluntarily undertakes, to make his body and soul the fitter to
pray more fervently unto God, upon some extraordinary occasion. And of this
Fast only we are to treat. The Religious Fast is of Two sorts, either private
or public.

1. Of a Private Fast.
THat we may rightly perform a private Fast, Four things are to be observed:
First the Author: Secondly, the Time and Occasion: Thirdly the Manner:
Fourthly, the Ends of private Fasting.

1. Of the Author.
The first that ordained Fasting, was God himself in Jejunium in Paradiso
praescriptum est reverere igitur jejunii canitiem. Basil. hom. c. de jejun.
Paradise: and it was the first Law that God made, in commanding Adam to
abstain from eating the forbidden fruit. God would not pronounce nor write his
Lev. 23.
Law without fasting, and in his Law commands all his people to fast. So does
our Mat. 6. 17. and 9. 15.
Savior Christ teach all his Disciples under the New Testament likewise. By
religious fasting a man comes nearest the life of Qui jej^nat, Angelorum ritu
vivit, and dam paucissi^ is contentus est; similitudinem cum illis assequicur.
Bas. hom. de jejuniis.
Angels, and to do God's will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.

Yea, Nature seems to teach man this duty, in giving him a Natura os parvum,
and gutter ^ar^tum homini dedit.
little mouth, and a n^rrower throat; for Nature is content with a little,
Grace with less. Neither does Nature and Grace agree in any one act better than
in this Exercise of Religious Fasting; for it strengthens the memory, and
clears the mind; illuminateth the understanding, and bridleth the Affections;
mortifieth the flesh, and preserves Chastity; preventeth sickness, and
continues health; it delivers from evils, and procures all kind of
blessings.

By breaking this Fast, the Serpent overthrew the first Quamdiu jej^navit Adam,
in Paradiso f^it; com^dit, and ejectus est. Hieron.
Adam, so that he lost Paradise. But by keeping a Fast, the second Adam
vanquished the Serpent, and restored us into Heaven. Fasting was she who
covered Noah safe in the Ark, whom Intemperance uncovered, and left stark naked
in the Vineyard. By fasting, Lot quenched the flame of Sodom, whom Drunkenness
scorched with the fire of Incest. Religious Fasting and talking with God, made
Moses's Face to shine before Men; when Idolatrous eating and drinking ca^sed
the Israelites to appear abominable in the sight of God. It rapt Elias in an
Angelical Coach to Heaven; when voluptuous Ahab was sent in a Bloody Chariot to
Hell. It made Herod believe that John Baptist should live after death by a
blessed Res^rrection, when after an intemperate life, he could promise nothing
to himself, but eternal death and destruction. O divine Ordinance of a divine
Author!

2. Of the Time.
The Praeceptum esse (...) video, quibus autem non di^bus opo^t^a^ jej^nare,
and quibus, opo^teat pr^^cepto Domini vel Apostolor (...) inve^iod^ sinitum.
Aug ad Cassal. Epist. ^6.
holy Scripture appoints no Time under the New Testament to fast; but but
leaves it unto Christians own free choice, Romans 14. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 5. to fast as
occasion shall be offered unto them, Mat. 9. 15. As when a man becomes an
humble and earnest suitor unto God for the pardon of some gross sin committed;
or for the Indifferenter jejunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex impe^io (...)
discipl^^^ pro temporibus, and (...) uniuscujus^^^. Tert. adver. (...) cus
primus erat qui (...) leges (...) Hist. lib. 5. cap. 1^. ex Appolton.
prevention of some sin, whereunto a man feels himself by Satan solicited: or
to obtain some special blessing which he wants: or to avert some Judgment which
a man fears, or is already fallen upon himself or others: Or, lastly to subdue
his flesh unto his spirit, that he may more cheerfully pour forth his soul unto
God by prayer. Upon these occasions a man may fast Lev. 23. 32. Josh. 7. 6.
a day or H^st. 4. 1^.
longer, as his occasion requiees, and the constitution of his body, and other
needful affairs will permit.

3. Of the manner of a private Fast.
The true manner of performing a private fast, consists partly in outward,
partly in inward actions.

The outward actions are, to abstain, for the time that we fast: First, from
all Lev. 23. 28, 36. Joel. 1. 14. and 2. 15.
worldly business and labor, making our fasting day, as it were a Sabbath day,
Lev. 23. 28. for worldly business will distract our minds from holy devotion.
Secondly, from all manner of food, yea, from 2 Samuel 3. 35. Ezra. 10. 6. Dan.
10. 3. Esther 4. 16. Acts 9. 9.
bread and water, so far as health will permit: 1. That so we may acknowledge
our own indignity, as being unworthy both of life, and all the means for the
maintenance thereof. 2. That by afflicting the Body, the Soul, which fol^loweth
the constitution there^f, may be the more humbled. 3. That so we may take a
godly 2 Cor. 7. 11
revenge upon our selves, for abusing our liberty in the use of God's
Creatures. 4. That by the hunger of our Bodies, through want of these earthly
things, our Souls may learn to hunger more eagerly after spiritual and heavenly
food. 5. To put us in mind, that as we abstain from food which is lawful, so we
should much more abstain from Q^id prodest vacuare corpus ab escis, and animum
^epl^re peccatis? Aug. de tem. Ser. 46.
Sin, which is altogether unlawful.

Thirdly, From good and costly Exodus 33. 5, 6.
apparel; that as the abuse of these puffs us up with pride; so the laying
aside their lawful use may witness our humility. And to this end in ancient
times they used (especially in public Fasts) to put F^^th. 4. 1, 2. J^h. 3. 5,
6. Joel 1. 13. M^t. 11. 21.
on Sackcloth, or other course Apparel. The Equity hereof still remains;
especially in public Fasts, at what time to come into the Assembly with
starched Bands, crisped Hair, brave Apparel, and decked with Flowers or
Perfumes, argues a Soul that is neither humble before God, nor ever knew the
true use of so holy an exercise.

Fourthly, From the full measure of 2 Samuel 12. 16* Joel 1. 13. Esth. 4. 3.
ordinary sleep. That thou may that way also humble thy Body: and that thy
Soul may watch and pray, to be prepared for the coming of Christ. And if thou will break thy sleep early and late for worldly gain: how much more should
thou do it for the service of God? And if 1 King. 21. 27.
Ahab (in imitation of the godly) did in his fast lie in such-cloth, to break
his sleep by night; what shall we think of those who on a fasting-day will
yield themselves to sleep in the open Church?

Fifthly and lastly, From all outward pleasures of our senses. So that as it
was not the Si sola gula peccavit sola jejanet; and su^^icit: Si vevero
peccaverunt and membra caetera, cur non jejunent and ipsa* Bern. Sermon. Quadrag.
3.
throat only that sinned, so must not the throat only be punished: and
therefore we must endeavor to make our eyes (as at all times, so) especially
on that day, to fast from beholding vanities; our ears from hearing Mirth or
Music, but such as may move to mour^; our n^strils from pleasant smell: our
tongues from lying, dissembling, and slandering; yea, the use of the Marriage
b^d must be omitted in a religious reverence of the Divine Majesty, that so
nothing may hinder our true Humiliation, but that all may be signs that we are
unfeignedly humble. Thus much of the outward manner.

The inward manner of fasting consists in Two things: 1. Repentance. 2. Prayer.

Repentance has Two Parts:

1. (...)
Penite^cy for sins past.

2. (...)
Amendment of life in time to come.

This Penitency consists in Three things: First, an inward insight of sin, and
sense of misery. Secondly, a bewailing of thy vile estate. Thirdly, an humble
and particular confession of all thy known sins.

1. Of the inward insight of sin, and s^^se of misery.

This sense and insight will be effected in thee: First, by considering thy
sins, especially thy gross sins, according to the circumstances of the time
when, place where, manner how, and persons with whom it was committed.
Secondly, the Majesty of God against whom it was done: and the rather, because
thou did such things against him since he became a Father unto thee, and
bestowed so many sweet blessings, in bountiful manner upon thee, Thirdly, in
considering the curses which God has threatened for thy sin: how grievously God
has plagued others for the same fault, and how that no means in Heaven or
Earth could deliver thee from being eternally damned for them, had not the son
of God so lovingly died for thee Lastly, That if God loves thee, he must
chasten thee ere it be long, with some grievous affliction; Mat. 9. 15. Can the
children mourn? then shall they fast: And M^rk and Luke for mourn, have fast.
Examples, Psalm. 6. and 22 and 38, and 79. and J^remy's Lament.
unless thou do prevent him by speedy and unfeigned repentance. Let these and
the like considerations, so prick thy heart with sorrow, that melting for
remorse within thee, it may be dissolved into a fountain of tears, trickling
down thy mournful Cheeks. This mourning is the beginning of true fasting, and
therefore oft-times Joel 2. 12, 17.
put for fasting, the first and principal part for the whole action.

2. Of the bewailing of thine own estate.

Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
Bewailing or lamentation, is the pouring out of the inward mourning of the
heart, by the outward means of the voice, and tears of the eyes. With such
filial earnestness and importunity in prayer, is our heavenly Father well
pleased. Nay, when it is the fruit of his Spirit, and the effect of our faith,
he cannot be displeased with it. For if he heard the moans which extremity
wrong from Genesis 21. 17.
Ismael and Hagar; and hears the cry of the Psalm. 147. 9.
young ravens, and roaring of Psa. 104. 21.
Lions, how much rather will he hear the mournful lamentations which his own
Children make unto him in their misery?

3. Of the humble confession of sins.
In this action thou must deal plainly with God, 1 Samuel 7. 6. Ez^k. 9. 4. D^n.
9. Neh. 1.
and acknowledge all the sins thou know, not only in general, but also in
particular. This has been the manner of all God's Children in their Fasts:
first, Prove. 28. 13. Psalm. 32. 5.
because that without Confession thou have no promise of mercy or forgiveness
of sins. Secondly, That so thou may acknowledge God to be just, Psalm. 51. 4.
and thy self unrighteous. Thirdly, That by the numbering of thy sins, thy heart
may be the more humbled and pulled down. Fourthly, That it may appear, that
thou art truly penitent: for till God has given thee grace to repent, thou will be more ashamed to confess thy fault, than to commit thy sin. The plainer
thou deale^^ in this respect with God, the more graciously will God deal with
thee: for if thou do acknowledge thy sins, 1 John 1, 7, 9.
God is faithful and just to forgive thee thy sins: and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son shall clearse thee from all thy sins.

To help thee the better to perform these three parts of Penitency, thou must
diligently read such Chapters and Portions of the holy Scriptures, as do
chiefly concern thy particular sins: that thou may see God's curse and
judgments on others for the like sins, and be the more humbled thy self.

Thus far of the first part of Repentance, which is penitency.

The other part which is Amendment of life, consists; First, in devout Prayer:
Secondly, in devout Actions

This devout Prayer, which we make in time of Fasting, (...)
in either deprecation of evil, or craving needful good things.

Deprecation of evil, is, when thou beseech^st GOD for Christ the Mediator's
sake, to pardon unto thee those sins which thou have confessed, and to turn
from thee those judgments which are due unto there for thy sins. And as
Benhadad, because the heard, 1 Kin. 20 31.
That the King of Israel was merciful, prostrated himself unto him with a r^pe
about his neck; so because thou know that the King of Heaven is merciful,
cast down thy self in his presence, in all true signs of humiliation
(especially, Psalm 50. 15.
seeing h^ calls upon thee to come unto him in thy troubles) and doubtless
thou shall find him most merciful.

The craving of needful good things, is* First, a fervent and faithful begging
of God, to seal by his Spirit in thy heart, the assurance of the forgiveness of
all thy sins. Phil. 1. 6.
Secondly, to renew thy heart by the Holy Ghost, so that sin may daily decay,
and righteousness more and more increase in thee. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
Lastly, in desiring a supply of faith, patience, chastity, and all other
graces which thou want: and an increase of those which God of his mercy has
bestowed upon thee already.

Thus far of Prayer in Fasting.
The devout actions in Fasting, are two. First, Avoiding evil. Secondly, Doing
good.

1. Of avoiding Evil.
This Abstinence from evil, is that which is chiefly signified by thy
Abstinence from food, etc. and is the chief end of fasting, as the Joh 38. 10.
Ninevites very well knew. A day of fast, and not fasting from sin, the Lord
abhors. It is not the vacuity of the stomach, but the P^lch^^am est corporis
jej^ni^m, cum sit animas a vi^iis jejunus Hierad Celant. (...). 14.
purity of the heart that God respects. If therefore thou would have God
to turn from thee the Jejuna a malis actibus, abstinea malis sermo^ibus,
conti^e a cogita^ionibus p^^^mis. ^yril. in Lev. Cap. 10.
evil of Affliction; thou must first turn away from thy self the evil of
transgression. And without this fasting from evil, thy Fast favors more noisome
to God, than thy breath does to Man. This made God so often to reject the Fast
of the Isa. 58. 2, etc. Zach. 7. 5. Non pos^^^ (...) iniquitatem and
interdictionem. Isa. 1. 13.
Jews. And as thou must endeavor to avoid all sin; so especially that sin
wherewith thou have provoked God, either to shake his rod at thee, or already
to lay his chastening hand upon thee. And do this with a resolution, by the
assistance of God's grace, never to commit those sins again. For Q^id prodest
tenuari corpus abstinentia, si animus intumescit superbia? Vinum non bibere,
and ira inebriari? Carnibus non vesci, and de ore omni esca sordidius egredi
maledictum aut mendatium? Maximus Epist
what shall it profit a man by abstinence to humble his body, if his mind swell
with pride? Or to forbear Wine and strong drink, and to be drunk with wrath and
malice? Or to let no flesh go into the Belly, when lies, slanders, and
ribauldry (which are worse than any meat) come out of the mouth? To abstain
from * meat, and to do mischief, is the Devil's fast, who does evil, and is
ever hungry.

2. Of doing good works.
The Qui cibis abstinent, and mala agunt daemones i^^it^^tur quibus culpa
adest, and cibus deest. Isid.
good works which as a Christian thou must do every day, but especially on thy
Fasting-day, are either the works of Piety to God, or the works of Charity
toward thy brethren.

1. The works of Piety to God, are the practice of all the former duties, in
the sincerity of a good Conscience, and in the sight of God.

2. Vis orati^nem tuam volare ad coelum? Fac illi duas alas, Jejunium and
E^eemosynum. Aug.
The works of Charity toward our Brethren are, Isa. 58. 6. etc. Zach. 7. 9, 10.
forgiving wrongs, remitting debts to the poor that are not well able to pay:
but especially in giving alms to the poor, that want relief and sustenance.
Else we shall Qui^jej not ut parcat, n^n ad D^igl^^^m jejunat, sed substantiae
suae parcit. Chrysostom. i^ Mat. 5. Act. 10. 30.
under pretense of godliness, Act. 10 30.
practice miserableness: like those, who will pinch their own bellies, to
defraud their laboring servants of their due allowance. As therefore Christ
joined Fasting, Prayer, and Alms together, in Precept, ^o must thou join them
together, like Cornelius, in practice. And therefore be sure to give at the
least so much to the Non D^o sed ^bi jejunat, qui q^^ ad t^mpus subtrahit,
nonin op^^us subtrahit, sed ventri postmodum offecenda custodit. Greg. M Past.
c. 44.
poor, on thy Fasting-day, as thou would have spent in thine own diet, if
thou had not fasted that day. And remember that he that 2 Cor. 9. 6.
sows plenteously, shall reap plenteously; and that this is a special sowing
day. Let thy Fasting so Jejuniam tuam te castig^t, sed alterum laetisicat. Aug.
Ser. de temp. 64.
afflict thee, that it may refresh a poor Christian; and rejoice that thou have
dined and supped in another; or rather, that thou have Accipiat esuriens
Christus quod jejunans minus accipit Cristianus. Aug. d^^t^m. Ser. 157.
feasted hungry Christ, in his poor Members.

In giving Alms, observe Two things: First, the Rules, Secondly, the Rewards.

1. Rules in giving of Alms, and doing good works.

1. They must be done in obedience to God's Commandments: Be^tus qui jejunat ut
alat paup^ rem: imitatur enim Christum, qui ani^^m sua^ posuit pro statribus
suis ^yril. in (...) lib. 10.
not because we think it to be good, but because God requires us to do such
and such a good deed: for such 1 Sa. 15. 22
obedience of the worker God prefers before all sacrifices, and the greatest
works.

2. They must proceed from Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 2.
faith, else they cannot please God: nay without faith the most specious works
are but Splendi la peccata. Aug.
shining sins, and Ph^rifees Alms.

3. Thou must not think by thy good Works and Alms, to merit heaven: for in
vain had the Son of God shed his Blood, if Heaven could have been purchased
either for Money or Meat. Thou must therefore seek Heaven's Possession by the
purchase of Christ's Blood, not by the merits of thine own works. For Romans 6.
ult*
eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ. Yet every true Christian
that believes to be saved, and hopes to come to Heaven, must do good works (as
the Apostle says) for necessary uses, which are four.

First, That 1 Cor. 10. 31. 2 Cor. 8. 19. Phil 1. 11.
God may be glorified, Secondly, That thou may show thy self Luke 1. 74, 75.
thankful for thy Redemption. Thirdly, That thou may 2 Pet. 1. 10.
make sure thine Election unto thy self. Fourthly, That thou may Mat. 5. 16.
Isa 61. 9.
win others, by thy holy devotion, to think the better of thy Christian
profession. And for these uses we are said to be Ephesians. 2. 10.
God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, and that God has
ordained us to walk in them.

4. Thou must not give thine Alms to impudent Vagabonds, who live in wilful
idleness and filthiness, but to the religious and honest Poor, who are either
sick, or so old that they cannot work; or such who work, but their work cannot
competently maintain them: Seek out those in the back L^nes, and relieve them.
But if thou m^etest one that asks an Alms for Jesus sake, and know him not
to be unworthy, deny him not; for it is better to give unto ten Counterfeits,
than to suffer Christ to go, in one poor Saint unrelieved. Look not on the
Person, but give thy Alms as unto Christ in the Party.

2. Of the Rewards of Alms-deeds and Good works.

1. Alms are a special means to move God in mercy to turn away his Dan. 4. 27.
temporal judgments from us: when we by a true Faith (that shows it self by
such fruits) do return unto him.

2. Merciful- Alms givers Luke 6. 35, 36.
shall be the Children of the Highest, and be like God their Father, who is the
2 Cor. 1. 3.
Father of mercies. They shall be his Luke 16. 1.
Stewards to dispose his Goods; his Hands, to distribute his Alms: and if it be
so great an honor to be the King's Almoner, how much greater is it to be the
God of Heavens Almsgiver?

3. When all this World shall forsake us, then only good Works and good Angels
shall accompany us, the one to Rev. 14. 13.
receive their reward the other to deliver their Luke 16. 22. Psalm. 91. 11.
Heb. 1. 14.
charge.

4. Liberty in Alms-deeds is our 1 Timothy 6. 19.
surest foundation, that we shall obtain in eternal life, a liberal reward,
through the Mercy and Merits of Christ.

Lastly, By Alms-deeds we feed and relieve Christ in his Members; and Mat. 25.
Christ at the last day will acknowledge our love, and reward us in his mercy:
and then it shall appear, that what we gave to the poor, was not lost, but
Prove. 19. 17.
lent unto the Lord What greater motives can a Christian wish, to excite him to
be a liberal Almsgiver? Thus far of the Manner of Fasting. Now follow the Ends.

3. Of the Ends of Fasting.
The true Ends of Fasting are not to merit God's favor, or eternal life (for
that we have only of the gift of God through Christ) nor to place Religion in
bodily abstinence (for Fasting in it self is not the worship of God, but an
help to further us the better to worship God;) But the true Ends of Fasting are
Three:

First, To subdue our Esd. 8. 2.
Flesh to the Spirit: but not so to 1 Timothy 5. 23. Jejunium orationem roborat,
oration fanctificat Jejunium. Bern. Ser. de Jejun.
weaken our Bodies, as that we are made unfit to do the necessary Duties of our
Calling. A good man (says Solomon) is merciful to his beast, Prove. 12. verse
10. much more to his own body.

Secondly, That we may more devoutly contemplate God's holy Will, and fervently
Joel 2. 17. Luke 2. 37. 1 Cor. 7. 5.
pour forth our Souls unto him by prayer: for as there are some kind of Devils,
so there are also some kind of Sins, which cannot be subdued but by Fasting,
joined unto Prayer, Matthew. 17. 22.

Thirdly, That by our Joel 2. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 12.
serious humiliation, and judging of our selves, we may escape the judgment of
the Lord; not for the merit of our Fasting (which is none) but for the mercy of
God, who has promised to remove his judgments from us, when we by Fasting do
unseignedly humble our selves before him. And indeed no Child of God ever
conscionably used this holy exercise, but in the end he obtained his request at
the hand of God: both in receiving graces which he wanted, as appears in the
examples of 1 Samuel 1. 7.
Hannah, 2 Chr. 20.
Jehosaphat, Neh. 1.
Nehemiah, Dan. 9.
Daniel, Esd. 8. 23.
Esdras, Esth. 9.
Esther; as also in turning away judgments threatened, or fallen upon him, as may
be seen in the examples of the 1 Samuel 7. 6.
Israelites, the Jonah 3.
Ninevites, 2 Chr. 12. 5, 7, etc.
Rehoboam, 1 King. 21.
Ahab, 2 Chr. 32.
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 33. 18, 19.
Manasses. He who gave his dear Son from Heaven to the Death, to ransom us when
we were his enemies, thinks nothing too dear on Earth to bestow upon us, when
we humble our selves, being made his reconciled Friends and Children.

Thus far of the private Fast.

2. Of the public Fast.
A Public Fast is, when by the Jon. 3. 7. 2 Chr. 20 3. Ezra 8. 21.
Authority of the Magistrate, either the whole Church within his Dominion, or
some special Congregation (whom it concerns) do assemble themselves together,
to perform the forementioned duties of Humiliation: either for the removing of
some public. 1 Samuel 7. 5, 6.
calamity threatened, or already inflicted upon them, Joel 2. 15.
as the sword, invasion, famine, pestilence, or other fearful sickness: or else
for the obtaining of some public blessing, 2 Chronicles. 20. Jonah 3. 5. Esth. 4.
16.
for the good of the Exodus 19. Esdras 8. Act. 1. 13, 14.
Church, as to crave the assistance of his holy Spirit, in the election and
ordination of fit and able Pastors, etc. or, for the trial of Truth, and
execution of Justice, in matters of difficulty and great importance, etc.

When any evil is to be removed, the Joel 1. 14. Nehem. 8.
Pastors are to lay open unto the People, by the evidence of God's Word, the
sins which were the special causes of that Calamity: call upon them to repent,
and publish unto them the mercies of God in Christ upon their Repentance. The
People must hear the Voice of God's Messengers with hearty sorrow for their
sins; earnestly beg pardon in Christ, and promise unfeigned amendment of their
life. When any blessing is to be obtained, the Pastors must lay open to the
People the necessity of that blessing, and the goodness of God who gives such
graces for the good of Men. The people must devoutly pray unto God for
bestowing of that grace, and that he would bless his own means to his own
glory, and the good of his Church. And when the holy Exercise is done, let
every Christian have a special care, according to his ability, to Isa. 58. 7, 10
remember the poor. And whosoever (when just occasion is offered,) 2 Cor. 9. 7.
uses not this holy Exercise of Fasting, Gal. 2. 10.
he may justly suspect, that his heart never yet felt the power of true
Christianity.

So much of Fasting. Now follows the exercise of holy Feasting.

Of the Practice of Piety in Holy Feasting.
HOLY Feasting is a solemn Thanksgiving, (appointed by Authority) to be rendered
unto God on some special day, for some extraordinary blessings or deliverances
received. Exodus 12. 15.
Such among the Jews was the Feast of the Passover, to remember to praise God
for their deliverance out of Egypt's bondage: or the Feast of Purim, to give
thanks for their deliverance from Haman's conspiracy. Esth. 9. 19, 21.
Such amongst us are the fifth of August, to praise God for delivering our
Gracious King from the bloody conspiracy of the traitorous Gowries. And the
fifth of November, to praise God for the deliverance of the King and the whole
State, from the Popish Gunpowder Treason. Such Feasts are to be celebrated by
a public rehearsal of those special benefits, by spiritual Psalms and Dances,
by mutual feasting, and sending presents every man to his Neighbor, and by
giving gifts to the poor.

But forasmuch as the benefit of our Redemption was the greatest that Man
needed from God, or that God ever bestowed upon Man; and that the Lord's Supper
is left by our Redeemer, as the chiefest memorial of our Redemption: every
Christian should account this holy Supper, his chiefest and joyfullest Feast in
this World. And seeing that as it ministers to worthy partakers, the greatest
assurance which they have of their salvation; so it pulls temporal judgments
on the Bodies, and (without repentance) eternal damnation on the Souls of them
who receive it unworthily: Let us see how a Christian may best sit himself to
be a due partaker of so holy a feast; and to be a worthy Guest at so sacred a
Supper.

Meditations concerning the due manner of practicing Piety, in receiving the
Holy Supper of the Lord.
THough no man living is of himself worthy to be a Guest at so holy a Banquet;
yet it pleases God of his grace to accept him for a worthy receiver, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 11. Col. 1. 12. Luke. 20. 35. Apoc. 3. 4.
who endeavors to receive that holy mystery with that competent measure of
reverence that he has prescribed in his Word.

He that would receive this holy Sacrament with due reverence, must
conscionably perform three sorts of duties. First, those which are to be done
before he receives. Secondly, those that are to be done in the receiving.
Thirdly, those that are to be done after that he has received the Sacrament.
The first is called Preparation, the second Meditation, the third Action or
Practice.

Of Preparation.
That a Christian ought necessarily to prepare himself before he presume to be
a partaker of the holy Communion, may evidently appear by five Reasons.

First, Because it is God's Commandment. For if he commanded under the pain of
death, that none uncircumcised should eat the Paschal Lamb; Exodus 12. 48.
nor any circumcised under four days preparation: how much greater preparation
does he require of him, that comes to receive the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood, which as it succeeds, so does it exceed by many degrees the Sacrament
of the Passover.

Secondly, Because the Examples of Christ teaches us so much; Joh. 13. 5.
for he washed his Disciples F^et before he admitted them to eat of this
Supper, signifying how thou should lay aside all unpureness of heart, and
uncleanness of life, and be furnished with humility and charity, before thou
presumest to taste of this holy Supper.

Thirdly, because it is the counsel of the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. And if a man when he
is to eat with an earthly Prince, Prove. 23. 1, ^.
must consider diligently what is before him, and put a Knife to his Throat,
rather than commit any Rudeness; how much more ought thou to prepare thy
soul, that thou may behave thy self with all fear and reverence, when thou
art to feast at the holy Table of the Prince of Princes?

Fourthly, Because it has been ever the practice of all GOD's Saints to use
holy preparation before they would meddle with divine Mysteries. David would
not go near to God's Altar, till he had first washed his hands in innocence;
Psalm. 26. 6.
much less should thou without due preparation, approach to the Lord's
Table. Abimelech would not give, 1 Samuel 21. 4.
nor David and his Men would not eat the Shewbread, but on condition that
their Vessels were holy: How much less should thou presume to eat the Lord's
Bread, or rather the Bread which is the Lord, unless the Vessel of thy heart be
first cleansed by repentance? And if the Lord required Joshua (as he had done
Moses before) to put off his shoes, Exodus 3. 5.
in reverence of his Holiness, Josh. 5. 15.
who was present in that place, where he appeared with his sword in his hand
for the destruction of his Enemies: how much rather should thou put off all
the affections of thine earthly conversation, when thou come near that place,
where CHRIST appears to the Eye of thy Faith, with Wounds in his hands and
side, for the Redemption of his Friends? And for this cause it is said, Rev.
19. 7.
That the Lamb's Wife has made her self ready for the marriage. Prepare
therefore thy self, if thou will in this life be betrothed unto Christ by
Sacramental Grace, or in Heaven married unto him by Eternal Glory.

Fifthly, Because that God has ever smitten with fearful Judgments, those who
have presumed to use his holy Ordinances without due fear and preparation. God
set a flaming* Sword in a Cherubim's hand to smite our first Parents, Genesis 3.
24.
being defiled with Sin, if they should attempt to go into Paradise, to eat the
Sacrament of the Tree of Life. Fear thou therefore to be smitten with the Sword
of God's vengeance, if thou presumest to go to the Church with an impenitent
heart, to eat the Sacrament of the Lord of Life. God smote fifty thousand of
the 1 Samuel 6. 19.
Bethshemites for looking irreverently into his Ark, and killed 1 Chr. 13. 9,
etc.
Vzza with sudden death, for but rash touching of the Ark, and smote 2 Chronicles.
26. 19.
Vzziah with a Leprosy for meddling with the Priests Office, which pertained
not unto him. The fear of such a stroke made Hezekiah so earnestly to pray unto
God, that he would not smite the People that wanted time to prepare themselves
as they should, to eat the Passover; and it is said, that the Lord heard
Hezekiah, and healed the people: Intimating, that had it not been for
Hezekiah's Prayer, the Lord had smitten the People for their want of due
preparation. And the man who came to the Marriage Feast without his
Wedding Garment, or examining of himself, was examined of another: and
thereupon bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, Matthew. 22. 12. And
St. Paul tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
that for want of this preparation in examining and judging themselves, before
they did eat the Lord's Supper, God had sent that fearful sickness among them,
whereof some were then sick, others weak, and many fallen asleep; Verse 30.
that is, taken away by temporal death. Insomuch that the Apostle says, that
every unworthy receiver eats his own judgment; temporal, Verse 29.
if he repents; eternal, if he repents not: and that in so heinous a measure;
as if he Verse 27.
were guilty of the very Body and Blood of the Lord, whereof this Sacrament is
a holy sign and seal. And Princes punish the Indignity offered to their Great
Seal, in as deep a measure, as that which is done to their own Persons, whom it
represents. And how heinous the guiltiness of Christ's Blood is, may appear
by the misery of the Jews ever since they wished His Blood to be on them and
their Children. Mat. 27. 25.
But then thou will say, It were safer to abstain from coming at all to the
holy Communion: Not so, for God has threatened to punish the Number. 9. 13. Heb.
2. 9. Mat. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
wilful neglect of his Sacraments with eternal damnation both of Body and Soul.
And it is the Commandment of Christ; Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me:
And he will have his Commandment, under the penalty of his Curse, obeyed. And
seeing that this Sacrament was the greatest Token of Christ's love, Joh. 13. 1.
which he left at his end to his friends whom he loved to the end, therefore
the neglect and contempt of this Sacrament must argue the contempt and neglect
of his love and bloodshedding: Heb. 10. 29.
than which no sin in God's account can seem more heinous. Nothing hinders why
thou may not come freely to the Lord's Table, but because thou had rather
want the love of God, than leave thy filthy sins. Oh come, but come a Guest
prepared for the Lord's Table; seeing they are blessed, Rev. 19. 9.
who are called to the Lambs Supper. O come, but come prepared; Efficacia
Eucharistiae non equaliter se habet quo ad omnes fideles sed pro ratione fidei
communicantium. Origin.
because the efficacy of this Sacrament is received according to the proportion
of the Faith of the Receiver.

This preparation consists in the serious consideration of three things: First,
of the worthiness of the Sacrament, which is termed, to discern the Lord's
Body. Secondly, of thine own unworthiness, which is to judge thy self. Thirdly
of the means, whereby thou may become a worthy Receiver, called
Communication of the Lord's Body.

1. Of the worthiness of the Sacrament.
THE worthiness of this Sacrament is considered three ways: First by the
Majesty of the Author ordaining. Secondly, by the preciousness of the Parts
whereof it consists. Thirdly, by the excellency of the Ends for which it was
ordained.

1. Of the Author of the Sacrament.
The Author was not any Saint or Angel, but our Lord Jesus, the eternal Son of
God. For it pertains to Christ only under the New Testament, to institute a
Sacrament, because he only can promise and perform the grace that it
signifies. And we are charged to hear no voice but his in his Church. Mat. 17.
5.
How sacred should we esteem the Ordinance that proceeds from so Divine an
Author.

2. Of the parts of the Sacrament.
The parts of this blessed Sacrament are three. First, the earthly signs
signifying. Secondly, the Divine Word Sanctifying Thirdly, the Heavenly Graces
signified.

First, the Earthly signs are * Bread and Wine, 1 Cor. 11. 23, etc. Prove. 9. 5.
in number two, but one in use.

Secondly, the Divine Word, is the Word of Christ's Institution; pronounced
with prayers and blessings by a Heb. 5. 4. Number. 16. 40. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Eucaristiae Sacramentum non de aliorum manu quam praesidentium sumimus Tert. l
de Coron. c. 3.
lawful Minister. The Bread and Wine without the Word are nothing, but as they
were before: but when the Word comes to those Elements, then they are made a
Sacrament: and God is present with his own ordinance, and ready to perform
whatsoever he does promise. The Divine Words of blessing do not change or
annihilate the qui est a terra panis percipiens vocationem Domini, non jam
communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and
coel^sti. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34 Per Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Domini
divinae ^fficimur consortes naturae and tamen esse non desinit substantia vel
natura panis and vini. Gelasius contra Eu^yc.
substance of the Bread and Wine: (for if their substance did not remain, it
could be no Sacrament:) but it changes them in use and in name: For, that
which was before but common Bread and Wine to nourish men's Bodies; is after the
blessing destinated to an holy use, for the feeding of the Souls of Christians.
And where before they were called but Bread and Wine; they are now called by
the name of those holy things which they signify, The Body and Blood of
Christ; the better to draw our minds from those outward Elements to the
Heavenly Graces, which by the sight of our bodies they represent to the
spiritual eyes of our Faith. Neither did Christ direct these words, Christus
visibilia symbola, corporis and sanguinis appellatione honoravit, non naturam
mutans, sed gratiam naturae adjiciens Theodoret. Dial. 1.
This is my body This is my blood, to the Bread and Wine; but to his Disciples,
as appears by the words going before, Take ye, eat ye, Neither is the Bread his
Body, but in the same sense that the Cup is the New Testament, viz. by a
Sacramental Metonymie. And Mark notes plainly, that the words This is my Blood,
etc. were not pronounced by our Savior, till after that all his Disciples had
drunk of the Cup. Mark 14. 23, 24. And afterward, in respect of the natural
substance thereof, he calls that the fruit of the Vine, which in respect of the
spiritual signification thereof, he had before termed his Blood, verse 25.
after the manner of terming all Sacraments. And Christ bids us not to make him,
but to do this in remembrance of him; and he bids us eat not simply his Body,
but his Body as it was then broken, and his Blood shed. Which S. Paul expounds
to be but the Communion of Christ's Body and the 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Communion of his Blood; that is, an effectual Pledge that we are (...) of
Christ, and of all the Merits of his Body and Blood. And by the frequent use of
this Communion, Paul will have us to 1 Cor. 11. 26
make a show of the Lord's death till he come Act. 3. 21. Act. 1. 11.
from Heaven, and till we, as Mat. 24. 27, 28.
Eagles, shall be caught up into the air, to meet him who is the blessed
Carkase and Life of our Souls.

Thirdly, The spiritual Graces are likewise two; the Body of Christ, as it was
with the feeling of God's anger due to us, crucified: and his blood, as it was
(in the like sort) shed for the remission of their sins. They are also in
number two, but in use one, viz. whole Christ; with all his benefits offered to
all, and given indeed to the faithful. These are the Three integral parts of
this blessed Sacrament, the Sign, the Word, and the Grace. The Sign without the
Word, or the Word without the Sign, can do nothing, and both conjoined are
unprofitable without the Grace signified: but all Three concurring, make an
effectual Sacrament to a worthy Receiver. Some receive the outward Sign without
the spiritual Grace, as Judas, who (as Austin says) received Panem Domini, non
panem Dominum. Aug.
the bread of the Lord, but not the bread which was the Lord. Some receive the
spiritual Grace without the outward Sign, as the Saint-Thief on the Cross; and
innumerable of the faithful, who dying desire it, but cannot receive it through
some external impediments: but the worthy Receivers to their comfort receive
both in the Lord's Supper.

Christ chose Bread and Wine (rather than any other Elements) to be the outward
Signs in this blessed Sacrament: first, because they are easiest for all sorts
to attain unto: Secondly, to teach us, that as man's temporal life is chiefly
nourished by David calls bread the strength of man's heart, Psalm. 104 15, Esaias,
the stay of Bread, cap. 3. 1. Ezekiel, the staff of Bread, cap 4. 16. Homer.
(...).
bread, and cherished by wine; so are our Souls by his body and blood sustained
and quickened unto eternal Life. Christ appointed Wine with the Bread to be the
outward Signs in this Sacrament, to teach us: first, that as the perfect
nourishment of Man's Body consists both of meat and drink: so Christ is unto
our Souls not in part, but in perfection, both salvation and nourishment.
Secondly, that by seeing the Sacramental Wine apart from the Bread, we should
remember how all his precious blood was spilt out of his blessed body for the
remission of our sins. The outward signs the Pastor gives in the Church, and
thou do eat with the mouth of thy body: the spiritual grace Christ reaches
from Heaven, and thou must eat it with the mouth of thy Faith.

3. Of the Ends for which this holy Sacrament was ordained.
The excellent and admirable Ends or Fruits, for which this blessed Sacrament
was ordained, are seven.

Of the first End of the Lord's Supper.
1. To keep Christians in a continual Mat. 26. 26.
remembrance of that propitiatory sacrifice, which Christ once for all, offered
by his death upon the Cross, to reconcile us unto God. Luke 22. 19.
Do this (says Christ) in remembrance of me. And (says the Apostle) 1 Cor.
11. 26.
As often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's
death till he come. And he says, that (by this Sacrament, and the Preaching of
the Word) Gal. 3. 1.
Jesus Christ was so evidently set forth before the eyes of the Galatians, as
if he had been crucified among them: for the whole action represents Christ's
death; the breaking of the bread, blessed the crucifying of his blessed body:
and the pouring forth of the sanctified wine, the shedding of his holy blood.
Christ was once in himself Heb. 9. 26 and 10. 12. Quotidie nobis Christus
crucisigitur. Aug. in Psalm. 95.
really offered: but as often as the Sacrament is celebrated: so often is he
spiritually offered by the faithful.

Hence the Lord's Supper is called a propitiatory Sacrifice, not properly or
really, but Metonymicus.
figuratively, because it is a memorial of that propitiatory Sacrifice, which
Christ offered upon the Cross. And to distinguish it from that real Sacrifice,
the Fathers call it the * Incruentum sacrificium. If it be unbloody; because it
is void of blood: then it is not Christ's natural body: If because it is
offered without shedding of blood, then it is not available for the remission
of sins, Heb. 9. 21. Christo cum patre and Spiritu sancto sacrificium panis and
vini in fide and charitate sancta Ecclesia Catholica offerre non cessat. Aug.
de fid. ad Pet. diac. cap. 19.
unbloody Sacrifice. It is also called the Eucharist, because that the Church
in this Action, offers unto God the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for
her Redemption; effected by the true and only expiatory Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross. If the sight of Moab's King sacrificing on his walls his own
son, to move his Gods to rescue his, 2 King. 3. 27. moved the assailing Kings
to such pity, that they ceased the assault, and raised their siege: how should
the spiritual sight of God the Father, Cum frangitur hostia, dum sanguis de
calice in ore fidelium funditur, quid aliud quam Dominici corporis in cruce
immolatio ejusque sanguinis de latere effusio designatur? Can. did. 2. de
consec cum frangitur. 37.
sacrificing on the Cross his only begotten Son, to save thy soul, move thee to
love God thy Redeemer, and to leave sin, that could not in justice be expiated
by any meaner ransom?

Of the second end of the Lord's Supper.
2. To confirm our Faith: For God by this Sacrament does signify and seal unto
us from Heaven; that according to the promise and new covenant which he has
made in Christ, he will truly receive into his grace and mercy all penitent
believers, who duly receive this holy Sacrament; and that for the merits of the
death and passion of Christ, he will as verily forgive them all their sins, as
they are made partakers of this Sacrament. In this respect the holy Sacrament
is called, Romans 4. 11. Mat. 26. 28. 1 Cor. 11. 25.
The seal of the new Covenant and remission of sins. In our greatest doubts we
may therefore, receiving this Sacrament, undoubtedly say with Samson's Mother,
Judge 13. 23.
If the Lord would kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and a
meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things,
nor would at this time have told us such things as these.

Of the third end of the Lord's Supper.
3. To be a pledge and symbol of the most near and effectual communion which
Christians have with Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
the Cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? that is a most effectual sign and pledge of our Communion with Christ?
This union is called Joh. 14. 16. 23.
abiding in us, 1 Cor. 6. 17. (...).
joining to the Lord, Ephesians. 3. 17. (...).
dwelling in our hearts: and set forth in the holy Scriptures by diverse
Similes. 1. Of the Joh. 15. 5. Ephesians. 3. 6. (...).
Vine and branches. 2. Of the Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. Romans 12. 4, 5.
head and body. 3. Of the Ephesians. 2. 19, 20.
foundation and building. 4. Of one 1 Cor. 10. 17.
Loaf, confected of many Grains. 5. Of the Ephesians. 5. 31, 32. Rev. 21. 2.
matrimonial union 'twixt Man and Wife, and such like. And it is threefold
betwixt Christ and Christians. The first is natural, betwixt our Humane Nature,
and Christ's Divine Nature, in the Person of the Word: The second is mystical,
betwixt our Persons absent from the Lord, and the Person of Christ, God and
Man, in one mystical Body. The third is celestial, betwixt our Persons present
with the Lord, and the Person of Christ in a body glorified. These three
Conjunctions depend each upon other. For, had not our Nature been first
Hypostatically united to the Nature of God in the second Person, we could never
have been united to Christ in a Mystical Body. And if we be not in this life
(though absent) united to Christ by a Mystical Union, we shall never have
Communion of glory with him in his heavenly Presence. The Mystical Union
(chiefly here meant) is wrought betwixt Christ and us by the Spirit of Christ
apprehending us: and by our faith (stirred up by the same Spirit) apprehending
Christ again. Both which St. Paul does most lively express: Phil. 3. 12.
I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended
of Christ Jesus. How can he fall away that holds, and is so firmly holden?
This Union he shall best understand in his mind, who does most feel it in his
heart. But of all other times, this Union is best felt, and most confirmed,
when we duly receive the Lord's Supper. For then we shall sensibly feel our
hearts knit unto Christ, and the desires of our souls drawn by Faith and the
Holy Ghost, as by the cords of love, nearer and nearer to his holiness.

From this Communion with Christ, there follow to the faithful many unspeakable
benefits.

As first, Christ took by imputation all their Romans 4. 25.
sins and guiltiness upon him, to satisfy God's Justice for them; and he
freely gives, by imputation, unto us all his Phil. 3. 9.
righteousness in this life, and all his right unto eternal life when this is
ended: and counts all the good or ill that is done unto us, as done unto his
Mat. 25. 35. Acts 9. 4. Mat. 15. 45. Zach. 2. 18.
own person.

Secondly, There flows from Christ's Nature into our Nature, united to him,
the lively spirit and breath of grace, which Ephesians. 4 23, 24.
renews us to a spiritual life: and so sanctifies our minds, wills, and
affections, that we daily grow more and more Romans 8. 29.
conformable to the Image of Christ. 2 Cor. 3. 18.


Thirdly, He bestows upon them all saving Joh. 15. 5. Joh. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 8.
1, 4, 6, 7, 19.
graces, necessary to attain eternal life, as the sense of God's love, the
assurance of our election, with regeneration, justification, and grace to do
good works: till we come to live with him in his heavenly Kingdom. This should
teach all true Christians to keep themselves as the undefiled members of
Christ's holy body, and to beware of all uncleanness and filthiness: knowing
that they live in Christ, or rather, that Christ lives in them. From this
Union with Christ (sealed unto us by the Lord's Supper) St. Paul draws
arguments, to withdraw the Corinthians from the pollution both of Idolatry, 1
Cor. 10. 16. and Adultery, 1 Cor. 16. 15, 16.

Lastly, From the former Communion 'twixt Christ and Christians, there flows
another Communion 'twixt Christians among themselves. Which is also lively
represented by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: in that the whole Church
being many, do all communicate of one Bread, in that holy action, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We being many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that
one Bread: that as the Bread which we eat in the Sacrament, is but one, though it
be confected of many Grains; so all the faithful, though they be many, yet are
they but one mystical body, under one head, which is Christ. Our Savior prayed
five times in that Prayer which he made after his last Supper, that his
Disciples might be one: to teach us at once, how much this Unity pleases him.
Joh. 17. 11, 21, 22, 23, 26.
This Union betwixt the faithful, is so ample, that no distance of place can
part it; so strong, that death cannot dissolve it; so durable, that time cannot
wear it out; so effectual, that it breeds a fervent love betwixt those who
never saw one another face. And this conjunction of Souls is termed, the
Communion of Saints, which Christ effects by six special means. First, by
governing them all by one and the same holy 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Spirit. Secondly, by enduring them all with one and the same Ephesians. 4. 5.
Faith. Thirdly, by shedding abroad his own Romans 5. 5.
love into all their hearts. Fourthly, by Tit. 3. 5. Ephesians. 4. 5.
regenerating them all by one and the same Baptism. Fifthly, by 1 Cor. 10. 17.
1 Cor. 11. 33.
nourishing them all with one and the same spiritual food. Sixthly, by being
one Col. 1. 18.
quickening Head of that one body of his Church, which he Verse 22.
reconciled to God in the body of his flesh. Hence it was, that the multitude
of believers in the Primitive Act. 4. 32.
Church, were of one heart and of one soul, in truth, affection, and
compassion. And this should teach Christians to love one another; seeing they
are all members of the same holy and mystical Body, whereof Christ is Head. And
therefore they should have all a Christian sympathy, and fellow feelling, to
rejoice one in another joy, to condole one in another grief, to bear with one
another infirmity: and mutually to relieve one another wants.

Of the fourth end of the Lord's Supper.
4. To feed the Souls of the faithful, in the assured hope of life everlasting.
For this Sacrament, is a sign and pledge unto as many as shall receive the same
according to Christ's Institution; that he will according to his promise, by
the virtue of his crucified body and blood, as verily feed our souls to life
eternal, as our bodies are by Bread and Wine nourished to this temporal life.
And to this end Christ in the action of the Sacrament Audio quid verba sonent,
neque enim mortis tantum ac resurrectionis suae beneficium nobis offert
Christus, sed corpus ipsum in quo passus est ac resurrexit. Concludo, realiter,
h^c est vere nobis in c^^na dari Christi corpus, ut sit animis nostris in cibum
salutarem. Calvin in Com. in 1 Cor. 11. 25.
really gives his very Body and Blood to every faithful Receiver. Therefore
the Sacrament, is called the 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Communion of the body and blood of the Lord. And Quod se nobis communicate, id
fit arcana spiritus sancti virtute, qu^e res locorum distantia se junctas, ac
procul dissitas non modo aggregate, sed co-adunare in unum potest. Calv. In 1
Cor. 11. 25.
Communication is not of things absent, but present: neither were it the Lord's
Supper, if the Lord's Body and Blood were not there. Christ is verily present
in the Sacrament, by a double Union; whereof the first is spiritual, 'twixt
Christ and the worthy Receiver; the second is Sacramental, 'twixt the Body and
Blood of Christ, and the outward signs in the Sacrament. The former is wrought
by means that the same holy Spirit, dwelling in Christ and in the Faithful Haec
(sc. corpus and sanguis Domini) accepta atque hausta, id efficient, ut and nos
in Christo and Christus in nobis sit. Hill. lib. 8. de Trin. Jam corpus Christi
meo corpori sociatum est, and sanguis ejus meas ornavit genas. B. Agnetis dict.
apud Amb.
incorporateth the Faithful, as Members unto Christ their Head, and so makes
them one with Christ, and partakers of all the Graces, Holiness, and eternal
Glory, which is in him: as sure and as verily as they hear the words of the
promise, and are partakers of the outward signs of the holy Sacrament. Hence
it is, that the Will of Christ is a true Christians will: and the Christians
life is Christ who lives in him, Gal. 2. 20. If you look to the things that
are united, this Union is essential; if to the truth of this Union, it is real;
if to the manner how it is wrought, it is spiritual. It is not our Faith, that
makes the Body and Blood of Christ to be present; but the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in him and us. Our Father does but receive and apply unto our Souls
those heavenly Graces which are offered in the Sacrament.

The other, being the Sacramental Union, is not a Physical or Local, but a
Spiritual conjunction of the earthly signs, which are Bread and Wine, with the
heavenly Graces, which are the Body and Blood of Christ in the act of
receiving: as if by a mutual relation they were but one and the same thing.
Hence it is, that in the same Corpus non adest, cum pane, (...), id est simul
loco, sed (...) id est, simul tempore.
instant of time that the worthy Receiver eats with his mouth the Bread and
Wine of the Lord, he eats also with the mouth of his Faith, the very Body and
Blood of Christ. Not that Quum coena c^^l^stis sit actio, minime absurdum est
Christum in coelo manentem a nobis recipi. Call. in 1 Cor. 11. 25.
Christ is brought down from Heaven to the Sacrament, but that the holy Spirit
by the Sacrament lifts up his mind unto Christ; not by any local mutation, but
by a devout affection; so that in the holy Fidem mitte in coelum, and eum in
terris tanquam praesentem tenuisti. Aug. Ep. 3. ad Vol. Fidem quum dico non
intelligo quamlibet opinionem s^d siduciam qua quum audis panem tesseram esse
corporis Christi, non dubitas impleri a Domino, quod verba sonant: corpus quod
nequaquam cernis spirituale esse tibi a^^mentum, vimque ex Christi carne
vivificam in nos per Spiritum ^^^ndi. Calvin. ibid.
contemplation of Faith, he is at that present with Christ, and Christ with
him. And thus believing and meditating how Christ his Body was crucified, and
his precious blood shed for the remission of his sins, and the reconciliation
of his Soul unto God: his Soul is hereby more effectually fed in the assurance
of eternal Life, than Bread and Wine can nourish his Body to this Temporal
life. There must be therefore of necessity in the Sacrament both the outward
signs to be visibly seen with the eyes of the Body, and the Body and Blood of
Christ, to be spiritually discerned with the Eye of Faith.

But the form, how the Holy Ghost makes the Body of Christ, being absent from
us in place, to be present with us by our union, S. Paul terms a Ephesians. 5. 32
great mystery, such as our understanding cannot worthily comprehend. The
Sacramental Bread and Wine therefore are not bare signifying signs, but such as
wherewith Christ does indeed exhibit and give to every worthy Receiver Ego
tunc nos demum participare Christi bonis agnosco postquam Christum ipsum
obtinemus. Obtinetur non tantum quum pro nobis factum fuisse victimam credimus:
sed dum in nobis habitat, dum ejus sumus membra, ex carne ejus, dum in unem
denique and vitam and substantiam (ut ita loquar) cum ipso coalescimus. Calv.
ibid.
not only his divine virtue and efficacy, but also his very Body and Blood, as
verily as he gave to his Disciples the Holy Ghost, by the sign of his sacred
breath, or health to the diseased, by the Word of his mouth, or touch of his
hand or garment. And the apprehension by faith is more forcible than the
exquisitest comprehension of Sense or Reason. To conclude this point, this holy
Sacrament is that blessed Bread, which being eaten, opened the eyes of the Luke
24. 30, 31.
Emauites that they knew Christ. This is that Lordly Cup, by which 1 Cor. 12.
13.
we are all made to drink into one Spirit. This is that Rock flowing with 1 Samuel 14. 27.
honey, that reviveth the fainting spirits of every true Jonathan, that tastes
it with the mouth of Faith. This is that Judge. 7. 13,
barley loaf, which tumbling from above, strikes down the tents of the
Midianites of infernal darkness. Elias's Angelical 1 King. 19 6, 7, 8.
Cake and Water preserved him forty days in Horeb: and Psalm. 78. 24, 25. Exodus
16. 35.
Manna (Angels food) fed the Israelites forty years in the wilderness: but this
is that Joh. 6. 32, 35, 49, 50.
true Bread of life, and heavenly Manna, which if we shall duly eat, will
nourish our souls for ever unto life Joh. 6. 51, 58.
eternal. How should then our Souls make unto Christ that request from a
spiritual desire, which the Capernaites did from a carnal motion? Joh. 6. 34.
Lord, evermore give us this bread?

The fifth end of the Lords Supper.
5. To be an assured pledge unto us of our Resurrection. The Resurrection of a
Christian is Twofold, First the Joh. 5. 25. Romans 6. 4, 5, 12.
spiritual Resurrection of our Souls in this life, from the death of sin,
called the first Resurrection: because that by the Trumpet-voice of Christ, in
the preaching of the Gospel, we are raised from the death of sin, to the life
of Grace: Rev. 20. 6.
Blessed and holy is he (says St. John) who has part in the first
Resurrection: for on such the second death has no power: The Hinc apud priscos
Sacramentum baptismi appellabatur, Salus, Sacramen^^m vero Dominici corporis,
Vita. Aug. lib. 1 de peccatorum me^i^i^ c. 14.
Lord's Supper is both a mean and a pledge unto us, of this spiritual and first
Resurrection. Joh. 6. 57.
He that eats me, even he shall live by me. And then we are fit guests to sit
Joh. 12. 2.
at the table with Christ, when like Lazarus, we are raised from the death of
sin, to newness of life,

The truth of this first Resurrection will appear by the motion wherewith they
are internally moved: for if, when thou art moved to the duties of Religion,
and practice of Piety, thy heart answers with Samuel: 1 Samuel 3. 10.
Here I am, speak Lord, for thy servant hears; and with David, Psalm. 108. 1.
O God, my heart is ready. And with Acts 9. 6.
Paul, Lord what will thou have me to do? Then surely, thou art raised from the
death of sin, and have thy part in the first Resurrection; but if thou
remainest ignorant of the true grounds of Religion, and find in thy self a
kind of secret loathing of the exercises thereof, and must be drawn, as it were
against thy will, to do the works of Piety, etc. then surely thou have but a
name that thou live, but thou art dead, Rev. 3. 1.
as Christ told the Angel of the Church of Sardis, and thy soul is but as salt
to keep thy body from stinking.

2. The corporal resurrection of our bodies at the last day, which is called
the second resurrection, which freeth us from the first death. Joh. 6. 54.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eterra^ life, and I ^id
raise him up at the last day. For this Sacrament signifies and fealeth unto us
that Christ died and rose again for us, and that his Hinc panis and vinum a
veteribus nominantur symbola resurrectionis Conc. Nicaec. Joh. 6. 51. Caro
Christi non in ^ese, sed in verbo ipsi hypostati^e unito, vivifica est. Cyr. in
Joh. 10. 13. Ft quia est propria caro verbi cuncta vivificantis. Synod. Ephesians.
directa fide ad R^ginas. Vivificat 1. Ratione meriti obedientiae, quia Christi
caro pro credentibus oblata fuit in sacrificium; 2 Ratione copulationis nostrae
cum Christo, quia non possumus ad Deum vitae fontem pertingere, nisi carne illa
Christi mediante, and quatenus carni illi quasi membra sumus insiti. Caro non
prodest. Joh. 6. 63. i. carnalis opinio non conveniens cum mysterio
manducationis carnis Christi.
flesh quickens and nourishes us unto eternal life, and that therefore our
bodies shall surely be raised to eternal life at the last day. For seeing our
head is risen, all the members of the body shall likewise surely rise again.
For how can those bodies which (being the weapons of righteousness, Romans 16.
13. Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19 and members of Christ) have been
Quomodo negant carnem capacem esse resurrectionis quae sanguine and corpore
Christi nutritur? Iren. Lib. 4. Cap. 34.
fed and nourished with the Body and Blood of the Lord of life, but be raised
up again at the last day? And this is the cause that the bodies of the Saints,
being dead, are so reverently buried and laid to sleep in the Lord. And their
burial places are termed the Isa. 26. 19. 20.
beds and dormitories of the Saints. The Reprobates shall arise at the last
day; but by the Almighty Power of Christ, as he is Judge, bringing them as
malefactors out of the Gaol, to receive their sentence and deserved execution:
but the Elect shall arise by virtue of Christ's Resurrection, and of the
Communion which they have with him, as with their Head. And his Resurrection is
the Christi resurrectio in qua nostra inititur, communis resurrectionis Fide
jussor est. Theod.
cause and assurance of ours. The Mortuum esse Christum etiam Pagani credunt:
resurrexisse vero propria Fides est Christianorum. Aug. l. 16. contra Faust.
cap. 19. Tota fiducia Christianorum est resurrectio mortuorum. Tert. l. 5 de
resur. Carn.
Resurrection of Christ is a Christian's particular faith: the Resurrection of
the dead, is the Child of God's chiefest confidence. Therefore Christians in
the Primitive Church, were wont to salute one another in the Morning with these
Phrases: (...).
The Lord is risen: and the other would answer, True, the Lord is risen indeed.

The sixth end of the Lord's Supper.
6. To seal unto us the assurance of everlasting Life. Oh what more wished or
loved than life? (...) ^^mum mo^s Arist.
Or what do all men naturally more, either fear or abhor, than death? Yet is
this first death nothing, if it be compared with the second death: neither is
this Life any thing worth, in comparison of the Life to come. If therefore thou
desire to be assured of eternal life, prepare thy self to be a worthy
receiver of this blessed Sacrament. For our Savior assures us, That if any
man eat of this bread he shall live for ever: Joh. 6. 51.
and the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. He therefore who duly eats of this holy Sacrament, may truly say,
not only, Credo vitam eternam, I believe life everlasting; but also, Edo vitam
eternam, I eat life everlasting. And indeed this is the true Tree of life,
which God has planted in the midst of the Paradise of the Church: And whereof
he has promised to give every one that overcomes to eat. And this Tree of
life, Rev. 2. 7.
by infinite degrees excels the Tree of life that grew in the Paradise of
Eden; for that had his root in the Earth, this from Heaven: that gave bu^ life
to the Body, this to the Soul; that did but preserve the life of the living,
this restores life to the dead. The leaves of this tree heal the nations of
believers, Rev. 22. 2.
and it yields every month a new manner of fruit which nourishes them to life
everlasting. Oh, blessed are they who often eat of this Sacrament! at least,
once every month, taste anew of this renewing fruit, which Christ has prepared
for us at his Table to heal our infirmities, and to confirm our belief of life
everlasting.

Of the seventh end of the Lord's Supper.
7. To bind all Christians, as it were, by an Militus Sacramento erant (...)
and obst^^^^i ad pr^^standam soli ^^peratori ^^delitatem and obedientiam.
oath of fidelity, to serve the one only true God; and to admit no other
propitiatony sacrifice for sins, but that one real sacrifice, which by his
death Christ once offered, and by which he finish^d the sacrifices of the Law,
and effected eternal Redemption and Righteousness for all believers. And so to
remain for ever a public mark of profession, to distinguish Christians from
all Sects and false Religions. And seeing that in the M^ss there is a strange
Christ adored, not he that was born of the Virgin Mary, but one that is made of
a Wafer Cake; and that the offering up of this breaden god is thrust upon the
Church, as a Propitiatory S^crifice for the quick and the dead: all true
Christians upon the danger of wilful perjury before the Lord Chief Justice of
heaven and earth, are to detest the Mass, as the Idol of Indignation, which is
most derogatory to the all-sufficient world-saving merits of Christ's Death and
Passion. For by receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, we all swear that
all real Sacrifices are ended by our Lord's death, and that his body and blood
once crucified and shed, is the perpetual food and nourishment of our Souls.

2. How to consider thine own unworthiness.
A Man shall best perceive his own unworthiness, by examining his life
according to the Ten Commandments of Almighty God. Search therefore what duties
thou have omitted, and what vices thou have committed, contrary to every one of
the Commandments: remembering, that without repentance, and God's mercy in
Christ, the Deu. 27. 26 Gal. 3. 10.
Curse of God (containing all the miseries of this life* and everlasting
torments in hell fire, when this is ended) is due to the breach of the least of
God's Commandments. And having taken a due survey both of thy sins and
miseries, retire to some secret place, and there putting thy self in the sight
of the Judge, as a guilty malefactor standing at the Bar to receive his
Sentence, bowing thy knees to the earth, smiting thy breast with thy fists, and
^edewing thy cheeks with thy tears, confess thy sins and humbly ask him mercy
and forgiveness, in these or the like words.

An humble confession of sins, to be made unto God before the receiving of the
holy Communion.
O God and heavenly Father, when I consider the goodness which thou have ever
showed unto me, Luke 15. 21.
and the wickedness which I have committed against heaven and against thee, I
am ashamed of my self, and confusion seems to cover my face as a veil; for
which of thy Commandments have I not transgressed? O Lord, I stand here guilty
of the breach of all thy holy Laws. For the love of my heart has not so
entirely cleaved unto thy * The first Commandment. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Psalm. 22. 5, 6.
Psalm. 38. 8.
Majesty as to vain and earthly things: I have not feared thy judgments to
deterr me from sins, nor trusted to thy promises, to keep me from doubting of
my temporal, or from despairing of mine eternal state. I have made the rule of
thy The second meant. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Mat. 15. 9. Gal. 3. 1.
divine worship, to be what my mind thought fit, not what thy Word prescribed;
finding my heart more prone to remember my blessed Savior in a painted Picture
of Man's device, rather than to be behold him crucified in his Word and
Sacraments, after his own ordinance. Where The third Commandment. Phil. 2. 10.
1 Kin. 19. 10. Jer. 5. 2. He^r confess thy rash and false swearing.
I should never use thy Name (whereat all knees do bow) but with religious
reverence; nor any part of thy worship, without due preparation and zeal: I
have blasphemously abused thy holy Name to rash and customary oaths; yea, I
have used oaths by thy sacred name, as false covers of my filthy sins. And I
have been present at thy Service oft-times more for ceremony than conscience,
and to please Men more than to please thee my gracious God.

Where I should sanctify thy The fourth Commandment,
Sabbath Day, by being present at Act 20. 7.
the public exercises of the Church, and by meditating privately on the word
and works of God, and by visiting the sick and 1 Cor. 16. 2.
relieving of my poor brethren: alas I have thought those holy Exercises a
burden, because they hindered my vain sports: yea, I have spent many of thy
Sabbaths in my own Here confess thy traveling on the Sabbath, and thy leaving
the holy exercise, to go to sporting o^ feasting.
profane Pleasures, without being present at any part of thy divine worship.

Where I should have given all due reverence to my The fifth Commandment.
Natural, Ecclesiastical, and Politic Parents, I have not showed that measure
of duty and affection to my Parents, which their care and kindness has
deserved. I have not had thy Ministers in such singular 1 These 5. 1^ Gal. 4. 15.
love for their works sake, as I ought: but I have taunted at their zeal, and
hated them because they reproved me justly. And I have carried my self
contemptuously against thy Here confess thy disob^ (...).
M^gistrates and Ministers, though I knew that it is (...) ordinance, that I
should be obedient unto them.

(...)
Where I should be (...)
sl^w to wrath, and (...)
ready to forgive offenses, and not (...) the Sun to go down upon my wrath, but
to (...) good for evil, loving my very enemies for thy sake: I, alas, for one
sorry word, have burst out into open rage; and harboring thoughts of mischief
in my heart, I have preferred to feed on mine own malice, rather than to eat of
thy holy Supper,

Where I should keep my Mind from all filthy lusts, The seventh Commandment.
and my Body from all uncleanness: 1 Thessalonians 4. 3, etc.
O Lord, I have defiled both, and made my Heart a Cage of all impure thoughts,
Romans 6. 13. Here confess unto God thy secret Pollutions, Fornication, or
Adultery, if Satan has so f^r prevailed over thee.
and my Mind a very st^e of the unclean Spirit. Yea, the remedy which thou
(Lord) have ordained for incontinency, could not contain me within the bounds
of Chastity: for by doting on beauty, whose grounds is but dust, Satan has
bewitched my flesh to lust after strange flesh.

Where I should have lived in uprightness, The eighth Commandment.
giv^ng every Man his due, being contented with mine own Estate, and living
cons^ionably in my lawful Calling, should be ready (according to mine Ability)
to lend and Ephesians. 4. 28. Luke 6. 34, 35. Lev. 25. 35. Here confess if thou have
secretly stolen, or openly obbed any thing, or have detained from any fatherless
Child that which is his by right.
give unto the Poor: O Lord, I have by oppression, extortion, bribes,
cavillation, and other indirect dealings, under pretense of my Calling and
Office, robbed and purloined from my fellow Christians: yea, I have received
and suffered Christ, where I was trusted, many a time, in his poor members, to
stand hungry, cold and naked at my Door, and hungry, cold and naked to go away
succourless, as he came; and when the leanness of his checks pleaded pity, the
hardness of my heart would show no compassion.

Where I should have made conscience to Z^ch 8. 16. Mat 10. 16.
speak the truth in simplicity, The ninth commandment.
without any falsehood; (...). 13. 7.
prudently imaging aright, and charitably con^^^ing all things in the best
part; and should have defended the Mat. 1. 18, 1^.
good name and credit of my Neighbor: alas, (vile wretch that I am) I have
belyed and Psalm. 50 20. P^^l 15. 3. (...) confess if tho^ have ^^lyed or
s^^dered thy neighbor or not spoken the truth to cl^ar his (...), when thou
^^st called thereto.
slandered my fellow-brother, and as soon as I heard an ill report, I made my
tongue the Instrument of the Devil, to blazon that abroad unto others, before I
knew the truth of it my self. I was so far from speaking a good word, in
defense of his good name; that it tickled my heart in secret to hear one that I
envied, to be taxed with such a blemish: though I knew that otherwise the graces
of God shined in him in abundant measure. I made jests of officious, and
advantage of pernicious lies: herein showing my self a right Tit. 1. 12.
Certain, rather than an upright Christian.

And lastly (O Lord) where I should have rested The tenth (...) Heb. 1^. 5. ^
Tim 6 6. Phil. 4. 11, 12.
fully contented with that portion which thy Majesty thought m^^r^st to bestow
upon me in this Pilgrimage; and rejoiced in another good as in mine own: alas
my life has been nothing else but a greedy lusting after this Neighbors
house, and that Neighbors land; yea, secretly wishing such a man dead, that I
might have his living or office, cov^^i^g rather those things which thou have
bestowed on another, rather than being thankful for that which thou have given
unto my self. Thus I, O Lord, who am a carnal sinner, and sold under sin, have
transgressed all thy holy and spiritual Commandments, from the first to the
last, from the greatest unto the least: and hear I stand guilty before thy
Judgment Seat, of all the breaches of all thy laws; and therefore liable to thy
curse, and to all the miseries that Justice can pour forth upon so cursed a
creature. And whether shall I go for deliverance from this misery? Angels blush
at my Rebellion, and will not help me: Men are guilty of the like
transgression, and cannot help themselves. Shall I then despair with Cain, or
make away my self with Judas? No, Lord, for that were but to end the miseries
of this life, and to begin the endless torments of hell: I will rather appeal
to thy Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. ult.
where mercy reigns to pardon abounding sins; and out of the depth of my
miseries, I will cry with Psalm. 130. 1.
David, for the depth of thy mercies. Though thou should kill me with
afflictions, yet will I, like Job, Job 13. 12.
put my trust in thee. Though thou should drown me in the Sea of thy
displeasure, with Jonas, yet will I catch such hold on thy Mercy, that I will
be taken up dead, clasping her with both my hands. And though thou should
cast me into the bowels of Hell, Jonah 2. 2.
as Jonas into the belly of the Whale: yet from thence would I cry unto thee; O
God the Father of heaven, O Jesus Christ the Redeemer of the World, O Holy
Ghost my Sanctifier, three Persons, and one eternal God, have mercy upon me a
miserable sinner. And seeing the goodness of thine own Nature first moved thee
to send thine only begotten Son to die for my sins, that by his Death I might
be reconciled to thy Majesty: O reject not now my penitent Soul, who being
displeased with her self for sin, desires to return to serve and please thee
in newness of life; and reach from Heaven thy helping hand to save me thy poor
servant who am (like Peter) ready to sink in the Sea of my sins and misery.
Wash away the multitude of my sins with the merits of that Blood which I
believe that thou have so abundantly shed for penitent sinners.

And now that I am to receive this day the blessed Sacrament of thy precious
Body and Blood; O Lord I beseech thee, let thy holy Spirit, by thy Sacrament,
seal unto my soul, that by the merits of thy Death and Passion, all my sins are
so freely and fully remitted and forgiven, that the curses and judgments which
my sins have deserved, may never have power either to confound me in this life,
or to condemn me in the world which is to come. For my steadfast faith is, that
thou have died for my sins, Romans 4. ult.
and risen again for my justification. This I believe, O Lord, help mine
unbelief. Work in me likewise, I beseech thee, an unfeigned repentance, that I
may hear^ily bewail my former sins, and loath them, and serve thee henceforth
in newness of life, and greater measure of holy devotion. And let my soul never
forget the infinite love of so sweet a Savior, that has laid down his life to
redeem so vile a sinner. And grant, Lord, that having received these seals and
pledges of my Communion with thee, thou may henceforth so dwell by the
Spirit in me, and I so live by faith in thee, that I may carefully walk all the
days of my li^e, in godliness and piety toward thee, and in Christian love and
charity toward all my Neighbors: that living in thy fear I may die in thy
favor, and after death he made partaker of eternal life through Jesus Christ,
my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

3. Of the means whereby thou may become a worthy Receiver.
THese means are duties of Two sorts: the former respecting God; the latter our
Neighbor Those which respect God, are Three: First sound Knowledge: Secondly,
true Faith: Thirdly, unfeigned Repentance. That which respects our Neighbor,
is but one sincere Charity.

1. of sound Knowledge, requisite in a worthy Communicant.
Sound Heb. 6. 1, 2. John 17. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Knowledge is a sanctified understanding of the first Principles of Religion.
As first, Of the Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Godhead. Secondly, Of
the creation of Man, and his Fall. Thirdly, Of the curse and misery due to sin.
Fourthly, Of the Natures and Offices of Christ, and redemption by faith in his
death, especially of the doctrine of the Sacraments, sealing the same unto us.
For as an house cannot be built unless the foundation he first laid; so no more
can Religion stand, unless it be first grounded upon the certain knowledge of
God's Word. Secondly, If we know not God's Will, we can neither believe nor do
the same. For as worldly businesses cannot be done but by them who have skill
therein; so without knowledge must men be much more ignorant in divine and
spiritual matters. And yet in temporal things a Man may do much by the light of
nature: but in religious mysteries, the more we rely upon 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8.
7.
natural reason, the further we are from comprehending spiritual Truth. Which
discovers the fearful estate of those who receive without knowledge, and the
more fearful estate of those Pastors who minister unto them without Catechizing.

2. Of sincere Faith, required to make a worthy Communicant.
Sincere Faith is not a bare knowledge of the Scriptures, and first grounds of
Religion, ^^m 2. 19.
(for that Devils and Reprobate have in an excellent measure, and do believe it
and tremble) Heb. 4. 2.
but a true persuasion as of all those things whatsoever, the Lord has
revealed in his Word; so also a particural applications unto a man's own soul
of all the promises of mercy which God has made in Christ to all believing
sinners. And consequently, the Christ and all his merits do belong unto him as
well as to any other. For first if we have not the righteousness of Faith, Romans
4. 11.
the Sacrament seals nothing unto us; and every man in the Lord's Supper
receives so much as he believes. Secondly, because that without Faith we
communicating on earth, cannot apprehend Christ in Heaven. For as he dwells
in us by Faith, so by faith we must likewise eat him. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Thirdly, because that without faith we cannot be persuaded in our consciences,
Heb. 11. 6.
that our receiving is acceptable unto God. Romans 14. 23.


3. Of unfeigned Repentance requisite a for true Communicant.
True Repentance is a holy change of the mind, Isaiah 55. 7. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Act.
26. 29. Act. 3. 19. Luke 1. 74, 75.
when upon the feeling sight of God's mercy, and of a man's own misery, he
turns from all his known and secret sins, to serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the rest of his days. For as he that is glutted with meat, is
not apt to eat bread: so he that is stuffed with sins, is not sit to receive
Christ. Heb. 2. 13. 14. Tit. 1. 15.
And a conscience defiled with wilful filthiness, makes the use of all holy
things unholy unto us. Our sacrificed spotless Passover cannot be eaten with
the sour leaven of malice and wickedness, says Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 8. Neither can
the old Bottles of our corrupt and impure Consciences, retain the new Wine of
Christ's precious Blood, as our Savior says, Mar. 2. 22. We must therefore
truly repent, if we will be worthy partakers.

4. The duty to be performed in respect of our Neighbor, is Charity.
Charity is a hearty forgiving of others, who have offended us, and after
reconciliation, an outward unfeigned testifying of the inward affections of our
hearts by gestures, words, and deeds as often as we meet, and occasion is
offered. Mat. 5. 23, 24.
For first, without love to our Neighbor, no Sacrifice is acceptable unto God.
Secondly, John 13. 14. 34, 35.
because one chief end wherefore the Lord's Supper was ordained, is to confirm
Christians love one toward another. Thirdly, no man can assure himself that
his own sins are forgiven of God, Mat. 6. 12, 14, 15. and 18, 35.
if his heart cannot yield to forgive the faults of men that have offended him.
Thus far of the first sort of Duties which we are to perform before we come to
the Lord's Table, called Preparation.

2. Of the Second sort of Duties which a worthy Communicant is to perform at
the receiving of the Lord's Supper, called Meditation.
THis Exercise of spiritual Meditation consist in diverse Points.

First when the Sermon is ended, and the Banquet of the Lord's Supper begins to
be celebrated, meditate with thy self how thou art invited by Christ to be a
Guest at his Holy Table, and how lovingly he inviteth thee; Isa. 55. 1, 2.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters of life, etc. Come, buy
wine and milk, without money, and without price: eat ye that which is good, let
your soul delight it self in fatness. Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28, etc.
Take ye, eat ye: This is my body, which was broken for you; drink ye all of
this: for this is my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins. What
greater honor can be vouchsafed than to be admitted to sit at the Lord own
Table; What better fare can be afforded, than to feed on the Lord's own Body
and Blood? If David thought it to be the greatest favor that he could show
unto good Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19. 33.
for all the kindness that he showed unto him in his Troubles, to offer him,
that he should feed with him at his own Table in Jerusalem: how much greater
favor ought we to account it, When Christ does indeed feed us in the Church at
his own Table, and that with his own most holy Body and Blood?

Secondly, Genesis 22. 5.
As Abraham, when he went up to the mount, to sacrifice Isaac his Son, left his
Servants beneath in the Valley: so when thou come to the spiritual sacrifice
of the Lord's Supper, lay aside all earthly thoughts and cogitations; that thou
may wholly contemplate of Christ, and offer up thy Soul unto him, who
sacrificed both his Soul and Body for thee.

Thirdly, Meditate with thy self, how precious and venerable is the Body and
Blood of the Son of God, who is the Ruler of Heaven and Earth, the Lord, at
whose beck the Angels tremble, and by whom both the quick and dead shall be
judged at the last day, and thou among the ^est. And how that it is he, who
having been crucified for thy sins, offers now to be received by faith into
thy s^ul. On the other side, consider how sinful a Creature thou art: how
altogether unworthy of so holy a Guest: how ill deserving to taste of such
sacred food, having been conceived in filthiness, and wallowing ever since in
the mire of iniquity: bearing the Name of a Christian, but doing the works of
the Devil; adoring Christ with an ^ail King.
Ave Rex in thy mouth, but spitting Oaths in his face, and crucifying him anew
with thy graceless actions.

Fourthly, Ponder then with what face dare thou offer to touch so holy a Body
with such defiled hands? or to drink such precious blood with so lewd and lying
a mouth? or to lodge so blessed a Guest in so uncle an a stable? For if the
Bethshemites were slain, for but looking irreverently into the Ark of the old
Testament, what Judgment may thou justly expect, who with such impure Eyes
and Heart, art come to see and receive the Ark of the New Testament, in which
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily? Col, 2. 3, 9.


If Vzzah for but touching (though not without zeal) the Ark of the Covenant,
was stricken with sudden death; 2 Samuel 6. 7.
what stroke of divine Judgment may thou not fear, that so rudely, with
unclean hands, do presume to handle the Ark of the Eternal Testament; wherein
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

If John Baptist (the holiest man that was born of a Woman) thought himself
unworthy to bear his shoes; Mat. 3. 11.
O Lord, how unworthy is such a Profane Wretch, as thou art, to eat his holy
Flesh, and to drink his precious Blood.

If the blessed Apostle Saint Peter, seeing but a glimpse of Christ's Almighty
Power, thought himself unworthy to stand in the same Boat with him; how
unworthy art thou to sit with Christ at the same Table, where thou may
behold the infiniteness of his Grace and Mercy displayed?

If the Centurion thought that the roof of his house was not worthy to harbor
so Divine a Guest; Mat. 8. 8.
what room can there be fit under thy ribs for Christ's holiness to dwell in?

If the Blood-issued sick Woman feared to touch the hem of his garment; how
should thou tremble to eat his flesh, and to drink his all-healing Blood?

Yet if thou come humbly, in Faith, Repentance, and Charity, abhorring thy
sins past, and purposing unfeignedly to amend thy life henceforth, let not thy
former sins affright thee, for they shall never be laid unto thy charge; and
this Sacrament shall seal unto thy Soul that all thy sins, and the Judgments
due unto them, are fully pardoned, and clean washed away by the Blood of
Christ. For this Sacrament was not ordained for them who are perfect, but to
help penitent sinners unto perfection. Mat. 9. 12, 13
Christ came not to call the righteous, Mat. 11. 28.
but sinners to repentance. And he says, that the whole need not the
Physician, but they that are sick. Those has Christ called; and when they
came, them has he ever helped. Witness the whole Gospel, which testifies,
that not one Sinner who came to Christ for mercy, went ever away without his
errand. Bathe thou likewise thy sick Soul in this fountain of Christ's Blood,
and doubtless, according to his promise, Zach. 13. 1. thou shall be healed of
thy sins and uncleanness. Not Sinners therefore, but they who are unwilling to
repent of their sins, are debarred this Sacrament.

Fifthly, Meditate, that Christ left this Sacrament unto us as the chief token
and pledge of his love, not when we would have made him a King, John 6. 15,
(which might have seemed a requital of kindness) but when Judas and the
Highpriests were conspiring his Death (therefore wholly of his mere favor.)
When Nathan would show David how entirely the poor man loved his sheep that was
killed by the rich man, He gave her (says he) to eat of his own Morsels, and
of his own Cup to drink, 2 Samuel 12. 3. and must not then the love of Christ to
his Church be unspeakable, when he gives her his own flesh to eat, and his own
blood to drink, for her spiritual and eternal nourishment? If then there be any
love in thine heart, take the Cup of Salvation into thy hand, and pledge his
love with love again, Psalm. 116. 11.

Sixthly, when the Minister begins the holy Consecration of the Sacrament,
then lay aside all praying, reading, and all other cogitations whatsoever; and
settle thy Meditations only upon those holy actions and rites, which according
to Christ's institution, are used in and about the holy Sacrament: For it has
pleased God (considering our weakness) to appoint those rites as means the
better to lift up our Minds to the serious contemplation of his Heavenly Graces.

When therefore thou see the Minister putting apart Bread and Wine on the
Lord's-Table; and consecrating them by Prayers, and the rehearsal of Christ's
Institution, to be a holy Sacrament of the blessed Body and Blood of Christ;
then meditate how God the Father, of his mere love to Mankind, set apart, and
sealed his only begotten Son, to be the all-sufficient means, and only
Mediator, to redeem us from sin, and to reconcile us to his grace, and to bring
us to his glory.

When thou see the Minister break the Bread, being blessed, thou must
meditate, that Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God was put to death, and his
blessed Soul and Body (with the sense of God's anger) broken asunder for thy
sins, as verily as thou now see the holy Sacrament to be broken before thine
eyes. And withal call to mind the heinousness of thy sins, and the greatness of
God's hatred against the same, seeing God's Justice could not be satisfied but
by such a Sacrifice.

When the Minister has blessed and broken the Sacrament, and is addressing
himself to distribute it: then meditate, Mat. 22. 11.
That the King (who is the Master of the Feast) stands at the Table to see his
guests; and looks upon thee, whether thou have on thee thy This Wedding
Garment is righteousness and true holiness R^v. 19. 8. Ephesians. 4. 24.
Wedding Garment. Think also, that all the holy 1 Cor. 11. 10.
A^gels that attend upon the Elect in the Church, and 1 Pet. 1. 12.
do desire to behold the celebration of these hol^ mysteries, do observe thy
reverence and behavior. Let thy soul therefore, whilst the Minister brings
the Sacrament unto thee, offer this, or the like short Soliloquy unto Christ.

A sweet Soliloquy to be said betwixt the consecration and receiving of the
Sacrament.
IS it true indeed, 1 King. 8. 27.
that God will dwell on earth? Behold the heaven, and the heaven of heavens are
not able to contain thee: how much more unable i^ the soul of ^uch a sinful
Caitiff as I am, to receive thee?

But seeing it is thy blessed pleasure to come thus to Rev. 3. 20.
sup with me, and to Joh. 14. 23
dwell in me: I cannot for joy but burst out and say, What is man that thou art
so mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou so regardest him? What favor
soever thou vouchsafest me in the abundance of thy Grace, I will freely confess
what I am, in the wretchedness of my Nature: I am, in a word, a carnal
Creature; whose very soul is Romans 7. 14.
sold under sin, a wretched man, compassed about with verse 24.
a body of Death: Yet Lord, seeing thou Mat. 9. 13.
call, here I come; and seeing thou call sinners, Mat. 11. 28.
I have thrust my self in among the rest; and seeing thou call all with
their heaviest loads, I see no reason why I should stay behind. O Lord, I am
sick, and whither should I go, but unto thee the Physician of my Soul? Thou
have cured many, but never did thou meet with a more miserable Patient; for I
am more leprous than Gehazi, more unclean than Magdalen, more blind in Soul
than Bartimeus was in Body; for I have lived all this while, and never seen the
true light of thy Word: my soul runs with a greater flux of sin, than was the
Hemorrhoise Issue of blood; Mephibosheth was not more lame to go, than my Soul
is to walk after thee in love; Jeroboam's Arm was not more withered to strike
the Prophet, than my Hand is maimed to relieve the Poor. Cure me, O Lord, and
thou shall do as great a work as in curing them all. And though I have all
their Sins and Sores; yet, Lord, so abundant is thy grace, so great is thy
skill, that if thou will, thou can with a word, forgive the one, and heal the
other: and why should I doubt of thy good will; when to save me, will cost thee
now but one loving smile; who did show thy self so willing to redeem me
though it should cost thee all thy heart-blood: and now offerest so graciously
unto me the assured pledge of my Redemption, by thy blood? Who am I, O Lord
God? and what is my merit, 2 Samuel 7. 18.
that thou have bought me with so dear a price? It is merely thy mercy; and I,
Genesis 32. 10.
O Lord, am not worthy the least of all thy mercies: much less to be partaker
of this holy Sacrament, the greatest pledge of the greatest mercy, that ever
thou did bestow upon those sons of men whom thou love. How might I in
respect of mine own unworthiness, cry out for fear at the sight of thy holy
Sacrament, 1 Samuel 5. 7.
as the Philistines did, when they saw the Ark of God come into the Assembly?
Woe now unto me a sinner; but that thy Angel does comfort me, as he did the
woman: Mat. 28. 5.
Fear thou not for I know that thou seek Jesus which was crucified. It is
thou indeed that my soul seeks after. And here thou offerest thy self unto me
in thy blessed Sacrament. If therefore Elizabeth thought her self so much
honored at thy presence in the Womb of thy blessed Mother, Luke 1. 43, 44.
that the babe sprang in her belly for joy; how should my soul leap within me
for joy, now that thou come by the holy Sacrament, to dwell in my heart for
ever? Oh what an honor is this, not that the Mother of my Lord, but my Lord
himself, should come thus to visit me! Indeed, Lord, I confess with the
faithful Matthew. 8. 8.
Centurion, that I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof: and
that if thou did but speak the word only, my soul should be saved: yet seeing
it has pleased the riches of thy grace, for the better strengthening of my
weakness, to seal thy mercy unto me, by thy visible sign, as well as by thy
visible word; in all thankful humility my soul speaks unto thee with the
blessed Virgin: Luke 1. 38
Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word. Rev. 3.
20.
Knock thou, Lord, by thy Word and Sacraments at the door of my heart; and I
will, like the Luke 18. 13.
Publican, with both my fists, knock at my breast, as fast as I can, that thou
may enter in: and if the door will not open fast enough, break it open, O
Lord, by thine Almighty Power, and then enter in, and dwell there for ever,
that I may have cause with Zaccheus, to acknowledge, that Luke 19. 9.
this day salvation is come into mine house. And cast out of me whatsoever
shall be offensive unto thee; for I resign the whole Possession of my heart
unto thy sacred Majesty, entreating, that I may not live henceforth, but that
thou may live in me, speak (...) me, walk in me: and so govern me by thy
Spirit, that nothing may be pleasing unto me, but that which is acceptable unto
thee. That finishing my course in the life of grace, I may afterward live with
thee for ever in the Kingdom of Glory. Grant this, O Lord Jesus, for the merits
of thy death and blood shedding. Amen.

When the Minister brings toward thee the bread thus blessed and broken; and
offering it unto thee, bids thee, Take, eat, etc. then meditate that Christ
himself comes unto thee, and both offers and gives indeed unto thy faith,
his very Body and Blood, with all the merits of his death and passion, to feed
thy Soul unto eternal life: as surely as the Minister offers and gives the
outward signs, that feed thy Body unto this temporal life. The Bread of the
Lord is given by the Minister, but the Bread which is the Lord, is given by
Christ himself.

When thou take the Bread at the Ministers hand to eat it, Sacramentum
requi^it sacram ment^m.
then rouse up thy Soul to apprehend Christ by faith; and to apply his merits
to heal thy miseries. Embrace him as sweetly with thy faith in the Sacrament,
as ever Simeon hugged him with his arms in his swaddling clouts.

As thou eatest the Bread, imagine that thou see Christ hanging upon t^^
Cross, and by his unspeakable tormen^^ fully satisfying God's Justice for thy
sins, and strive to be as verily partaker of the spiritual grace, as of the
Elemental signs. For, the truth is not absent from the sign; neither does
Christ deceive, when he says, This is my Body: but he gives himself indeed to
every Soul that spiritually receives him by Faith. For as ours is the same
Supper which Christ administ^red: so is the same Christ verily present at his
own Supper; not by any Papal Christ calls it his Body, not the sign of his
Body; because this Sacrament was instituted not only to signify, but also to
communicate the spiritual graces that they represent: and by the signs to draw
our minds to the graces signified. So Euthymius in Matthew. 19. Non dixit
Dominus, Haec sunt signa corporis mei, sed, Hoc est corpus meum. Oportet ergo
non ad naturam ^orum quae proposita sunt aspicere, sed ad ipsorum virtutem and
gratiam. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituti illum
sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucisigent. Sacramentum aliquid vobis
commendat; spiritualiter intelle^tum vivificabit vos. August. in Psalm. 98.
speaking in the person of Christ. The Disciples did not eat Christ corporally
and substantially in the first Institution; no more do we in reiteration of the
same Supper.
Transubstantiation, but by a Sacramental Participiation, whereby he does truly
feed the faithful unto eternal life: not by coming down out of Heaven unto
thee, but by lifting thee up from the Earth unto him. According to that old
saying, Sursum corda; lift up your hearts: And, where the carcass is, thither
will the Eagles resort, Matthew. 24.

When thou see the Wine brought unto thee apart from the Bread, then remember
that the Blood of Jesus Christ was as verily separated from his Body upon the
Cross, for the remission of thy sins: And that this is the seal of the new
Covenant, which God has made to forgive all the sins of all penitent sinners
that believe in the merits of his blood shedding. For the Wine is not a
Sacrament of Christ's Blood contained in his Veins, but as it was shed out of
his Body upon the cross for the remission of the sins of all that believe in
him. Mat. 26. 28.


As thou drinkest the Wine and pourest it out of the Cup into thy Stomach,
meditate and believe, that by the merits of that Blood, which Christ shed upon
the Cross, all thy sins are as verily forgiven, as thou have now drunk this
Sacramental Wine, and have it in thy stomach. And in the instant of drinking,
settle thy meditation upon Christ, as he hanged upon the Cross; as if like Mary
and John, thou did see him nailed, and his Blood running down his blessed
side, out of that ghastly wound, which the Spear made in his innocent heart:
wishing thy mouth closed to his side, that thou might receive that precious
Blood before it fell to the dusty Earth. And yet the actual drinking of that
real Blood with thy mouth, would be nothing so If remission of sins and eternal
life had been appropriated to the drinking of the real Blood, doubtless John
and Mary would have made means to have drunk it: But J^hn ascri^es the virtue
to believing that it was s^ed.
effectual, as this Sacramental drinking of that blood spiritually by Faith.

For one of the Soldiers might have drunk that, and been still a reprobate:
but whosoever drinks it spiritually by Faith in the Sacrament, shall surely
have the Remission of his sins, and life everlasting.

As thou feel the Sacramental Wine which thou have drunk, warming thy cold
stomach; so endeavor to feel the Holy Ghost cherishing thy Soul in the joyful
assurance of the forgiveness of all thy sins, by the merit of the blood of
Christ. And to this end God gives every faithful Soul, together with the
Sacramental Blood, the Holy Ghost to drink. 1. Cor. 12, 13.
We are all made to drink into one Spirit. And so lift up thy mind from the
contemplation of Christ, as he was crucified upon the Cross, to consider how he
now (...).
sits in glory at the right hand of his Father, making Heb. 7. 25. Heb. 9. 24.
intercession for thee, by presenting to his Father the unvaluable merits of
his death, which he once suffered for thee, to appease his Justice for the sins
which thou do daily commit against him.

After thou have eaten and drunk both the Bread and Wine, labor that as those
Sacramental Signs do turn to the nourishment of thy body, and by the digestion
of heat become one with thy substance: so by the operation of Faith, and the
Holy Ghost, thou may become one with Christ, and Christ with thee: and so
may feel thy Communion with Christ confirmed and 1 Cor. 10 17. (...) est
pa^is comm^ni notione Sacramenti, non autem necessa^io ^nus ^umero.
increased daily more and more. That as it is impossible to separate the Bread
and Wine digested into the blood and substance of thy body: so it may be more
impossible to part Christ from thy Soul, or thy Soul from Christ.

Lastly, As the Bread of the Sacrament, though confected of many Grains, yet
makes but one Bread: so must thou remember, that though all the faithful are
many; yet are they all but one mystical Body, whereof Christ is Head. And
therefore thou must love every Christian as thy self, and a member of thy body.

Thus far of the duties to be done at the receiving of the holy Sacrament,
called Meditation.

3. Of the duties which we are to perform after receiving of the holy Communion
called Action or Practice.
THE duty which we are to perform after the receiving of the Lord's Supper, is
called Action or Practice: without which all the rest will minister unto us no
comfort.

The Action consists of Two sorts of duties: First, such as we are to perform
in the Church, or else, after that we are gone home.

Those that we are to perform in the Church, are either several from our own
souls: or else jointly with the Congregation.

The several duties which thou must perform from thine own Soul, are Three:
First, Thou must be careful (that forasmuch as Christ now dwells in thee,
therefore) to entertain him in a clean heart, and with pure affections; for the
Psalm. 18. 26. Sancta non nisi sancte and sanctis.
most holy will be holy with the holy: for if Joseph of Arimathea, when he had
begged of Pilate his dead body, to bury it, wrapped it in sweet odours, and
fine Linen, and laid it in a new Tomb; how much more should thou lodge
Christ in a new heart, and perfume his Rooms with the odoriferous incense of
Prayers, and all pure affections? If God required Moses to provide a Pot of
pure gold to keep the Manna that fell in the Wilderness: what a pure heart
should thou provide to receive this divine Manna, that is come down from
Heaven?

And as thou came sorrowing like Joseph and Mary, Luke 2. 46.
to seek Christ in the Temple: so now having there found him in the midst of
his Word and Sacraments, be careful with joy to carry him home with thee, as
they did.

And if the man that found but his lost sheep, Luke 15. 6.
rejoiced so much; how can thou, having found the Savior of the World, but
rejoice much more?

Secondly, Thou must offer the Sacrifice of a private thanksgiving unto God,
for this inestimable grace and mercy: for as this action is common unto the
whole Church; so is it applied particularly to every one of the faithful in the
Church; and for this particular mercy, every soul must joyfully offer up a
particular Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. For if the Wise Men rejoiced so much when
they saw the Star, which conducted them unto Christ; and worshipped him so
devoutly when he lay a Babe, in the Manger; and offered unto him their Gold,
Myrrh, and Frankincense: how much more should thou rejoice, now that thou
have both seen and received this Sacrament, which guides thy soul unto him,
where he sits at the right hand of his Father in glory? And thither lifting
up thy heart, adore him, and offer up unto him the gold of a pure Faith, the
Myrrh of a mortified heart, and this or the like sweet incense of Prayer and
Thanksgiving.

A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the Communion.
WHAT shall I render unto thee (O blessed Savior) for all these blessings
which thou have so graciously bestowed upon my Soul? How can I sufficiently
thank thee, when I can scarce express them? Where thou might have made me a
Beast, thou made me a Man after thine own Image. When by sin I had lost both
thine Image, and my self, thou did renew in me thine Image by thy Spirit, and
did redeem my Soul by thy Blood again: and now thou have given unto me thy
Seal and Pledge of my Redemtion; nay, thou have given thy self unto me, O
blessed Redeemer. Oh what an inestimable treasure of riches, and overflowing
Fountain of grace has he got who has gained thee! No man ever touched thee by
Faith, but thou did heal him by Grace; for thou art the Author of Salvation,
the remedy of all evils, the medicine of the sick, the life of the quick; and
the resurrection of the dead. Seemed it a small matter unto thee to appoint thy
holy Angels to attend upon so vile a Creature as I am; but that thou would
enter thy self into my Soul, there to preserve, nourish and cherish me unto
life everlasting.

If the carcass of the dead Prophet could 2 Kin. 13. 21.
revive a dead man that touched it; how much more shall the living body of the
Lord of all Prophets, quicken the faithful, in whose heart he dwells? And if
thou will raise my body at the last day out of the dust; how much more will thou now revive my Soul which thou have sanctified with thy Spirit, and
purified with thy blood? O Lord, what could I more desire, or what could
thou more bestow upon me, than to give me thy body for meat, thy blood for
drink, and to lay down thy Soul for the price of my Redemption? Thou Lord
enduredst the pain, and I do reap the profit: I received pardon, and thou did
bear the punishment. Thy tears were my bath, thy wounds my weal* and the
injustice done to thee, satisfied for the Judgment which was due to me. Thus by
thy birth thou art become my Brother, by thy death my ransom, by thy mercy my
reward, and by thy Sacrament my nourishment. O divine ^ood, by which the sons
of men are transformed into the sons of God: so that man's nature dies, and
God's nature lives and rules in us. Indeed, all Creatures wondered that the
Creator would be enclosed nine Months in the Virgins Womb; (though her Womb
being replenished with the Holy Ghost, was more splendid than the Starry
Firmament:) but that thou should thus humble thy self to dwell for ever in
my heart, which thou foundest more unclean than a Dunghill, it is able to make
all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth to stand amazed. But seeing it is thy
free Grace and mere pleasure thus to enter and to dwell in my heart, I would to
God, that I had so pure a heart as my heart could wish, to entertain thee. And
who is fit to entertain Christ? or who, though invited, would not choose with
Mary rather to kneel at thy feet, than presume to sit with thee at thy Table?
Though I want a pure heart for thee to dwell in, yet weeping eyes shall never
be wanting to wash thy blessed feet, and to lament my filthy sins. And albeit I
cannot weep so many tears as may suffice to wash thy holy feet; yet, Lord, it
is sufficient that thou have shed Blood enough to cleanse my sinful So^l. And I
am fully (O Lord) assured, that all the (...)* fare wherewith the disdainful
Pha^isee entertained thee at his Table, did not so much please thee, as those
tears which penitent Mary poured under the ^^ble. I would therefore wish with
Jeremy, that my head were a fountain of tears: that seeing I can by no means
yield sufficient thanks for thy love to me; yet I might by continual Tears,
testify my love unto thee. And though no man is worthy of so infinite a grace:
yet this is my comfort, That he is worthy whom thou in favor accountest
worthy. And seeing that now of thy mere grace thou have counted me (among
others thy chosen) worthy of this unspeakable favor, and sealed by thy
Sacrament the assurance of thy love, and the forgiveness of my sins: O Lord,
confirm thy favor unto thy Servant: and say of me as Isaac did of Jacob, I
have blessed him, Genesis 27. 33.
therefore he shall be blessed. And that I may say unto thee with David, 1 Chronicles. 17. 27.
Thou, O Lord, have blessed my Soul, and made it thy house, and it shall be
blessed for ever And seeing it pleased thee to bless the house of Obed-edom and
all his 2 Samuel 6. 11, 12.
household whilst the Ark of the Lord remained in his house: I doubt not but
thou will much more bless my soul and body, and all that do belong unto me, now
that it has pleased thy Majesty of thine own good will to enter under my roof,
and to dwell for ever in my poor cottage. Bless me, O Lord, so, that my sins,
may wholly be remitted by thy Blood, my conscience sanctified by thy Spirit, my
mind enlightened by thy Truth, my Heart guided by thy Spirit and my Will, in all
things, subdued, to thy blessed Will and Pleasure. Bless me with all graces
which I want, and increase in me those good gifts which thou have already
bestowed upon me. And seeing that I hold thee not by the arms, as Jacob
wrestling without me; but inwardly dwelling by Faith within me: surely, Lord,
Genesis 32. 24, etc.
I will never let thee go, except thou bless me, and give me a new name, a new
heart, a new spirit, and strength by the power of God to prevail over sin and
Satan. And I beseech thee, O Lord, desire not to depart from me, as thou did
from Jacob, because the day breaks, and thy grace begins to dawn and
appear: But I from my soul, humbly with the Emmauites, entreat thee. O sweet
Jesus, to abide with me, because it draws toward night. For the night of
temptation, the night of tribulation; yea, my last long night of death
approaches, O blessed Savior, stay with me therefore now and ever. Exodus 33.
14
And if thy presence go not home with me, carry me not from hence Go with me,
and live with me, and let neither death nor life separate me from thee. Drive
me from my self, draw me unto thee. Let me be sick, but sound in thee; and in
my weakness let thy strength appear. Let me seem as dead, that thou alone
may be seen to live in me: so that all my members may be but instruments to
act thy motions. Cant. 8. 6.
Set me as a seal upon thine heart; and let thy zeal be settled upon mine, that
I may be out of love with all, that I may be only in love with thee. And grant,
O Lord, that as thou now vouchsafest me this favor to sit at thy Table, to
receive this Sacrament in thy house of grace: so I may hereafter through thy
mercy, Luke 22. 30.
be received to ^ eat and drink at thy Table in thy kingdom of Glory. And for
thy mercy, I do here with the four beasts, and twenty four Elders, cast my self
down before thy Throne of Grace; acknowledging, that it is thou that have Rev.
5. 9.
redeemed with thy blood, and that salvation comes only from thee. And
therefore unto thee Chap. 7. 10, 11, 12.
I do yield all praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and
power, and might, and Majesty, O my Lord, and my God, for evermore. Amen.

Thirdly, Seeing Christ has sacrificed himself for thee (and all that thou
can give, is too little) therefore thou must offer thy self to be a living,
Romans 12. 1.
holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God; by serving him in Luke 1. 75.
righteousness and holiness all thy days. Thus Iertullian witnesses, that in
his time a Christian was known from another man, only by the holiness and
uprightness of his life.

2. Of the duties which we are to do after the Communion jointly with the
Congregation.
THE duties to be performed jointly with the Church, are Three. First, public
thanksgiving, both by Prayers, and Mat. 26. 30. Which is probable to have ^een
the 123. Psalm.
singing of Psalms; Thus Christ himself and his Apostles did. Secondly, joining
with the Church, 1 Cor. 16. 1. Romans 15. 25. Qui c^piosio^es sunt and volunt pro
arbitrio quisque suo quod visum est contrib^^^nt: and quod it^ o^igitur apud
pr^positum deponitur, atque inde ille opitulatur pupills and vi^^is, and qui
propter mo^bum aut aliquam aliam causam egent, etc. Justin, Martyr. Apolog. 2.
in giving (every man according to his ability) toward the relief of the poor.
This was the manner of the Primitive Churches, to make Collections and (...),
Lucrum est pietatis nomine facere sumptum. Tert. Apol. adv. Genesis c. 39.
Love Feasts after the Lord's Supper, for the relief of the poor Christians.
Thirdly, when thanks and praise is ended, then with all reverence to stand up,
and to receive the blessing of God, by the mouth of his Minister; and to
receive it, as if thou did hear God himself pronouncing it unto thee from
Heaven. For by their blessing, Number. 6. 23, 27.
God does bless his people.

Thus far of the Duties to be practiced in the Church.
The Duties which thou art to practice after that thou art departed home, are
three. First, to observe diligently, whether thou have truly received Christ in
the Sacrament. Which thou may thus easily perceive: for seeing his flesh is
meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55.
and that he is so full of grace, that no man ever touched him by faith, but he
received virtue from him; it cannot possibly be, that if thou have eaten his
flesh, or drunk his blood, but thou shall receive grace and power to be
cleansed from thy sins and filthiness. For if the Hemorrhoise that did but
touch his garment, Mark. 5. 29.
had her bloody issue that continued so long, forthwith stanched; how much more
will the bloody issue of thy sin be stanched, if thou then have truly eaten and
drunk the very flesh and blood of Christ? But if thy issue still runs, thou
may justly suspect thou have never yet truly touched Christ?

Secondly, seeing thou have now reconciled thy self to God, and renewed thy
Covenant, and vowed newness and amendment of life; thou must therefore have a
special care, that thou do not yield to commit thy former sins any more:
knowing that the Matthew. 12. 43, etc.
unclean spirit, if ever he can get into thy Soul again, after that it is swept
and garnished: he will enter forcible possession with seven other devils worse
than himself: So that the end of that man shall be worse than his beginning. Be
ye not therefore like the Dog 2 Pet. 2. 22.
that returns to his vomit, or the washed Sow that walloweth in the mire again.
And return not to thy malice, like to the Adder, who laying aside her poison
while she drinks, takes it up again when she has done. But when either the
devil or thy flesh shall offer to tempt and move thee to relapse into thy
former sins, answer them as the Spouse does in the Canticles, Cant. 5. 3.
I have put off my coat (of my former corruption) how shall I put it on? I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them again?

Lastly, If ever thou have found either joy or comfort in receiving the holy
Sacrament; let it appear by the eager desire of receiving it Scio Romae hanc
esse consuetudinem, ut fideles semper Christi corpus accipiant. Hier. Apol.
adv. Jovin. Quotidie communionem Eucharistiae percipere non laudo, nec
reprehendo. Omnibus Dominicis diebus communicandum suadeo and hortor, si men's
sine affectu peccandi sit. Aug. (vel potius Gennadius) lib. de Ec. Dogm. c. 53.
often again. For the Body of Christ as it was Psalm. 45. 7. Heb. 1. 9.
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows; so does it yield a
sweeter savor than all the ointments of the world: The fragrant smell whereof
allureth all Souls who have once tasted the sweetness thereof, ever after to
desire oftener to taste thereof again. Cant. 1. 3.
Because of the savor of thy good Ointments, therefore do the Virgins love
thee. O Psalm. 34. 8.
taste therefore often, and see how good the Lord is, says David. This is the
Commandment of Christ himself, Do this in remembrance of me; and in doing this,
thou shall show thy self best mindful and thankful for his death. For as often as
ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye shall show the Lord's death
until he came. And let this be the chief end whereunto both thy receiving and
living tends: Tit. 2. 12, 14
that thou may be a holy Christian, zealous of good works, purged from sin, to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; that thou may be
acceptable to God, profitable to thy brethren, and comfortable unto thine own
soul.

Thus far of the manner of glorifying God in thy life.

Now follows the Practice of Piety in glorifying God in the time of sickness,
and when thou art called to die in the Lord.
AS soon as thou perceivest thy self to be visited with any sickness, meditate
with thy self.

1. That misery comes not forth of the dust; Job. 5. 6.
neither does affliction spring out of the earth. 1 Samuel 6. 9.
Sickness comes not by hap or chance (as the Philistines supposed that their
Mice and Emrods came,) but from man's wickedness, which as sparkles breaks
out. Man suffers (says Lam. 3. 39.
Jeremy) for his sins. Fools (says Psalm. 107. 17.
David) by reason of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities are
afflicted. As therefore Solomon advises a man to carry himself toward an
earthly Prince; Eceles. 10. 4.
If the Spirit of him that rules, rise up against thee, leave not thy place;
for gentleness pacifieth great sins: so counsel I thee to deal with the Prince
of Princes: If the spirit of him that rules heaven and earth, rise up against
thee, let not thy heart despair, for repentance pacifieth great sins. 2 Chronicles.
15. 4.
And whosoever returns in his affliction to the Lord God of Israel, and
seeks him, he will be found of him.

2. Mat. 6. 6.
Shut to thy Chamber door; Psalm. 4. 4.
Examine thine own heart upon thy bed; Lam. 3. 40.
search and try thy ways. Search as diligently for thy capital sin, as Joshua
7. 16, etc.
Joshua did for Achan, till thou find it: For albeit God, when he begins
to chasten his Children, has respect to all their sins: yet when his anger is
incensed, he chiefly takes occasion to chasten, and enter with them into
judgment, for some one grievous sin, wherein they have lived without Repentance.

3. When thou have thus considered all thy sins, put thy self before the
Judgment Seat of God, as a Felon or Murderer, standing at the Bar of an
earthly Judge: and with grief and sorrow of heart confess unto God all thy
known sins, especially thy Capital Offenses, wherewith God is chiefly
displeased. Lay them open, with all the circumstances of the time, place, and
manner how they were committed, as may most serve to aggravate the hainousness
of thy sins, and to show the contrition of thy heart for the same. Lift up
thine hand, and acknowledge thy self before the righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth, guilty of eternal death and damnation, for those thy heinous sins and
transgressions. And having thus accused and judged thy self: cast down thy self
before the Psalm. ^9. 5. ^^b. 4. 16.
Fcotstool of his Throne of grace: assuring thy self, that whatsoever the 1
King. 20. 31.
Kings of Israel be, yet the God of Israel is a merciful God: And cry unto him
from a penitent and faithful heart, for mercy and forgiveness, as eagerly and
earnestly, as ever thou knew a malefactor, being to receive his sentence,
crying unto the Judge for favor and pardon; vowing amendment of life, and (by
the assistance of his grace) never to commit the like sin any more. All which
thou may do in these or the like words.

A Prayer when one begins to be sick.
O Most righteous Judge, yet in JESUS CHRIST my gracious Father: I wretched
sinner do here return unto thee (though driven with pain and sickness) like the
prodigal Child with want and hunger. I acknowledge that this sickness and pai^
comes not by blind chance or fortune, but by thy divine providence, and special
appointment. It is the stroke of thy heavy hand, which my sins have justly
deserved: Job 3. 25.
and the things that I feared, are now fallen upon me. Yet I do well perceive,
Hab. 3. 2.
that in wrath thou remembrest mercy, when I consider how many, and how heinous
are my sins, and how few and easy are thy corrections. Thou might have
stricken me with some fearful and sudden death, whereby I should not have had
either time or space to have called upon thee for grace and mercy; and so I
should have perished in my sins, and have been for ever condemned in hell.

But thou, O Lord, visitest me with such a fatherly chastisement, as thou usest
to visit thy dearest Children whom thou best love: giving me (by this
sickness) both warning and time to repent, and to sue unto thee for grace and
pardon. I take not therefore, O Lord, this thy visitation, as any sign of thy
wrath or hatred; but as an assured pledge, and token of thy favor and loving
kindness, whereby thou do with thy temporal Judgments draw me to judge my
self, and to repent of my wicked life, 1 Cor. 11. 13.
that I should not be condemned with the godless and unrepentant World. For thy
holy Word assures me, that whom thou love, thou thus chastenest: Heb. 12. 6,
7. etc.
and that thou scourgest every son that thou receivest. That if I endure thy
chastening, thou offerest thy self unto me as unto a son: and that all that
continue in sin, and yet escape without correction (whereof all thy children
are partakers) are bastards and not sons; and that thou chastenest me for my
profit, that I may be a partaker of thy holiness. O Lord, how full of goodness
is thy Nature, that have dealt with me so graciously in the time of my health
and prosperity: and now being provoked by my sins and unthankfulness, have such
fatherly and profitable ends, in inflicting upon me this sickness and
correction!

I confess, Lord, that thou do justly afflict my Body with sickness, for my
Soul was sick before of a long prosperity, and surfeited with ease, peace,
plenty, and fullness of bread. And now, O Lord, I lament and mourn for my sins:
Psalm. 51. 3.
I acknowledge my wickedness, and mine iniquities are always in my sight. Oh,
what a wretched sinner am I, void of all goodness by nature, and full of evil
by sinful custom! Oh, what a world of sin have I committed against thee, whilst
thy long-sufferance expected my conversion, and thy blessings wooed me to
repentance! Yet, O my God, seeing it is thy property more to respect the
goodness of thine own nature, than the deserts of sinners, I beseech thee, O
Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, and for the merits of that all
saving death which he has voluntarily suffered for all which believe in him,
Psalm. 51. 1.
Have mercy upon me, according to the multitude of thy mercies; turn thy face
away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities: Verse 11.
Cast me not out of thy presence, Psalm. 28. 4.
neither reward me according to my deserts: For if thou do reject me, who
will receive me? or who will succor me, if thou do forsake, me? But thou, O
Lord, art the helper of the helpless: Hos. 14. 3.
and in thee the fatherless finds mercy: for though my sins be exceeding
great, yet thy mercy, O Lord, far exceeds them all: neither can I commit so
many, as thy grace can remit and pardon. Wash therefore, O Christ my sins with
the virtue of thy precious Blood, especially those sins, which from a penitent
heart I have confessed unto thee: but chiefly, O Lord, for Christ his sake
forgive me Here name that sin which most troubles thy conscience.
. And seeing that of thy love thou did lay down thy life for my ransom, when
I was thine enemy: Oh save now the price of thine own Blood, when it shall cost
thee but a smile upon me, or a gracious appearance in thy Father's sight in my
behalf. Reconcile me once again, O merciful Mediator, unto thy Father: for
though there be nothing in me that can please him: yet I know that in thee, and
for thy sake, Mat. 3. 17.
he is well pleased with all whom thou acceptest and love. And if it be thy
blessed Will, remove this sickness from me, and restore me to my former health
again; that I may live longer to set forth thy glory and to be a comfort to my
friends which depend upon me; and to procure to my self a more settled assurance
of that heavenly inheritance which thou have prepared for me. And then, Lord,
thou shall see how religiously and wisely I shall redeem the time, Ephesians. 5. 16.
which heretofore I have so lewdly and profanely spent. And to the end, that I
may the sooner and the easier be delivered from this pain and sickness, direct
me, O Lord, I beseech thee, by thy divine providence, to such a Physician and
helper, as that (by thy blessing upon the means) I may recover my former health
and welfare again. And, good Lord, vouchsafe, that as thou have sent this
sickness unto me, so thou would likewise be pleased to send thy holy Spirit
into my heart, whereby this present sickness may be sanctified unto me: that I
may use it as thy School, wherein I may learn to know the greatness of my
misery, and the riches of thy mercy; that I may be so humbled at the one, that
I despair not of the other: and that I may so renounce all confidence of help
in my self, or in any other creature; that I may only put the whole rest of my
salvation in thy all sufficient merits. And forasmuch as thou know, Lord,
how weak a vessel I am, full of frailty and imperfections: and that by Nature I
am angry and froward under every Cross and Affliction: Jam. 1. 17. Joh. 3. 27.
O Lord, who art the giver of all good gifts, arm me with patience to endure
thy blessed will and pleasure, and of thy mercy lay no more upon me, 1 Cor. 10.
13.
than I shall be able to endure and suffer. Give me grace to behave my self in
all patience, love, and meekness, unto those that shall come and visit me; that
I may thankfully receive, and willingly embrace all good counsels and
consolations from them: and that they may likewise see in me such a good
example of Patience, and hear from me such godly lessons of comfort, as may be
arguments of my Christian faith and profession, and instructions unto them, how
to behave themselves when it shall please thee to visit them, with the like
affliction of sickness. I know, O Lord, I have deserved to die; and I desire
not longer to live, than to amend my wicked life, and in some better measure to
set forth thy glory. Therefore, O Father, if it be thy blessed will, restore me
to health again, and grant me a longer life. But if thou have, according to
thine eternal decree, appointed by this sickness to call for me out of this
transitory life; I resign my self into thy hands, and holy pleasure; thy
blessed will be done, Psalm. 31. 5.
whether it be by life or by death. Only I beseech thee of thy mercy forgive me
all my sins, and prepare my poor soul, that by a true faith, and unfeigned
repentance, she may be ready against the time that thou shall call for her out
of my sick and sinful body. O heavenly Father, Psalm. 65. 2. 1. Kin. 8. 39.
who art the hearer of prayers, hear thou in heaven this my prayer; and in this
extremity grant me these requests: not for any worthiness that is in me, but
for the merits of thy beloved Son Jesus, my only Savior and Mediator; for
whose sake thou have promised to hear us, and to grant whatsoever we shall ask
of thee in his Name. Joh. 16. 23.
In his Name therefore and in his own words, I conclude this my imperfect
Prayer, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed by thy Name, etc.

Having thus reconciled thy self unto God in Christ;

1. Let thy next care be to set thy House in order, as Esaias advised King
Hezekias: Isa. 38. 1.
making thy last Will and Testament, (if it be not already made.) If it be
made, then peruse it, confirm it, and for avoiding all doubts and contention,
publish it before Witnesses, that (if God call for thee out of this life) it
may stand in force and unalterable, as thy last Will and Testament, and so
deliver it locked or sealed up in some Box, to the keeping of a faithful
Friend, in the presence of honest Witnesses.

2. But in making thy Testament, take a Religious Divine's Advice, how to
bestow thy Benevolence; and some honest Law^er's counsel, to continue it
according to Law.

Dispatch this before thy sickness does ^^crease, and thy memory decay: lest
otherwise thy Testament prove a dotement, and so be another man's fancy, rather
than thy Will.

3. To prevent many inconveniences, let me recommend to thy discretion two
things.

1. If God has blessed thee with any competent state of wealth, make thy Will
in thy health-time. It will neither put thee farther from thy goods, nor hasten
thee sooner to thy Death: but it will be a greater ease to thy mind in freeing
thee from a great trouble when thou shall have most need of quiet; for when thy
House is set in order, thou shall be better enabled to set thy Soul in order,
and to dispose of thy Journey toward God.

2. If thou have Children, give to every one of them a Portion, according to
thy ability, in thy lifetime; that thy life may seem an ease, and not a yoke
unto them; yet so give, as that thy Children may still be beholden unto thee,
and no^ thou unto them. But if thou keep all i^ thy hands whilst thou live,
they may thank Death, and not thee for the portion that thou leavest them. If
thou have n^ Children, and the Lord has blessed the^ with a great portion of the
goods of thi^ World, and if thou meanest to bestow them upon any charitable or
pious uses put not over that good work to the trus^ of others, seeing thou
see how most o^ other men's Executors prove almost Exe^cutioners. And if
Friends be so unfaithfu^^ in a man's life, how much greater caus^ have thou to
distrust their fidelity afte^ thy death? Lamentable experience shows how many
dead men's Wills have of la^ either been quite concealed, utterly overthrown,
or by cavils and quirks of Law, frustrated or altered: whereas by the Law of
God, the will of the dead should not be Gal. 3. 15. Heb. 9. 17.
violated; but all his godly intentions conscionably performed and fulfilled,
as in the sight of God, who in the Day of the Resurrection, will be 2 Cor. 5.
10. Eccl. 12. 14. Romans 2. 15. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
just Judge both of the quick and dead. And if any thing should hap in his Will
to be ambiguous or doubtful, it should be Voluntas testatoris magis inspicienda
est quam verba, l. cum virum sect. sani. C. de fidei, cum ff. ad leg. Fall. l.
si ff. ad Treb. l. ubi sect. te rogo.
construed as it might come nearest to the Honor of God, and the honest
Intention of the Testator. But let the vengeance due to such unchristian Deeds,
light on the Actors that do them, not on the Kingdom wherein they are suffered
to be done. And let other rich Men be warned by such wretched examples not so
to Matrimonium inter Aurum and Arcam, divortium inter Deum and Animam. Aug.
Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
marry their Minds to their Money; as that they will do no good with their
Goods, till Death divorceth them. Considering therefore the shortness of thine
own life, and the uncertainty of others just dealing after thy death, in these
unjust days: let me advise thee (whom God has blessed with ability and an
intent to do good) to become in thy life time, thine own Administrator: make
thine own Hands thine Executors, and thine own Eyes thy Overseers; cause thy
Lanthorn to give her light before thee, and not behind thee: give God the
Glory, and thou shall receive of him in Gal. 6. 9.
due time the Mar. 10. 42. Mar. 9. 41. Matthew. 25. 34, etc. Luke 14. 14. and 18.
22. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Rev. 14. 13.
reward, which of his grace and mercy he has promised to thy good works.

4. Having thus set thy House and Soul in order (if the Job. 14. 5.
determined number of thy days be not expired) God will either have mercy upon
thee, and say, Job 33. 24.
Spare him (O killing Malady) that he go not down into the pit, for I have
received a reconciliation: Or else, his Fatherly providence will direct thee to
such a Physician, and to such 2 Kin. 20. 7. 2. King. 5. 7, 8, 10. Joh. 9. 7.
means, as that by his blessing upon their endeavors thou shall recover, and
be restored to thy former Health again. But in any wise, take heed that thou,
nor none for thee, send unto Sorcerers, Wizards, Charmers, or Inchanters for
help: for this were to leave the God of Israel, and to go to 2 King, 1. 2, 3.
Baal-zebub, the God of Ekron, for help, as did wicked Ahaziah, and to break
thy Vow which thou have made with the blessed Trinity in thy Baptism: and be
sure that God will never give a Blessing by those means which he has accursed;
Lev. 20. 6. Deuteronomy. 18. 10, etc.
but if he permit Satan to cure thy Body, fear lest it tend to the damnation of
thy Soul. Thou art Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
tried, beware.

5. When thou have sent for the Physician, take heed that thou put not thy
trust rather in the Physician than in the Lord, as Asa did; of whom it is said,
that he sought not to the Lord in his Disease, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
but to the Physician: which is a kind of Idolatry, that will increase the
Lord's anger, and make the Physic received uneffectual. Use therefore the
Physician as God's Instrument, and Physic as God's Means. And seeing it is not
lawful without Prayer to use ordinary food, 1 Timothy 4. 4. much less
extraordinary Physic (whose good effect depends upon the blessing of God)
before thou take thy Physic, Jer. 8. 22.
pray therefore heartily unto God to bless it unto thy use, in these or the
like words.

A Prayer before taking of Physic.
O Merciful Father, who art the Lord of health, and of sickness, of life, and
of death; who killest, 1 Samuel 2. 6.
and make alive; who bring down to the grave, and raisest up again: I come
unto thee as to the only Physician, who can cure my Soul from sin, and my
Body from sickness. I desire neither life nor death, but refer my self to thy
most holy Will. For, 2 Samuel 14. 14
though we must needs die, and being dead, our lives are as water spilt on the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again: yet has thy gracious Providence
(whilst li^^ remains) appointed means which thou will have thy Children to
use; and (by the lawful use thereof) to expect thy blessing upon thine own
means, to the curing of their sickness, and restitution of their health. And
now, O Lord, in this my necessity, I have according to thine Ordinance, sent
for thy Servant (the Physician) who has prepared for me this Physic, which I
receive as means sent from thy fatherly hand: I beseech thee therefore, that as
by thy blessing on a l^^p of dry Figs, (...)
thou did heal Hezekiah's sore, that he recovered; and by seven times washing
in the river of Jordan did cleanse Naaman the Syrian of his Leprosy, ^ King.
5. 14.
and did restore the Man that was blind from his birth, by anointing his Eyes
with Clay and Spittle, ^h. 9. 6, 7.
and sending him to wash in the Pool of Siloam; and by touching the hand of
Peter's Wife's Mother, Man. 8. 15.
did cure her of her Fever; and did restore the Woman that touched the hem
of thy Garment, Matthew. 9. ^0, etc.
from her bloody Issue: So it would please thee of thine infinite goodness and
mercy, to sanctify this Physic to my use, and to give such a blessing unto
it, that it may (if it be thy Will and Pleasure) remove this my sickness and
^ain, and restore me to health and strength again. But if the number of those
days which thou have appointed for me, Job 14. 5.
to live in this Vale of misery, be at an end; and that thou have sent this
sickness, as thy Messenger, to call me out of this mortal life, then, Lord, let
thy blessed will be done; for I submit my will to thy most holy Pleasure. Only
I beseech thee, increase my faith and patience, and let thy grace and mercy be
never wanting unto me; but in the midst of all extremities, assist me with thy
Holy Spirit, that I may willingly and cheerfully resign up my Soul (the price
of thine own Blood) into thy most gracious hands and custody.) Grant this, O
Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory, both now and evermore. Amen.

Meditations for the sick.
WHilst thy sickness remains, use often (for thy comfort) these few
Meditations, taken from the ends wherefore God sends afflictions to his
Children. Those are ten.

1. That by afflictions God may not only Deus suo^ Percutit ut emendet. Hier.
Com^ in Esa. 1. 6.
correct our sins past, but also work in us a deeper loathing of our natural
corruption; and so prevent us from falling into many other sins, which
otherwise we would commit: like a good Father, D^us calamitates infligit, non
ex^inguere, sed castigare nos cupiens Basil Jerm. 3. in divites.
who suffers his tender Babe to scorch his finger in a candle, that he may
the rather learn to beware of falling into a greater fire. So^ that the Child
of God may say with David, Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes,
for Psalm. 119. 67.
before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy word. And indeed
(says St. Paul) 1 Cor. 11. 32.
We are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the
World. With one Cross God makes two Cures: the chastisement of sins past, and
the prevention of sin to come. For though the eternal punishment of sin (as it
proceeds from Justice) is fully pardoned in the Sacrifice of Christ, yet we
are not (without serious judging of our selves) exempted from the temporal
chastisement of sin: for this proceeds only from the love of God, for our
good. And this is the reason that when Nathan told David, from the Lord, that
his sins were forgiven, yet that the 2 Samuel 12. 10.
Sword (of Chastisement) should not depart from his house, and that Verse 14.
his Child should surely die. For God like a skilful Physician, seeing the Soul
to be porsoned with the settling of sin; and knowing that the reigning of the
flesh will prove the ruin of the Spirit, ministereth the bitter Pill of
affliction, whereby the relics of sin are purged, and the Soul ^ore soundly
cured; the Flesh is subdued, and the Spirit is sanctified. Oh the odiousness of
sin, which causes God to chasten so severely his Children, whom otherwise he
loves so dearly.

2. God sends affliction, to seal unto us our Adoption: for every child whom
God loves, he corrects: ^eb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
And he is a Bastard that is not corrected. Yea, it is a sure note, that where
God sees sin and sinites not, there he detests and loves not. Therefore it is
said that he Ad (...) servant^r non (...) ^^di. 1 Samuel ^. 25.
suffered the wicked sons of Ely to continue in their sins without correction,
because the Lord would stay them. O^ the (...) favor (...) non ^st favor, ira
sed ingens. At favor in magno s^^pe dolor late^ Basil. Antho. ^a^r.
other side, there is no surer token of God's fatherly love and care, than to
be corrected with some Cross, as often as we commit any sinful crime. Affliction
therefore is a seal of Adoption, no sign of Reprobation. For the purest Corn is
cleanest ^anned, the finest Gold is of^est tried, and the sweetest Grape is
hardest pressed, and the truest Christian heaviest crossed.

3. God sends affliction, to wean our hearts from too much loving this world
and wordly vanities; and to cause us the more earnestly to desire and long for
Cr^bris tribulationibus Ecclesiam suam Dominus exercet: ne si cun^ta temporalia
forte prospere current; incolatu praesentis exilii delectata, minus coelestem
patriam suspiret. Beda in Cant. Mundanus affectus praesentia amat, temporal^a
cumulat, spiritulia ^^ligit, and cum totus se sp^r git in imis, nil potest
amare de sum mis. Justin. Patriarch. ^^ di^^ menast. cap. 4.
Eternal Life. For as the Children of Israel (had they not been ill entreated
in Egyp^) would never have been so willing to go toward Canaan: so (were it
not for the crosses and afflictions of this life) God's Children would not so
heartily long, and willingly desire for the Kingdom of Heaven. For, we see many
Epicures that would be content to forego Heaven, on condition that they might
still enjoy their earthly Pleasures; and (having never tasted the joys of a
better) how loath are they to depart this life? Whereas the Apostle (that saw ^
Cor. 12. 4.
Heavens glory^) tells us, that there is no more comparison betwixt the joys of
eternal life, and the Pleas^res of this world, than there is betwixt the
filthiest dung and the pleasantest meat; or betwixt the stinkingest Phil. 3. 8.
^^ ^aucti (...) aliqua (...) in (...), qui basdam ten^^^ionibus (...) ^^ch. in
1. Reg.
Dunghill, and the fairest Bed Chamber. As therefore a loving Nurse puts (...)
or Mustard on the Breast, to make the Child the rather to forsake the (...): so
God mixeth sometimes ^ affliction with the pleasures and prosperity of (...),
lest (like the Children of this (...) ration) they should forg^^ God, and fall
into too much love of this (...) sent evil World; and so by Riches grow proud;
by Fame insolent; (...) ^iberty wanton, and Deuteronomy 32. 15.
(...) against the Lord, when they (...). For if God's Children love the World
so well when (like a cursed Stepmother) she mis^seth and strikes us, how should
we love this Harlot, if she smiled upon us, and stroaked us, as she does her
own worldly Brats? Thus does God (like a wise and loving Father) embitter with
crosses the pleasures of this life to his Children, that (finding in this
earthly state no true and permanent joys) they might sigh and long for eternal
life, where firm and everlasting joys are only to be found.

4. By affliction and sickness God exercises his Children, and the Graces
which he bestows upon them. He refineth and tries their faith, as the
Goldsmith does his Gold in the 1 Pet. 1. 7. Ut igne purgati and ab admixtione
viti^rum carnalium defaecati, splend^ant exanimatae innocentiae claritate.
Hilar. in Psalm. 95.
Furnace, to make it shine more glistering and bright; he stirs us up to
pray more diligently and zealously, and proves what patience we have learned
all this while in his Schola crucis, schola lucis. Gubernator in tempestate
dignoscitur, in acie miles probatur: delicata jactatio est, cum periculum non
est: conflictatio in adversis, probatio est veritatis. (...) Su^. 1 de ^m.
School. The like Experience he makes of our Hope, Love, and all the rest of
our Christian Virtues: which without this Trial, would rust like Iron
unexercised, or corrupt like standing Waters, that either have no current, or
else are not Jer. 48. 11.
poured from Vessel to Vessel; whose taste remains, and whose scent is not
changed. And rather than a Man should keep still the scent of his corrupt
Nature to damnation; who would not wish to be changed from state to state, by
crosses and sickness to salvation? For as the Camomile which is t^odden,
grows best, and smells most fragrant; and as the Fish is sweetest that
lives in the saltest Waters, so those Souls are most precious unto Christ, who
are most exercised and afflicted with his Cross.

5. God sends afflictions, to demonstrate unto the world, the trueness of his
Childrens love and service. Every Hypocrite will serve God whilst he prospers
and blesses him, Job 1. 9, 10.
as the Devil falsely accuses Job to have done; but who (save his loving Child)
will love and serve him in adversity, when God seems to be angry and
displeased with him? yea, and cleave unto him most inseparably, when he seems
(with the greatest frown and disgrace) to reject a Man, and to cast him out of
his favor? yea, when he seems to wound and kill as an enemy: yea, then to
say with Job: Though thou Lord kill me, Job 13. 15.
yet will I put my trust in thee. The loving and the serving of God, and
trusting in his mercy in the time of our correction and misery, is the truest
note of an unfeigned Child and Servant of the Lord.

9. Sanctified affliction is a singular help to further our true Conversion,
and to drive us home by Repentance to our heavenly Father. In their affliction
(says the Lord) they will seek me diligently. Hos. 5. 15.
Egypts burdens made Exodus 3. 7.
Israel cry unto God. Psalm. 86. 7.
David's troubles made him pray. Isa 38. 2, 3.
Hezekiah's sickness made him to weep, and misery drove the Luke 15. 16, etc.
prodigal Child to return and sue for his Father's grace and mercy. Yea, we
read of many in the Gospel, that by sicknesses and afflictions were driven to
come unto Christ, who, if they had had health and prosperity, as others, would
have (like others) neglected or contemned their Savior, and never have sought
unto him for his saving health and grace. For as the Ark of Noah, the higher it
was tossed with the Flood, the nearer it mounted toward Heaven: so the
sanctified Soul, the more it is exercised with affliction, the nearer it is
lifted toward God O blessed is that Cross that draws a sinner to Deus non
delectatur poenis nostris, sed confessionem quaerit erroris. Alb. in Psalm. 4.
Poenitent.
come (upon the knees of his heart) unto Christ, to confess his own misery, and
to implore his endless mercy! Oh blessed, ever blessed be that Christ, that
never refuses the sinner that comes unto him, though weather-driven by
affliction and misery.

7. Affliction works in us pity and compassion toward our fellow brethren,
that be in distress and misery; Heb. 13. 3.
whereby we learn to have a fellow-feeling of their Calamities, and to condole
their estate, as if we suffered with them. And for this cause Christ himself
would suffer, and be tempted in all things like unto us (sin only excepted)
that he might be a merciful High Priest, Heb. 4. 15. and 2. 18. and 5. 8, 9.
touched with the feeling of our infirmities. For none can so heartily bemoan
the misery of another, as he who first suffered himself the same affliction.
Hereupon a Sinner in misery may boldly say unto Christ, Non ignare mali,
miseris succurito Christ.
Our frailty since (O Christ) thou did perceive,
Condole our state, who still in frailty cleave.


8. God uses our sicknesses and afflictions, as means and examples both to
Sinit Deus justum incidere in calamitates, ut virtutem quae in illo lateb^t,
aliis ap^rtam manifestamque faciat. Dam. l. 2. de Orth. cap. 29.
manifest unto others the faith and virtues which he has bestowed upon us, as
also to strengthen those who have not received so great a measure of Faith as
we. For there can be no greater encouragement to a weak Christian, than behold
a true Professor (in the extremest sickness of his Body) supported with
greater patience and consolation in his Soul. And the comfortable and blessed
departure of such a man will arm him against the fear of death, and assure him
that the hope of the godly is a far more precious thing than that flesh and
blood can understand, or mortal eyes behold in this vale of misery. And were it
not that we did see many of those whom we know to be the undoubted Children of
God, to have endured such afflictions and calamities before us; the greatness
of the miseries and crosses which oft-times we endure, would make us doubt
whether we be the Children of God or no. And to this purpose St. James says,
God made Job and the Prophets an example of suffering adversity, and of long
patience.

9. By Romans 8. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 14.
afflictions God makes us conformable to the Image of Christ his Son, who being
the Heb. 2. 10.
Captain of our Salvation was made perfect through sufferings. And therefore he
first bare the Cross in shame, before he was Heb. 2* 7.
crowned with glory; and did first taste Mat. 27. 34.
gall before he did eat the Luke 24. 42. Favus post mella guftavit. Ter. lib.
de Coron. milit. c. 24.
honeycomb: and was first derided, King of the Jews, by the Soldiers in the
Highpriests Hall, before he was saluted Psalm. 24. 7.
King of Glory, by the angels in his Father's Court. And the more lively our
Heavenly Father shall perceive the Image of his natural Son to appear in us,
the better he will love us; and when we have, for a time, born his likeness in
his sufferings, and 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
fought and Rev. 3. 21.
overcome, we shall be crowned by Christ; and with Christ sit on his Throne,
and of Christ receive the Rev. 2. 17.
precious white Stone and morning Star, that shall make us Phil. 3. 21. Ideo
tentantur Sancti, ut ipsi se agnoscant. Primas. Esse se magnarumvirium homo
crederet, si nullum unquam earundem virium defectum sentiret.
shine like Christ for ever in his Glory.

10. Lastly, That the godly may be humbled in respect of their own state and
misery; and God glorified by delivering them out of their Troubles and
Afflictions, Greg. l. 2.
when they call upon him for his help and succor. Moral. Job.
For though there be no Man so pure, but if the Lord will straightly Psalm 130. 3.
mark Iniquities, he shall find in him just cause to punish him for his sin:
yet the Lord in mercy does In his quae patimur, nullum contra Deum murmur cordi
nostro subrepat: quia ad quod hoc Creator noster operetur, ignot^m est.
not always in the affliction of his Children, respect their sins, but
sometimes lays afflictions and crosses upon them for his glories sake. Thus
our Savior Christ told his Disciples, Greg. Epist. 31.
That the man was not born blind for his own or his Parents sin: but that the
work of God should be showed on him. So he told them likewise, John 9. 3.
that Lazarus's sickness was not unto the death, John 11. 4
but for the glory of God. O the unspeakable goodness of God, which turns
those afflictions, which are the shame and punishment due to our sins, to be
the subject of his honor and glory.

These are the blessed and profitable ends, Malum pati malum non est: malum
facere malum est.
wherefore God sends sickness and affliction upon his Children; whereby it
may plainly appear, that afflictions are not signs either of God's hatred,
Chrysostom. de Prod. Ind.
or of our reprobation; but rather tokens and pledges of his fatherly love unto
his Children, whom he loves, and therefore chasteneth them in this life, where
upon repentance, there remains hope of pardon; rather than to refer the
punishment to that life, where there is no hope of pardon, nor end of
punishment. For this cause, the Christians in the Cum vexamur ac premimur, tum
maximas gratias agimus indulgentissimo Patri, quod corruptelam nostram non
patitur longius procedere, sed plagis ac verberibus emendat.
Primitive Church, were wont to give God great thanks, for afflicting them in
this life. So the Apostles rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer
for Christ's Name, Acts 5. 41. And the Christian Hebrews suffered with joy the
spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in Heaven a better, and an
enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. And in respect of those holy Ends, the Apostle
says, Heb 12. 11.
That though no affliction for the present seems joyous, but grievous; yet
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them who are thereby
exercised. Lact. lib. 5. cap. 23.
Pray therefore heartily, that as God has sent unto thee this sickness, so it
would please him to come himself unto thee with thy sickness; by teaching thee
to make those sanctified uses of it, for which he has inflicted the same upon
thee.

Meditations for one that is recovered from Sickness.
IF God has of his mercy heard thy Prayers, and restored thee to thy health
again, consider with thy self,

1. That thou have now received from God, as it were, another life. Spend it
therefore to the honor of God, in newness of life. Let thy sin die with thy
sickness: but live thou by grace to holiness.

2. Be not the more secure, that thou art restored to health, neither insult in
thy self, that thou have escaped Death; but think rather, that God (seeing how
unprepared thou wast) has of his mercy heard thy Prayer, spared thee, and
given thee some little longer time of respite; that thou may both amend thy
life, and put thy self in a better readiness against the time that he shall
call for thee without further delay, out of this World. For though thou have
escaped this, it may be thou shall not escape the next sickness.

3. Consider how fearful a reckoning thou had made before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, by this time, if thou had died of this Sickness: Spend therefore
the time that remains, so, as that thou may be able to make a more cheerful
account of thy life, when it must be expired indeed.

4. Put not far off the day of Death, thou know not for all this how near it
is at hand; and being so fairly warned, be wiser. For if thou be taken
unprovided the next time, thy excuse will be less, and thy Judgment greater.

5. Remember that thou have vowed amendment and newness of life. Thou have
vowed a vow unto God, defer not to pay it: for he delights not in fools;
Eccles. 5. 4.
pay therefore that thou have vowed. The unclean Spirit is cast out; O let him
not re-enter with seven worse than himself. Mat 12. 45.
Thou have sighed out the groans of Contrition, thou have wept the tears of
Repent^nce; thou are washed in the Pool of B^thesda, streaming with five bloody
Wounds, not of a Joh. 5. 4.
troubling angel, but of the Isa. 63. 9.
Angel of God's presence, troubled with the wrath due to thy sins; who
descended into Hell, to restore thee to saving health, and Heaven. Return not 2
Pet. 2. 22.
now, with the Dog, to thine own vomit, nor like the washed Sow, to wallow
again in the mire of thy former sins and uncleanness; lest Verse 20.
being entangled and overcome again with the filthiness of sin, (which now thou
have escaped) thy latter end prove worse than thy first beginning. Twice
therefore does our Savior Christ give the same cautionary warning to healed
Sinners. First, To the Man cured of his 38 years desease; John 5. 14.
Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing fall upon thee.
John 8. 11.
Secondly, to the woman taken in adultery; Neither do I condemn thee: Go thy
way and sin no more. Teaching us, how dangerous a thing it is, to relapse and
fall again into the former 1 Pet. 4. 4.
excess of Riot. Take heed therefore unto thy ways; and pray for grace, Psalm.
90. 12.
that thou may apply thy heart unto wisdom, during that small number of days
which yet remain behind. And for thy present mercy and health received, imitate
the thankful Leper, and return unto God this, or the like Thanksgiving.

A Thanksgiving to be said of one that is recovered from sickness.
O Gracious and merciful Father, who art the Lord of Health and Sickness, 1 Samuel 2. 6.
of Life and of Death: who killest, and make alive; who bring down to the
Grave and raisest up again; who art the only preserver of all those that trust
in thee, I thy poor and unworthy Servant, having now (by experience of my
painful sickness) felt the grievousness of misery due unto sin, and the
greatness of thy mercy in forgiving sinners, and perceiving with what a
fatherly compassion thou have heard my Prayers, and restored me to my health
and strength again; do here (upon the bended knees of my heart) return (with
the thankful Leper) to acknowledge thee alone to be the God of my health and
salvation: and to give thee the praise and glory for my strength and
deliverance out of that grievous Disease and Malady: and for thus turning my
mourning into mirth, my sickness into health, and my death into life. My sins
deserved punishment, and thou have corrected me, but have not given me over
unto death. Isai. 38. 9, etc.
I looked (from the day to the night) when thou would make an end of me: I
did chatter like a Crane or a Swallow: I mourned (as a Dove) when the
bitterness of sickness oppressed me: I lifted up mine eyes unto thee, O Lord,
and thou did comfort me, for thou did cast all my sins behind thy back, and
did deliver my soul from the pit of corruption; and when I found no help in
my self, nor in any other creature (saying, I am deprived of the residue of my
years, I shall see man no more among the Inhabitants of the World) then did
thou restore me to health again, and gave life unto me; I found thee, O Lord,
ready to save me.

And now, Lord, I confess, that I can never yield unto thee such a measure of
thanks, as thou have (for this benefit) deserved at my hands. And (seeing that
I can never be able to repay thy goodness with acceptable works) O that I could
with Mary Magdalen testify the love and thankfulness of my heart, with
abounding tears! O, what shall I be able to render unto thee, O Lord, for all
these benefits which thou bestowedst upon my Soul! Surely, as in my Sickness,
when I had nothing else to give unto thee, I offered Christ and his merits unto
thee as a Ransom for my sins; so being now restored by thy Grace unto my health
and strength, and having no better thing to give; behold, Romans 12. 1.
O Lord, I do here offer up my self unto thee, beseeching thee so to assist me
with thy Holy Spirit, that the remainder of my life may be wholly spent in
setting forth thy praise and glory.

O Lord forgive me my former follies and unthankfulness, that I was no more
careful to love thee, according to thy goodness, nor to serve thee, according
to thy Will; nor to obey thee, according to thy Commandments; nor to thank
thee, according to thy Benefits. And seeing thou know, that of my self I am
not sufficient so much as to think a good thought (much less to do that which
is good and acceptable in thy sight;) assist me with thy grace and holy Spirit,
that I may (in my prosperity) as devoutly spend my health in thy service, as I
was earnest in my sickness to beg it at thy hands. And suffer me never to
forget either this thy mercy, in restoring me to my health, or those Vows and
Promises which I have made unto thee in my sickness. With my new health, renew
in me, O Lord, a right Spirit: which may free me from the slavery of sin, and
establish my heart in the service of grace. Work in me a greater detestation of
all sins (which were the causes of thy anger, and my sickness) and increase my
Faith in Jesus Christ, who is the Author of my health and salvation. Let thy
good Spirit lead me in the way that I should walk; and teach me to deny all
ungodliness, Tit. 2. 12.
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this world,
that others by my Example may think better of thy Truth. And since this time
(which I have yet to live) is but a little respite and small remnant of days,
which cannot long continue; Teach me, Psalm. 90. 12.
O my God, so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to that spiritual
wisdom which directs to salvation. And to this end make me more zealous than
I have been in Religion, more devout in Prayer, more servent in Spirit, more
careful to hear and profit by the preaching of thy Gospel, more helpful to my
poor Brethren, more watchful over my ways, more faithful in my calling, and
every way more abundant in all good works. Let me (in the joyful time of
prosperity) fear the evil day of affliction; in the time of health, think on
sickness; in the time of sickness, make my self ready for death; and when death
approaches, prepare my self for Judgment. Let my whole life be an expressing
thankfulness unto thee for thy Grace and Mercy. And therefore, O Lord, I do
here from the very bottom of my heart, together with the thousand thousands of
Angels, Rev. 5. 12, etc.
the four Beasts, and twent^ four Elders, and all the creatures in heaven and
on the earth, acknowledge to be due unt^ thee, O Father, which sit upon the
Throne^ and to the Lamb, thy Son, who sits at the right hand, and to the
Holy Spirit, which proceeds from both; the holy Trinity (...) Persons in
unity of substance; all prais^ honor, glory, and power, from this tim^ forth
and for evermore. Amen.

Meditations for one that is like to die.
IF thy Sickness be like to increase unto Death, then meditate on Three things^
First, how graciously God deals with thee^ Secondly, from what evils Death
will fre^ thee. Thirdly, what good Death will brin^ unto thee.

First, Concerning God's favorable dealing with thee.

1. Meditate, That God uses this chastisement of thy Body, but as a Medicine
to cure thy Soul, by drawing thee (who ar^ sick in Sin) to come by Repentance
unto Christ (thy Physician) to have thy So^^ healed. Matthew. 9. 12.


2. That the sorest Sickness, or painfulle^^ Disease which thou can endure,
is n^^thing, if it be compared to those dolours and pains which Jesus Christ
thy Savior has suffered for thee: when in Luke 22. 44.
a bloody sweat, he endured the Psalm. 88. 7. Isa. 53. 6.
wrath of God, the pains of Psalm. 18. 5.
hell, and a Heb. 5. 7.
cursed death which was due to thy sins. Justly therefore may I use those words
of Jeremy, Gal. 3. 13. Lam. 1. 12.
Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, Dum legimus vel
audimus quot and quanta ille sine culpa sustinuit, intelligimus nos peccatores
omnia debere libenter sustinere. Theod. ad 5. Cap. in Romans
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his
fierce wrath. Has the Son of God endured so much for thy redemption, and wilt
not thou a sinful man endure a little sickness for his pleasure; especially
when it is for thy good?

3. That when thy sickness and disease is at the extremest, yet it is less and
easier than thy sins have deserved. Let thine own Conscience judge whether thou
have not deserved worse than all that thou do suffer.

Murmur not therefore, but considering thy manifold and grievous sins, thank
God that thou art not plagued with far more grievous punishments. Think how
willingly the damned in Hell would endure the extremest pains a thousand
years, on condition that they had but the hope to be saved, and (after so many
years) to be eased of their eternal torments. And seeing that it is his mercy
that thou art not rather consumed than corrected; Lam. 3. 22.
how can thou but bear patiently his temporal correction, seeing the end is
to save thee from eternal damnation? 1 Cor. 11. 32.


4. That nothing comes to pass in this case unto thee, but such as ordinarily
befell to others thy Brethren; Heb. 11.
who (being the beloved and undoubted servants of God when they lived on earth)
are now most blessed and glorious Saints with 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Christ in Heaven: as Job, David, Lazarus, etc. They groaned for a time, as
thou do, under the like burden; but they are now delivered from all their
miseries, troubles, and calamities. And so likewise ere long (if thou will
patiently tarry the Lord's leisure) thou shall also be delivered from thy
sickness and pain, either by restitution to thy former health, with Job; or
(which is far better) by being received to heavenly rest, with Lazarus.

5. Lastly, that God has not given thee over into the hand of thine Enemy, to
be punished and disgraced; but (being thy loving Father) he corrects thee
with his own merciful hand. When David had his wish, to choose his own
chastisement, he chose rather to be corrected by the hand of God, than by any
other means; Let us fall into the hand of the Lord, 2 Samuel 24. 14.
for his mercies are great, and let me not fall into the hand of man. Who will
not take any affliction in good part, when it comes from the hand of God, Heb.
12. 11.
from whom (though no Affliction seems joyous for the present) we know
nothing comes but what is good? 2 Samuel 16. 9, 10.
The confideration hereof made David to endure Shimei's cursed railing with
greater patience, and to correct himself another time for his impatiency; Psalm.
39. 9.
I should not have opened my mouth, because thou did it: and Job, to reprove
the unadvised speech of his Wife! Job 2. 10.
Thou speak like a foolish Woman; What? Job 2. 10.
shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? And though the
Cup of God's wrath due to our sins, Mat. 26. 39.
was such a horror to our Savior's humane nature, Verse 42.
that he earnestly prayed that it might pass from him; yet (when he considered
that it was reached unto him by the hand and will of his Father) he willingly
submitted himself to drink it to the very dregs thereof. Nothing will more arm
thee with Patience in thy sickness, than to see that it comes from the hand of
thy heavenly Father, who would never send it, but that he sees it to be unto
thee both needful and profitable.

The second sort of Meditations are, to consider from what evils death will
free thee.
IT freeth thee from a corruptible Body, which was conceived in the weakness of
flesh, the heat of lust, the stain of sin, and born in the blood of filthiness,
a livi^g Prison of thy Soul, a lively instrument of ^in, a very sack of
stinking dung: the ex^^ements of whose Nostrils, Ears, Pores, and ^ther
passages (duly considered) will seem more loathsome than the uncleanest sink ^r
vault. Insomuch that whereas Trees and Plants bring forth Leaves, Flowers,
Fruits, and sweet smells; man's body brings forth ^^turally nothing but Lice,
Worms, Rotten^ss and filthy stinks. His affections are al^ogether corrupted:
Psalm. 14. 1.
and the imaginations (...) heart are only evil continually. Genesis 6. 5.
Hence (...) is that the ungodly is not satisfied with profaneness, nor the
voluptuous with pleasures, nor the ambitious with perferments, nor the curious
with preciseness, nor the malicious with revenge, nor the leacherous with
uncleanness, nor the covetous with gain, nor the drunkard with drinking. New
passions and fashions do daily grow: new Fears and Afflictions do still arise;
here Wrath lies in wait, there Vainglory vexes: here pride lifts up, there
disgrace casts down; and every one waits who shall arise in the ruin of
another. Now a Man is privily stung with Back-biters like fiery Serpents, anon
he is in danger to be openly devoured of his enemies, like Daniel's Lions^ And
a godly man where ere he lives shall ever be vexed (like Lot) with Sodom's
uncleanness.

2. Death brings unto the godly an end of Romans 6. 7.
sinning, and of all the miseries which ar^ due unto sin: Rev. 21. 4.
so that after Death there sha^^ be no more sorrow, nor crying; neither shall
there be any more pain, for God shall wipe a^ way all tears from their eyes.
Yea, by death we are separated from the company of wick^ed Men, Isa. 57. 1.
and God takes away merciful (...) righteous men from the evil to come. So
(...) dealt with Josiah: 2 Kin. 22. 20.
I will gather thee to the Fathers: and thou shall be put into thy gr^^ in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the (...) which I will bring upon this
place* And Go^ hides them for a while in the grave, Isa. 26. 20.
until (...) indignation pass over. So that as Paradise (...) the Heaven of
the soul's joy; so the Gra^^ may be termed the Heaven of the bodies (...)

3. Whereas this wicked Body lives in a world of wickedness, so that the poor
Soul cannot look out at the Eye, and not be infected; nor hear by the Ear, and
not be distracted; nor smell at the Nostrils, and not be tainted; nor taste
with the Tongue, and not be allured; nor touch by the Hand, and not be defiled;
and every sense upon every temptation is ready to betray the Soul; by death the
Soul shall be delivered from this Thraldom, and this corruptible body shall put
on incorruption, and this mortal immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53. O blessed, thrice
blessed be that Death in the Lord, which delivers us out of so evil a World,
and freeth us from such a body of bondage and corruption.

The third sort of Meditations are, to consider what good Death will bring unto
thee.
1. DEATH brings the godly Man's Soul to enjoy an immediate Communion with
the blessed Trinity in everlast^ng bliss and glory.

2. It translates the Soul from the Mise^ies of this world, the contagion of
sin, and ^^ciety of Sinners, to the City of the living ^ed, the Celestial
Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
and the com^any of innumerable Angels, and to the assem^ly and congregation of
the firstborn, which (...) written in Heaven, and to God the Judge (...) all,
and to the Souls of just Men made per^ect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
^ovenant.

3. Death puts the Soul into the aactual and full possession of all the
inheritance and happiness which Christ has either promised unto thee in his
Word, or purchased for thee by his blood.

This is the good and happiness whereunto a blessed death will bring thee. And
what truly Religious Christian that is young, would not wish himself old, that
his appointed time might the sooner approach to enter into this celestial
Paradise; where thou may exchange thy Brass for Gold, thy Vanity for
Felicity, thy Vileness for Honor, thy Bondage for Freedom, thy Lease for an
Inheritance, and thy mortal State for an immortal Life? He that does not daily
desire this blessedness above all things, of all others he is less worthy to
enjoy it.

If Plut. in vit. Cat. Cic. Tus. quaest l. 1 V^l de praecipiti venias in
Tartara saxo, Ut qui Socracicum de ne^e l^git op^s. Ovid. in Itin.
Cato Vticensis, and Cleombrotus, two Heathen-men, (reading Plato's Book o^ the
Immortality of the Soul) did voluntarily, the one break his Neck, the other run
upon his Sword, that they might the sooner (as they thought) have enjoyed those
joys: what a shame is it for Christian^ (knowing those things in a more
excellent measure and manner out of God's ow^ Book) not to be willing to enter
into these heavenly Joys? especially when their Master calls for them thither.
Mat. 25. 21.
If therefore there be in thee any love of God, or desir^ of thine own
happiness or salvation, when the time of thy departing draws near^ that time,
I say, and manner of Death which God in his unchangeable Counsel has
appointed, and determined be^fore thou wast born; yield and surrender up
(willingly and cheerfully) thy Soul into the merciful hands of Jesus Christ thy
Savior. And to this end, when the time is come, Judge. 13. 19. 20.
as the Angel in the ^ight of Manoah and his Wife, ascended from the Altar up
to heaven in the flame of the sacrifice, so endeavor thou, that thy spirit in
the sight of thy friends, may from the altar of a contrite heart, ascend up to
Heaven, in the sweet perfume of this or the like spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer.

A Prayer for a sick Man, when he is told that he is not a Man for this World,
but must prepare himself to go unto God.
O Heavenly Father, who art Number. 16 22. Number. 27. 16.
the Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, and have made us these souls, and
h^st Jer. 38. 16.
appointed us the time, Act. 17. 25, 26.
as to come into this World, so (having finished our 2 Timothy 4. 7.
course) to go out of the same: the Psalm. 90. 12.
number of my days which thou have J^b 14 5. 1^. and 16.
determined, are now expired, Luk 2^. 53.
and I am come to the utmost bounds which thou have appointed, beyond which I
cannot pass. I know (O Lord) that if thou enterest into judgment, Psalm. 143 2.
no flesh can be justified in thy sight: And I (O Lord) of all others should
appear most impure and unjust; 2 Timothy 4. 7.
for I have not fought that good ^ight for the defense of thy Faith and
Religion, with that zeal and constancy that I should: but for fear of
displeasing the World, I have given way unto sins and errors; and for desire
to please my flesh, I have broken all thy Commandments, in thought, Psalm. 40.
12.
word, and deed; so that my sins have taken such hold on me, that I am not able
to look up, and they are more in number than the hairs on my head. Psalm. 130. 3.
If thou will straightly mark mine iniquities, O Lord, where shall I stand? Dan.
5. 27.
if thou weighest me in the balance, I shall be found too light. For I am void
of all righteousness, that might merit thy mercy; Mat. 11. 21.
and laden with all iniquities that most justly deserve thy heaviest wrath.
Bu^, O my Lord, and my God, Mat. 3. 17.
for Jesus Christ thy Son's sake, in whom only thou art well pleased with all
penitent and believing sinners; take pity and compassion upon me, who am the 1 Timothy 1. 15.
chief of sinners. Blot out all my sins out of thy Ez^k 18. 22.
remembrance, and Psalm. 51. 7.
wash away all my transgressions out of thy sight, with the 1 Pet. 1. 19.
precious blood of thy Son, which I believe that he (as an undefiled John 1. 29.
Lamb) has shed for the cleansing of my sins. In this faith I lived; in this
faith I die: believing that Romans 4. 25.
Jesus Christ died for my sins, and rose again for my justification. 1 Cor. 15.
3. 4.
And seeing that he has endured that Death, and 1 Pet. 2. 24.
born the burden of that Judgment, which was due unto my sins; O Father, for
his Death and Passion's sake, now (that I am coming to appear before thy
Judgment Seat) acquit and deliver me from that fearful Judgment, which my sins
have justly deserved. And perform unto me that gracious and comfortable Promise
which thou have made in thy Gospel: That whosoever believes in thee, Joh. 5.
24.
has everlasting life, and shall not come into Judgment, but shall pass from
death unto life. Strengthen, O Christ, Luke 17. 5.
my Faith that I may put the whole confidence of my salvation in the merits of
thy obedience and Blood. Increase, O holy Spirit, my patience, lay no more upon
me than I am able to bear: 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and enable me to bear so much, as shall stand with thy blessed will and
pleasure. O blessed Trinity in Unity, my Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier,
vouchsafe, that as my outward man does decay; so my inward man may more and
more by thy grace and consolation, increase and gather strength. O Savior, put
my Soul in a readiness, that (like a Mat. 25. 4.
wise Virgin, having the Mat. 22. 11. Rev. 19. 8.
Wedding Garment of thy Righteousness and holiness) she may be ready to meet
thee at thy coming, with Oil in her Lamp Rev. 19. 7.
Marry her unto thy self; that she may be Joh. 17. 22.
one with thee in everlasting love and fellowship O Lord, Zech. 3. 2.
reprove Satan, and chase him away: Psalm. 22. 20, 21.
Deliver my soul from the power of the Dog. Save me from the Lyon's mouth. I
thank thee, O Lord, for all thy blessings both spiritual and temporal, bestowed
upon me: especially for my Redemption by the death of my Savior Christ. I
thank thee that thou have protected me with thy holy Mat. 18. 10.
Angels from my youth up until now. Heb. 1. 4.
Lord, I beseech thee give them a charge to attend upon me till thou call
for my soul; and then to carry her (as they did the soul of Luke 16. 22.
Lazarus) into thy Heavenly Mat. 8. 11. Luke 3. 18.
Kingdom. And as the time of my departure shall approach nearer unto me, so
grant, O Lord, that my Soul may draw nearer unto thee, and that I may joy fully
commend my Soul into thy hands, as into the hands of a loving Father, and
merciful Ephesians. 1. 10. Act. 15. 11.
Redeemer, and at that instant Act. 7. 59.
O Lord graciously receive my Spirit. All which that I may do, assist me I
beseech thee, with thy Grace: and let thy holy spirit continue with me unto the
end, and in the end, for Jesus Christ his sake, thy Son my Lord, and only
Savior: In whose Name I give thee the glory, and beg these things at thy hand,
in that Prayer which Christ himself has ^aught me, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Meditations against Despair, or doubting of God's Mercy.
IT is found by continual experience that near the time of Death (when the
Children of God are weakest) then Satan makes the greatest flourish of his
strength, and assails them with his strongest temptations. For he knows that
either he must now or never prevail: for if their souls once go to Heaven, he
shall never vex nor trouble them any more. And therefore he will now bestir
himself as much as he can, and labor to set before their eyes all the gross
sins which ever they committed, and the Judgments of God which are due unto
them: thereby to drive them, if he can, unto despair, which is a grievouser sin
than all the sins hat they committed, or he can accuse them of.

If Satan therefore trouble thy Conscience more toward thy death, Satan's
first stratagem in time of death. The defeature.
than in thy life;

1. Confess thy sins unto God, not only in general, but also in particular.

2. Make satisfaction unto those Men, whom thou have wronged, if thou be^st
able. And if thou do injuriously or fraudulently detain or keep in thy
possession, any Lands or Goods, that of right do belong to any Widow, or
Fatherless Child, presume not, as thou tenderest thy Soul's health, to look
Christ the righteous Judge in the face, unless thou do first make a
restitution thereof to the right owners; for the Law of God under the penalty
of his curse, requires thee to Lev. 6. 2, 3, 4, etc. Nu^ 5. 6, 7, 8.
restore whatsoever was given thee to keep, or which was committed to thy
trust, or whatsoever by robbery, or violent oppression, thou tookest from thy
neighbor, with a fifth part for amends added to the principal. Non remittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablutum.
And unless that like Zaccheus thou do make Luke 19. 8, 9. Mic. 6 10, 11.
restit^tion of such Goods and Lands, according to God's Law, thou can never
truly repent, and without true Repentance, thou can never be saved. But
though by the temptation of the Devil, thou have done wrong and injury; yet if
thou do truly Jet. 18 7. Act. 2. 38. Act 8. 22.
repent and make restitution to thy power, the Lord has promised to be
merciful unto thee, to hear the Genesis 20 7. J^m 5. 14, 15. 16. Lev. 6. 6, 7.
Prayers of his faithful Ministers for thee, to forgive thee thy trespass and
sin, and to receive thy Soul in the Merits of Christ's Blood, as a Lamb without
blemish.

3. Ask God for Christ his sake pardon and forgiveness. And then these troubles
of mind are no Discouragements, but rather Comforts: Exercises, not
Punishments. They are assurances unto thee, that thou art in the right way: for
the way to Heaven is by the gates of Hell: that is, by suffering pains in the
body, and such doubtings in the mind, that thy estate in this life being every
way made bitter, the joys of eternal life may relish unto thee better and more
sweet.

If Satan tell thee that thou have no Faith, Satan's second assault. Tbe
Christian's encounter.
because thou have no feeling; Meditate,

1. That the truest Faith has oftentimes the least feeling, and greatest
doubts; but so long as thou hate such doubtings, Mar. 9. 24.
they shall not be laid unto thy charge; for they belong to the flesh from
which thou art divorced. Mat. 14. 31.
When thy flesh shall perish, thy weak inward man, which hates them, and loves
the Lord Jesus, shall be saved.

2. Job 13. 15.
That it is a better Faith to believe without feeling, than with feeling. The
least Faith (so much as a grain of Mustardseed, Mat. 17. 20.
so much as is in an Infant baptized) is enough to save the Soul which loves
Christ, and believes in him.

3. That the Child of God which desires to feel the assurance of God's favor,
shall have his desire, when God shall see it to be for his good: For God has
promised to give them the Rev. 21. 6. Isa. 55. 1.
Water of Life, who thirst for it, we have an example in Fox Acts. and Monum.
Mr. Glover the holy Martyr, who could have no comfortable feeling till he came
to the sight of the Stake: and then cried out and clapped his hands for joy to
his Friends, saying, O Austin, he is come, he is come; meaning the feeling joy
of Faith, and the Holy Ghost. Tarry therefore the Lord's leisure: be strong,
Psalm. 27. 14.
and he shall comfort thine heart.

If Satan shall aggravate unto thee the greatness, Satan's third assault.
the multitude, and hainousness of thy sins; meditate,

1. That upon true Repentance it is as easy with God to forgive the greatest
sin, The encounter.
as the least; 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and he is as willing to forgive many, as to pardon one. And his mercy shines
more in pardoning great sinners, than small offenders; as appears in the
Examples of Manasses, Magdalen, Peter, Paul, etc. And where sin most abounds,
Romans 5. 20
there does his Grace rejoice to abound much more.

2. That God did never forsake any man, till a man did first forsake God, as
appears in the examples of Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Ahazia, Judas, etc.

3. That God calls all, even those sinners who were heavy laden with sin,
Mat. 11. 28.
and that he did never deny his mercy to any sinner that asked his mercy with a
penitent heart. This the history of the Gospel witnesses: There came unto
Christ all sorts of sick sinners; the blind, lame, halt, Lepers; such as were
sick of Palsies, Dropsies, Bloody-fluxes; such as were Lunatic, and possessed
with unclean Spirits and Devils: Yet of all these, not one that came and asked
his mercy and help, went away without his errand: If mercy he asked, mercy he
found, were his sin never so great, were his Disease never so grievous. Nay, he
offered and gave his mercy to many that never asked it, (being moved only with
the Bowels of his own compassion, and the sight of their misery) as to the
woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. Luke 7. 13.
the widow of Naim, and to the sick man that lay at the Pool of Bethesda, who
had been 38 years sick. If he thus willingly gave his mercy to them that did
not ask it, and was found of them (as the Isa. 65. 1. Romans 10. 20
Prophet says) that sought him not; will he deny mercy unto thee, who do so
earnestly pray for it with Tears; and do like the poor Publican, so heartily
knock for it, with penitent fists upon a bruised and broken heart? Especially
when thou prayest to thy Father, in the name and mediation of Christ, for whose
sake he has promised to grant whatsoever we shall ask of him; Joh. 14. 14.
as sure as God is true, he will not. Though Nineve's sins had provoked the
Lord to send out his sentence against them, yet upon their repentance he
recalled it again and spared the City: how much more if thou likewise
repentest, will he spare thee, seeing his sentence is not yet gone forth
against thee? Novit Dominus mutare sententiam si tu noveris ^mendare vitam.
Aug. in Psalm. 50.
if he deferred the judgments all Ahab's days, for the external show only which
he made of humiliation; how much more will he clean turn away his vengeance, if
thou will unfeignedly repent of thy sin, and return unto him for grace and
mercy?

He offered his mercy unto Cain (who murdered his innocent Brother.) Genesis 4. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? As if he should have said, if
thou will leave thy envy and malice, and offer unto me from a faithful and
contrite heart, both thou and thine Oblation also shall be acceptable unto me.
And to Judas (that so treacherously betrayed him) in calling him Mat. 26. 50.
friend, a sweet appellation of love: and when Judas offered, he willingly
consented with that mouth (wherein never was found 1 Pet. 2. 22.
guile) to kiss those dissembling lips, under which lurked the Psalm. 140. 3. 1
King. 20. 32, 33. Verse 34.
poison of Asps. Had Judas apprehended this word friend out of the mouth of
Christ, as Benhadad did the word Brother from the mouth of Ahab, doubtless
Judas should have found the God of Israel more merciful than Benhadad found the
King of Israel. But God was ^udam non tam ^^^lus quam desperatio fecit penitus
interire. Aug. li. de util. poenit.
more displeased with Cain for despairing of his mercy, than for murdering his
Brother, and with S^^leration omnibus O Juda extitisti quem non poen^tentia
duxit ad Dominum, sed desperatio traxit ad laqueum. Leo.
Judas for hanging himself, than for betraying his Master in that they would
make the sins of mortal men greater than ^he Infinite mercy of the eternal God;
or as if they could be more sinful than God was merciful. Whereas the least
drop of Christ's Blood is of more merit to procure God's mercy for thy
salvation, than all the sins (that thou have committed) can be of force to
provoke his wrath to thy damnation.

If Satan shall suggest, Satan's fourth assault.
that all this is true of God's mercy, but that it does not belong unto thee,
because thy sins are greater than other men's, as being sins of knowledge, and
of many years continuance, and such as whereby others have been undone: and all
(for the most part) ^ommitted wilfully and presumptuously against God and thy
Conscience. And therefore though he will be merciful unto others, yet he will
not be merciful unto thee; Meditate.

1. The encounter.
That many (who are now in Heaven most blessed and glorious Saints) committed
in the same kind (when they lived on earth) as great and greater sins then ever
thou have committed, and continued (before they repented) in those sins as long
as ever thou have done. As therefore all their sins and the continuance in
them, could not hinder God's mercy upon their repentance, from forgiving their
sins, and receiving them into favor; no more shall thy sins and continuance
therein hinder him from being merciful unto thee, if thou do repent as they
did: 1 Timothy 1. 16.
yea, upon thy Repentance, every one of their examples is a pledge that he will
do the same unto thee that he did unto them. For as the least sin in God's
Justice without repentance is damnable; so the greatest sin upon repentance is
in his mercy pardonable. Thy greatest and inveteratest sins are but the sins of
a man, but the least of his Mercies is the mercy of God. Because thou know
thine own sins, thou doubtest whether they shall be pardoned. Mark how this
doubtful case is resolved by Good himself. Many in Isaiah's days, thought (as
thou do) that they had continued so long in sin, that it was too late for
them now to seek to return unto God for Grace and Mercy. But God answers
them, Seek ye the Lord whilst he may be found: Isa. 55. 6, 7, 8, 9.
call ye upon him whilst he is near. As if he had said, whilst life lasts,
and my Word is preached, I am near to be found of all that seek me, and pray
unto me. The People reply: But we (O Lord) are grievous sinners, and therefore
dare not presume to call upon thy Name, or to come near thine Holiness To this
the Lord answers, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his
thoughts: and let him return unto me, and I will have mercy upon him, and to
his God, and I will pardon him abundantly. But we would think (say the people)
that if our sins were but ordinary sins, this promise of Mercy might belong
unto us: But because our sins are so great, and of such long continuance,
therefore we fear lest when we appear before God, he will reject us. To this
God answers again: My thoughts (of mercy) are not your thoughts, neither are
your ways (of pardoning) my ways: for as the heavens are higher than the earth,
so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. If
therefore every sinner in the world were a world of such sinners as thou art;
do thou but yet (what God bids thee) repent and believe, and the Act. 20. 28. 1 John 1. 7.
Blood of Jesus Christ, being the Blood of God, will cleanse both thee, and
them from all your sins.

2. That as God did foresee all the sins which the world should commit, and yet
all those could not hinder him from loving the world, Joh. 3. 16.
so that he gave his only begotten Son to death, to save as many of the world,
as would believe and repent: much less shall thy sins (being the sins of the
least member of the world) be able to hinder God from loving thy soul, and
forgiving thy sins, if thou do repent and believe.

3. Romans 5. 8, 9.
That if he loved thee so dearly (when thou wast his Enemy) that he paid for
thee so dear a price as the spilling of his heart blood; how can he now but be
gracious unto thee, when to save thee will cost him but the casting of a
gracious look upon thee? Look nor thou therefore to the greatness of thy sins,
but to the infiniteness of his mercy, which is so surpassing great, that if
thou put all thine own grievous sins together, and addest unto those the
sins of Cain and Judas, and put unto them all the sins of all the
Reprobates in the World (doubtless it would be a huge heap) yet compare this
huge heap with the infinite mercy of God, and there will be no more comparison
betwixt them, than betwixt the least Molehill and the greatest Mountain in a
Country. The cry of the grievous est sins that ever we read of, could never
reach up higher than unto Heaven, as the cry of the sins of Sodom: Genesis 19. 13.
Psalm. 108. 4.
but the mercy of God (says David) reaches up higher than the Heavens, and so
overtoppeth all our sins. And if his Mercy be greater than all his works, Psalm.
145. 9.
it must needs be greater that all thy sins. And so long as his mercy is
greater than the sins of the whole world, do thou but repent, there is do doubt
of pardon.

If Satan's fifth assault.
^^tan shall object, that thou have many times vowed to repent, and have made a
show of repentance for the time, and yet did fall to the same sins again and
again; and that all thy repentance was but feigned, and a mocking of God. And
that seeing thou have so often broken thy vow, therefore God has withdrawn his
mercy, and has changed his love, etc. medi^ate,

1. The encounter.
. That though this were true (which indeed is heinous) yet it is no sufficient
cause why thou should despair; seeing that this is the common case of all the
Children of God in this life, who vow so often to forbear some sin I remember
(says Luther that Staupitius was wont to tell me, Ego plus quam millies Deo
vovi, etc. I have more than a thousand times vowed unto God, that I would mend
my life, but I could never perform my vow. Henceforth I will make no such vow,
because I verily know that I cannot keep it. Unless therefore God will be
merciful unto me for Christ his sake, and grant me a blessed departure out of
this wretched life all my vows and good works will stand me in no stead. This
is the state of the dearest Children of God in this life. Read Luther on Galat.
5.
till perceiving their weakness nor able to perform it, they vow that they will
vow no more. Their Vows show the desires of their spiritual Man; their
breaking, the weakness of their corrupt flesh. And our often slips into the same
sins, Christ foresaw, when he taught us to pray daily; Our Father, forgive us
our trespasses. And why does Christ enjoin thee (who art but a sinful man) to
forgive thy brother seven times in a day, Luke. 17. 3, 4.
if he shall return seven times in a day, and say, it repents me? But to
assure thee that he (being the God of mercy and goodness it self) will forgive
unto thee thy seventy times sevenfold sins a day which thou have committed
against him, Mat. 18. 21. 22.
if thou return unto him by tru^ Repentance. Number. 21. 9. Post lachrymas
gemitusque graves clementia Christi confestim est, occulos ante locanda tuos.
The Israelites were cured by looking (though with weak eyes) on the Brazen
Serpent, as often as they were stung by the fiery Serpent in the Wilderness: to
assure thee that upon thy tears of repentance, thou shall be recovered by ^aith
in Christ as often as thou are wounded to death by sin.

2. That thy salvation is grounded, not upon the constancy of thine obedience,
but upon the firmness of God's Covenant. Though thou variest with God, and the
Covenant be broken on thy behalf, yet it is firm on God's part; and therefore
all is safe enough if thou will return; for there is no Jam. 1. 17.
variableness with him, neither shadow of change. He has locked up thy
salvation, and made it sure in his own Rom, 8. 28. Romans 9. 11.
unchangeable purpose; and has delivered to thy keeping the keys, which are By
these Keys Peter opened Heaven to himself, and afterward with the rest of the
Apostles, unto others, Luke 22. 62. Luke 24. 47. etc.
Faith and repentance; and whilst thou have them, thou may persuade thy self
that thy salvation is su^e and safe; Joh 20. 21.
For whom God Joh. 13. 1.
loves, he loves to the end, and never Romans 11. 29.
repents of bestowing his love on them who repent and believe.

Lastly, Romans 8. 30. Satan's sixth assault.
If Satan shall persuade thee that thou have been doubting a long time, and
that it is best for thee now to despair, seeing thy sins increase, and thy
judgment draws near; meditate,

1. That no sin (though never so great) should be a cause to move any Christian
to despair, so long as God's mercy by so many millions of degrees is greater:
and that every penitent and believing Sinner has the pardon of all his sins
confirmed by the Word and Oath of God; Heb. 6. 18.
two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie. His Word
is, that at what time soever a sinner, whosoever, does repent of his sin,
whatsoever, (for both time, and sins, and sinners are indefinite) from the
bottom of his heart, Ezekiel. 18. 22.
God will blot forth all his sins out of his remembrance, that they shall be
mentioned unto him no more. Dr. King of Lond^n, his Lectures on Jonah.
If we will not take his word (which God forbid we should doubt of) he has
given us his Oath: As I live, I desire not the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.
11.
but that the wicked turn from his way and live. As if he had said, will ye not
believe my Word? I swear by my life, that I delight not to damn any sinner for
his sins, but rather to save him upon his conversion and repentance. O foelices
nos quorum causa jurat Deus! O miserrimos nos si non Deo quidem juranti
credimus? Tertul.
The meditation hereof moved Tertullian to exclaim: O how happy are we, when
God swears that he wills not our damnation! O what miserable wretches are we,
if we will not believe God when he swears this truth unto us! Listen, O
drooping Spirit, whose soul is assailed with ways of faithless despair; how
happy were it to see many like thee, and Hezekiah? Isa. 38. 14.
(who mourn like Doves for the sense of sin, and chatter like Cranes and
Swallows for the fear of God's anger) rather than to behold many who die like
Beasts without any feeling of their own estate, or any fear of God's wrath, or
Tribunal Seat, before which they are to appear? Comfort thy self, O languishing
soul; for if this earth has any for whom Christ spilt his blood on the Cross,
thou assuredly art one Cheer up therefore thy self in the all-sufficient
atonement of the blood of the Lamb, which speaks better things than that of
Abel. Heb. 12. 24.
And pray for those, who never yet obtained the grace to have such a sense and
detestation of sin. Thou art one indeed, for whom Christ died, and from whom a
wounded spirit (judging rather according to his feeling than his faith) has
wrung that doleful voice of Christ, Mat. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And doubt not but ere long thou
shall as truly 2 Timothy 2. 11.
reign with him as now thou do suffer with him, for 2 Cor. 1. 20.
Yea and Rev. 3. 14.
Amen has spoken it. No sin bars a man from salvation, but only Incredulity
and Impenitency: Heb. 6. 6.
nothing makes the sin against the Holy Ghost unpardonable, but want of
repentance. Thy unfeigned desire to repent, is as acceptable unto God, as the
perfectest repentance that thou could wish to p^r^orm unto him.

Meditate upon these Evangelical comforts, and thou shall see that in the very
agon^ of death God will so assist thee with his spirit, that when Satan looks
for the greatest victory, he shall receive the foulest foil; yea, when thy
eye-strings are broken, that thou can not see the light, Jesus Christ will
appear unto thee to comfort thy Soul, and his Holy Angels will carry thee into
his Heavenly Kingdom. Luke 16. 22.
Then shall thy Friends behold thee, like Judge. 13. 1.
Manoah's Angel, doing wonders indeed, when they shall see a frail man in his
greatest weakness (by the mere assistance of God's Spirit) overcoming the
strength of sin, the bitterness of death, and all the power of Satan; and in
the fire of Faith, and perfume of Prayer, ascend up with Angels victoriously
into Heaven.

An Admonition to them who come to visit the sick.
THey who come to visit the sick, must have a special care not to stand dumb
and staring in the sick person's face to disquiet him; nor yet to speak idly,
and to ask unprofitable questions, as most do.

If they see therefore that the sick party is like to die, let them not
dissemble; but lovingly and discreetly admonish him of his weakness, and to
prepare for eternal life. One hour well spent, when a man's life is almost
out-spent, may gain a man the assurance of eternal life. Sooth him not with the
vain hope of this life, lest thou betray his Soul to eternal death. Admonish
him plainly of his estate, and ask him briefly these or the like Questions.

Questions to be asked of a sick Man, that is like to die.
Do thou believe that Almighty God, the Trinity of Persons in Unity of
Essence, has by his Power made Heaven and Earth, and all things therein? and
that he does still by his Divine Providence govern the same? So that nothing
comes to pass in the world, nor to thy self, but what his divine hand and
counsel had determined before to be done.

2. Do thou confess that thou have transgressed and broken the holy
Commandments of Almighty God, in thought, word, and deed? and have deserved for
breaking his holy Laws, the Curse of God, which contains all the miseries of
this life, and everlasting torments in Hell fire, when this life is ended, if
so be that God should deal with thee according to thy deserts.

3. Art thou not sorry in thy heart, that thou have so broken his Laws, and
neglected his Service and Worship, and so much followed the world, and thine
own vain pleasures? And would thou not lead a holier life, if thou were to
begin again?

4. Do thou not from thy heart desire to be reconciled unto God in Jesus
Christ his blessed Son, thy Mediator, who is Romans 8. 54.
at the right hand of God in heaven, Heb 9. ^4.
now appearing for thee in the sight of God, and making request unto him for
thy Soul?

5. Do thou renounce all confidence in all other Mediators, Heb. 9. 11.
or Intercessors, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Saints or Angels, Heb. 7. 25.
believing that Jesus Christ the only Mediator of the New Testament, is able
perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them? And will thou with David say unto Christ, Psalm. 73. 25.
whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.

6. Do thou confidently believe and hope to be saved by the only merits of
that bloody death and passion, which thy Savior Jesus Christ has suffered for
thee? not putting any hope of Salvation in thine own Merits, nor in any other
means or Creatures, being assuredly persuaded, Act. 4. 1.
that there is no salvation in any other; Act, 10. 43.
and that there is none other name under Heaven, whereby thou must be saved.

7. Do thou heartily forgive all wrongs and offenses done or offered unto
thee, by any manner of Person whatsoever? And do thou as willingly (from thy
heart) ask forgiveness of them whom thou have grievously wronged in word or
deed? And do thou cast out of thy heart all malice and hatred, which thou
have born to any body; that thou may appear before the Face o^ Christ (the
Prince of Peace) in perfect love and charity. Isa. 9. 6. Heb. 12. 14.


8. Does thy Conscience tell thee of any thing, which thou have wrongfully
taken, and do still withhold, from any widow or fatherless Children, or from
any other persons whomsoever? Be assured, that unless thou shall restore, like
Zaccheus, those goods and lands (if thou be'st able) thou can not truly
repent: and without true Repentance thou can not be saved, nor look Christ in
the face when thou shall appear before his Judgment Seat.

9. Do thou firmly believe that thy body shall be raised up out of the Grave,
at the sound of the last Trumpet? and that thy Body and Soul shall be united
together again in the Resurrection Day, to appear before the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thence to go with him into the Kingdom of Heaven, to live in everlasting
bliss and glory?

If the sick party shall answer to all these questions like a faithful
Christian, then let all who are present, join together and pray for him, in
these, or the like words.

A Prayer to be said for the sick by them who visit him.
O Merciful Father, who art the Lord, and giver of life, and to whom belong the
issues of Death; we thy Children here assembled, do acknowledge, that (in
respect of our manifold sins) we are not worthy to ask any blessing for our
selves at thy hands, much less to become suitors unto thy Majesty in the behalf
of others; yet because thou have commanded us to pray one for another, James 5.
especially for the sick and have promised that the Prayers of the righteous
shall avail much with thee: in obedience therefore to thy Commandment, and
confidence of thy gracious Promise, we are bold to become humble Suitors to thy
Divine Majesty in the behalf of this our dear Brother (or Sister) whom thou
have have visited with the Chastisement of thine own fatherly hand. We could
gladly wish the Restitution of his health and a longer continuance of his life
and Christian ^ellowship amongst us: but forasmuch as it ^ppeareth (as far as
we can discern) that ^hou have appointed by this visitation, to ^^ll for him
out of this mortal life; we sub^it our wills to thy blessed will, and hum^ly
entreat for Jesus Christ his sake, and ^e merits of his bitter death and
passion which he has suffered for him) that ^ou would pardon and forgive
unto ^im all his sins: as well that wherein he ^as conceived and born, as also
all the offen^es and transgressions, which ever since, to ^his day and hour, he
has committed in ^hought, word, and deed, against thy Divine ^ajesty. Cast
them behind thy back, re^ive them as far from thy presence, Psalm. 103. 12.
as the East ^ from the West. Blot them out of thy re^embrance; lay them not to
his charge; ^ash them away with the Blood of Christ, that they may no more be
seen: and deli^er him from all the Judgments which are ^ue unto him for his
sins, that they may ^ever trouble his conscience, nor rise in ^udgment against
his Soul; and impute un^o him the righteousness of Jesus Christ, whereby he may
appear righteous in thy ^^ght. And in his extremity at this time we ^eseech the
look down from heaven upon him with those eyes of grace and com^assion
wherewith thou art wont to look upon thy children in their affliction and
misery. Pity thy wounded Servant, like ^he good Samaritan: for here is a sick
soul that needs the help of such a heaven^^ Physician. O Lord increase his
Faith, that he may believe that Christ died for him, and that his blood
cleans^th him from all his sins: and either assuage his pain, or else increase
his patience, to endure thy blessed will and pleasure. And good Lord, lay no
more upon him than thou shall enable him to bear. Heave him up unto thy self
with those sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. Make him now to feel
what is the hope of his Calling, and what is the exceeding greatness of thy
Mercy and Power toward them that believe in thee. And in his weakness, O Lord,
show thou thy strength* Defend him against the suggestions and temptations of
Satan; who (as he has all his life time) will now in his weakness especially
seek to assail him and to devour him. O save his Soul, and reprove Satan, and
command thy holy Angels to be about him, to aid him, and to chase away all evil
and malignant Spirits far from him. Make him more and more to loath this world,
and to desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. And when that good hour and
time shall come (wherein thou have determined to call for him out of this
present life) give him grace peacefully and joyfully to yield up his soul into
thy merciful hands, and do thou receive her into thy mercy, and let thy blessed
Angels carry her into thy kingdom. Make his last hour his best hour, his last
words his best words, and his last thoughts his best thoughts. And when the
sight of his eyes is gone, and his tongue shall fail to do its office, grant, O
Lord* that his Soul may (with Stephen) behold Jesus Christ in Heaven ready to
receive him: Romans 8. 26.
and that thy Spirit within him may make request for him with sighs which
cannot be expressed. Teach us in him to read and see our own end and mortality:
and therefore to be careful to prepare our selves for our last ends, and put
our selves in a readiness against the time that thou shall call for us in the
like manner. Thus, Lord, we recommend this our dear Brother (or Sister) thy
sick servant unto thy eternal Grace and Mercy, in that Prayer which Christ our
Savior has taught us, saying,

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy love, O heavenly Father, thy comfort and
consolation, O holy Spirit, be with us all, and especially with this thy sick
servant, to the end, and in the end. Amen.

Let them read often unto the sick some special Chapters of the holy Scripture:
as,

The three first Chapters of the Book of Job.

The 14. and 19. Chapters of Job.

The 34. Chapter of Deuteronomy.

The two last Chapters of Joshua*

The 17. Chapter of the first of Kings.

The 2, 4, and 12. Chapters of the Second of Kings.

The 38, 40, and 65. Chapters of Isaiah.

The History of the Passion of Christ.

The 8. Chapter of the Romans.

The 15. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

The fourth of the first Epistle to the Thessalonians.

The fifth Chapter of the second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.

The first and last Chapters of St. James.

The 11 and 12 to the Hebrews.

The first Epistle of Peter.

The three first and the three last Chapters of the Revelations, or some of
these.

And so exhorting the sick party to wait upon God by faith and patience, till
he send for him; and praying the Lord to send them a joyful meeting in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and a blessed Resurrection at the last day; they may depart
at their pleasure in the Peace of God.

Consolations against impatience in sickness.
IF in thy sickness by extremity of pain, thou be driven to impatience,
meditate,

1. That thy sins have deserved the pains of hell; therefore thou may with
greater patience endure these fatherly Corrections.

2. That these are the scourges of thy heavenly Father, and the rod is in his
hand. If thou did suffer with reverence being a child, Heb. 12. 9.
the correction of thy earthly Parents, how much rather should thou now
subject thy self (being the Child of God) to ^he chastis^ment of thy heavenly
Father, seeing it is for thine eternal good?

3. That Vir dolorum. (...). 53. 3.
Christ suffered in his soul and body far grievo ser pains for thee, therefore
thou must more willingly suffer his blessed pleasure for thine own good.
Therefore says Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 21
Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that ye should follow hi^
steps. And, Heb. 12. 1, 2.
Let us (says S. Pau^, run with joy the race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, etc.

4. That these afflictions which now you suffer, are none other, but such as 1
Pet. 5 9. S. (...).
are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world, as witnesses Peter:
Yea, Job's afflictions were far more grievous. There is not one of the Saints
which now are at rest in heavenly joys, but endured as much as you do, before
they went thither: yea, ^^ny of them willingly suffered all the torments that
Tyrants could inflict upon them, that they might come to those heavenly (...)
whereunto you are now called. And you have a promise, that 1 Pet 5. 10.
the God of a^l grace, after that you have suffered a while, will make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you. And that 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God of his fidelity, will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it.

5. That God has determined the time when thy affliction shall end, as well as
the time when it began, 38 years were appointed the sick man at Joh. 5. 5.
Be^hesda's Pool Twelve Years to the Woman with the Mat. 9. 20.
bloody Issue^ Three months to Exodus 2. 2.
Moses. Ten days tribulation to the Rev. 2. 10.
Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Three days plague to 2 Samuel 24 13.
David. Yea, the number of the godly man's tears are registered in Psalm. 56. 8.
God's book, and the quantity kept in his bottle,

The time of our trouble (says Christ) is but a Modicum and (...) Joh. 16. 16.
Modicum. God's Anger lasts but a Psalm ^^.
moment (says David.) A little (...).
season, (says the Lord) and therefore calls all the time of our pain, but the
J^h 16. 21,
hour of sorrow. Da^id, for the swiftness thereof, compares our present trouble
to a Psalm. 11^. 7.
Book; and (...).
A^^anasius to a Shower. Compare the longest misery that Man endures in this
(...), to the eternity of heavenly joys, and they will appear to be nothing.
And as the sight of a Son safe born, Joh. 16. 21.
makes the M^ther forget all her former deadly pain: so the sight of Christ in
Heaven, who was born for thee, will make all these pangs of death to be quite
forgotten, as if they had never been: Acts 7.
like Stephen, who as soon as he saw Christ, forgot his own wounds, with the
horror of the grave, and terror of the stones; and sweetly yielded his soul
into the hands of his Savior. Forget thine own pain, think of Christ's wounds,
Rev. 2. 10.
Be faithful unto the death, and he will give thee the Crown of eternal life.

6. That you are now called to Repetitions in Christ's School; to see how much
Faith, Patience, and Godliness you have learned all this while: and whether you
can, like Job, Job 2. 10.
receive at the hand of God some evil, as well as you have hitherto received a
great deal of good? As therefore you have always prayed, Thy will be done; so
be not now offended at this which is done by his holy will.

7. That Romans 9. 28, 38 39 Morbus non (...) lis^ ad nu^^ (...), m^l^is (...)
Basil in ^^xam.
all things shall work together for the best to them that love God: Insomuch
that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, etc.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our
Lord. Assure your self that every pang is a prevention of the pains of hell:
every res^ite an earnest of Heavens rest, Morbus est ^tilis (...) institu^io,
qu^e (...) care. (...).
and how many stripes do you esteem heaven worth? As your life has been a
comfort to others; so give your friends a Christian example to die, and deceive
the Devil as Job did. It is but the ^^oss of Christ sent before to crucify the
love of the World in thee; that thou m^^st go eternally to live with Christ who
was crucified for thee. As thou art therefore a true Christian, take up (like
Simon of Cyr^n^) with both thy arms his holy Cross, carry it after him, (...)
him; thy pains will shortly pass, thy joys shall never pass away.

Consolations against the fear of Death.
IF in the time of thy sickness, thou find thy self fearful to die, meditate,

1. That it argues a dastardly mind to fear that which is nor: For in the
Church of Christ there is no death, Isa. 25. 7, 8. And whosoever lives and
believes in Christ shall never die. Job 11. 26. Let them fear death, who live
without Christ. Christians die not: but when they please God, they are like
(...) translated unto God. Genesis 5. 24.
Their pains are but Elijah's fiery chariot to carry them up to heaven: 2 King.
2^ 11, 12.
or like Lazar^^'s sores, Luk 16. 23
sending them to Abraham's Bosom. In a word, if thou be one of them that like
Lazarus, love Jesus, Joh. 11. 4.
thy sickness is not unto the death, but for the glory of God, who of his love
changes thy living death to an everlasting life And if man's heathen men, as
Socrat^s C^^tiu^, Seneca, etc. died willing^^ (when they might have lived) in
h^pe of the immortality of the soul: will thou, being trai^^d so long in
Ch^^st's Sch^ol, (and now c^ll^d to the Marriage Supper of the blessed L^^h,
Rev. 19 7.) be one of those Guests th^^ refuse to go to that joyful banquet?
God forbid.

2 Remember that thy abode here is but the second degree of thy life: for after
thou had first lived nine Months in thy Mothers Womb, thou wast of necessity
driven thence to live here in a second degree of life. And when that number of
months which God has determined for this life, are expired; thou must likewise
leave this, Job 14. 5.
and pass to a third degree in the other world, which never ends. Which to them
that live and die in the Lord, surpasses as far this kind of life, as this
does that which one lives in his Mothers Womb. To this last and excellentest
degree of life, through this door passed Christ himself, and all his Saints
that were before thee: and so shall all the rest after them and thee. Why
should thou fear that which is common to all God's Elect? Why should that be
uncouth to thee, which was so welcome to all them? Fear not death, for as it is
the Exodus of a bad, Mors praesentis vit^e exitus and introitus melioris. Ber.
in Epist. ad Romans
so it is the Genesis of a better World: the end of a temporal, but the
beginning of an eternal life.

3. Consider that there are but three things that can make death so fearful
unto thee: 1. The loss thou have thereby: 2. The pain that is therein: 3. The
terrible effects which follow after. All these are but false ^res, and
causeless fears. For the first, if thou leavest here uncertain goods which
Thieves may rob, thou shall find in heaven a true Treasure, Mat. 6. 19, 20.
that can never be taken away: these were but lent thee as a Steward upon
accounts; those shall be given thee as thy reward for ever. If thou leaves^ a
lo^ing Wise, thou shall be married to Christ which is more lovely. If thou
leavest Children and Friends, thou shall there find all thy religious Ancestors
and Children departed: yea, Christ, and all his blessed Saints and Angels. and
as many of thy Children as be God's Children, shall thither follow after thee.
Thou leavest an earthly p^ssession, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
and a house of clay; John 14. 2.
and thou shall enjoy an heavenly inheritance and mansion of glory: which is
purchased, prepared, and reserved for thee. What have thou lost? Nay, is not
death unto thee gain? Go home, go (...), and we will follow after thee.

Secondly, For the pain in death; the fear of death more pains many than the
very (...).
pa^gs of death; for many a Christian dies without any great pangs or pains.
^itch the (...) of thy Hope on the firm ground of the Wo^d of God, who has
promised 2 Cor. 12. 9.
in thy weakness to perfect his strength, and 1 Cor. 10. 13.
not to suffer thee to be tempted above that thou art able to bear. And Christ
will shortly turn all thy temporal pains to his eternal joys.

Lastly, As for the terrible effects which follow after death, they belong not
unto thee being a member of Christ; for Christ by his death has taken away the
sting of death to the faithful; so that now there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1.
And Christ has protested, that he that believes in him, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, Joh. 5. 24.
but ha^^ passed from death unto life. Hereupon the holy Spirit from Heaven
says. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: and that from thenceforth
they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. In respect
therefore of the faithful, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
death is swallowed up in victory: and his sting, which is sin, and the
punishment thereof, is taken away by Christ. Hence death is called in respect
of our bodies, a 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. Isai. 26. Rev. 14.
sleep and rest: In respect of our Souls, a going to our heavenly Father, a
(...). Luke 2. 29.
departing in peace, a removing from this body to go to the Lord; a 2 Cor. 5.
Phil. 1. 23. (...). Mors port^ gloriae. Gr^g. Janua vitae. Bernard.
dissolving of soul and body to be with Christ. What shall I say? Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. These pains are but thy
throes and travail to bring forth eternal life. And who would not pass through
Hell to go to Paradise? much more through death? There is nothing after death
that thou need fea^; not thy sins^ because Christ has paid thy ransom; not
the Judge, for h^ is thy loving brother; not the grave, (...) i^ is the Lord's
bed; not he, for thy Redeem^r keeps the keys; not the Devil, for God's holy
Angels pitch their Tents about thee, and will not leave thee, till they bring
thee to Heaven. Thou wast never (...) et^^nal life: glorify therefore. ^^ist
by a blessed ^eath. Say cheerfully, Come Lord Jesus, (...) thy Servant comes
unto thee: I am willing, Lord help my weakness.

Seven sanctified Thoughts, and mournful Sighs of a sick Man, ready to die
NOW forasmuch as God of his infinite mercy does so temper ou^ pain and
sickness, that we are not always oppressed with extremity, but gives us in the
midst of our extremities some ^espite to ease and refresh our selves, thou m^st
have an esp^cial ca^e (consid^ring how short a (...) thou have, either for ever
to lose, or to obtain Heaven) to make use of every breathing time which God
does afford the: and during that (...) time of ease, (...) roweth with all his
force to arrive at the wished Port; and that the Traveller never rests till
he come to his Journeys end; we fear to descry our Port; and therefore would
put back our Bark to be longer tossed in this continual tempest? We weep to see
our jorneys end; and therefore desire our journey to be lengthened, that we
might be more tired with a foul and cumbersome way.

The Spiritual Sigh thereupon.
O Lord this life is but a troublesome pilgrimage; Genesis 17. 9.
few in days, but full in evils: and I am weary of it, by reason of my sins.
Let me therefore (O Lord) entreat thy Majesty, in this my bed of sickness, ^
Kin. 19. 4.
as Elias did under the Juniper tree in his affliction: It is now enough, O
Lord, that I have lived so long in this vale of misery; take my soul into thy
merciful hands, for I am no better than my Fathers.

The Second Thought.
THink with what a Romans 7. 24.
body of sin thou art laden, what great civil wars are contained in a Iam. 4.
1.
little world; the Gal. 5. 17.
flesh fighting against the Spirit, Passion against Reason, Earth against
Heaven; and the World within thee bending it self for the World without thee;
and that but (...) only means remains to end this conflict^ death, which (in
God's appointed time) will separate thy spirit from thy flesh; the pure and
regenerate part of thy Soul, from that part which is impure and unregenerated.

The spiritual Sigh upon the second Thought.
OWretched man that I am, Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? O my sweet Savior Jesus
Christ, Rev. 5. 9.
thou have redeemed me with thy precious blood. Psalm. 116 8.
And be cause thou have delivered my soul from sin, min^ eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling; Psalm. 145.
I do here from the very bottom of my heart, ascribe the whole praise and glory
of my salvation, to thy only grace and mercy, saying (with the holy Apostle) 1
Cor. 15. 57.
Thanks be unto God, which has given me the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Third Thought.
THink how it behooves thee to be assured that thy soul is Christ's; for death
has taken sufficient gages to assure himself of thy bod^, in that all thy
senses be all ready to die, save only the sense of pain: but since the beginning
of thy being began with p^in; marvel the less it thy end conclude with dolours.
But if these temporal dolours (which only afflict the body) be so painful: O
Lord, Isa. 33. 14.
who can endure the devouring fire? who can abide the everlasting burning?

The spiritual Sigh upon the third Thought.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God who art the only Physician that
can ease my body from pain, and restore my soul to life eternal: put thy
(...), Cross and Death, betwixt my (...) and thy Judgments: and let the merits
of thy obedience stand betwixt thy Father's justice and my disobedience: and
from these bodily pains receive my Soul i^to thine everlasting peace: for I cry
unto thee with Stephen, Acts 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

The Fourth Thought.
THink that the worst that Death can do, is but to send thy Soul sooner than
thy flesh would be willing, to Christ and his heavenly Joys: remember that that
Christ is thy best hope. ^he worst therefore of death, is rather a help than a
harm*

The spiritual Sigh upon the Fourth Thought.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of all them that put their trust in thee,
f^rsake ^or him that in misery fl^^^h unto thy grace^ f^^ succor and mercy; Oh
sound that sweet Voice in the ears of my Soul, which thou spakest unto the
penitent thief on the cross, Luke 23. 42.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. For I, O Lord, do (with the
Apostle) from my Soul speak unto thee, ^hil. 1. 23.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

The Fifth Thought.
Think, (if thou fear to die) That in Mount S^on there is no Death, (...).
25. 7, 8.
for ^e that believes in Christ, shall never die. John 11. 25.
And if thou desire to live, without (...), the life eternal (whereunto this
(...) their miseries) live with Christ in joys* and thither shall all the
godly, which survive, be gathered out of their troubles, to enjoy with him
eternal rest.

The Spiritual Sigh on the Fifth Thought.
O Lord, thou see the malice of Satan, who (not contenting himself, 1 Pet. 5.
8.
like a roaring Lion all the days and nights of our life, to seek our
destruction) shows himself busiest, when thy Children are weakest, and nearest
to their end: O Lord reprove him, and preserve my Soul. He seeks to terrify me
with death, which my sins have deserved: but let thy Holy Spirit comfort my
Soul with the assurance of eternal life, which thy Blood has purchased.
Assuage my pain, increase my patience, and (if it be thy blessed will) end my
troubles: for my Soul beseeches thee with old blessed Simeon, Luke 2. 29.
Lord, now let me thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word.

The Sixth Thought.
THink with thy self what a blessing God has bestowed upon thee above many
millions in the world: that whereas they are either Pagans, who worship not the
true God; or Idolaters, who worship the true God falsely: thou have lived in a
true Christian Church, and have grace to die in the true Christian Faith, and
to be buried in the Sepulcher of God's Servants; Acts 16. 6, 7
who all wait for the hope of Israel, and raising of their Bodies in the
resurrection of the Just. Luke 1^. 1^.


The spiritual Sigh upon the sixth Thought.
O Lord Jesus Christ, who art Joh. 11. 25, 26.
the Resurrection, and the life, in whom whosoever believes, shall live, though
he were dead: I believe that whosover lives and believes in thee, shall never
die. Verse 24.
I know that I shall rise again in the Resurrection of the last day: Job. 19.
25, 26.
for I am sure, that thou my Redeemer live. And though that after my death
worms destroy this body; yet I shall see thee, my Lord, and my God, in this
flesh.

Grant therefore, O Christ, for thy bitter death and passions sake, that at
that day I may be one of them to whom thou will pronounce that joyful sentence:
Mat. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the
foundation of the world.

The Seventh Thought.
THink with thy self how Christ endured for thee a Gal. 3. 13.
cursed death, and the wrath of God, which was due unto thy sins; and what
terrible pains and cruel torments the Apostles and Martyrs have voluntarily
suffered for the Defense of Christ's Faith, when they might have lived by
dissembling or denying him: how much more wil^ing should thou be to depart
in the ^aith of Christ, having (...) pains to torment thee, and ^ere (...) to
comfort thee?

The spiritual sigh upon the seventh Thought.
O Lord, my sins have deserved the pains of Hell, and eternal death; much more
these fatherly corrections wherewith thou do afflict me: But, O Joh. 1. 29.
blessed Lamb of God, which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon
me, and Rev. 1. 5.
wash away all my filthy sins with thy most precious blood, and Luke 23. 4^.
receive my soul into thy heavenly Kingdom; for Psalm. 31. 5.
into thy hands, O Father, I commend my spirit, and thou have redeemed me, O
Lord, thou God of truth.

The sick Person ought now to send for some godly and religious Pastor.
IN any wise remember (if conveniently it may be) to send for some godly and
religious Pastor: not only to pray for thee at thy death (for God in such a
ca^e has promised to hear the prayers of the righteous Genesis 20. 7. Jer. 18.
^0. and 15. 1. 1 Samuel 12. 19, 23.
Prophets, and Jam. 5. 14, 15, 16.
Elders of the Church) but also upon thy confession and unfeigned Repentance to
absolve thee of thy sins. For as Christ has given him a calling to Mark 1. 4.
Acts 19. 4.
baptize thee unto repentance for the remission of thy sins: so has he
likewise given him a calling, and 1 Cor. 5. 4.
power, and 2 Cor. 10 8
authority (upon repentance) to absolve thee from the sins. Mat. 16. 19.
I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall
bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And again, Mat. 18. 18.
Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven:
and whatsoever ye l^ose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And again, Receive
ye the holy Ghost: whose soevever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them,
Joh. 20. 2^. 23.
and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. This Doctrine was as
ancient in the Church of God as Job, for Elihu tells him, Job 33. 19, 22, 23,
24.
That when God strikes a man with mal^dy on his bed, so that his soul draws
near the grace, and his life to the burie^^: if there be any messenger with
him, or an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto man his
righteousness, then will ^e have mercy upon him, etc. and answerable hereunto
(says St. James) James 5. 15.
if the sick have committed sins (upon his repentance, and the Prayers of the
Elders) they shall be forgiven him. Rev. 11. 6.
These have power to shut Heaven, and to 1 Cor ^5. 5.
deliver (the scandalous impenitent sinner) to Satan: For, 2 Cor. 10. 4, etc.
the weapons of their warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to cast
down, etc. and to have vengeance in readiness against all disobedience. They
have the Mat. 16. 19 Ministri p^cca^a ^emittunt ^on (...), sed (...).
key of loosing, therefore the power of absolving.

The Bishops and Pastors of the Church, do not forgive sin by any 1 Cor. 5. 4.
absolute power of their own (for so only Christ the^r Master forgive* (...))
but 1 Cor 4. 1, 2.
ministerially, as the se^vants of Christ, and St^wards, to whose fidelity
their Lord and Master ^ath committed his Keys, Act. 13. 38.
and that is, when they do declare and pronounce, either publicly, or
privately, by the Word of God, what binds, what loses, and the me^cie^^ of
God to penitent sinners, or his Judgments to impenitent and obstinate persons,
To this end ^ith Pas^l* i^ ^sc. c. 13. Ch^istus omn^bus Pasto^^bes and
De^^o^ibus (...) (...) (...) quod omnes ex aequo ligant and solv^nt, ut Pet^^s.
Papists dare not deny this. Quilibet s^ce^dos ^quantum est ex virtute clavium)
habet potestat^m indiffer^nter in omnes. In supplement. Thom^^ 4. 6. (...) 10.
and so do apply the general promises or threatenings to the penitent or
impenitent. For Christ from Heaven does by them (as by his Ministers on Earth)
declare whom he remitteth and binds, and to whom he will open the gates of
heaven, and against whom he will shut them. And therefore it is not said, Whose
sins ye signify to be remitted, but whose sins ye remit. They then do remit
sins, because Christ by their Ministry remitteth sins, as Christ by his
Disciples loosed Lazar^s, Joh. 11. 44. And as no water could wash away Naaman's
Leprosy, but the waters of Jordan, (though other Rivers were as clear) because
the promise was annexed unto the water of Jordan, and not of other Rivers: so
though another Man may pronounce the same words, yet have they not the like
efficacy and power to work on the conscience, as when they are pronounced from
the Mouth of Christ's Ministers, because the Joh. 20. 22, 23.
promise is annexed to the Word of God in their mouths: for them has he Act.
1. 24.
chosen, Acts 13. 2.
separated, and Romans 1. 1.
s^t apart for this work, and to them he has committed the 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
ministry and word of reconciliation: by their holy Act. 13. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 1.
Heb. 5. 4.
calling and Tit. 1. 5.
ordination they have received the Joh. 20. 22, 2^.
holy Ghost, and the ministerial power of binding and loosing. They are sent
forth of the Act. 13. 2, 4.
holy Ghost for this work, whereunto he has called them. And Christ gives his
Ministers power to forgive sins to the penitent in the (...), Jo^. ^0. ^3.
(...).
same words that he teaches us in the Lord's Prayer, to desire God to forgive
us our sins: to assure all penitent sinners, that God by his Minister's
absolution does fully, through the merits of Christ's Blood, forgive them all
their sins. So that what Christ decrees in heaven, in ^oro ju ^icii, the same
he declares on earth by his reconciling Ministers, in foro poenitentie: so
that as God has reconciled the world to himself by Jesus Christ: 2 Cor. 5. 18.
so has he (says the Apostle) given unto us the ministry of this
reconciliation.

He that sent them to baptize, saying, Go and teach all nations, baptizing
them, Joh. 20. 21, 23.
etc. sent them also to remit sins, saying, As my Father sent me, so send I
you: whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, etc. As therefore
none can baptize, (though he use the same water and words) but only the lawful
Minister, which Christ has called and authorized to this Divine and
Ministerial Function: so though others may comfort with good words; yet none can
2 Cor. 2. 7, 10.
absolve from sin, Heb. 5. 41.
but only those, to whom Christ ^ath committed the holy 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
Ministry and Word of reconciliation: and of their absolution Christ speaks,
Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears me. In a doubtful Title thou will ask the Counsel
of a skilful Lawyer; In peril of sickness thou will know the Advice of the
learned Physician: and is there no danger in dread of damnation, for a sinner
to be his own Judge?

Judicious Calvin teaches this point of Doctrine most plainly; ^ib. 3. Instit.
cap. 4. S^^t. 12.
Etsi omnes mutuo ^^s debeamus consolari, etc. Although ( says he) ^e ought to
comfort and confirm one another ^n the confidence of God's Mercy; yet we see
that the Ministers are appointed as witnesses and sureties to ascertain our
Consciences of the ^emission of sins: insomuch, as they are said tyremit sins,
and to loose souls. Let every faithful man therefore remember, that it is his
duty (if inwardly he be vexed and afflicted with the sense of his sins) not to
neglect that remedy which is offered unto him by the Lord, to wit, that (for
the easing of his conscience) he make private confession of his sins unto his
Pastor; and that he desire his private endeavor for the application of some
comfort unto his soul: whose office it is (both publicly and privately) to
administer Evangelical Consolation to God's People.

Beza highly In Antith. P^p^tus and Christi nismi vol. 1. fol. 66.
commends this practice: and Luther tom. ^. fol. 109. and (...)*
Luther says, That he had rather lose a thousand worlds than su^^er private
confession to be thrust out of the Church. Our Church has ever most Witness
(...) being able to speak, kissed the hand ^herewith he was (...).
soundly maintained the truth of this Doctrine; but most justly abolished the
Tyrannous and Antichristian abuse of Popish Auricular Confession; which they
thrust upon the souls of Christians, as an expiatory Sacrifice, and a
meritorious satisfaction for sin: racking their Consciences to confess, when
they feel no distress, and to enumerate all their sins, which is impos^ible:
That by this means they might dive into the secrets of all Men, which ofttimes
has proved pernicious, not only to private Persons, but also to public
Estates. But the truth of God's Word is, that no person having received Orders
in the Church of Rome, can truly absolve a sinner: for the Keys of Absolution
are Two; the one is the Key of Authority, and that only Rev. 3. 7.
Christ has; Mar. 2. 7.
the other is the Key of Ministry, Luke 5. 21.
and this he Mat. 16. 19.
gives to his Ministers who are therefore called, the 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Ministers of Christ, the Stewards of God's Mysteries, the 2 Cor. 5. 20*
Ambassadors of Reconciliation, Ministerii clavis duplex est, un^^scientia
discernendi, (1 Cor. 12. 10 1 John 4. 1.) Alia est potestas li gandi and
absolvendi.
Bishops, Pastors, Elders, etc. But Christ never ordained in the new Testament
any order of sacrificing Priests: neither is the name of (...), which properly
signifies Sacerdos, or sacrificing Priest, given to any officer of Christ, in
all the New Testament: Neither do we read in all the new Testament, of any, who
confessed himself to a Priest, Joh. 20. 23.
but Mat. 27. 4.
Judas. Neither is there any real Priest in the New Testament, but only Heb. ^.
24, 27, 28.
Christ. Neither is there any part of his Priesthood to be now accomplished on
Heb. 8. 4.
Earth, but that which he fulfilleth in Heaven, Heb. 7. 15.
by making intercession for us. Seeing therefore Christ never ordained any
order of sacrificing Priest, and that Popish Priests scorn the name of
Ministers of the Gospel, to whom only Christ committed his Keys: it necessarily
follows, that no Popish Priest can truly either excommunicate or absolve any
sinner, or have any lawful right to meddle with Christ's Keys. But the
Antichristian abuse of this Divine Ordinance should not abolish the lawful ^se
thereof betwixt Christians and their Pastors in cases of distress of
conscience, for which it was chiefly ordained.

And verily, there is not any means more excellent to humble a proud heart, nor
^o raise up an humble spirit, than this spiritual conference betwixt the
Pastors and the People committed to their charge. If any sin therefore
troubles thy Conscience, confess it to God's Minister, ask his counsel, and if
thou do truly repent, receive his absolution. And then doubt not in foro
Conscientiae, but thy sins be as verily forgiven on earth, as if thou did
hear Christ himself in foro judicii, pronouncing them to be forgiven in heaven.
Luke 10 16.
Qui vos audit, me audit; he that hears you, hears me. Try this, and tell
me whether thou shall not ^ind more ease in thy Conscience than can be
expressed in words. Did profane Men consider the dignity of this Divine
Calling, they would the more honor the Calling, and reverence the Persons.

The sick Man (having thus eased his Conscience, and received his absolution)
may do well (having a convenient number of faithful Christians joined with him
to receive the holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; to encourage him in his
Faith and to discourage the Devil in his assaults. In this respect the Council
of Nice terms this Sacrament, Council. Nic. Can. 12.
Viaticum, the Soul's pro^ision for her journey. And albeit the Lord's Supper
be an Ecclesiastical action, yet forasmuch as our Lord (the first instituter)
celebrated it in a Mat. 26. 18. Luke 22. 12.
private house, and that Romans 16. 5. Phil^m. v. 2.
St. Paul terms the houses of Christians, the Churches of Christ, and that
Mat. 18. 2^
Christ himself has promised to be in the midst of the faithful, where but two
or three are gathered together in his Name: I see no reason, but if Christians
desire it (when they are not, through sickness, able to come to the Church) but
that they should receive, and Pastors ought to administer unto them the
Sacrament at home. He shows more simplicity than knowledge, who thinks that
this savours of a Private Mass. For a Mass is called private, not because it is
said in a private house, but because (as Bishop Jewel against Harding Artic. 1.
of private Mass. fol. 4.
Jewel teaches out of In missis privatis sufficit si unus sit praesens,
scilicet Minister, qui populi totius personam gerit. Aquin. part. 3 q. 38 art.
5.
Aquinas) the Priest reciveth the Sacrament himself alone, without distribution
made unto others, and then it is private although the whole Parish be present
and look upon him. There is as much difference between such a Communion, and
the Antichristian Idol of a private Mass, as there is betwixt Heaven and Hell.
For at a Communion in a private Family upon such an extraordinary occasion,
Christ his Institution is observed. Many faithful Brethren meet together, and
tarry one for another. Christ his Death is remembered and showed, and the
Minister together with the faithful, and the sick party to communicate. Mr.
Calvin De coenae administratione ita sentio, libenter ad^itt^ndum esse. hunc
morem ut apud aegro^os celebretur communio, cum ita res and opportunitas ^eret
Ep. 51.
says, That he does very willingly admit administering of the Communion to them
that are sick, when the case and opportunity so requires. And in Cur coena^
aeg^otis ^eg^nd m^sse non arbitrer, mult^e and g^aves (...) me imp^llunt. Ep.
31. 1.
another place he says, That he has many weighty reasons to compel him not to
deny the Lord's Supper unto the sick. Yet, I would wish all Christians to use
to receive often (in their health) especially once every Month with the whole
Church; for then they shall not need so much to assemble their friends upon
such an occasion, nor so much to be troubled themselves for want of the
Sacrament. For as M. Perkins says very well, Perkins his right way to dying
well
The fruit and efficacy of the Sacrament is not to be restrained to the time of
receiving; but it extends it self to the whole time of man's life afterward:
the efficacy whereof, did men thoroughly understand, they should not need to be
so often exhorted to receive it.

Pastores omnes hic exoratos vellem, ut in hujus controversiae stat^m penitius
introspiciant; Admonitio ad Pastores.
nec fideles ex hac vita migrantes, and panem vitae petentes, viatico suo
fraudari sin^nt, ne lugubris ista in iis adimpleatur lamentatio: Parvuli panem
petunt, Lam* 4. 4.
and non sit qui f^^ngat eis. As therefore when a wicked liver dies, he may
say to death, as Ahab said to Elijah, 1 Kin. 21. 20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? So on the other side, wh^^ it is told a
penitent sinner, that Dea^^ knocks at the door, and begins to look him in the
face, he may s^^ of Death, as David said of Ahimaaz, Let him come and welcome,
for he is a good man, and comes with good tidings: 2 Samuel 18. ^7. Ut mo^i^^e
pius, vivere disce pi^.
he is the messeng^^ of Christ, and brings unto me the joyful (...) of
eternal life. And, as the Red Sea was a gulf to drown the Eg^ptians to
destruction; but a passage to the Israelites, to convey them to Canaan's
possession: so death to the wicked is a sink to hell and condemnation; but to
the godly, the gate to everlasting life and salvation. And one day of a Summum
hominis bonum, bonus ex h^c vita exitus.
blessed death will make amends for all the sorrows of a bitter life.

When therefore thou perceivest thy soul departing from thy body, pray with thy
Tongue if thou can, else pray in thy heart and mind, these words, fixing the
eyes of thy soul upon Jesus Christ thy Savior.

A Prayer at the yielding up of the Ghost.
O Lamb of God, which by thy blood have taken away the sins of the world: John
1. 29.
have mercy upon me a sinner, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Luke 18. 13.
Amen.

When the sick party is departing, let the faithful that are present kneel down
and commend his soul to God, in these or the like words.
O Gracious God, and merciful Father, who art our refuge and strength, Psalm.
46. 1.
and a very present help in trouble; lift up the light of thy favorable
countenance at this Instant upon thy servant, Psalm. 4. 6.
that now comes to appear in thy presence: wash away, good Lord, 1 John 1. 7.
all his sins, by the merits of Christ Jesus's blood, that they may never be
laid to his charge. Increase his faith, preserve and keep safe his soul from
the danger of the Devil and his Wicked Angels. Comfort him with thy Holy
Spirit, cause him now to feel that thou art his loving Father, and that he is
thy child by Adoption and Grace. Save, O Christ, the price of thine own blood;
and suffer him not to be lost, whom thou have bought so dearly. Receive his
soul, as thou did the penitent thief, into thy heavenly Paradise. Let thy
blessed Angels conduct him thither, as they carried the soul of La^arus; and
grant unto him a joyful resurrection at the last day. O Father, hear us for
him, and hear thine own Son, our only Mediator, that sits at thy right hand,
Romans 8. 31.
for him and us all; even for the merits of that bitter death and passion which
he has suffered for us. In confidence whereof, we now recommend his soul into
thy fatherly hands, in that blessed Prayer, which our Savior has taught us in
all times of our troubles to say unto thee: Our Father, etc. Sanguis martyrum
semen Ecclesiae. Martyrs acc^perunt, non dederunt coron^s. Leo. Martyrio (...)
usually.


Thus far of the Practice of Piety in dying in the Lord.

Now follows the Practice of Piety in dying for the Lord.
THE Practice of Piety in dying for the Lord, is termed Martyrdom.

Martyrdom is the testimony which a Christian bears to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, by enduring any kind of death: to invite many, and to confirm all, to
embrace the truth thereof. To this kind of death, Christ has promised a Crown:
(...).
Be thou faithful unto the death, Rev. 2. 1^. (...) in f^st. (...) invit. Johan
Flo^es Hist. ad An. 65.
and I will give thee the Crown of life. Which promise the Church so firmly
believed, that they termed martyrdom it self a Crown. And God to animate
Christians to this excellent prize, would, by a prediction, that Acts 7.
Stephen, the first Christian Martyr, should have his name of a Crown.

Of Martyrdom there are Three kinds.

1. Sola voluntate, in will only, as John the Evangelist, who (being boiled in
a Cauldron of Oil) came out rather anointed than sod: and died of old age at
Ephesus.

2. Solo opere, in deed only: as the Innocents of Matthew. 2. Acts and Monuments.
1 Pet. 2. 19. ^ausa, non pass^o, facit Martyrem. Aug. Ep 61 Non mortes ^d
mores, ^r. Boys. Tho. Aquin. 1, 2. quaest. 17. art. 6.
Bethlehem.

3. Voluntate and opere, both in will and deed, as in the Primitive Church,
Stephen, Polycarpus, Ignatius, Laurentius, Romanus, Antiochianus, and
thousands. And in our days, Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper, Ridley, Farrar, Bradford,
Philpot, Sanders, Glover, Tailor, and others innumerable, whose fiery zeal to
God's Truth, brought them to the flames of Martyrdom; to seal Christ's Faith.
It is not the cruelty of the death, but the innocence and holiness of the
cause, that makes a Martyr. Neither is an erroneous Conscience a sufficient
warrant to suffer Martyrdom: because Science in God's Word, must direct
Conscience in man's heart. For they who killed the Apostles, in their erroneous
Consciences, thought they did God good service: Joh 16. 2.
and Paul of zeal breathed out Acts 9. 1. Phil. 3. 6.
slaughters against the Lord's Saints. Now whether the cause of our Seminary
Priests and Jesuits be so holy, true, and innocent, as that it may warrant
their Conscience to suffer death, and to hazard their eternal salvation
thereon, Epistola ad Romanos, is now Epistola in Romanos.
let Paul's Epistle written to the ancient Christian Romans (but against our
new Antichristian Romans) be judge. And it will plainly appear, that the
Doctrine which St. Paul taught to the ancient Church of Rome, is ex diametro
opposite in 26 fundamental points of true Religion, to that which the new
Church of Rome teaches and maintains. For St. Paul taught the Primitive
Church of Rome,

1. That our Election is of God's free Grace, and not ex operibus praevisis,
Romans 9. 11. Romans 11. 5, 6.

2. That we are justified before God by faith only, without good works, Romans 3.
20, 28. Romans 4. 2, etc. Romans 1. 17.

3. That the good works of the regenerate, are not of their own condignity
meritorious, nor such as can deserve Heaven, Romans 8. 18. Romans 11. 6. Romans 6. 23.

4. That these Books only are God's Oracles and Canonical Scripture, which were
committed to the custody and credit of the Jews, Romans 3. 2. Romans 1. 2. Romans 16.
26. such were never the Apocrypha.

5. That the Holy Scriptures have God's authority, Note that the Scripture
says, God says, and the Scripture concludes, is all one with Paul.
Romans 9. 17. Romans 3. 4. Romans 11. 32. conferred with Gal. 3. 22. Therefore above
the authority of the Church.

6. That all, as well Laity as Clergy that will be saved, must familiarly read
or know the Holy Scripture, Romans 15. 4. Romans 10. 1, 2, 8. Romans 16. 26.

7. That all Images made of the true God are very Idols, (...) Having reference
to what he spoke before. Romans 1. 23. Of Images.
R. 1. 23. and R. 2. 22. conferred.

8. That to bow the knee religiously to an Image, or to worship any Creature is
mere Idolatry, R. 11. 4. and a lying service, R. 1. 25.

9. That we must not pray unto any but to God only, in whom we believe, Romans
10. 13, 14. Romans 8. 15, 27. therefore not to Saints and Angels.

10. That Christ is our only intercessor in Heaven, Romans 8. 34, Romans 5. 2 Romans
16. 27.

11. That the only Sacrifice of Christians, is nothing but the spiritual
Sacrificing of their souls and bodies to serve God in holiness and
righteousness, R. 12. 1 R. 15. 16. therefore no real sacrificing of Christ in
the Mass.

12. That the religious worship called dulia, as well as latria, belongs to
God alone, Romans 1. 9. Romans 12. 11. R. 16. 18. conferred.

13. That all Christians are to pray unto God in their own native language, R.
14. 11.

14. That we have not of our selves, in the state of corruption, free will unto
good, Romans 7. 18, etc. Romans 9. 16.

15. That Concupiscence in the regenerate, is sin, Romans 7. 7, 8, 10.

16. That the Sacraments do not confer grace ex opere operato, but sign and
seal that ^t is conferred already unto us, Romans 4. 11, 12. Romans 2. 28, 29.

17. That every true believing Christian may in this life be assured of his
salvation, Romans 8. 9, 16, 35, etc.

18. That no man in this life, since Adam's fall, can perfectly fulfill the
Commandments of God, Romans 7. 10, etc. Romans 3. 19, etc. Romans 11. 32.

19. That to place Religion in the difference of meats and days, is
superstition, Romans 14. 3. 5, 6, 17, 23.

20. That the imputed righteousness of Christ, is that only that makes us just
before God, Romans 4. 9, 17, 23.

21. That Christ's flesh was made of the Seed of David, by Inca^nation; not of
a Wafer Cake, by Transubstantiation. Romans 1. 3.

22. That all true Christians are Saints, and not those whom the Pope only does
Canonize, Romans 1. 7. Rom, 8. 27. Romans 15. 31. Romans 16. 2. and 15. Romans 15. 25.

23. That Ipse, Christ, the God of Peace: and not Ipsa, the Woman, should
bruise the Serpent's Head, Romans 16. 20.

24. That every soul must of conscience be subject, and pay Tribute to the
higher powers, that is, the magistrates which bear the Sword, Romans 13. 1, 2.
etc. and therefore the Pope and all Prelates must be subject to their Emperors,
Kings and Magistrates, unless they will bring damnation upon their souls, as
Traitors, that resist God and his Ordinance, Romans 13. 2.

25. That Paul (not Peter) was ordained by the grace of God, to be the chief
Apostle of the Gentiles, and consequently of Rome, the chief City of the
Gentiles, It seems by Romans 15. ^0, 29. and the whole last Chapter, that the
Christians who were in Rome before Paul came thither, were converted by those
Preachers whom he had sent thith^r before him: for he calls them his helpers,
v. 3, 9. kinsmen, v. 7, 13. fellow prisoners, v. 7. the first fruits of Achaia,
where he had preached v. 7. all familiar to him, and to Tertius, who writ the
Epistle, v. 22. And therefore they came so joyfully to meet Paul (...) App^i
Forum, hearing that he was coming toward Rome, Acts 28. 15.
Romans 15. 15, 16, 19, 20, etc. Rom 11. 14. Romans 16. 4.

26. That the Church of Rome may err, and fall away from the true Faith, as
well as the Church of Jerusalem, or any other particular Church, Romans 11. 20,
21, 22.

And seeing the new upstart Church of Rome teaches in all these, and in
innumerable other points, clean contrary to that which the Apostle taught the
Primitive Romans, let God and this Epistle judge betwixt them and us, whether
of us both stands in the true ancient Catholic Faith, which the Apostle taught
the old Romans? And whether we have not done well to depart from them, so far
as they have departed from the Apostles Doctrine? And whether it be not better
to return to St. Paul's Truth, than still to continue in Rome's Error? And if
this be true, then let Jesuits and Seminary Priests take heed and fear, lest
it be not faith, but faction; not truth, but treason; not Religion, but
Rebellion, beginning at Tiber, and ending at Tyburn, which is the cause of
their deaths. And being sent from a troublesome Apostatical See, rather than
from a peaceable Apostolical Seat, because they cannot be suffered to persuade
Subjects to break their Oaths, and to withdraw their Allegiance from their
Sovereign, to raise Rebellion, to move Invasion, to stab and poison Queens, to
kill and murder Kings, to blow up whole States with Gun powder, they
desperately cast away their own bodies to be hanged and quartered; and (their
souls saved, if they belong to God) I wish such honor to all his Saints that
sends them. Psalm. 149. 9.
And I have just cause to fear, that the miracles of Ut Alexandri causa iis qui
ill^m scire cupiunt pate^^t: judicatus est Ephesi ab AEmilio Frontino
Proconsule, non propter professionis nomen, sed propter perpetrata latr^^cinia,
cum j^m esset, prevaricator (and pr^ditor) Eu^eb. Hist. Eccles lib. 4. cap. 18.
Lipsius's Two Ladies, Blunstone's Boy, Garnet's Straw, and the Maid's fiery
Apron, will not suffice to clear that these men are not Murderers of
themselves, rather than Martyrs of Christ.

And with what conscience can any Papist count Garnet a Martyr, when his own
conscience forced him to con^ess, that it was for Treason, and not for Religion
that he died? But if the Priests of such a Gunpowder Gospel be Martyrs, I
marvel who are Murderers? if they be Saints, who are Scythians? and who are
Canibals, if they be Catholics?

But leaving these, if they will be filthy to their filthiness still, let us
(to whose fidelity the Lord has committed his true faith, as a precious 1 Timothy
6. 20 Prove. 24. 21 1 Pe^. 2. 17.
depositum) pray unto God, that we (...) lead a holy life, answerable to our
holy faith in piety to Christ, and obedience to o^r King; that if our Savior
shall ever count us Acts 5. 41.
worthy that honor to suffer Martyrdom for his Gospel's sake: be it by open
burning at the stake, as in Q. Mary's days; or by secret murdering, as in the
Inquisition-house; or by outrageous massacring, as in the Parisians Mattens; in
being blown up with Gunpowder, as was intended in the Parliament House: we may
have grace to pray for the assistance of his holy Spirit, so to strengthen our
frailty, and to defend his cause; as that we may seal with our deaths the
evangelical truth which we have professed in our lives. That in the days of our
lives we may be Luke 11. 28.
blessed by his word in the day of Death, Rev. 14. 13.
be blessed in the Lord, and in the day of judgment be the Mat. 25. 34.
blessed of his Father, Rev. 22. ^0.
Even so grant, Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Divine Colloquy betwixt the Soul and her Savior, concerning the effectual
merits of his dolorous Passion.
Soul.
LOrd, wherefore did thou wash thy Disciples feet? Christ, To teach thee how
thou should prepare thy self to come to my Supper.

S. Lord, why would thou wash them Joh. 13. 14.
thy self? C. To teach thee humility, if thou will be my Disciple.

S. Lord, wherefore did thou before thy death Luke 22. 19. ^0.
institute thy last Supper? C. That thou might the better remember my death,
and be assured that all the merits thereof are thine.

S. Lord, wherefore would thou go to such a place, where Joh. 18. 2.
Judas knew to find thee? C. That thou might know that I went as willingly
to suffer for thy sin, as ever thou wentest to any place to commit a sin.

S. Lord, wherefore would thou begin thy passion in a Joh. 18. 1.
Garden? C. Because that in a Genesis 3. 3.
Garden thy sin took first beginning.

S. Lord, wherefore did thy three select Disciples, Mat. 26. 40.
fall so fast asleep, when thou beganst to fall into thy agony? C. To show,
that I Isa. 63. 5.
alone wrought the work of thy Redemption.

S. Lord, why were there so many Mat. 26. 4.
plots and snares laid for thee? C. That I might make thee to escape all the
snares of thy Ghostly Hunter. Psalm. 124. 7.


S. Lord, Mat. 20. 19.
why would thou suffer Judas ( betraying thee) to kiss thee? C. That by
enduring the words of dissembling Lips, I might there begin to expiate sin,
where (...) find brought it into the world. (...)


S. Lord, why would thee be sold for thi^ty pieces of Silver? C. (...)
That I might free thee from perpetual bondage.

S. Lord, why did thou pray with such str^ng crying and tears? C. (...)
That I might (...) the fury of God's Justice, (...)
which was so fiercely kindled against thee.

S. Lord, why wast thou so afraid, and cast unto such an A^^ny? C. Luke. 22. ^^.
That (...) the ^rath due to thy sins, thou might be more secure in thy
de^^h, and (...) more comfort in thy cross.

S. Lord, wher^f^re (...) (...)
and so earnestly, (...) (...)
(...) thee? C. That (...) (...)
the horror of that curse^^ (...) being due to thy sin, I was (...) and endure
for thee.

S. Lord, (...)
wherefore did thou after (...) wish, submit thy will unto the wi^ (...)? C.
To teach thee what thou (...) do in all thy afflictions: and how willingly thou
should yield to bear with (...) that Cross which thou see to come from the
just hand of thy heavenly Father.

S. Lord, wherefore did thou (...) (...)
drops of water and blood? C. That I might cleanse thee from thy stains and
(...)

S. Lord, why would thou be taken, (...)
(...) thou might have escaped thine Enemies?

C. That thy spiritual enemies should not take thee, Mat. 5. 25.
and cast thee into the prison of Mat. 22. 13.
utter darkness.

S. Lord, wherefore would thou be Mat. 26. 56.
forsaken of all thy Disciples? C. That I might reconcile thee unto God, of
whom thou wast forsaken for thy sins.

S. Lord, Joh. 13. 8.
wherefore would thou stand to be apprehended alone? C. To show thee, that my
love of thy salvation was more than the love of all my Disciples.

S. Mark 14. 51. 52.
Lord, wherefore was the young man caught by the soldiers, and unstrip'd of his
linen, who came out of his bed, hearing the stir at thy apprehension, and
leading to the high Priest? C. To show their outrage in apprehending me, and my
power in preserving out of their outrageous hands, all my Disciples, who
otherwise had been worse handled by them, than was that young man.

S. Mat. 27. 2.
Lord, wherefore would thou be bound? C. That I might loose the Cords of
thine iniquities.

S. Luke 22. 57, 58. 60.
Lord, why wast thou denied of Peter? C. that I might confess thee before my
Father, and thou might learn, that there is no trust in man, and that
salvation proceeds of my mere mercy.

S. Mat. 26. 74. 75.
Lord, wherefore would thou bring Peter to repentance by the crowing of a
Cock? C. That none should despise the means which God has appointed for their
conversion, though they seem never so mean.

S. Lord, wherefore did thou at the Cock-crowing turn and look upon Peter?
Luke 22. 61.
C. Because thou might know, that without the help of my grace no means can
turn a sinner unto God, when he is once fallen from him

S. Joh. 19. 5.
Lord, wherefore wast thou covered with a purple robe? C. That thou might
perceive that it was I that did away thy scarlet sins.

S. Isa. 1. 18.
Lord, Mat. 27. 29.
wherefore would thou be crowned with thorns? C. That by wearing thorns, the
first fruits of the Curse, it might appear, that it is I which take away the
sins and curse of the world, and crown thee with the 1 Pet. 5. 4. Rev. 2. 10.
Crown of life and glory.

S. Lord, why was a Mat 27. 29.
reed put into thy hand? C. That it might appear that I came not to Mat. 12. 20.
break the bruised reed.

S. Lord, wherefore wast thou Mat. 27. 29.
mocked of the Jews? C. That thou might insult over Devils, who otherwise
would have mocked thee as the Philistines did Samson. Judge. 16. 25.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou have thy blessed face defiled with Mat. 27.
30.
spittle? C. That I might cleanse thy face from the shame of sin.

S. Wherefore, Lord, were thine eyes hoodwinkt with a veil? C. Mark 14. 65.
That thy spiritual blindness being removed, thou might behold the face of
my Father in heaven.

S. Lord, wherefore did they Mat. 26. 67.
buffet thee with fists, and beat thee with Mat. 27. 30.
slaves? C. That thou might be freed from the strokes and tearings of
infernal fiends.

S. Lord, wherefore would thou be reviled? C. Mat. 27. 39.
That God might speak peace unto thee by his Word and Spirit.

S. Lord, wherefore was thy Joh. 19. 3. Isa. 50. 6.
face disfigured with blows and blood? C. That thy face might shine glorious as
the Mat. 22. 50.
Angels in heaven.

S. Lord, wherefore would thou be so ^^^elly John 19. 1.
sc^urged? C. That thou might be freed from the sting of Conscience, and
whips of everlasting torments.

S. Mark 15 1.
Lord, wherefore would thou be arraigned at Pilate's Bar? C. That thou
might at the last day be acquitted before my Judgment Seat.

S. Luke 23. 2.
Lord, wherefore would thou be falsely accused? C. That thou should not be
justly condemned.

S. Mat. 27. 2.
Lord, where wast thou turned over to be condemned by a strange Judge? C. That
thou being redeemed from the cap^ivity of a hellish Tyrant, might be
restored to God, whose own thou art by right.

S. Wherefore, O Christ, did thou acknowledge, that Pilate had power over
thee from above? Joh. 19. 11.
C. That Antichrist, under pretense of being my Vicar, should not exalt himself
above all Tit. 3. 1. Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
Principalities and Powers.

S. Lord, why would thou suffer thy Passion under Luke 23. 1, 2.
Pontius Pilate, being a Roman President to Caesar of Rome? Joh. 19. 13, etc.
C. To show, that the Caesarian and Pontifician Polity of Note well Rev. 11. 8.
and Rev. 17. 5, 6.
Rome, should chiefly persecute my Church, and crucify me in my members.

S. But why Lord would thou be condemned? C. Joh. 19. 16.
That the Law being condemned in me thou might not be condemned by it. Luke
23. 24.


S. Romans 8. 3.
But why wast thou condemned seeing nothing could be proved against thee? C.
Mat. 27. 24. Joh. 19. 6.
That thou might know, that it was not for my faults but for thine that I
suffered.

S. Lord, wherefore wast thou led to suffer out of the city? C. Mat. 27. 33.
That I might bring thee to rest in the heavenly City. H^b. 13. 12.


S. Lord, why did the Jews compel Simon of Cyrene, Luke ^3. 26.
coming out of the field, to carry thy Cross? C. Mat. 27. 32.
To show the weakness whereunto the burden of thy sins brought me: and what
must be every Christians case, which goes out of the field of this world,
toward the heavenly Jerusalem.

S. Lord, why wast thou unstripped of thy garments? C. Joh. 19. 23.
That thou might see how I forsook all to redeem thee.

S. Luke 23. 33.
Lord, wherefore would thou be li^t up upon a Cross? C. That I might lift
thee up with me to Heaven.

S. Ibid.
Lord, wherefore did thou hang upon a cursed tree? C. That I might satisfy
for thy sin committed in eati^g the forbidden fruit of a Tree. Genesis 2. 17.


S. Luke 23. 33.
Lord, wherefore would thou hang between two thieves? C. That thou my dear
Soul might have place in the midst of heavenly Angels.

S. Psalm. 22. 16.
Lord, wherefore were thy hands and feet nailed to the Cross? C. Joh. 20. 25.
To enlarge thy hands to do the works of righteousness: and to set thy feet at
liberty, to walk in the ways of Peace.

S. Lord, wherefore did they crucify thee in Golgo^ha, Mat. 27. ^3.
the place of dead men's sculls? C. To assure thee that my death is life unto
the dead.

S. Lord, why did not the Soldiers divide thy seamless coat? C. Joh. 19. 24.
To show that my Church is one without rent or schism.

S. Mat. 27. 34.
Lord, wherefore did thou taste Vinegar and Gall? C. That thou might eat
the bread of Angels, and drink the water of life.

S. John 19. 30.
Lord, why said thou upon the Cross, It is finished? C. That thou might
know, that by my death the Romans 10. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 13.
Law was fulfilled, and thy Redemption effected.

S. Lord, why did thou cry out upon the Cross, Mar. 15. 34.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? C. Lest thou being forsaken of God,
should have been driven to cry in the pains of Hell, Woe and alas for evermore.

S. Lord, wherefore was there such a general Mat. 27. 45.
darkness when thou did suffer and cry out on the Cross? C. That thou
might see an Image of those hellish pains which I suffered, to deliver thee
from the endless pains of Hell, and everlasting chains of darkness.

S. Lord, why would thou have thine arms nailed abroad? C. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude
v. 6.
That I might embrace thee more lovingly, my sweet Soul.

S. Lord, why did the Thief, that Luke 23. 43.
never wrought good before, obtain Paradise upon so short repentance? C. That
thou may see the power of my death to forgive them that repent, that no
sinner needs despair.

S. Luke 23. 39.
Lord, why did not the other Thief which hanged as near thee, obtain the like
mercy? C. Romans 9. 18.
because I leave whom I will, to harden themselves in their lewdness, to
destruction, that all should fear, and none presume.

S. Mat. 27. 50.
Lord, wherefore did thou cry with such a loud and strong voice in yielding
up the ghost? C. John 10. 18.
That it might appear that no man took my life from me, but that I said it down
of my self.

S. Luke 23. 46.
Lord, wherefore did thou commend thy soul into thy Father's hands? C. To
teach thee what thou should do, being to Joh. 13. 1.
depart this life.

S. Mat. 27 51.
Lord, wherefore did the veil of the Temple rent in twain at thy death? C. To
show that the Levitical Law should be no longer a Ephesians. 2. 14.
partition wall between Jews and Gentiles, and that the way to Heaven is now
open to all believers. Heb. 10. 19. 20.


S. Lord, wherefore did the Mat. 27. 51.
earth quake, and the Stones cleave at thy Death? C. For horror to bear her
Lord dying: and to upbraid the cruel hardness of sinners hearts.

S. Lord, wherefore did not the Soldiers break thy Legs, Exodus 12. 46.
as they did the thieves who hanged at thy right and left hand? C. Joh. 19. 33.
That thou might know, Joh. 19. 34.
that they had not power to do any more unto me than the Scripture had foretold
that they should do, and I should suffer to save thee.

S. Lord, wherefore was thy side opened with a Spear? C. That thou might
have a way to come nearer unto my heart.

S. Lord, wherefore ran there out of thy precious side blood and water? C. To
assure thee, that I was slain indeed, seeing my heart-blood gushed out, and the
There is about man's heart a skin called Pericardium, containing water, which
cools and moistens the heart, lest it should be scorched with continualmotion.
This skin once pierced, man cannot live Columb. Anatom. l. 7. Horst. de not.
human. l. 1. exerc. 8. q. 5.
water which compassed my heart, flowed forth after it, which once spilt, man
must needs die.

S. Lord, wherefore ran the blood first by 1 John 5. 6.
it self, and the water afterward by it self, out of thy blessed wound? C. To
assure thee of two things: 1. That by my bloodshedding Justification and
Sanctification were effected to save thee. Secondly, that my Spirit by the
conscionable use of the water in Baptism, and blood in the Eucharist, will
effect in thee righteousness and holiness, by which thou shall glorify me.

S. Lord, wherefore did the Mat. 27. 52.
graves open at thy death? C. To signify, that Death, by my death, had now
received his death's-wound, and was overcome.

S. Mat. 27. 60.
Lord, wherefore would thou be buried? C. That thy sins might never rise up
to Judgment against thee.

S Mat. 27. 57.
Lord, wherefore would thou be buried by two such honorable Senators, Joh.
19. 39, 40.
as Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea? C. That the Truth of my Death (the Cause
of thy life) might more evidently appear unto all.

S. Joh. 19. 41.
Lord, wherefore wast thou buried in a new Sepulcher, wherein was never laid
man before? Mat. 27. 60.
C. That it might appear that I, and not another arose; and that by my own
power, not by another's virtue; like him who revived at the touching of
Elisha's Bones.

S. 2 Kin. 13. 21.
Lord, wherefore did thou raise up thy body again? C. Mat. 28. 6.
That thou may be assured that thy sins are discharged, Romans 4. 25.
and that thou art justified.

S. Mat. 27. 52, 53.
Lord, wherefore did so many bodies of thy Saints (which slept) arise at thy
Resurrection? Act. 17. 31.
C. To give an assurance, that all the Saints shall arise, by the virtue of my
Resurrection at the last day.

S. Lord, what shall I render unto thee for all these benefits? C. Psalm. 116. 1^
Love thy Creator, Gal. 6. 17.
and become a new creature.

The Soul's Soliloquy, ravished in contemplation of the Passion of our Lord.
WHat had thou done, O my sweet Savior, and ever blessed Redeemer, that thou
wast thus betrayed of Judas, sold of the Jews, apprehended as a Malefactor, and
led bound as a Lamb to the slaughter? What evil had thou committed, that thou
should be thus openly arraigned, accused falsely, and unjustly condemned
before Annas and Caiaphas, the Jewish Priests, at the judgment seat of Pilate,
the Roman President? What was thine offense? or to whom did thou ever wrong?
that thou should be thus pitifully scourged with whips, crowned with thorns,
scoffed with flouts, reviled with words, buffeted with fists, and beaten with
staves? O Lord, what did thou deserve to have thy blessed face spit upon, and
covered as it were with shame? to have thy Garments parted, thy hands and feet
nailed to the Cross? To be lifted up upon the cursed Tree, to be crucified
among Thieves, and made to taste Gall and Vinegar: and in thy deadly extremity,
to endure such a Sea of God's wrath, that made thee to cry out, as if thou
had been forsaken of God thy Father? yea, to have thy innocent heart pierced
with a cruel spear, and thy precious blood to be spilt before thy blessed
mothers eyes? Sweet Savior, how much wast thou tormented to endure all this,
seeing I am so much amazed but to think upon it! I enquire for thine offense,
but I can find none in thee; no, not so much as guile to have-been found in thy
mouth. Thy enemies are challenged, and none of them dare rebuke thee of sin;
thy accusers (that are suborned) agree not in their witness, the Judge that
condemns thee, openly clears thy innocence, Mat. 27. 19.
his wife sends him word she was warned in a dream that thou wast a just Man,
and therefore should take heed of doing injustice unto thee. The Centurion that
executed thee, confessed thee of a truth to be both a just man, and the very
Son of God. The thief that hanged with thee justifies thee, that thou have
done nothing amiss. What is the cause then, O Lord, of this thy cruel ignominy,
passion, and death? I, O Lord, I am the cause of these thy sorrows, my sins
wrought thy shame, my iniquities are the occasion of thy injuries. I have
committed the fault, and thou art plagued for the offense; I am guilty, and
thou art arraigned; I committed the sin, and thou suffer'st the death; I have
done the crime, and thou hangedst on the Cross: Oh the deepness of God's love!
Oh the wonderful disposition of heavenly grace! Oh the unmeasurable measure of
divine mercy! the wicked transgresses and the just is punished; the guilty is
let escape, and the innocent is arraigned; the malefactor is acquitted, and the
harmless condemned: what the evil man deserves, the good man suffers; the
servant does the fault, the master endures the strokes. What shall I say? Man
sins, and God dies. O Son of God! who can sufficiently express thy love, or
commend thy pity, or extol thy praise? I was proud, and thou art humbled; I was
disobedient, and thou becam'st obedient; I did eat the forbidden fruit, and
thou did hang on the cursed tree; I played the glutton, and thou did fast,
evil concupiscence drew me to eat the pleasa^^ apple, and perfect charity led
thee to drink of the bitter cup; I assayed the sweetness of the fruit, and thou
did taste the bitterness of the gall. Foolish Eve smiled when I laughed; but
blessed Mary wept when thy heart bled and died O my God, here I see thy
goodness and my badness, thy justice and my injustice, the impiety of my flesh,
and the piety of thy nature. And now, O blessed Lord, thou have endured all
this for my sake; what shall I render unto thee for all thy benefits bestowed
upon me a sinful soul? Indeed, Lord, I acknowledge, that I owe thee already for
my creation more than I am able to pay: for I am in that respect bound, with
all my powers and affections to love and adore thee. If I owed my self unto
thee for giving me my self in my creation, what shall I now render to thee for
giving thy self for me to so cruel a death, to procure my Redemption? Great was
the benefit that thou would create me of nothing: but what tongue can
express the greatness of this grace, that thou did redeem me with so dear a
price when I was worse than nothing? Surely, Lord, if I cannot pay the thanks I
owe thee ( and who can pay thee, who bestowest thy graces without respect of
merit or regard of measure?) it is the abundance of thy blessings that makes me
such a bankrupt, that I am so far unable to pay the principal, that I cannot
possibly pay so much as the interest of thy love.

But, O my Lord, thou know, that since the loss of thine Image (by the fall
of my first unhappy Parents) I cannot love thee with all my might, and mind, as
I should: therefore as thou did first cast thy love upon me, when I was a
child of wrath, and a lump of the lost and condemned world; so now, I beseech
thee, shed abroad thy love by thy Spirit through all my faculties and
affections, that though I can never pay thee in that measure of love which thou
have deserved, yet I may endeavor to repay thee in such a manner, as thou
vouchsafest to accept in mercy: that I may in truth of heart love my neighbor
for thy sake, and love thee above all, for thine own sake. Let nothing be
pleasant unto me, but that which is pleasing unto thee And sweet Savior,
suffer me never to be lost or cast away, whom thou have bought so dearly with
thine own most precious blood. O Lord, let me never forget thine infinite love,
and this unspeakable benefit of my Redemption: without which, it had been
better for me never to have been, than to have any being

And seeing that thou have vouchsafed me the assistance of thy holy Spirit;
suffer me, O heavenly Father, who art the Father of Spirits, in the meditation
of thy Son, to speak a few words in the ears of my Lord. If thou, O Father,
despisest me for mine iniquities, as I have deserved; yet be merciful unto me
for the merits of thy Son, who so much for me has suffered. What if thou see
nothing in me but misery, which might move anger and passion? Yet behold the
merits of thy Son, and thou shall see enough to move thee to mercy and
compassion. Behold the mystery of his incarnation, and remit the misery of my
transgression. And as often as the wounds of thy Son appear in thy sight; O let
the woes of my sins be hid from thy presence. As often as the redness of his
blood glisters in thine eyes, O let the guiltiness of my sins be blotted out of
thy Book. The wantonness of my flesh provoked thee unto wrath, O let the
chastity of his flesh persuade thee to mercy: that as my flesh seduced me to
sin, so his flesh may reduce me unto thy favor, My disobedience has deserved
a great revenge, but his obedience merits a greater weight of mercy: for what
can man deserve to suffer, which God made man, cannot merit to have forgiven?
When I consider the greatness of thy passion, then do I see the trueness of
that saying: That Christ came into the world to save the chiefest sinners.
D^rest thou. O Cain, say that thy sins are greater than may be forgiven? Thou
l^est like a murderer; the mercies of one Christ are able to forgive a world
of Cains, if they will believe and repent. The sins of all sinners are finite the
mercies of God are infinite. Therefore, O Father, for the death and passions
sake, which thy Son Jesu; Christ has suffered for me, and I have now remembered
to thee, pardon and forgive thou unto me all my sins, and deliver me from the
curse and vengeance which they have justly deserved, and through his merits
make me, O Lord, a partaker of thy mercy. It is thy mercy that I so earnestly
knock for: neither shall mine importunity cease to call and knock, with the man
that would borrow the loaves, until thou arise, and open unto me thy gates of
grace. And if thou will not bestow on me thy loaves, yet, O Lord, deny me not
the crumbs of thy mercy, and those shall suffice thy hungry hand-mind. And
seeing thou req^i est nothing for thy benefits, but that I love thee in the
truth of my inward heart (whereof a new creature is the truest outward
testimony) and that it is as easy for thee to make me a new creature, as to
bid me to be such: create in me, O Christ, a new heart, and renew in me a right
spirit, and then thou shall see how (mortifying old Adam, and his corrupt lust)
I will serve thee as thy new creature, in a new life, after a new way, with a
new tongue, and new manners, with new words, and new works, to the glory of thy
Name, and the winning other sinful souls unto thy Faith, by my devout example.
Keep me for ever, O my Savior, from the torments of hell, and tyranny of the
Devil. And when I am to depart this life send thy holy Angels to carry me, as
they did the soul of Lazarus, into thy Kingdom. Receive me into that joyful
Paradise, which thou did promise to the penitent thief, which at his last
gasp upon the Cross so devoutly begged thy mercy and admission into thy
Kingdom. Grant this, O Christ, for thy own Name's sake, to whom (as is most
due) I ascribe all glory and honor, praise and dominion, both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

