Claustrum Animae: THE Reformed Monastery; OR, THE LOVE OF JESUS.

A sure and short, pleasant and easy way to HEAVEN.

IN Meditations, Directions, and Resolutions to Love and Obey JESUS unto Death.

In two Parts.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard the
West End. MDCLXXVII.

Imprimatur.

Antonius Saunders, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino GILBERTO
Archiepiscopo Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aed. Lambeth. Febr. 16. 1675/6.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God JOHN, Lord Bishop of Oxford.
My LORD,
It Is not in regard of my Obligations to you, though I own them with grateful
acknowledgements; it is not in regard of your late most deserved advancement,
though I heartily rejoice at it: It Is in regard of your intrinsic goodness,
that this Dedication begs your acceptance, and humbly offers it self to you.
Before Lordship and Paternity were added to your Honorable Titles, you was
entitled to this book: your dignities being dignified by you, I considered not
their eminency, but the eminency of your Virtue and Piety. I know, My Lord,
that you aim at a better reward than this world can give; but that a great
light set on a high place cannot be hid from the eyes of Men, Angels alone
should rejoice in the brightness of yours: you shun praise as much as you
deserve it: you neither desire nor want any thing of Fame. But, My Lord, I
wanted a living example of a sincere and devout lover of JESUS to exemplify my
Discourse: and though (God be praised) many more might be found in this Church,
yet you are one of the fairest and most attractive: in so much that though it
be easier to write than to do well, yet a better Pattern of a Religious Life
might be drawn from your actions than from my directions.

My Lord, I have just cause to fear that I have indulged my genius too far, and
perhaps some will think that I would have Godliness to be Shorn and devotion a
Recluse from the world, which is far from my thoughts or desires: though I must
confess that at first I intended a much different and less defective Treatise
on this so good a subject, had not other necessary helps as well as abilities
been wanting. However at the best I could have added nothing to such persons as
your Lordship; the Holy flames of Divine Love that burn in your heart have too
much light and fervency to have received any increase from me: and therefore I
have not aimed at any thing higher than only to assist the weak and fix the
inconsiderate. But, My Lord; though I can not in the least profit you by this
my poor labor, yet its being owned by you may be very advantageous to me: Your
Reverend and much Honored name will not only credit me, but which is more,
will recommend my Book, and also promote its design of winning affectionate
Servants and lovers to JESUS. This I know you will rejoice to do: Wherefore in
presenting my Book to your Lordship, I humbly beg your blessing on it and its
Author. Who is with due respect and affection,

Your Lordships most dutiful Son and most humble Servant L. B.

THE PREFACE.
It Is probable that they, who these many years, have cried out Popery (till
they made way for it to come) upon every thing they liked or understood not,
will start and think that their fears are come upon them, at the sight of the
first Title Page: and possibly our Lay-Abbots will also be frighted at it, as
though the dispossessed Coenobites were coming again to lay claim to their old
Mansions and fat indowments. For my part I wish that theirs may be but pannick
terrors: yet withal, I wish they might so far affect them, as to make the first
have a greater value for that Reformed Religion, and purer worship which then
they would certainly lose; and the last pay Tithes Conscienciously out of those
estates, which then they would be forced to resign. And yet I may, and do
assure them, that if they will Read not only the Title, but the book also, it
will certainly cure them of their fears, if it works no better change upon
them: for its design is not to alter the established Religion, but to make us
more devout and sincere in the profession thereof; nor yet to enrich any
persons with temporal estates, but to make us gather treasures in heaven, and
set our affections on things above.

That the age we live in, is greatly depraved, is no observation of mine, there
are almost as many that complain of it, as there are that contribute to the
increasing of its wickedness: it is in every man's mouth that virtue being
disgraced, vice is countenanced, and that the numerousness of its votaries,
makes it now impudent, as well as fashionable. Therefore it should be no
difficult matter, to persuade those that have any sense of Religion, or longing
after its rewards, that they ought not to conform themselves to this present
evil world, but choose a better pattern to live by. And the truth is, it matters
not much, whether these be worse than the former times; for the way to life
has all along been straight and narrow, and found and followed but by few: as
that to destruction wide and spacious, and yet crowded by the many. Good men
have always lived in a perverse and crooked generation: So that if it be now,
as it has ever been, those that will enter into life, must follow the narrow
path, though they have but few fellow travelers: and if it be worse, they must
walk with the greater care and wariness. However it be, the difference must
needs be very great, betwixt the lives and works of those, whose reward and
condition will be so vastly different at last. And therefore whoever will go to
heaven, had need keep at a great distance from that world which lies in
wickedness, and take a much contrary course, to those many who go to
destruction.

But how then? Must we retire into Thebais, with the Fathers of the desert?
Must we confine our selves to the solitude of a Monastic Cell? Or shall we
become Quakers, and profess the sullenness of Melancholy Fanatics? Why, truly
in Popish Countries, the Cloister has engrossed the name of Religion, and they
that would be, or be thought to be, devout beyond others, do usually put on a
Friars hood, and embrace the Rule of some Religious Order: and amongst us
Puritanism has usurped the Name of Godliness; and some who, in truth or in
pretense, abhor looseness, or are reclaimed from a vicious life, will too often
forsake not the world, but the Church; as it were to preserve the strictness of
a severer virtue, in the Society of a Separated Brotherhood. It Is possible
that the irreligion and imm^rality of Christians abroad, It may be matter of
inquiry whether that demure pretense of holiness, the adversaries had put on,
did not more avert some of our libertines from them, than all their real
crimes; they perhaps so far mistook them, as to suspect they might be in
earnest, when they professed to advance the power of Godliness. Decay of
Christian Piety. Page 198.
in the general, has occasioned the distinction of Regular and Secular
persons; and perhaps the profaneness and debauchery of too too many amongst
us, who are in the Church, as the tares in the field, among the wheat has
partly caused the unjust distribution, our late Pharisees had made of our
people, into two parties, the Godly and the Wicked: though many are of opinion,
that discontent or melancholy makes men, for the most part, both Monks and
Schismatics, or else spiritual pride or wordly interest. However it be, I will
not make exprobrations against either of them, with dis^bliging truths, but
rather commend what is praiseworthy in them: because I would have every
Christian, to be really devout and precise, without entering the Cloister or the
Conventicle.

I am indeed somewhat jealous, that the engaging men to be Religious and
Virtuous, by other considerations besides their Christian duty has done some
prejudice to Religion; for now there be some that fancy, self-denial and
contempt of the world to belong only to Friars, and others, that to abstein
from swearing and drunkenness, is only the part of a Puritan: Whereas
Christianity binds those duties upon all its professors, and every one, by his
Baptismal vow is bound to perform them; though he does not submit himself to
the Rule of S. Francis, or the dictates of the Assembly. The heavenly
mindedness of Carthusians, the zeal and laborious preaching of Carmelites and
Dominicans, the penitent mortifications of Franciscans, Non desiderabit tria
illa vota ab hominibus reperta, qui primum, illud and unicum votum, quod in
Baptismo, non homini sed Christo nuncupavimus sinceriter pureque servaverit.
Eras. Ench.
and the sobriety of Non-Conformists are all contained in the Christian Rule:
and whosoever owns it, needs not make new vows, wear distinct habits, or
separate from the Church, the better to discharge them: but only, seriously
mind and study the obligations of his Religion, and, with diligence and
sincerity, live according to them. My design therefore is not to Incloister
particular persons, Vellem universos Christianos ita vivevere, ut qui nunc soli
Religiosi vocantur parum Religiosi viderentur.
but to make a large Monastery of the whole Commonwealth, at least to make
every family a School of Virtue and Piety, and every man an Ascetick and strict
liver: wishing heartily with Erasmus that they, who hitherto, have been called
Precise and Religious, by way of appropriation, might justly lose that name, by
the more exemplary lives of all other Christians.

But though it be my wish, it is not my hope in the least, to see any such
thing come to pass, by means of this little volume. Many much bigger and better
have not been able to effect it; they that will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, nay, Christ the Lord himself, will be far enough from being persuaded
by the meanest of his servants: and the truth is, it may be the matter of our
desires, but must never be expected, that a general Reformation of manners
should follow that of Doctrine among us. Nevertheless our endeavors ought not
to be wanting; though our sanctification be never consummated here below, yet
we are commanded, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and should strive to perfect holiness in the fear of God: and so, though we
know that many will so live, as that the end of them shall be destruction, yet
ought we like S. Paul, to try all means, that by any means we may save some. If
we convert none of the impenitent, we may benefit some better Christians: and
if our instructing our brethren by word or writing, profits none of them, yet
it may make us take the better heed, that after we have preached to others, we
our selves be not cast-aways.

Now to this end, my chiefest endeavor, is to make a Christian devout, to make
him love God with a sincere love, and then make it appear by a hearty
obedience; a devout love is not only the best part, but also the best
instrument of Religion, as being an irreconcilable enemy to sin, a friend, or
rather a nurse to all virtue: No inticement could have drawn penitent Magdalene
to her former impurities, whilst she washed her dearest Saviors feet with her
tears: and it is known by experience that when reading, meditation, the sight of
a dying friend, or any such thing, has softened a man's heart into a Religious
temper, temptations would be then so far from prevailing, that they durst not
so much as appear before him. But when he returns to mind earthly things, and
has his thoughts taken up with the concerns of this life, he finds that his
spiritual strength decays, by the same proportions that his love becomes cold,
and he grows indevout again.

Love is the queen, if not the fountain of passions, the great mover and
governor of actions and affections: could we keep the fire of Divine Love
always burning in our breasts, it would be the most powerful and best
instrument of Holy-living; it would make self-denial and the yoke of Christ
easy, it would make acts of virtue and Religion pleasant; and it would make us
delight in pleasing God, as much as we naturally do in pleasing our selves.
Therefore I have made it my aim and design in the following Pages, to seize
upon the affections, to inkindle in the hearts of Christians the heavenly
flames of the love of God. To that end, I have represented the more general
benefits of God to mankind, and especially that of Redemption, by the greatest
demonstration of love that ever was given, the death of Jesus: which if duly
considered, would be an irresistible motive to love him; I have showed the
power, the pleasure, and the great advantages of love; and I have used devout
meditations and ejaculations, as it were to transport our souls to heaven by
love, for to adore that God, whom love brought down from thence to save us.
It Is certain that most of them that perish, perish for want of consideration;
and I have heard dying men wonder at themselves, how they could be so stupid,
as not to mind those things which are of an infinite concern, and should rather
take up all our thoughts and our cares, than be neglected or forgot one only
moment. Israel does not understand, Isa. 1.3.
my people does not consider.

Love may be said to be that fire which God would have always to burn upon his
altar, that is, Lev. 6.12.
in our hearts, which are his temple, where the sacrifices of good works and
the incense of devotion should always be offered to him: now that sacred fire
must have fuel to entertain it; it must be nourished by reading good books,
and especially by frequent and pious meditations. Wherefore I have endeavored
as much as I could to feed those holy flames, by representing things as they
are; and I would have every Christian, seriously and often to consider, what
God is, what he has done, what he does, and what he will do for us, if we love
him sincerely: as also, what we are, whence we come, whither we go, and how
easy it is for us to be eternally happy, if we will set our affections upon
God, who deserves them so infinitely. Doubtless inconsideration is the cause
why God is not loved! It is not possible men could resist the charms of his
love, if they would open the eyes of their mind and of their faith to view them!

But how few are there that do it? How fully is the prophecy fulfilled, Mat.
24.12
Iniquity shall abound and the love of many shall wax cold? To how many
Christians might our Blessed Savior say, as once to the Jews, I know you, Joh.
5.42.
that you have not the love of God in you? How justly might now S. Paul
complain, Phil. 2.21.
all men seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's? And how justly
might our Blessed Lord, the great lover of men, complain in the words of his
Apostle, I will gladly spend and be spent for you; (or rather, I have gladly
spent, and been spent for you) though the more abundantly I love you, 2 Cor.
12.15.
the less I be loved? Want of love is a very sad and general evil among
Christians, in these worst of times! and I hope some will be by me persuaded,
not carelessly to say, that they shall do as well as others: but, as wise men
would in pestilent times, carefully to provide Antidotes, to prevent or cure
the infection. But alas, how should I persuade others? de ingratis etiam
ingrati queruntur: Physician cure thy self; I help to propagate the distemper,
and therefore am very unfit to prescribe against it. Shall the unthankful teach
gratitude? Shall the Pharisee persuade others, when he says and does not? If
it be as one says, qui non ardet non accendit, that he that burns not with the
Divine Fire of love, cannot inflame others with it; then I may well cry out
with him, vae mihi frigenti; woe is me unhappy creature, who am so far from
burning, that I am almost quite cold! and indeed, I know and grieve the defects
and imperfections of my love, and have writ for my self, more than for any
others: and I heartily wish, better hearts and pens would treat of this
subject, and help, that way amongst others, to reinkindle that almost extinct
fire of charity and devotion in the hearts of men; and in mine own, who would
thankfully use their assistance, and heartily pray for a reward to them.

I have no more to say by way of Preface, but that if I have been so unhappy as
to write any thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Church; I disown and retract
it before hand, and would blot it out with my blood: as for particular persons,
who may find fault with any thing herein, I desire them to pass it by. It
matters not much, if they like not every passage and expression; if they do but
follow what they judge to be good, and approve my design, and love Jesus with
all their hearts; it will be enough for their profit and my satisfaction.

1 John 4.9. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love.
Claustrum Animae: THE Reformed Monastery; Or, the Love of JESUS.
. 1. Of the benefits of God to mankind.
IT were as easy to find out the bottomless depth of the inexhaustible
fountain of the Divine Bounty, as to tell the Streams which run from it; Gods
mercies are over all his works, and all things that are made, are a
demonstration as much of his goodness as of his being. I will not therefore
undertake to number what is innumerable, or to express what we cannot so much
as comprehend: but only insist briefly upon some of the most general benefits
of God to mankind, and in the representing of them, endeavor to make us read
our duty, and to inflame our hearts with love.

. 2. Of Creation.
First, It is God that has made us and not we our selves, we owe him our very
being; thine hands have made and fashioned me: (says David) thine eyes did see
my substance being yet imperfect, Psalm. 119.13.
and in thy book were all my members written. Let us say therefore with the
same Prophet, 134.16.
I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: and let us with
him, fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker. You know that by the Laws
of God and of all Nations, there is an indispensable obligation upon all
children to love and honor their Parents, because they brought them into the
world: now certainly the obligation doubles upon every man, in respect to his
Father which is in heaven; for our natural parents were but second causes under
him, his own power it was that formed and created us: they engendered our mortal
bodies only, he is the Father of Spirits, he himself gave being to our immortal
souls. Therefore let every man pay to his Maker those duties he would expect
from his child: Mal. 1.6.
if I am a Father (says God) where is mine honor? If from our heavenly Father
we have received our life and being, let us pay that respect, and love and
obedience to him, which thereby are become his due.

But there is yet more in this; Creation is not a transient act; the same power
that once gave us our being, does still exert it self in the continuation
thereof. When a child is born, he subsists by himself, his parents need not
take any care, that he returns not to his pristine condition: but we have the
same dependence upon God in our preservation as we had in our creation; should
he withdraw his Almighty hand, we should return to our first nothing; in him we
live and move, and have our being; Therefore we are the more bound to serve and
love him, that he not only made us to be; but gives us, as it were, a new being
every moment, by continuing our life and duration, by that Almighty will,
whereby he effected our first production.

Now if we consider further, not only that God made us, but what he made us, it
will yet enforce those bonds of duty, which Creation tied upon us. For it was
in our Makers power, either to make us vile and abject as the vilest of beasts,
or to deny us those faculties and abilities, which are most honorable and most
useful to our nature: but he made us Men, the most wonderful of his creatures;
in us he joined what heaven and earth had most excellent, an immortal Spirit,
created after his image, with the most elaborated, the most perfect of material
things: Take a view of the mavelous organs of thy senses, of the curious
contrivance of those joints and ligaments which unite thy several members, of
those various and delicate channels which contain thy blood and spirits; in a
word of all the parts and passions of thy body, which are all made for
necessity and comeliness; and then admire the great goodness, as well as wisdom
of thy creator; and say with the Psalmist, that thou art fearfully and
wonderfully made, and that Gods works are very mavelous.

After this let thy thoughts dive deeper, and consider thine interior senses;
the mysterious union of thy soul and body, with the beauty of that Divine Light
which we call Reason; thy memory, thy will, thine understanding, which are the
faculties of thy precious soul, which is not only created after Gods image; but
is capable and desirous to enjoy him: and then see how numerous, or rather
innumerable are the benefits which God has bestowed upon us in our creation,
and how just it is that we should love him, that we should glorify God, in our
Body and in our Spirits, which are Gods.

. 3. Of Preservation.
Preservation comes next to be considered; a benefit of very large extent, and
well deserving that rank, the Church has placed it in, in making it the
subject of our daily thanksgiving; for ever since man changed the impenetrable
armor of Original Righteousness, for a thin covering of fig leaves, he became
so defensless, and yet exposed to so many sharp and wounding arrows, that
should not Divine Protection interpose for to shelter and secure him, his
temporal Life would be a true and a sad emblem of Eternal Death. It appears by
the history of Patient Job, that if we were not senc'd about with the hedge of
a gracious providence, we should find that all creatures conspire our vexation
and ruin. God had no sooner broke the enclosure; but afflictions crowded in so
fast upon that happy man, that in a short time there remained nothing of his
former prosperity, but a bare and bitter remembrance, to make the sense of his
present misery more grievous. There is no man, but is exposed to all the
greatest Calamities that ever befell any of the Sons of Adam: and there is none
able by his own power, to defend himself against the least of them. Fortune and
accidents sport themselves (if I may so speak) with our goods and estates;
Moths fret our garments, rust cankers our metals, thieves break through and
steal our riches, or else they make to themselves wings and fly away; besides
their own corruptibility which of its self would consume them, they are exposed
to so many hazards, that it would be as impertinent, as it is impossible to
number all the ways and means, whereby men are afflicted with losses, and
brought to poverty: only from hence, we may justly infer, that the same God who
gives us all things richly to enjoy, must also secure them in our possession,
or else we certainly lose them.

If we look on our selves, we shall like the Prophets man in Dothan, 2 King. 6.
see armed enemies on all sides of us, our spiritual enemies are many, strong,
and full of rage and malice; and yet we have no defense against them: but that
God makes his heavenly host, to wait on our safety, incamps his Angels about
us, to be an invisible guard against our invisible enemies, and not only so,
but to secure us also from thousands of sudden and sad accidents, which might,
every moment befall us. All creatures are now furnished with a sting wherewith
they may either vex or kill us. The elements and all compounded bodies, the air
we breath, and the food that nourishes us, all things in nature, and all
things in chance, may become our tormentors or murders. Nay, we carry swords
and daggers in our own bosoms; we have within our selves the matter of all
sorts of distempers; not one joint in our bodies, but may be afflicted with the
gout; Not one humor, but may overflow its banks, and quench the light of
Reason, or the fire of Life; Not one pore or part within or without, but may
unexpectedly, at all times, and in all places, become an entrance to death and
sorrow. In the midst of so many and great dangers, it were impossible for us to
stand one moment, but that God defends us under his wings and keeps us safe
under his feathers, Psalm. 90.
as the Psalmist speaks, and so the blessings of immunity, which most men
slight, or overlook, are never enough to be acknowledged, but deserve the
thanks of a whole life. We dwell under the defense of the most high, and abide
under the shadow of the Almighty: therefore let us set our love upon him and
glorify him.

. 4. The Positive blessings of this life.
The Positive blessings of this life, are now to be exposed to view; but of
them, I may use the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 40.
If I would reckon and speak of them, they are more in number than can be
numbered. Health and strength, and comeliness, with industry and learning, are
shared among the sons of men in several proportions: and so are good friends,
and a good name, peace, plenty, and pleasures; any one of those single, might
make a rich portion for one man, for each, within it self contains many rich
and precious blessings: yet oftentimes, God unites all, or most of these
together, to crown us with loving kindness and tender mercies. Psalm. 103.
The works of creation, and the works of providence are not more numerous, then
the graces and gifts of God to mankind; any one that should seriously meditate
upon this subject, would find it multiply and increase almost to immensity, and
would be forced to break off with the exclamation of David; Lord, Psalm. 8.4.
what is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou so
regardest him: God renews his mercies to us every day together with our lives;
every hour, Psalm. 36.
we eat of the fatness of his house, drink of the river of his pleasure, and
receive the sweet emanations that flow continually from the fountain of life.
But of those benefits which God pours open hands upon us, how many are there
that pass unregarded! we usually mind, not what we receive, but what we desire.
Let heaven rain Manna never so thick upon us, if we wish for Quails, Angels
food shall be unsavory, and perhaps distastful. They that long for great and
well covered tables, find no relish in their daily bread; they that pursue
after wealth, look not on the blessings of competency; they that aspire to
honor, receive health, food and raiments, rather with a disdainful anger, than
with thankfulness; all the favors we receive from God, are unobserved or
slighted as long as he does not gratify our humor with what we desire, and
even these gifts whereof we are most sensible, are soon laid in oblivion; an
hours pain will cause many longer pleasures to be forgotten; and if God sends
evil upon us only for one day, it makes us forget the many good things, which
we for many years received from him. This I say, because many men's
unsatiableness and ingratitude makes them overlook most of Gods blessings;
despise what they have, and value only what they have not; and so murmur and
complain when they should give thanks. But whoever shall diligently observe all
the gracious distributions of that God, who always gives to all men, being
debtor to none, all the supplies and comforts we receive from him, will
heartily say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.107.
O love the Lord all ye his Saints; and, O that men would therefore praise the
Lord, for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children
of men; that they would exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise
him in the seat of the elders.

sect;. 5. What returns we should make for them.
Those Benefits we have hitherto mentioned, we receive as we are men, and that,
from the free goodness of our gracious God, we are his people, and the sheep of
his pasture; we are, and we have nothing that is good, but it comes from him;
he made us, he preserves us, and he provides for us: therefore, O go your way
into his gates with thanksgiving and into his courts with praise, be thankful
unto him, and speak good of his name. It was Jacob's vow, that if God would
keep him, and give him food and raiment, whilst he sojourned in Haran, then the
Lord should be his God: Now what was his vow should be our resolution and
practice; God feeds, and clothes, and defends us, therefore ought he to be our
God; That is, we ought to own him for such by faithful service and hearty
obedience. Therefore, 1. Let us pay our bounteous Benefactor, the just and
easy tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving, for our creation, preservation, and
all the blessings of this life. 2. Let us set apart daily, some of that time
which he gives us, for acts of Worship and Religion. 3. Let us honor the Lord
with our substance; either in secret charities or public offerings, paying him
an acknowledgement, that he is our landlord; and lastly, let us apply our
selves to observe his Laws, to do what pleases him; because we are not our
own, we owe our selves to him, we are his, he gave us our being. These are acts
of natural Religion, and them we owe to God, as he is our Creator and
Benefactor.

. 6. Of Redemption and first of the infinite miseries we are redeemed from.
Now are to be considered the benefits we receive from God as we are sinners;
the mercies of our Redemption; how God our Creator is become JESUS, our
Savior; how after having given us many good things, he at last gave himself
for us. And that we may the better understand the greatness of this unspeakable
and Divine Mercy, let our meditation descend a while into that bottomless gulf
of perdition wherein we were plunged by nature, in this plain manner. Represent
to thy self a man in Job's condition, having added to his ulcers and poverty
all the saddest calamities that ever afflicted any man upon earth, especially
the remorses and horrors of a guilty and tormented conscience, crying out of
impatience and despair with Cain, my pain is greater than I can bear. This
unhappy creature having for many years born the uneasy weight of his miseries,
lingered out a tedious and disconsolate life, is at last struck to the heart
with a mortal wound and dies, and so passes from temporal to eternal sorrows;
he falls into a lake of fire and brimstone, a place where there is nothing but
woe and darkness, weeping and gnashing of teeth; where there is no company but
of tormented and tormentors; nothing to be seen, but what is frightful, no
voices to be heard but curses, shrieks and lamentations, where there is the
absence of all good and the presence of all evil; where men desire to die, and
death flees away from them. This is the fullness of his misery, that it shall
have no end, that he must dwell with everlasting burnings; their fire is not
quenched, and their worm dies not. If weeping but one tear every day, he might
expect to be releast, after he had wept as much as would make an ocean, it
would be some comfort! but at the end of so many millions of years as would
suffice to weep a Sea, his torments will be as far from ending as the first day
they began: and if after this manner in process of time, he should shed tears
enough to make many more seas, yet still it might be truly said, this is but
the beginning of sorrows; still there is an intolerable Eternity to come; for
after as many thousands of millions of years as tongue can express or heart
comprehend; Eternity is nothing lessened; still it is what is was before, an
abyss of duration that can have no end; this excludes all comfort, this fills
his soul with a woeful despair, this is another hell in the midst of hell, which
inrageth him, and perpetually tortures his mind, to think that there will be no
end of his sufferings, that he can conceive no hope of being delivered: but
that he must bear to all Eternity, what every moment is intolerable! O dreadful
Eternity, who can seriously think of thee and not tremble! Now if thou do ask
for what reason this wretched creature is thus tormented, know that it is for
sin; because his first parents broke the Law of their Creation, and he followed
their footsteps; they involved him first in the guilt of a wicked rebellion
against God, and afterward by his own acts he made himself yet more criminal;
by nature he was a child of wrath, and then he became so, yet more by his own
transgressions; he was sold under sin, and then he became a willing slave to
it; his own thoughts, words, and works being evil, and that continually, he
forsook God, and dishonored him, and professed enmity against him, and opposed
his depraved will to Gods Holy Will, and so became obnoxious to the infinite
justice of God, which therefore justly inflicts this deserved punishment upon
him.

And now, if knowing the reason, thou do inquire after the person, who by
being so unholy, is become so extremely unhappy; I could say with the Prophet,
thou art the man, this is thy patrimony, as thou art a child of Adam; this thou
art by nature: but the Divine Mercy has rescued thee from this misery, and
therefore I must say, thou were the man, this must have been thy case, had not
the Holy JESUS work't thy Redemption by means as wonderful, as was his pity and
charity.

But before I proceed I must also propound one question. Two men are equally
indebted, and equally unable to pay; the one is patiently forborne and at last
freely acquitted, the other is cast into the dungeon, and a while after
compassionately releast and set at liberty; I demand, is not he that never
entered the Prison, as much bound to love his generous creditor, as he that was
delivered out of it? yes doubtless, or rather more: because his debt is also
forgiven, and yet he is freed from that trouble and sorrow, which his fellow
debtor underwent. Why then, thy gracious Redeemer, by saving thee from the
horrors and torments of Hell, has laid on thee, at least as great obligations
to love him, as if he had brought thee out of it, after thou had been long
detained therein. Therefore I desire, thou would bring thy thoughts back
again to that unpleasant abode, and consider thy self as if thou were shut up
in that dismal dungeon, and then express what thou would give to be releast,
what thou would do for him that should bring thee out of that horrible and
bottomless pit.

I know that they that are afflicted with sharp pains and grievous sicknesses,
would purchase health with all the wealth they have; and I believe no reward
would hire a man, to hold his hand in the fire but for one hours time:
therefore I doubt not but that, if it were in a man's power, he would give this,
and a thousand more worlds, to be brought out of an ever-burning furnace: and I
am persuaded, that if thou will suffer thy fansy to be active in framing the
black and dreadful scene of hellish horrors about thee, thou will then heartily
say, were I owner of the whole universe, I would joyfully give it, to come out
of these ever-burning flames which torment my body, and to be freed from this
never dying worm, the remorses of my guilty conscience, which torture my soul:
but because I have nothing, freely would I give my self to him, that should
bring me out of this woeful place. O I would follow him any where, do any thing
that he should command me, embrace his feet, kiss the ground they tread on, and
give him all the demonstrations of a sincere and passionate Love! Well, thy
petition is granted, before 'twas presented; the Love and Mercy of JESUS has
prevented thy request, and distress: New make good thy vows and resolutions;
Love and Serve JESUS thy Redeemer, and give thy self up wholly to him. I know
that many may be good Christians, without being snatched out of the fire,
without these terrors and affrightments: but I am showing what our condition
had been without a Savior, what is that gulf of perdition, whence JESUS has
saved us, if we will be saved by him: and I mention these terrors of the Lord,
as S. Paul calls them, to persuade men; to be motives of an active and vehement
Love. For it is too observable, that few men seriously consider what Redemption
means, what it was we were redeemed from, else they could no^ be so indevout,
so disobedient, so unthankful to their Savior. S. Paul supposing, as I do
here, that without Christ we were already dead and perish't, makes it the
reason of that Constraining Love which enabled him and other Primitive
Christians, to suffer so patiently, and act so zealously for JESUS; the love of
Christ (says he) constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for
all then were all dead; as if he should say, we were certainly dead,
irrecoverably lost, had not Christ died, to purchase life and salvation for us:
therefore we cannot choose but love him, and it is no wonder if that love be
strong, and if we are governed and acted by it. That thou may therefore love
affectionately and live devoutly, consider seriously that death, the misery of
that condition wherein thou were, and ever must have been, had thou not a
JESUS. I might add, that we were delivered from the power and slavery, as well
as from the condemnation of sin: but this is included in the other, it being
impossible to be saved from the wrath to come, without bringing forth fruits
meet for repentance: and as it is mercy and grace on God's part, so on ours, it
is matter of duty and earnest endeavor, and must be the result and effect of
our love, first that we offend not, and then that we serve diligently, and
faithfully him that redeemed us from our vain conversation, and gave himself
for us, that we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness.

. 7. How we were Redeemed.
A further engagement to love and obey, will be to consider the manner how our
redemption was effected, and the price that was paid for it, thus, The Blessed
Son of God, the Second Person of the Ever-glorious Trinity undertook that work
himself which none else could perform: for us men, and for our salvation, he
came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary,
In praesepe jacet, sed mundum continet ubera sugit, sed angeles paseit. Aug.
Ser. de purific. 2.
and was made man. In this act of his, miracles and mercies seem to vie one
with another; that the God of Eternity should be born in time, that the Creator
of all things should be the Son of a Creature; that the most highest should
abase himself to the low condition of a servant; that God should become an
infant, is a miracle of Love, which we can admire and adore, but never fully
comprehend. The greatness of God is unsearchable, his excellencies and
perfections are incomprehensible, he is infinitely good, powerful, wise, and
holy: Man contrariwise, is in himself wicked and weak, ignorant, impure and
miserable, there is so great a disproportion betwixt God and man, Haec est
mensura amoris, non solum quantum fecit nos, quanta fecit pro nobis, sed and
quantillus factus est pro nobis.
so wide, so immense a distance, that nothing less than an infinite love could
have filled up the gulf betwixt those two so different natures, and united them
into one person. 'Twas never seen that a shepherd would creep upon all four,
and cover himself with a sheep-skin, to call his flock out of danger, and to
expose himself for it: but the good shepherd did much more! When he came to lay
down his life for his lost and wandering sheep, and gather them into his fold;
he took on him, not only the likeness, but the very nature of them: he became
the lamb of God, that he might be the shepherd of mankind. Though he was
infinitely more above man, then men are above beasts, yet he became the son of
man, that he might become the Savior of men: 'Twas never seen that a Sovereign
Prince would seek to reduce to loyalty the most abject of his rebellious
subjects, by mixing blood with them, uniting their families together: but
behold the Supreme Monarch of heaven and earth contracts a near affinity with
his ungrateful rebels, who are as vile and miserable, as they are criminal,
that he may free them from their guilt, and win them to their duty and their
happiness. Proud and wretched sinner! thou would be so far from entering into
the kindred of meaner persons, those that are much thine inferiors, that thou
can hardly endure to be in their company: and behold, the most Glorious and
Holy God, thine offended Sovereign, is become thy near relation, is become thy
Brother, that he may win thine affections and become thy Savior!

His life, all along, was a continuation of his great mercy and humility, he
went about doing good, healing all manner of diseases Corporal and Spiritual,
giving excellent instructions and great examples of virtue. But what we now
consider, and what should most affect us, is, that for our sakes he was a man
of sorrows and acquainted with grief, all the time of his abode here below. At
his first entrance into the world, he was degraded, even below the condition of
the meanest infants, being born in a Stable and laid in a Manger; eight days
after he began to be numbered among the transgressors, receiving the bloody and
painful Sacrament of Circumcision, which belonged only to sinners; in his youth
he lived in poverty and obscurity, and was subject to his Parents; when he
manifested himself to the world, then he perpetually endured the contradiction
of sinners; besides that he lived upon alms, becoming poor for us, who was Lord
of all: he wanted even time to eat what the charity of pious persons afforded
him, and had not so much as a place where he might rest his head. He was
tempted of Satan, that he might succor those that are tempted, he often watched
whole nights to Prayer, and was often faint with tiresome journeys, and hunger,
and thirst: and what is yet worse, he was daily persecuted by ungrateful men,
for whom he endured all this. They slandered him with false imputations of
being a glutton and a wine-bibber; his kind and charitable affability in
conversing with noted sinners, was made matter of accusation, as if he had
consented to their evil deeds; his Divine Doctrine was derided, as if
proceeding from madness; the miracles which he wrought in their behalf, were
said to be done by sorcery, and pact with Beelzebub: and to all these disgraces
and contumelies, they would often have added violence, and stoned him to death,
had he not escaped out of their hands by a hasty flight.

Lord, Mat. 15.32.
thou had compassion on the multitudes, because they had followed thee three
days, and had nothing to eat, and thou livedst above three and thirty years,
waiting upon thy base and fugitive servants, who were become thine enemies,
seeking to prevent their ruin, by the assiduity of thy care and kindness! O
sad ingratitude, that we should be so soon weary in serving thee, when thou
were so patient and indefatigable in acting and suffering for us, for our
happiness and salvation.

. 8. A consideration of the Cross in its four dimensions.
But if we desire to be rooted and grounded in love, and to comprehend and to
comprehend with all Saints the immense charity of the Son of God, Ephesians. 3.17.
which passes knowledge, which infinitely exceeds all Learning in
profitableness and excellency, then measure the love of Christ, by the
dimensions of his Cross, the breadth and the length, the depth and the height
thereof, for therein love appears in its full extent, so that nothing can be
added to it. That the eternal Son of God would become our Brother, by becoming
Man, and would-live in Poverty and Contempt, was very much: but that afterward
he would die for us, in that manner as he did, is the greatest wonder that ever
the world saw. And indeed, there happened more prodigies when he died, than at
all other times of his humiliation; the sun hid himself, darkness overspread
the whole world; the earth shook, the stones and rocks were rent, the graves
were opened, and the vail of the Temple was divided in twain; Nature seemed to
be amazed to see her God suffer, and die upon a cross, greater love has no man
than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend, it is true man cannot
possibly do more, but JESUS did much more: he was God, then he became man that
he might die for his enemies. This is it, whereof S. Paul speaks, when he says
that it was never conceived or seen, how great are the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; We speak (says he) the wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hidden wisdom which none of the Princes of this world knew,
for had they known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory: but
as it is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither is it entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him,
but GOd has revealed them to us by his Spirit. It appears that he speaks (not
of the bliss of heaven but) of the crucifixion of our Blessed Savior, which to
the Jews was a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, and which
neither the senses nor the reason of man could ever comprehend; but, as a
hidden mystery was made known to Christians, by the revelations of the
allknowing Spirit of God. To understand therefore as much as may be, this never
fully understood and never enough admired love of our Redeemer, in dying for
us, let us in the first place view the Breadth of his Cross; that is, the
variety of the torments he endured for us, in the last stage of his uneasy
pilgrimage.

. 9. The Breadth.
We may begin with the manner of his apprehension; he was taken as if he had
been a public enemy to mankind, a thief or a murderer, with swords and
staves, with rudeness and violence; he was betrayed by one of his Disciples,
forsaken by the rest, and then bound and dragged from place to place by those he
had instructed and fed, and in whose behalf he had workt miracles. He was
called an impious blasphemer and voted guilty of death, for confessing a great
and necessary truth, that he was the only Son of God. Afterward he was exposed
a whole night to the indignities and mockeries of his insulting enemies; they
spet upon his sweet and glorious face; they veiled him, and smote his head and
buffetted him; and as if he had been a contemptible idiot, to be made sport
withal, they bad him prophecy, guess who gave him the blows, he was accused
before the Roman Praetor, as being a lewd malefactor, a rebellious traitor who
subverted the people and forbade to pay tribute to Caesar. From thence he was
sent to King Herod, where he was set at naught, and abused by him and his
Soldiers, and then sent back with scorn and contempt to Pilate. Afterward
Barrabas a seditious murderer was preferred to him, and a loud clamor raised by
the people, that he might be crucified and put to death. Then was he whipped
before their eyes, tied to a post like a vile slave, and exposed to the servile
rods, whiles they plough'd furrows upon his back, as the Prophet spoke; the
Soldiers took him, platted a Crown of thorns and pressed it on his head, till
the blood run of all sides of him; they beat him with canes and clubs, and put
a reed instead of a scepter in his hand, and when he was all over spittle and
blood they brought out their mock-King, and Pilate presented him to the people,
and said behold the Man, thinking to move them to pity, by so sad a spectacle;
but nothing less than his death would satisfy their enraged cruelty: therefore
he was condemned, and then abused afresh by the Soldiers, and loaded with his
Cross and driven out of the City to Mount Golgotha. Now here begins a new scene
of sorrows; the afflicted Son of Man, having lost much blood, and suffered so
much; having been rudely haled from the garden to Annas, from Annas to Caiphas,
from Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again, and
from thence to the place of his Execution, arives at last, faint, and weary,
and sorrowful upon Mount Calvary, where he was to die; here his hands and feet
(which are most sensible parts of our bodies, by being most full of nerves)
were pierced through and nailed to the Cross; and though there was a seat where
to rest his body, as the Ancients say, yet the Cross being lift up, and put
into the hollowness of the ground to make it stand upright, his wounded body
was shaken and affected, doubtless with a most acute pain, he was exposed
naked, not only to the view of the multitudes, but also to the open air, which
was extremely cold, in that the Sun was hid, he was burnt inwardly with an
excessive heat and dryness, being tired with so many journies, and being
exhausted of spirits and moisture, by his sorrows and bleeding, insomuch that
he complained of this above all his other sufferings, crying out, I thirst,
(though we may say, that he thirsted most our happiness, that he thirsted to
drink out the dregs of his bitter cup, that we might drink the cup of
Salvation) he wanted the use of his hands and feet, being tied to suffer, so
that he could not so much as stir, nor wipe the blood off of his face, he was
afflicted with the fight of his afflicted Mother, who from her wounded soul
reflected sorrow upon her dying Son and Savior. His soul was also, as it were
crucified, by the sense of the Divine Anger against the sins of men, for the
which he was making expiation, insomuch that he complained, that God had
forsaken him. And lastly, his heart strings were broke, and his body deprived
of life, by a most violent and bitter death. And now, who shall not love JESUS?
and who shall not admire that love which is expressed in the breath of the Cross?
Lord how exceeding broad was thy Cross, which contained so many sorts of
torments! Nothing can be compared to it, but thy charity, which made thee take
it up, that we might be charged with nothing, but a pleasant and easy yoke!
But Lord, why do we, most vile and sinful creatures refuse to bear thy light
burden, when thou the Most Holy and Most Highest have born for us so sad and
intolerable a load.

. 10. The length.
We are now to measure the length of the Cross, that is, the time of Christ's
bitter passion, the tedious duration of his sufferings, which began with his
birth and continued to his last breath. The Life of JESUS, as we have seen,
was, as it were, a chain of miseries, every link, every connection, had
something grievous and afflictive, he was a Man of sorrows: therefore, we no
where read that ever he laughed or enjoyed the pleasures and the mirth of this
world: but that he suffered much and wept several times, is recorded by the
Evangelists. Every day was, in some manner, the day of his Crucifixion (which
to us is Good, but to him was sad Friday:) for he knowing all along what he was
to suffer, and living in expectation of that cruel death: we may say that his
fears did, in some manner, prevent his murderers, and by anticipation, acted
upon him, while he lived, what they were to inflict on him to put him to death:
for he was pleased to assume, together with our nature, our innocent passions
and infirmities. I have a Baptism (says he) to be Baptized with, and how am I
constrained until it be accomplished! that was the Baptism of his Blood, which
he wished for, because of his love to mankind, his great desire of paying our
ransoms: but feared, because of the repugnance of his humane nature, to such
bitter sufferings; wherefore (says he) (...), I am constrained, I am in a
straight betwixt two, I wish, and yet I fear to die. But that which we most
properly call his passion, because it exceeded the rest of his sufferings,
lasted eighteen hours, without intermission, nine of Thursday-night, and nine
of Friday; from the time of his agony, in the garden, about nine at night,
while three in the afternoon of the day following; all that time he suffered
those several sorts of pains and tortures, which are already mentioned; all
that time, he drank full draughts of that bitter cup, the fear whereof made him
sweat drops of blood, when he began to taste of it; all that time he suffered
what no tongue can express; but what all hearts should endeavor to feel, and
to think of daily. Lord JESU, thou were tormented a long time, that we might
not be tormented to all Eternity; grant that we may endure any thing for thee,
and from thee our God, who did endure so much for men, and from men.

. 11. The depth.
We have seen that bar of the Cross, on which the hands of our Blessed Savior
were nailed, the breadth and the length, that is, the variety and the
tediousness of the pains and sufferings, he underwent for us? Now we are to
consider the biggest piece which stood upright, whereon his body rested and his
feet were nailed; the depth and the height, that is, the pureness and the
greatness of his sorrows. If we read with attention the passion of Christ in
the four Gospels, we shall see our Blessed Redeemer, as it were, sunk into a
deep abyss of misery, by the heavy burden of our sins; he might well cry by
his Prophet, See whether there is any sorrow like unto my sorrow? for the
greatest of humane afflictions admit of many comforts, whereas he was deprived
of all; as there was no part in us but was infected with sin, there was none in
him but was affected with pain; he was all over stripes and sores, an universal
wound within and without; he suffered in all his capacities, in his outward and
inward senses, in all the parts and faculties of his soul and body: the very
circumstances of his passion, did all concur to make it more bitter and
afflictive. He was deprived of that ordinary comfort of being assisted by his
friends, all the Disciples forsook him and fled; as the Prophet had foretold of
him, I have trodden the wine press alone and of the people there was none with
me; Isa. 63.
I looked and there was none to help, I wondered that there was none to uphold.
He was like a mild and deffence-less-lamb in the midst of ravenous wolves,
there were none about him, but such as thirsted for his blood. And no wonder if
man forsook him, when he was in some manner forsaken even by his Father. It
pleased God to give him up to the cruelties of wicked men and the sorrows of
death; and that his Divine Nature, (though personally and inseparably united to
his humanity) should for a time suspend the effects of its beatifying union,
and leave him, suffer as a man in soul and body, the greatest pains, without
the least comforts. They that saw our Crucified Savior suffer so patiently, as
not to open his mouth to complain, might have thought that he had no sense of
pain: therefore he cries out so bitterly, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Why, do thou suffer me to be plunged into this gulf of sorrow, so that I
have nothing but anguish within and without? Why do thou suffer me to be
almost overwhelmed by so great a distress, and art so far from helping me and
from the words of my complaint? Psalm. 22.
Lord, we had deserved to sink, and evermore to cry and groan in the bottomless
pit: and to rescue us, Thou art pleased to descend very low: and with strong
crying and tears, to say, de profundis clamavi, out of the depths have I cried
unto thee, Psalm. 130.
O Lord hear my voice; be pleased to hear us dearest Lord when we call upon
thee, and make thy voice sink into our hearts, and there find a cheerful
admission, and a constant and sincere obedience.

. 12. The height.
Now we have only the height of the Cross to look on, that is, the sublimity,
the greatness of the torments of Christ's crucifixion; that in this sense his
Cross was very high, appears already by what has been said: and yet we may
consider further; that he being conceived by the Holy Ghost of a most pure
Virgin, was therefore of a most healthful constitution; so that his senses,
being very quick and apprehensive, were sensible of pain beyond other men's:
and so all the blows and wounds he received, and his being nailed and
stretched, three long hours on the Cross, as upon the rack, must needs have
been a most exquisite torture. Also, the vigor of his nature being neither
weakened nor spent, by age or distempers, he being full of strength and in the
flower of his age, was capable to taste the smart and sharpness of his pain, to
the very last moment of his life: and so it is written by S. Luke, that he cried
with a loud voice, when he gave up the ghost, to show that he was still very
strong, and that his death was bitter and violent to extremity. There was
likewise an invisible Cross, which afflicted his soul, and made it sorrowful
even unto death; his heart was like wax, Psalm. 22.
melted in the midst of his bowels: and in the midst of so many and such
intolerable pains, his murderers shook their heads, made mouths at him,
scoft at his sorrows by cruel and insulting mockeries, and by their tongues and
derisions aggravated those sufferings, which their hands could hardly increase;
but that the Cross of Christ was higher in the greatness of it is pains than
that of any Martyr, of any man that ever suffered, is evident enough only by
considering who it was, that was crucified on it: for it was more that JESUS,
being perfect God as well as Man, should shed one drop of blood, than that all
Men and Angels should for Millions of years bear the greatest torments. Lord we
were wonderfully made by thy power, but we are yet more wonderfully redeemed by
thy mercy! Lord what is man, that thou should thus be mindful of him! or
rather, what is man, that he is unmindful of thee!

. 13. What an infinite love is expressed by the Cross.
Now we have seen the whole frame of the Cross, writ all over in blood, with
characters of love, expressions of the greatest kindness, for a testimony that
JESUS loved us unto death. Not any sorrow or anguish in his soul, not any gap
or wound in his body, but are as many mouths to cry aloud in the ears of all
men, Behold what manner of love, God had for his enemies, his sinful and
unworthy creatures, to suffer such things, to die in such a manner, for to
redeem them and make them happy! Now let us, if we can comprehend, the breadth
and the length, O dilectio quam magnum est vinculum tuum quo ligari potuit
Deus. Idiot.
the height and the depth of the love of JESUS, that love which bound him much
harder than the cords of the Jews, and nailed him to his cross much faster than
those Irons which pierced his hands and feet: for he that could, with one word,
cast his enemies to the ground, could easily have broke their bands and escaped
from them, but that his love did constrain him, and make him desirous and
willing, thus to die. What man would suffer one half of what Christ did, for
his dearest Benefactor? And then, how immense and wonderful was that charity
which he expressed in suffering the ignominy and pains of the Cross, for those
that were his enemies and had highly injured him, and from whom he could expect
no reward, but only to be loved again! Let us therefore remember it throughout
this whole book, or rather throughout our whole life, that we have been
redeemed from eternal despair and misery, and from our vain and sinful
conversation, not by any corruptible thing, as silver and gold, but by the
precious Blood of Christ, shed with great pain and great ignominy.

. 14. Of the eternal happiness Jesus merited for us by his death.
This love of JESUS is more already by far, than ours can answer; Could our
hearts burn perpetually with those brightest flames of love which beatifie the
Cherubims, could they contain all, the most passionate affections of all
Saints, both in heaven and earth, yet we could not love JESUS so much as he
deserves, for having died to save us from eternal death: and yet he did more;
he suffered death that we might have life, that we might have eternal life; Not
only that we might not be entirely miserable, but also that we might be
perfectly happy. Heaven is the purchase of the Blood of Christ, as well as
Redemption from hell; God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, when we were dead in trespasses and sins, has quickened us together
with Christ, and has raised us up, Ephesians. 2.5.
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Let us
meditate a while, upon that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory
reserved in heaven for us, 2 Cor. 4.17.
and in it consider the same dimensions, as in the price wherewith it was
bought, the Cross of our Savior: and it will greatly press and increase our
obligations to love him.

It is (...), as S. Paul calls it; each word is a part of its dimension. First,
the Breadth; it comprehends all joys and pleasures, all things that are good
and desirable, all that can yield satisfaction, and create happiness to a man:
even that incomprehensible and increated goodness, which is the inexhaustible
fountain of perfect Bliss and Felicity; in whose presence there is fullness of
joy, at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Secondly, It Is
Height. It is above the regions of the air, in the highest heavens; the
sublimity and greatness of it is glory, is expressed, by being like the Angels of
God; by shining forth as the Sun; by a kingdom, a crown incorruptible, a crown
of life, and sitting with the Son of God in his throne. Thirdly it is Depth. It
is pure and unmingled, it admits of nothing afflictive: neither death nor
sorrow, neither hunger nor thirst, neither pain nor anguish; all tears are
wiped from their eyes. There is the absence of all evil and the presence of all
good; therefore it is called the joy of our Lord, than which, nothing can
express a greater: for God is entirely and perfectly happy, and so incapable of
any sorrow, that the least sight of the Beatifical vision would turn hell it
self into a paradise. Fourthly and lastly, Its Length, It Is never ceasing
duration; it admits of no end or period, it is everlasting, it is eternal, it
is for ever and ever; after as many millions of years as there is drops of
water in the sea, it will but begin: and after as many thousands of millions
more, it will be no nearer ending, then it was at first, still eternal, and
ever eternal. This is that Bliss which we had forfeited by sin, and are
reintitled to by the passion of Christ; that Bliss which if often and duly
considered, would make us despise the world, long for heaven, love
affectionately, and serve diligently that JESUS who offers it to us, and died
to purchase it: Wherefore S. Paul prays so earnestly for the Ephesians, that
God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation, the eyes of their
understanding enlightened, Ephesians. 1.18
that they might know what is the hope of his calling: and what the riches of
his glory of his inheritance in the Saints.

That we might once be possessed of this bliss, as well as delivered from hell,
was the Cause why JESUS descended down from heaven, became poor, took on him
the form of a Servant, and humbled himself unto death, even the death of the
Cross; for the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2.
he despised the shame and endured the Cross, says S. Paul. That joy, we may
say, was not the enjoyment of heavenly bliss, for himself; 'twas his without
suffering; there was no need he should bear the Cross, for to obtain it, he had
a sure title to it by nature: the joy therefore that was set before him, was
the joy of saving us, the joy of rescuing us from the jaws of death, the gulf
of eternal perdition; the joy of paying the price of our Redemption; the joy of
making us capable of eternal joys; the joy of purchasing the glories and
felicities of heaven for us; in a word the joy of showing us his love, and
expecting the returns of ours. This was the joy, why, he despised the shame,
because his shame should raise us to glory; this was the joy, why, he endured
the Cross, because his Cross should exalt us to a happy and honorable Throne.

This meditation of the great and manifold benefits of God, and the wonderful
love and charity, he has showed us, in JESUS, we may and should prosecute much
farther, in all instances: for it is infinite; and never enough to be considered
and admired. But Reader, if that little, I have here set down, does not affect
thee, and if being affected with it, thou do not resolve to return to God,
all possible acknowledgments and demonstrations of a grateful love, Haeece via
a meris est vera non ficta: via cordialis, non verbalis: via fructuosa non
ociosa: via non solum sermonis, sed etiam operis. Idiot.
then read no further: for, as what precedes is matter of mercy from Gods part,
so what follows is matter of duty on thine. I shall now infer that we must love
God, because he first loved us; and that if the love of JESUS to us, has made
him bear our Cross, our love to him must make us bear his yoke: if he died for
us, because he loved us, then we must live to him, to make it appear that we
love him. Our love to Christ (says an excellent late Author) is not a subtle
airy, and metaphysical notion, Sherl. 412.
as some represent it, but is a vital principle of action which governs our
lives, and makes us fruitful in good works: thus it should be at least, and
thus I intend it, the trial of love is obedience; if ye love me (says our
Blessed Savior) keep my Commandments.

. 15. What all these benefits require from us.
Now then we are to consider, that God giving knowledge of salvation to men,
has also thereby proclaimed their duty: Manifesting his love, he has engaged
and required theirs; as our being called to be Christians makes a great and
real change, as to the happiness of our condition: a great and real change it
ought also to make, as to the holiness of our conversation. Therefore S. Romans
2.16.
Paul calls the Gospel, the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes, and he prays for the Ephesians, Ephess 3.18
that they might know the love of Christ, that so they might be filled with all
the fullness of God: as to say, that the knowledge of the love of Christ is
exceeding powerful and efficacious, and would replenish them with all graces
and virtues; for this cause he sets so high a value upon the excellency of this
knowledge, Phil. 3.8.
esteeming all the world but dung in comparison of it; and he exhorting the
Cretians to be ready to every good work, puts them in mind that they, who were
once disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, had been delivered from that
unhappy condition by the appearance of the love of God our Savior toward man:
Tit. 3.
as in other places, he exhorts Christians, to walk worthy of their calling;
worthy of the Gospel; thereby declaring that the manifestation of the Divine
Love, in the Preaching of the Gospel, was the promulgation, as of their
happiness, so of their duty: whereby they were rescued, as well from living as
from perishing in their sins. It Is the appearance of that grace of God which
brings salvation, Tit. 2.11.
that teaches men to live, soberly, righteously and godly: and it is the
receiving and crediting that Heavenly Doctrine, that quenches the fiery darts
of Satan, that purifies the heart, and overcomes the world; so that the bare
belief of the truth of the New Testament is a strong and indispensable
obligation to a cheerful, universal, and persevering obedience to all its
precepts; the very profession of being Christians does strictly bind us to the
performance of all Christian duties. But the necessity of a Holy Faith and a
Holy Life has been so fully evinced and asserted, and all things that pertain
to life and godliness so clearly and learnedly explained by Catholic Writers
Ancient and Modern, especially many Pious Fathers and Sons of this Church,
since the Reformation, that I shall not insist upon the fundamentals, either of
Faith or Practice, to enforce it; As indeed my design is not to instruct, but
to move the affections; not to argument or explain, but to draw inferences from
known and granted premises, to administer prudential helps and Religious
counsels, and by devout meditations to affect the heart.

. 16. An invitation unto the Cloister of love.
I ask therefore; have thou conceived a fair Idea of Christianity? have thou
observed the glory and greatness of it is Mysteries, the holiness of it is
Doctrine, and the perfection of its precepts and counsels? have thou considered
and admired the great exemplar of all virtues, the Holy JESUS, author of this
Holy Institution? have thou read his life with an observing eye, and have thou
viewed the fair copies of this perfect Original, which have been drawn by many
of his Saints, in the imitation of his example? have thou weighed the
excellency of his promises, the great immunities, and the invaluable advantages
which belong to his followers? have thou seriously pondered the great
obligations which the love of JESUS has laid upon thee? and art thou desirous
to be happy by loving again, and being grateful? If so, enter this Cloister,
love JESUS and thou shall reign with JESUS.

The Cloister I mean is not the precinct of a particular Abbey, or the
confinement of a narrow Cell, but the Catholic Church, whose enclosure is
large enough to entertain all the Religions in the world, all that are of the
Christian Order: And the Rule I would have thee follow, is not that of any
Founders, nor even that of Pachomius said to have been brought down by Angels:
but that which the Son of God himself delivered, the Gospel-rule, the Christian
Laws and appointments, has not God given his Beloved Son, the heathen for his
inheritance, Psalm. 2.
and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession? Cursic arctcmus Christi
professionem quam ille latissime voluit patere and ego certe sic optarim
Evangelicam Religionem sic omnibus esse cordi, etc. Ench.
Why then (says Erasmus) Should we confine the excellency and perfection of
Christianity to particular places? Why should we make that short and narrow
which Christ would have to be of an universal extent? If it be words we affect,
is not a City a great Monastery, the Abbot whereof is the Bishop, set over it
by Christ? Would to God the Christian Rule were so well beloved and observed
that no man might look or desire the Benedictin or Franciscan. I say so too,
all this is true and to be wished: yet the universal comprehends many
particular Churches, and the Christian Rule has also many several
interpretations: therefore to be plain and positive; the Church of England (as
the purest part, or member of the Catholic; which has repurg'd corrupt
innovations, and maintains a Blessed Conformity with Antiquity) is that which I
recommend to thee above all others: and for the best interpretation of the
Sacred Canon, the Doctrine and Worship of this Church is that, which I would
have thee prefer to all the rest.

. 17. The vow to be taken at the entrance of it.
But (because I speak not to dissenters, nor intend to dispute with them) thou will say, that thou have entered this Cloister already, and have undertaken it is
Rule; but though it be so, thou may do it the second time, by a second
choice, an afterelection. Thou did not come of thy self but wast brought in,
when first thou entred'st this society, and 'twas by a proxy thou promisedst to
observe the orders of it: therefore now that thou have the use of reason, it is
very necessary thou should do it again, by a free and considerate act of
thine own will. Ratify then thy former engagements by being confirmed, Quod
summum est id omnibus est enitendum ut saliem mediocria assequamur, nec est
quod ullum vitae genus ab hoc scopo submoveamus, etc. Eras.
if thou art not, and if thou art, by a hearty and sincere endeavor to perform
thy vows and promises, which are as follows. First, To renounce the Devil and
all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, with all covetous
desires of the same, and the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, To believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, To keep Gods Holy Will,
and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of thy life.

This vow contains all thy duty, the highest pitch of Christian perfection,
rules for the most Regular and Spiritual Life; let thy serious application, and
earnest endeavor to observe it, discriminate and sever thee from the profane
and less Religious world: Thou need no distinct enclosure, no distinct
habits, no distinct patrons or offices, thy sincere Study, thy Religious care
to discharge this obligation, will sufficiently cloister thee in, from the
looser society and conversation of men, and will make a difference great enough
betwixt thee and them.

But though thou do remain in the civil society of the world, and the
neighborhood of thy neighbor: yet various are the ways that lead through the
world to heaven, and here I undertake to teach thee a sure and short one,
through which all glorified Saints have past. Some persons here, Qui timendo
non facit male, male faceret si liceret: itaque etsi facultas non datur,
voluntos retinetur. August. in Psalm. 32.
are eminent in one virtue, some in another: some are guided by hope and some
by fear: Many different are the considerations and helps whereby men are
brought to make themselves happy in doing their duty: but the motive, the
guide, the way, Dilectio est via rectissima absque devio: via brevis absque
taedio: via plana absque tumulo: via clara absque nubilo: via secura absque
periculo, etc. Idiot. Cont.
the instrument I recommend to thee above all others, is Love. Love is the
strongest motive, the surest guide, the safest way, the best instrument in the
world: to live well, to keep thee from wandering, to bring thee to heaven, to
conquer all oppositions, and do the work of God thoroughly. Love has a general
intendance over all virtues and duties, and makes them pleasant to us, and
acceptable to God. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Love, and thou can
never do amiss; love and thou can never miscarry.

. 18. Of Love, and first of Self-love.
Love is the common prince and parent of other passions, as they all take their
Laws, so they take their Origin from it: Or, to speak more properly, Amor
inhians habere quod amatur, cupiditas est; idem habens eoque fruens, laetitia
ect; fugiens quod eiadversatur timor est; idque cum acciderit sentiens,
tristitia est. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 14. c. 7.
love it self is all passions, and it obtains several different names,
according to its several acts and objects. Love (says S. Aug.) is called
desire, when it gasps after its beloved object; when it is possessed of it, it
takes another denomination, and is called joy or pleasure, when it flies from
what it abhors, it has the name of fear; and it is called sorrow, when what it
feared overtakes it: But still love is the only passion: desire, anger, joy and
sorrow, hope and fear are either the motions or acts: or else the accidents of
it. This clearly shows the great power and activity of this noble passion: for
it is well known that the greatest, and indeed all humane actions that are free,
proceed from these natural affections, and so are the effects of love. There is
no need to distinguish the several sorts thereof, declaring that love is,
either natural or supernatural, sensual or spiritual, of friendship or of
interest; for all these are the same faculty, or passion in man, differing in
their principles or objects only; neither would it much avail to give and
explain a ^^rate and studied definitions of love, which is much better felt
than expressed, and much better declared by actions than words: it will be more
useful to consider, that, as love is the principle of all passions, so it is of
all virtues and vices. This fountain sends forth the clearest and the foulest
streams; and like all other things, the greater its excellency, the worse is
its abuse: so that it should be our greatest care, to use it well, and set it
upon the right object.

No joy in enjoyment without love, without it no pleasure in fruition: it is
the great instrument of happiness, if we place it aright, and it brings the
greatest infelicities if we misplace it. It Is a misguided love that makes men
vicious, that causes all the disorders in the world: because men love
themselves more than God; and so would be Gods to themselves, the Authors of
their own happiness, expecting their greatest felicities, either from their
bodies as the sensual Epicures, or from their minds, as the proud Stoics.
Hence it is, that in the head of a long catalogue of the blackest sins, S. Paul
sets self-love as the cause, and origin of all the rest: saying, that in the
worst and most perilous times, Men should be lovers of their own selves, 2 Timothy
3.2.4.
and again, that they should be lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God;
which, being the greatest depravation of the understanding and of the will of
men, plungeth men into the greatest sins, and thence into the greatest
miseries. Certain it is that piety or true goodness consists in willingly
submitting ones self to the Divine Pleasure, either to suffer or obey: and
certain it is that self-love will admit of neither, it makes a man incapable of
Religion, the Essence whereof is to deny our own, to comply with God's Will:
and so instead of that Godliness, Justice and Sobriety which are the three
generals comprehensive of all Religious duties, this muddy head-spring,
self-love, sends forth three muddy streams, which cause the overflowing of
ungodliness, and almost drown the world under a deluge of wickedness. These be
the love of sensual pleasures, called voluptuousness; the love of Riches,
called covetousness, and the vainglorious love of honor, called pride or
ambition. These three are disclaimed and renounced by all Christians in the
first part of their Baptismal vow: for the love of them confounds the world and
all Religion; makes men criminal in souls, bodies, and estates, and is the
great enemy to their rest and salvation. Therefore S. John who calls these the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, gives us this
necessary caution; 1 John 2.15.
love not the world, neither the things that are in the world; if any man love
the world, the love of the father is not in him; that is, as our Blessed
Savior says, Mat. 6.24.
no man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one and despise the other: ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. There is no halting betwixt God and Baal, 1 Kings 18.21.
the one or the other must be acknowledged for Lord; there cannot be two
contrary Sovereigns together; and the same thing cannot be granted to two
several competitors; if we love the world it reigns in our hearts and God is
excluded: if we give our love to the world, we cannot possibly give it to God
also; Amor motus est cordis qui cum se inordinate movet, cupiditas dicitur: cum
vero ordinatus est charitas apellatur. Aug. de subst. dil. c. 2.
so then the love of our selves is concupiscence, the mother of all sin and
impurity, and the love of God is grace or charity, the fountain of all holiness
and virtue: and these two, according as they are predominant in men, make here
the distinction betwixt the penitent and the impenitent, betwixt the just and
the unjust: and will make the great difference hereafter, betwixt those that
shall dwell in the embraces of the God of love to eternity, and those that
shall dwell with everlasting burning; for every man is what he loves, (as S.
Talis est quisque qualis est dilectio ejus; terram diligis, terra es, etc. Aug.
Tract. 2. in 1 John
Augustine says) the irresistible power of that mighty passion does in some
manner transform him, into that which his love imbraceth: and therefore to know
whether a man be good or bad, we inquire not what he knows or what he believes,
but what he does love: being sure that his morals are of the same nature as his
love; because his desires and actions are all guided by it.

. 19. How they that will be professed lovers of JESUS must mortify self-love.
This makes it our greatest duty, as it is our greatest interest, to rule by
reason and Religion that passion which certainly will rule over us, to set our
love upon the right object, upon God, not upon our selves. Not that we should,
or can be our own enemies, and seek our own ruin; no man ever yet hated his
own flesh, Ephesians. 29.
says S. Paul; the worst of Misanthropes are kind to themselves: and we may as
soon lose our being, as the desire of our well-being; and indeed, as we should
have, in the state of innocence, so we may still love our selves in God: only
God must be preferred before all; and it is impossible we should be happy, but
in loving him above all things, with all our hearts and souls; but now that we
are in a state of sin and depravation, there must be a dereliction of our
natural desires and affections, a renunciation to our own wills: that we may
comply with the will of God, and be guided by his Divine Laws. In the time of
man's integrity, God was to be regarded and loved first and most of all, so it
must be still: the difference is, that then man did it naturally, and now by a
supernatural assistance: he did it then by the grace of his Original
Righteousness, and now by the grace of the Gospel; he did it then without
reluctance, now he has sinful appetites and passions which he must deny and
mortify, before he can do it. Therefore our Blessed Savior requires it, at
the very entrance of his School, as a necessary qualification to all that will
be his Disciples, that they should deny themselves and hate all things in
comparison of him: Luke 9.13.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross
daily and follow me: 14.20.
and again if any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife
and children, and brothers and sisters, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple; that is, he that will own JESUS, and he owned by him, must in all
things give him the preeminence; must relinquish his natural desires, deny his
own will, that he may yield an humble obedience to God; he must forsake all
things that come in competition with him; and even part with his dearest
relations and his own life, (as though he hated them) rather than commit what
God has forbidden, or disclaim what he would have us profess; this
self-abnegation, Ule satis se diligit qui sedulo agit ut summafrnatur bono.
this daily self-crucifixion is no act of hatred, as the world might think: but
the greatest kindness we can show to our selves or others: as he that cuts off
one of his limbs, hates not himself, but seeks the preservation of his body;
and he that casts his goods overboard, hates them not, but prefers his safety
to them: so in this case, he that parts with his earthly enjoyments, hates them
not, but prefers heaven to this earth; he that loses this present life, hates
it not, but loves eternal life beyond it; and he that forsakes his friends or
parents to follow his Savior, hates them not, but loves JESUS above them, and
seeks to win them to JESUS. In this case the promise is verified, that he that
parts with any thing for Christ's sake, receives an hundredfold, in
compensation: and he that loses his life, certainly finds it; Therefore,
hating our kindred and our own lives, is otherwise expressed in S. Mat. 10.37.
Matthew; he that loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me,
etc. As much as to say, that it is only required, that the love of God should
be predominant; that JESUS should be dearer to us, than all persons whatever;
and that, in the first place, we should love God with all our minds, with all
our strength and with all our souls: for then afterward, the love of our
selves and others being subordinate would become regular and innocent.

. 20. Of the love of God.
Now as all sins and miseries proceed from a misplaced love; so all virtues and
felicities are the product of love well-guided, and placed on the right object;
this is as beneficial and advantageous, as the other is pernicious: that is,
(as S. Sicut radix omnium malorum est cupiditas: ita radix omnium bonorum est
charitas. Sermon. de Charit.
Augustine says) that as self-love is the root of all evil, so the love of
God, is the root of all good, the stock whence all virtues do grow. The
excellency of Divine Love is so great, so transcendent, Sine charitate fides
potest esse; sed non prodesse. Aug. 1 Cor. 13.
that it alone is accepted on its own account, and all other things for its
sake; a faith strong enough to work miracles, alms the most expensive, and even
the flames of Martyrdom profit nothing without love, as S. Paul teaches; love
it is that makes all good works meritorious in the best sense; love it is that
gives a value to all other virtues; or rather, it is love that produces all
good works and virtues, as they are so indeed. Love is the discharge of our
whole duty, the fulfilling of the law, Romans 13.10
says S. Paul; love is that grace which renews and sanctifies our natures and
abides for ever; it is the greatest, the most excellent gift of God; it is even
the Divine Spirit, Vnitas Spiritus continet omnia. Sermon. Pent.

Donum est Spiritus Sanctus in quo nobis omnia bona dantur.


who unites all things within the bonds of love and unity, says S. Augustine,
and with whom all good things are ever given. Divines teach that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son, by way of love; wherefore he is called,
nexus amoris quo conjungitur Pater cum Filio, and Filius cum Patre; that is, in
the Language of the Church, that in the Unity of the same Spirit the Father and
the Son live and reign evermore; Charitas qua pa^er diligit filium and filius
patrem, quae est Spiritus Sanctus, ineffabilem communionem amborum demonstrat.
De Trin. l. 15.
or, as S. Augustine expresses it, the love wherewith the Father and the Son
love mutually is the Holy Spirit, and represents best the Mystery of their
Incomprehensible Union.

Now that Divine Spirit, which is the eternal love of God to himself, is given
to us, in the grace of love or charity (which are one and the same) whereby we
are all joined together into one body, and all united to God; therefore in our
holding Communion with the Church, we are commanded to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace; Ephesians. 4.3.
and we are taught, Romans 5.5.
that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is
given to us; 2 Cor. 13.14.
and that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost are all one: so that to come to the highest pitch,
and finish the elogium of love, we may say with S. John, that God is love, 1 John 4.16.
and then we have said all. God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells
in God and God in him, that is, God is an abyss of love and goodness; by love
he gives himself to us, and by love we give up our selves to him, and are
transformed into him. Wonder not therefore, Deus chari, tas est; brevis laus
sed ma^na laus: brevis in sermon and magna in iatellectu, etc. Aug. Tract. 9.
in Ep. Johan.
if the effects of love are so glorious and wonderful, when it proceeds
immediately from God, and is the communication of himself to us; when it is the
grace of Jesus Christ, and the most precious gift of the Divine Spirit; when it
is the Sanctification of our natures, and the bettering and perfecting of the
noblest of humane affections, natural love, that powerful passion whereby all
things and all men are governed.

. 21. Of the properties of love. The first.
Though the properties of love in general be better known by experience than
they can be by discourse: Ineffabilem prorsus ego sentio amorem Dei; and qui
sentiri magis quam dici possit. Basil.
yet it may serve to good purpose to say something of them; the first whereof
is, that love always imbraceth what is good, either in truth or appearance: for
Man's inclinations are still the same, as they were in the state of innocence;
though much depraved: we still pursue after what we think will make us happy;
only we mistake. Like the bramble in the fable, which having lost a rich
freight of the finest silks, and now takes hold of the coarsest stuffs, to
recover its loss; so have all men a secret sense, that they are fallen from a
state of felicity, and have lost a jewel of infinite value, which still they
esteem and love, though they know it not: and therefore now, to recover the
eminency of their first station, they are climbing upon every molehill, petty
mountains of ambition; to recover their lost jewel, they pick up every pebble
stone; where they see a glimpse of beauty, where they relish any thing of
goodness, there they set their love and affection, as if that were the summum
bonum, which is but an imperfect shadow of it; so that we are like an
unfortunate lover, who, being seized by a phrensy, forgets and forsakes his
Mistress, and dotes on her picture. We neglect God, and fall in love with those
things that have the least impress of his perfection: and then, like Idolaters
we pay that worship to the work, which is due to the maker only.

Therefore ought we to take great heed, that we be not taken with every seeming
beauty or goodness: but that we examine whether that be the thing which will
make us entirely happy, and beyond which we shall wish for nothing. For, if it
be not, we must pass it by, and seek further, and never rest, nor set our
hearts on any thing, till we have found that true and perfect good, most
obvious and easy to be found, which being loved will be certainly possessed, and
being possessed will make us perfectly happy; and that is God alone. It is the
meditation of S. Augustine, Amaturus and honorem and forte non perventurus: --
quis me amavit and non ad me pervenit? -- quisquis me quaerit cum ipso sum,
etc. Tract. 10. in Ep. Johan.
Thou may seek after honors and not obtain them; thou may labor for
riches, and remain poor; thou may dote on pleasures, and have many sorrows:
but our God, the Supreme Goodness says, Who, ever sought me, and found me not?
who, ever defir'd me, and obtained me not? who, ever loved me, and mist of me?
I am with him that seeks for me; he has me already that wishes for me; and he
that loves me is sure of me: the way to come to me is neither long nor
difficult; love makes me present to every lover.

. 22. The second.
A second property of love is; that it never rests and is never satisfied,
until it be possessed of the beloved object; This makes abused worldlings so
busy, so perpetually restless and active about the purchase of their beloved
vanities: and this makes devout Christians, like S. Paul, Phil. 3.
never to count themselves to have apprehended: but forgetting the things which
are behind, and reaching forth to those that are before, to press forward
toward the mark, the price of their high calling, the object of their love and
most passionate desires. This restlessness and activity of love found work
enough for the Fathers of the Deserts; whose indefatigable pains to mortify
their sinful appetites; whose unwearied diligence to serve God; whose swift and
violent motion heavenward is the object of our wonder, and upbraids our sloth
and negligence. They were almost wholly freed from the necessities of the body,
which is the endless task and work of other men, and yet they were always
employed; they had almost nothing to do, and yet were never idle; the love of
Eternity, the love of JESUS kept them in action; they dwelt in peace, and yet
were never at rest. Our heart, which is the seat of love, can never be quiet,
till it returns within Gods embraces, till it be possessed of that infinite good,
which all men love, though but a few know it. See the several plots and
undertakings of men in the world, it is love sets them at work: it is to obtain
what their blind affections run after, that they are so assiduous and so
laborious. See the prayers and pious exercises, the self-denial and
mortifications, the manifold acts of charity and the great patience of
Christians in the Church: it is love also has set them their task and makes
them so diligent so watchful till they have fulfilled it. We sometimes wipe the
tears from our eyes, and our sorrows admit of joyful intervals; our anger does
not last always, and sometimes hatred is asleep: Habet omnis amor vim suam, nec
potest vacare amor, in anima amantis. Aug.
but love like the heart wherein it dwells, can never cease to act and move
till it cease to be, where ever love is, it shows it is life and power, and is
always doing.

. 23. The third.
In the third place, as love is active, so it is effective; it does not spend
it self in useless and insignificant attempts; it is strength is great, as well
as it is endeavors. Great are the dangers and difficulties which love
overcomes; it carries the ambitious lover of honor through many uneasy perils
to a fading laurel; it carries the covetous lover of riches through the most
hard and slavish labors, to his false and treacherous mammon; and it carries
likewise the devout lover of JESUS through obedience and self-humiliation,
through briers and uneasy crosses, through patience and the greatest
sufferings to the enjoyment of his Beloved. Love can do all things, since it
brought God down from heaven to become man, and die for man. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.35, etc.
says S. Paul, Shall tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay, in all these things we are more then
conquerors, through him that loved us; for I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; As much as
to say, that the power of love is irresistible, that it answers all objections
and conquers all obstacles: notwithstanding man's high provocations and great
unworthiness, love made the Almighty lay down the arms of his just vengeance,
and open his bosom of mercy, to give his dear and only Son to man for a
Savior; Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. And likewise man
is enabled or rather forced by love to do and suffer any thing; as soon as
Divine Love enters a man's heart, of proud, it makes him humble; of lustful and
intemperate, it makes him chaste and sober; of covetous, it makes him
charitable; of dainty and effeminate it makes him a Martyr. No ill habits so
deeply rooted, but love can pluck them up; no cross so heavy but love can bear
it. Many waters cannot quench love (says Solomon) neither can the floods drown
it. Cant. 8.7.
No, the strongest torrent of affliction is but like drops of water sprinkled
upon the fire, it increases the flames and ardency thereof. 6.
Love is as strong as death, and death is very strong, Magnum verbum fortis ut
mors dilectio; magnificentius exprimi non potuit fortitudo charitatis, quis
enim morti resistat? ignibus undis, ferro, regibus resistitur, venit una mors,
quis ei resistit? nihil illa fortius, propterea viribus ejus charitas
comparatur. Aug. in Psalm. 121.
stronger than all visible creatures. We daily fight against death and beat it
back; by rest and food and Physic, we dispute the victory with it many years;
but it is ever victorious at last; so is love, it never gives over, till it
has conquered all oppositions; it is courage increases together with
difficulties; the more obstacles in its way, the greater it is endeavors, the
more fierce it is contentions. Death severs a man from himself, and disunites
what seems inseparable: love also takes the lovers soul from him and unites it
to the beloved, so that he lives more in what he loves than in himself; love is
as strong as death; Death converts the greatest sinners, or at least keeps them
from sinning at all, any longer: so does love, it certainly mortifies all, even
the most reigning sins, it will not suffer them to sin that love God. We can
tame wild beasts by industry; overcome the barrenness of the earth by labor;
resist the angry elements by Art and Physic; no evil but has a remedy, only
death has none, there is no striving against it: so that nothing can better
express the irresistible power of love, than to say that it is as strong as
death.

. 24. The fourth.
The last property of love I shall now mention, is, that love sweetens bitter
things, makes our labors pleasant, and even our sufferings delightful. How
heavy is that yoke which is imposed by an ungrateful hand! the Soldier pressed
to the service can hardly bear his arms: but he that is inrol'd by love thinks
them light and bears them with pleasure; the slave that works in the Mines
counts his very life a burden: the niggard that works much harder likes well
his drudgery, because the love of riches is his task-master; he that serves his
master out of fear works faintly and with a heavy heart: he that serves him out
of love, does it diligently and yet with cheerfulness; the Christian pilgrim
who is driven heavenward with fears and terrors, goes on with much
reluctance, and a sorrowful heart: he that is drawn with the cords of love,
follows with joyfulness, minds not the ruggedness of his way, and even
rejoices in his weariness, because it brings him nearer and nearer to his
beloved: he that could say, the love of Christ constrains us, could say also,
we rejoice in tribulations; 'Twas the love of JESUS made primitive Christians
work hard and suffer much, Nullomodo sunt oncrosi labores amantium, sed etiam
ipsi delectant, sicut venantium, piscantium: interest ergo quid ametur: nam in
eo quod amatur, aut non laboratur, aut laber amatur. Aug.
with comfort and unspeakable joy: and it is for want of that sweet and Divine
Love that Christians now find sorrow and great difficulty in that little they
do or suffer for JESUS. The labors of love are ever pleasant; nothing is hard,
that love binds upon us.

. 25. A farewell to all sinful desires.
These considerations are now to be reduced into practice; And so I come to
enter upon the work and labor of love; Heb. 6.10.
I come to profess my self a lover of JESUS, and so to approve my self by deeds
and actions. The love of JESUS has prevailed; I find my heart wounded; I can
no longer resist the charms of his love; he has woed me so long, and with so
much kindness, that now my heart is his; I will love him, because he first
loved me. Now it repents me that ever I rejected his suit, that ever I was
unkind to him; it grieveth me that ever I countenanced and preferred his rivals,
the lusts of sensuality, covetousness, and pride, which I renounced in my
Baptism; I will now exclude them wholly; this is the first mark JESUS shall
receive of my sincere affection to him, that I will entertain nor caress no
longer those his enemies, with whom I have had an unhappy intelligence for too
long a time; henceforth, if they come near me, I will endeavor to drive them
away; if they come after me, I will flee; if they persevere in their attempts,
they shall get nothing else, but shame and denials. Away from me then, ye
wicked spirits, with all your tempting allurements, worldly vanities, deceitful
riches, sensual pleasures; I remember that I renounced you all, when first I
gave up my name to JESUS, when he first began to show and seal his love to me,
and to engage mine I then renounced the devil and all his works, the vain pomp
and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal
desires of the flesh; I now remember those my engagements, and grieve that I
have not kept them: and therefore will hate you the more; that you made me
forget my promises, and break my holy vows. Now will I be revenged of you, ye
proud and ambitious designs, lustful thoughts, greedy desires of wealth; I will
now kill and crucify you. Henceforth, it shall be my honor, that I am a
Servant of JESUS; it shall be my delight and pleasure, that I am a lover of
JESUS; and it shall be my wealth, that he is mine as I am his. JESUS has done
and suffered much to declare his love and to deserve mine; he has come down
from heaven, and humbled himself to my mean and low condition; he has lived
poor and despised; he has been afflicted and persecuted; he has died for me;
hereby I know that he loves me, because he laid down his life for me, but ye
his unworthy rivals never gave me any assurance of your affection, never did,
or suffered any thing for me. JESUS exposed himself to shame, that I might
become glorious; endured pains, that I might have pleasures; he became poor,
that I might be enriched: but covetousness offers me riches, to pierce me
through with many sorrows; lust inticeth me, to wound me, when I have consented
to it; and pride promises me honors, to cumber me and expose me to envy. JESUS
is infinitely lovely, he is all perfection and goodness; and he desires to be
loved, not for any advantage of his own, but to make his lovers entirely and
eternally happy: but you painted idols of abused mortals, are in your selves
ugly, and even loathsome; though at a great distance, ye may seem somewhat
fair, yet near at hand, ye are nothing but deformity; ye always prove vain and
vexatious; ye seek to enter men's hearts, only to tyrannize and torment them,
and betray them to eternal sorrows. JESUS is a true and constant lover, he ever
owns his friends: he never fails them that love him; he helps them in their
distresses; he comforts them in their sorrows; and when they die he stands by
them: but ye temporal deceitful pleasures, are false and inconstant; ye forsake
your friends in their greatest need; ye flatter them for a few Summer days,
while the Sun shines kindly upon them; but in the rigors of Winter, when an
unprosperous storm arises, you are gone, ye leave them to die comfortless;
they carry nothing of you, when they go from hence, but the bitter remembrance
of your treacherousness. JESUS is a most grateful lover, he ever returns love
for love; he is ever found of them that seek him; to them that desire him he
ever gives himself; every true lover of JESUS is sure to enjoy him: but you
worldly enjoyments are generally most unkind to your most passionate lovers; ye
flee from them that run after you; ye grieve and vex your greatest admirers, ye
are ever uncertain, false and ungrateful. I will therefore never love you
again; nay, I resolve to hate and persecute you; to mortify the lusts of my
flesh; to humble the pride of my heart, and overcome the covetous desires of my
mind: but JESUS shall reign in my heart; him will I love; him will I serve; him
will I endeavor to please in all things; I will be wholly his; therefore I
renounce all friendship with you that are his enemies; there can be no
agreement betwixt the Holy JESUS and this sinful world; If any man love the
world, 1 John 2.15
the love of the father is not in him.

. 26. Of the antipathy betwixt sin. and Jesus.
Fleshly lusts are against the purity of JESUS; pride is against his humility;
and wordly-mindedness contrary to his heavenly promises and his mercifulness.
These are never to be reconciled with JESUS: they are mortal enemies, mortal I
may call them, because they were his murderers, or rather, because he died to
put them to death; We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and
gold from our vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ: JESUS
shed his blood to redeem us, as well from the practice and commission, as from
the punishment and destruction of sin. Nay, the first is that which he chiefly
designed, because, though we should not be punished, yet if we remain in sin,
we are unhappy: holiness being the ultimate end, perfection, and happiness of
man. Blessed are the pure in heart, for without holiness no man shall see God.
S. Paul therefore saying that Christ died unto sin, that is, to take away sin,
infers from thence, Romans 6.
that we being baptized into Christ's death, our old man is now crucified, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin;
and S. Peter likewise makes it the purpose, why Christ did bear our sins (their
punishment) on his own body, on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24
that we thereby being dead unto sin might live unto righteousness. Christ gave
himself for us, Gal. 1.4.
that he might redeem us from this present evil world. 1 John 3.8.
The Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil.
Sin is that which God hates above all things: sin is that which is most
contrary to his nature, and to our happiness; and so JESUS was crucified, that
sin might be destroyed, he died that sin might live no longer: and therefore I
renounced all sin, the Devil and all his works, when JESUS owned me for his
friend and I owned him for my Lord and Master, they are incompatible, their
inconsistency is irreconcilable; if I hold to the one, I must despise the
other; if I love one, I must hate the other. I will therefore, as I am most
bound, and as I have promised, forsake sin and follow JESUS; I will fight
against his enemies, and side with him against my own corrupt affections; while
I have a being, I will love and obey JESUS.

. 27. Of outward helps and means.
Now, To effect this, means are to be used; for our hearts will not of a sudden
be brought to a Religious temper; it is not bare resolutions will make us resist
temptations when they assault us, with their most prevailing inticements, grace
indeed is never wanting to us: but if we be wanting to our selves, we receive
it in vain: if we second it not with our endeavors, we make it ineffectual.
Now among private means of grace (for I speak not of those that may be had in
the Church, in the dispensation of the word and Sacraments belonging to all)
fasting, alms, and prayers, which are also acts of Religion may hold the first
rank. But besides them, there are other adminicula pietatis, instruments of
holy contrition, handmaids to devotion, which, though they be indifferent, and
uncommanded, yet may help to move our affections, and secure our duty. Such are
retirement from the world, reading of good Books, pious Meditations, humble
prostrations, etc. And (though needless scruples and rejecting of Ancient
Ceremonies, be now much in use and credit, yet) amongst them I will reckon, the
sign of the Cross, which was certainly used by Primitive Christians very
frequently, and yet without superstition; thereby to vouch it to others, and
even to themselves, that they owned JESUS Christ crucified for their Lord and
Savior: as also it was made upon our foreheads in Holy Baptism, in token that
we should not be ashamed to profess the faith of Christ crucified, Caro
signatur ut anima muniatur. Tert.
and manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the world, and the devil,
etc. And to the same purpose we may use it on our selves again, to testify
that we own the profession we then made, and tacitly to confirm and renew our
vows of obedience, and fidelity; not to conjure away spirits, and work such
feats as many intend it for, in the Church of Rome: but to strengthen our good
resolutions, by moving and affecting our hearts. Certain it is that nothing
palpable or visible may in this life, be the object of our worship; it may have
some power on the heart as well as what comes in by the ear; but though it have
the warrant of antiquity, yet it may not serve any further than only to stir up
our dull affections, and raise holy passions in us. But, if we sincerely
forsake our sins, and evidence our love to JESUS, it is not greatly material
what means or instruments we use.

. 28. Meditation on the passion.
My love is crucified, said that loving and holy Martyr Ignatius, declaring how
earnestly he wished to die for JESUS: (...).
and so, considering the passion of JESUS, I meditate with him; My love is
crucified, my dearest Savior dies in most bitter pains; he has been rudely
bound and dragged from place to place; he has been stripped, tied to a post, and
whipped like a vile slave; he has been buffetted and caned, and abused with all
manner of contumelies; and now I see him crowned with thorns, all over spittle
and blood. I see him stretched upon the cross, where his hands and his feet are
nailed; his head hangs down; I read in his pale face and his weeping eyes, the
extremity of his pain, the anguish of his wounded soul. Lord art thou he whom
my soul loves? O Domine Jesu Christ, si intelligentia quam mihi dedisti uti
vellem sicut deberem, cernerem manifest, quo modo, imo quam sine modo, a me
creatura tua amari merueris, qui prior dilexisti me; tantus and tantum, and
gratis, tantillum, and talem, and ingratum. Idiot.
art thou my dearest JESUS! were it my father, my brother, my friend, or my
benefactor that should suffer this undeservedly, how would I pity them! but
should they suffer this upon my account, Lord I could not outlive such a sight!
if nothing else, love would certainly wound my soul to death. But behold it is
so; this crucified, this dying man is my father, he gave me my being; he is my
brother, he came down from heaven and took humane flesh, that he might have
that relation to me; he is my friend, he lays down his life to save mine; he is
my greatest benefactor, from him I receive all I have; all the blessings, the
good things I enjoy I owe to his kindness.

But hark, methinks I hear him speak to me these pathetick, these moving
words; Christian, dearest Christian for whom here I die; consider seriously,
imprint it in thine heart, what in my words, what in my mysteries, thou read
of my suffering for thee; consider who I am, what I endure, and to what end. I
am the eternal Son of God whom the Angels adore: I became Man to make thee
partaker of the Divine Nature; I am infinitely rich, the whole universe is
mine: I became thus destitute of all things to purchase true riches for thee; I
am of an Almighty Power, the whole world was made and subsists by me: I am now
weak to make thee strong I am overcome of mine enemies to make thee conquer
thine; I am crowned with glory, and clothed with Majesty: I now wear these
thorns, and am become naked, to clothe thee with robes of righteousness, and
Crown thee with a Royal Diadem; I am the inexhaustible fountain of joy and
happiness: I now endure sorrows and miseries, to make thee joyful and happy; I
am infinitely pure and innocent: I am become a sacrifice for sin, to merit thy
pardon, and to sanctify and make thee holy; I am the Author of life, the first
and the last: I now die to make thee live for ever: nothing but love moves me
thus to suffer for thee, This used to be written under Crucifixes.

Aspice serve Dei, sic me posuere Judaei.
Aspice mortalis, pro te datur hostia talis.
Aspice devote, quoniam sic pendeo pro te.
Introitum vitae reddo tibi, read mihi te.
In cruce sum pro te, qui peceas desine pro me.
Desine, do veniam, dic culpam, corrige vitam.

and nothing but love I require for it. Dearest soul, thy sins are more
grievous to me than my wounds; add not sorrow to my sorrow by remaining
impenitent; deny not this request to thy dying bleeding Savior that thou
would mortify thy lusts and forsake thy sins; all that is past I heartily
forgive, if thou becomest true penitent. I freely give my self for thee, and
beg that thou would give thy self to me.

. 29. Protestations of love to JESUS.
What shall I say, now dearest Lord? Words cannot answer thee. I am amazed, I
am astonished, I know not how to speak, my tongue cannot express what my heart
feels. Lord I will say nothing! I will answer with sighs and tears, with devout
affections, by resigning and giving up my body and soul to thee. I will answer
by obedience, by actions, by now falling to work to reform my life, to mortify
my sinful lusts, to cut off the members of the body of sin. Sweetest JESU, I
will love thee with all the affections my heart can entertain; no bosom sin
shall be so dear to me, but for thy sake I will heartily part with it; no lust
shall be so pleasing, but I will kill it, at thy request and command; even my
natural desires and inclinations will I gladly deny, when they come in
competition with that duty and love I owe, and ever will pay JESUS.

sect;. 30. Of a sincere amendment.
But fickle and unhappy creatures, that we are, we often promise well, but
seldom stand to our engagements; our resolutions are good and our performances
very defective; The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. I must not
therefore rest in generals, but I must resolve more especially against those
sins I am inclined to: and not only against them, but also upon the means
whereby I may overcome and mortify them; as avoiding the occasions and
inticements, inflicting on my self such severities, as may be proper remedies,
and tying my self to such pious exercises, as I know will drive away the
temptation. To forsake my sins, is not to forbear drunkenness, when perhaps I
am not inclined to it; or to avoid swearing, when I look upon it as an
unpleasing and unprofitable sin; or to hate covetousness, when by nature I am
liberal: but, knowing what sin pleases me most, what vice my temper inclines
me to, and what temptation is most strong and importunate upon me, by my
calling or my company, against that to fortify my self, and employ the utmost
of my strength; against that to watch and pray, and use sincere and earnest
endeavors. To forsake my sins, is not to say, I will forsake them. Some men,
when they are called upon by fear, adversity, or the secret voice of God within
them, are forward enough to engage with the Elder Brother in the Gospel, Lord,
I will go and work in thy vineyard: but their hot zeal and hasty promise, soon
decays into negligence, and at last into a cold denial. Though I resolve
against my natural corruptions never so seriously, that will not subdue them,
without I use proper means for it; to take up my cross and follow Christ, to
forsake all for him, to deny my self, to take the kingdom of heaven by force,
to cut off my right hand, and pluck out mine eye when they offend, is more than
barely to resolve, Gal. 5.24.
and promise high, and proceed no further. They that are Christ's have, not only
verbally renounced, but actually crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts: therefore now, I have given up my self to Christ, and desire ever to be
his, I must pray heartily, and watch diligently against my sins, those
especially that are most pleasing and customary to me; I must, like S. Paul,
not fight in the air against generals, but keep under my body, be temperate in
all things, and strive to the utmost for the incorruptible crown; I must use
that violence to my self, such harsh applications, acts of penance and
mortification, of my own or the Spiritual Physicians appointment, as are fit
and requisite to cure my distemper, to expel or reform that evil inclination
which is inconsistent with my love to JESUS. To that end it will be very useful
frequently to meditate on the passion of Christ, the day of our change, our
appearance in judgment, the joys of heaven, the torments of hell, and the
amazing consideration of Eternity: and I am persuaded, and will therefore speak
it plain, (though to the dislike of most Dissenters) that it might be very
profitable, a great token of sincerity, and an excellent instrument of
reformation, to acquaint the Spiritual Judge and Physician, with the state of
our Conscience and the distempers of our souls, to submit to his impositions,
to follow his counsels, and carefully observe his prescriptions. This is
recommended to us by Divine Authority, the general practice of the Christian
Church, while of late, and the greater Piety of our Ancestors: and it would be
a good remedy against our ignorance, the wrong judgment we make of our selves,
our self-love and partiality, our inward doubts and tormenting fears, and our
reigning lusts and most common temptations. Every man that striveth for the
mastery is temperate in all things; now they do it to obtain a corruptible
crown, but we an incorruptible: He that would vanquish his antagonist, was in
the first place to vanquish himself, to endure hardship and severity, and use
all endeavors for the victory, for a fading garland: so he that will overcome
his lusts, and master himself, and obtain that heavenly crown which never
fades, must use great industry, many arts, all means that can conduce to that
end.

. 31. Love will work the best Reformation.
But the voluminous directions of Casuists and Confessionists cannot reach all
cases and all particulars: to shorten our labor therefore, let the love of
JESUS do the work of self-reformation and it will be soonest and best done.
Love will find out the most effectual means for the extermination of our sins,
and love will use them to the best purpose. Certain it is, that love in all
instances, sets men upon acts of self-denial; as great Generals and many more,
who forego the peaceable enjoyment of the comforts they might have at home, and
expose themselves to dangers, because they love honor; merchants who forsake
their dearest relations, and run through many great troubles and perils,
because they love gain; and the more generous love of friendship, which has
caused many to choose great inconveniences and even death to serve their
friends: and therefore certain it is also that the love of JESUS will make his
yoke and even his cross easy; will make us deny our selves and forbear what
displeases him, though otherwise pleasing to us. That men might be without
excuse, God has made a short work upon the earth: Vt nemo habet excusationem
in die judicii voluit Dous, sicut scriptum est, consummare and abbreviare
verbum super terram. Aug. de Doct. Christiana. l. 1. c. 1.
(says S. Aug.) by contracting his immensity into the narrow dimensions of
man, he has abbreviated his doctrine and our talk. JESUS is the Center and the
sum of our Faith and Religion, and the love of JESUS is the content of our
duty. I have determined, 1 Cor. 2.2.
(says S. Paul) not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ and him
crucified, 1.24.
and we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness: but to them that are called, Christ the power of God, and
the wisdom of God, that is, in whom God fully reveals his will, and gives us
full power to fulfill it. Gal. 6.14.
Therefore (says the Apostle) God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross
of Jesus Christ my Lord; by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. The knowledge and love of JESUS, our Crucified Savior, is the most
proper means to teach us our duty, the greatest motive to undertake it, and the
best instrument to perform and effect it withal; it will kill our lusts,
crucify the members of the body of sin, and carry us through the labors and
difficulties of penitence and sincere amendment: it will be the fulfilling of
repentance, as it is the fulfilling of the law.

For, as love is strong to overcome strong enemies, to kill the greatest sins:
so it is wise and quicksighted to see and to find out the least. A loving
friend will not only not slander and defame his friend, not rob, or strike, or
murder him: but will forbear all words and actions which might bring him the
least grief or inconvenience; love will not only not give the greatest
provocations; but even not disoblige or displease in the least instances. And
so, if my love to JESUS be sincere, it will not only keep me from confederation
with his professed and greatest enemies, but even make me shun and forsake the
most secret and contemptible of them: I mean that the love of JESUS will never
suffer me to entertain any the least sin; and, whenever I find that I have been
unhappily seduced to commit any, it will cause me to grieve and sadly to
repent, that I have displeased my dearest Savior, and wounded that tender love
I have for him. And indeed, it is reported of many devout persons, great lovers
of JESUS, that they would sorrow and weep for ordinary failings, for small
omissions, more than others would, for much greater sins. Divine Love, like a
bright burning flame, will feel a commotion and disturbance by the least drop
of water that falls upon it: a small irregularity will be more grievous to a
pious lover of JESUS, than great crimes to another. Therefore he that could
say, the love of Christ constrains us, would also highly complain, and groan
under the sense of our unavoidable imperfections; Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Nothing will make us more sensible of our least and most common sins, than the
love of JESUS; it will make us angry at, and impatient of them, and earnest and
severe in reforming of them.

. 32. The exercise of repentance.
So then as I profess my self a lover, a sincere and affectionate lover of
JESUS, I am obliged to undo, as much as may be, what I have done amiss, and to
do it no more: this I heartily resolve to do, and I hope shall really perform
by the grace and assistance of my God. I will make amends and restitution to
those I have damnified in body, goods, or name, and even ask their pardon for
the injury: and then bewail my sins, grieve that I have offended my Divine and
loving Master, and beg his forgiveness, and endeavor by tears and contrition
to wash away the stains and spots wherewith my soul is polluted, and
displeases the holy eyes of the Holy JESUS; and so, to love JESUS binds upon
me the whole exercise of repentance, which now must be work of my life; I am
henceforth to live the life of a penitent, and I resolve so to do; therefore,
every night, I must call my ways to remembrance and besides those greater
provocations, wherewith I offended my God in the days of my folly and
inconsideration, I am to take notice of those sins of daily incursion I am
fallen into the last day, and weep over them all, and beg for pardon; and this
especially upon those times appointed for mortification and acts of punitive
repentance, Fridays, Lent, and others; wherein devout Christians make it their
more solemn endeavors to soften their hearts and make them melt into penitent
tears: which must be done by Religious exercises and such meditations as this.

My dearest JESUS, I owe to thy kindest goodness, my being and all the
blessings I enjoy; and I know that thou did come down from heaven to die on
the Cross, that I might not die in hell to eternity; to suffer a bitter and
shameful death, that I might live in eternal joys. I hope to see thy glorious
face, one day; I hope to receive a crown from thy gracious hands; I hope to
dwell in thy blissful society for ever, dearest Savior, if thou were upon
earth, I would go all the world over to prostrate my self before thee, to kiss
the ground thy Holy Feet should tread, to serve thee, to show my love and
gratitude to thee. Dearest Lord, I would now joyfully give up my life for thee;
I would lose the last drop of my blood to please and glorify thee; I would die
rather than deny thee. Why then, unhappy wretch that I am, do I offend thee, to
whom I owe my self, and all that I have? Why do I wound thee by my
transgressions, who was wounded for them, by thy love? Why do I grieve thee,
who purchasest eternal joys for me? Why do I displease thee, with whom I hope
to live and dwell, and from whom I expect mercy and Salvation? Why do I sin
against thee, whom I love with all my soul? and why do not I live to thee, for
whom I would die.

. 33. Is made easy by love.
Such considerations and soliloquies as these will produce not only lachrymas
doloris, tears of grief, but also lachrymas amoris, tears of love and true
contrition; and moreover, all the severities of repentance which are so
unacceptable and so repugnant to nature will be made pleasant: those things
that would be ungrateful, as acts of justice and obedience, will become
delightful as acts of love; in amore nihil amari, in love all things are sweet
that are done or suffered, for the sake of the beloved. I take pleasure in
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.10.
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's
sake, says S. Paul, that great lover of JESUS; not that those things are of
their own nature pleasant, whether inflicted by our selves or others; 'twas for
Christ's sake that he like't them. He that by penitent sorrow, and acts of
self-denial shows his love to JESUS, is certainly delighted with the most
afflictive of those voluntary sufferings, as they are expressions of his love.
Accordingly it is said of the Religious of S. Bernard, that their watchings, and
fastings, and all the severities of their rule were become so pleasant to them,
by the devoutness of their affections, that they were afraid of having their
paradise in this world, and consulted S. Bernard about it. And certainly
nothing but love could carry the primitive solitaries and Coenobites through
that uneasiness and hardship they willingly undertook, and endured many years,
and rejoiced in, and would not have exchanged for all the pleasures in the
world.

. 34. And proceeds not from melancholy.
Perhaps it will be said, that such things are the effect of melancholy or a
forward and misguided zeal, not of true piety. But let it be considered, that
natural love it self has done, and still does wonderful things. The love of
friendship, the love of lust, the love of riches and ambition have set men upon
difficult attempts, have made them despise great dangers, have carried them
through many labors and sufferings, and perhaps as great as the most mortified
Christian ever undertook for JESUS, and Eternity. This has been and is still
the effect of Natural Love, and sure Divine Love, whose object is so infinitely
more excellent, may do at least as much.

Besides, things temporal seem great at a distance; but near at hand, they
appear, as they are indeed, mean and contemptible: whereas contrariwise, things
eternal, as they seem small and despicable afar off, so near at hand they
appear great and immense, they overwhelm the mind. Hence it is, that dying men
who are on the brink of eternity, are amazed at the thoughts and near prospect
of it, and express great regret for their past inconsideration, and promise
great things for the future, if they might live longer: looking upon the world,
as an empty nothing, not to be regarded where eternity appears; and hence it is
also, that they who approach things eternal, and view them by meditation and
contemplation, are of the same mind, have the same apprehensions of them, and
act accordingly: doing those things which dying men repent they have not dove;
for indeed, it is no illusion or deceit, but a great and real truth, that the
world and all it is concerns are nothing, compared to eternity: and that we can
never be too careful to obtain eternal joys, and avoid eternal sorrows. How
much the Blessed Apostles and primitive Christians were acted by this
consideration, 2 Cor. 4.16, etc.
S. Paul gives us to understand, saying, that whilst they looked not on things
visible and transitory, but on things invisible and eternal, then their
afflictions were light and but for a moment; though, they lasted many years,
and were so great, that the very thoughts of them can make us tremble, yet they
were light and momentary, whilst they looked on eternity: and they fainted not,
though their outward man decayed daily, by their great mortifications, and
their laborious zeal to serve God: and all this, whilst we look not on the
things that are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal; So
that it is the effect of a wise and most rational consideration, to value and
love him above all things, who by dying for us; has rescued us from eternal
ruin, and obtained eternal happiness for us: and to make it appear by all
means possible, doing or suffering any thing that may manifest our love to
JESUS, and assure us of a blessed eternity. It may justly be feared that the
indevotion and lukewarmness of very many, not the worst of Christians, will not
make them acceptable to God, who declares that he will spue them out of his
mouth that are neither hot nor cold: Rev. 3.16.
and that their carelessness and indifferency in religious duties, will hardly
secure their eternal interest: However I think that it is a shame, to see
Benedictins, Franciscans, Carthusians', and others, forsake the merriments,
pleasures and honors of the world, rise up early and late go to rest, wear
nothing but Cilices and coarse cloth, feed poorly and lie hard: and all this,
and much more to observe the Rule of S. Bruno, S. Francis, or some other
fansieful or melancholy Devoto, who obliged them to some absurd, some needless,
and many uneasy observations: from whom they never received any benefit, and
from whom they can expect no kind of remuneration: and at the same time to see
Christians nice and dainty, unwilling to deprive themselves of any pleasure, or
to undergo any thing of hardship, for to observe the most reasonable, holy, and
advantageous Rule of Christ; from whom they have received the greatest favors,
from whom they expect the greatest rewards, and to whose service and obedience
they have devoted themselves, by a solemn vow, in holy Baptism.

. 35. Corporal Austerities may please God.
Now if it be doubted whether voluntary Corporal Austerities be acceptable to
God, I answer, that the example of our Blessed Savior, which we are to imitate
and follow, makes it unquestionable; besides those Scriptures which command us
to deny our selves, to take up our Cross, to cut off even hands and feet, when
they make us offend, and that declaration of our Blessed Savior, Mat. 6.18.
when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, (fasting comprehends all external
mortifications, which Christ appoints not when, and how to be used: but leaves
to our free choice and the determination of the Church, only declaring how much
God is pleased with them) but anoint thy head and wash thy face, that thou
appear not unto men to fast, but to thy father which is in secret, and thy
father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly; the same that is
promised to Prayers, and alms. These, I say, make it as clear as the light,
that God recommends, accepts, and rewards spontaneous acts of Mortification,
when performed without hypocrisy or ostentation. They are instruments of
Religion, whereby our lusts are subdued, the body kept under, and the spirit it
self mortified; they are marks of the sincerity of our sorrow, Homo paenitent
est homo sibi iratus.
of our regret to have offended God, and our anger against our selves for it;
and they are testimonials of our love, when we thus take Gods cause in hand,
punishing the offender for past offenses, and seeking to prevent others that
might follow. For this I dare appeal to the true lovers of JESUS, who needed
not this digression, to convince them that acts of self-denial are pleasing to
God, and pleasing to themselves.

I must therefore, the better to declare my love to JESUS, upon appointed days
especially, or also at other times, as occasion may be offered, either inflict
on my self voluntary afflictions, or deprive my self of lawful pleasures; as
that pious Prince who poured out to God that water, 2 Samuel 23.16.
which he thirsted exceedingly: sometimes in the matter of meat and drink, put
a knife to my throat, when I might indulge to it; remembering how in that matter
I have offended, and inwardly speaking my grief for it, and my desire of the
food of Angels, the dainties of the great Supper of the Lamb: sometimes forbear
a merry meeting, and devote to charity what I should spend on my recreation;
and so, in many innumerable other cases, as opportunity, and the secret
whispers of love shall suggest; and all this, without scruple, without
affectation, without pride: for, where we are not bound, such things may be
omitted, so the great duty of contrition and love be secure.

. 36. Not to return again to our sins when temptations return.
But the best half of repentance is yet behind; that which is most to be
attended to, that which I must chiefly design in all acts of mortification is,
that I return no more to those sins for the which I grieve and afflict my self.
The occasions and inticements of sin will doubtless come again; my thoughts
will not always be fixed upon on Divine Objects, my mind will return to the
world; my passions will be disorderly and my appetite unruly again: how shall I
stand, and resist, and be safe, in the time of danger, in the hour of trial and
temptation? I resolve to lift up my soul to JESUS and beg his assistance; I
will remember my vows and engagements, how much I am bound to love and obey
JESUS rather than my lusts, and how much a gainer I shall be by it.

Thus, when a provocation to anger is given, and I find my heart rise, and my
spirits take fire and grow turbulent, instead of giving way to passion, or
suffering that it should proceed to hatred and revenge, I will turn aside and
check my self with the remembrance of my meekest Savior, 1 Pet. 2.21.
who was led as a lamb to the slaughter and opened not his mouth, who, when he
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered the greatest injuries, yet
used no threatening, leaving us an exemple that we should follow his steps. I
will remember how ill it becomes me to be angry with others, who have so much
reason to be angry with my self for having so highly and frequently, provoked
my God to anger; I will confider how ill it becomes me to be revengeful and
severe to others, when all my hopes, and all my happiness depend upon
forbearance and mercy; I will think of, and fear that just exprobration of my
Lord against the revengeful, thou wicked servant, should thou not have had
compassion on thy fellow servant, as I had pity on thee; and I will remember
that it is JESUS who died for me, JESUS for whom I would die, who intercedes
for mine enemies, and will rejoice that I have some of that kind of love to
repay to him, which he showed me when I was his enemy; Joh. 13.34.
sicut ego vos, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. If lust
inticeth me to acts of impurity, I will call to mind the corruption and
dissolution of this vile body of sin; I will think on my last account, the day
of judgment, and the dreadful flames of hell; and I will remember him, who for
me was crucified and with whom my love has crucified me; and that now is the
time to make it appear that I love him, to justify the sincerity of my
protestations; and so, for covetousness, pride, intemperance, and all such
temptations, I will reject their attempts and profers, with indignation, as a
true friend would scorn the solicitations to betray his friend. What, shall I
be false to him I love, to him that loves me, who has shed his blood for me,
and to whom I have often protested that I would die for him? shall I break the
sacred bonds of love, and my most sacred vows, and put my soul into a state of
regret, unquietness, shame and sorrow for this vile transitory profit or
pleasure? O my dearest JESUS, thou know that I love thee; I beseech thee,
make that love victorious against thine enemies and mine. I would die rather
than deny thee, for any interest in the world: and I hope thou will not deny me
at the last day, but own me among thy faithful friends. Lord, I serve thee not
for nothing; great are the reasons why I should obey thee: thou have done much
for me, and from thee I still expect much, infinite rewards for such due and
poor services; Lord, let me die before I deliberately sin against thee.

. 37. To do what we do cheerfully.
Thus, by love I resolve to conquer my self, to deny and mortify my lusts; by
love, I will strive to overcome all unlawful desires, all sinful motions: and
then I shall rejoice in the victory. It shall not make me peevish and morose,
churlish and severe to others, but rather cheerful and contented, gentle and
affable: so that it shall be seen by my outward deportment, how much pleasure
and tranquillity my soul has inwardly: that I rejoice in what I do for Christ;
that it is delicious to me to deny my self for his sake, to oblige so great, so
true, so generous a friend as JESUS, who has done all acts of friendship for
me, and owns me for his friend. I call you not servants but friends, Job. 13.14
ye are my friends indeed, if ye do whatsoever I have commanded you. Those that
are accounted gallant men in the world will venture their lives to second a
friend in an idle and unchristian quarrel: and their wounds they bear with
courage and count them honorable, 'Twas to serve a friend; How much more
should I rejoice in that violence I offer to my appetites and unruly desires,
for to please and serve my heavenly, my best, my dearest friend, whom I can
never love so much as he deserves: and in loving of whom, I am infinitely
happier than if I should enjoy all the pleasures of sin, as long as I live; I
only grieve and am displeased that I can do so little for him, that I can
requite his love no better. I know that many persons have done far more for
their less-deserving friends, than I do for JESUS.

. 38. A singular example of humane love.
It is reported by Greek historians of two loving sisters, Eudoxia and Irenea
daughters to the last unhappy Prince of Morea, Niceph. Gregor. Chalcondys.
who with his life lost his crown and country; that an uncle saved them from
the general desolation and captivity which soon succeeded the lost battle, and
carried them to old Andronicus their kinsman, then Emperor of Constantinople.
There, with pity, they found a kind well-come and as great respects as they
could wish. Their beauty, their virtues and accomplishments surpast their
princely birth, and were as eminent as their fortune was low: so that young
Andronicus who was to succeed in the Empire was, in process of time taken with
Eudoxia, loved her passionately, and obtained the Emperors consent to marry
her. This caused great troubles to Irenea, who liked it well as she loved her
sister, but could not but grieve at it, as she loved the Prince (for unhappily
she had settled her affections on him.) Upon this she fell sick, and almost to
death: and, it being observed that some distemper in her mind caused the
distemper of her body, her sister, protesting of her love to her, assuring her
that Eudoxia should have only the title and the trouble, but Irenea the
privileges and the power of an Empress, conjured her to declare what caused
her discontent. Having understood what it was, and grieving that she should be
the occasion of her sisters danger and sorrow, she presently took from her head
a jewel the Prince had given her, in form like a half moon; and with it she so
wounded and disfigured her face, that she cured the Prince of his love, as she
designed: and afterward retired to Galliopoli, where she entered a Cloister,
and devoted the rest of her life to God. The Prince finding in Irenea what he
had lost in Eudoxia, soon after entertained the same passion for her, he had
for her sister: but Irenea, remembering her sisters generosity, forgot her
affection to the Prince; considering what Eudoxia had voluntarily suffered for
her, how great, how tender a love she had expressed in what she had done,
resolves to forsake Andronicus, to forego her ease and pleasure, and what she
had so earnestly desired, rather than be ungrateful. Whereupon she steals away
from the court, goes to Galliopoli, enters her sisters Cloister, and, having
expressed to her her love and acknowledgments, she takes the same vows, and
resolves to live and die to God, and with her beloved sister. This story makes
me grieve and blush, that so little gratitude should be paid to JESUS for
greater benefits, for that incomparable love he has showed men in dying for
them; that I my self should so ill requite his much greater kindness, so poorly
and imperfectly return his most wonderful love. What, shall I think it much to
refrain my intemperance for his sake, who, for mine, fasted long and often, and
tasted vinegar and gall? shall I think it much to mortify my pride and anger
for him, who, for my sake despised the shame of the cross, and returned nothing
but meekness to the greatest provocations? shall I think it much to refrain my
worldly, covetous desires for him, who, for me, became poor, naked, destitute
of all things, though he were Lord of all? shall I think it much, to deny my
self some momentary sensual pleasures, for him who carried my sorrows, who shed
his blood and was crucified to save me? No, my dearest JESUS, thy love has
overcome me, I will be no more what I have been, henceforth it shall be my
wealth, my delight, my glory and ambition to serve and obey thee, to be loving,
to be faithful to thee.

. 39. The design of Religion is to make us better.
This change and Reformation is what our Religion requires; The Scripture
supposes it in all that have embraced Christianity, and is earnest and
pressing in its exhortations to it. We beseech you Brethren, and exhort you by
the Lord JESUS, 1 These. 4.1.
that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to please God, 2.
so ye would abound more and more: for ye know what commandments we gave you by
the Lord JESUS, for this is the will of God, even your sanctification: Again,
Ephesians. 4.20.
but ye have not so learned Christ (as to follow the greediness and lusts of
the Gentiles) If so be that ye have heard of him, and have been taught by him,
21, etc.
as the truth is in JESUS, that ye put off, concerning the former conversation,
the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed
in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the new man, which, after God,
is created in righteousness and true holiness: And in another place, this
change, being so absolutely necessary, is absolutely supposed to be wrought in
us. If ye are risen with Christ, seek those things which are above -- for you
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. -- Mortify therefore your
members which are upon the earth, Coloss. 3.1.
fornication, uncleanness, 2, etc.
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is idolatry
-- in the which ye walked sometime when ye lived in them, but now, you also put
off these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, evil communication out of your
mouth; lie not one to another, seeing that you have put off the old man with
his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after
the image of him that created him. Here is nothing to countenance those
frightful fanatical pangs of the New Birth, which proceed from Enthusiasm or
melancholy; nothing to countenance the fansieful applications of a borrowed or
rather snatcht-away righteousness: but a real change, in our affections and our
manners, is supposed and recommended; And indeed, Tit. 2.11.
that grace of God which brings salvation, teaches none of these odd and
new-devised doctrines, but that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, 12.
we should live in this present world soberly, righteously, and godly; which is
the sum of our duty: that we should be temperate in our bodies and minds, just
and charitable in our intercourse with other men, and pious in our minds,
devout in acts of Religion and worship to God. The learning and practicing this
lesson is that and that alone, whereby the offered salvation is obtained and
laid hold on.

. 40. A protestation of being faithful unto death.
So now, I must remember that I am not mine own, I am his that made and
redeemed me; I am his to whom I have given my self, when I undertook manfully
to fight under his banner against sin, the world and the Devil: to me is
addressed that exhortation, Thou, O man of God, flee these things (strifes,
disputes and covetousness, before mentioned) and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, 1 Timothy 6.11
love, patience, meekness, fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal
life. 12.
I am become a Soldier of JESUS; to me S. Paul speaks, as well as to Timothy,
2 Timothy 2.3.
Thou therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier of JESUS Christ, no man that
warreth intangles himself with the affairs of this life, 4.
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. If I were in the
Militia of any other Prince, I might endure hardness enough, before I could
obtain his favor, or indeed be taken notice of; heat and cold, hunger, thirst
and weariness, sleepless nights and perpetual dangers; all this, and much more
I might endure many years, and not be looked upon; here my General prevented me
with his kindness; he first fought against mine enemies; he first loved me, and
endured hardship for me; and he notes every thing I suffer for him, sets it
down and assigns a reward to it. Under another commander I might do brave
actions, behave my self valiantly, and yet not be seen: here my General has
always his eyes upon me, he incourageth me; and rejoices to see my fortitude;
he is always ready to help me, and is most delighted, when he sees me zealous
and diligent. I might fight long enough for an earthly King, I could only get a
poor subsistence or an empty fame, but never so much as one province of his
dominions: here, fighting for my heavenly King, I shall get unvaluable
treasures, immortal glory, and a kingdom which shall have no end, Rev. 3.21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne. I will
therefore, never again, fight against the captain of my salvation, and I will
never forsake him; I will often renew my vows, often swear allegiance to him,
upon that sacred blood which he shed for me, and which he gives me to comfort
and strengthen my heart; I will daily think on those things that may increase
my zeal and diligence, and help me to resist temptations; and I will suffer any
thing, use all means possible to perform these resolutions, and approve my
self, unto death, a lover of JESUS, 1 Cor. 16.22.
if any man loves not the Lord JESUS, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

FINIS.
Claustrum Animae: THE Reformed Monastery; OR, THE LOVE OF JESUS.

The Second Part.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard the
West End. MDCLXXVI.

THE PREFACF.
I Have now gone through half of my task, the negative part of our Baptismal
vow, and of our duty; and would to God, Reader, I had inkindled of the Divine
fire of love in thy heart and mine, but enough to secure us from works of
darkness, enough to quench and to consume our lusts: I would not doubt but it
would soon burn light, inflame our hearts with a pious zeal, and make us so
fruitful in good works, that men, seeing them, would glorify our father which
is in heaven. I may, with a just cause complain of my self; concerning this
Tractate of mine, Eras. Epist. ad Volus.
as one did of Erasmus about his Enchiridion, that there is more piety in the
book than in the Author; and withal I may complain of the book also, that it is
many ways defective, that is, it supposes many things previous to the use of
it, Christian instruction, a pious mind, pious books, pious meditations, all
helps and instruments of Religion and Holy Living: and even in what it handles
it falls far short, of what the subject would bear. The caution therefore I
would give is this, that no person would think that no other appetites are to
be restrained, no other sins forsaken than those I mention: or that no other
means to master our lusts and secure our duty, are to be used, than those I
specified: or that no other acts and expressions of love are to be given, than
those I have prescribed. No, my design is not to run over particulars, and
indeed it is next to impossible, for love has a general intendance over all
actions. That little I have said concerning Self-Reformations, abstaining from
that which is evil, will be sufficient where love is, and where it is not, more
would do no good: and that little I shall say concerning the positive part of
our duty, doing that which is good, will suffice also that Christian who knows
what it is to love God. The truth is, my design is only to direct or beget
love, to show its great power, and the great advantages it brings. Could I but
teach thee, often to repeat from thy heart (as some Ancient Christians, at the
Celebration of the Lords Supper) I love thee dear Jesus, I love thee dear
Jesus, I should think to have profited thee more, than if I had unfolded
mysteries, and display^d much learning in the fairest, and most exact method;
For, I am sure, that love would soon teach thee to know and to do that which
pleases God, to know and to perform the whole of thy duty: Praecipuam
Christiana pietatis portionem docuit, quisquis ad hujusinflammavit amorem.
He has taught the best part of Religion, and to the best purpose, who has
taught others to love it. It Is certain that, if we give our love to God, we
shall afterward refuse him nothing; where a man gives his heart, he will not
refuse his hands or his knees; where he gives his soul, he will not deny his
bread, or his goods: God shall have all that he requires, and all we can offer
to him, if he has our love and affections* No qualification but love will make
us true Christians; Alia virtus cum peccato sed dilectio tua omni peccato
contrariatur, omni temptationi resistit. Idiot.
no other virtue but may consist with some sin, love alone is contrary to all,
no other grace can resist all temptations, love alone has that unlimited
power; no other grace will enable us to discharge all our obligations, love
alone is the fulfilling of the law; all gifts and virtues, without love, can
not fit a man for heaven, nor make him dear to God: but love can do it of it
self; they that be faithful in love, Wisd. 3.9.
shall abide with him. As there are Dragons that are bright and glittering, and
have precious stones in their heads; as there are Comets that have the light
and the elevation of stars: so there are vicious persons, false Christians that
are endowed with excellent parts, and are eminent in some virtues; but it
profits nothing without love; If I speak the tongues of Men and Angels; 1
Cor. 13.1, etc.
( says S. Paul) If I have the gift of prophecy and understand all mysteries;
if I have all faith, so that I remove mountains; if I give my goods to the poor
and even my body to be burned, and have not charity, I am nothing, and it
profits me nothing. Of all other gifts and abilities it may be said, 1 Cor. 8.1.
as of knowledge, that they all puff up, but charity alone edifieth; among
those creatures which stand and worship before God, there is not only a Man and
an Eagle, which may represent persons of great learning, fitted for high
speculations, but also a Lion and an Ox, whereby Christians of meaner parts and
knowledge are signified: for these are capable of love as much as the others,
and it is love alone qualifies men to dwell with that God, who is love it self,
as S. John calls him; God is love, 1 John 4.16
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. God loves men,
that they may love him again: (says S. Aug.) Amat Deus ut ametur, nil aliud
vult quam amari, etc.
and he only requires that we would love him, knowing that that love is, of it
self, sufficient to make us eternally happy* I have therefore all along fitted
my discourse and meditations to every man's capacity and opportunities, as much
as I could: because all may love, and all must love that will be happy. And
though I may have recommended some things as means and instruments: yet I have
prescribed nothing as a duty, but the great obligations which were laid upon
us, when we were baptized into Christ. My Monastery, as to the place, is the
Church, as to the rule is the love of Jesus: and the Orders of it are such as
should be observed by all Christians. I might indeed have mentioned many useful
directions, given by Ancient Fathers and Spiritual Guides, to such as made
profession of greater piety and stricter lives than others: but they could not
have suited with all conditions and callings: therefore I have appointed no
other rule to those that shall enter this Cloister, but the love of Jesus, in a
sincere obedience to his holy precepts, or a voluntary compliance with his
Divine Counsels.

Not that I would deny that places for Religious Retirement might afford many
great advantages, in order to greater devotion and heavenly mindedness: for I
bewail their loss, and heartily wish that the piety and charity of the present
age might restore to this nation the useful convenience of them. Necessary
Reformations might have repurg'd Monasteries as well as the Church, without
abolishing of them: and they might have been still houses of Religion without
having any dependence upon Rome. Multi sunt qui possunt Religiosam vitam etiam
cum saeculari habitu ducere, and plerique sunt qui nisi omnia reliquerint,
salvari apud Deum nullatenus possunt. Greg. M. Ep. ad Maur. imp.
All men are not inclining to, nor fitted for an active life; some would be
glad to find a place of rest and retirement for contemplation: some who, by
melancholy or by the terrors of the Lord, are frighted from their sins and from
the civilized world into Quakerism, into an unhappy sullenness and Apostasy,
would perhaps exchange their silks and laces for the coarser garments of
mortified professors of a Monastic life: and find, among them, that happiness
and peace of the soul, which they vainly seek for, in their wretched and
deluded Brotherhood; some who, upon great afflictions and sudden changes of
fortune, fall into a state of sorrow and tedious sadness, and are left in the
world to struggle with the temptations of a discontented mind, would perhaps
take Sanctuary in a Religious house; and give themselves up wholly to Jesus,
and forget their temporal sorrow, by heavenly joys and meditations: and at last
bless that storm and shipwreck which cast them into that unknown land of rest
and safety; some, that are forward and ready to promise well and take good
resolutions, have not strength enough to keep them, but are prevailed upon, by
the importunity of those temptations they meet withal in the converse of men,
who, being fled from those occasions of sin, might, by the good example and
good instructions of a Religious Society, secure themselves, and stand to their
holy engagements; some who never loved the world, or that are grown weary of
it, or have passionate longings for heaven, would willingly free themselves of
the cumbrances and distractions of worldly business, to enjoy the leisure and
opportunities of meditation, devotion, and other spiritual exercises; and some
that are much taken with the strict lives and great piety of Papist-Friers,
would look home and spond their commendations on the purer Religion, and
better-order'd lives and devotions of those, in this Church, that should wholly
devote themselves to God. However it is not to be denied, but that men are much
affected and influenced by the place, the company, the way of living, and the
outward circumstances wherein they are engaged: and, I believe, it might be now
as true a proverb as ever, Been vixit qui been latuit, he lives best and most
safe, who is least acquainted with the world and lives farthest from it.

But though we want some conveniences for withdrawing from temporal affairs, to
mind eternity and our souls the better: yet we must go to heaven; wherever we
live, Claustrum ubique portate interius. Norb. Ab. praemonst.
we must live to God, that we may live with God; therefore, if we cannot have a
material, we must have a Spiritual cloister, which may defend us against
temptations, and guide and assist us in doing our duty. Such a one is the love
of Jesus; it will protect us against all dangers and spiritual enemies, better
than the strongest walls of any Abbey: and it will make us devout and zealous
in God's service, beyond what the exhortations of the wisist Abbot could do.
Greg. Mag.
Dum crescit fortitudo amoris interni, infirmatur fortitudo carnis, whilst love
is strong the flesh is mortified, and its lusts are subdued. August.
Amanti nihil est difficile, nihil impossible, love can do all things of its
self, it passes over all difficulties, and there is no obstacle which it
overcomes not. Love can supply the want of all outward helps and advantages,
let it but be our care, to secure love and it will secure us. Let us therefore
feed and entertain it by reading and meditation, Coelum and terra and omnia
quae in cis sunt non cessant mihi dicere ut amem Dominum Deum meum. Aug.
by frequent prayers and acts of love, and by observing and tasting how
gracious the Lord is in all his works; all things in heaven and earth do
incessantly cry to us, that we should love God. God draws us after him, Hos.
4.11.
with cords of a man, with bands of love, therefore, by love, we can best
follow him. 1 John 3.18
But, let us not love in word or in tongue, but indeed and in truth: and hereby
we shall know that we are of the truth, and we shall assure our hearts before
him.

Claustrum Animae: THE Reformed Monastery; OR, The Love of JESUS.
. 1. Of the positive part of our Baptismal vow.
MY former disobedience and rebellions against my Blessed Lord and dearest
Master, I have examined and bewailed; I have considered that by sin I wound and
crucify him afresh, and therefore have resolved to sin no more, never to lift
up hand or heart against him. But will love be satisfied with this? is it a
sufficient demonstration of love, not to abuse, not to injure a friend? No
sure, I must proceed further; love requires more than this. I must not only
abstain from what would anger him I love: but I should do that that will please
him. It Is part of my duty, as it was of my vow, not only to renounce the Devil
and all his works: but also to believe all the articles of the Christian faith,
and to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days
of my life, As for the Articles of the Christian Faith, I believe them from my
heart, and resolve to own and confess them whilst I live; I never will dispute
or object against them, and I hope, I should choose to die, before I would
renounce any of them; as for other less necessary doctrines, I will be guided
by my Spiritual Governors; in controversies, I will submit to the judgment of
that Holy Church, in whose Communion I live; and so I will read and ponder Gods
Holy Word, especially the New Testament, that I may know my masters will, and
be encouraged to do it: not that I may find out new mysteries and maintain the
private opinions of a party. It remains then only, that I should keep Gods holy
will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life. And this I
also undertake; it shall be my daily and constant study and endeavor; I
resolve to obey to the utmost of my power: and I also promise further to
manifest my love by free-will-offerings, as God shall enable me.

. 2. A protestation of obedience.
But first my love is to appear by doing what is commanded; 1 John 5.3.
This is the love of God that we keep his commandments (says S. John:) Joh.
14.21.
and he that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
(says our Blessed Savior.) There can be no love without obedience, this is
its first and chiefest Trial; 23.
if a man love me, he will keep my words. Now then, should my beloved Lord ask
me, as once he did Saint Peter, N. do thou love me? Joh. 21.15.
would not my heart answer, with his zealous Apostle, Yes Lord, 13.37.
thou know all things, thou know that I love thee; -- I would lay down my
life for thee: why, to this he replies again, if thou love me, 14.15.
keep my Commandments. Every time a Christian tells Jesus, Lord I love thee,
Jesus answers again, if thou love me, keep my Commandments: So that, without
I observe this, I can no ways pretend to love him. Therefore I am to take
notice of, and to amend sins of omission, which too too many among Christians
mind little, or not at all. In the matter of sobriety I am commanded, whether I
eat or drink, to do it, as all things else, to the glory of God; and to be
contented, whatsoever state I am in; for chastity I am commanded to know how to
keep my vessel in sanctification and honor; for acts of corporal and spiritual
mercy, I am commanded to be merciful, as my heavenly father is merciful, and to
forgive injuries, as I desire my self to be forgiven; for reverence to my
betters, I am commanded to honor and obey my superiors Ecclesiastical and
Civil; in what concerns Divine Worship, I am bound to read and pray, and
mediditate, to instruct my self and family, to receive the Blessed Sacrament,
to have a veneration and respect for all things that belong or relate to God,
and him to love and fear, and trust and adore evermore: All these, and all
other duties, with the special precepts of the New Testament, is the task I
cheerfully undertake, and in the performance whereof I will approve my self a
sincere lover of JESUS.

. 3. How great a happiness follows our obedience.
His yoke is easy and his burden light, his Commandments are not grievous,
and yet in keeping of them there is great reward: a temporal happiness, than
which none is greater in this world, and an eternal happiness, infinitely
greater than any this world can afford: do not I see what pains most men are at
to get a subsistence for this world? how they run and sweat and spend
themselves to provide for this perishing life; which yet is miserable, short,
and uncertain? and shall I not labor for the meat which abides to eternal
life? shall I be at no pains to secure that life which has no end, and knows
no misery? O that I could duly understand the difference betwixt this life and
the life to come! how would I slight the one, and desire the other! or rather
how cheerfully would I employ this present, to obtain that which is to come! Is
not there servants that work hard day by day, a whole year together for small
wages; who are almost perpetually employed about their masters business: and
yet have sometimes no thanks, and often, but a sorry reward? and am not I one
of those laborers whom my Lord has hired to work in his vineyard? Mat. 20.
am not I one of those servants, whom he has entrusted with his goods, to whom
he has entrusted talents to improve for him, and do not I desire he should
tell me one day, well done, Mat. 21.
good and faithful servant? is not my salary great, greater than any Prince on
earth could make it, greater than I could wish, greater than I can comprehend?
eternal rest, eternal joys, eternal happiness, eternal glories; eternity it
self, he himself will be my reward. Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! Blessed
Eternity. Eternity never enough to be considered, Eternity never enough to be
valued, shall I obtainthee by what I do here for my Lord? shall I obtain thee
by that imperfect service I pay to my gracious Master? O God who have prepared
for them that love thee, Sixth Sunday after Trinity.
such good things as pass manse understanding, pour into our hearts such love
toward thee, that we loving thee above all things, may obtain thy promises
which exceed all that we can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Lord
I am not worthy to be called thy Son; I have often begged to be one of thy hired
servants, the meanest so I love and obey best. O let me, like thy servant
Moses, ever have a respect to the recompense of the reward, ever consider what
I shall get by serving thee, that I may be diligent, persevering and cheerful
in doing my duty. O my soul, blush to consider how laborious men are for the
unsatisfying acquests of this earth; how eager thou have been thy self in
pursuing of them; and how slothful, how unactive and heavy thou art in working
for eternal rest, for the treasures of eternity, for the glories of heaven, for
those Divine Pleasures which are at the right hand of God for evermore. Whence
comes this, unhappy soul, is it not from inconsideration? because thou do not
lift up thine eyes to see whither the way of love and obedience will bring
thee; because thou do not look beyond the world, upon things eternal; because
thou do not often enough meditate upon heaven and eternity; that unvaluable,
infinite recompense which awaits thee, as soon as thy work is finished. Resolve
therefore to amend this, and daily, once at least, to consider what are thy
wages, what thou shall get by serving God. As the Apostle says of afflictions,
that they are light and but for a moment, whilst we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: the same we may say of
the most difficult of Christian duties, that they are light and but for a
moment, that they are easy and soon done; that there is no tediousness, no
hardship in them, whilst we look upon things eternal, whilst we have a respect
unto the recompense of the reward.

. 4. We should often look on our reward.
This consideration doubtless, would be powerful and effectual, would wake and
stir us up, and make us active and lively, if we had it often in our minds.
Therefore our Blessed Savior, to encourage his followers and make them
diligent in his service, does often give them to understand, what by parables
and what by plain declarations, that they should not serve him for naught, and
that they should be no losers by him; that he would consider them for their
time, for their expenses, for their sufferings and for their labors; that he
would take notice of the least thing they should do for him; so that even a cup
of water given for his sake should not go unrewarded; and that their reward
should be great, bountiful and most excellent, far above their deserts and even
above their wishes and apprehensions: an angelick nature, a glory bright as the
Sun it self, an eternal life, a heavenly, an endless kingdom, his own joys
should be their portion and their recompense. And we find also the Holy
Apostles, assuring those whom they brought to work in their Lords vineyard,
that they should certainly have their hire, and be paid most generously for
their work, God will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6.7.
to them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honor, and
immortality shall be rendered eternal life. Every man shall receive his own
reward according to his own labor. 1 Cor. 3.8.
And S. Paul, to encourage the Corinthians, tells them that we Christians are
entered into a race, at the end whereof we may see the Laurel, 1 Cor. 9.24.
palmam in stadio positam, a glorious prize, an incorruptible crown, if we will
run and strive for it; and he likewise tells the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.8.
that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the
Lord, whether be be bond or free. S. Peter also teaches that we should be
moved and encouraged, by the greatness of the promised reward, to forsake our
lusts, and wholly devote our selves to God; 2 Pet. 1.4.
exceeding great and glorious promises are given unto us, that by these you
might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the pollution that is
in the world through lust. Heb. 5.9.
Christ is become the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him, (not
to those who hope and roll, and take hold:) and so the result of all these may
be comprehended in the exhortation of S. 1 Cor. 15.58.
Paul: My Beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord. In this sense good works are meritorious, in that they procure us a
reward, a reward infinitely greater than their own desert.

. 5. Love is noble and generous.
But, Though it may encourage us to love that gracious God who gives so very
much for that little we are able to do, yet love its self is not Mercenary; 1
Cor. 13.5
charity does not seek her own (says S. Paul,) we may desire our promised
reward and set our affections upon it, as it is a demonstration of Gods
infinite love and goodness: or because it will be the expressing of our duty
and thankfulness, when we shall love and glorify and adore God perfectly and
for ever: or rather because the reward is God himself, who will be to every
faithful servant, his exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.4.
as well as to faithful Abraham: rewarding sincere obedience with the fruition
of himself, being all in all to his Saints. But still I say, love is not
selfish, but free and generous, if nothing were to be gained by it, it would
have satisfaction enough in showing its self: it is an unspeakable pleasure to a
devout lover to act and labor for JESUS, when he thus thinks with himself; by
the performance of this duty, by this act of virtue, by this good work, I serve
my dearest Lord, I oblige my best friend; I express my love to him whose
infinite kindness to me has conquered my heart, whom I love as my own soul,
and for whom I would willingly die. O happy soul, who feel what an exceeding
joy it is to love JESUS! or rather unhappy soul, who can show so little love
to JESUS! Unhappy necessities of a frail body, unhappy distractions of a
troublesome world! Why am I, by you deprived of the continual pleasure of
waiting continually on my Divine and most loving Master? But blessed be my
gracious Lord, that I might have more opportunities of pleasing him, and
expressing my affections to him, he has made virtues of necessities, he has
turned nature into grace, and of humane duties he has made acts of Religion in
relieving mine own and others wants. If I observe the rules of sobriety and
charity, he takes thence occasion to bless and reward me, as if he were thereby
glorified, in discharging the duties of my place and calling. If I am diligent
and faithful; though my work be never so mean, he owns it as a service done to
him. Servants (says S. Paul) obey your masters in all things, Col. 3.22,
and do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men, 23.
knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance, for
ye serve the Lord Christ. If I am conscientious in all my ways and works, he
takes it as a mark of my love and part of my duty to him. O that the constant
course of my conversation might speak the sincerity of my affection to my
Blessed Lord. Dearest JESUS, the Cross thou did bear for me was heavy and
painful to extremity: but thy yoke is light and pleasant, thy service is
perfect freedom. O let it be my delight and daily employment as it is my duty,
to serve and obey thee, to follow thy blessed example and be instrumental in
winning hearts to thee: let me love thee so entirely that I may love nothing
but thee, nothing but for thy sake; Fac precor Domine, B. Ansel.
me gustare per amorem quod gusto per cognitionem, sentiam per affectum, quod
sentio per intellectum. Amen.

. 6. We belong to Jesus and are not our own.
Love regards not so much what is commanded, as who it is that commands it; if
it be the Beloved requires any thing, love does it cheerfully without
reluctance; another with earnest begging should not have that granted, which
the least word of a friend shall obtain. The commands of Christianity are easy
and most rational, in keeping of them consists our present and future
happiness: Yet the ture lover of JESUS looks farther, he considers that it is
his God and Savior who would have him obey, he to whom he belongs, to whom he
ows himself and infinitely more: for every Christian ows JESUS to JESUS, who
gave himself for him. The old saying was emendus cui imperes, buy your slaves;
buy those that will be commanded by you; none of us can say so to the God whom
we serve, for he has indeed bought us; Ye are not your own (says S. Paul) ye
are bought with a price, thence it is strongly inferred, therefore glorify God,
in your body and in your spirit which are Gods. We are not at our own dispose,
our Divine Master has a most just propriety in us; we are wholly his: and
would to God, we were his as much by affection and resignation, as by right;
the price he has paid for us, is no less than himself; he has given his life
that ours might be his; We were redeemed from our vain conversation by the
precious blood of Christ, who died for us, that we might live to him, he could
get nothing by that dear purchase, but our love only, for we were his before,
it is he that made us: only we had estranged our selves from him, and placed
our love upon other things, and he could not count us his own while we loved
him not.

. 7. Meditation our obligation to serve JESUS.
I must therefore consider whose I am; I am Christ's by a strong and
incontestable title; while I serve him I do that proper work which belongs to
me; whilst I obey what he has commanded, I do what is infinitely my duty, what
his love to me challenges, and what my love to him desires to return. Had I
ten thousand years to live, and could I serve him all that while and do nothing
else, I could not repay him for the least part of that great ransom he has
paid for me, neither could I deserve any thing of those great wages which he
will give me: my life is but short and he allows me time for other things, even
for pleasure and recreation. I have therefore a most gracious Master, and
therefore I resolve and promise to do what he requires of me; I will except at
nothing he commands, it shall be my joy to pay my duty to him; and I will make
it appear that I serve out of love and affection. Vae miserae animae quae
Christum non quaerit nec amat, arida manet and misera, etc. Aug. Man.
O my dearest JESUS, would my heart did feel what it should; would I could
express what it feels; and would I could perform as much as I express: But O my
Blessed Lord, how frequently and unhappily do I forget that thou art my Master,
and I thy servant; that my chiefest business is to do thy will, and that my
greatest happiness as well as duty, is to obey thee? Is it not because I also
forget that thou did redeem me from a most wretched slavery; that thou did
pay an immense price for me; that thou becamest a servant for me, before thou
requiredst any service from me; and that thou did first love me before thou
did entreat my love? O thou great Lover and Savior of men, I wholly give my
self to thee, body and soul, heart and affections; I desire to be thine; I pray
that thou would make me to be thine, and that thou would own me for thine,
that so thou may be mine to eternity. would thou know (says S. Aug.) Aliud
non quaerit precium nisi te ipsum; tantum valet quantum es, te da and habebis
illud. Manual.
what thou must give for heaven? give thy self, that is the price; nothing less
will serve, that alone is accounted sufficient: heaven is worth just what thou
art, give thy self and thou shall certainly have it. Do not men seek to serve
and oblige great persons expecting to be by them gratified? are they not
ambitious to wait upon Princes in regard of an Honorable stipend? and why
should I not count it the greatest Honor and preferment to serve the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords? The salary he pays his servants is infinitely greater
than any the greatest Monarch can give; they oftentimes cast off with disgrace
their most faithful officers: my Lord is so far from so doing, that he bears
with the faults of his meanest servants, and never turns out any that will live
with him. It Is highly difficult to become a Prince his favorite, many spend
their time, their wealth and themselves, and never can get the least share in
his affections; but I am sure my heavenly Master loves me; I know it by what
he has done, by what he daily does, and by what he has declared he would do
for me: Although he has bought me, and so might well require the utmost I can
do, without any reward: yet he hires me and gives me more, infinitely more than
I can earn. I will therefore be diligent, faithful and zealous in fulfilling
the work he has appointed me. I will often say to myself; I am a servant and a
lover of JESUS, I am a servant and a lover of JESUS. I will every morning
consider, what can I do this day of what my Lord has commanded me? what duties
of sobriety, righteousness or godliness can I discharge to make it appear that
JESUS is the Master I own and obey? Romans 14.7, 8, 9.
None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself, for whether we live
we live unto the Lord, or whether we die we die unto the Lord: Whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lords; for to this end Christ both died and rose
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.

. 8. Our love and obedience God requires.
This double duty of dying unto sin and living unto righteousness, absteining
from that which is evil and doing that which is good, I am obliged to perform
by strong and indispensible obligations: if I do not, I certainly perish. When
we say, in common speaking, that we do things out of love, we mean that we are
free, and may choose whether we do them or no, we are not bound to it: but here
all along where I undertake to discharge the duties of Religion out of love; I
do not in the least mean so. I acknowledge my self under the greatest necessity
of discharging my baptismal vow, of living according to the Gospel Rule,
otherwise my neglect of it would be my ruin, I should perish in my
disobedience. Love it self is a duty, the first and greatest commandment: Mat.
22.37
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind. I recommend love therefore, Meliores quos dirigit amor,
plures quos corrigit timor. Aug.
as the noblest, the most powerful motive to a Religious obedience; as that
which makes our duty easy and pleasant, and gives a value to what we do or
suffer for God. I know there is those who teach that, by our well-doing we must
not seek for salvation, and that our obedience is not required to our
justification, but may be a mark or an effect of it, faith having done the work
before; but this groundless and mischievous opinion is contradicted by
thousands of plain express Scriptures, He that hears these sayings of mine
and does them not, is like the man that built his house upon the sand. Not
every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. If thou will
enter life, keep the Commandments: and innumerable others, with all those that
affirm, that God shall judge and reward every man according as his works have
been.

No, the holy Religion we profess requires a conformity betwixt the Holy JESUS
and his followers; that by a devout imitation we should copy his example: that
we should be fruitful in good works, and by a sincere and universal obedience
serve God all days of our life; Heb. 2.2,
For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a full recompense of reward: 3.
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation; by being disobedient
to our Lord JESUS, who having wrought and revealed it, offers it to us, on the
condition of an affectionate obedience to his Gospel? Heb. 6.7, etc.
The earth which drinks the rain that comes upon it -- and bears thorns
and briers, is rejected and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burnt; such
is their condition who receiving the heavenly dew of Divine Grace, in their
admission into, and profession of Christianity, yet still remain barren, or
bring forth evil fruit: But beloved (says the Apostle) we are persuaded better
things of you, and things that accompany salvation: for God is not unrighteous
to forget your work and labor of love which ye have showed toward his name;
and we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end. He says not, we desire that you may be
confident and persuaded of your salvation, but that, by love and diligent
obedience, ye may ascertain your hope, 1 Pet. 1.10.
make your calling and election sure, as S. Peter speaks, for indeed, God has
not appointed us to wrath, 1 These. 5.9, 10.
but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us that whether
we wake or sleep we should live together with him, Ephesians. 4.1.
in holiness of life, worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, for we
are Gods work-manship created in Jesus Christ unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. This then is the way
wherein of necessity we must walk, that as we engaged and promised when we were
Baptized into Christ, so we should live ever after: which S. Col. 2.6.
Paul expresses thus, As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him: Col. 1.10.
and again, walk worthy of the Lord, being fruitful in every good work, This is
the rule whereby we must order the course of our lives, Phil. 1.27.3.20.
that our conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; that our
conversation be in heaven whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ; that whatsoever things are true, 4.8.
honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, any virtue, any thing
praiseworthy, may be our constant study and practice, We must labor that
whether present or absent we may be accepted of our Lord, 2 Cor. 5.9.
because we shall all appear before him and receive according as we obey him,
now in his absence.

. 9. Encouragements to obey Jesus.
All this, and much more to the same purpose, which I have read and observed in
the Sacred Books of the New Testament, has convinced me that it is the design
of Christian Religion to make me meek and humble, sober and contented, just and
charitable, devout and religious, virtuous and holy: this I own to be my duty,
and I will endeavor my self heartily to perform the same. And that I may do it
with cheerfulness and affection, I will stir and quicken ^he holy fire of love
in my heart, by p^ous considerations. When any duty to God or man calls upon me
for ac^ion and performance, and I find in my soul too much of dullness or
reluctance, I will again by meditation suppose my dying Savior present,
telling me, how much he has done and suffered for me, and desiring me, as I
love him, to do that duty which lies before me. Christian, if thou do
understand the greatness of my love which brought me here to die for thee; if
thou art sensible of it, and would make any return for it, do this, obey this
command; this may be the last thing thou shall ever do for me, this may be the
last trial of thy love: sure it would grieve thee to have denied this small
request to him that gives his life, that gives himself for thee. Or else I will
suppose my self in the presence of my Divine Master sitting on his heavenly
throne with his glorified servants about him, showing me the crown he has
assigned to me, and saying; N. N. will thou deny to do this at my earnest
request? will thou be so unkind to me? Sure I have deserved better at thy hands
than so; sure I, who am much above thee, have done much more for thee, than
that comes to; but besides, I would highly recompense thee. These my friends I
have rewarded with the bliss and glory they enjoy, for having done such things
for me: and I would reward thee as bountifully: here is eternal life, eternal
rest, eternal glory for thy recompense: as thou love me, as thou love thy
self, obey, that thou may be happy. To this, what answer could I make, but
such as this? Lord not only this, but any thing else thou have commanded, I am
willing to fulfill and obey. I bewail my dullness and depraved nature that makes
me so unready, so unactive in thy service: but Lord thou know that I love
thee. I would undertake any labor, any trouble to make it appear; I would die
to justify it. Yet, sweetest JESU, I beg of thee to increase my love; to
increase it to such a degree that, like thy heavenly attendants, I may burn
with that Divine fire, and be all love to thee: Sund. 25. after Trinity.
that so I may be always prepared and desirous to do thy will. Stir up, we
beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people, that they plenteously
bringing forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously rewarded
through JESUS Christ our Lord. Amen. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

Christian Reader, I hope that what I have writ, thou will also read and repeat
heartily in the first Person: for to that end I have thus contrived it to
engage thine affections, to make thee speak, as of thy self, these soliloquies,
acts of love, and acts of resolution which run throughout the whole discourse,
and I would have thee use that method, which may much affect thee; to make
dialogues betwixt thy Savior and thy soul, and betwixt thy soul and thy self;
for certain it is, that for thee N. N. by name, JESUS was crucified and died;
and certain it is, that thou thy self shall die and be judged, and rise again
to an intolerable eternity, if by carelessness and inconsideration thou have
been unmindful of thy Lord and thy soul: or else rise again to eternal joys, if
thou have sincerely loved and served JESUS; Job. 15, 10
If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my
Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love.

. 10. Of free-will-offerings.
Thus much of necessity must be done; my duty as well as my love constrains me
to it. Not to break negative precepts and to obey positive ones, (that is, to
cease from sin and to work righteousness,) is required of me; if I do it by
love, I have made my task pleasant: but yet a task it is, which must be
fulfilled. Not but that there is mercy for sins against the New Covenant, for
the transgression of Gospel precepts; there is joy in heaven at the conversion
of a sinner, what ever his sins have been; and it ought greatly to indear God
to us, that he is so willing to forgive; so desirous to have us repent, that we
may be capable of his pardon: but whether soon or late, whether after crying
guilts or ordinary sins, still I say, there must be a true contrition, a sorrow
and repentance for our sins, proceeding from the love of God, and a sincere
endeavor to please and obey him for the future; and so, thus far we are drawn
by a moral necessity, by the desire of our own happiness, which is not to be
obtained any other way. But shall we stay just here, and not go one step
further than is required? it is well indeed when we are safe, and that must be
secured first of all, and with the greatest care; but shall our love proceed no
further? Sure that Christian who is best assured of his salvation, will love
God most of all and make to him the greatest and most hearty returns. When a
man is qualified for heaven and enjoys the greatest happiness this world is
capable of; that is, a sense of Gods favor and a well-grounded assurance of a
future bliss, his soul cannot but melt into the most affectionate love for that
gracious God, whose mercy and loving kindness has brought him into that happy
condition and fitted him by his grace for a much happier; and they, I say, that
are in such a case (for to them only I now speak) may well do something more,
than what needs they must; may well enlarge their affections to God, beyond the
bounds of prescribed duties, it is a good sign, a sign of a sincere and a pious
heart, when a man is forward to undertake for God: when he does not weigh
grains and scruples, lest he should part with any of his right and liberty: but
affords God a full measure and running over, and think he never gives enough,
and still desires that he might do infinitely more for him. It Is true that
properly speaking, all is due to God: and the more any, the best Christian
returns, the more he has received, and so the more he is indebted; but yet,
God is pleased not to require all that he gives, nor all that we may give, that
we may have wherewith to make a free-will-offering; that we may have something
to give him, that he requires not, tokens of our greater love and gratitude. It
was foretold that under the Gospel, in the day of Christ's power, Psalm. 110.3
his people should offer him feee-will-offerings with an holy worship. And
David himself, under the Law, was at his quid retribuam? Psalm. 116.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has done unto
me? Though the benefits which God vouchsafed his people then, were much
inferior to those he has since bestowed upon us; ( for eye had not then seen
nor ear heard, neither was it entered into the heart of man, what great things
God would do for them that love him, as he has now declared in the revelations
of his Gospel,) though he had tied them to a burdensome and most expensive
service: yet he accepted their voluntary vows and engagements, and was well
pleased with them: yet he would receive their free-will-offerings, and delight
in them. And sure we are more obliged than the Jews to let our love and
gratitude break forth beyond the limits of commands and express injunctions:
and now that God has opened to us his rarest treasures, his own bosom, for to
give us his beloved Son, he will not reject our free oblations, the voluntary
acknowledgments of his undeserved and unspeakable mercies. It Is not to be
denied (without giving the lie to the learning and piety of the best Christians
in all ages) but that there is in the New Testament counsels as well as
precepts, some things recommended, though not commanded; he that sells all that
he has for to buy the pearl of great price, and they that make themselves
Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven, 2 Cor. 9.6.
were not enjoined so to do, but are well approved of: and that God who gives a
plentiful harvest to him that sows bountifully, is doubtless well-pleased, with
his open handedness and charitable profusion. And as it is the best indication
of a devout and loving soul, cheerfully to exceed what is strictly required: it
is also the best fence to immure and secure our duty; for then, when we slack
and abate, we may be still within our due bounds; nay more, I am confdent that
as it is best and safest, it is also easier, to give free-will-offerings, than
only, just to pay the daily commanded sacrifice, because those proceed from
affection, these perhaps only from injunction. He that is desired to go one
mile and goes two or ten, finds his way pleasant, for love leads him: but he
that is pressed to the same journey, and is acted by fear and compulsion, while
he resolves not to go one foot farther than needs he must, will easily be
tempted to stay one short of what he should. But this is better understood by
the devout lovers of JESUS than I can express it. Precepts are given to all men
as tributes are exacted of all: (...). Beat. Doroth. Doct. 1.
(says an Ancient guide of souls) but as in the world, great persons and
favorites not only pay the tax, but also offer presents and gifts to the
Prince: so in the Church, the most Religious observe not only the precepts, but
also intimations and counsels, and give to God, not only what he exacts, but
also free oblations, all that they are able. How many thousands of Saints, now
in heaven, have taken this course? how many that now wear the bright crown of
virginity, might have enjoyed the comforts of marriage, had not the love of
JESUS prevailed over their natural desires? how many who might have possessed
great estates, enjoy now the greater treasures of eternity, for having made
themselves poor, to relieve the needy members of JESUS? how many who now sit on
thrones of glory, have chosen here to follow JESUS in meanness and humility,
when honors and worldly pomps were at their command? how many are now rewarded
with high degrees of everlasting bliss, for having spent their short time upon
earth in serving JESUS, when they might have spent it upon their own profit or
pleasure? and how many now living, aspire to the same felicities and
recompenses, by cheerfully following the same ways, and expressing a sincere
and unbounded love, S. Aug.
by such free oblations? Cur non possum quod isti and istae? Why cannot I do
what these my Christian Brothers and Sisters have done, and do still? has not
God done as great things for me as for them? has he not given me the same
promises as they had? do not I hope to be their companion and fellow citizen in
heaven? And why then cannot I love as much as they did? I should therefore, and
do resolve to make no reservations; JESUS shall have the command of all he has
given me, of all he has enabled me to do; I shall keep nothing from him which
may express my love and gratitude, and do him service. Dearest JESUS, I know I
can never do for thee so much as I should, and I know that I shall never do so
much as I would; thou gave thy self for me, and thou will give thy self to
me: and Lord, what am I worth, and what is the worth of all I can do? It is a
great favor that thou will accept of me and my weak endeavors. I know that if
heaven were capable of any grief, it would be only that we have not loved thee
enough upon earth; when thou fillest our souls with thy Divine and ravishing
joys, we shall wish we had done nothing here, but serve and love thee. O give
me grace now whilst I live, to do what I shall wish to have done when I die;
let me d^ now I am absent from thee, what I shall wish to have done when I
dwell with thee* let me love thee infinitely and without measure. Modus amandi
Deum sine modo. S. Bern.


. 11. Of our obedience to the Church.
The first instance o^ our love in this way o^ free-will-offerings should be a
pious obedience to our Mother the Church; not but that it is many ways
required, but because it is almost wholly neglected. What by pride and
refractoriness, what by ignorance and indevotion, and what by looseness and
irreligion, that obedience which ought to be paid to those that have the rule
over us in the Lord, to the standing rules and orders of our Spiritual
governors, is so generally laid aside, that many that would, yet dare not press
it upon the people; and that, even they that obey, do it secretly, and, as
though 'twere dishonorable, are in a manner ashamed to own it; Hence comes
that great neglect of Confirmation, that most necessary and Ancient, if not
Apostolic constitution; hence the desuetude of fasting upon appointed days,
and even of bidding of them: and the non-observance of Holy Days, and times of
solemn devotion; hence the slight regard had to the public worship of God, and
the seldom receiving of the Lords Supper; hence the reservedness and unhappy
secrecy of most people in not acquainting their spiritual guides with the
state of their conscience when it needs, and not receiving their comforts and
directions; hence the not sending for the elders of the Church to do their
office upon sick persons, and the seldom desiring their absolution; and hence
even in too many of the Clergy, the neglect of daily saying Divine Offices, as
they are commanded, and observing other injunctions peculiar to them. I may say
that it fares with our Church as with some Princes, who have their due
Sovereignty denied them because they are Christians: (as if by becoming members
and defenders of the Church, they were become subject to Pontifical Chairs and
Puritan Synods) for so, many would not have this Church obeyed because it is
Reformed; they would not have its laws observed, because it makes them inferior
to Gods; as though, by not imposing a blind superstitious, and oversevere
obedience, as Rome does, this Church were become incapable of exercising any
authority over her children and requiring any duty from them. But I say, let
those that love JESUS amend this, for his sake: for the Church is his spouse
and has received her power from him; let them yield a free and Religious
obedience to Ecclesiastical injunctions, because JESUS has said, he that
receives you receives me. It is doubtless our duty so to do: and I am sure it
will be a good token of a pious heart, when we shall obey them in the Lord,
whom the Lord has set over us. We shall make it appear that we own the
Authority of our heavenly King, when we are subject to those his officers, by
whom he now reigns over us: to whom he has given the keys of his kingdom, and
whom he has appointed Stewards of his saving Mysteries: we shall have a share
in the Mysterious representation of the great expiatory sacrifice, which by the
Church is celebrated in the Eucharist, and in those Divine Services and solemn
Prayers which the Church offers to God daily: and we shall receive the full
benefit of being members of the Church and holding communion with it; if this
were not absolutely required, yet I am sure it will be a very acceptable
free-will-offering, if we do it devoutly and joyfully, because we love JESUS;
and this Christian obedience to the known, rational, and pious orders of the
Church, will answer the best part of that ancient and so much magnified
self-abnegation, vowed by the Coenobites, when they gave up themselves to be in
all things ruled and commanded by their superiors: and it will exercise those
two heavenly graces, meekness and humility, which the world despises, but all
true Christians own to be most Divine: Mat. 11.29
as they that bring rest to the soul, and make us most conformable to the meek
and humble JESUS.

. 12. Of several voluntary oblations.
As for corporal austerities commanded or uncommanded, I have said something of
them already: and the chiefest use and design of them is to mortify sensual
lusts, and to keep under the body that the spirit may rule and be obeyed; yet,
as they are exercises of repentance, marks of the just indignation we conceive
against our selves for having displeased God; as they may effect or express a
disrelish of temporal pleasures, a longing for heavenly joys, and an endeavor
to take up our cross and follow JESUS; they may be the matter of a
free-will-offering, and they may find a gracious reward and acceptance in so
much as they proceed from a sincere love to JESUS. Prayer also, thanksgiving,
reading, meditation, acts of Religion; though, as to the substance, they be the
discharge of the greatest duty God requires of us, the worship and adoration of
his Divine Majesty: yet as to the quantity, they may become free oblations, the
expressions of a greater love. He that with devout affections inlargeth his
offices, or counts the frequency of them by Canonical hours and wished for
opportunities: and he that sets apart large portions for religious exercises,
or in the following of his necessary business, does often lift up his heart and
thoughts to heaven and heavenly things, makes a voluntary offering of some of
his time, to him of whose eternity he hopes to be partaker. He that defalks
some hours from the refreshment of his body, to bestow them upon his soul; he
that chooses a meaner condition and employment, that having fewer avocations he
may spend more time upon Religion; and he that bears with some wrongs and
injuries, that being free from the distractions of quarrels and lawsuits, he
may be the better disposed to serve God, has bought the blessed opportunity of
attending JESUS and indearing himself to him. Charity likewise, whether
Spiritual or Corporal, whether in giving or in forgiving may be carried further
than is absolutely required, and so become a free oblation. He that takes great
pains to instruct the ignorant, to convert sinners, by all means to win souls
to JESUS, may manifest a greater love than was absolutely necessary to his own
salvation; and he that makes it his business and delight to prevent quarrels or
make reconciliations; to comfort and defend the afflicted, and oppressed, to
visit hospitals and relieve the poor; and to spend all his substance in pious
uses, for the honor of God, and Religion, and for the present and future
happiness of men, may exceed what God would have rewarded, and by showing so
great a love enrich his crown of glory and recompense. I only mark the
head-springs or storehouses of those arbitrary gifts wherewith men may honor
God and enrich themselves: the several emanations and offerings which may
proceed from them, being free and innumerable, cannot be specified, and should
not be imposed. Where there is love there is a willing mind: and where there is
a willing mind a man (in other cases as well as in charity) is accepted, 2 Cor.
8.12.
according to what he has and not according to what be has not. Some
husbandmen sow that they may have wherewith to pay their debts, (...), etc. S.
Johan. Clim. Grad. 26.. 43.
(which marks the labors and offerings of penitents, who endeavor to make
what satisfaction they can for their injuries to God or man.) Some sow that by
the expected crop they may increase their wealth; (which represents the good
works of more innocent persons, who aspire to a great reward and a glorious
crown.) Some sow that they may have something wherewith to express their
gratitude and make presents to their kind landlord or benefactor; (whereby is
signified the best of Christians, who in all things seek and design the glory
and advantage of their Lord.) And others sow that they may be thought diligent,
and receive commendations from the passers by; (these are an emblem of the most
imperfect Christians, who in Gods service seek their own glory, and of whom our
Blessed Savior says that they have their reward.) However all must sow; and
every one as he does it, sparingly or bountifully, so shall he reap at last.
But heaven is a cheap purchase, give we never so dear for it. Decay of
Christian Piety.
The Gospel reveals and offers a glorious kingdom great and eternal felicities:
but he that expects their possession because he reads and believes them, is
like him that should fancy the whole world shall be his, because he has the
History or the Map thereof. Ecclus. 37.11.
Consult not then with a coward in matters of war, as the Son of Sirach
advises; consult not with an irreligious age in matters of Piety and Religion:
and think it not enough to do as the most do. When first Christian Religion was
preached in the world, and men understood what JESUS had done for them, and
what he had promised, they thought nothing too much nor too good for him: they
cheerfully parted with temporal pleasures, honors and riches: with their
liberties, their limbs, blood, their very lives, that they might be faithful to
JESUS and come to reign with him: they made it appear by their patient,
cheerful, and magnanimous sufferings, that they valued nothing but JESUS and
eternity. We are not now exposed to the same dangers for the belief and
profession of Christianity: but the commands thereof may have Martyrs as well
as the Creed; the same Lord and Savior requires our obedience to the one, who
exacts our faith to the other; he that spends his life in the observance of his
Lords precepts and counsels, in thus confessing of him before men, may be
entitled to as great a reward, as he that dies, that he may not renounce his
Religion and deny his Faith. I need not insert cautions against vain glory and
self complacency after we have done the most we are able: for if it proceeds
not from the love of God, it is nothing worth; and if it does, it will never
bring pride nor vanity. Charity vanteth not it self, and is not puffed up: 1
Cor. 13.4.

(...), etc. S. Johan. Clim. Grad. 23.11.


Only in the words of a pious Saint, If we had died a thousand times for JESUS,
yet we should not have repaid him the least part of what we owe his infinite
mercy and condescension: for vast is the difference betwixt the blood of God,
and the blood of his creatures and servants, if we judge according to the
dignity, and not to the substance of it. What have thou, that thou have not
received? remember what JESUS says to all Christians, He that loves father or
mother more than me, Mat. 10.37
is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter more than me, Luke
14.33
is not worthy of me: and whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he
has, he cannot be my disciple. We can never do too much for JESUS: but we may
easily do too little; though the most we can do will never merit heaven, yet
the least we may do shall not obtain it: it is safe and impossible to exceed,
but it is easy and dangerous to be defective. 6. Sunday after Trinity.


O God, who have prepared for them that love thee such good things as pass man's
understanding, pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving thee
above all things, may obtain thy promises which exceed all that we can desire,
through JESUS Christ our Lord, Amen.

I have now assigned love its full task; to repent, and mortify our lusts, to
serve and obey God, and to abound in good works even free-will-offerings. I
have no more for it to do; I would only have it to increase, to grow toward
perfection, to be constant, and to endure unto the end. To help this forward,
and to conclude I have here added four considerations, wherewith to assist and
encourage the sincere lover of JESUS to the discharge of this great and blessed
duty, the work and labor of love.

. 13. That God should be loved above all things.
The first is, that it is most unjust and unreasonable to love any creature to
the prejudice of the Creator. As all things have their being from God, so they
have from him all the goodness and beauty which makes them lovely to us: and
God drawing upon visible objects fair copies of his invisible perfections,
designed to be loved in them: or that they should be loved in him, and for his
sake. If men being delighted with the beauty of the heavenly host took them to
be gods, Wisd. 13.3.
let them know how much better the Lord of them is, for the first Author of
beauty has created them: 5.
for by the beauty and greatness of the creatures proportionably the maker of
them is seen. Beauty and goodness are the proper object of love: and therefore,
God who is the first and supreme beauty and goodness, should be loved before
all things. We indeed reverence Princes in their seals and arms, in their
meanest servants clothed with their livery: but should a subject set up these
in the royal throne, and transfer to them, or even to the greatest Favorite,
those special honors which belong to the Prince only: he should justly be
deemed a Rebel, and his proceedings would be as unjustifiable, as the disloyal
distinction of taking arms by the Kings Authority against his Person. Yet such
are the proceedings of all disorderly lovers, I mean of all sinners: who
setting more of their affections upon the creatures, than upon God the Creator,
pay them afterward a greater veneration than they do to him; having exalted
honors, pleasures, and riches into the Imperial chair, they do more for them
than for the Sovereign himself: nay they obey them to his prejudice, and
against his express command. Thus vicious unreasonable men burn in the shade,
and freeze where the Sun shines; they dote upon inferior beauties, and neglect
the highest and most perfect; they take fire at dark shadows, and find no heat
in the brightest light. Great men have a respect paid them, in their
degenerating posterity: great Artists are respected in their liveless children;
we highly honor unhappy Pagans in those labors of theirs which adorn our
closets and libraries: God only is dishonored in his works, the more perfect
he has made them, the more injurious they prove to him. Phidias and Apelles
are remembered with veneration, in a fine picture or Statue: God only is
ingratefully forgotten in a lovely creature whereof he is Maker. An absurd
impiety this is, Absurdum est genu posito simulacra adorare, and suspicere,
fabros vero qui ea fecerunt contemnere.
which Seneca reproved in his Fellowheathen, to worship and deifie the carved
image, and to take no notice of the Carver that made it. God has done like a
loving father, who jealous of his sons affection, would have none to tend him
but such as wear his livery; would have the picture of himself hang in every
room; and all the goods in the house marked with his name and cipher: So God,
who loves men tenderly, and desires to be by them loved again, has put
something of himself in all the creatures he has appointed to serve us; that,
which way soever we turn our eyes, we might be put in mind of him, he has
stamped his name, in more or less legible Characters, upon all the goods and
utensils of this his great house, the world, wherein he has placed us. And now
shall we do like a simple child, who turning his back upon his father, should
look and smile on his picture, and caress it, and wait upon it, and ask it
blessing, while he slights the original? So absurd a thing would be counted
madness, and move pity or laughter: but when we act the same folly, in loving
the world whilst we despise God, we are highly criminal, and we highly provoke
our heavenly Father, thus to return to him contempt and disobedience for the
gracious tokens of his love. From hence it follows, that as we should love God
above all and all things, things in him and for him: we should also love those
things most, which have most of his impress and likeness. Therefore, man who is
created after Gods image, should be by us loved above all other creatures: and
that part of man which is chiefly adorned with the likeness of God, should have
the greater share of our affection. God himself values humane souls at a high
rate, because they are like him; as appears by what he has done and suffered
to save them. And for the same reason also, we should pay to the souls of men
the best part of that kindness we owe them: and if we do not, we give our
friends no greater love than children to their puppets; for they dress them
fine, and lay them soft, and kiss and embrace them: Just as they who aim at
nothing more than to make their friends merry, to wish them toys and gaudy
things and to see them at ease. A fondness inexcusable in rational creatures,
especially in Christians, who know the worth of an immortal soul and the great
concern of Eternity: and yet seek only to gratify the material part of their
friends which is subject to corruption, and to engage their affections to the
world which passes away and they must soon leave. As if when King Edward the
first was hastening out of the Holy Land hither to receive the Crown which
expected him, his friends had staid him by the way, and invited him to rest and
case, and provided for him all Princely delights, and entertainments, and
retarded his coming so long, till he had forgot or lost his right and his
kingdom. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his
soul? and what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? We are indeed much
commanded to love one another, and in this consists one great half of our
Religion, all justice and charity, and all the duties of the second Table. To
love our brother as we ought, is the best demonstration of our love to God, 1 John 4.20
for he that says he loves God, and hates his brother, Romans 13.10
is a liar, says S. John: and love works no ill to his neighbor, Mat. 19.19.
and is therefore the fulfilling of the law, says S. Paul, but a man is to
love his neighbor as himself, and therefore as he is most obliged to seek for
himself the kingdom of God and its righteousness: so should he in the first
place endeavor to procure it to his friend. Or else we are to love one another
as Christ has loved us: Joh. 13.33
and that was in redeeming our souls and purchasing for us heavenly joys and
eternal life: not in providing ease and sensual pleasures to our bodies here in
this world. The result of this is, that in the first place we should love God
infinitely and for his own sake: and that in the next, we should love those
things most which have a nearest relation to God; Grace and Virtue, Religion,
Holiness and Men; especially their Souls, which are an image of the Deity;
especially sanctified souls which are most like God. Afterward our lesser love
for less Divine Objects, may be reasonable and innocent: and however we have
secured a great duty and a great happiness. Mar. 13.33
To love God with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all
the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is
more than all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

. 14. It Is most just and easy to love God.
A second consideration may be, that it is most just and easy to love God.
That it is most just, is shown all along this discourse, wherein I have
represented the more general and most excellent benefits of God to mankind: all
the which challenge and deserve the greatest love our hearts are capable of.
God had required of his people that the firstborn and the first fruits should
be consecrated to him, thereby to acknowledge him the author of all their
blessings and the giver of all their increase: Now the firstborn of our souls,
the first fruits of our hearts is love, which God, who gives us all things,
demands as an acknowledgment from us. thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart and with all thy soul. We therefore commit a greater sacrilege if we
deny him so just a tribute, than if a Jew had robbed him of his first grapes or
his first ears of corn. But it is so much the more just, in that it is most
easy to love God. Infinite perfections, an abyss of goodness whence rivers and
oceans of good things do perpetually flow, one would think should swallow up
the hearts and affections of men: as indeed it does, of all that duly consider
it. And more perfectly of beatified Saints, and of those blessed spirits who
minister before his throne and are all flame for him. Besides, it is natural for
men to love what is theirs, propriety begets or increases love: Now God is our
God; he has given himself for us, he does now, and will more entirely
hereafter give himself to us; he made us for the enjoyment of himself, and for
that purpose he has redeemed us: and that we might all say, with David, O God
thou art my God, that God might show his kindness and indear himself to us, and
assert our right to him, he has assumed the names of those relations who love
us best, whom we love most tenderly, and whom we count most ours. God the
Father is pleased to be called our Father, God the Son, our Brother, and God
the Holy Ghost our Comforter, as it were our friend: thereby to express that
affection which he has for us, and the propriety which we may claim in him.
Sure it is an easy thing to love them that love us: Nimis durus est animus qui
amorem eisi nolebat dare, nolit tamen rependere. Aug.
and where God has expressed so much love, it is strangely unnatural if we are
not affected with it. Prove. 19.6.
Every man is a friend to him that gives gifts, says the Wiseman: Now what
gifts has our God given us! or rather, what gifts has he not given us! and
what perverse violence do they offer nature, that seek to confute Solomon's
saying, in this instance where it should be most true. Certainly it is an easy
thing to love infinite perfections, and infinite goodness; one that ever did
and ever does us good; from whom we daily receive favors, so great and so many
that we can tell neither their worth nor number: Wherefore S. Aug. says, Potes
mihi dicere, non habeo quod tribuam egenti, non possi^m jejunare, non possi^m
flere. Numquid potes mihi dicere charitatem habere non possum, etc.
that to love God is so natural, so easy, so infinitely just, and so much our
duty, that to omit it can admit of no plea nor pretense, and is inexcusable,
and criminal in the highest degree. Perhaps thou will say, I cannot fast, I
cannot weep, I have not what to give to the poor, but can thou say I cannot
love God? is there any obstacle in thy way? do thou want inducements or a
heart to do it? No, doubtless it is the easiest thing in the world to love him
that is most lovely, to love our greatest benefactor, to love him who is
infinitely kind and loving to us. Some virtues require opportunities and cannot
be exercised for want of them: but whether thou be sickly or healthy,
whether thy condition be high or low, whether thy leisure be much or little,
whether thy calling be easy or laborious, thou may love; love does not pinch
the belly, Facilis res, est Domine JESV CHRIST superamande, dilectio, a qua
nullus cujuscunque status, gradus, aut conditionis existat excusari potest,
etc. Idiot.
wearies not the hands, makes not the head ache, empties not the purse: for love
is neither grief nor pain; it is easy to all men, none can plead any excuses
against it.

. 15. An Objection answered.
Now here I will digress a little to answer two Objections which possibly might
be made against what I have said of Divine Love. The first, that I have
humaniz'd it too much; that whereas it is supernatural and should be spiritual,
I have made it almost palpable and sensible. To this I say, that whether we set
our love upon earthly or heavenly things, upon God or upon the world, still it
is the same passion, which resides in the same humane faculty. The will of man,
and the effects thereof are alike evident and real. He that truly loves God,
has that same hearty affection for him, as to the kind, as one friend has for
another: a sincere lover of JESUS will seek to please him, and to be with him,
and to enjoy him, and do all that for him, which men would do for those whom
they love heartily: all the difference is, that Divine Love has its proper
expressions, can never be too great, and is in all respects infinitely more
excellent than the love of any creature. Therefore, if in some places I have
represented things plainly, and made that, in some manner to be touched by
sense which is only the object of faith, my design was thereby to move the
affections, and to bring down the notions of Religion, from the head into the
heart. Heb. 11.1.
Faith should be the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen: We should consider things of faith, whether past or to come, as if they
had now a real subsistence, as if they were present before our eyes; their
greatness then, would be better viewed, and have the greater power upon us: 27.
as Moses, who, by consideration, seeing him who is invisible, was thereby
enabled to prefer the afflictions of Gods people to the pleasures and dignities
of the Courts of Pharaoh. I believe it was a great advantage to the Piety of
Primitive ages, that they lived near the time when those things were acted,
which we now believe at a greater distance: for then, the Revelations of the
New Testament were every Christians discourse and admiration; the proximity of
the times made them almost visible, and the recent footsteps of those great
transactions gave them a kind of sensibility, whereby their thoughts and
considerations were drawn and retained, and made serious and efficacious. And I
believe it may be a great cause of the degeneracy of these latter ages, that
faith is become too notional, too metaphysical and abstracted, whereas we
should vest the great objects of our faith with material circumstances, to make
them in some manner the object of sense, that to us it might be said as S. Gal.
3.1.
Paul to the Galatians, Before your eyes JESUS CHRIST has been evidently set
forth, crucified among you; and that, in all other instances, our faith might
be to us, the evidence of things not seen. When we look upon the things of
revelation as far distant from us, they appear hardly credible, and not much to
be regarded: but a closer viewing of them, by a nearer and almost sensible
consideration, would make them appear great and wonderful, would make deep and
lasting impressions on our minds, and cause us to cry out with grief and
wonder; Lord, what is man, that thou art thus mindful of him! or rather, what
is man, that he is unmindful of thee! However, I have the warrant, and do claim
the privilege, of them that write contemplative meditations, to represent
things as present and visible; and well we may, especially when we treat of the
love of God showed to mankind in JESUS: for that love became palpable, and
converst among men, and was manifested to sense, in the birth, the actions, and
the sufferings of our Blessed Savior: who by becoming man, seemed to comply
with that unjust and yet general desire which men had, of worshipping humane
creatures, and having things visible and material for the object of their
devotion and Religious love.

. 16. A second objection answered.
The other Objection would perhaps be made by them who scruple and refuse to
bow at the Holy name of JESUS, and who might say that I have mentioned it too
often and too often called Divine Charity, The love of JESUS: and that in so
doing I have been either superstitious or injurious to God. To this I answer,
That as our Blessed Savior says, He that hates me, Joh. 15.23
hates my father also: so we may say, that he that loves him loves his
father also. For the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost are one and the same God
blessed for ever; 1 John 5.1.
he that loves him that begat, loves also him that is begotten, and so
reciprocally. The Divine Essence is but one, it admits of no division:
therefore whatever honor is paid to one of the Divine Persons, is paid to all
Three, the Ever-glorious Trinity is honored by it. But then it must be
considered that JESUS the second Person of that Blessed and Glorious Trinity is
not only God, but also Man, and so Mediator betwixt God and Man: so that by,
and through him we pray, we worship, we love God. As God manifested his love to
men in JESUS: so in JESUS men offer the returns of their love to God; 1 John
4.9.
In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only
begotten Son into the world that we might live through him: and in this is
manifested our love toward God, that we receive, and love, and obey that Son.
With this, God is in no wise offended, but rather infinitely well pleased; Joh.
14.21
he that loves me shall be loved of my Father; says our Blessed Savior; 23.
If a man love me he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him; and again, If any man serve
me, Joh. 12.26
him will my Father honor. Though we owe our redemption to the infinite
mercies of God Father, Son and Holy Ghost: yet in a more especial manner we are
engaged to the Son, who personally came down from heaven, for us men and for
our salvation. JESUS is the Author and finisher of our faith, he is the Founder
of our Holy Religion; it is he has revealed those doctrines we are to believe;
it is he has given us those laws and precepts whereby we are to live, it is he
from whom we are called Christians; it is he who for us despised the shame and
endured the Cross, who has shed his blood and given his life a ransom for
ours; it is he who by contracting a near relation with us, becoming our
brother, has caused us to be adopted Sons of God, and heirs with him of an
eternal kingdom; it is he who is our Lord and Master, and will be our judge and
our rewarder if we be faithful to him. Romans 14.9.
For this end Christ died and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the
dead and living, says S. Paul. Act. 2.36.
God has made that same JESUS whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, him
God has exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and Savior, says S.
Peter. 5.31.
All power is given him in heaven and earth: and he must reign till he has put
all enemies under his feet. Hence the frequent and urgent exhortations to
follow and imitate, to serve and obey JESUS; Hence those Pathetick words of S.
Paul, The love of Christ. 2 Cor. 5.14 Phil. 3.7,
constrains us, and again, what things were gain to me I counted loss for
Christ: yea doubtless and I count all things loss, 8.
for the excellency of JESUS CHRIST my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss
of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. It Is JESUS
has won our hearts to God; it is he has reconciled us from a state of enmity
to a state of love. besides that God was justly angry for our rebellions, his
glories are so bright, so amazing, his Divine Majesty so high, that to love a
being so infinitely above us might have been thought profaneness or
presumption; Non been convenient nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and amor.
respect, not friendship, is the affection of subjects to Princes. (...) was an
ordinary Epithete for the heathen Gods: and even the Israelites were amazed and
terrified at the sight of a heavenly messenger, crying we shall die for we have
seen God: it is the great humiliation of JESUS has procured and established an
everlasting reconciliation and friendship betwixt God and man. Romans 5.8.
God commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
died for us: and now there is neither death, Romans 8.39.
nor life, nor angels, nor any other creature can separate us from the love of
God which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD: Therefore for a reward for the great
sufferings and abasement of JESUS, God has given him a supreme authority over
all the world, Men and Angels being made subject unto him; because he made
himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7, 8, etc.
and took on him the form of a servant, and humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, therefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name
of JESUS every thing should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
things under the earth: and every tongue should confess that JESUS CHRIST, is
the Lord to the Glory of God the Father. Our love and obedience to JESUS
derogates nothing from but belongs to God: It Is to the glory of God the Father.
God has highly exalted JESUS for his humiliation, and for the same cause we
ought also to love and exalt him, as much as possibly we can, because it was
for us; not only bow at his name, but ever kneel and kiss the ground, when he
only sees us; no fear of exceeding here, no fear of superstition: we can never
show him too much love or respect: Psalm. 72.
All Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall do him service: prayer
shall be made unto him, and daily shall he be praised. Amen.

. 17. It Is most pleasant and safe to love God.
A third consideration will be that it is most pleasant and safe to love God.
Love may cause trouble, but it certainly is the spring or parent of all joy and
satisfaction. He that has an affection to nothing has pleasure in nothing:
could the imaginary apathy of the Stoics really seize upon any man: if he
could never be miserable, he would also be incapable of all happiness. It Is
true indeed that the love of worldly things, in that they are vain and
perishing, is it self vanity and vexation: qui multum amat plus dolet, is
certainly true of all but the Divine Love. He that has many friends has many
sorrows; he that loves many things has many things to fear for: It Is only God
that has those infinite excellencies which can fully replenish our minds and
desires: It Is only God that admits of no variableness neither shadow of
turning: and therefore it is the love of God alone that can make us eternally
and entirely happy. It is reported of a person of great sanctity, that an evil
spirit confessed to him, that were it possible for one who loves God to come into
hell; yet it were impossible he should be miserable but that it would rather
sink hell it self and make it disappear, or else make it a paradise for him.
Though the relation may be fabulous, yet I believe the thing it self is true:
However, I am confident that the love of God would sweeten all the bitterness
of our innocent miseries, and that it is only the imperfection of a Christians
love that exposes his mind to the vexation of humane sorrows. I am not (to my
grief) a competent witness to this truth: but there have been many Saints and
devout persons who, in the fervency of their love to God, have found those
joys, Nihil crus sentit in nervo, dum animus est in Coelo.
those ravishments of joy which are ineffable, and which made them, in some
manner insensible and incapable of any great sorrow. And even the lesser love
of more imperfect, though sincere, Christians, does in a great measure take
away the sense of humane calamities, and brings to their minds the greatest
contentment and delight this world is capable of. Magis est ubi amat quam ubi
animat.
A man's heart is more where it loves than where it lives; he that loves
dwells in God and God in him: 1 John 4.16.
and what greater, Deus Charitas est, quid pretiosius? and qui ma net in
Charita^e, in Deo manet, quid securius, and Deus in eo, quid jucundius. Bern.
what more excellent bliss can we imagine or desire? What stronger expression
could one find to express the highest felicities? to dwell in God! to be
swallowed up in an abyss of infinite goodness! to be overwhelmed in the
immensity of Divine Joys and perfections! as an atome in the air, as a drop of
water in the Ocean: so he that dwells in love dwells in God. Nothing can
better represent those transcendent and delicious raptures wherewith the soul
is inebriated and raised above it self. Extasin fa^it amor^ amatores suo statu
di monet, sui juris esse non sinit. Dionys. de Divin. nom.
This was it made the Holy Martyrs shout and rejoice in the midst of the
flames: they dwelt in God; no sorrow, no harm could approach them. Happy are
they that can say with S. Col. 3.3.
Paul, Our life is hid with Christ in God, and I live, yet not I, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me. The love of God fits us for the joys of heaven, and
is an anticipation of them; it powerfully governs the will, and it sweetly
overflows the mind; it is the perfection of grace, and will be the consummation
of glory: but it is much easier and happier to feel than to express it. Cant.
4.10.
How much better is thy love than wine, and the smell of thine ointment than
all spices!

One thing that adds much to the worth and the pleasure of Divine Love, is that
it never fails: it is of the nature of its object, eternal, as God is; whether
there be prophecies, 1 Cor. 13.8.
they shall fail: whether there be tongues, they shall cease: whether there be
knowledge, it shall vanish away: but charity never fails. Faith and hope may
accompany us as far as heaven's gate, but there they forsake us; the one is
turned into sight and the other into enjoyment; love alone enters and abides
with us to eternity. Our greatest safety therefore as well as pleasure consists
in loving God affectionately; for that love which never fails secures our
duty here and our happiness hereafter. We are sure never to live, and never to
perish in sin if we love JESUS sincerely: He that dwells in love dwells in
God: and there neither sin nor misery can come to hurt him. Quid refert natura
esse quod potes effici voluntate? Chrysostom.
What matters it then, to be that by nature, that we may be by choice and
affection? If of our selves we are not holy and happy, we may be so by love;
the (love of God will transform us into his nature, and make us partakers of
his holiness and happiness. Love kills us in our selves, that we may live in
God, Occidit quod fuimus and simus quod non eramus. Aug. It makes such a
change in us, that we are no longer what we were, as to the sinfulness and
wretchedness of our condition. The New Commandment makes the New Creature;
Mandato novo facit hominem norum, homines amando Deum dii effici. untur. Aug.
men become Gods by loving God. Love considers and discharges all the duties
of Religion: it allows of no omission nor trausgression: 2 John 6.
Love is the fulfilling of the law: this is love that we keep his Commandments.
Ille sancte and just agit qui sanctam habet dilectionem. Aug. He is a Holy Man
whose love is holy, Non faciunt bonos vel malos mons, nisi boni vel mali
amores. Aug.
for love having the rule and direction of all man's passions and affections,
they become either good or bad according to the nature of what he loves.
Therefore to know whether a man be virtuous or no, we inquire not what his
condition is, or what are his parts and learning: but what he delights in, what
he loves: for if he loves the world and himself, he is certainly vain and
vicious, but if he loves God, he is pious and good, and of a certainty he can
never perish. If natural love be so powerful and active, as we know it is: how
much more when it is set upon God and by him assisted? This therefore does
greatly manifest how secure and well guarded they are that love God, in that
their holy love masters and mortifies their unholy affections. What is it that
hurries men to sin and hell and destruction, but their masterless and unruly
passion? now love can not only subdue them, but even makes them useful and
subservient to it; the love of God sanctifies all passions and makes them
serviceable. If it cannot make him meek who is of an angry nature: it will make
him angry against sin and against himself a sinner; if it does not make him
bold and generous whose temper inclines him to timorousness: it will turn his
fear into prudence, and make him not dare to offend God; if it makes him not
cheerful who naturally is melancholy: it will turn his sadness into penitent
sorrow, and make him a blessed mourner. And so all other passions, love will
make them instruments of virtue, Amor ubi venerit caeteros in se traducit and
captivat affectius. S. Bern.
or occasions of a greater reward: that is, it will either fight and conquer
them, or else put them to a good use. Love is obeyed wherever it appears, and
Divine Love is irresistible: it overcomes all difficulties, Nomen difficultatis
erubescit.
nay, it scorns it, disowns the name of difficulty, says, S. Augustine; It is
as strong as death, says the Scripture; it breaks the strongest and most
vicious habits, and like death, it is ever victorious.

Happy and safe are they that love JESUS: Charitas est donum Dei quo nullum est
excellentius: solum est quod dividit inter filios regni aeterni, and filios
perditionis. Aug. de Trin. lib. 15. cap. 18.
for that love it is makes the difference betwixt sincere and false Christians,
betwixt those that shall be heirs of salvation and those that shall go to
perdition, betwixt heaven and hell. Many privileges may belong to the tares
while they grow in the same field with the wheat; many Sun-shiny-days they may
have, and many drops of dew and rain may fall upon them: but they are not
rooted and grounded in love, therefore they are plucked up and withered and
burned. Many gifts of the Divine Spirit wicked men may receive; they may
prophecy and do miracles in Christ's name, they may excel in some virtues: but
the grace of Charity they never receive, the love of God never dwells in their
hearts. Thou may be Baptized, (says S. Aug.) Habere Baptismum and malus esse
potes; habere, etc. Tract. 7. in Epist. Johan.
and yet not be good; thou may have knowledge, and remain vicious; thou may
be called a Christian, and be none: but thou can not love God and be wicked;
thou can not love God, but thou must be holy and happy. Thus we see, love
affords the greatest pleasure, and the greatest safety this world is capable
of. The love of JESUS is a precious jewel, precious beyond gold and the best of
pearls: Charitas est amor rerum quas nonnisi volentes amittimus. Aug.
he that has it, has an infinite treasure, and it is so much the more to be
valued, because we may acquiesce in its possession: we can never lose it except
we will. We may lose our riches and we may lose our health; we may lose our
learning and our eloquence; we may lose our friends and our lives: but the love
of God we can never lose without our consent; no time, no fortune, no Tyrant
can snatch it by force out of our hearts; Verum bonum illud est quod non potes
invitus amittere. Aug.
as it is never given against our will, so against our will it can never be
taken away. Charity never fails. Quinquagesima Sunday.
O Lord who have taught us, that all our doings without charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee: grant this for thine only Son JESUS Christ's
sake. Amen.

. 18. Love brings a lasting joy and peace to the Soul.
The fourth and last consideration is, that the love of God is the solid joy
and lasting Tranquillity of the Soul. No tormenting fear or sadness can harbor
in a heart that loves God; the Motto of love might well be that of a late order
of Knighthood at Mantua, meant of the Holy Chalice, Nihil isto triste recepto;
grief and the love of God are incompatible: no sadness should enter that breast
wherein dwells Divine Love. I need not treat at large of those many doubts and
terrors concerning future happiness which grieve and almost distract the hearts
of many Christians to prove that it is a happy thing to be freed from them:
there are few, but are so far acquainted with them as readily to assent to it;
it will be more to purpose to show that the love of God is the best remedy
against them, the best balsom to heal a wounded spirit. Some persons from their
poverty, bodily pains, or other afflictions draw this most afflictive
inference, that God is not their friend, and that therefore their condition is
dangerous, and very bad, if not quite desperate: and this adds such a weight to
their cross, that they have no strength to bear it, but are ready to sink;
whereas the love of God has enabled thousands to bear a heavier with patience,
with fortitude, and men with cheerfulness; I take pleasure in infirmities, and
distresses, and necessities for Christ's sake, said S. Paul, that great lover of
JESUS. He that would suffer for God, will suffer from God: he that would die
and be crucified, for JESUS, will willingly bear that cross which JESUS lays
upon his shoulders. And indeed it is a greater virtue, meekly, and thankfully to
accept of that correction wherewith God visits us, than voluntarily to inflict
the greatest sufferings on our selves: what proceeds from God is ever best for
us, and most pleasing to him. No Patient will question the love of that
Physician who is his intimate friend, for that he makes incisions, and applies
causticks upon him, and makes him drink bitter potions; he will not suspect his
friends affection; he will not doubt but that it is for his good: after this
manner, he that loves God will receive afflictions from him, and gratefully
acknowledge with David, I know that of very faithfulness thou have caused me to
be troubled. Knowing that all things work together for the good of them that
love God, he will harbor no thoughts of diffidence, nor question Gods loving
kindness to him: but rest satisfied, that while he loves God nothing can hurt
him, and that whatever happens is certainly for his greatest advantage.

But it is not always the storms of adversity that bring those dark and dismal
clouds on the minds of men: they come sometimes in fair weather, in the
greatest prosperity. Whence, it is in vain to examine: better it is to drive
them away, for they are as mischievous as black. They cast a damp upon men's
spirits; they freeze their hearts in such a manner that they can receive no
spiritual joy; they so weaken their hands and feet, that they can hardly work
for God, or walk in his ways: so that their condition is sad indeed, not
because God is their enemy: but because they being unreasonably afraid of it,
are thereby hindered from being his friends. To this evil none can prescribe a
better remedy than love: let such persons love God heartily, and all these
terrors will vanish away like the vain images of a terrible dream; when one
awaketh. Love begets love, therefore we should love God because he first loved
us: and love begets a confidence of being loved again: so that if we love God
we shall not long doubt but that we are loved by him: and then all is well. And
if at first, our hearts do not melt into devout affections, and are not
replenished with the sweetness and comfort of love, let us not be dismayed at
it, nor too much study our own disturbed thoughts and apprehensions: but let us
continue to give God demonstrations of love, to abstein from what he forbids,
and to do that which he commands, or that which will please him, though
uncommanded: and then either holy joys and ecstasies will come, or it will be as
well without them. No man is afraid of his friends, nor of those whom he serves
and obliges; we easily suppose that they love us, whom we love, and that they
to whom we do good will be kind to us: therefore let us show to God all the
love we can, and by words and actions protest that we seek to please him, and
our hearts will soon be possessed with a blessed assurance that we are dear to
him, and he will never be cruel and severe to us. It Is reported of a Religious
Person whose soul was grieved and wounded with doubts and fears and with
sadness, that while he was one day weeping and praying thus; O that I were sure
that I shall persevere and never fall from God; O that I were sure that God
loves me, and that I shall one day see his Blessed Face: how zealous then
should I be in mortifying my sins and doing my duty! how cheerfully should I
serve God every day, and take pleasure in suffering for him! how would I
despise the world and its vanities, and fix my thoughts and affections on
things above! while he was thus expressing the sorrows of his troubled mind, he
heard the whispers of a secret voice, which told him, fac quod faceres, do now,
what thou would do if thou had all those assurances. With this he found
himself so affected and refreshed, that he took it as an Oracle, from heaven;
and in obeying of it found those comforts he begged. Better counsel I cannot
give thee; fac quod faceres, do what thou would do, if thy diffident
timorousness and jealousies were confuted by a voice from heaven, and they will
soon be removed. Let thy meek submission, thy sincere obedience, and thy
free-will-offerings speak thy love to God and thou shall soon find thy self
persuaded that God loves thee dearly and that thy condition is safe and happy.
Other assurance we are not to expect in this world, and this is not to be
obtained any other way: should thy comfort proceed from any thing else but
thine humble and devout love to God, it would be fancy and presumption;
whereas so, it is well-grounded and never can deceive thee. 1 John 4.18
There is no fear in love (says Divine S. John) but perfect love casts out
fear; it is never otherwise: grace and nature join together to make the effect
infallible, that a Holy Love should ever produce a Holy Peace; if we love
indeed and in truth, 1 John 3.18
thereby (not by new and secret revelations) we shall know that we are of the
truth, and we shall assure our hearts before God. Love may well work confidence
and joy in our souls, for it injoys already what it loves: it is affectuosa
unitas, and unitiva affectio, love is inseparable from its object, and the
essence thereof consists in their union, if not unity. Though God be exalted
infinitely above all things, in a sphere of Glory and Majesty so high that the
Cherubim with their many wings cannot fly up to it: Qui mente integra Deum
desiderat profecto jam habet quem amat. Greg. Mag.
yet thither love sores up and takes God, and holds him as his own: so that
every one that loves God is already possessed of him, and may say with the
spouse, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine. Cant. 6.3.


We come to God by love, S. Aug.
amando non ambulando: and to him we are united by love; Magna res est amor quo
anima per semetipsam fiducialiter accedit ad Deum, etc.
amore Deo conjungimur: therefore love is a great thing, (says that devout
father) it brings the soul to God with an holy confidence, and makes it trust
in him, and cleave steadfastly to him, and rejoice in him, and represent her
needs and beg his mercies with fiducial and devout affections. And this is so
great a truth, that death it self with its pains and sorrows alters nothing of
it; even then in the last agonies, the love of God sweetens the bitter cup, and
still entertains the soul with joy and holy comforts. It was the saying of S.
Aug. that because the soul has willingly forsaken God whom she should love
infinitely, she is forced therefore with grief and regret to forsake her body
which she loves too much: and that because she voluntarily departed from God
who is her life, Aug. de Trin. lib. 4. cap. 13.
she therefore departs from the body whose life she is, with sadness and much
reluctance. Now we may say, that when the soul returns to God by love, Charitis
libertatem donat, timorem pellit, etc. S. Bern.
she is freed from this punishment and restored to her first liberty, she is
willing to die for to be with Christ: and then comes a cheerful cupio dissolvi,
O when shall I come and appear before God. Happy is he who living does so
manifest his love to God by Piety and Charity, that dying he can say with
Theodosius, Dilexi; love has been the business and delight of my life, I have
daily endeavored by my actions to declare the sincerity of my love to God: he
is doubtless of the number of those that love the appearing of JESUS: and so he
goes out to meet him with joy and confidence, expecting a kind reception from
him, Nemo se amari diffidat qui jam amat: libenter Dei amar nostrum quem
praevenit subsequitur, etc. Bern.
whom having not seen yet he loved, and worshipped and served affectionately.
Let no man that loves God doubt of God's Love to him: for he that loved us when
we were his enemies, so as to die for us, will much more love us when we have
for him the hearty affections of friends, It is the joy of heaven, the joy of
the Holy JESUS when his loving kindness has won and conquered our hearts, and
it is our greatest joy, it is for us a heaven upon earth, when we love him
faithfully and fervently, with all our souls and affections. The love of God
brings that peace to the soul, which the world can neither give nor take away.
Her sins which are many, Luke 7.47.
are forgiven, because she loved much.

. 19. The Close.
Now who can refuse to love God, when it is a thing so just and reasonable, so
pleasant and easy, so safe and advantageous, something of necessity we must
love, every man's heart is full of that passion, and every man's life is governed
by it? it is but considering who has done most for us, and whom we are most
obliged to love; who is most lovely, and who will best reward our love: and we
shall soon understand that God is to be loved above all things, infinitely,
without measure: and if we love our selves as we should, we shall easily remove
our affections from the world to set them upon God and Eternity, upon JESUS and
his kingdom. Love, as we have seen, will make it easy and delightful to do our
duty, Onus sine onere portat. Kemp.
will make the yoke of Christ light, and enable us with strength and courage to
bear our cross cheerfully like Christians: it will lead us the shortest and the
safest way to heaven, and make our journey pleasant: it will make us dear to
God, and to his Saints and blessed Angels, and fill our hearts with peace and
comforts: it will abide with us, when we are forsaken by the world, and all our
friends can do us no good: it will accompany us when we go from hence, and open
heavens gate, and enter in with us; there to perfect our happiness which it
here began: to be there our reward, as it was here our work and our duty. I may
now upon too too just an account, use the words of S. Non quod ego ista faciam
dico, sed quod facere vellem, etc. Ber. Med.
Bernard; what I have written is not what I do, but what I should do, what I
grieve that I do not, what I endeavor to do, and what I wish all others might
do. But withal I shall plead for my self the advice of a Greek Father; not to
judge too severely of those who teach excellent lessons, (...), etc. Joh. Clim.
grad. 26.. 18.
great and profitable truths which they themselves learn and practice but very
imperfectly: because the usefulness of their instructions may make some amends
for the defects of their performance. Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love our LORD JESUS CHRIST in sincerity.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
. 1. OF the Benefits of God to Mankind. Page 1.. 2. Of Creation. 2.. 3. Of
Preservation. 5.. 4. The positive Blessings of this life. 8. 5. What returns we
should make for them. 11.. 6. Of Redemption: and first of the infinite miseries
were redeemed from. 12.. 7. How we were Redeemed. 20.. 8. A consideration of
the Cross in four dimensions. 25.. 9. The Breadth. 27.. 10. The Length. 31..
11. The Depth. 33.. 12. The Height. 36.. 13. What an infinite Love is expressed
by the Cross. 38.. 14. Of the eternal happiness JESUS merited for us by his
Death. 39.. 15. What all these benefits require from us. P. 45.. 16. An
invitation into the Cloister of Love. 47.. 17. The Vow to be taken at the
entrance of it. 49.. 18. Of Love: and first of Self-love. 52.. 19. How they
that will be professed Lovers of JESUS must mortify self-love. 57.. 20. Of the
Love of God. 61.. 21. Of the Properties of Love. The First. 64.. 22. The
Second. 66.. 23. The Third. 68.. 24. The Fourth. 72.. 25. A farewell to all
sinful desires. 73.. 26. Of the antipathy betwixt Sin and the Love of JESUS.
78.. 27. Of outward helps and means. 80.. 28. Meditation on the Passion. 82..
29. Protestations of Love to JESUS. 85.. 30. Of a sincere amendment. 86.. 31.
Love will work the best Reformation. 90.. 32. The Exercise of Repentance. 94..
33. Is made easy by Love. 97.. 34. And proceeds not from Melancholy. 98.. 35.
Corporal Austerities may please God. P. 102.. 36. Not to return again to our
sins when temptations return. 104.. 37. To do what we do cheerfully. 108.. 38.
A Singular Example of Human Love. 109.. 39. The design of Christian Religion is
to make us better. 113.. 40. A Protestation of being faithful unto Death. 115.
The CONTENTS of the Second Part.
. 1. OF the Positive part of our Baptismal Vow. P. 1.. 2. A Protestation of
Obedience. 3.. 3. How great a happiness follows our Obedience. 5.. 4. We should
often look on our reward. 8.. 5. Love is noble and generous. 11.. 6. We belong
to JESUS, and are not our own. 14.. 7. Meditations on our obligations to serve
JESUS. P. 15.. 8. God requires our Love and Obedience. 19.. 9. Encouragements
to obey JESUS. 23.. 10. Of Free-will-offerings. 26.. 11. Of our Obedience to
the Church. 34.. 12. Of several Voluntary Oblations. 37.. 13. That God should
be loved above all things. 45.. 14. It Is most just and easy to love God. 51..
15. An Objection answered. 55. Sect. 16. A second objection answered. 59. Sect.
17. It Is most pleasant and safe to love God. 64. Sect. 18. Love brings a
lasting joy and peace to the Soul. 73. Sect. 19. The Close. 82.
ERRATA.
Part I. Page 12. lin. 6. read love, not service. p. 55. l. 3. r. plungeth
them. p. 91. l. 25. r. task. p. 96. l. 20. r. wast.

Part II. P. 57. l. 1. r. court. p. 63. l. 26. r. even.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1676.
Divinity.
DR. Hammond on the New Testament. Bishop Tailor 's Life of Christ. Dr. Duport
's three Sermons, on Jan. 30. May 29. and November. 5. Mr. Farindon 's 130
Sermons, in 3 Vol. in fol. Price 2. l. 5 s. A large Concordance, by S. N. to
the Bible, fol. 16 s. Dr. Heylin on the Creed, fol. 15 s. A Guide to Eternity,
by John Bona, 2 s. A Companion to the Temple, or, A help to public Devotion,
by Tho. Cumber, in 2 Vol. 8. 10 s. Holy Anthems of the Church, 2 s. 6 d. Bishop
Wilkins Principles and Duties of Natural Religion, in 8. 5 s. Bishop Lanye 's
Sermon at Court against Comprehension. 6 d. Dean W. Lloyd 's 3 Sermons at
Court. -- his Sermon at the Funeral of John L. Bishop of Chester. Dr. Du Moulin
's Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England for some Ages, with two
Sermons on the fifth of Nov. in 4. 1 s. 6 d.
Histories.
The Life of the Duke Espernon, the great Favorite of France; from 1508, where
D'Avila leaves off, to our Times, by C. Cotton, Esquire; in fol. 18 s. The History
of the Ottoman Empire, with Cuts, by P. Rieaut, Esquire; in 8. 6 s. Bishop Wilkins
Real Character, in fol. Bishop Cousin of Transubstantiation, in 8.
Miscellanies.
Dr. Glisson, De vita Naturae, 4. 8 s. Lord Bacon 's Advancement of Learning.
The Planter's Manual, very useful for such as are curious in Planting and
Grafting, by C. Cotton Esquire; Dr. Skinner 's Lexicon, in fol. 1 l. 5 s. 14
Controversial Letters, in 4. 14 Parts. The-Vindication of the Clergy, 1 s. 6 d.
Toleration discussed, by R. L'Estrange Esquire; 2 s 6 d. England 's Improvements,
or, How the Kingdom may be improved in Strength, Wealth, Employment and Trade,
by Roger Coke Esquire; 1 s. 6 d.
Controversies.
The seasonable discourse against Popery, -- The Defense of it, 4. 6 d. -- The
Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, in 4. 6 d. The Papists Apology
to the Parliament Answered, 6 d. Dr. Du Moulin against the Lord Castlemain, 6
d.

