The Epistle to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of Friends in England,
Wales, and Elsewhere.
From Our Yearly Meeting, held in London, the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth
Days of the Fourth Month, 1693. Dear and truly beloved Friends and Brethren,
WE tenderly salute you in the Lord with Love unfeigned, heartily desiring
Sion's Prosperity, and earnestly praying for the Peace of Jerusalem and of the
whole Israel of God and Church of Christ, That all the Assemblies of Friends
may be truly comforted, and abundantly refreshed in the living sense of his
Presence and unspeakable Goodness of our God, as we have been beyond Expression
in this our solemn and seasonable Assembly at this time, for which we are
greatly obliged to bless and praise the God and Fountain of all our Mercies,
and always to continue humbly thankful to him for the same.

The Principal Matters of most General concern agreed upon by this Meeting to
be communicated, we do faithfully recommend to your Christian Care and Notice
as heretofore.

Our last Yearly Epistle being very comprehensive and weighty, Reference to our
last Yearly Meeting Epistle.
and more large than usual, It is earnestly desired, that the Contents thereof
be seriously Reminded in all your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in order to
the faithful performance, according to our Christian Religion and Profession in
the purity thereof, and as God's faithful Witness in all Hearts does enjoin,
and is ready to assist all the Faithful and diligent in the Conduct of their
Conversations.

And therefore that all due and Godly care be taken and exercised among all
Friends in the Christian and sober Education of their Children and Youth, A
summary of the former Years Epistle to be taken notice of by Friends.
which are under their Care and Trust, that they be good Examples and Patterns
both in Conversation, Words, and Habits, becoming our holy Profession and
humble Religion of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, against the Pride
of Life, against the Breach of Promise, Injuring and defrauding others in their
Properties, Trade and Commerce, etc. against the grand Oppression and
Antichristian yoke of Tithes, that our Christian Testimony born and greatly
suffered for, be faithfully maintained against them in all respects; and
against Steeple-house Rates or Lays; as also against the Burden and Imposition
of Oaths; and against all Whisperings and Backbitings which tend to Strife and
Division, and making Parties; and all disorderly and undue proceedings in
Marriages, That Truth's Order, Method and Testimony be faithfully kept unto
concerning all these matters, and the judgment thereof in God's Wisdom, set
over all perverseness, unfaithfulness, and disorderly walking, tending to the
dishonor of God, reproach and scandal of our holy Profession, and of us his
People.

It is desired, that Friends at all their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings be
reminded to call for the Records of the Sufferings of Friends, to see that they
be duly gathered, The Records of Sufferings to be more carefully looked after.
truly entered and kept, and accordingly sent up, as has been often advised,
both of what Tithes, etc. are pretended to be due, and for how long a time, and
the time when taken, and by, and for whom; and what Goods are taken, and the
value thereof, as well of those not exceeding, as those exceeding the sums or
quantities demanded (it being a suffering in both for Truths sake) they being
in these particulars found defective and imperfect in diverse Counties, which is
an Obstruction to the General Record of Friends Sufferings. And therefore the
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings are advised to take more care for the future,
that all Friends Sufferings for Truth's sake may be brought up as full and
complete in all respects as possibly may be.

A complaint being made about some Ship-Masters, who profess the Truth, and are
esteemed Quakers, their carrying Guns in their Ships, supposing thereby to
defend and secure themselves and their Ships, contrary to their former
Principle and Practice, and to the endangering their own and others Lives
thereby; also giving occasion of more severe hardships and sufferings to be
inflicted on such Friends as are pressed into Ships of War, who for Conscience
sake cannot fight nor destroy men's Lives, Of Ship-Masters reputed Quakers
carrying Guns in their Ships, the dangerous Consequences thereof.
it is therefore recommended to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings whereunto
such Ship-Masters belong, to deal with them in God's Wisdom, and tender Love,
to stir them up, and awaken their Consciences, that they may seriously consider
how they injure their own Souls in so doing, and what occasion they give to
make the Truth and Friends to suffer by their declention, and acting contrary
thereunto through Disobedience and Unbelief, placeing their security in that
which is altogether Insecure and Dangerous, which we are really sorry for, and
sincerely desire their Recovery and safety, from Destruction, that their Faith
and Confidence may be in the Arm and power of God.

Dear Friends, you very well know our Christian Principle and Profession in
this matter, both with respect to God and Caesar, That because we are Subjects
of Christ's Kingdom, Our Respect to Christ and to Caesar.
which is not of this World, we cannot Fight, Jo. 18.36. Yet, being Subjects of
Caesar's Kingdom, we pay our Taxes, Tribute, etc. according to the Example of
Christ and his holy Apostles relating to Christ's Kingdom and Caesar's, wherein
we are careful not to Offend, Matt. 17.27. and 22, 20. Romans 13.6, 7. Being also
very glad, and much satisfied in the many Testimonies given at this Meeting, of
our Friends Innocence, quiet and peaceable Behavior, under the outward
Government, as becomes our Christian Principle and Profession.

Of Tho. Wilson's and James Dickinson's Travels.
Our dear Friends and Brethren, Thomas Wilson and James Dickinson, being by the
good providence of God, preserved in their Travels, and safely returned, and
present at this Meeting, gave account of their eminent Preservation and
Deliverance both by Sea and Land, and of their Travils and Service in
Barbados, East and West Jarsey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, New England,
North Carolina, Rhoad-Island, Long Island, Antego, Mevis; and that they found
Friends in good Unity in most Parts, and great openness to Truth, and that in
many parts, their great need of being Visited, and Friends there much desire
it. And that in New England the cry of the Blood of Friends formerly put to
Death there, is much revived, by the late Judgment and Confusion fallen upon
the Professors there, about Witchcraft, several being there put to Death,
under pretense of being Witches, which they wickedly accused Friends formerly
with; insomuch, that some of the more Moderate People among them declared, that
they believed, that the Hand of the Lord would not be taken from off that
Place, until a day of Humiliation be appointed, to acknowledge and condemn that
action, in putting the Quakers to Death. Which we pray God give them Repentance
for.

Of four Epistles from Ireland.
Four Epistles from Ireland, one from the half Years Meeting in Dublin, another
from Vlster Province, another from Munster Province; the fourth, from the
Province-Meeting at Lemster; intimating the goodness of God in their
Preservation and his Presence amongst them, and how well things are with
respect to Unity, Peace and Concord among themselves; and withal, return their
grateful acknowledgments of Friends dear Love; great Affection and Charity here
toward them, for the Relief of poor Friends that greatly suffered by the late
Calamities, which has been to the great refreshment of the Bowels of many.

Of several Epistles from Foreign Parts.
Several other Epistles from Foreign Parts, as Barbados, Maryland, Pensilvania,
Virginia, Scotland, Holland, were Read, signifying for the most part, the Love
and Unity amongst Friends, and great Openness in diverse parts, with desires of
Friends Prayers for them, particularly in Pensilvania. And that in Barbados
there has been a very violent Distemper, which has caused a great Mortality.

Of the Earthquake in Jamaica.
A Letter also from Jamaica, signifying the sad effects of the late terrible
Earthquake there, by the destruction of many with their Substance; two Thirds
of the People (as is supposed) at Port Royal, and the most of Friends then
there lost, except those that were at a Monthly Meeting, twelve Miles distant
from Port Royal, who were by that means Preserved.

An Epistle from Amsterdam in Holland, signifying their Meetings are quiet, and
that they are thankful to God for it, John Furley's late Travels in Holland,
etc.
and desires to be Visited.

And our dear Friend, John Furley, of Colchester, being newly returned out of
Holland, and present at this Meeting, gave a full account, that he has lately
visited all the Meetings in Holland and Low-countrys in those Parts, except one
little Meeting, which he could not get to, the place being much covered with
Water. And that there is some Openness in some places, and great flocking of
Strangers to the Meeting at Amsterdam.

Of Dantzick Friends.
An account was given of Dantzick Friends, that they have been quiet one Year
and half, and so continue, tho but few left; some having died under Persecution
-- The Magistrates there now pretty kind -- And that there are a People raised
up and increased in Germany, Of a People called Pietes.
from among the Lutherans called Pietes, and by some called Quakers, many
whereof Persons of Learning and of the Gentry; That they are a People of sober
Conversations; Persecuted by the Duke of Saxony and the Priests, but favored
and Tolerated by the Duke of Brandenburgh; several Friends Books at their
request, have been spread among them: The Priests at Hamburgh much disturbed
and enraged against our Friends and them, do rail and abuse them in Print,
endeavoring to insense the Magistrates there by their Lies and Calumnies, but
the Magistrates do not gratify them, but rather discountenance them; Blessed
be the Lord, whose power is at work in the Hearts of many People.

Of the Captives in Macqueness.
The Friends yet remaining Captives in Maqueness, are still held under great
Severities and Hardships, by that cruel tyranical Task-master, who is yet
suffered cruelly to punish, wound and kill poor Captives at his pleasure; and
all possible care of their Redemption and Relief, is by this Meeting still
recommended to the Meeting for Sufferings, to continue their endeavors for the
effecting thereof.

This Meeting being acquainted that endeavors have been used for the relief of
Friends in relation to Oaths, pursuant to the last Yearly Meetings Advice in
that case, Of Friends endeavors for Relief from Oaths.
and what progress was made in the House of Commons in order thereto, and
before the Committee of Parliament, who after a due hearing of Friends, drew up
a fair Report, and gave their opinion for our Relief, which nevertheless was
lost by Vote in the House.

This Meeting being sensible of the great care of the Meeeting for Sufferings
here in that case, many tenderly acknowledged Friends labors and endeavors
therein.

And the Meeting still leaves it to the said Meeting for Sufferings, to
continue their care and endeavors in that case as the Lord shall please to
make way for the general Ease of Friends.

About poor Friends Removal, etc.
An account being given to this Meeting, that several poor Friends have removed
themselves and their Families from diverse parts of the Nation, to the City of
London, who soon after their coming, being not capable to subsist, have applied
themselves to Friends there for Relief, and have been very chargable.

It Is advised, that if any poor Friends for the time to come should incline to
remove themselves and Families to this City, that before they unsettle
themselves, they apply themselves to the Monthly or Quarterly Meetings to which
they belong, for Advice and Counsel; and that such Meeting do rather advertise
them to be contented in their Station, and places, where Provisions, and
Accomodations may be easier and much cheaper obtained then at London. Or if
permitted by Certificate from the Counties to Remove, that then the monthly and
quarterly Meetings from whence they come, do take care to supply their
Necessities, that the Friends of London be not overcharged for the future.

Its desired that the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings respectively take notice
of all Friends Books, that are or may be sent to them, according to former
agreement, Of Friends Books.
and take care for the dispersing the same for the Service of Truth.

Correspondants only to be written to about Sufferings.
And also it is agreed that each Quarterly Meeting take care to advise the
Correspondants for the Counties, and any others concerned to Write Only to your
Correspondants in London about their Sufferings, and not to other persons, lest
their suffering Case be delayed.

Friends appointed to view the Accounts Report, that they find they are truly
stated and rightly kept. Accounts.
And Friends are again advised to bring up with them the total Sum of each
Counties Collection for the Relief of Friends that suffered by the late
Calamities in Ireland.

We are truly comforted and greatly refreshed in the Lord by the weighty
Accounts given at this our solemn Assembly from the respective Counties in
England and Wales, by the Friends sent up, as also by some Epistles from
several Counties, importing the Unity, Accounts of Truth's Prosperity, etc.
Love, Peace and Concord among Friends, and Prosperity of the blessed Truth and
increase of the Government of Christ, and his Peace in the Church, in which we
pray God to keep his People to the end.

To avoid Contention and Strife in all Meetings, It is the Advice and Sense of
this Meeting,

1. That all Friends have a care of God's Glory, be tender thereof, as has
been often advised. Seasonable Advice for Peace and good Order in several
particulars
2. And to keep the Authority of your Meetings in the Power of God, and Unity
of his blessed Spirit, whereby they were errected, and settled, and continue
your Godly care and services therein for these good ends for which they were
first instituted. 3. And to keep out all Contention, personal Reflections and
Smitings out of your Meetings; and keep down and out of all Heats, and
Passions, and doubtful Disputations. 4. Suffer no turbulent contentious
quarrelsom Spirit or Person to be concerned among you, in ordering your
affairs, that they may be all managed in the peaceable tender Spirit and Wisdom
of Christ Jesus. 5. Suffer no Divisions, or Schisms, or making parties among
your selves one against another, for that will greatly tend to weaken your
Meetings, and lose their power, and to cause them and you to be slighted. 6.
Both our Men's and Women's Meetings, and our Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, and
Yearly Meetings, and Meetings for Sufferings were set up in the Wisdom,
Counsel, and tender Love of God, and in the same peaceable Wisdom to be kept
and encouraged for all those good ends for which they were intended and
appointed. 7. All Differences happening in Personal or Temporal occasions to be
speedily ended (according to the Advice given in our last Yearly Epistle) and
if any doubtful point in Law be in the case, then both parties may advise with
some well knowing in the Law; For if any lust to be con(...) we have no such
Custom in the Churches of Christ. 8. The Meeting for S^gs is entrusted to take
care of all Sufferings of Friends for Truth and Conscience sake, as at first
intended.
The six Friends of the City appointed and entrusted this Year with the
Accounts, are William Crouch, John Staploe, William Macket, William Chandler,
William Beech, and Nathaniel Marks.

The blessed Progress and Conclusion of the Meeting.
Our Souls also were very deeply affected with the refreshing Presence and
Counsel of the Lord our God attending this our Yearly Meeting, and the Amicable
and Peaceable Management of the Affairs, and the Blessed End and Closure
thereof, to the great Consolation and Satisfaction of Friends, and honor of
his Blessed Truth, in which our Unity stands: blessed be the God of all our
Mercies forever.

It Is agreed that our Yearly Meeting be continued as hitherto, if the Lord
will, being Adjourned till the next Year. And that Friends of each County send
two Faithful Friends to attend the Service thereof as formerly directed.

Signed in behalf of our said Meeting, by Benjamin Bealing.


