THE THEATER OF GODS JUDGMENTS: Wherein is represented the admirable Justice
of GOD against all notorious sinners, great and small, specially against the
most eminent Persons in the World whose exorbitant power had broke through the
bars of Divine and Humane Law. Collected out of Sacred, Ecclesiastical, and
Pagan History by two most reverend Doctors in Divinity, THOMAS BEARD of
Huntington, and THO. TAILOR, the famous late Preacher of Mary Aldermanbury in
LONDON. The incomparable use of this Book for Ministers and others is largely
expressed in the Preface.

The fourth Edition, With Additions.

God has Woollen feet, but Iron hands. Aug.

LONDON, Printed by S. I and: M. Hand are to be sold by Thomas Whitaker at the
sign of the KINGS ARMS in St Paul's Churchyard, MDCXLVIII.

To His Highness JAMES Duke of YORK.
SIR,
IN the lowliest posture of Humility these Historical Examples, extracted out
of the choicest Authors both Ancient and Modern by two learned Doctors, are
presented to Your Highness; Neither would they presume to put themselves under
so high a Patronage, did I not humbly conceive, that being Historical Pieces,
they might be fit for Your Highness perusal, History being the proper'st and
most advantageous Study that Princes can apply themselves unto, because it
contains examples of all sorts; In History Brave men stand as Marble Statues
erected in the Temple of Immortality, and Bad men as Malefactors upon Gibbets,
exposed to the public view of the world to all Posterity. Although Your
Highness has a Royal Father for an incomparable living Pattern of all the
Cardinal Virtues with their Attendants, (which breaking through these late
Clouds of Civil Confusions) shined with an advantage of luster to the
wonderment of the world) as also against any thing that may have the least
vicinity with Vice, to imitate, yet, humbly under favor, variety of Examples,
as of Witnesses in Law, cannot do amiss, the one for confirmation of Truth,
the other for direction of Life; In which opinion I rest,

Your Highness most Humble, and most obedient Servant, M. HERON.

THE PREFACE.
IF to avoid and eschew vice (according to the saying of the Poet) be a chief
virtue, and as it were the first degree of wisdom; then it is a necessary
point, to know what vice and virtue is, and to discern the evil and good
which either of them bring forth, to the end to beware lest we dash our selves
unawares against vice in stead of virtue, and be caught with the deceitful
baits thereof. For this cause the great and famous Philosopher, about to lay
open the nature of Moral virtues (according to that knowledge and light which
nature afforded him) contented not himself with a simple narration of the
properties, essence, and object of them, but opposed to every virtue on each
side the contrary and repugnant vice; to the end that the sight of them, being
so out of square, so hurtful and pernicious, virtue it self might be more
admirable, and in greater esteem. And for this cause also God himself, our
sovereign and perfect Lawgiver, that he might fashion and fit us to the mould
of true and solid virtue, uses ostner negative prohibitons then affirmative
commandments in his Law; to the end above all things to distract and turn us
from cvill; whereunto we are of our selves too too much inclined. And as by
this, mean sin is discovered and made known unto us, so is the pnnishment
also of sin set before our eyes, by those threatenings and curses which are
there denounced: to the end that whom the promises of life and salvation could
not allure and persuade to do well, them the fear of punishment (which
follows sin as a shadow does the body) might bridle and restrain from giving
them over to impiety. Now then if the very threatenings ought to serve for such
good use, shall not the execution and performance of them serve much more? to
wit, when the tempest of Gods wrath is not only denounced, but also thrown
down effectually upon the heads of the mighty ones of the world, when they are
disobedient and rebellious against God. And hereupon the Prophet says, That
when Gods judgments are upon earth, then the Inhabitants learn justice. And
doubtless it is most true, that every one ought to reap profit to himself by
such examples, as well them which are presented daily to their view by
experience, as them which have been done in times past, and are by benefit of
History preserved from oblivion. And in this regard History is accounted a very
necessary and profitable thing, for that in recalling to mind the truth of
things past, which otherwise would be buried in silence, it sets before us
such effects (as warnings and admonitions touching good and evil) and lays
virtue and vice so naked before our eyes, with the punishments or rewards
inflicted or bestowed upon the followers of each of them, that it may justly
be called an easy and profitable Apprentiship or School for every man to
learn to get wisdom at another man's cost. Hence it is that History is termed
of the ancient Philosophers, The record and register of Time, the light of
Truth, and the mistress and looking-glass of man's life: insomuch as under the
person of another man it teaches and instructs all those that apply their
minds unto it, to govern and carry themselves virtuously and honestly in this
life. Wherefore they deserve great praise and commendation, that have taken
pains to inroll and put in writing the memorable acts and occurrents of their
times, to communicate the same to their posterity: for there the high and
wonderful works of God do most clearly, and as it were to the view, present
themselves, as his justice and providence: whereby albeit he guides and
directs especially his own, to wit, those that in a special and singular
manner worship and trust in him (as by the sacred Histories, touching the state
and government of the ancient and Primitive Church, it may appear) yet he
cease not for all that to stretch the arm of his power over all, and to
handle and rule the profane and unbeleeving ones at his pleasure; for he has
a sovereign Empire and predominance over all the World; And unto him belongs
the direction and principal conduct of humane matters, in such sort that
nothing in the world comes to pass by chance or adventure, but only and
always by the prescription of his will; according to the which he orders and
disposes by a strait and direct motion, as well the general as the
particular, and that after a strange and admirable order. And this a man may
perceive, if he would but mark and consider the whole body, but especially the
end and issue of things: wherein the great and marvailous virtues of God, as
his bounty, justice, and power, do most clearly shine; when he exalts and
favors some, and debaseth and frowneth upon others, blesses and prospers
whom he please; and on the contrary, curses and destroys whom he please,
and that deserve it It is he also which erecteth principalities, and which
maintains Commonwealths, Kingdoms, and Empires, until by the sum and
weight of their iniquities they sink themselves into ruin and destruction. And
herein is he glorified by the execution of his most just and righteous
judgments, when the wicked after the long abuse of his lenety, benignity, and
patience, do receive the wages and reward of their iniquities. In this (I say
once again) shines out the wonderful and incomprehensible wisdom of God,
when by the due ordering of things so different and so many, he comes still
to one and the same mark which he once prescribed, to wit, the punishment of
the world according to their demerits. And this same is most manifest and
apparent even in the Histories of profane Writers, albeit in their purpose it
was never intended nor thought upon, nor yet regarded almost of any that read
the same; men contenting themselves for the most part with the simple recital
of the story, therein to take pleasure and pass away time, without respecting
any further matter: Notwithstanding, the true and principal use of their
writings ought to be, diligently to mark the effects of Gods Providence, and
of his justice, whereby to learn to contain our selves within the bounds of
modesty and the fear of God; seeing that they which have carried themselves
any thing uprightly in equity, temperance, and other natural virtues, have
been in some sort spared: and the rest (bearing the punishment of their
iniquities) have fallen into destruction.

This consideration ought to persuade every man to turn from evil, and to
follow that which is good, seeing that the Lord shows himself so incensed
against all them which lead a wicked, damnable, and perverse life. And this is
the cause why I, having noted the great and horrible punishments wherewith the
Lord in most righteous judgment has scourged the world for sin, according to
that which is contained as well in sacred as profane Histories; having
gathered them together, and sorted them one after another in their several
rooms, according to the diversity of the offenses, and order and course of
time, which as near as I could I endeavored to sollow, to the end to lay
down, as it were in one Table, and under one Aspect, the great and fearful
judgments of God upon them that have rebelled or repugned his holy will. And
this I do not with purpose to comprehend them all (for that were not only
difficult but impossible) but to lay open the most notable and remarkable ones
that came to my knowledge; to the end that the most wicked, dissolute, and
disordered sinners, that with loose reins run fiercely after their lust, if
the manifest tokens of Gods severity presented before their eyes do not touch
them, yet the cloud and multitude of examples, through the sight of the
inevitable anger and vengeance of God upon evil livers, might terrify and
somewhat curb them: Perjurers, Idolaters, Blasphemers, and other such wicked
and profane wretches, with murderers, whoremongers, adulterers, ravishers, and
tyrants, shall here see by the mischief that has fallen upon their likes, that
which hangs before their eyes, and is ready to lay hold of them also. For
albeit for a time they sleep in their sins and blindness, delighting in their
pleasures, and taking sport in cruelties and evil deeds, yet they draw after
them the line wherewith (being more ensnared then they were aware) they are
taken and drawn to their final destruction.

And this may teach and advertise both those that are not yet obstinate in
their sins, to bring themselves to some amendment; and those that fear God
already, to strengthen and encourage them in the pursuit and continuance in
their good course. For if God show himself so severe a revenger of their
sins that take pleasure in displeasing him, there is no doubt but on the
contrary he will show himself bountiful, gracious, and liberal in rewarding
all them according to his promise which seek to please him, and conform their
lives unto his will. Great and small, young and old, men and women, and all
other, of what degree and condition soever, may here learn at other men's
charges, how to govern themselves in duty toward God, and betwixt themselves,
by a holy and unblameable life in mutual peace and unity; and by shunning and
eschewing sin, against the which God (a most just Judge) powers forth his
vengeance, even upon the heads of them that are guilty thereof. Beside, here is
ample matter and argument to stop the mouths of all Epicures and Atheists of
our age, and to leave them confounded in their errors, seeing that such and so
many occurrents and punishments are manifest proofs, that there is a God above
that guides the stern of the world, and that takes care of humane matters,
and that is just in punishing the unjust and malicious. Again, whereas so much
evil, and so many sins have reigned and swayed so long time, and do yet reign
and sway upon the earth, we may behold the huge corruption and perversity of
mankind, and the rotten fruits of that worme-eaten root, Original sin: when
we are not directed nor guided by the holy Spirit of God, but lest unto our
own nature. And hereby true faithful Christians may take occasion so much the
more to acknowledge the great mercy and singular favor of God toward them, in
that they being received to mercy, are renewed to a better conversation of life
then others. In brief, a man may here learn (if he be not altogether void of
judgment and understanding) to have sin in hatred and detestation, considering
the wages and reward thereof; and how the justice of God pursues it
continually, even to the extremest execution, which is both sharp and rigorous.

Touching the word Judgment, I have imitated the language of Holy Scripture:
wherein as the Ordinances and Commandments of God are called Judgments,
because in them is contained nothing but that which is just, right, and equal:
so likewise the punishments inflicted by God upon the despisers of his
Commandments are called by the same name, as in Exodus 6. 6. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
and 22. 8. Ezech. 5. 8. and 11. 9. and elsewhere, because they also are as just
as the former, proceeding from none other fountain save the most righteous
judgment of God; whereof none can complain but unjustly.

The Names of the Authors from whom the most part of the Examples contained in
this book are collected.
Moses and other sacred Writers. Tertullian. Cyprian. Eusebius. Socrates.
Theodoret. Sozomenes. Nicephor. Ruffinus. Suidas Chrysostom. Luther.
Illyricus. Herodotus. Thucydides. Dion. Halycarnasseus. Diodorus Siculus.
Polybeus. Plutarch. Herodian. Dyon. Procopius. Iornandes. Agathius. Aelianus.
Tit. Livius. Salustius. Suetonius. Corn. Tacitus. Amm. Marcellinus. Justinius.
Eutropius. Lampridius. Spartianus. Flavius Vopiscus. Cuspinianus. Orosius.
Aimoinus. Gregor. Turonensis. Anton Volscus. Paulus Diaconus. Luitprandus.
Olaus magnus Gothus. Sabellicus. Anton. Panormitanus. Aeneus Silvius. Ravisius.
Hieronymus Marius. Alexander ab Alexandro. Petrus Pramonstratensis. Mich.
Ritius Neapolitanus. Fulgosius. Fran. Picus Mirandula Bembus. Antonius
Bonfinus. Munsterus. Johan. Wierus. Platina. Nauclerus. Vincentius. Hugo
Cluniacensis. Benno Baleus. Gagninus. Paulus Aemilius. Discipulus de Tempore.
Acts and Monuments. Carrion. Chronicon. Beza. Josephus. Manlii Collectanea. Stow
Chronica. Froyssard. Enguerran de Monstrel. Philip de Comines. Nicholas Gilles.
Guicciardine. Paulus Iovius. Benzoin Milanois. Job. Fincelius. Centuriae
Magdeburg. Abbas Vrispurgensis. Philippus. Melancthon. Sleidanus. Lanquet.
Chronica.


The first Book, OF THE WORTHY AND MEMORABLE HISTORIES of the great and
mavelous Judgments of God sent upon the World for their misdeeds against the
Commandments of the first and second Table.
CHAP. 1. Touching the Corruption and Perversity of this World, how great it is.
EVen as one that takes pleasure to behold a pleasant and delightsome place, a
piece of ground covered and painted with all manner of fine flowers, a garden
decked, and as it were clothed with exquisite plants and fruitful trees, is
much grieved so soon as he perceives all this beauty and pleasure suddenly to
be withered and scorched by the violence of some outrageous tempest: or if he
be constrained to cast his eyes from them, upon some other place by, all
cragged and parched, full of briers and brambles. In like sort, a man cannot
choose but be sore grieved and discontent, when he beholds on the one side
the wholesome light of the Sun, whereby the heavens do many ways distill
their favors upon this World, gloriously to advance it self: on the other
side he perceives such an army of thick clouds and palpable darkness, from
whence such a number of disorders and hurliburlies do arise, that most
strangely disfigure the face of the whole World: when that he which ought to be
gentle and peaceable, is become mischievous and quarrellous: in stead of being
true and single hearted, disloyal and deceirfull: in stead of being modest,
well governed, and courteous, is proud, cruel, and dissolute: in stead of
serving God, serves his own humors and affections: Which kind of behavior
is too common and usual; for there is not any kind of wickedness which is not
found in this rank. Ungodliness vomiteth up his fury together with injustice,
in those men of whom it is said, There is none Psalm. 14.
that understands or secketh after God: their throat is an open sepulcher,
they use deceit in their tongues, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, they
have nothing in their mouths but cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift
to shed blood: destruction and misery is in their ways, and they have not
known the way of peace: In sum, the fear of God is not before their eyes.
From whence it comes, that being not restrained by any bridle, like untamed
colts broke loose, they give the full swinge to their bold and violent
affections, running fiercely to all filthiness and mischiese: and being thus
enraged, some of them with horrible blasphemies (most villanously) speak and
do in despite of God, and deny him that created them, and sent them into the
World: Others are not ashamed to be open forswearers of themselves, violating
and breaking every promise, without regard of faith or honesty: Others, as they
are of cruel and bloody natures, so they do not cease to exercise these their
natures by outrageous practices: to some of them whoredoms and adulteries are
no more esteemed, than as sports and pastimes, whereof they boast themselves:
to another sort, cousenings, extortions, and robberies, are ordinary exercises,
whereof they make their best occupations. All which evils are so common and so
usual at this time amongst men, that the World seems truly to be nothing
else but an ocean full of hideous monsters, or a thick forest full of thieves
and robbers, or some horrible wilderness wherein the inhabitants of the earth,
being savage and unnatural, void of sense and reason, are transformed into
bruit beasts, some like Tygres or Lions, others like Wolves or Foxes, others
like Dogs and Swine: Oh sinful nation (would the man of God say if he lived
at this hour) a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt
children, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Isay.
14.
Israel to anger. The noble and high minded are proud to disdain the lower,
and ready always to smite them, making their countenance pale with vices and
oaths: the Magistrate partial and full of brides, overthrows equity: the
Merchant covetous and desirous of gain remembers not his integrity: nor the
labourer his simplicity. And so virtue in most men lies buried, piety
banished, justice oppressed, and honesty trodden under foot: in such sort, that
all things being as it were overthrown and turned upside down, men speak
evil of good, and good of evil, accounting darkness light, and light
darkness, sour sweet, and sweet sour. And by such disorder it comes to
pass, that the most virtuous are despised, whilst naughty-packs and vicious
fellows are esteemed and made much of.

CHAP. II. What is the cause of the great overflow of Vice in this age.
IF we would consider from whence it is that this great disorder and
corruption of manners does arise, we should find especially that it is because
the world every day grows worse and worse, according to the saying of our
Savior and Redeemer (Christ Jesus the Son of God) That in the latter days
(which are these wherein we live) Iniquity shall be increased. And herein we
shall perceive even the just vengeance of God to light upon the malice and
unthankfulness of men, to whom when he would draw near, to do good unto by
offering them the clear light of his favor, the more they strive to alienate
and keep themselves aloof from him, and are so far from being bettered
thereby, that they show themselves a great deal more malicious and obstinate
than ever they did before: not unlike to those who by nature being bleare eyed,
and tender sighted, are rather dazzled and dimmed by the Sun beams, than any
ways enlightened: so men in stead of growing better, grow worse, and every
add some increase to their wickedness: to whom also many great men give
elbow-roome and permission to sin, whilst justice slumbreth, and the not
punishing of misdeeds gives them liberty and boldness to commit their
wickedness: so that some of these mighty ones show themselves but little
better than the other. A mischief to be lamented above the rest, drawing after
it an horrible overflow of all evils, and like a violent stream spoiling every
where as it goes: when as they that ought to govern the stern of the
Commonwealth, let all go at random, suffering themselves to be rocked asleep
with the false and deceitful lullaby of effeminate pleasures and delights of
the flesh; or at least letting themselves be carried headlong by the tempest of
their own strong and furious passions, into imminent danger and shipwrackes:
when as their careful watch fullness and modesty, accompanied with the train
of other good and commendable virtues, ought to serve them for saliscables,
ankers, masts, and skuttles, whereby to govern and direct the Vessel whose
steersman they are appointed, and those that are their charge, to whom they
ought to give a good example of life, and to be unto them as it were a glass
of virtue: for they are set aloft, as it were upon a stage, to be gazed at of
every commer. Their faults and vices are like foul spots and scars in the
face, which cannot by any means be hid. And therefore they ought to be
careful to lead an honest and virtuous life, that thereby they might persuade
and move the meaner sort of people to do the like: For it is a true saying of
the Philosopher, Like Prince, like People; insomuch that every one desires to
frame himself according to the humor of his superior, whose will and manners
serve simply for a law to do evil: to the which men use by taking any occasion
too hastily to give themselves over with too much liberty: whereupon follows
an unrecoverable ruin, no less than the fall of a great house, which for want
of pillars and supporters that should uphold it, suddenly falls to the
ground; so this ship being deprived of her governor, is set loose and laid
open to the mercy of the waves, violence of winds, and rage of tempests,
without any direction and government: and so the body of man, not having any
more the light of his own eyes, abides in darkness all blinded, not able to
do any thing that is right and good, but ready every minute to fall into some
pit. And this is the perversity and corruption of this world.

CHAP. III. That Great men which will not abide to be admonished of their
faults, cannot escape punishment by the hand of God.
IN this poor and miserable estate every man rocketh himself asleep, and
flattereth his own humor, every man pursues his accustomed course of life,
with an obstinate mind to do evil: yea many of those that have power and
authority over others, according as they are endued and persuaded with a
foolish conceit of themselves, make themselves believe, that for them every
thing is lawful, and that they may do whatsoever they please; never
imagining, that they shall give up an account of their actions, to receive any
chastisement or correction for them; even as though there were no God at all
that did behold them. And being thus abused by this vain and fickle security,
they swim in their sins, and plunge themselves over head and ears in all
kind of security; giving hearty welcome and entertainment to all that approve
and applaud their manners, and that study to feed and please their humor. As
contrariwise none less welcome unto them, than they that tell them of their
faults, and contradict them never so little: for they cannot abide in any case
to be reprooved, whatsoever they do. And now adays every base companion will
forsooth storm and fume as soon, if he be reproved of a fault, as if he had
received the greatest wrong in the world: so much is every man pleased with
himself, and puffed up with his own vice and foolish vanities. And what
should a man do in this case? It is as hard to redress those great
mischiefs, as if we should go about to stop and hinder the course of a
mighty stream there where the bank or causey is broken down: if it be not
by applying extreme and desperate medicines, as to desperate diseases, which
are as it were given over by the Physician, and to the which a light purgation
will do no good. For as for admonitions and warnings, they are not a whit
regarded: but they that give them, are derided or laughed to scorn, or reviled
for their labors. What must we therefore do? it is necessary that we assay
by all means to bring these men (if it be possible) to some modesty and fear
of God; which if it cannot be done by willing and gentle means, force and
violence must be used to pluck them out of the fire of Gods wrath, to the end
they be not consumed: if not all, yet at least those that are not grown to that
height of stubbornness, and of whom there is yet left some hope of amendment.
For even as when a Captain has not prevailed by summoning a city to yield up
it self, he by and by places his cannon against their walls, to put them in
sear; in like sort must we bring forth against the proud and high minded men
of this world, an army of Gods terrible judgments thrown down by mighty and
puissant hand on the wicked, more terrible and searefull than all the roaring
or double canons in the World, whereby the most proud are destroyed and
consumed even in this life, all their pride and power, how great soever it be,
being not able to turn back the vengeance of God from lighting upon their
heads, to their utter destruction and confusion. And it is manifest by infinite
examples. Now because that the nature of man is fleshly, and given to be
touched with things that are presented before their faces, or has been done
before time; it is a more forcible motive to stir them up, than that which as
yet cannot be made manifest, but is to come. Therefore I purpose here to set
down the great and fearful judgments, wherewith God has already plagued many
in this world, especially them of high degree, whose example will serve for a
glass both for these that live now, or shall live hereafter. And to the end
that the justice of God may more clearly appear and show it self in such
strange events; before we go any further, we will run over certain necessary
points concerning this matter.

CHAP. IIII. How the Justice of God is more evidently declared upon the mighty
ones of this world, than upon any other, and the cause why.
SEeing then that these men are more guilty and culpable of sin than any
other, they deserve so much a more grievous punishment, by how much their
misdeeds are more grievous: for doubtless, There is a God that judges the
earth (as the Psalmist says) who as he is benign and merciful toward those
that fear and obey him, so he will not suffer iniquity to go unpunished: This
is he (says the Prophet) that executes justice, mercy, and judgment upon
the earth: for if it be the duty of an earthly Prince, to exercise not only
clemency and gentleness, but also sharpnes and severity, thereby punishing and
chastising malefactors, to suppress all disorders in the common wealth; then
it is very necessary, that the justice of our great God, to whom all sovereign
rule and authority belongs, and who is the Judge over all the world, should
either manifest it self in this world, or in the world to come: and chiefly
toward them which are in the highest places of acount, who being more hardened
and bold to sin, do as boldly exempt themselves from all corrections and
punishments due unto them, being altogether unwilling to be subject to any
order of justice or law whatsoever: and therefore by how much the more they
cannot be punished by man, and that humane laws can lay no hold upon them; so
much the rather God himself becomes executioner of his own justice upon
their pates: and in such sort, that every man may perceive his hand to be on
them. Let any adversity or affliction light upon a man of low degree, or which
is poor and desolate, no man considers of it rightly; but talking thereof,
m^n cease not to impute the cause of this poor souls misery, either to
poverty, or want of succor, or some other such like cause. Therefore if any
such be in grief, or by chance fallen into some pit and drowned, or robbed and
killed in the way by thieves: straightway this is the saying of the world, That
it comes thus to pass, either because he was alone without company, or
destitute of help, or not well looked to and regarded: and thus they pass over
the matter. But as concerning great men, when they are any way afflicted, no
such pretenses or excuses can be alleged; seeing they want neither servants
to attend upon them, nor any other means of help to succor them: therefore when
these men are overtaken and surprised with any great evil, which by no means
they can eschew, and when their bold and wicked enterprises are pursued and
concluded with strange and lamentable events, in this we must acknowledge an
especial hand of God, who can entangle and pull down the proudest and
arrogantest He that lives, and those whom the world fears to meddle withal.
These proud gallants are they against whom God displaieth his banner of power
more openly, than against meaner and baser persons: because these poor souls
find oftentimes to their pains, that they are punished without cause, and
tormented and vexed by those tyrants, not having committed any offense at all,
to deserve it: whereas (as Philip Comine says) who dare be so bold as to
control or reprehend a King and his favorites, or to make enquiry of his
misdeeds: or having made inquisition of them, who dare presume to inform the
Judge thereof? who dare stand up to accuse them? who dare sit down to judge
them? Nay who dare take knowledge of them? and lastly, who dare assay to punish
them? Seeing then in this case, that our worldly justice has her hands bound
behind her from executing that which is right; it must needs be that the
sovereigne Monarch of heaven and earth should mount up into his Throne of
Judgment, and from thence give his definitive unchangable sentence, to deliver
up the most guilty and heinous sinners to those pains and torments which they
have deserved; and that after a strange and extraordinary manner, which may
serve for an example to all others.

CHAP. V. How all men, both by the Law of God and Nature, are inexcusable in
their sins.
NOw to the end that no man should pretend ignorance for an excuse, God has
bestowed upon every one a certain knowledge and judgment of good and evil,
which being naturally engraven in the tables of man's heart, is commonly called
the Law of Nature, whereby every man's own conscience gives sufficient
testimony unto it self, when in his most secret thoughts, it either accuses
or excuses him: for there is not a man living, which does not know in his
heart, that he does an evil deed, when he wrongeth another, although he had
never been instructed elsewhere in that point. So, although that in Tarquinius
Superbus time (Cicero says) there was no written Law established in Rome,
forbidding the ravishing and deflouring of wives and virgins, yet the wicked
son of this Tarquine was not therefore less guilty of an heinous crime, when
contrary to the Law of Nature he violently robbed Lucrece of her chastity: for
no man can be ignorant, that it is a most grievous crime to lay siege to the
chastity of a married woman, with such outrage: and so the whole people of Rome
did esteem of it, as a crime most wicked, strange, and intolerable, and worthy
of grievous punishment. Every man knows thus much, that he ought not to do
that to another, which he would not another should do to him: which sentence
the Emperor Severus made always to be spoken aloud, and declared by the
sound of the trumpet, in the way of advertisement, as often as punishment was
taken upon any offender, as if it were a general Law pertaining to all men.
This is that equity and justice which ought to be ingraffed in our hearts, and
whereof nature her self is the schoolmistresse: from this fountain all humane
and civil Laws are derived: if we had not rather say that they are derived
from that true spring of equity, which is in the Law of God, which Law he has
given for a plain and familiar manifestation of his will, concerning just,
holy, and reasonable things, touching the service, honor, and glory, which is
due unto himself, and the mutual duty, friendship, and good will, which men
owe one to another: whereunto he exhorts and enticeth every one by fair and
gracious promises, and forbids the contrary by great and terrible
threatenings (so gentle and merciful is he toward us, and desirous of our
good.) This is that Law which was published before the face of more than six
hundred thousand persons, with the mighty and resounding noise of Trumpet, with
earthquake, fire, and smoke, and with thunders and lightnings, to make men
more attentive to hear; and more prepared to receive it with all humility,
fear, and reverence; and also to put them in mind, that if they were
disobedient and rebellious, he wanted no power and ability to punish them; for
he has lightning, thunder, and fire, prepared instruments to execute his just
vengeance, which no creature under heaven is able to avoid, when by the
obstinate transgression of wicked men he is provoked to anger and indignation
against them. This is that holy law which has been set forth by the Prophets;
by the rule whereof, all their warnings, exhortings, and reproovings have been
squared. To this Law, the only begotten Son of God, our Savior and Redeemer
Jesus Christ, conformed his most holy doctrine, bringing men to the true use
and observation thereof, from which they had declined, and whereof he is the
end, the scope, and perfect accomplishment: so that so far it is that a
Christian man may be ignorant of it, and have it in contempt, that none can be
counted and reputed a true Christian, if he frame not his life by the rule
thereof; if not fully, yet at least as far forth as he is able: otherwise,
what a shame and reproach is it for men to call themselves by the name of Gods
children, Christians, and Catholics, and yet to do every thing clean
contrary to the will of God, to make no reckoning of his Law, to lead a
dissolute and disordered life, and to be as evil, if not worse than the vilest
miscreants and Infidels in the world? God wills and requires that he alone
should be worshipped and prayed unto; and yet the greater part of the world
are Idolaters, and full of superstition, worship Images, stocks, and stones,
and pray to creatures, in stead of the Creator. God forbids us to swear by
his name in vain: and yet what is more rise than that? so that a man can hear
nothing else but oaths and blasphemies. Many for the least trifle in the world
stick not to swear and forswear themselves. God forbids theft, murder,
adultery, and false witness bearing, and yet nothing so common as backbitings,
slanders, forgeries, false reports, whoredoms, cousenings, robberies,
extortions, and all manner of envies and enmities. God has commanded, that we
love our neighbors as our selves; but we, in stead of love, hate, despise, and
seek to procure the hurt and damage of one another, not regarding any thing
but our own peculiar profit and advantage. Is not this a manifest and professed
disobedience, and intolerable rebellion against our Maker? What child is there
that is not bound to honor and reverence his father? What servant, that is not
bound to obey his master, and to do all that he shall will him? What subject,
that is not tied in subjection to his Prince and Sovereign? Yet there is not
one which will not confess, yea and swear too with his mouth, That God is his
Lord and Father. Which if it be true, what is then the cause that in stead of
serving and pleasing him, they do nothing else but displease and offend his
Majesty? Is not this the way to provoke his wrath, and stir up his
indignation against them? Is it any marvel if he be incensed with anger, if
he be armed with revenge, and send abroad his cruel scourges upon the earth,
to strike and whip it withal? Is it any wonder, if he pile up the wicked ones
on heaps, and shoot out his revengefull arrows against them, and make them
drunken with their own blood, and make his sword of justice as sharp as a
rasor, to punish those Rebels that have rebelled against him? For vengeance is
mine (says he) and belongs only unto me. Whosoever therefore he be that
follows the desires and concupiscence of his own flesh, and this wicked
world, and shall lead a life contrary to the instruction and ordinance of the
law of God, yea although he never heard thereof, yet is he guilty thereof, and
worthy to be accursed; for so much as his own conscience ought to serve for a
law unto himself, by the which he is condemned in those evil actions which
he commits: even as Paul says, All that have sinned without the Law, shall
likewise perish without the Law. Romans 2. 12.


CHAP. VI. How the greatest Monarchs in the World ought to be subject to the
Law of God, and consequently the Laws of Man and Nature.
EVery man confesses this to be true, That by how much the more benefits and
dignity he has received from another, by so much he is the more bounden and
beholden to him: now it is so, that Kings and Princes are those upon whom God
has bestowed more plentifully his gifts and graces, than upon any other, whom
he has made as it were his Lievtenants in the world: for he has extolled
and placed them above others, and bedecked them with honor, giving them power
and authority to rule and reign, by putting people in subjection to them; and
therefore so much the more are they bound to re-acknowledge him again, to the
end to do him all honor and homage which is required at their hands.
Therefore David exhorts them, to serve the Lord even with reverence. Psalm. 2.
11.
This then their high and superintendent estate is no privilege to exempt them
from the subjection and obedience which they owe unto God, whom they ought to
reverence above all things. Ye Princes and high Lords (says the Prophet) give
you unto the Lord eternal glory and strength: Psalm. 29. 1.
give unto him glory due unto his name, and cast your selves before him to do
him reverence. If they owe so much honor unto God as to their Sovereign, then
surely it must follow, that they ought to obey his voice, and fear to offend
him; and so much the rather, because he is a great deal more strong and
terrible than they, able to cause his horrible thunderbolts to tumble upon
their heads, they being not able once to withstand his puissance, but
constrained very often to tremble thereat. In all that prescription Deuteronomy. 17.
15.
and ordinance ordained and set down by God concerning the office of Kings,
there is no mention made of any liberty he gives them to live after their own
lusts, and to do every thing that seems good in their own eyes: but he
enjoyneth them expressly, to have always with them the book of his Law,
delights to read and meditate therein, and thereby to learn to fear and
reverence his name, by observing all the precepts that are contained in that
book. As for civil and natural Laws, insomuch as they are founded upon
equity and right (for otherwise they were no Laws) therein they are agreeable
to, and as it were dependents on the Law of God; as is well declared by Cicero
in the first and second book of his Laws; for even they also condemn
thieves, adulterers, murderers, parricides, and such like. If then Princes be
subject to the Law of God, (as I am about to show) there is no doubt but that
they are likewise subject to those civil Laws, by reason of the equity and
justice which therein is commended unto us. And if (as Plato says) the Laws
ought to be Dial. 4. de Legib.
above the Prince, not the Prince above the Laws, it is then most manifest,
that the Prince is tied unto the Laws, even in such sort, that without the
same, the government which he swayeth can never be lawful and commendable.
And if it be true, that the Magistrate is or ought to be a speaking Law (as it
is said) and ought to maintain the authority and credit thereof, by the due
and upright administration of Justice (for if he did not this, he were a dumb
Law, and without life) how is it possible that he should make it of authority
and force with others, if he despises and transgresses it himself? David
did never assume so much to himself, as to desire to have liberty to do what
he listed in his Kingdom, but willingly submitted himself to that which his
office and duty required; making, even then when he was installed and
established King over the whole Land, a Covenant of peace with the Princes and
Deputies of the people: 2. Sam. 5.
and we know, that in every covenant and bargain both parties are bound to
each other, by a mutual bond to perform the conditions which they are agreed
upon. The like is used at the coronation of Christian Kings, whereas the people
is bound and sworn to do their alleagance to their Kings; so the Kings are
also solemnly sworn to maintain and defend true Religion, the estate of
Justice, the peace and tranquillity of their subjects, and the right and
privileges (which are nothing but the Laws) of the Realm: whereas David was
by the Prophet Nathan reproved for the adultery and murder which he had
committed, he neither used any excuse, nor alleged any privilege whereby he
was exempted from the rigor of the law to justify his fact, but freely
confessed without any cloak, that he had sinned. Whereby it appears of how
small strength and authority their opinion and words be, which think or
affirm that a Prince may dispense with the laws at his pleasure: by this
opinion was the mother in law of Antonius Caracalla seduced; who having by her
lascivious and filthy allurements enticed her son in law to lust, and love
her, and to desire her for his wife, persuaded him that he might bring his
purpose to pass, and that it was lawful enough for him, if he would, though
for other it was unlawful, seeing that he was Emperor, and that it belongs
not to him to receive, but to give laws: by which persuasion, that brave
marriage was concluded and made up, contrary to the law of nature and nations,
and to all honesty and virtue. So it was reported how Cambyses Herod. li^ 3.
took his own sister to wife, whom notwithstanding a little after he put to
death: which thing being not usual then among the Persians, not daring to
enterprise it (although he was a most wicked man) without the advice of the
Magistrates and Counselors of his Realm; he called them together, and
demanded whether it was lawful for him to make such a marriage or no? to whom
they answered freely, That there was no prescript law which did allow of it:
yet (that they might sooth him up, fearing to incur his displeasure) they
said further, that though there was no law to command it, yet such a mighty
King as he, might do what he pleased. In like manner the trencher Philosopher
Anaxarchus, after that he had told Alexander the Great with a loud voice, that
he ought not to Plutarch.
fear the penalty of any law, nor the reproach nor blame of any man, because
it belonged only to his office to create laws for all other to live by, and
to prescribe the limits of lawful and lawless things; and that it became him,
being a conqueror, to rule like a lord and a master, and not to obey any vain
conceit of law whatsoever; and that what thing soever the King did, the same
was sacred, just and lawful, without exception. And by this means made his
proceedings far more dissolute and outrageous in many things than ever they
were before. Dion in the Epitome of Xiphiline reports, how the Emperors were
wont to usurp this privilege, to be exempted from all law, that they might
not be tied to any necessity of doing or leaving undone any thing, and how in
no case they would endure to be subject to any written ordinances: the which
thing is manifest even in the behavior of the chiefest of them, as well in
regard of their life and manners, as of the government that they used in their
Commonwealths. For first of all, Augustus Caesar having kept in his own hand
the office of the Triumvir ten years (as Suetonius testifies) he also
usurped the Tribunes office and authority, and that till his dying day: and
likewise took upon him the Censorship; namely, the office of correcting and
governing manners and laws, if need required: whose successors (a man may
truly say for the most part) trampled under their feet all sincere and sacred
laws, by their notorious intemperance, dissoluteness, and cruelties. And yet
for all this there wanted not a parasiticall Lawyer, who to please the Emperor
his lord and master the better, and to underprop, and as it were seele over
with a fair show that tyrannical government used by other Emperors; foisted
in this as a law amongst the rest, Princeps legibus solutus est, That the
Prince was exempted from all law. As for that which they allege out of
Aristotle's Politiques, it makes nothing to set a color upon this counterfeit:
(for says Aristotle) If there be any man that excels so in virtue above all
others, that none is able to compare with him, that man is to be accounted as a
God amongst men, to whom no law may be prescribed, because he is a law unto
himself: all which I grant to be true, if that which was presupposed could
take place: for where no transgression is found, there no law is necessary;
according as Saint Paul said, The law was not given for the just, but for the
unjust and offenders: but where is it possible to find such a Prince so
excellent and so virtuous, that stands not in need of some law to be ruled by?

Of the like force and strength is that which is written in the first book of
Institutions, tit. 2. the words are these: The Princes pleasure serves for a
law, because the whole body of the people has translated all their authority,
power, and jurisdiction unto him. This is spoken of the Roman Emperors, but
upon the ground of so slender and silly reason, that upon so weak a foundation
it can never stand: for if it be demanded, whether this action of the people,
of giving over their right and prerogative to their Prince, be willing or
constrained, what answer will they make? If it be by constraint and fear (as
it is indeed) who will not judge this usurping of their liberty utterly unjust
and tyrannical, when one man shall arrogate that to himself which pertains
to many, yea to the whole body of the people? And admit that this reason was
effectual, yet the gloss upon the place says very notably, That the Princes
pleasure may be held for a law, so far forth as that which pleases him be
just and honest: giving us to know thus much thereby, That every will and
pleasure of a Prince may not indifferently be allowed for a law, if it be an
unjust and dishonest action, and contrary to the rule of good manners.
Moreover, it appears by the Customs of many ancient people and Realms, That
Princes had never this license given them, to do what they listed: for let
them be never so mighty, yea as mighty as Darius, under whose reign the
Persian Monarchy was abolished; yet he must be content (acording to the law of
the Medes and Persians) not to be able to infringe that law which was by the
advice of his Peers and Privy Council enacted, and by his own consent and
authority established: no, though for Daniels deliverance sake, Dan. ^. 8.
whom he loved, he greatly desired and took pains either to disannull, or at
least to give a favorable interpretation of it.

Such in old time was the custom of the Kings of Egypt, not to follow Di^d.
lib. 2 c* 2.
their own affections in any actions they went about, but to be directed by
the advice of their laws: for they had not so much authority as to judge
betwixt man and man, or to levy subsidies and such like by their own powers;
neither to punish any man through choler, or any overweening conceit, but were
always tied to observe justice and equity in all causes: neither did it grieve
them so to do, being persuaded that whilst they obeyed their laws, nothing
could betide them but good. The Lacedemonian Kings were in such bondage to the
laws of their Th*ucyd. lib. 1.
country, that the Ephori, which were set up to none other end but to be a
bridle to hold them back from doing what they listed, had absolute authority
to correct them when they had committed any fault; which subjection nothing
displeased King Theopompus, as it is apparent by the answer he made his wise,
that reproved him once in anger, saying, By his cowardice he would leave a
less kingdom to his children, than he had received of his Ancestors. Nay
(says he) a greater, for so much as more durable and permanent. Plutarch
praising the uprightness of King Alcamenes, who, for fear to break the law,
refused diverse presents that were sent him, bursteth into this speech: O heart
worthy of a King, that has preferred the authority of the law before his own
profit! Where are those fellows now that cry, Kings pleasures ought to be
observed for Laws, and that a Prince may make a law, but is not subject to it
himself? And this is that which Plutarch says as concerning that matter, who
lived under Trajan the Emperor.

Cornelius Tacitus discovering the beginning and original of the Roman Civil
Law, says, That Servius the third King of Rome after Romulus and Lib. 3. Annal.
Numa, was the only man that most established those laws, whereunto Kings
themselves ought to yield and be obedient. And admit that the Emperors swayed
with great power and authority almost all the world; yet for all their
fierceness and haughtiness of mind, Pliny durst tell Trajan, In Panegyr.
That an Emperor ought to use to carry himself with such good government in
his Empire, as if he were sure to give up an account of all his actions: Thou
must not (says he) desire more liberty to follow thine own lust, than any
one of us do: a Prince is not set over the law, but the law placed in
authority above the Prince. This was the admonition of that heathen man.
Likewise Antonius and Severus, two mighty Emperors, although by reason of an
opinion of their own greatness and haughtiness, wherewith they flattered
themselves, bragged that they were not subject to any law; yet they added this
clause withal, That notwithstanding they would live according to the direction
of the law. This (says Theodosius and Valentinion, two no less mighty
Emperors) is a voice becoming the Royal Majesty and greatness of a King, To
confess himself Lib. 4. ti^. 17.
to live under a law; and in truth it is a thing of greater importance than the
imperial dignity it self, to put sovereignty under the authority of law.
Amongst many other good lessons and exhortations which Lewis that good King
gave unto his son on his deathbed, this was Lib. 1. cod. Nicol. Gil. vol. ^.
Chronic. Franc.
one worthy the remembering, how he commanded him to love and fear God with all
his strength, and to take heed of doing any thing that should be contrary to
his law, whatsoever should befall him; and to provide that the good laws and
statutes of his kingdom might be observed, and the privileges of his subjects
maintained: to forbid Judges to favor him more than any others, when any cause
of his own came in trial. Thereby giving us thus much to understand, That
every good King ought to submit himself in obedience under the hand of God,
and under the rule of justice and equity. Wherefore there is neither King nor
Keisar that can or ought to exempt himself from the observance of sacred and
upright laws; which if they resist or disanull, doubtless they are culpable
of a most heinous crime, and especially of Rebellion against the King of Kings.

CHAP. VII. Of the punishment that seized upon Pharaoh King of Egypt, for
resisting God, and transgressing the first commandment of the Law.
We have sufficiently declared in the premises, that the mightiest potentates
of this world are bound to range themselves under the obedience of Gods law: it
remains now that we produce examples of those punishments that have fallen
upon the heads of the transgressors of the same, according to the manner of
their transgression, of what sort soever: which that we may the better
describe, it behooveth us to follow the order of the Commandments, as the
examples we bring may be fitly referred to any of them. And first we are to
understand, that when God said, Thou shall have none other Gods before me, he
condemns under these words the vanity of men that have forged to themselves a
multitude of gods: he forbids all false Religion, and declares, That he
would be acknowledged to be the sole and true God; and that we should serve,
worship, love, fear, and obey him in and above all things; and whosoever it be
that does otherwise, either by hindering his worship, or afflicting those that
worship him, the same man provokes his heavy wrath to be thrown upon him, to
his utter ruin and destruction. This is the indignation that lighted upon
Pharaoh King of Egypt, as we read in the book of God: who being one of the
most puissant Kings of the earth in his age, God chose him for an object to
show his wonderful power, by the means of horrible plagues and scourges which
he cast upon him, and by destroying him with all his armies at the length, as
his rebellion well deserved: For he like a cruel Tyrant continuing to oppress
the children of Israel, without giving them any release or breathing time from
their misery, or liberty to serve God, although by Moses in the name and
authority of God (who made himself well enough known unto him, without the
help of any written law) he was many times instantly urged and requested
thereunto: so many judgments and punishments assailed him one in the neck of
another, in such sort, that at length he was overtaken and ensnared therewith.
First of all, the very waters of Egypt being converted into blood, proclaimed
war against him: then the frogs which covered the face of the earth,
climbed up even to his chamber and bed, and filling every corner of his land,
sounded him an alarm: next a muster of lice and gnats, and such other
troublesome and stinking creatures, summoned him to combat: an handful of
embers seattered in the air by Moses, were unto him as the strokes of a stone
or a shaft, which did wonderfully disfigure their bodies with boyles and most
noisome scabbes: afterward the grasshoppers were put in battle array against
him, together with the hailestones, horrible thunders and lightenings, wasting
and spoiling, and running up and down grievously through his whole land. After
all these bitter blows, the Tyrant being cut short, and being so besieged on
every side with hideous and palpable darkness, that he could not tell which
ways to turn himself, yet would he not be brought to any reason, but
continued obstinate and hardened against God, though all the elements, with
heaven and earth, had taken armor together, and conspired his destruction.
Therefore while he remained in this wretched state, Gods Angel punished him
in the person of his eldest son, which died suddenly in one night, together
with all the first borne of Egypt; wherewithal both he and all his people
being greatly moved and grieved, at length gave the Israelites not only leave,
but also hasted them to depart: but anon, as he saw them going, like a man
bestraught he ran after them again, and pursued them with a mighty army,
until God in the mean while opening a passage for his children overthwart the
deep Red sea, attended him in the mid way, where he surprised and ensnared
him, overthrew and violently overturned the wheels of his chariots, and put
his whole army to a burly burly; and that he might utterly destroy him, caused
the sea from each side to return to his channel, which drowned and devoured
him and all his army. And this is one of the noblest and fearfullest judgments
of God that can be mentioned, and therefore is very often recounted in many
places of the Scripture, as a thing most memorable above others. Neither ought
we to marvel, if so notable a History as this is not set down among the
writings of profane authors: for that besides their Histories do not
ordinarily stretch so far, as to record such ancient acts, there is also no
doubt but the successors of that Tyrant, and all the Egyptians, sought all
means possible to cancel and blot out the memory of their so great and
horrible ruin. And if by chance any Historiographer make mention of the
departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, it is done in such sort, that the
truth is not only disguised, but wholly perverted by them, and in place
thereof nothing but lies and falsehood foisted in.

Like as Pharaoh by his unjust and outrageous persecuting of the children of
God, made himself so guilty of Gods wrath, that he deserved to be utterly
destroyed, with the greatest part of his people: so also after their miraculous
deliverance, whosoever labored either to hurt, hinder, or resist them, did no
less incur Gods displeasure and fierce wrath against them, wherewith they
were consumed: whereof the overthrow and discomfiture of Amalech is a plain
example; who, admit all the great wonders which God had done for the Israelites
in Exodus 17.
Egypt and in the red sea (whereof the brute being blown into all corners of
the earth, he could not be ignorant;) yet was he so malicious and foolish
hardy, as to take up armor against them, and to meet them to bid them battle;
but he and his wicked accomplices were by Ioshuah and his poor people (though
unwarliking and unacquainted with such actions, lately crept out of bondage,
wherein they had been only exercised to make mortar and brick, and not to
handle weapons) discomfited and overthrown: for the Lord of Hosts (who is the
divider of victories to whom he pleases) at the servent prayers of his servant
Moses, fought for them, to the confusion of Amalech and all his train; and
therefore he commanded Moses to put this deed of his in writing, as a thing
worthy to be remembered; who also erected an Altar in the same place, for a
perpetual monument of so noble a victory.

As Amalech, and for the like sin, were Arad a King of the Number 2. 1.
Canaanites, Sehon King of Amorites, and Og King of Basan, with their people
and cities, destroyed and rased down; so the Madianites enterprising to
withstand the foresaid Israelites, by the wicked and pernicious counsel of
Balaam, were subdued and put to the Number. 31.
sword, even five Kings of them together, not one escaping save the young
Virgins which had never committed fornication with man.

After that the Children of Israel had continued a season peaceably in the Land
of Canaan which the Lord had bestowed upon them, then did Eglon King of Moab
rise up, and subdued them by war, and tyrannized over them eighteen years.
And although it was Gods Judge. 3.
will that they should be thus chastised, because of their corruption, and
iniquity, nevertheless this Moabite (his Rod) he caused (in regard of his
love to his people) to be slain by Ahud an Israelite, as he was taking his
case in his chamber. In like manner was his wrath stirred up against Iabin King
of Asor, who had oppressed Israel twenty years: whose army, though it was
great and well appointed, was notwithstanding by Baraks handful of men, under
the conduct and rule of Deborah the Prophetess, wondrously discomfited; in
such sort, that of all the multitude there remained not one that felt not the
edge of the sword, except Sisera their Captain; who escaping from the battle
by betaking him to his heels, turned in by chance into the house of a woman
called Iahel; who hating him, as he slept, with a hammer fastened a nail into
his temples; and thus escaping from those whom he feared, he was murdered by
her whom he trusted. And so this valiant warrior, as he was overcome in
battle by the conduct of a woman, so was he put to death by the hand of a
woman.

That which happened to the Madianites in the time of Gideon, is admirable and
very strange; who being furnished with a mighty army of soldiers, with the
Amalekites and other their Allies, to destroy Israel, were so Judge. 7.
scarred and scattered at the sound of the trumpets, and brightness of torches
of three hundred men at the most that were with Gideon, that through the
mavelous astonishment they were in, they turned their blades into their own
bosoms, and murdered one another, till the greatest part of them were
destroyed; and the residue being put to flight, and pursued by the men of
Ephraim, two of their Kings, Oreb and Zeb, were taken and slain.

A while after it came to pass, that the Princes of the Philistims, who Judge
16.
had oppressed the people of God by the space of forty years, being assembled
together with all their people in the Temple of Dagon their god even then when
after their sacrifices, they thought to make themselves most sport and pastime
with poor Sampson, whose eyes in mockery and contempt they had put out, were
altogether massacred by the fall of the house which Sampson by his strength
pulled upon their heads: which was the greatest overthrow that before times by
his means they had received.

In the reign of Saul King of Israel, Agag King of Amalech, the posterity 1 Samuel 15.
of those that laid wait for Israel in the desert, as they came out of Egypt,
were by Saul (following the commandment of the Lord) set upon; who running
upon him and his people, made a great slaughter and butchery of them, not
sparing man, woman, nor child, but the King only, whom he took to mercy, and
led captive, which he ought not to have done. This Captain being thus spared
by one that was but little better than himself, could not so escape; for the
Prophet, Samuel became the executioner of Gods vengeance upon him, since Saul
refused it, and with his own hand flew him, even then when he thought he should
live.

A little while after, Goliath a giant of the Philistims, who as well through 1 Samuel 17.
the hugeness of his stature, and strength of body, as through the horrible
cruelty which appeared in him, seemed in man's eyes invincible, proudly and
presumptuously defied the army of the living God, offering and daring any one
man of Israel to enter combat with him: This proud fellow was, notwithstanding
all his brags, by young and unarmed David, save a little stick and a few
stones which he had in his hands; vanquished and trod under foot; for he gave
this great beast such a knock with one of his stones on the forehead, that at
the first blow he tumbled him grovelling on the earth, and quickly leaping upon
him, caught hold of his huge sword, and therwithall cut off his monstrous head:
which the Philistims perceiving, turned their backs and fled, and were pursued
and slain by the Israelites.

CHAP. VIII. More Examples like unto the former.
IN the time of Achab, Benhadad King of Syria accompanied 1. King. 20.
with two and thirty Kings, came very proudly against Israel, as it were in
despite of God to bid him battle, but it turned to his own shame and
confusion, being first dishonourably put to flight by 230 servants of the
Princes of Israel (a small handful to encounter so mighty an army:) and
secondly, returning to seek revenge, found the loss of 100000 footmen at one
clap, besides 27000 which escaping by flight, were crushed in pieces by the
ruin of a wall in the city Aphec. And so this brave gallant, that erst
bragged, that the gold and silver of Israel, yea their wives and children were
his, was now glad to fly for his life amongst the rest, and in his return to
hide himself, all dismayed in a little chamber; and from thence (being advised
thereto by his servants) to send to entreat Achab for his own life, which a
little before thought him sure of the lives of all Israel. Yet for all this,
ere long he enterprised a new practice against the Prophet Elizeus, and
besieged also the city of Samaria so long, that certain 2 King. 6. 2. King 7.
women (constrained by extreme famine) devoured their children: but in the end
he was compelled (through fearful terror which God sent into his army by the
noise of infinite Chariots and Horses which sounded in their ears, as if some
puissant host of men of war had been marching toward them) to forsake the
siege, and flee with all his forces, leaving behind them their tents, horses,
carriages, victuals, and munitions, to be a prey for them that pursued them
not. And lastly, falling ficke, Hazael one 2. King. 8.
of his own servants, that succeeded him in the kingdom, to the end he might
dispatch him quickly, and without tumult, early in the morning took a thick
cloth dipped in water, and spreading it over his face, stifled him to death.

When the Moabites and Ammonites rose up in arms against Iehosaphat 2. Chron.
20.
King of Judah, as soon as this good King humbled himself together with all
his people before the face of God by fasting and prayer, forthwith God sent
such a giddiness of spirit amongst his enemies, that they killed one another:
and the men of Judah without being troubled with fighting, gathered the spoil
which they had scattered, and enriched themselves with their relics.

Aman, promoted in honor and credit above all the Princes of the Est* 17, and
9.
Court of King Assuerus, conceived so beastly an hatred against the poor
dispersed Jews (being at that time the only Church of God) that maliciously he
conspired, in one day to destroy and put to death the whole nation, to the very
women and infants: and in accomplishing this his purpose, he mightily abused
the authority of the King, whom he falsely informed. That this nation would not
be subject to his ordinances and laws which his other people were subject
unto; and that therefore he ought not to permit and suffer them any longer.
But God that carries always a watchful eye over his Church, and knows how
to break and dash all the enterprises of his enemies, brought all this
wretches purposes to naught, by preserving miraculously those whom he would
have destroyed, and making him do reverence to Mordecheus, whom he specially
sought to bring to infamy, and for whom he had of purpose provided a gibbet to
hang him on, but was hanged thereon himself, with ten of his sons: beside, all
those which had conspired with him against the Jews, were upon the same day
which they had set down for their massacre, by the kings commandment slain
by the hands of them whom they had appointed to the slaughter.

Balthazar King of Babylon, as he was feasting among his Princes, commanded
Dan. 5.
amidst his cups, the golden and silver Vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had taken
out of the Temple of Jerusalem, to be brought, that both he, and his princes,
and his wives and concubines might drink therein; exalting himself thus
against the Lord of Heaven, and boasting in his idols of earth; therefore God
being stirred up to wrath against him, appointed his destruction even whilst
he thus drank and made merry in the midst of his jollity, and caused a strange
and fearful sign to appear before his eyes, a bodilesse hand writing upon
the wall over against the candlestick; the words of which writing portended
the destruction of his kingdom, which presently ensued; for the very same
night he was murdered, and the Scepter seized upon by Darius King of the
Medes.

Antiochus, by surname Epiphanes, or Excellent (though by truer report of ^.
Macch. 2 and 6.
people, contemptuously entitled the Furious) King of Asia, being venomously
Epima^es.
enraged against the Jews, began at the first marvellously to oppress them,
to rob and spoil their Temple, and to slaughter the people. About ten years
after, deceiving the poor people with fair and smooth words, covers of most
vile and wretched treason, whilst they imagined no mischief, he set upon
them in such cruel sort, that the loss and desolation which they endured at
that time was inestimable; for besides the destruction of Jerusalem their City,
the slaughter of infinite multitudes of their people, and the captivity of
women and infants; as if all these were not enough, there was yet another
misery to make up the full sum, worse than all the rest: which was this; The
cursed tyrant seeing his purpose not to take the full effect, commanded every
where, That all his subjects (I mean the Jews) should forsake and abjure the
Law of God, and be united into one Religion with the Infidels. By means of
which Edict the Religion of God was defaced, the books of his Law rent and
burned, and those with whom any such books were found, rigorously put to death:
Which fearful cruelty when the Jews perceived, it caused many of them to wax
faint hearted, and to give themselves over to wallow in the dirty fashions of
the uncircumcised Idolaters, and in their madness to subscribe to the unjust
laws of the vile monster. Now after he had committed all these outrages, he
was repulsed with dishonor from the city of Elymais in Persia, which he went
about to spoil and rob, and forced to fly to Babylon; where after tidings of
the overthrow of his two armies in Judea, with grief and despite he ended his
days.

Antiochus the son of this wretched father succeeding him as in his ^. Macch.
6.
kingdom, so in wickedness, perjury and disloyalty; when, to the end to
consult about his own affairs, he concluded a peace with the Jews, and by
solemn oath as well of himself as his princes, confirmed the free exercise of
their Religion: behold, suddenly he falsied his plighted and sworn faith, and
undid all that ever he had done; but it was not long ere he also was overtaken
by the army of Demetrius, and together with Lysias his Governor, put to death.

A while after reigned Alexander his brother, who whilst he was encombred 1.
Macch. 11.
with the troubles of Cilicla, that revolted from him, the King of Egypt his
father in law came traitorously to forestall him of his kingdom, took his
wife, and gave her to hi^ deadliest enemy, and afterward gave him battle,
discomfited his forces, and drove him to fly into Arabia for safety; where in
stead of help, he found an hatchet to chop off his head, which was sent for a
Present to gratify the King of Egypt withal.

Not long after, Antiochus his son recovered the Scepter of his Father; 1.
Macch. 13.
but alas his reign endured but a small space; for being yet but a young
child, he was slain by Tryphon in the way as he led him to war against the
Jews. And thus perished the cursed race of Antiochus, which felt Gods wrath
upon it even in the third generation.

Antiochus the son of Demetrius (of whom mention was made but a 2. Macch. 5.
little before) after he had chased Tryphon from the kingdom of Asia, which
he usurped, and broken the league which he had made with the Jews, gave
himself wholly to work them mischief. Therefore coming against Jerusalem,
he took it by force, commanding his soldiers to put all to death that were
within the same* so that within three days there was such a massacre of young
and old men, women, and children, that the number of the slain arose to four
score thousand carcasses. After this, having executed many more villainies
against this people, in so much as to make them renounce the law of God,
putting them cruelly to death that did not obey his commandment, it came to
pass, that this cruel tyrant was first of all put to flight by the
inhabitants of Persepolis a city of Persia, for going above to rob their temple
of their treasures: next endamaged by an overthrow of his army in Iudaea: which
he no sooner understood, but he took counsel in his fury how to be revenged
of Jerusalem, and belched forth bitter threats against it. But in the mean
time the Lord stroke him with a sudden and incurable plague, and surprised him
with a horrible torment of his entrails. Howbeit, for all this he ceased not
his malicious enterprise, but hasted forward his journey toward the Jews with
such cagernesse, that in the way he fell out of his chariot, and bruised so his
body, that it became putrified and so full of corruption, that very vermin
scrawled out thereof, and the rotten flesh dropping piecemeale away, no man, no
not himself being able to endure the stinch thereof. Then was he constrained
in the midst of his torments to confess, that it was meet that he should
submit himself unto God, that he which is mortal, ought not to exalt himself
so high, as to compare with the immortal God: and in this estate this
reprobate ended his wicked days by a strange and most miserable kind of death.

CHAP. IX. Of those that persecuted the Son of God and his Church.
IF they who in the law injured and persecuted the Church of God, were punished
according to their deserts, as we have already heard; is it any marvel then if
the enemies and persecuters of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, which labor
by all means to discountenance and frustrate his Religion, and to oppress his
Church, do feel the heavy and fearful vengeance of God upon them for their
very wickedness and unbelie^e? No verily, for he that honors not the Son,
honors not the Father which sent him, and is guilty therefore before God, of
impiety and profaneness. From this heinous crime King Herod in Mat. 2.
no wise can be exempted, that caused all the Infants of Bethlehem of two
years old and under, to be cruelly murdered, in hope thereby to put the true
Messiah and Savior of the world to death. For which deed, accompained This
example belongs also (in regard of cruelty) to the sixth commandment. Lib.
2. Cap. 11. 17. Book of the Jewish antiquity, cap. 8.
with many other strange cruelties, as by killing the ordinary Judges of the
house of David, and his own wife and children, this Caitise was tormented with
sundry intolerable griefs, and at last devoured by an horrible and most
fearful death. For (as Josephus reports) his body was boiled, and his
bowels gnawne in two by a soft and slow fire, fretting inwardly, without any
outward appearance of heat: besides the ravenous and insatiable desire of
eating, which so possessed him, that without chewing, his meat in whole lumps
descended into his body, devouring it so fast as it could be thrown into his
mouth, and never ceasing to farse his greedy throat with continual sustenance:
moreover, his feet were so swollen and pust up with such a phlegm, that a man
might see through them; his privy parts so rotten and full of vermin, and his
breath so stinking, that few or none durst approach near unto him; yea his own
servants for sooke him. Now lying in this wretched plight, when this wicked man
saw no remedy could be found to assuage his grief, he went about to kill
himself, and being not able to perform it, he was constrained to endure all
the pangs of a most horrible, lingering, and languishing death, and at last mad
and miserable bestraught of sense and reason, to end his days.

As for Herod the Tetrarch, surnamed Antipas (who to please Herodias, Luke 9. 7.
had caused John Baptist to be beheaded) when he had likewise prepared snares
for our Saviors feet, and being sent to him by Pilate, to quit himself, and
gratify him withal, had jeasted and mocked at him his belly full, This
example in regard of divorce, be longs to the seventh Commandment. Lib 2.
cap. 29. Joseph. of the Jewish Antiquity, l. 8. c. 6. Eusebius.
behold, his reproaches and mockes (was he never so subtle) turned into his
own bosom: for first, after that his army had been discomfited by the
soldiers of King Aretas, whose daughter (in regard of Herodias his brother
Philips wife) he had repudiated; a further shame and dishonor befell him, even
to be deprived of his Royal dignity; and not only to be brought into a low and
base estate, but also being robbed of his goods, to be banished into a far
country, and there to make an end of the rest of his life.

As touching Pilate the governor of Judea, he did so excel in wickedness and
injustice, that notwithstanding the restraint of his own conscience, the law
of civil equity, and the advertisement of his own wise, Eusebius.
yet he condemned Christ Jesus, the just and innocent, to the death of the
cross: albeit he could not but know the power of his miracles, the renown
whereof was spread into all places. But ere long having been constrained to
erect the image of the Emperor Caligula in the Temple of Jerusalem to be
worshipped, he was sent for to make personal appearance at Rome, to answer to
certain accusations of cruelty which were by the Jews objected against him:
And in this journey being afflicted in conscience, Eusebius. Eutrop. lib. 7.
with the number and weight of his misdeeds, like a desperate man, to prevent
the punishment which he feared, willingly offered violence to his own life,
and killed himself.

The first Emperor that took in hand to persecute the Christians, was Nero
the Tyrant; picking a quarrel against them for setting the City on Tertul,
Niceph. 8 Commandment. Calumniation Lib. 2. cap. 44.
fire; which being himself guilty of, he charged them withal, as desirous to
find out any occasion to do them hurt: wherefore under pretense of the same
crime, discharging his own guilt upon their backs, he exposed them to the
fury of the people, that tormented them very sore, as if they had been common
burners and destroyers of Cities and the deadliest enemies of mankind.
Hereupon the poor Innocents were apprehended, Tacit. Ann. l. 5.
and some of them clad with skins of wild beasts, were torn in pieces by
dogs; others crucified, or made bone-fires of on such heaps, that the flame
arising from their bodies, served in stead of torches for the night. To
conclude, such horrible cruelty was used toward them, that many of their very
enemies did pity their miseries. But at last this wretch, the causer of all,
seeing himself in danger to be murdered by one appointed for that purpose (a
just reward for his horrible and unjust dealing) hastened his death by killing
himself, as it shall be showed more at large in the second book.

The author of the second persecution against the Christians, was Domitian,
Suet. Refer this also to the ^4. chapter of this book. Suet. Eutrop.
who was so puffed up and swollen with pride, that he would needs ascribe unto
himself the name of God. Against this man rose up his household servants, who
by his wives consent slew him with daggers in his privy chamber: his body was
buried without honor, his memory cursed to posterity, and his ensigns and
trophies thrown down and defaced.

Trajan, who albeit in all things, and in the government of the Empire also,
showed himself a good and sage Prince, yet did he dash and bruise himself
against this stone with the rest, and was reckoned the third persecuter of the
Church of Christ: for which cause he underwent also the cruel Dion.
vengeance of God, and felt his heavy hand upon him: for first he fell into a
palsy, and when he had lost the use of his senses (persuading himself that he
was poisoned) got a dropsy also, and so died in great anguish.

Hadrian in the ninth year of his Empire caused ten thousand Christians to
be crucified in Armenia at one time; and after that ceased not to stir up a
very hot persecution against them in all places. But God persecuted him, and
that to his destruction; first with an issue of blood, wherewith he was so
weakened and disquieted, that oftentimes he would feign Mandat. 7. l. ^. c. 12.
Spart.
have made away himself: next with a consumption of the lungs and lights,
which he spate out of his mouth continually; and thirdly with an unsatiable
dropsy: so that seeing himself in this horrible torment, he desired poison to
hasten his death, or a knife to make quick riddance; but when all those means
were kept back, he was enforced to endure still, and at last to die in great
misery.

Whilst Marcus Antonius, surnamed Verus, swayed the empire, there were
exceeding cruelties set abroach against the poor Christians every Eusebius. Spart.
where, but especially at Lions and Vienna in Daulphin (as Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical History records;) wherefore he wanted not his punishment, for
he died of an Apoplexy, after he had lien speechless three days.

After that Severus had proclaimed himself a professed enemy to Gods Church, his
affairs began to decline, and he found himself pestered with diverse
extremities, and set upon with many wars; and at length assaulted with such
an extreme pain throughout his whole body, that languishing and consuming, he
desired often to poison himself, and at last died in great distress. Vitellius
Saturninus one of his Lievtenants in those exploits Tert. ^d Scap.
became blind: another called Clandius Herminianus Governor of Capadocia, who
in hatred of his own wife that was a Christian, had extremely afflicted many
of the faithful, was afterward himself afflicted with the pestilence,
persecuted wi^h vermin bred in his own bowels, and devoured of them alive in
most miserable sort. Now lying in this misery, he desired not to be known or
spoken of by any, lest the Christians that were lest unmurthered, should
rejoice at his destruction, confessing also that those plagues did justly
betide him for his cruelties sake.

Dicius, in hatred of Philip his predecessor, that had made some profession
Oros. l. 7. c. 14.
of Christianity, wrought tooth and nail to destroy the Church of Christ,
using all the cruelties and torments which his wit could devise, against all
those which before time had offered themselves to be persecuted for that cause.
But his devilish practices were cut short by means of the war which he waged
against the Scythians; wherein, when he had reigned not full two Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 1. Ecclesiast. Hist.
years, his army was discomfited, and he with his son cruelly killed, Others
Pomponim.
say, that to escape the hands of his enemies, he ran into a whirl^pit, and
that his body was never found after.

Neither did the just hand of God plague the Emperor only, but also as well
the heathen Gentiles throughout all Provinces and dominions of the Roman
Empire. For immediately after the death of this Tyrant, God Eusebius. l. 7. c. 21.
sent such a plague and pestilence amongst them, lasting for the space of ten
years together, that horrible it is to hear, and almost incredible to
believe. Dionysius writing to Hierax a Bishop of Egypt, declares the
mortality of this plague to have been so great at Alexandria, where he was
Bishop, that there was no house in the whole city free. And although the
greatness of the plague touched also the Christians somewhat, yet it scourged
the heathen Idolaters much more: beside that, the behavior of the one and the
other was most diverse: for as the foresaid Dionysius does record, the
Christians through brotherly love and piety did not refuse one to visit and
comfort another, and to minister to him what need required: notwithstanding it
was to them great danger; for diverse there were, who in closing up their eyes,
in washing their bodies, and int^rring them in the ground, were next themselves
which followed them to their graves. Yet all this s^ayed not them from doing
their duty, and showing mercy one to another. Whereas the Gentiles contrarily
being extremely visited by the hand of God, felt the plague, but considered not
the striker; neither yet considered they their neighbor, but every man
shifting for himself, cared not for one another. Such as were infected, some
they would cast out of the doors half dead, to be devoured of dogs and
beasts; some they let die within their houses, without all succor; some they
suffered to lie unburied, for that no man durst come near them: and yet
notwithstanding, for all their voyding and shifting, the postilence followed
them whithersoever they went, and miserably consumed them. Insomuch that
Dionysius reports of his own city Alexandria, That there was not left in the
city, of old and young, so many as there was wont to be old men from threescore
years upwards. This plague, though it spread it self over the whole world, yet
especially it raged where the Edicts of the Emperor had been against the
Christians, whereby many places became utterly desolate.

Valerian, albeit in the beginning of his Empire he showed himself somewhat mild
and gentle toward the professors of religion, yet afterward he became their
deadly enemy; but when he had terribly persecuted them in his dominions, it was
not long ere he was taken prisoner in the Persian wars, being seventy years
old, and made a slave to his conqueror all the rest of his life: And whose
condition was so miserable, that Sapor King of In the Sermon of the
congregation of saints Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c 30.
Persia used his back as a block or stirrup to mount upon his horse. Yea he
dealt so cruelly with the poor old man (as Eusobius testifies) that to make
up the full number of his miseries, he caused him to be fleine alive, and
poudred with salt.

The like severity of Gods terrible judgment is also to be noted in Glaudius
Henric. de Erford.
his President, and minister of his persecution^: For God gave him up to be
possessed and vexed of the Devil, in such sort, that biting off his own
tongue in many small pieces, he so ended his days.

Neither did Galienus the son of Valerian, after the captivity of his father,
utterly escape the righteous hand of God: for beside the miserable captivity of
his father, whom he could not restore, such strange portents, and such
earthquakes did happen, also such tumults, commotions, and rebellions did
follow, that Trebellio does reckon up to the number of thirty together, which
at sundry places, all at one time, took upon them to be Emperors of the
Roman Monarchy: by the means whereof he was not able to succor his father,
though he would: notwithstanding the said Galienus, being, as is thought,
terrified by the example of his father, did remove, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 13
or at leastwise moderate the persecution stirred up against the Christians, as
it may appear by his Edict set forth in Eusebius.

Aurelian being upon point to trouble the quiet of the church, which it a while
enjoyed under the Emperor Galien; even whilst he was devising new practices
against it, a thunderbolt fell from heaven at his feet, which so amazed him,
that his malicious and bloodthirsty mind was somewhat rebated and repressed
from doing that which he pretended; until that reourning Vopis. Eutrop. Niceph.
to his old bent, and persevering to pursue his purpose, when Gods thunder
could not terrify him, he stirred up his own servants to cut his throat.

Dioclesian went another way to work, for he did not set abroach all his
practices at one push, but first assayed by subtle means to make those that
were in his army to renounce their faith; then by open proclamation commanded,
that their churches should be rased and beaten down, their Bibles burned and
torn in pieces: that they that were Magistrates, or bore Ruffin.
any public office in the commonwealth, if they were Christians, should be
deposed: and that all bondmen that would forsake their profession, should be
enfranchised. When he had thus left no devise unpractised that might further
to abolish and destroy the religion of Christ, and perceiving that,
notwithstanding all his malice and cruel rage, it every day (through the
wonderful constancy of Martyrs) increased and grew even against the hair;
with very spite and anger he gave up the Empire. And lastly, when he had been
tormented with diverse and strange diseases, and that his house had been set on
fire with lightning, and burned with fire from heaven, and he himself so
scarred with thunder, that he knew not where to hide him, he fell mad and
killed himself. There was joined to this man in the government of the Empire,
one Maximilian, whose cruelty and tyranny against the Christians was so
outrageous also, that upon a solemn festival day, when infinite numbers of
them were assembled together at Mandat. 7. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Nicomedia, in a Temple, to serve God, he sent a band of Atheists to enclose
them, and burn the Temple and them together, as they indeed did: for there
were consumed at that bone-fire (as Nicephorus writes) twenty Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. 7, and 8. c. 16 Niceph. l. 7. c. 6.
thousand persons. In like sort dealt he with a whole city in Phrygia, which
after he had long besieged, he caused to be burnt to cinders, with all the
inhabitants therein. But the end of this wretch was like his life, even
miserable: for lying a while sick of a grievous disease, the very vermin and
such horrible stink came forth of his body, that for shame and grief he hung
himself.

Maximinus that reigned Emperor in the East, was constrained to interrupt
Niceph. 7. 12.
and make cease his persecution which he had begun, by means of a dangerfull
and grievous sickness, and to confirm a general peace to all Christians in
his dominions, by public Edicts.

His sickness was thus: In the privy members of his body, there grew a sudden
putrefaction, and after in the bottom of the same a botchy corrupt bile, with
a fistula, consuming and eating up his intrails, out of the which came swarming
an innumerable multitude of lice, with such a pestiferous stink, that no man
could abide him; and so much the more, for that all the grossness of his
body, by abundance of meat before he fell sick, was turned into fat; which fat
now putrified and stinking, was so ugsome and horrible, that none that came to
him could abide the sight thereof, by reason whereof the Physicians which had
him in cure, some of them not able to abide the intolerable stink, were
commanded to be slain; other some, because they could not heal him, being
past hope, were also cruelly put to death. At length, being put in remembrance,
that his disease was sent of God, he began to repent of the cruelty which he
had showed the Christians, and forthwith commanded all persecution to cease.

But (alas) this peace was so brittle, that it lasted but six months; for even
then he sought by all means possible again to trouble and disquiet their rest,
and sent forth a new Edict quite contrary to the former, importing their utter
destruction. And thus being nothing amended, but rather made worse by his
sickness, it affailed him afresh, in such sort, that every day growing in
extremity, as he grew in cruelty, it at last brought him to his death, his
carcass being all rotten and full of corruption and worms. Saint Chrysostom
writes of him, That the apple of his eye fell out before he died. Against the
Gentiles.


Maxentius and Licinius, the one Emperor of Italy, the other of the East,
perceiving how the Emperor Constantine that reigned in the West, was had in
great reputation, for maintaining the cause of the Christians, began also to
do the like: but by and by their malice and hypocrisy discovered it self,
when they undertook to trouble and afflict those whom before they seemed to
favor. For which cause Constantine taking arms against them, destroyed them
both one after another; for Maxentius thinking to save himself upon a Bridge
on Tyber, was deceived by the breaking of the Bridge, and so drenched and
drowned in the water. Licinius was taken and put to death. And thus two Tyrants
ended their days, for persecuting the Church of Christ.

In the tenth year of the persecution of Dioclesian, Galerius his chief
Lanquet. Chro.
minister and instrument in that practice, fell into a grievous sickness,
having a sore risen in the neither part of his belly, which consumed his privy
members, from whence swarmed great plenty of worms engendered by the
putrefaction. This disease could not be helped by any Surgery or Physic:
wherefore he confessed that it justly happened unto him for his monstrous
cruelty toward the Christians, and called in his proclamations which he had
published against them. Howbeit notwithstanding he died miserably, and as some
write slew himself.

CHAP. X. More examples of Persecutors.
SAint Bartholomew one of the twelve Apostles, after he had preached Christ
Jesus unto the Indians, and delivered them the Gospel written by Saint Matthew,
and had converted many unto the Faith, albeit the miracles which he wrought
were strange and supernatural (for he restored many diseased persons to their
health, and cleansed King Polemius his daughter from an unclean spirit wherewith
she was possessed) yet in Hieron. in Ca^.
regard that he destroyed their Idol Astaroth, and bewraied the subtilties of
Satan, he was by Astyages, Polemius younger brother, at the instigation of the
Idolatrous Priests, first cruel beaten with clubs, after fleyed, and last of
all beheaded. But within thirty days after, both the wicked King, and the
sacrilegious Priests, were poffessed with devils, and brought to a wretched
and miserable death.

Aphraats that heavenly Philosopher, going out of his Cloister toward Theod.
l. 4. c. 26.
the Temple, to feed the flock of Christ with some wholesome food of sound
Doctrine; and being perceived by the Emperor Valeus, and demanded Tripartit.
Hist. lib. 8. cap. 4. Nicl. 11. c. 25.
whither he went; he answered, To pray for him and his kingdom. Yea, but said
the Emperor, it were more convenient for thee that professest thy self a
Monk, to remain at home in contemplation, than to stray abroad: True answered
this holy man, if Christ's sheep enjoyed peace; but as it becomes an honest
Matron to sit still within doors; nevertheles if her house were on fire, and
the flame invi^oned her, should she not stir to help to quench it? And
should I lie still, and see my Country set on fire by the persecution? Whereat
the Emperor being netled, threatened him with death; and one of his
chamberlaines taunting him for his boldness, used him most currishly. But
presently as he went to the Baths, to make them ready for the Emperor, the
hand of God stroke him with an Apoplexy, that he fell down dead into the
waters.

Under the Empire of Julian the Apostate, all they that either conspired T^eod.
l. 3. c. 7.
or practiced the death of Cyrillus a Deacon of Heliopolis, situate near to
Libanus, came to a miserable end: for after that Constantine was deceased, by
whose authority the holy Martyr had broken down many of their Images and
Idoils, the abominable Idolaters did not only murder him, but also devoured
his liver with bread, as if it had been the sweetest morsel of meat in the
world. But the all-seeing eye of God saw their villainy, and his revengefull rod
bruised them in pieces: for their teeth wherewith they chewed that unnatural
food, fell all out of their heads; and their tongues wherewith they tasted it,
rotted and consumed to nothing; and lastly, their eyes which beheld it, failed
them, and they became blind. And thus were they all served, not one excepted,
bearing justly the marks of Gods wrath for so inhumane and unnatural a deed.

At Tire a City of Phoenicia, under the reign of Dioclesian, many Christians
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 7.
that stoutly professed and maintained the Faith and Religion of Christ Jesus,
were after many tortures and destructions, exposed to wild beasts to be
devoured, as Bears, Libards, wild Boares, and Bulls: the savage basts, though
made fierce and furious by fires and swords, yet (I know not by what secret
instinct.) resused once to touch them, or to come near them, but turned their
teeth upon the Infidels that were without, and came to set them on upon the
Saints, and tore many of them in pieces in their steads. Howbeit, although they
escaped the jaws of wild beasts, yet they escaped not the swords of them that
were more savage than any beasts: and though the bowels of Bears refused to
entombe them, yet were they intombed in the floods, and crowned with the Crown
of sacred martyrdom.

Processus and Martianus, Keeper of the Prison wherein the Apostles Peter and
Paul were enclosed at Rome, seeing the miracles which were wrought by their
hands, believed in Christ, and together with seven and forty other prisoners
were baptized. Which when Paulinus the Judge perceived, he enjoined them to
lay aside their conscience, and offer sacrifice to Idols. But they, readier to
obey God than man, could neither by threats nor violence be brought to it; but
chose rather to be beaten with clubs Vincentius, l. 10. c. 56. Petru^ de
Natalibus.
or consumed with fire, or scourged with Scorpions, as they were, than to yield
to deny their Maker, by doing worship to devilish and monstrous Idols. But that
Judge the procurer of their martyrdomes, shortly after became himself an
object of Gods wrath; when his eyesight failed him, and an evil spirit so
possessed and tormented him, that in the extremity of terrors and grief, he
breathed out ere long his last and miserable breath.

Nicephorus reports, How the Emperor Trajan having caused five Lib. 3. c. 21.
holy Virgins to be burned, for standing in the profession of the Truth,
commanded certain Vessels to be made of their ashes mingled with brass, and
dedicated them to the service of a public Bath; but the Bath that before time
instilled a wholesome and healthful vapor into men's bodies, now became
pernicious and fatal unto them: for all that washed themselves therein, felt
presently such a giddiness in their brains, and such a dimnesse of sight,
that they fell down dead forthwith: The cause of which mischief being
perceived by Trajan, he melted again the Virgin-moulded Vessels, and erected
five statues to the honor of them; so choking as it were one superstition
with another, to his own eternal infamy and disgrace.

Agapitus, a youngman of fifteen years of age, being apprehended by Bergom.
lib. ^.
the inhabitants of Preneste, and grievously tormented, for refusing to offer
sacrifice to their Idols; and when all would not serve to shake the foundation
of his Faith (which was builded upon a Rock) he was condemned and executed to
death: For, being first scourged with whips, then hanged up by the feet; after
having hot scalding water poured upon him, at last he was cast unto wild
beasts. With all which torments being not terrified, nor yet dispatched,
finally had his head cut off. But behold, the Judge called Antiochus, that
pronounced the sentence, fell down from his Throne before the face of the
world, even whilst the young man was in the midst of his torments; and by his
example made known to all men, how odious such cruel persecutors are in the
sight of Him that judges the Earth, and controlleth the mighty Princes and
Potentates of the same.

In the Empire of Julian the Apostate the Lord seen such horrible earthquakes
upon the world, that what for the fall of houses, and raptures of fields,
neither city nor country was safe to abide in: besides, such an extreme
drouth dried up the moisture of the earth, that victuals were very geason and
dear. These plagues Theodoret avoucheth to have fallen upon Lib. 4. cap. 4.
the world for the impiety of Julian, and the miserable persecution of
Christians.

The Emperor Gallus had good success in his affairs whilst he abstained
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 21. and 2^.
from shedding the blood of the Christians; but as soon as he gave himself
over unto that villainy, his prosperity, Kingdom, and life diminished and
decreased at once: for within two years he and his son V^lusianus, in the
war against Aemylian, were both slain, through the defection of his
soldiers, who in the point of necessity forsook him. Beside, the Lord in his
time sent upon the Provinces of Rome a general and contagious pestilence,
which lasted whole ten years without intermission, to make satisfaction for
the much innocens blood which was spilled amongst them.

Arnolphus the fourescor*th Emperor, raged like a Tyrant against all men, but
especially against those that professed the Religion and name of Philip Melan.
Chron. lib. 4. ^ebast. Franc. Chron. Pelon.
Christ Jesus: for which cause the Lord stirred up a woman the wife of Guid^,
to minister unto him the dregs of his wrath in a poisoned cup, by means whereof
such a rottenness possessed all his members, that lice and worms issuing out
continually, he dyed most miserably in Or^nge, a city of Bavary, the twelfth
year of his reign.

Bajazet the Turk, to what a miserable and ludibrious end came he, for Philip
Mela. Chron. lib. 5.
his outrageous hatred against all Christendom, but especially against
Constantinople, which he had brought to so low an ebb, that they could scarce
have resisted him any longer, had not Tamberlaine the Tartarian revoked him
from the siege, and bidden him leave to assail others, and look unto his
own? And indeed he welcomed him so kindly, that he soon took him prisoner,
and binding him with chains of gold, carried him up Composulus, lib. 9. cap. 5.
and down in a cage for a spectacle, using his back for a footstool to get
upon his horse. And thus God plagueth one Tyrant by another, and all for the
comfort of his chosen.

Gensericus King of the Vandales exercised cruel tyranny against the Philip
Mela. Chron. lib. 3.
professors of the truth. So did Honoricus the second also: but both of them
reaped their just deserts: for Gensericus dyed, being possessed with a Spirit;
and Honoricus being so rotten and putrified, that one member dropped Greg.
Taren. lib. 2. cap. 3.
off after another. Some say, that he gnawned off his own flesh with his teeth.

Authar is the twelfth King of Lombardy forbad children to be baptized Paulus
Diaconus, l. 3. c. 18. de Gestis Long^^ard.
or instructed in the Christian Faith: seeking by that means to abolish and
pluck down the Kingdom of Christ; but he reigned not long, for ere six years
were complete, he dyed with poison at Pavia: And so he that thought to
undermine Christ Jesus, was undermined himself most deservedly, in the year
of our Lord 593.

When Arcadius the Emperonr, through the persuasion of certain envious
fellows, and his wife Eudoxia, had banished John Chrysostom Bishop Evagrius,
l. 5. c. 34.
of Constantinople into Bosphorus; the next night there arose such a terrible
earthquake, that the Empress and the whole city was sore affrighted
therewith; so that the next morrow messengers after messengers were sent
Mandat. 9. Calumniation lib. 2. c. 44.
without ceasing, till they had brought him back again out of exile, and his
accusers were all punished for their wrongful accusation. Thus it pleased God
to testify the innocence of his servant, by terrifying his enemies.

Smaragdus an Exarch of Italy was transported by a Devil, for tyrannizing over
Christians in the first year of the Empire of Mauritius.

Ma^^u^ha a Sarasen, being equal to Pharaoh in persecuting the Church of God,
God made him equal to him also in the manner of his destruction: Paul. Diacon.
lib. 3. c. 22. de Gostis Long^^. cent. 6. cap. 3. Anton. l. 15. c. 15.
for as he returned from the spoil of the Monastery of Ca^^ime and Mossana,
and the Daughter of many Christians, the Lord caused the sea to swallow up his
whole army, even an hundred ships, so that few or none escaped.

Another time, even the year 719, they were miraculously consumed with famine,
sword, pestilence, water, and captivity, and all for Paul. Diac. l. 21.
their infestuous rancour and tyranny toward Christians: for whom the famine
spared, the sword devonred; whom both these touched not; the pestilence ate up;
and they that escaped all three, yet perished in the waters; and ten ships that
escaped the waters, were taken by the Romans and the Syrians: surely an
egregious sign of Gods heavy wrath and displeasure.

To conclude, there was never any that set themselves against the Church of
God, but God set himself against them by some notable judgment: so that some
were murdered by their subjects, as Bluso King of the Vandales; others by
their enmies, as Vdo Prince of Sclavonia; others by their wives, as Cruco
another Sclavonian Prince; others discomfited in war, as Abbas the King of
Hungaria: some destroyed by their own horses, as Lucius the Emperor, who
first cast his own daughter, because she was a Christian, amongst the same
horses. And generally few persecutors escaped Helm. c. 24. Sclavon. and cap.
34. Bonfi^us.
without some evident and markable destruction.

CHAP. XI. Of the Jews that persecuted Christ.
BY how much the offense of the Jews was more heinous, not only in despising
and rejecting the Lord of glory, whom God had sent amongst them for their
salvation, but also in being so wicked as to put him to death; by so much the
more has God bestowed his fearful indignation upon them: as at many other
times, so especially by that great calamity and desolation which they abid at
their last destruction, begun by Vespasian, and perfected by Titus; which was
so great and lamentable, as the like was never heard of until this day: for if
the sacking and overthrow of Jerusalem, then when Jeremy the Prophet made his
book of Lamentations over it, was reputed more grievous than the subversion of
Sodom, which perished suddenly, how much more then is this last destruction
without all comparison, by reason of those horrible and strange miseries, which
were there both suddenly and in continuance of time committed? Neither truly
is there any History which contains a description of so many miseries as this
does: as it may appear by Josephus record of it. For after that they had been
afflicted in diverse countries, and tossed up and down by the Deputies a long
while, there were slain at Caesarea in one day twenty thousand: At Alexandria
another time fifty thousand: at Zabulon and Joppe eight thousand and four
hundred, besides the burning of the two Towns: at Damascus ten thousand that
had their throats cut. As for Jerusalem, when it had a long time endured the
brunt of the war both within and without, it was pinched with so sore a
famine, that Joseph of the wars of the Jews, l. 2. c. 19. 21. 22, 23 Lib. 6.
cap. 16. Lib. 7. c. 7, 8. Lib. 6. cap. 16.
the dung of Oxen served some for meat: others fed upon the leather of old
shoes and buckles; and diverse women were driven to the extiemity to boil and
eat their own children: Many thinking to save their lives by flying to the
Enemy, were taken and slit in pieces, in hope to find gold and silver in their
guts; in one night two thousand were thus piteously dealt withal; and at the
last the whole City was by force taken, and the holy Temple conslumed by fire.
And this in general was the miserable issue of that lamentable war: during
which, fourscore and seventeen thousand Jews were taken Prisoners, and eleven
hundred thousand slain; for within the city were enclosed from the beginning
to the ending, all those that were assembled together from all quarters of the
earth, to keep the Passover, as their custom was. As touching the prisouers,
some were carried to Rome in triumph; others were here and there massacred at
their conquerors wills; somes lot it was to be torn in pieces and devoured of
wild-beasts; others were constrained to march in troops against their fellows,
and kill one another as if they had been enemies. All which evils came upon
them for the despite and fury which they used toward the Son of God and our
Savior; and that was the cause why he, foreseeing this desolation, wept over
Jerusalem, and said, That it should be besieged on every side, and rased to the
ground, and that not one stone should be left upon another, because it knew not
the time of her visitation. Likewise said he to the woman that bewailed him as
he was led to the Cross, That they should not weep for him, but for themselves
and their children, because of the days of sorrow which were to come, wherein
the barren and those that had no children, and the dugs that never suckled
should be counted happy. So horrible and pitiful was the destruction of this
people, that God would not suffer any of his own children to be wrapped in
their miseries, nor to perish with this perverse and unbelieving Nation: for
(as Eusebius reports) they were a little before the arrival of these
mischiefs, advertised from heaven by the special providence of God, to
forsake the City, and retire into some far Country where none of these evils
might come near them. The relics of this This example belongs also to the
contempt of the Word. lib. 1. cap. 34.
wretched people that remained after this mighty tempest of Gods wrath, were
dispersed and scattered throughout all nations under heaven, being subject to
them with whom they sojourned, without King, Prince, Judge, or Magistrate to
lead and guide them, or to redress their wrongs, but were altogether at the
discretion and commandment of the Lords of those Countries wherein they made
their abode; so that their condition and kind of life is at this day so vile
and contemptible (as experience shows) that no nation in the world is half
so miserable, which is a manifest badge of Gods vengeance yet abiding upon them.

And yet for all this, these dispersed relics ceased not to vomit out the
foame of their malice against Christ, it being so deep rooted an evil, and so
inveterate, that time nor reason could revoke them from it. And no marvel,
seeing that God uses to punish the greatest sins with other sins, as with
the greatest punishment: so they having shut their eyes to the light when it
shined among them, are now given over to a reprobate and hardened sense;
otherwise it were not possible they should remain so obstinate. And albeit (God
be thanked) we have many converts of them, yet I dare say for the most part,
they remain in malicious blindness, barking against, and despighting both our
Savior himself, and all that profess his name, although their punishments
have been still according to their deserts: as by these examples following
shall appear.

The Jews of Inmester, a Town lying betwixt Calchis and Antioch, being upon a
time celebrating their accustomed plays and feasts, in the midst of their
jollity, as their use is, they contumeliously reviled not only Christians, but
even Christ himself: for they got a Christian child, and hung him upon a
Cross, and after many mocks and taunts, making themselves merry at him, they
whipped him to death. What greater villainy could there be than this? Or wherein
could these Devils incarnate show forth their malice more apparently than thus?
not content once to have crucified Christ the Savior of the World, but by
imitation to perform it again; and as it were to make known, that if it were
undone, they would do it: So also handled they a boy called Simeon, of two
years and an half old, in the year of our Lord 1476. and an another in
Fretulium five years after that. But above all, they massacred a poor
Carpenters son in Hungary Ioh. Fincel. l. 3
in hatred of Christ, whom they falsely supposed to be a Carpenters son: for
they cut in two all his veins, and sucked out his blood with quills. And being
apprehended and tortured, they confessed that they had done the like at Thirna
four years before, and that they could not be without Christian blood, for
therewithal they anointed their Priests. But at all these times they suffered
just punishment; for being still taken, they were either hanged, burned,
murdered, or put to some other cruel death, at the discretion of ^he
Magistrates. Moreover, they would at diverse times buy the Host of some Popish
Priest, and thrust it through with their knives, and use it most despightfully.
This did one Bleazarus in the year of our Lord 1492, the 22 of October, but
was burnt for his labor: and eight and thirty at another time for the same
villainy, by the Marquess Ioachinus: for the caitifes would suffer themselves
to be baptized for none other end, but more securely to exercise their
villainies.

Another Jew is recorded in the year of our Lord 147 to have stolen the picture
of Christ out of a Church, and to have thrust it through many times Casp
Hedi^^, lib. 3. cap. 6.
with his sword, whereout, when blood miraculously issued, he amazed, would
have burned it, but being taken in the manner, the Christians stoned him to
death. The truth of which story, though I will not stand to avow, yet I doubt
not but it might be true, considering that either the Devil might by his
cunning so foster and confirm their superstition, or rather that seeing Christ
is the subject of their religion as well as of ours, though after a corrupt and
sacrilegious form, and that the Jew did not so much aim at their religion, as
at Christ the subject of it, the Lord might show a miracle, not to establish
their error, but to confound the Jews impiety, especially in those young
years of the Church.

In our English Chronicles are recorded many histories of the malicious
practices of the Jews against Christians, in hatred of Christ Jesus our
Savior, whom they in contempt call our crucified God; and especially this
devilish practice was most frequent amongst them here in England, as in
Germany, France, and other places where they were suffered to inhabit; namely
every year to steal some Christian man^ child from the parents, Nic. Trivis.
and on good Friday to crucify him in despite of Christ and Christian
religion. Thus they served a child at Lincoln named Hugo, of nine years of
age, in the year 1255, in the reign of Henry the third, and another at
Norwich about the same time; having first circumcised him and detained
Cestrens. Flores histor.
him a whole year in custody. In which two facts they were apprehended; and at
Lincoln thirty two of them put to death, and at Norwich twenty, But this was
not all the punishment that they endured: as they proceeded and increased in
their malice against Christ and his religion, so he proceeded in vengeance and
indignation against them: First therefore at the coronation of Richard the
first, whereas some of them presumed to enter into the Court-gate contrary to
the Kings express commandment, a great tumult arising thereupon, a number of
them were slain, and their houses fired in the City of London, by the raging
multitude and from thence the example spread into all other countries of the
Land: for they following the example of the Londoners, havocked, spoiled,
killed, and fired as many Jews as they could come by; until by the Kings
Writs unto the Sheriff of every County the tumult was appeased, and some few
of the principal authors and stirrers of this outrage punished. And it is to
be noted, that this year the Jews held for their Jubilee, but it turned to
them a year of confusion. Neither were they thus massacred only by the
Christians, but they became butchers of themselves also: For in the City of
York, when as they had obtained the occupying of a certain Castle for their
preservation, and afterward were not willing to restore it to the Christians
again, and being ready to be vanquished, and offering much money for their
lives, when as that would not be accepted, by the counsel of an old Jew among
them, every one with a sharp rasor cut another throat, whereby a thousand and
five hundred of them were at that present destroyed. At North-Hampton a number
of them were burnt, for enterprizing to fire the City with wilde-fire, which
they had prepared for that purposes besides many grievous impositions and taxes
which were laid upon them. At last by King Edward the first they were utterly
banished this Realm of England, in the year 1291: For which deed the Commons
gave unto the King a Fifteen. And about the same time also they were banished
out of France for the like practices; and still the wrath of God cease not to
punish them in all places wheresoever they inhabit.

But that their Impiety may be yet more discovered, I will here set down the
confession of one of their own Nation, a Jew of Ratisbone converted 10. Fineel.
l. 3. de Miracul.
to the Faith, one very skillful in the Hebrew tongue. This man being asked
many questions about their superstition and ceremonies, answered very fitly:
and being demanded, why they thirsted so after Christian men's blood? He said it
was a mystery only known to the Rabbines and highest persons; but that this
was their custom he knew, when any of them was ready to dye, a Rabbine
anointed him with this blood, using these or such like words: If he that was
promised in the Law and Prophets has truly appeared, and if this Jesus
crucified be the very Messiah, then let the blood of this innocent man that
diedin his Faith, cleanse thee from thy sins, and help thee to eternal life.
Nay Epiphanius affirms, That the Jews of Tyberias did more confidently
affirm it than thus: for they would whisper into a dying man's ear, Believe in
Jesus of Nazareth whom our princes crucified, for he shall come to judge thee
in the latter day: All which declares how impious they are to go against
their own conscience, and upon how fickle ground all their Religion stands.

CHAP. XII. Of those that in our age have persecuted the Gospel in the person
of the Faithful.
AS the Religion of Christ has been hitherto cruelly crossed and besieged by
the mightiest captains of this world (as has been partly declared) so it has
not been any better entertained by the Potentates of this age, that ceased not
to disturb the quiet, and pursue to death the lives of Gods children for their
professions sake and to bring them utterly to ruin: to address all the
engines and subtilties of their malicious and wicked counsels, without leaving
any one device unthought of that their wit could imagine, or their power
afford; they joined craft with force, and vile treason with horrible cruelty,
thereby to suppress the truth, and quench that fair and clear light, which
God after long time of blindness and ignorance, had caused of his infinite
mercy to shine upon us. There fires were kindled every where with the bones of
Martyrs; whilst for the space of forty years or thereabouts they never ceased
to burn those that were followers of that way. Now when they saw that all
their butcheries and burnings were not able to consume this holy seed, but that
the more they went about to choke it, the more it grew up and increased, they
took another course, and raised up troubles and seditions in all quarters, as
if by that means they should attain the end of their purpose. Hell vomited up
all her Furies of war, the whole earth was in a tumult, young and old with
tooth and nail were employed to root out the Church of Christ, but God
stretching forth his arm against all their practices, showed himself not only
a Conqueror, but also a most sharp revenger of all his adversaries. This is
most apparent in that which happened to Thomas Arondel an English man,
Archbishop of Canterbury, an enemy and persecutor of the Truth of Christ: who
having put to death diverse holy and upright men, thinking that all he did was
History of Martyrs, ^. 1.
gain, was rooted out at last himself, by a most strange and horrible death;
for he that sought to stop the mouth of God in his Ministers; and to hinder the
passage of the Gospel, had his own tongue so swollen, that it stopped his own
mouth, that before his death he could neither swallow nor speak, and so
through famine died in great despair.

Foelix Farle of Wartemberg, one of the Captains of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, being at supper at Ausburg with many of his companions, Illirle^^.
where threats were blown out on every side against the Faithful, swore before
them all, That before he died he would ^ide up to his spurs in the blood of the
Lutherans. But it happened in the same night, that the hand of God so stroke him,
that he was strangled and choked with his own blood: and so he rode not, but
bathed himself, not up to the spurs, but up to the throat, not in the blood of
Lutherans, but in his own blood, before he died.

In the reign of Francis de Valois of late memory, the first King of France of
that name, those men that showed themselves frowardest, sharpest, and History
of France.
most cruel in burning and murdering the holy Martyrs, were also forwardest
examples of the vengeance of God prepared for all such as they are. For proof
whereof, the miserable end of John Roma a Monk of the Order of the White
Friars, may serve; who although in regard of his hood and habit ought not to be
placed in the number of men of note, yet by reason of the notable example of
Gods vengeance upon him, we may rightly place him in this rank. This man
therefore, at that time when the Christians of Cabrier and Merindol began to
suffer persecution, having obtained a Commission from the Bishop of Provence
and the Ambassador Avignion, to make inquisition after and seize upon the
bodies of all them that were called Lutherans; ceased not to afflict them with
the cruellest torments he could devise: Amongst many of his tortures this was
one, To cause their boots to be filled with boiling grease, and then fastening
them overthwartwise over a bench, their legs hanging over a gentle fire, to
sees them to death. The French King advertised of this cruelty, sent out his
Letters Patents from the Parliament of Provence, charging, That the said John
de Roma should be apprehended, imprisoned, and by process of law condemned.
Which news when the Caitife heard, he fled back as fast as he could trot to
Avignion, there purposing to recreate and delight himself with the excrements
of his oppression and robbery which he had wrung out of the purses of poor
people: but see how contrary to his hope it fell out; for first he was robbed
of his evil gotten goods by his own servants; and presently upon the same he
fell sick of so horrible and strange a disease, that no salve or medicine
could be found to assuage his pain; and beside it was withal so loathsome,
that a man could not endure his company for the stink and corruption which
issued from him. For which cause the white Friars (his Cloysterers) conveyed
him out of their Covent into the hospital; where increasing in ulcers and
vermin, and being become now odious, not only to others, but to himself
also, he would often cry, either to be delivered from his noysomnesse, or to
be slain, being desirous, but not able to perform the deed upon himself.
And thus in horrible torments and most fearful despair he most miserably
died. Now being dead, there was none found that would give Sepulture to his
rotten carcass, had not a Monk of the same Order dragged the carrion into a
ditch, which he provided for the purpose.

The Lord of Revest, who a while supplied the place of the chief President in
the Parliament of Provence, by whose means many of the Faithful Ibid.
were put to death, after he was put beside his office, and returned home unto
his own house, was attached with so grievous a sickness, and such furious and
mad fits withal, that his wise and nearest alliance not daring to come near
him, he like a frantic bedlam, enraged and solitarily ended his life.

A Counselor of the same Court called Bellemont, was so hot and zealous in
proceeding against the poor prisoners for the Word of Gods sake, that to the
end to pack them soon to the fire, he usually departed not from the Judgment
Hall from morning to evening, but caused his meat and drink to be brought for
his meals, returning not home but only at night to take his rest. But whilst
he thus strongly and endeavourously employed himself about these affairs,
there began a little sore to rise upon his foot, which at the first being no
bigger, than if a waspe had stung the place, grew quickly so red and full of
pain, and so increased the first day by ranckling over all his foot, and
inflaming the same, that by the judgment of Physicians and Chirurgions,
through the contagious fire that spread it self over his whole body, it seemed
incurable, except by cutting off his foot, the other members of the body might
be preserved: which he in no case willing to yield unto, for all the medicines
that were applied unto it, sound the second day his whole leg infected, and the
third his whole thigh, and the fourth day his whole body, insomuch that he died
the sameday, his deadbody being all partched as if it had been roasted by a
fire. And thus he that was so hot in burning poor Christians, was himself by
a secret flame of Gods wrath, as by slow and soft fire, burned and consumed to
death.

Jews du Vain, brother in law to Meni^r the President of the said Parliament
History of Martyrs, lib. 2.
of Provence, with the brother and son of Peter ^urand, chief butcher of the
city Ajax, the evening before the horrible cruelty was executed at Merindoll,
fell at debate amongst themselves, and the morrow, as instruments of Gods
judgments, slew one another.

The Judge of the City Aix (one of that wretched crew) drowned himself in his
return, as he passed over the river Durance.

As for the chief Judge that was principal in that murtherous action, Ibid.
touching the condemnation of those poor souls of Merindoll and Cabrieres, he
likewise suddenly died before he saw the execution of that decree which
himself had set down.

John Mesnier Lord of Oppede, another chief Officer of the aforesaid Ibid.
Parliament, that got the leading of the murdering Army against the poor
Christians aforesaid, committing such excess of cruelty, that the most
barbarous heathen in the world would have yearned to do. For which cause he
was also summoned to appear personally at the Parliament of Paris, there to
answer those extortions, robberies, and oppressions, which were laid to his
charge; and being convinced and found guilty theieof, was nevertheless
released and set at liberty; and that which is more, restored to his former
estate. Howbeit, though he escaped the hands of men, yet was he overtaken by
the hand of God, who knew well enough the way how to entrap and abate his proud
intents: for even then when he was in the height of worldly prosperity, and
busier than ever, in persecuting Christians, even then was he pulled down by
a flux of blood, which provoking his privy parts, engendered such a carnositie
and thickness of flesh therein, and withal a restraint of urine, that with
horrible outeries and raving speeches he died; feeling a burning fire broyling
his entrails from his navill upwards, and an extreme infection putrefying his
lower parts, and beginning to feel in this life, both in body and soul, the
rigor of eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

John Martin Trombant of Briqueras in Piemont, vaunting himself 2. Book of
Martyrs.
every foot in the hinderance of the Gospel, cut off a Ministers nose of
Angrogne in his bravery; but immediately after was himself assailed by a mad
Woolse, that gnawed off his nose as he had done the Ministers, and caused him
like a mad man to end his life: Which strange judgment was notoriously known
to all the country thereabout; and beside, it was never heard that this Woolfe
had ever harmed any man before. Caspard of Renialme, one of the Magistrates of
the City of Anvers, that adjudged to death certain poor faithful souls,
received in the same place, ere he removed, a terrible sentence of Gods
judgment against himself; for he fell desperate immediately, and was feign to
be led into his house half beside himself, where crying that he had condemned
the innocent blood, he forthwith died.

CHAP. XIII. Other examples of the same subject.
ABout the same time there happened a very strange judgment upon an ancient
Lawyer of Bourges, one John Cranequin, a man of ripe wit natural, and a great
practitioner in his profession, but very ignorant in the law of God, and all
good literature, and so enviously bent against all those that knew more than
himself, and that abstained from the filthy pollutions of Popery, that he
served instead of a Promotor, to inform Ory the Inquisitor for them; but for
his labor, the arm of God stroke him with a mavelous strange frenzy, that
whatsoever his eyes beheld, seemed in his judgment to be crawling serpents: in
such sort, that after he had in vain experienced all kind of medicines, yea
and used the help of wicked sorcery and conjuration, yet at length his senses
were quite benumbed, and deprived him, and in that wretched and miserable
estate he ended his life.

John Morin, a mighty enemy to the professors of Gods truth, one that labored
continually at Paris in the apprehending and accusing the faithful, insomuch
that he sent daily multitudes that appealed from him to the high Court of the
Palace; died himself in most grievous and horrible torment. The Chancellor of
Prat, he that in the Parliaments of France put up the first bill against the
faithful, and gave out the first commissions to put them to death, dyed
swearing and blaspheming the name of God, his stomach being most strangely
gnawne in pieces, and consumed with worms.

The Chancellor Oliver being restored to his former estate, having first
Refer this among Apostates, l. ^. c. 18.
(against his conscience) renounced his religion; so also now (the same
conscience of his, checking and reclaming) he spared not to shed much innocent
blood, by condemning them to death. But such a fearful judgment was
denounced against him (by the very mouths of the guiltless condemned souls)
that stroke him into such a fear and terror, that presently he fell sick,
surprised with so extreme a melancholy, that sobbing forth sighs without
intermission, and murmurings against God, he so afflicted his halfe-dead body,
like a man robbed and dispossessed of reason, that with his vehement fits he
would so shake the bed, as if a young man in the prime of his years with all
his strength had assayed to do it. And when a certain Cardinal came to visit
him in this extremity, he could not abide his sight, his pains increasing
thereby, but cried out as soon as he perceived him departed, That it was the
Cardinal that brought them all to damnation. When he had been thus a long time
tormented, at last in extreme angish and fear he died. S^^iden. l. 9.


Sir Thomas more L. Chancellor of England, a sworn enemy to the Gospel, and
a professed persecutor by fire and sword, of all the faithful, as if thereby he
would grow famous and get renown, caused to be erected a sumptuous Sepulcher,
and thereby (to eternize the memory of his profane cruelty) to be engraven the
commendation of his worthy deeds: amongst which the principal was, that he
had persecuted with all his might the Lutherans; that is, the faithful: but it
fell out contrary to his hope; for being accused, convicted, and condemned of
high Treason; his head was taken from him, and his body found no other
sepulcher to lie in but the gibbet.

Cardinal Cr^s^entius, the Popes Ambassador to the Council of Trent, in the
year of our Lord 1552, being very busy in writing to his Master the Pope, and
having labored all one night about his letters; behold as he raised himself
in his chair, to stir up his wit and memory, over-dulled with watching; a huge
black dog with great flaming eyes, and long ears dangling to the ground,
appeared unto him: which coming into his chamber, and making right toward
him, even under the table where he sat, vanished out of his sight: whereat he
amazed, and a while senseless, recovering himself, called for a candle, and
when he saw the dog could not be found, he fell presently sick with a strong
conceit, which never left him till his death; ever crying, that they would
drive away the black dog which seemed to climb up on his bed: and in that
humor he died.

Albertus Pightus, a great enemy of the Truth also (insomuch that Paulus Iovius
calls him the Lutherans scourge) being at Boloigne at the coronation 27.
Book of his history.
of the Emperor upon a scaffold, to behold the pomp and glory of the
solemnization, the scaffold bursting with the weight of the multitude, he
tumbled headlong amongst the guard that stood below, upon the points of their
Halbards, piercing his body clean through, the rest of his company escaping
without any great hurt: for though the number of them which fell with the
scaffold was great, yet very few found themselves hurt thereby, save only this
honorable Pighius, that found his deaths wound, and lost his hearts blood, as
has been showed.

Poncher, Archbishop of Tours, pursuing the execution of the burning chamber,
was himself surprised with a fire from God, which beginning at 2. Book of
Martyrs. The burning chamber was a Court in France, which adjudged the
Christians to be burned.
his heel, could never be quenched, till member after member being cut off, he
died miserably.

An Augustine Friar named Lambert, Doctor and Prior in the City of Liege, one
of the troop of cruel inquisitors for Religion, whilst he was preaching one
day with an open mouth against the Faithful, was cut short of a sudden in the
midst of his sermon, being bereaved of sense and speech, insomuch that he was
feign to be carried out of the pulpit to his cloister in a chair, and a few
days after was drowned in a ditch.

In the year of our Lord 1527, there was one George Hala a Saxon, Minister of
the Word and Sacraments, and a stout professor of the reformed Luther.
Religion, who being for that cause sent for to appear before the Archbishop
of Mentz at Aschaffenburge, was handled on this fashion: they took away his
own horse, and set him upon the Archbishops fools horse, and so sent them
back homewards, conducted by one appointed for the purpose: who not suffering
him to ride the common and beaten way, but leading him a new course through
uncoth paths, brought him into an ambush of thieves placed there by the Bishops
appointment, who set upon him and murdered him at once: but it is notoriously
known, that not one of that wicked rabble came to a good end, but were
consumed one after another.

In a City of Scotland called Fanum Ianius, the chief mart Town of that
country, sour of the chiefest citizens were accused by a Monk before the
Cardinal, for interrupting him in a Sermon, and by him condemned to be hanged
like heretics, when no other crime could be laid to their charge, save that
they desired the Monk to tie himself to his text, History of Martyrs, part. 7.
and not to rove up and down as he did, without any certain scope or
application of matter. Now as they went to execution, their wives fell down at
the Cardinals feet, beseeching and entreating pardon for their husbands lives:
which he was so far from granting, that he accused them also of heresy; and
especially one of them (whose name was Helene) for he caused her young infant
to be pulled out of her arms, and her to be put to death with her husband, for
speaking certain words against the Virgin Mary, which by no testimonies could
be proved against her. Which doom the godly woman taking cheerfully, and
desiring to hang by her husbands side, they would not do him the least favor,
but drowned her in a River running by, that it might be truly said, that no jot
of mercy or compassion remained in them. But ere long the cruel Cardinal
found as little favor at another Butchers hands, that slew him in his
Chamber, when he dreamed of nothing less, and in his Cardinals robes hanged
him over the wall to the view of men. And thus God revenged the death of those
innocents, whose bloods never ceased crying for vengeance against their
murderer, until he had justly punished him in the same kind, and after the
same fashion which he had dealt with them.

Of this Cardinal, called David Beton, Buchananus reports many strange acts
of Cruelty, both in the Commonwealth of Scotland, in matters of State, as also
in the Church, in questions of Religion* how he suborned a false testament in
the dead Kings name, whereby he would have created himself chief Governor
of the whole kingdom, had not his knavery bin soon detected: and how he set
many together by the ears of the chiefest sort, not caring which of them
soonest perished, so that they perished; glutting himself thus with blood: But
amongst all his cruelties, the least was not extended toward the professors of
the Gospel, whom he endeavored by all means possible, not to suppress only,
but even utterly to extinguish: Many he put to death with fire, diverse he
forced to revolt with extreme torments, and many he punished with banishment:
among whom was George Buchanan, the reporter of this history; who being taken
and imprisoned, escaped through a window, whilst his keepers slept, out of
this Lions jaws. Amongst the rest there was one George Sephocard, a most
learned and sincere Preacher of the word of God, in whom his savage cruelty was
most eminent, This man abiding at one John Cockburns house, a man of no small
reckoning and account, about 7 miles from Edenborough, was first sent for by
the Cardinal, and after being not delivered, he together with the Vicegerent,
beset all the passages that he might not escape; so that Cockburn was
constrained to deliver him into their hands, upon the assurance of Earl
Bothuel, who promised to protect him from all injuries: How be it
notwithstanding the Earls promise, and the countermand of the Vicegerent,
refused to meddle with that innocent man, yea and gave command, That no
proceedings should be made against him; yet the bloody tyrant condemned him
tobe put to death, and also caused the condemnation to be executed: and that
which does more aggravate his cruelty, he caused a place to be prepared for him
and his company, hung with tapestry and silk, very sumptuously, that he might
be a joyful spectatour and eyewitness of his torments. But mark how the
just vengeancee of God showed it self even in that place: for, as it is in the
former story, not long after, this vile butcher was murdered in his own
house, by the conspiracy of Normanus Leslius, son to the Earl of Rothusia, who
early in a morning surprised his porters, and all his servants, in their
sleep, and murdered him in his bed that had murdered so many Christians: and
to stop the rage and fury of his friends, hung out his body for a spectacle
unto them in the same place where a little before he had with such triumph
beheld the tortures of that guiltless Martyr: Insomuch that almost all did not
only acknowledge the just view of Gods judgment herein, but also remembered the
last words of that constant Saint, who being ready to give up the ghost,
urtered this speech in effect: He that sits and beholds us so proudly in
that high place, shall within few days as reproachfully lie, as now arrogantly
he sits.

A story not much unlike in manner of punishment, happened in the reign of King
Henry the eighth, to one Sir Ralph Ellerker, Knight marshall in the town of
Calice, when as Adam Damlip, otherwise called George Bucker, a sincere Preacher
of the word of God, was condemned to be executed as a traitor in pretense,
though indeed for nothing but defending the truth against the dregs of Popery,
would not suffer the innocent and godly man to declare either his faith, or the
cause he dyed for: but said to Acts and Monuments. p. 1223.
the Executioner, Dispatch the knave, have done, not permitting him to speak a
word in his own defense to clear himself from the treason that was objected,
not proved against him; but this cruel Tyrant swore he would not away before
he saw the traiterous heart out. Now this said Sir Ralph in a skirmish or road
between the French and us at Bulloine, was amongst others slain, whose only
death sufficed not the enemies, but after that they had stripped him stark
naked, they cut off his privy members, and pulled the heart out of his body,
and so lefthim a terrible example to all bloody and merciless men: for no
cause was known why they should use him so rather than the rest; but that it
is written, Faciens justitias Dominus and judicia omnibus injuria pressis.

Thomas B^aver, one of the Privy Counselors of the King of Scots, was a sore
persecutor of the faithful in that land: for which cause, lying on his
Theatrum historicum.
death bead, he fell into despair, and said, he was damned, and a castaway;
and when the Monks came about him to comfort him, he cried out upon them,
saying, That their Masses and other trash would do him no good, for he never
believed them; but all that he did was for love of lucre, and not of Religion,
not respecting or believing there was either a God or a Devil, or a hell, or a
Heaven, and therefore he was damned, there was no remedy. And in this miserable
case, without any sign of repentance, Refer this also to hypocrisy, lib. 1.
cap. 22.
he dyed.

But let us come to our homebred English stories, and consider the judgments of
God upon the persecutors of Christ's Gospel in our own country. And first to
begin with one Doctor Whittington, under the reign of King Henry the seventh,
who by virtue of his office, being Chancellor to the Bishop, had condemned
most cruelly to death a certain godly woman in a town called Chipping sadberry
for the profession of the truth, which the Papists then called Heresy. This
woman being adjudged to death by the wretched Chancellor, and the time come
when she should be brought to the place of her martyrdom, a great concourse of
people both out of town and country was gathered to behold her end: Amongst
whom was also the foresaid Doctor there present, to see the execution
performed. The godly woman and manly Martyr with great constancy gave over her
life to the fire, and refused no pains or torments to keep her conscience
clear and unreproveable against the day of the Lord. Now the Sacrifice being
ended: as the people began to return homeward, they were encountered by a
mighty furious Bull, which had escaped from a Butcher that was about to kill
him (for at the same time as they were slaying this silly Lamb at the towns
end, a Butcher was as busy within the town in slaying of this Bull.) But
belike not so skillful in his art of killing of beasts, as the Papists be in
murdering Christians, the Bull broke loose, as I said, and ran violently
through the throng of the people, without hurting either man or child, till he
came to the place where the Chancellor was, against whom, as pricked forward
with some supernatural instinct, he ran full butt, thrusting him at the
first blow through the paunch, and after goaring him through and through, and
so killed him immediately, trayling his guts with his horns all the street
over, to the great admiration and wonder of all that saw it.

Behold here a plain demonstration of Gods mighty power and judgment against
a wretched persecutor of one of his poor flock: wherein (albeit the carnal
sense of man does often impute to blind chance that which properly pertains
to the only power and providence of God) yet none can be so dull and ignorant,
but must needs confess a plain miracle of Gods almighty power, and a work of
his own finger.

Stephen Gardener also, was one of the grand butchers in this land, what a
miserable end came he unto? Even the same day that Bishop Ridley and Master
Latimer were burned at Oxford, he hearing news thereof, rejoiced greatly, and
being at dinner ate his meat merrily; but ere he had eaten many bits, the
sudden stroke of Gods terrible hand fell upon him, Acts and Monuments, page
1788.
in such sort, that immediately he was taken from the board, and brought to his
bed, where he continued 15 days in intolerable anguish, by reason he could not
expel his urine; so that his body being miserably inflamed within (who had
inflamed so many Godly Martyrs) was brought to a wretched end, with his tongue
all black and swollen, hanging out of his mouth most horribly: a spectacle
worthy to be beholden of all such bloody burning persecutors.

Bonner Bishop of London, another arch butcher, though he lived long after this
man, and dyed also in his bed; yet was it so provided of God, that as Page 2114.
he had been a persecutor of the light, and a child of darkness, so his
carcass was tumbled into the earth in obscure darkness at midnight, contrary
to the order of all other Christians: and as he had been a most cruel
murderer, so was he buried amongst thieves and murderers; a place by Gods
judgment rightly appointed for him.

Morgan Bishop of S. David's sitting upon the condemnation of the blessed Martyr
Bishop Farrar, whose room he unjustly usurped, was not long 2099.
after stricken by Gods hand after such a strange sort, that his meat would not
go down, but rise and pick up again, sometime at his mouth, sometime blown
out of his nose, most horrible to behold, and so continued unto his death.
Where note moreover, that when Master Leyson (being then Sheriff at Bishop
Farrars burning) had fetched away the cattle of the said Bishop, from his
servants house into his own custody, diverse of them would never eat meat, but
lay bellowing and roaring, and so dyed. Add unto this Bishop Morgan, Justice
Morgan a Judge that sat upon the death of the Lady Jane: this Justice, not
long after the execution of the said Lady, fell mad, and being thus bereft of
his wits, dyed, having ever in his mouth, Lady Jane, Lady Jane.

Bishop Thornton Suffragan of Dover, another grand persecutor, coming upon a
Saturday from the Chapter House at Canterbury, and there upon the Sunday
following looking upon his men playing at bowls, fell suddenly into a palsy,
and dyed shortly after. And being exhorted to remember God in his extremity of
sickness: So I do (says he) and my Lord Cardinal too, etc.

After him succeeded another Suffragan, ordained by the foresaid Cardinal, and
equal to his Predecessor in cruel persecuting of the Church; who enjoying his
place but a short time, fell down a pair of stairs in the Cardinals chamber
at Greenwich, and broke his neck, and that presently (let it be noted) after
he received the Cardinals blessing.

The like sudden death happened to Doctor Dunning the bloody and wretched
Chancellor of Norwich, who after he had most rigorously condemned and
murdered a number of simple and faithful servants of God, was suddenly
stricken with death even as he was sitting in his chair.

The like also fell upon Berry, Commissary of Norfolk, another bloody
persecutor; who four days after Queen Mary's death having made a great
Feast, whereat was present one of his concubines; as he was coming home from
the Church, where he had ministered the Sacrament of Baptism, fell down
suddenly to the ground with a heavy groan, and never stirred after, thus
ending his miserable life without any show of repentance.

So Doctor Geffrey Chancellor of Salisbury, another of the same stamp, was
suddenly stricken with the mighty hand of God in the midst of his buildings,
where he was constrained to yield up his life, which had so little pity of
other men's lives before: and it is to be noted, that the day before he was thus
stricken, he had appointed to call before him ninety poor Christians, to
examine them by inquisition, but the goodness of God and his tender providence
prevented him.

Doctor Foxford, Chancellor to Bishop Stockesley, dyed also suddenly. So did
Justice Lelond the persecutor of one Ieffery Hurst.

Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, a cruel enemy to those that lay in that
prison for Religion, dyed very miserably, being so swollen, that he was more
like a monster than a man, and so rotten within that no man could abide the
smell of him. His son called James, after he had spent all his fathers
substance riotously, fell down suddenly in Newgate market, and there
wretchedly dyed. John Peter son in law to the said Alexander, and no less
cruel to the poor Christians, rotted away, and so dyed.

Cox an earnest Protestant in King Edwards days, and in Queen Mary's time a
Papist, and a Promoter, going well and in health to bed (as it seems was dead
before the morning.

All these almost, with many more which I could recite, dyed suddenly, being
most cruel and horrible persecutors of the flock of Christ. Many there were,
which though they escaped sudden death, yet did not avoid a most miserable and
wretched end. In the number whereof I may place first Alexander the Keeper of
Newgate, together with his son in law John Peter, of whom mention was made
before: Also Master Woodroofe the Sheriff of London, who used to rejoice at
the death of the poor Saints of Christ, and would not suffer Master Rogers,
going to his Martyrdom, to speak with his children: this man lay seven or
eight years bedridden, having one half of his body all benumbed, and so
continued till his dying day. Also one Burton the Bayliffe of Crowland in
Lincolneshire, who having been a Protestant in outward show in King Edwards
days, as soon as Queen Mary was quietly seated in the kingdom, became very
earnest in setting up the Mass again, and constrained the Curate by threats
to leave the English Service, and say Mass. This blind Bailiffe not long
after, as he was riding with one of his neighbors, a Crow flying over his
head, let her excrements fall upon his face, the poisoned stink and savor
whereof so annoyed his stomach, that he never lest vomiting until he came
home, and there after certain days, with extreme pain of vomiting, crying
and cursing the Crow, desperately he dyed without any token of repentance. Also
one Robert Baldwine, who being stricken with lightning, at the taking of
William Seaman, pined away and dyed. Robert Blomfield also, Bailiffe to Sir
John Ierningham, after he had prosecuted one Master Brown, pined away both in
his goods and body, by a consumption of both.

William Swallow the cruel tormentor of George Egles, was shortly after
plagued of God, that all the hair of his head, and nails of his fingers and
toes went off; his eyes were well near closed up, that he could scant see; his
wife was also stricken with the falling sickness, with the which malady she
was never infected before.

Lastly (to omit many others) one Twiford is not to be forgotten; who in King
Henry's days was a busy doer in setting up stakes for the burning of poor
Martyrs: and seeing the stakes consume so fast, provided a big tree, cutting
off the top, and set it up in Smithfield, saying, I will have a stake that
shall hold. But behold Gods hand; before ever that tree was consumed, the state
of Religion turned, and he fell into an horrible disease, rotting alive above
the ground before he dyed.

Besides these, many there were that hanged themselves. As for example, one
Clarke an open enemy to the Gospel in King Edwards days, hanged himself in
the Tower. So did Pavier the Town Clarke of London, another bitter enemy to
the Gospel. So did the son of one Levar a husbandman, that mocked and
scorned at the holy Martyr Master Latimer, being dead; and that at the same
hour, as near as could be gathered, whilst his father was railing upon the
dead Martyr. So did Henry Smith a Lawyer, who having been a Protestant, became
a Papist. Others drowned themselves; as namely Richard Long at Calice, in King
Henry the eights days. John Plankney a Fellow of New College in Oxford, in
the year of our Lord 1566. And one Lanington a Fellow of the same College, in
a Well at Padua, or as some think, at Rome.

Others were stricken with madness: in which rank place first Justice Morgan,
of whom we made mention a little before: Then, a Sheriffs servant that railed
upon James Abbes a godly Martyr, as he was going to be burned; saying, That he
was an Heretic and a mad man; but as soon as the fire was put to the Martyr
(such was the fearful stroke of Gods justice upon him) he was there presently
in the sight of all the people stricken with a frenzy, crying out aloud, that
James Abbes was saved, but he was damned; and so continued till his dying day.
So likewise one William a Student in the inner Temple, in the midst of his
railing against the Gospel of Christ and the Professors thereof, fell stark
mad.

Many other examples of the like kind I could here add, but he that desires
to know and read more thereof, let him have recourse unto the latter end of the
Acts and Monuments of the English Church, where he shall find a whole Catalogue
of such like examples.

The overthrow of many mighty ones in our Age, serve for a looking glass to
represent the high exploits of the wonderful judgments which the King of
Kings has sent upon those that have in any place or country whatsoever,
resisted and strove against the Truth. whereof some after great victories,
which by their singular dexterity and worldly wisdom in the mannaging of
their affairs, have achieved, by a perverse and overthwart end, contrary to
their former prosperity, have darkened and obscured the renown and glory of all
their brave deeds, their good report dying with their bodies, and their credit
impaired and buried with them in their graves. Others in like manner having
addressed all their forces, and laid their battery, and placed all their Pieces
and Canons against the walls of Sion, and thinking to blow it up and consume it
to ashes, have made many breaches into the sides thereof, yea they have so bent
all their strength against it, and afflicted it with such outrageous cruelty,
and unmercifull effusion of blood, that it is pitiful and lamentable to
remember: howbeit after all their policies and practices, their courage has
been at length abated, and themselves raked one after another out of this
world, with manifest marks of the just vengeance of God upon them. For though
it may seem for a time that God slepeth and regards not the wrongs and
oppressions of his servants, yet he never fails to carry a watchful eye upon
them, and in his fittest time to revenge himself upon their enemies.

CHAP. XIV. A Hymn of the persecution of Gods Church, and the deliverance of
the same.
ALong the verdant fields all richly died.
With Natures paintments, and with Flora's pride:
Whose goodly bounds are lively Christ all streams
Begirt with bowers to keep back Phoebus beams;
Even when the quenchlesse torch, the Worlds great eye,
Advanc'^ his rays orethwartly from the sky,
And by his power of heavenly influence
Revived the seeds of Springs decayed essence:
Then many flocks unite in peace and love,
Not seeking ought but natural behove,
Past quietly uncharg'a with other care,
Save of their feed within that pasture fair.
These Flocks a Shepherd had (of power and skill)
To fold and feed, and save them from all ill:
By whose advice they lived; whose wholesome voice
They heard and feared with love, and did rejoice
Therein with melody of song and praise,
And dance, to magnify his Name always.
He is their Guide, they are his Flock and Fold,
Nor will they be by any else controld.
Well knowing, that whom he takes care to feed,
He will preserve and save in time of need;
Thus lived this holy Flock at hearts content,
Till cruel Beasts all set on ravishment,
Broke off their peace, and ran upon with rage,
Themselves, their Young, and all their heritage;
Slitting their throats, devoured Lambs and all,
And dissipating them that seap't their thrall.
Then did the jolly feast to fast transform,
(So ask't the fury of that ragefull storm)
Their joyful song was turned to mournful cries,
And all their gladness changed to well adyes.
Whereat Heaven grieving, clad it self in black;
But earth in uprore triumph't at their wrack.
What profits then the sheephooke of their Guide?
Or that he lies upon a Beacons side,
With watchful eye to circumscribe their train,
And has no more regard unto their pain?
To save them from such dangers imminent
(Some say) as are so often incident.
It Is not for that his arm wants strength to break
All proud at tempts that men of might do make:
Or that he will abandon unto death
His Own, dear bought with exchange of his breath.
For must we think, that though they dye they perish;
Death dies in them, and they in death reflourish:
And this life's loss, a better life renues,
Which after death eternally ensues.
Though then their passions never seem so great,
Yet never comfort serves to swage their heat:
Though strength of torments be extreme in durance,
Yet are they guencht by Hopes and Faiths assurance.
For thankful Hope, if God be grounded in it.
Assures the heart, and pacifies the spirit.
To them that love and reverence his Name,
Prosperity betides, and want of shame.
Thus can no Tyrant pull them from the hands
Of mighty God, that for their safety stands:
Who ever sees, and ever can defend;
Them whom he loves, he loves unto the end:
So that the more their fury overfloweth,
The more each one his own destruction sows.
And as they strive with God in policy,
So are they sooner brought to misery.
Like as the savage Boar dislodged from den,
And hotly chased by pursuit of men,
Run's furiously on them that come him near,
And goares himself upon the hunters spear:
The gentle puissant Lamb, their Champion bold,
So help's to conquer all that hart's his fold,
That quickly they and all their Progeny
Confounded is, and brought to misery.
This is of Judah the courageous Lion,
The conquering Captain, and the Rock of Sion;
Whose favor is as great to Jacobs Line,
As is his fearful frown to Philistine.
CHAP XV. Of Apostata's and Backsliders, that through infirmity and fear have
fallen away.
IT is a kind of Apostasy and Backsliding condemned by the first commandment
of the Law, when as he that has been once enlightened by the word of God in
the knowledge of salvation, and nourished and instructed therein from the
cradle, does afterward cast behind his back the grace of Gods spirit, or
disallow thereof, and exempt himself from the service of God, to serve Idols,
or make any outward show to do it: which kind of sin may be committed after
two sorts; either through infirmity and fear, or willingly and with
deliberation: when not being pressed or constrained thereto by any outward
means, a man does clearly and of himself abandon and forsake the true
Religion, to march under the baoner of Satan and Antichrist. And this is also
of two sorts; either when a man does simply forsake the profession of the
Truth, to follow superstition and Idolatry, without attempting any thing beside
the mere denial of his Faith; or when after his revolt he professes not
only the contrary Religion, but also endeavors himself by all means
possible to advance it, and to oppress and lay siege to the doctrine of Gods
Truth in those that maintain the same. By this it appears that there are
three kinds of Apostasy; one as it were enforced and compelled, the second
voluntary, the last both voluntary and malicious: which though they be all very
heinous and offensive in the sight of God, yet the second and third sort are
most dangerous, and of them also one more hurtful and pernicious than the
other, as we shall perceive by that which follows. Now as all these kinds are
different one from another, so I will refer the examples of each sort to his
several place, that the efficacy thereof may be the better perceived. And
first of those which have fallen away through fear and infirmity, and
afterward in order of the rest. Athough that they who by the conceit and fear
of tortures presented before their eyes, or of speedy and cruel death
threatened against them, do decline and slide back from the profession of the
Gospel, may pretend for excuse the weakness and feebleness of the flesh,
yet doubtless they are found guilty before the throne of God, for preferring
the love of this transitory and temporary life before the zeal of his glory,
and the honor which is due to his only begotten Son, especially at that
time when they are called out of purpose by their Martyrdom to witness his
sacred truth before men, and he desires most to be glorified by their free and
constant perseverance therein: to the which perseverance they are exhorted by
many fair promises of eternal life and happiness: and from the contrary
terrified by threats of death and confusion, and upon pain to be discharged
from the presence of Christ before God, because they have denied him before
men: which is the misery of all miseries, and the greatest that can happen to
any man; for what shall become of that man whom the Son of God does not
acknowledge? Now to prove that God is indeed highly offended at this faint
hearted cowardlinesse, he himself has made known unto us, by the punishments
which diverse times he has sent upon the heads of such offenders. As in the
time of the Emperor Valerian the eighth persecutor of the Church, under whose
persecution albeit that many Champions bestirred themselves most valiantly in
that combat of Faith; yet there wanted not some, whose hearts failing them, and
who in stead of maintaining and standing for their cause to the death, as they
ought to have done, retired and gave up themselves to the enemy at the first
assault. Amongst the number of which doubty soldiers, there was one that went
up into the Capitol at Rome, in that place where Jupiters Temple in old time
stood, to abjure Cyprian in his Sermons, de Lapsu multerum.
and recant Christ and his profession: which he had no sooner done, but he was
presently struck dumb, and so was justly punished in that very member
wherewith he had offended.

A woman likewise having renounced her profession, and feeling in herself
Cyprian.
no remorse of conscience for her fall, went as she was wont to do in the time
of her rest and prosperity, to the Bathes and Hot-houses to refresh herself,
as if all had had gone well with her; but she was so seized upon and possessed
by an evil Spirit, that in stead of pleasure, which she fought for, she fell
to lamenting, and tormenting her own flesh, and chopped in pieces with her
dainty teeth her rebellious tongue, wherewith she had spoken wicked words, and
dishonored God, and tasted meats offered to Idols: and so this poor wretch,
whereas she should have wasted her self in tears of true repentance, and in
the true bath of grace and mercy, because she had more care of cleansing her
body from filth, than her soul from sin, became corrupt and filthy both body
and soul, by the means of that unclean spirit which God had given power to
afflict her: and armed her own mouth, which had tasted, chewed, and swallowed
that cursed food, furiously to rise against her self to destroy her: so that
she became her own murderer, for she survived not long, by reason that her
bowels and intrails were choked up to the throat with pain.

Another woman well stricken in years, that in like manner had revolted from
the Truth, thrust her self notwithstanding into the assembly of Cyprian.
the Faithful, as they were receiving the holy Sacrament. But that holy
Contempt of Word and Sacrament. lib. 1. c. 24.
food which nourished the souls of them that believed, turned to her bane; for
she found there in stead of peace, a sword; in stead of norishment, deadly and
mortal poison, in such sort, that immediately after the receipt of that holy
Supper, she began to be marvellously troubled and vexed in soul, and felt the
hand of God so heavy upon her for her offense committed in denying her Savior,
to shun her persecution, that trembling and stamping she fell down dead.

There was also in like manner a certain man, that having renounced his Cyprian.
says, did notwithstanding present himself at the celebration of the holy
Supper, presuming to come and eat at his Table, whom he had a little before
denied; but receiving into his hand part of the Sacrament as well as the rest,
and thinking to put it into his mouth, it was turned into ashes: Contempt of
Sacrament. lib. 1. c. 34.
whereupon he stood amazed and confounded in himself, God manifesting in him,
that he that revoked his faith, and recoiled from Christ Jesus, Christ Jesus
would recoile from him, and give him over to death, by depriving him of his
grace, and spoiling him of the power of his quickening and saving Spirit.

These are the fearful examples of Gods Judgments, which Saint Cyprian
reports to have light upon back sliders in his time; adding moreover, that
besides these, many were possessed of devils, robbed of their wits, and enraged
with fury and madness, and all for this offense of Apostasy.

Amongst all the examples of our age, of Gods severe justice upon Apostates,
Sleiden. l. 21. ^.
the example of Francis Spi^ra an Italian Lawyer, a man of credit and authority
in his country, is most pitiful and lamentable; who having embraced the true
Religion with mavelous zeal, and made open profession of the same, feared not
freely to declare his opinion of every point of Doctrine that came in question,
and grew in knowledge every day more and more. But it was not long ere he was
complained of to the Popes Ambassador: which when he understood, and saw the
danger wherein he was like to fall, after he had long debated and disputed the
matter in his own conscience, the counsel of the flesh and worldly wisdom
prevailing, he resolved at last to go to the Ambassador, to the intent to
appease his wrath, and do whatsoever he should command. Thus coming to Venice,
and overruled with immoderate fear, he confessed that he had done amiss, and
craved pardon for the same, promising ever after to be an obedient subject to
the Popes Laws: and that which is more, when it was enjoined him, that at his
return home he should in his own country openly recant his former profession,
he refused not, but performed his recantation in due sort. But it chanced very
soon after, that this miserable man fell sick of body and soul, and began to
despair of Gods mercy toward him. His Physician perceiving his disposition,
judged, that the cause of his bodies disease was a vehement conceit and thought
of mind; and therefore gave advice to minister counsel to his troubled mind
very carefully, that the cause being taken away, the effect also might
surcease. To this end many learned men frequented him every day, recalling into
his mind, and laying open before him many express places of Scripture,
touching the greatness of Gods mercy. Which things he avouched to be true, but
said that those promises pertained not to him, because he had renounced Christ
Jesus, and forsworn the known truth, and that for this cause nothing was
prepared for him but hell fire, which already in soul he saw and felt: I
would (said he) willingly, if it were possible, love God, but it is altogether
impossible. I only fear him without love. These and such speeches used he
with a steadfast countenance; neither did his tongue at any time run at random,
nor his answers savor of indiscretion or want of memory; but advisedly warned
all that stood by to take heed by his example, how to listen too much to
worldly wisdom, especially when they should be called before men to profess
the Religion of Christ. And lying in this extremity, he refused all manner of
sustenance, rebuking and being angry with his sons that opened his mouth to
make him swallow some food to sustain him; saying, Since he had forsaken his
Lord and Master, all his creatures ought to forsake him; I am afraid of every
thing, there is not a creature that has not conspired to work my destruction:
let me die, let me die, that I may go and feel that unquenchable fire, which
already consumes me, and which I can by no means escape. And thus he died
indeed, pined to death in despair and horrible torment of conscience.

Nichomachus a man that stoutly professed Christ Jesus in prosperity, being
Cen^ur. 3. c. 12.
brought to his trial at Troas, and put into torments he denied him; and being
delivered by that means, consented to offer sacrifice unto Idols. But as soon
as he had finished his sacrifice, he was hoisted up by the spirit of darkness,
whose darling now he was, and dashed against the earth: so that his teeth
biting his profane tongue (wherewith he had denied his Savior) in two, he
died continently.

Tamerus a professor of the true Religion, was feduced by his brother to cleave
unto Popery, and to forsake his first love: but for his defection from Theatrum
historicum.
the truth, the Lord gave him up into a ceprobate sense, so that falling into
despair he hung himself.

Richard Denton a Blacksmith dwelling at Wels in Cambridge-shire, having been a
professor of the Gospel a foretime; when William Woolsey Martyr (whom the said
Denton had first converted from the Truth) sent him certain money out of
prison at Ely, with his commendations, That he marvelled he tarried so long
behind him, seeing he was the first that delivered him the book of Scripture
into his hand, and told him that it was the truth: his answer was this, I
confess it is true, but alas I cannot burn. But he that could not burn in the
cause of Christ, was afterward burned Acts and Monuments, page 1717.
against his will; for in the year 1564 his house was set on fire, and whilst
he went to save his goods, he lost his life.

There was also one Burton Bailiffe of Crowland in Lincolnshire, who
pretending an earnest friendship to the Gospel in King Edwards time; after the
Kings death began lustily to set up the Popish Mass again, and would have
beaten the poor Curate, if he had not settled himself thereto: but see how the
Lords judgment overtook, him; as he came riding Acts and Monuments, page 2101.
from Fennebanke one day, a Crow flying over his head, let fall her excrements
upon his face, so that it ran from the top of his nose down to his beard,
the poisoned sent and savor whereof so annoyed his stomach, that he never
ceased vomiting until he came home: and after falling deadly sick, would
never receive any meat, but vomited still, and complaining of that stink,
cursing the Crow that had poisoned him: to be short, within few days he died
desperately, without any token of repentance of his former life.

Hither may we add the examples of one Henry Smith a Lawyer of the Acts and
Menuments.
middle Temple, and Arnoldus Bomelius a Student of Lovaine; both which having
professed the Truth a while, and after being seduced by evil company, the one
of Gilford, the other of Master Tileman, Smith afterward hanged himself in his
chamber in the Temple, in the year of our Lord 1569. Bomelius murdered
himself with his own dagger. And thus these two Apostata's felt the heavy
scourge of Gods wrath, for revolting from the Truth which they once professed.

CHAP. XVI. Of those that have willingly fallen away.
THese kind of Apostata's which we are now to speak of, are such as without
any outward compulsion, threats, or likelihood of danger, forsake freely Gods
true Religion, and give themselves over to all Idolatry: Against whom there is
a Decree ordained in the thirteenth of Deutronomy, by the Lawgiver of Heaven:
which is this; If the inhabitants of any city have turned from the Lord, to
follow after strange gods, let them be destroyed with the edge of their sword,
and their city consumed with fire, that they may be utterly rased out and
brought to nothing. This was the sin of Solomon King of Israel (a brave and
mighty 1 King. 110
kingdom in his time) a man subject to none for power, nor fearing any for
authority: yet for all this, so filthily recoyling from the Truth which he
knew and had professed, that in stead of serving the true God, he became a
setter up of false Idols, and that of his own freo will and pleasure: he that
had been so well brought up and instructed from his childehood in true Religion
by his School master the Prophet Nathan, into whose charge he was committed;
and so often and earnestly admonished by his father David, to observe
diligently the law of God, to direct his ways thereby: and whom God vouchsafed
this honor, to appear twice unto, and to enrich and adorn with such
excellent wisdom, that the Queen of Saba hearing his report, came to
Jerusalem to be his auditor: even this Solomon in his old age, when he should
have been most steadfast and constant, suffered himself to be seduced by the
enticements of his strange wives and concubines, to offer service unto strange
gods, and to forsake the God of Heaven, to worship the Idols of the Gentiles.
And as his renown was great and famous before for building that sumptuous and
beautiful Temple at Jerusalem; so was his obloquy and reproach the greater,
for erecting Altars and Chapels for the Idols of his wives and concubines,
even for every one of their Idols, to the intent to flatter and please their
humors: it was therefore just and equal, that the Lord (his wrath being
provoked against him) raised up two strong enemies that wrought him and his
people much scath. Yea moreover Jeroboam, one of his own servants (whilst he
yet lived) was by the ordinance of God designed King over ten Tribes: and so
God punished him for his Idolatry and Backsliding, leaving him but a small
portion of the kingdom to continue to his successors: which, had it not been
for his father David's sake, had been also taken away. It is true, That we read
not that he ever hindered the service of the Temple, or compelled or persuaded
any man to worship an Idol; yet he did enough to make him culpable before God
of a grievous sin, in that he being the head and Sovereign Magistrate of the
people, committed such wickedness and such Apostasy in Israel: beside, it is a
mavelous strengthening, that in all his History there is not so much as any
token mentioned, or to be gathered of his true repentance alter this notable
fall. And he that well weighs the nature and quality of this sin, shall
perceive that it somewhat resembles that which is spoken of, Heb. 6. ver, 4,
5, 6: for Solomon was not so ignorant and destitute of the knowledge of God,
but rather had the treasure of wisdom in fullness and abundance, and was
endowed with the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, that he was able to instruct
others, and to discharge a Doctors place in the Church, as he also did both by
word and writing. And although that the Son of God was nos as then yet
manifested in the flesh; yet the power and efficacy of his death being
everlasting, and from the beginning, whereof the Law with the ceremonies and
sacrifices thereof, was as it were a Schoolmaster, could not be hidden from
him: Therefore so soon as he addicted himself to his Idolatry, he It is
manifest that Solomon did repent: first because it is said, that God loved him.
Seco^dlv, because he was a pen man of some part of the Scr^ptu^e and th^^dly,
because he was a ^ype of Christ. 2 Chronicles. 12.
forthwith abandoned the holy ordinances and sacrifices of Gods Law, and
quitted himself of the promise of salvation therein contained; disanulling and
making of none effect, as concerning himself, the grace of the Mediator,
ordained from the beginning: so that his downfall was terrible and perilous.
Yet there be that think that after all this he wrote the book of
Ecclesiastes, as a declaration of his repentance; whose opinion I purpose not
to contradict.

Roboam his son succeeded him, as well in the likeness of his sin, as of
his kingdom: for after that the Priests and Levites forsaking the part of
Jeroboam because of his Idols, and leaving their houses and possessions to
strangers, had made repair to him, for fear of God, and love of his holy
service, and that he had disposed and put in order his public affairs, for
the ratifying and confirming of his kingdom; presently he and all his people
forsook the law of God, and gave themselves over to Idolatry and other
grievous sins: wherefore the Lord also forsook and gave them over to the
hands of Caesac King of Egypt, that raised up a mighty power of men, even a
thousand and two hundred chariots, threescore thousand horsemen, with an
infinite multitude of footmen to make war against him: so that all the strong
cities and fortresses of Judah, no nor Jerusalem it self, was strong enough to
repulse him from sacking and taking them, and robbing the Temple of their
treasures and despoyling the Kings palaces of his riches, and carrying back
into Egypt a rich prey of the best and beautifullest things that were therein.
And this was the first shake that ever this kingdom received since it was a
kingdom, whereby it began to waine and decline. Notwithstanding all this, yet
the Lord had compassion and pity of him and all his people, and would not
suffer his dignity to be trodden under foot and quite suppressed, but restored
him once again into an honorable estate, because when he was reproved by
Semeia the Prophet, he humbled himself before the Lord, and his Princes also:
which is a mafest sign, that his sin was not an universal Apostasy,
whereby he was wholly turned aside from God and all hope of grace, but it was
a particular revolt, such as was that of his forefathers, the children of
Israel, when they imagined that God would be present with them in the
idolatrous golden Calfe, and in that figure to worship him, so gross and
senseless were they: although yet Roboams sin seems to exceed theirs in
greatness and guiltiness.

The Jews that in the time of Ptolomey Philopater abode in Egypt, and
willingly renounced the law and service of God, in hope thereby better to
provide for their worldly commodities, enjoyed not long their ease and
prosperity: for the other Jews which had courageously stuck to their
profession, and had been miraculously delivered from their enemies, being
grieved and chased at their recoyle, made their supplications to the King
(whose heart God inclined to favor their suit) that he would permit them to
revenge Gods quarrel upon those Apostates as they had deserved: alleging,
that it was hard for them to be true subjects to the King, who for Machab. 7.
their bellies sake had rebelled against the commandment of God. The King
seeing their request reasonable, and their reasons which they alleged likely,
not only commended them, but gave authority to destroy all those that could be
found in any place of his dominion, without any further enquiry of the cause,
or intelligence of the Kings authority; insomuch that they put to death all
those that they knew to have defiled themselves with filthy Idols, doing them
before, all the shame they could devise. So that at that time there were
dispatched above three hundred persons: which when they had accomplished they
rejoiced greatly.

CHAP XVII. Of the third and worst sort of Apostates, those that through malice
forsake the Truth.
IF so be that they of whom we have spoken in the two former Chapters, are in
their revoltings inexcusable (as indeed they are) then much more worthy
condemnation are they, who not only in a villainous contempt cast away the grace
of Gods Spirit, and his holy worship; but also of a purposed malice set
themselves against the same, yea and endeavor with all their power, utterly to
race and root it out, and in stead thereof to plant the lies, errors, and
illusions of Satan by all means possible. Against this kind of Monsters
sentence is pronounced in the thirteenth of Deutronomy, to wit, That justice
should be executed upon them with all extremity, and no mercy and compassion
showed upon him, be he Prophet or what else, that goes about to seduce others
from the service of the Almighty, to follow false gods. This is the pitfall
wherein Jeroboam the first King of Israel slipped by the perverseness of his
own conscience; who as he had by his rebellion against Rehoboam and the house
of David, upreared a new kingdom; so by rebellion against God and his House
(in hope by that means to retain his usurped state and people in subjection)
upreared also a new Religion: for distrusting the promises of God which were
made him by the Prophet Ahias as touching the Realm of Israel, which he was
already in possession of, and despising the good counsel of God, in respect of
his own inventions, he was so besotted and bleared with them, that just after
the pattern of his idolatrous forefathers, who by their Egyptian tricks had
provoked the wrath of God against themselves, he set up golden calves, and
caused the people to worship them, keeping them so from going to Jerusalem to
worship God: nor yet content with this, he also erected high places to set his
Idols in; and having restrained the Priests and Levites from the exercise of
their charge, he ordained a new order of Priests to sacrifice and minister
unto his gods, and proclaimed a newer feast than that was in Judah; even the
seventh day of the eighth month: wherein he not only exiled the pure service
of God, but also perverted and turned upside down the Ecclesiastical
discipline and policy of Gods Church, which by the Law had been instituted. And
that which is yet more, as he was offering incense on the Altar at Bethel, when
the Prophet cried out 1 King. 13.
against the Altar, and exclaimed against that filthy Idolatry, by denouncing
the vengeance of God against it, and the maintainers thereof, he was Contempt
of Gods Word, lib. 1. cap. 34.
so desperate and senseless, as to offer violence to him, and to command that
he should be attached; but the power of Gods displeasure was upon him by and
by: for that hand which he had stretched out against the Prophet, dried up, so
that he could not draw it back again; and at the very instant, for a manifest
declaration of the wrath of God, the Altar rent in pieces, and the ashes that
were within were dispersed abroad. And although at the prayer of that holy man,
his hand was restored to his former strength and soundness, yet returned not
he from his unjust and disloyal dealing, but obstinately continued therein
till his dying day. Wherefore also the 1 King. 14.
fierce wrath of God hunted and pursued him continually: for first of all, he
was robbed of his son Abia, dying through sickness: then he was set upon by
Abia King of Judah, with an army of four hundred thousand 2 Chronicles. 3.
men of war: and though his power was double in strength and number, arising
to eight hundred thousand persons, yet was he and his vaste army quite
discomfited: for he lost at that field five hundred thousand of his men, beside
certain cities which were yielded to Abia in the pursuit of his victory: his
courage was so abated and impoverished ever after this, that he could uever
recover strength to resist the King of Judah any more: And so God revenged at
once the Apostasy both of the King and people of Israel, and last of all so
struck him after, that he died.

Ioram King of Judah, although his father Iosaphat had instructed him from 2 Chronicles. 21.
his childehood with holy and wholesome precepts, and set before his face the
example of his own zeal, in purging the Church of God from all Idolatry and
superstition, and maintaining the true and pure service of God; yet did he so
foulely run astray from his fathers steps, that allying himself by the
marriage of Athalia, to the house of Achab, he became not only himself like
unto the Kings of Israel in their filthy idolatry, but also drew his people
after him, causing the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, to run a
whoring after his strange gods: for which cause Elias the Prophet most sharply
reproved him by letters; the contents whereof in sum was this: That because
he rebelled against the Lord God of his Fathers; therefore the people that were
in his subjection should rebel against him. Presently the Arabians and
Philistims rose up against him, wasted his country, robbed him of his
treasures, took away his wives, and put all his children to the sword, except
little Ochozias his youngest son that was preserved: And after all these
miseries, the Lord smote him with so outrageous and uncurable disease in his
bowels, that after two years torment he died thereof, his guts being fallen
out of his belly with anguish.

Ioas also King of the same country, was one to whom God had bin many 2. Chron.
22.
ways beneficial from his infancy: for he was even then miraculously
preserved from the bloody hand of Athalia, and after brought up in the house of
God, under the tuition of that good Priest Iehoiada; yet he was no sooner
lifted up into his royal dignity, but by and by he and his people started
aside, to the worship of stocks and stones, at that time when he had taken
upon him the repair of the House of God. But all this came to pass after the
decease of that good Priest his Tutor, whose good deeds toward him in saving
his life, and giving him the Crown, he most unthankfully recompensed, by
putting to death his son Zacharias; whom he 2 Chlon. 24.
caused (for reproving and threatening his Idolatry in a public assembly,
incited thereto by the Spirit of God) to be stoned to death in the porch of the
Temple. But seeing he did so rebelliously set himself against the holy Spirit,
as if he would have quite oppressed and extinguished the power thereof, by the
death of this holy Prophet, by whom it spoke; God hissed for an army of
Syrians, that gave him battle, and conquered his soldiers, who in outward
show seemed much too strong for them. His Princes also that had seduced him,
were destroyed, and himself vexed with grievous diseases; till at length his
own servants conspired against him for the death of Zacharias, and slew him on
his bed; yea and his memory was so odious, that they could not afford him a
burying place among the sepulchers of their Kings.

Amazias the son of this wicked father, carried himself also at the 2 Chronicles.
25.
first uprightly toward God in his service; but it lasted not long: for a
while after, he was corrupted and turned aside from that good way which he had
begun, to tread in the bypath of his father Ioas: for after he had conquered
the Idumaeans, and slain twenty thousand men of war, and spoiled diverse of
their cities; in stead of rendering due thanks to God, who (without the aid of
the Israelites) had given him that victory, he set up the gods of the Edomites,
which he had robbed them of, to be his gods, and worshipped and burned incense
to them, so void of sense and reason was he. And being rebuked by the Prophet
of his adverse dealing, he was so far from humbling and repenting himself
thereof, that quite contrary, he proudly withstood and rejected the Prophets
threatenings, menacing him with death if he ceased not. Thus by this means
having aggravated his sin, and growing more and more obstinate, God made him
an instrument to hasten his own destruction; for being proud, and puffed up
with the overthrow which he gave the Edomites, he defied the King of Israel,
and provoked him to battle also; but full evil to his ease: for he lost the
day, and was carried prisoner to Jerusalem, where before his face (for more
reproach) four hundred cubits of the wall was broken down, the Temple and
Palace ransackt of his Treasures, and his children carried for hostages to
Samaria. And not long after, treason was devised against him in Jerusalem, so
that he fled to Lachish, and being pursued thither also, was there taken and
put to death.

Likewise King Ahaz for making molten Images for Baalim, and walking 2. Chron.
28.
in the idolatrous ways of the Kings of Israel, and burning his sons with
fire, after the abomination of the heathen, in the valley of Ben-Hinnon, was
forsaken of the Lord, and delivered into the hands of the King of Syria, who
carried him prisoner to Damascus; and not only so but was also subdued by
Pekah King of Israel, in that great battle, wherein his own son, with
fourscore thousand men at arms, were slain; yea and two hundred thousand of
all sorts, men, women, and children, were taken prisoners: for all these
chastisements did he not once reform his life, but rather grew worse and
worse. To make up the number of his sins, he would needs sacrifice to the
gods of Damascus also, thinking to find succor at their hands: so that he
utterly defaced the true service of God at Jerusalem, broke in pieces the holy
Vessels, locked up the Temple doors, and placed in their steads his abominable
Idols, for the people to worship, and erected Altars in every corner of the
city to do sacrifice on. But as he rebelled on every side against his God, so
God raised up enemies on every side to disturb him: the Edomites and
Philistims assaulted him on every side, beat his people, took and ransackt his
cities: on the other side, the Assyrians whom he had hired with a great sum for
his help, turned to his undoing and utter overthrow and confusion.

Wat shall we think of Manasses? who re-edified the high places and 2 Chronicles.
22.
Altars, which the zeal of Ezech^ as his father had defaced and thrown down,
and adored and worshipped the planets of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, profaned the porch of Gods Temple with Altars dedicated to strange
gods, committing thereon all the abominations of the Gentiles; yea, and caused
his sons to pass through the valley of Lib. 1. cap. 26. Idolatry.
Ben-Hinnon, and was an observer of times and seasons, and gave himself over
to witchcraft, charming, and sorceries, and used the help of familiar spirits
and Soothsayers; and that which is more, placed a carved Image in the house of
God, flat against the second commandment of the Law: So that he did not only
go astray and err himself, in giving over his mind to most wicked and
damnable heresies, but also seduced the people by his pernicious example and
authority to do the like mischief. And that which is yet more, and worst of
all, he made no account nor reckoning of the admonitions of the Prophets; but
the rather and the more hardened his heart, to run out into all manner of
cruelty and wickedness, that his sins might have their full measure. For the
very stones of the streets of Jerusalem were stained from one corner to another
with the guiltless and innocent blood of those that either for dissuading him
from, or not yielding unto his abominable and detestable Idolatry, were
cruelly murdered: Amongst the number of which slain innocents, many suppose
that the Prophet Esayas (although he was of the bloud-royall) was with a 2
King. 12.
strange manner of torment put to death. Wherefore the flame of Gods ire was
kindled against him and his people: so that he stirred up the Assyrians against
them; whose power and force they being not able to resist, were subdued, and
the King himself taken and put in fetters, and bound in chains, carried
captive to Babylon: but being there in tribulation, he humbled his soul, and
prayed unto the Lord his God; who for all his wicked, cruel, and abominable
Apostasy was entreated of him, and received him to mercy; yea and brought him
again to Jerusalem into his unhoped for kingdom. Then was he no more
unthankful to the Lord for his wonderful deliverance, but being touched with
true repentance for his former life, abolished the strange gods, broke down
their Altars, and restored again the true Religion of God, and gave strait
commandment to his people to do the like. Wherein it was the pleasure of the
Highest, to leave a notable memorial unto all posterity, of his great and
infinite mercy toward poor and miserable sinners, to the end that no man (be
his sins never so heinous) should at any time despair: for, Where sin
abounds, Romans 5.
there grace abounds much more Admit that this revolt of Manasses was far
greater and more outrageous than was Solomon's, yet his true repentance found
the grace to be raised up from that (...) ^ull downfall: for, God Romans 9. 15.
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and compassion on whom he will have
compassion. O the profound riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unspeakable Romans 11. 33.
are his judgments? and his ways p^st finding out.

Amon the wicked son of this repentant ^ather committed also the like 2 Chronicles. 33.
offense in serving strange gods, but recanted not by like repentance; and
therefore God gave his own servants both will to conspire, and power Idolatry.
Lib. 1. cap. 26.
to execute his destruction, after he had swayed the kingdom but two years.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the third and worst sort of Apostata's.
BY how much the more God has in these latter days poured forth more
plentifully his graces upon the sons of men, by the manifestations of his
Son Christ Jesus in the flesh, and sent forth a more clear light by the
preaching of his Gospel into the world than was before times; by so much the
more culpable before God, and guilty of eternal damnation are they, who being
once enlightened and made partakers of those excellent graces, come afterward
either to despise or make light account of them, or go about to suppress the
truth, and quench the spirit which instructed them therein. This is the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which is mentioned in the sixth and tenth chapter to
the Hebrews and in the twelfth of Luke; and in another place, it is called a
Sin unto death, because it is impardonable, by reason that no excuse of
ignorance can be pleaded, nor any plaster of true repentance applied unto it.
The Apostata's of the old Testament under the Law were not guilty of this
sin: for although there were many that willingly and maliciously revolted and
set themselves against the Prophets of God, making war as it were with the
Holy Ghost; yet seeing they had no such clear testimonies of Christ Jesus, and
declaration of Gods Spirit as we have, their sin cannot be properly said
directly to be against the Holy Ghost, and so never to be remitted: according
to the description of this sin in those passages of Scripture which were
before recited, as it may manifestly appear by the former example of King
Manasses. The Apostle himself likewise does aver the truth hereof, when he
says, If we sin willingly after that we have Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29.
received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries. If any man despised Moses Law, he died without mercy,
under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he
be worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood
of the new Testament as a profane thing, whereby he was sanctified, and does
despite to the Spirit of Grace. Here we may see that this sin is proper to
those only that lived under the Gospel, and have tasted of the comfort and
knowledge of Christ.

Judas Iscariot (that wicked and accursed Varlet) committed the deed, and
feels the scourge of this great sin: for he (being a Disciple, nay an
Apostle of Christ Jesus) moved with covetousness, after he had devised and
concluded of the manner and complot of his treason with the enemy, sold his
Lord and Master, the Savior of the World, for thirty pieces of silver, and
betrayed him into the bands of thieves and murderers, who sought nothing but
his destruction. After this vile traitor had performed this execrable purpose
(by reason whereof he is called the son of perdition) he could find no rest
nor repose in his guilty conscience, but was horribly troubled and tormented
with remorse of his wickedness, judging himself worthy of a thousand deaths,
for betraying that innocent and guiltless blood. If he looked up, he saw the
vengeance of God ready to fall upon him and ensnare him: if he looked down,
he saw nothing but hell gaping to swallow him up: the light of this world was
odious to him, and his own life displeased him, so that being plunged into the
bottomless pit of despair, he at last strangled himself, and burst in twain
in the midst, and all Math. 27 Acts 1.
his bowels gushed out.

There is a notable example of Lucian, who having professed Christianity Suid.
for a season under the Emperor Trajan, fell away afterward, and became so
profane and impious, as to make a mock at Religion and Divinity; whereupon
his surname was called Atheist. This wretch, as he barked out (like a foul
mouthed dog) bitter taunts against the religion of Christ, seeking to rend and
abolish it, so he was himself, in Gods vengeance, torn in pieces and devoured
of dogs.

Porphyrie also (a whelp of the same litter) after he had received the
knowledge of the truth, for despite and anger that he was reproved of his
faults by the Christians, set himself against them, and published books full
of horrible blasphemies, to discredit and overthrow the Christian Faith. But
when he perceived how fully and sufficiently he was confuted, and that he was
reputed an accursed and confounded wretch for his labor, in terrible despair
and anguish of soul he died.

Julian the Emperor, surnamed the Apostate, cast himself headlong into the
same gulf: for having been brought up and instructed from his childehood in
the Christian faith, and afterward a while a professed reader thereof to others
in the Church, as soon as he had obtained the Empire, maliciously revolted
from his profession, and resisted with all his power, the Faith and Church of
Christ, endeavoring by all means possible, either Socrat. Theod. Sozom.
by force to ruinate and destroy it, or by fine sleights and subtilties to
undermine it. And because his purpose was to do what hurt he could to
Christians, therefore he studied by all he could, to please, content, and
uphold the contrary party, I mean the Painims: he caused their temples first
to be opened, which Constantine his predecessor had caused to be shut up: he
took from the Christian Churches and their Ministers those privileges,
liberties, and commodities which the said Constantine had bestowed A theisme,
lib. 1. cap. 25.
upon them: and not content with this, he confiscated the Church revenues, and
imposed great taxes and tributes upon all that professed the name of
Christians, and forbad them to have any schools of learning for their
children. And yet more to vex and grieve them, he translated many orders of
the Church discipline and policy into Paganism. After he had thus by all means
striven to beat down the Scepter of Christ's kingdom, it turned quite contrary
to his expectation; for in stead thereof, the scepter of his own kingdom was
broken and brought to naught: at that time when making war upon the Persians,
he was wounded with an arrow, which Socrat. l. 3. hist. Eccles. c. (...).
pierced his armor, and dived so deep into his side, that he died thereof.
When he undertook this voyage, he was furnished with such bravery both of
apparel and all things else, as it might seem it appertained to him and none
else to overwhelme and oversway the world; still belching out threats against
poor Christians, whom he head determined at his return from Persia utterly to
destroy, and leave none alive, as was afterward reported by one of his
Council. The number of his soldiers was so innumerable, and his strength so
impregnable, that he made no other reckoning but to be lord of Persia in a very
short space. But lo how the Lord overturneth the attempts of his enemies: This
great army (as S. Chrysostom reports against the Heathen) in which he put so
much confidence, seemed ere long to be rather a vaste and weak multitude of
women and infants, than an host of Warriors: for by evil and foolish conduct
and government, there rose so great a famine amongst them, that their horses
which were provided for the battle, served for their bellies, yea and for want
of that too, many hundreds died for hunger and thirst. Even when he skirmished,
his own side came to the worse, doing more scath to themselves, than to their
enemies; and lastly (leading them so undiscreetly) they could not by any means
escape, out were constrained after he was slain, to entreat the Persians to
suffer them to retire; and so as many as could, escaped and fled away to save
their lives. And thus this brave army was thus miserably dismembered and
discomfited, to the everlasting shame of that wicked Apostate.

One of the Treasurers of this wicked Emperor (who to please his Master,
Theod. l. ^. c. 13. Sozom. l. 5. c. 8. Contempt of the Word, lib. 1. cap. 34.
forsook also the Religion of Christ) being on a time mocking and deriding the
ministry of the holy Word, died miserably on a sudden, vomiting his own blood
out of his mouth, and (as Chrysostom says) his privy parts being rotten and
purrified, and consumed with lice, for all that ever he could do to remedy the
same.

It is recorded of Trebellius the first King of the Bulgarians, that being
converted with his people to the faith of Christ, to the end to give himself
more quiet to the meditation and exercise of Religion, resigned over his
kingdom to his eldest son: whom when he perceived to renounce the Faith,
and to follow strange gods, he not only deprived of all his Royal dignity, but
also caused his eyes to be put out, for a punishment of his Apostacy, and
bestowed the kingdom upon his other son; showing thereby, that he that
abandoneth the true light of salvation, is not worthy to enjoy the comfortable
light of the world.

During the heptarchy of the Saxons here in England, there reigned in ^eda
Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Northumberland two Kings; one called Ostrich, who was King of the Deirians,
and the other Eaufride King of the Bernirians (for into those two Provinces was
that country anciently divided.) These two Kings before they came to their
Crowns, were by the preaching of Paulinus converted to the Faith of Christ,
and baptized into the same Faith; but as soon as God advanced them to their
Kingly dignities, presently they expelled the King of Glory out of their
hearts, and renouncing Christ, betook themselves again to their filthy Idols.
But they joyed not long in this their Apostacy; for within one year they were
both slain by Cedwalla King of the Britains, the one in battle, the other
coming to sue for peace: And so they forsaking Christ in their prosperity,
were forsaken by him in their adversity, and given over to be a prey into the
hands of their enemies. This year wherein these two Kings thus revolted and
were slain, has upon it the mark of vengeance to this day: for by the common
consent of all Chronicles, that the memory of these Apostates might be utterly
defaced and blotted out, it was reckoned in the account of the next Kings
reign, to wit Oswold, a holy and religious man; and so both the name of the
Kings, and the time of their reign, is, in detestation of the Apostacy,
utterly left out of our English stories, as if they were unworthy to have a
place among men, much more among Kings, that forsook Christ of their own
accord, without any constraint or compulsion thereunto.

A Divine at Louvaine, one James La^onus, who was well instructed at the first
in the knowledge of the Truth, afterward renouncing the same, endeavored with
all his power to oppugn and oppress it. This man being on a time mounted into
a pulpit, to preach before the Emperor Charles the fifth, was at the very
instant so amassed and astonished, that no man could perceive what he said, and
so made himself a laughing stock to all that audience. Seeing himself thus
disgraced, he returned from Brussels to Louvaine, where he fell into such
grief and sorrow of mind, for the dishonor which he had gotten, that it
turned at length into despair: and in his daily Lectures, these or like words
oftentimes escaped after that goodly Sermon, That he had impugned the truth of
God: which when diverse of his own Coat heard, they caused him to be shut up
fast in a house, where in desperation he died, telling every man he was damned,
and that he could not hope for salvation or remission of his sins, because that
of mere malice he had resisted and made war with God.

Cardinal Poole an Englishman, had also sometimes professed himself to be well
seen in the sincerity of the Gospel, yet contrary to his conscience he sent
into his country the Trophies and Ensigns of Antichrist the Pope, which
before had been rased out and abolished the realm; but he died two or three
days after Queen Mary, in horrible griefs, terrors, and fearfulness,
without any show of repentance.

Stephen Gaediner Bishop of Winchester, and after Chancellor of England, showed
in his young years some forwardness to withstand the Popish abuses and
superstitions; but as soon as he was exalted to honor, he turned over a new
lease, and began freshly and furiously to afflict and to rend the poor and
faithful servants of Christ, putting them to the cruellest deaths he could
devise. And yet more to discover his profaneness and rebellion, he wrote many
books against the pure Religion of God: and being thus swollen with venomous
spite against the Son of God, beside the extreme covetousness, whoredoms,
and extortions which reigned in him, behold the Lord laid his hand of wrath
upon him, and stroke him with so strange a malady, that before his death such
horrible stink issued from him, that none of his friends and servants, no not
himself, could endure the savor thereof: his belly was swollen like a taber,
his eyes distracted and sunk into his head, his cheeks thin, and the
appearance of his whole face very terrible: his breath savoured of a filthy and
intolerable stink, and all his members were rotten with continual griefs and
swounings; yet this vile wretch in the midst of all these torments ceased not
to yell out continual blasphemies, and infamous speeches, and so despighting
and maugring God, died.

Peter Castellon Bishop of Maston, having attained to great riches and renown,
by the means of the Gospel, turned notwithstanding his back to Christ, and
mightily inveyed in his sermons at Orleance against the profession of his
Religion; seeking to make it known, that he had not only abjured and denied
it, but also that he was a professed adversary unto it. This man sitting at a
time in his chaite, fell into a strange disease, which no Physician had ever
seen, or could search out the cause of; for one half of his body was extreme
hot, and burned like fire, the other extreme cold, and frozen like Ice; and in
this torment with horrible cries and groanings he ended his life.

A gray Friar called Picard, who once was not ashamed of the Gospel,
afterward set himself to preach against that which he had professed, and
being in the pulpit at Orleance, after infinite blasphemies which he had
disgorged against the Truth, at last said, That he protested before God and the
holy assembly, that he would never preach more after that day, because he was
an Apostate: which saying he by and by impudently and constantly denied, to the
peril and damnation of his own soul; thinking by his horrible cursings and
forswearings, to abuse the poor ignorant and superstitions people; but he no
sooner came into the field, but the puissant hand of God overreached him, and
stroke him speechless, so that he was carried thence half dead, and within
short space died, altogether without any appearance of repentance.

Among other Judges which showed themselves hot and rigorous in persecuting and
proceeding against the faithful prisoners of Valence in Daulphine, and other
Romans, at that season when two Ministers of the same city suffered
Martyrdom, one Lanbespin a Counselor, and Ponsenas the Kings Attorney at the
Parliament of Grenoble, both two having been professors in times past, were not
the backwardest in that action; but God made them both strange examples of his
wrath: for Lanbespin falling in love with a young maid, was so extremely
passionate therein, that he forewent his own estate, and all bounds of civil
honesty, to follow her up and down whithersoever she went: and seeing his love
and labor despised and set at naught, he so pined away with very thought, that
making no reckoning of himself, such a multitude of lice so fed upon him, and
took so good liking of their pasture, that by no means he could be cleansed of
them; for they increased and issued out of every part of his body in such
number, as maggots are wont to engender in a dead and rotten carrion. At length
a little before his death seeing his own misery, and seeling Gods heavy
vengeance upon him, he began to despair of all mercy; and to the end to
abridge his miserable days, he resolved to hungerstarve himself to death.
Which purpose the lice furthered; for they stuck so thick in his throat, as
if they would have choked him every moment: neither could he suffer any
sustenance to pass down by reason of them. They that were eye witnesses of
this pitiful spectacle, were wondrously moved with compassion, and
constrained him to eat whither he would or not. And that they might make him
take culliss^s and other stewed broaths, because he refused and strove against
them, they bound his arms, and put gagges into his mouth, to keep it open
whilst others poured in the food. And in this wise being gagged, he died like
a mad beast, with abundance of lice that went down his throat; insomuch that
the very Papists themselves stuck not to say, That as he caused the Ministers
of Valence to have gagges thrust into their Persecution, lib. 1. cap. 15.
mouths, and so put to death, so likewise he himself died with a gagge in his
mouth.

As touching Ponsenas, commonly called Bourrel (a very Butcher indeed of poor
Christians) after he had sold his own patrimony, and his wives and friends
also, to the end to buy out his office, and had spent that which remained in
house*keeping, hoping in short space to take up twice as much as he had
scattered, fell down into a strange and unknown disease, and shortly grew in
despair of Gods succor and favor toward him, by a strong remembrance of
those of Valence, and the other Romans which Persecution, lib. 1. cap. 15.
he had put to death, which would never depart out of his mind, but still
presented themselves before him: so that as one bestraught of reason and sense,
he denied his Maker, and called upon his destroyer the Devil, with most
horrible and bitter ensuings: which when his Clearke perceived, he laid out
before him the mercies of God, out of all places of the Scripture, to comfort
and restore his decayed sense. But in stead of returning to God by repentance
and prayer, he continued obstinate, and answered his Clerk (whose name was
Stephen) in this wise; Stephen, Stephen, thou art black: So I am and it please
you (quoth he) but I am neither Turk nor Moore, nor Bohemian, but a Gascoigne
of red hair. No no (answered he) not so, but thou art black; but it is with
sin. That is true (quoth he) but I hope in the bountiful mercy of God; that
for the love of Christ who died for me, my black sins shall not be imputed
to me. Then he redoubling his choler, cried mainly after his Clerk, calling
him Lutheran, Huguenot, Villain. At which noise his friends without rushed in
to know what the matter was. But he commanded, that Stephen his Clerk should
presently have a pair of bolts clapped on his heels, and to be burned for an
Heretic. In brief, his choler and rage boiled so furiously in him, that in
short space he died a fearful death, with horrible howling and outcries. His
creditors scarce gave him respite to draw his carcass out of his bed, before
they seized upon all his goods, not leaving his poor wife and children so much
as a bed of straw to lie in: so grievous was the curse of God upon his house.

Another great Prince having in former time used his authority and power to the
advancing of Gods kingdom, afterward being seduced by the allurements of the
world, renounced God, and took part with the enemies of his Church, to make
war against it; in which war he was wounded to death, and is one notable
example of Gods just vengeance, to all that shall in like manner fall away.

CHAP. XIX. Of Heretics.
AS it is a matter necessarily appertaining to the first Commandment, That the
purity and sincerity of the doctrine of Gods Word be maintained, by the rule
whereof he would have us both know him, and understand the holy mysteries which
are revealed to us therein: so also by the contrary, whatsoever tends to the
corrupting or falsifying of the same Word, rising from foolish and strange
opinions of humane reason, the same transgresses the limits of this
Commandment: of which sort is Heresy, an evil of its own nature very
pernicious and contagious, and no less to be feared and shunned than the heat
of persecution: and by means whereof the whole nation of Christendom has been
heretofore tossed with many troubles, and the Church of God grievously vexed.
But as Truth got ever the upper hand, and prevailed against falsehood: so the
broakers and upholders of falsehood came ever to the worse, and were confounded
as well by the strength of Truth, as by the special judgments of God sent
down upon the most part of them.

Theudas and Judas Galileus were two that seduced the Jews before Christ: Acts
5. 36. 39. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 10. Ios. Antiq. lib: 18. c. 1. and
lib. 20. cap. 2.
for the first of them said he was a Prophet sent from God, and that he could
divide the waters of Jordan by his word, as Ioshuah the servant of the Lord
did. The other promised to deliver them from the servitude and the yoke of the
Romans. And both of them by that means drew much people after them: so prone
is the common multitude to follow novelties, and to believe every new sangle
that is but yesterday set on broach. But they came both to a deserved
destruction: for Fatus the Governor of Jury overtooke Theudas, and sending his
trunk to the grave, carried his head as a monument to Jerusalem. As for Judas,
he perished also, and all his followers were dispersed, manifesting by their
ends, that their works were not of God, but of men, and therefore must needs
come to naught.

After Christ, in the Apostles time there was one Elymas a Sorcerer, that
mightily withstood the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas, before Sergius Paulus
Act. 12.
the deputy, and sowed a contrary heresy in his mind: but Paul full of the
Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him, and said, O full of all subtilty and mischief,
the child of the Devil, and enemy of righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the strait ways of the Lord? Now therefore behold, the hand of the
Lord is upon thee, and then shall be blind for season. And immediately there
fell upon him a mist and darkness, and he went about to seek some to lead
him by the hand. And this recompense gained he for his erroneous and
heretical practice.

A while after him, under the Empire of Adrian, arose there another called
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6. Phi. M. chron.
Benchochab, that professed himself to be the Messiah, and to have descended
from Heaven in the likeness of a Star, for the safety and redemption of the
people: by which fallacy he drew after him a world of seditious disciples; but
at length he and many of his credulous rout were slain, and was called by the
Jews Bencozba (that is) the son of a lie. And this was the goodly redemption
which this Heretic brought upon his own head and many of his fellows.

It is reported of Cerinthus an Heretic, that he denying and going Eusebius.
about to darken the doctrine of Christ's everlasting kingdom, was overwhelmed
by the sudden fall of an hot house which fell upon him and his associates, as
soon as S. John was departed from it: for Ireneus says, That he heard
Polycarpus often report, how S. John being about to enter into the bathes at
Ephesus, when he perceived Cerinthus already within, departed very hastily;
saying to those that bore him company, that he feared that the house would fall
upon their heads, because of Cerinthus the heretic, that was therein at that
instnat.

Manes, of whom the Maniches took their name and first original, forged in
his foolish brain a fiction of two gods, and two beginners, and rejecting
Eusebius. Socrat.
the old Testament, and the true God which is revealed in the same, published a
fifth Gospel of his own forgery, yea and was so besotted with folly (as
Suidas testifies of him) that he reported himself to be the Holy Ghost: when
he had thus with his devilish heresies and blasphemies infected the world, and
was pursued by Gods just judgment, at last for other wicked practices he had
his skin plucked over his ears alive, and so dyed in misery.

Montanus that blasphemous Caitise, of whom came the Montanists, or Pepuzian
heretics, of a town in Phrygia called Pepuza, denied Christ our Savior to
be God, and said he was but a man only like other men, without any
participation of divine Essence: he called himself the Comforter and holy
Spirit which was forepromised to come into the world; and his two wives
Priscilla and Maximilla, he named his prophetesses, and their writings
prophecies: howbeit all their cunning could not foretell nor prevent a wretched
and desperate end which befell him; for he hung himself, after he had deluded
the world a long season, and proved by his end, his life to have been vile and
damnable, according to the proverb, Qualis vita, finis it a, Nicep. l. 4. c.
23. Cent. 3. cap. 8.
A cursed life, and a cursed death.

Of all Heretics that ever troubled and afflicted Gods Church, the Arrians
were the chief: the author and ringleader of which crew, as by his
vainglorious pride and ambition he sought to extol himself above the clouds,
boasting and vaunting in his damnable error; so by the just vengeance of God
he was abased lower than hell, and put in everlasting shame Socrat. Theod.
Sozom.
and opprobry: for he had long time as it were entered the list, and combated
with Christ, and was condemned for an Heretic by the Nicene Council, and his
books burned: and then afterward making show before Constantine the Emperor,
with a solemn oath to recant his old errors, and approve the profession of
Faith, which the Council of Nice had set forth concernning Christ's divinity,
whereunto also he subscribed his name: but all that he did was in hypocrisy,
to the end to renew and republish the more boldly his false and pernicious
doctrine. But when he thought himself nearest to the attainment of his
purpose, and braved it most with his supporters and companions, even then the
Lord stroke him with a sudden fear in the open street, and with such horrible
pangs in his guts, and vehement desire of disburthening nature, that he was
feign to come unto the public houses appointed for that purpose, taking them
which were next at hand for a shift: but he never shifted from them again; for
his breath went out of his mouth, and his guts ran out of his fundament, and
there lay he dead upon his own excrements.

As the Emperor Constantius was a great favourer and supporter of this sect,
and maintained it against, and in despite of true Christans, and by Socr. l.
2. c. 17.
that means stirred up schisms and dissentions throughout all Christendom:
so the Lord to requite him, stirred up Julian; whom he himself had promoted to
honor, to rebel against him: whose practices as he went about to suppress,
and was even ready to encounter, a grievous Apoplexy sudenly surcharged him so
sore, that he died of it; before he could bring his purpose to pass.

The Emperor Valens was infected also with this poison, wherewith Ruff. l. 2.
c. 13. Iornand.
likewise he infected the Goths, who by his means were become the greater part
Arrians, and not Christians: but neither went he unpunished* for when he
marched forth to repress the rage of the furious Goths, who were spread over
all Thracia, and had given them battle, he lost the day, and being shamefully
put to flight, was pursued so fiercely, that he was feign to hide himself in
a little house, which being set on fire by the Goths, he was burnt therein.

As for Nestorius, which would maintain by his foolish and dangerous Niceph.
l. 14. cap. 36.
opinions, that the divinity of Christ was divided from his humanity, making as
it were two Christ's of one, and two persons of one, and so turned upside down
that whole groundwork of our salvation, escaped no more the just vengeance of
God than all other Heretics did: for first he was banished into a far country,
and their tormented with a strange disease; the very worms did gnaw in pieces
his blasphemous tongue, and at length the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
him up.

Concerning the Anabaptists, which rose up about five hundred years since, it
is evidently known how diverse ways God scourged and plagued many of them: some
of them were destroyed by troops and by thousands; others miserably executed
and put to death in diverse places, as well for their monstrous and damnable
heresies, as for many mischiefs and outrages which they committed. By all
which things God does exhibit and set before our eyes, how dear and precious
in his sight the pureness of his holy Word, and the unity of his Church is;
and how careful and zealous every one of us ought to be in maintaining and
upholding the ^ame: when as he revengeth himself so sharply upon all those
that go about to pervert and corrupt the sincerity thereof, or which be
breeders of new sects and divisions Paul. Diac. in Anast. Hist. Sabel. l. 5. c.
4. (...), lib. 1. c. 31. (...) lib. 1. c. 25.
among his people.

Olympus (by office Bishop of Carthage, but by profession a ^avourer and
maintainer of the Arriah heresy) being upon a time in the Bath (...) himself,
he uttered with an impious mouth, blasphemous words against the holy Trinity,
but a threefold thunderbolt came from above, and stroke him dead in the same
place; teaching him by his pain, and all other by experience, what it is to
blaspheme the Lord of Heaven, or with polluted lips to mention his sacred
Majesty. This happened in the year of our Lord God five hundred and ten.

Cyril has recorded unto us of his own knowledge, a more wonderful and
admirable wonder of God upon an Heretic than all the rest, and such an one
indeed, as the like (I dare say) was never heard of: The history is this; After
the decease of Saint Hierome, there stood up one Sabinianus a perverse and
blasphemous fellow, that denied the distinction of persons in the Trinity, and
affirmed the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be but one distinct
person: and to give credit to his heresy, he wrote a book of such blasphemies,
tending to the confirmation of the same, and fathered it upon Saint Hierome, as
being the Author of it. But Silvanus the Bishop of Nazaren mightily withstood
and reproved him, for depraving so worthy a man now dead; and offering his life
for the truth, made this bargain with Sabinianus, That if Saint Hierome the
next day did not by some miracle testify the falsenesse of his cause, he would
offer his throat to the hangman, and abide death; but if he did, that then he
should die. This was agreed upon by each party, and the day following, both of
them accompanied with great expectation of the people, resorted unto the Temple
of Jerusalem to decide the controversy. Now the day was past, and no miracle
appeared, so that Silvanus was commanded to yield his neck to that punishment
which himself was Author of: which as he most willingly and confidently did,
behold, an Image like to Saint Hierome in show, appeared and stayed the
hangmans hand, which was now ready to strike: and vanishing forthwith, another
miracle succeeded; Sabinianus head fell from his shoulders, no man striking at
it, and his carcass remained upon the ground dead and senseless. Whereat the
people amassed, praising God, clave unto Silvanus, and abjured Sabinianus
heresy. Whence we may observe the wonderful wisdom of God, both in
punishing his enemies, and trying his children whither they will stand to his
Truth or no; and learn thereby, neither rashly to measure and limit the
purposes of God, nor yet timorously to despair of help in a good cause, though
we see no means nor likelihood thereof.

Grimoald King of Lombardy was infected with the Arrian heresy, for which
cause the Lord punished him with untimely death; for having been let blood, the
eleventh day after as he strove to draw a bow, he opened the vein anew, and so
bled to death.

^abades King of Persia, when he saw his son Phorsuasa addicted to the Gasp.
^ed. l. 3. cap. 10. and 11.
Maniches, he assembled as many as he could of that sect into one place, and
there setting his Soldiers on them, slew them till there was not one left.

Photinu^ a Gallograecian, for renewing the heresy of Hebion, and affirming
Christ to be but an excellent man borne naturally by Mary, after the manner
Platin^ sub. Siri^i^, 7.
of other men, excelling in justice and moral virtues, was by the Emperor
Valentinianus justly banished.

The Emperor Justinian favoring the heresy of the Apthardocites, when as he
gave out one Edict whereby Anastasius the Bishop, and all other that (...). ^^.
maintained the truth, should be banished; suddenly he was stricken with (...).
^.
an inward and invisible plague, which took away his life, and forestalled his
wicked and cruel determination from coming to the desired effect. In all
which examples we may see how God does not only punish heretics themselves,
but also their favorers and supporters, yea the very places and cities wherein
they lived and broached their blasphemies: as by the destruction of Antioch is
seen, which being a very sink of heretics, was Paul. Diac. l. 5.
partly consumed with fire from Heaven above, in the seventh year of Justinius
the Emperor, and partly overthrown with earthquakes below, wherein
Euphrasius the Bishop, and many other were destroyed.

Moreover, besides those, there were under Pope Innocent the third, certain
heretics called Albigenses, or Albiani, which being possessed with the same
spirit of fury that the Maniches were, affirmed that there were two Gods; the
one good, and another evil: they denied the Resurrection, despised the
Sacraments, and said that the souls of men after their separation, Contempt of
the Word, l. 1. c. 34.
passed either into hogs, oxen, serpents, or men, according to their merits
they would not spare to pollute the Temples appointed for the service of God,
with their excrements, and other filthy actions, and to defile the holy Bibles
with ruin, in despite and contumely. This heresy like an evil weed, so grew
and increased, that the branches thereof spread over almost all Europe; a
thousand cities were polluted therewith; so that it was high time to cut it
short by violence and the sword, as it was; for they were oppressed with so
huge a slaughter, that an hundred thousand of them were slain, partly by war,
partly by fire, at one time.

Gregory of Tours has recorded the life and death of an heretical Monk of
Bordeaux; that by the help of Magic wrought miracles, and took upon him the
name and title of Christ, saying he could cure diseases, and restore those
that were past help by physic, unto their healths: he went attired with
garments made of goats hair, and an hood, professing an austerity of life
abroad, whereas he played the glutton at home; but at length his cousenage was
discovered, and he was banished the city, as a man unfit for civil society.

In the year of our Lord God 1204, in the Empire of Otto the fourth, there was
one Almaricus also that denied the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and
said, that God spoke as well in profane Ovid, as holy Augustine: he scoffed at
the doctrine of the Resurrection, and esteemed heaven Athoisme, l. 1. c. 25.
and hell but as an old wives fable. He being dead, his disciples were brought
forth into a large field near Paris, and there in the presence of the French
King, degraded and burnt: the dead carcass of Almaricus being taken out of the
Sepulcher and burnt amongst them, it fell out that whilst they were in
burning, there arose so huge a tempest, that heaven and earth seemed to move
out of their places; wherein doubtless the souls of these wicked men felt by
experience, that hell was no fable; but a thing, and such a thing as waited for
all such Rebels against God, as they were.

Anastasius, Emperor of Constantinople, being corrupted with the heresy of
Eutiches, published an Edict, wherein all men were commanded to worship God not
under three persons as a Trinity, but as a Quaternity, containing it in four
persons: and could not by any counsel be brought from that devilish error,
but repelled from him diverse Bishops with great reproach, which came to
persuade him to the contrary: for which cause not long after, a flash of
lightning from Heaven suddenly seized upon him, and so he perished when he had
reigned twenty eight years.

Justinius the second also, who after the death of Justinian obtained the
Imperial Crown, was a man of exceeding pride and cruelty, contemning poverty,
and murdering the Nobility for the most part. In avarice his desire was so
insatiate, that he caused iron chests to be prepared, wherein he might lock up
that treasure which by unjust exactions he had extorted from the people.
Notwithstanding all this, he prospered well enough until he fell into the
heresy of Pelagius, soon after which, the Lord bereft him of his wits, and
shortly aster of his life also, when he had reigned eleven years.

Mahomet, by birth an Arabian, and by profession one of the most monstrous
heretics that ever lived, began his heresy in the year 625. His offspring
was out of a base stock; for being fatherless, one Abdemonoples a man of the
house of Ismael, bought him for his slave, and loved him greatly for his favor
and wit: for which cause he made him ruler over his merchandise and other
business. Now in the mean while one Sergius a Monk (flying for heresy into
Arabia) instructed him in the heresy of Nestorius: a while after, his Master
died without children, and left behind him much riches, and his wife a widow
of fifty years of age, whom Mahomet married, and when she died, was made heir
of all her riches. So that now (what for his wealth and cunning in Magic) he
was had in high honor among the people. Wherefore (by the counsel of Sergius)
he called himself the great Prophet of God. And shortly after (when his fame
was published) he devised a Law and kind of Religion called Alcaron, wherein
he borrowed something almost of all the heresies that were before his time,
with the Sabellians he denied the Trinity: with the Maniches he said there was
but two persons in the Deity: he denied the equality of the Father with the
Son, with Eunomius: and said with Macedone that the Holy Ghost was a
creature; and approved the community of women with the Nicholaits: he borrowed
of the Jews circumcision; and of the Gentiles much superstition; and somewhat
he took of the Christian verity, besides many devilish fantasies invented of
his own brain: those that obeyed his Law, he called Sarazins. Now after he
had lived in these monstrous abuses forty years, the Lord cut him off by the
falling sickness, which he had dissembled a long time, saying when he was
taken therewith, that the Angel Gabriel appeared unto him, whose brightness
he could not behold: but the Lord made that his destruction, which be imagined
would be for his honor, and setting forth his Sect.

Infinite be the examples of the destruction and judgment of private Stow
Chron.
Heretics in all ages, and therefore we will content our selves with them
that be most famous. In the year of our Lord 1561, and the third year of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in London one William Geffery, that
constantly avouched a companion of his called John Moore to be Christ our
Savior, and could not be reclaimed from this mad persuasion, until he was
whipped from Southwarke to Bedlam, where the said Moore meeting him, was
whipped also, until they both confessed Christ to be in Heaven, and
themselves to be sinful and wicked men.

But most strange it is, how diverse sensible and wise men were deluded and
carried beside themselves by the subtilty of Satan, in the year 1591, Ibid.
and of the reign of Queen Elizabeth 3 3, the memory whereof is yet fresh in
every man's head and mouth, and therefore I will but briefly touch the same.
Edmund Coppinger and Henry Arthington, two gentlemen, being associated with one
William Hacket, sometimes a profane and very lewd person, but now converted in
outward show, though not in inward affection, were so seduced by his
hypocritical behavior, and the devils extraordinary devices, that from one
point to another they came at last to think, that this Hacket was anointed to
be the Judge of the world; and therefore coming one day to Hackets lodging in
London, he told them they had been anointed Hypocrisy in regard of Hacket, l.
1. c. 22.
of the Holy Ghost: then Coppinger asked him what his pleasure was to be done?
Go your way (says he) and proclaim in the city, that Christ Jesus is come
with his fan in his hand to judge the earth: and if they will not believe it,
let them come and kill me, if they can. Then Coppinger answered, it should be
done forthwith; and thereupon (like madmen) he and Arthington ran into the
streets, and proclaimed their message aforesaid: and when by reason of the
concourse of people they could not proceed any further, they got up into two
empty carts in Cheap, crying, Repent, repent, for Christ Jesus is come to
judge the world: and then pulling a paper out of his bosom, he read out of it
many things touching the office and calling of Hacket, how he represented
Christ by taking part of his glorified body, etc. Besides, they called
themselves his Prophets, one of Justice, another of Mercy. And thus these
simple men were strangely deceived by a miraculous illusion of Satan, who no
doubt by strange apparitions had brought them into this vain conceit. But let
us observe the end of it; it was thus: the whole city being in amaze, took
Hacket, the breeder of this device, and arraigning him before the Mayor and
other Justices, found him guilty as well of this seditious practice, as of
speaking traitorous words against the Queen: wherefore he was shortly after
hanged on a gibbet in Cheap Side, counterfeiting to his last his old devices,
and at length uttering horrible blasphemies against the Majesty of God. As for
his Prophets, Coppinger dyed the next day in Bride well, and Arthington was
kept in prison, upon hope of repentance.

CHAP. XX. Of Hypocrites.
AS God is a Spirit and Truth, so he will be worshipped in truth of spirit and
affection, and not in hypocrisy and dissimulation: for which cause he
commands us by the mouth of Moses, in the sixth and tenth chapters of
Deuteronomy, To love and honor him with all our heart, with all our soul, and
all our strength: which hypocrites are so far from doing, that they have
nothing in them but a vain show of coined religion, and so by that means break
the first commandment; thinking to bleare Gods eyes with their outward shows
and ceremonies, as if he were like men, to see nothing but that which is
without, and offers it self to the view; but it is quite contrary: for it is
he that descryeth the heart, and searches out all the cornors thereof, to see
what truth and sincerity is therein, and therefore hates and detesteth all
hypocrisy, and abhors all such service as is performed only 1 Samuel 16:
for fashion sake, or in regard of men: as appears by there proofs and
checks which the Prophet Esaias denounces against the hypocrites of his time:
who made show of honoring God, but it was but with their lips and vain and
frivolous ceremonies, not in truth of heart and affection: so our Savior
Christ thundered out his curses against the Scribes and Pharisees Math. 23.
with the judgments and vengeance of God for their hypocrisy. With this sin
was Balaam that wicked Prophet, upon whom God bestowed Numb. 22.
a certain gift of prophecy, infected: for when King Balac sent for him to
curse the Israelites, he made as though he would not enterprise any thing
contrary to the will of God as if he had him in great reverence and estimation:
nevertheless being allured and enticed by the golden presents which were sent
him, he despised Gods commandment, and discovered his own secret impiety, and
became an hired slave and enemy to the people of God: but as he was in journey
toward him, there happened a strange and prodigious thing; an Angel met him
by the way with a naked sword in his hand ready to hew him in pieces: whom when
he himself being blinded with covetousness as with a veil, could not
perceive, ^is ass saw and was afraid; and that which was more strange, the
poor bruit and dumb beast speaking in a new language like a man, reproved his
masters ^ Pet. 2. 16.
madness. Whereat he being sore amazed, and notwithstanding all the asses
humbling before the Angel, yet pursued his unhappy journey, to his eternal
shame and confusion, as one of an obstinate and heardened heart; for he was
forced by the Spirit of God to bless those whom he had purposed to curse; and
yet further discovering his hypocrisy and envious disposition, he was the
cause why the Israelites provoked the wrath of God against themselves, through
the pernicious and deceivable counsel which he gave to the Madianites; for
which cause he himself was in the end slain. Numb. 25.

Numb. 3.




In this range may we place Geesie, Elizeus servant, who being as is it were
the Disciple and professed follower both of his Masters life and doctrine, the
true Prophet of God, by whom for the further assurance and confirmation 2 King.
5.
of the grace and blessing of God, he had seen many notable and excellent
miracles wrought; yet notwithstanding was not true of heart, but drawn aside
by desire of lucre, that caused him secretly (unwitting to his master) to ru^ne
after Naaman the Syrian in his masters name, for the money and Avarice, l. 2.
6. 35.
apparel which his master had before refused: and supposing his knavery to be
so hidden that it could not come to light, God discovered and pulled off his
visard, and punished as well the deed, as the manner of doing hereof, upon him
and his posterity, with a perpetual leprosy.

Saint Luke in the first chapter of the Acts, does at large describe the
hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphira, who that they might seem zealous to
Godward, and charitable toward the Saints, having sold a certain possession,
under pretense of giving the price thereof among the poor, retained covertly a
certain portion of it to their own use, being so impudent as to lie unto the
Holy Ghost the President of the Church, and founder of all secrets: but being
attached by the mouth of Peter, a just and fearful judgment of God fell on
them both, even their sudden death at the Apostles feet, one after another.

Nicephorus tells of one Philip, the first Emperor that undertook the name
and profession of Christ; but by the report of other writers, it proceeded not
from any zeal of Religion, or fear of God, but only to the intent to
counterfeit a kind of honesty, and cover his foul vices and cruelties under
the cloak of Religion. But God quickly espied and punished his deep
hypocrisy; for before he had reigned full five years, both he and his son
were slain at Verona by his men of war. Let us learn then this lesson, by these
examples to carry our selves in all pureness, sincerity, and good conscience
before God; that our thoughts, words, and deeds, being estranged from all
hypocrisy, and dissimulation, may be agreeable and acceptable in his sight.

Moreover, even as hypocrisy can wind and insinuate her self into the pure
and sincere service of God, as has been declared; so does she play her part
with no less bravery and ostentation in superstition and idolatry: for the
truth whereof (before I proceed further) I will set down a history not
altogether unworthy the reading and remembering. Two hundred years Enguerran de
Monstr. and Vol. 2.
are not yet past, since there was in the reign of Charles the seventh, King
of France, a certain preaching Friar of Britain, called Friar Thomas, who by
his dissembling customs and brags, under pretense of a certain reformation of
manners, so mightily deceived the whole world, that every where he was reputed
for an holy man. This Friar puffed up with a greedy desire of vainglory, used
to go from town to town, and from country to country, finding exceeding
honorable entertainment in every place; which he took very willingly; and
that he might ride at the more case, he got him a little young Mule, that would
go very softly; and in this sort appointed, he was accompanied with diverse of
his own Order, and many other Disciples that went for the most part on foot by
him: the people flocked from all quarters to see him; yea, and many were so
besotted, as to forsake their fathers, mothers, wives, and children, to attend
upon this holy man. Always when he came near to any city, the Burgesses, and
Gentlemen, and Clergy, with one consent came forth to meet him, doing him as
much reverence (says mine Author) as they would have done to one of Christ's
Apostles if he were alive. He was very well content, that honorable
personages, as Knights and such others, being on foot, should hold his Mule by
the bridle, to be in stead of pages and lacquies to lead him into the towns.
His entrance into every city was with great pomp and magnificence, and his
lodging provided at the richest and stateliest Burgesses house. Now that he
might the better play his part, they prepared him in the best and convenientest
places in the city, a scaffold richly hung and garnished, upon the which his
custom was first to say Mass, then to begin his Sermon; wherein he ripped up
the vices of every estate, but reproved especially the Clergies enormities,
because of their concubines and whores which they maintained: wherein he did
say nothing but that which was good and lawful; but in the same he used no
discretion, but joined madness and sacrilege with his Monkish nature, in
stirring up little children to exclaim upon women for their attire, promising
certain days of pardon to them, as if he had been a god: so that Ladies and
Gentlewomen were enforced to lay aside for a season their accustomed trinkets.
Moreover also, toward the end of his Sermons he commanded to be brought unto
him their Chesse-boords, Cards, Dice, Nine-pins, and such other trash, which he
openly threw into the fire, to be burned before them all. And that he might
give more strength and credit to this his paltry rifraffe, he caused the men
and women to be divided on each side, with a line drawn betwixt them, as in a
Tennis-court; and by this means he drew together sometimes twenty thousand
persons: so ready and zealous is and ever has been the world to follow after
such hypocritical deceivers, rather than the true preachers of Gods Word.

But let us hear the issue of this holy hypocrite; it was thus: When he had in
the forenamed sort traversed as well France as Flanders; it took him in the
head to pass the mountains, and visit Rome; imagining that it was no hard
matter to obtain the Popeship, seeing that in all places where he went, there
was equal honor given unto him: or if he should fail of that hope, yet at
least the Pope and his Cardinals would entertain him honorably; but it
happened far short of his expectation: for Popes are not so prodigal of
their honors, to do any such reverence to a poor silly Monk, but are very
niggards and sparing thereof even toward Kings; so far are they from leaving
their Thrones of Majesty to any other: neither must we think that the Pope
cared greatly for all those tricks and quidditi^s of Friar Thomas, seeing he
himself is the only merchant of such trash. When he was arrived at Rome, Pope
Eugenius seeing that he came not according to custom, to kiss his holiness
feet, sent for him twice, and understanding that he refused to come, and that
he feigned himself to be evil at ease, sent his Treasurer, but not to impart
to him any treasure, but to apprehend and attatch him. The Friar now perceiving
that enquiry was made for him, and that they were at his chamber-dore, leapt
out at a window, thinking by that means to escape; but he was quickly taken
prisoner by the Treasurers servants, waiting before the door, and brought
before the Consistory of Cardinals: Law proceeded against him, by doom whereof,
though no erroneous opinious could be proved against him, he was adjudged to
the stake to be burned for an Heretic: but it was sufficient to make him
guilty, because he defamed the Priests in his Sermons, and had spoken so
broadly of their Gossips, and had been so bold to usurp the authority of
giving pardons, which the Popes claim for a privilege of their own See; and
besides, had made no more account of him that is a petty god on earth, but had
done all these things without his leave and license: it was a hard matter to be
endured of the Bishops of Rome, that a silly Monk should so intermeddle with
their affairs, and should derogate any whit from their supremacy, seeing that
they quit themselves so well with Kings and Emperors, and can at every slight
occasion make them stoop: neither is it to be doubted, but that Pope Eugenius
was very jealous of the honor which Friar Thomas attained unto in every place,
and fearful lest his presence might disturb his present estate. By this
means God, who uses all instruments for his own purpose, and can direct
every particular to the performing of his will, did punish and correct the
hypocrisy of this Monk, that seemed to be holy and wise, being indeed nothing
but foolish, stubborn, and ambitious.

Moreover, most notable was the hypocrisy of two counterfeit holy Maids; one
of Kent in England, called Elizabeth Barton; the other of France, Stow Chron.
called Ioane la Pucelle: the former of which, by the procurement and
information of one Richard Master, Parson of Aldington, and Edward Bocking
Doctor of Divinity, a Monk of Canterbury, and diverse others, counterfeited
such manner of trances and distortions in her body, with the uttering of diverse
counterfeit virtues and holy words, tending to the rebuke of sin, and
reproving such new opinions as there began to spread, that she won great
credit amongst the people, and drew after her a multitude of favorites;
besides, she would prophecy of things to come, as that she should be helped of
her disease by none but the Image of our Lady in Aldington; whither being
brought, she appeared to the people to be suddenly relieved from her sickness;
by means of which hypocritical dissimulation she was brought into mavelous
estimation, not only with the common people, but with diverse great men also,
insomuch that a book was put in print, touching her fained miracles and
revelations. Howbeit, not content to delude the people, she began also to
meddle with the King himself, Henry the eight; saying, That if he proceeded to
be divorced from his wife Queen Katherine, he should not remain King one
month after, and in the reputation of God not one day: for which and many other
tricks practiced by her, she with her accomplices was arraigned of high treason,
and after confession of all her knavery, drawn from the Tower to Tyburne, and
there hanged; the holy maidens head being set upon London bridge, and the other
on certain gates of the City.

The other named la Pucella de Dieu, marvellously deluded with her counterfeit
hypocrisy, Charles the seventh, King of France, and all the whole Stow Chron.
French Nation; in such sort, that so much credit was attributed unto her, that
she was honored as a Saint, and thought to be sent of God to the aid of the
French King. By her means Orleance was won from the English, and many other
exploits achieved, which (to be short) I will refer the Reader unto the
French Chronicles, where they shall find her admirable knavery at large
discovered. But touching her end, it was on this sort: as she marched on
horsebake to the town of Champaigne, to remove the siedge, wherewith it was
guirt by the Duke of Burgoine and other of the English Captains, Sir John
Leupembrough, a Burgonian Knight, took her alive, and conveyed her to the City
of Roan, where she faigning her self with child, when the contrary was known,
was condemned and burnt. And thus these two holy women, that in a diverse kind
mocked the people of England and France by their hypocrisy, by the justice of
God came to deserved destructions.

CHAP. XXI. Of Conjurers, and Enchanters.
IF God by his first Commandment has enjoined every one of us to love, serve,
and to cleave unto him alone in the conjuction and unity of a true faith and
hope unremovable, there is no doubt but he forbids on the other side that
which is contrary to this foresaid duty, and herein especially that accursed
familiarity which diverse miserable wretches have with that lying Spirit, the
Father of error, by whose delusions and subtilty they busy themselves in the
study of sorceries and enchantments, whereupon it is forbidden the Israelites
in the nineteenth of Leviticus, to turn after familiar spirits, or to seek to
Soothsayers to be defiled by them: and the more to withdraw them from this
damnable Lev. 19 31.
crime, in the Chapter following there is a threat set down against it in ^0.
^7.
manner of a Commandment, That if either man or woman have a spirit of
divination or soothsaying in them, they should dye the death, they should stone
them to death, their blood should be upon them: so in the two and twentieth of
Exodus, Exodus 22. 18.
the Law of God says, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live: and Moses
following the same steps, gives an express charge in the eighteenth of
Deuteronomy, against this sin, saying, Let nonebe found among thee that uses
witchcraft, nor that regards the Clouds or times, nor a Sorcerer, or a
Charmer, or Deuteronomy. 19. 10, 11.
that counsels with a Spirit, or a teller of Fortunes, or that asks
counsel of the dead, for all that do such things are abomination unto the
Lord. And therefore this sin, 1 Samuel ver. 15. is reputed amongst the most
heinous and enormous 1 Samuel 15. Isa. 8. 19, 20.
sins that can be: When they shall say unto you (says the Prophet) Enquire
at them that have a Spirit of Divination, and at the Soothsayer, which whispers
and murmures: answer, Should not a people enquire at their God? from the living
to the dead? To the Law, and to the Testimony? Wherefore it was a commendable
thing, and worthy imitation, when they that had received the Faith by Paul's
preaching, having used curious Arts, as Magic and such like, being touched
with the fear of God, brought their books, and Acts 19. 19.
burned them before all men, although the price thereof amounted to fifty
thousand pieces of silver, which by Budeus his supputation arises to five
thousand French Crowns. The Councels, as that of Carthage, and that other of
Constantinople, kept the second time in the suburbs, utterly condemned the
practices of all Conjurers and Enchanters. The twelve Tables in Rome adjudged
to punishments those that bewitched the standing corn. And for the Civil Law,
this kind is condemned both by the Law Iulia and Cornelia. In like manner the
wisest Emperors (those I mean that attained to the honor of Christianity)
ordained diverse Edicts and Prohibitions, under very sharp and grievous
punishments, against all such villainy: as Constantine in the ninth book of the
Cod. tit. 18. enacted, That whosoever should attempt any action by Art Magic,
against the safety of any person, or should bring in or stir up any man, to
make him fall into any mischief or riotous demeanor, should suffer a grievous
punishment: in the fifth Law he forbids every man to ask counsel at
Witches, or to use the help of Charmers and Sorcerers, under the pain of
death. Let them (says he in the sixth Law) be thrown to wild beasts to be
devoured, that by conjuring or the help of familiar spirits go about to kill
either their enemies, or any other. Moreover in the seventh Law he wills,
that not so much as his own courtiers and servants, if they were found faulty
in this crime, should be spared, but severely punished; yet nevertheless, many
of this age gave themselves over to this filthy sin, without either fear of
God, or respect of Law: some through a foolish and dangerous curiosity, others
through the overruling of their own vile and wicked affections, and a third
sort, troubled with the terrors of an evil conscience, desire to know what
shall besall and happen unto them in the end.

Thus Saul the first King of Israel being troubled in himself, and terrified
with the army of the Philistims that came against him, would needs foreknow his
own fortune, and the issue of this doubtful war. Now whereas before whilst
he performed the duty of a good King, and obeyed the commandment of God, he
had cleansed his Realm of Witches and Enchanters; yet is he now so mad as to
make them serve his own turn, and to use their counsels in his extremity;
adding this wickedness to the number of his other great sins, that the measure
thereof might be full: he went therefore to a Witch to seek counsel, who
caused a Devil to appear and speak unto him in the shape of Samuel, and
foretell him of (Gods just judgment upon his wickedness) his utter and final
ruin and destruction.

An example not much unlike unto this in the event, but most like in Buchan.
rerum. Scot. lib. 4.
practice, we find recorded of Natholicus, the one and thirtieth King of the
Scots: who, after he had unjustly usurped the Crown and Seepter, and installed
himself by much bloodshed into the Throne of the Kingdom, by open intrusion,
and no apparent show of right, sought by the same means to confirm and
establish the Kingdom unto him: And therefore (as wickedness is always
accompanied with suspicion and fear) he sent one of his trustiest f^iends to
a Witch, to enquire of things to come, both what success he should have in his
Kingdom, and also how long he should live: the Witch answered, That he should
not live long, but should shortly be murdered, not by his enemy, but by his
familiar friend: when the Messenger urged instantly of whom; she answered, of
him: he detesting her at first, and abhorring the thought of any such villainy,
yet at length considering that it was not safe to disclose the Witches answer,
and on the other side, that it could not be concealed, resolved for his most
security, rather to kill the Tyrant, with the favor of many, than to save him
alive with the hazard of his own head. Therefore as soon as he was returned
home, being in secret alone with the King, to declare unto him the Witches
answer, he slew him suddenly, and gave him his just desert, both for his
horrible cruelty, and wicked sorcery. Let all them that make no conscience of
running to Witches, either for their lost goods, or for recovery of their own
or friends health, remember this example either for their instruction to amend,
or for their terror, if they continue that devilish practice.

Plutarch in the life of Romulus reports of one Cleomedes, a man in
proportion Plut. Romans
of body, and cruel practices, huge and gyant-like: who for that he was the
cause of the death of many little children, and was pursued by the parents of
those dead infants, who sought to be revenged on him for that cruel part, he
hid himself in a coffer, closing the lid fast to him: but when the Coffin was
broken up, the Conjurer was not therein, neither alive nor dead, but was
transported by the malicious spirit the Devil, to a place of greater torment.

Ancient Histories make mention of one Piso, a man of credit and authority
Tacit.
among the Romans, whom the Emperor Tiberius gave unto his son Germanicus
for an help and counselor in the mannaging of his affairs in Asia; so well
was he persuaded both of his sufficiency, courage, and loyalty toward him. It
chanced a while after, that he was suspected to have bewitched to death the
said Germanicus: the signs and marks of which suspicion were, certain dead
men's bones dug out of the earth with diverse charms and curses, and
Germanicus name engraven in tables of lead, and such like trash which Witches
use to murder men withal, were found with him. Whereupon Tiberius himself
accused him of that crime; but would not have the ordinary Judges to sit upon
it, but by special privilege committed the enquiry thereof unto the Senate.
Piso, when every man thought he was preparing himself for his defense against
the morrow (like a wise man to prevent all mischiefs) was found dead the day
before, having his throat cut, and, as most likelihood was, finding himself
guilty of the fact, and too weak to overweigh the other side, forestalled the
infamy of a most shameful death, by killing himself; although there be that
say, that the Emperor sent one of purpose to dispatch him in this manner.

Olaus Magnus tells of one Methotin, a noble Magitian in old time, that Lib.
3. cap. 4. Of the Northe^ne people.
by his delusions did so deceive and blind the poor ignorant people, that
they accounted him not only for some mighty man, but rather for some demi god;
and in token of the honor and reverence they bare him, they Refer this also 10
l. 1. c. 24.
offered up sacrifices unto him, which he refused not; but at last his
knaveries and cousenages being laid open, they killed him whom before they so
much esteemed: and because his dead carcass with filthy stink infected the
approachers, they dug it up, and broached it upon the end of a stake, to be
devoured of wild beasts.

Another called Hollere (as the same Author witnesses) played the like chap.
18. of the foresaid book.
tricks in abusing the peoples minds as strongly as the other did, insomuch
that he was reputed also for a god: for he joined with his craft, strength and
power to make himself of greater authority in the world. When he listed to
pass over the sea, he used no other ship but a bone figured with certain
charms, whereby he was transported, as if both sails and wind had helped and
driven him forwards; yet his enchanted bone was not of power to save him from
being murdered of his enemies.

The same Author writes, That in Denmark there was one Otto a great Rover and
Pyrat by sea, who used likewise to pass the seas without the Olaus Magnus.
help of ship or any other vessel, and sunk and drowned all his enemies with
the waves, which by his cunning he stirred up: but at last his cunning practice
was overreached by one more expert in his art than himself, and as he had
served others, so was he himself served, even swallowed up of the waves.

There was a Conjurer at Saltzburg, that vaunted that he could gather together
all the serpants within half a mile round about into a ditch, and feed them and
bring them up there: and being about the experiment, behold, the old and grand
serpent came in the while, which whilst he thought by the force of his charms
to make to enter into the ditch among the rest, he set upon and enclosed him
round about like a girdle so strongly, that he drew him perforce into the
ditch with him, where he miserably died. Mark here the wages of such wicked
miscreants, that as they make it their occupation to abuse simple folk, they
are themselves abused and cousened of the Devil, who is a finer jugler than
them all.

It was a very lamentable spectacle that chanced to the Governor of Mascon a
Magitian, whom the Devil snatched up in dinner while, and hoisted aloft,
carrying him three times about the town of Mascon in the presence of many
beholders, to whom he cried on this manner, Help, help, Hugo de Cluni.
my friends; so that the whole town stood amassed thereat, yea and the
remembrance of this strange accident sticks at this day fast in the minds of
all the inhabitants of this country; and they say, that this wretch having
given himself to the Devil, provided store of holy bread (as they call it)
which he always carried about with him, thinking thereby to keep himself from
his claws; but it served him to small stead, as his end declared.

About the year 1437, Charles the seventh being King of France, Sir Glyes of
Britain, Lord of Raise, and high Constable of France, was accused (by the
report of Enguerran de Monstrelet) for having murdered many infants and women
with child, to the number of eightscore or more, with Vol. 2.
whose blood he either writ or caused to be written books full of conjurations,
hoping by that abominable means to attain to high matters: but it happened
clean cross and contrary to his expectation and practice; for being convinced
of those horrible crimes (it being Gods will, that such gross and palpable
sins should not go unpunished) he was adjudged to be hanged and burned to
death, which was also accordingly executed at Nantes, by the authority of the
Duke of Britain.

John Francis Picus of Mirand says, That he conferred diverse times with many,
who being enticed with a vain hope of knowing things to come, were afterward
so grievously tormented by the Devil (with whom they had made some bargain)
that they thought themselves thrice happy if they escaped with their lives. He
says moreover. That there was in his time a certain Conjurer that promised a
too curious and no great wise Prince, to present unto him upon a stage the
siege of Troy, and Achilles, and Hector fighting together as they did when they
were alive; but he could not perform his promise for another sport and
spectacle more hideous and ougly to his person; for he was taken away alive by
a Devil, in such sort, that he was never afterward heard of.

In our own memory the Earl of Aspremont and his brother Lord of Orne, were
made famous, and in every man's mouth, for their strange and prodigious seats,
wherein they were so unreasonably dissolute and vaineglorious, that sometime
they made it their sport and pastime to break down all the windows about the
castle Aspremont, where they kept (which lies in Lorraine two miles from Saint
Michael) and threw them piecemeale into a deep Well to hear them cry plumpe:
but this vain excess presaged a ruin and destruction to come, as well upon
their house, which at this present lies desolate and ruinous in many respects,
as upon themselves, that finished their days in misery one after another; as
we shall now understand of the one the Lord of Orne: as for the Earl, how he
died, shall more at large be declared elsewhere. Now it chanced, that as the
Lord of Orne was of most wicked and cruel conditions, so he had an evil
favored look, answerable to his inclination and name, to be a Conjurer: the
report that went of his cruelty was this, That upon a time he put the Baker
(one of his servants, whose wi^e he used secretly to entertain) into a ^un,
which he caused to be rolled from the top of a hill, into the bottom,
sometimes as high as a pike, as the place gave occasion; but by the great mercy
of God, notwithstanding all this, this poor man saved his life. Furthermore,
it was a common report, that when any Gentlemen or Lords came to see him, they
were entertained (as they thought) very honorably, being served with all sort
of most dainty fair and exquisite dishes, as if he had not spared to make them
the best cheer that might be: but at their departure, they that thought
themselves well refreshed, found their stomach empty and almost pined for want
of food, having neither eaten nor drunk any thing save in imagination only; and
it is to be thought, that their horses found no better fare than their masters.
It happened one day that a certain Lord being departed from his house, one of
his men having left something behind, returned to the Castle, and entering
suddenly into the hall where they dined but a little before, he espied a Munky
beating the master of the house that had feasted them of late, very sore. And
there be others that say, that he has been seen through the chink of a door
lying on a table upon his belly all at length, and a Munkey scourging him very
strangely; to whom he should say, Let me alone, let me alone, will thou always
torment me thus? And thus he continued a long time: but at length after he had
made away all his substance, he was brought to such extremity, that being
destitute of maintenance, and forsaken of all men, he was fain (for want of a
better refuge) to betake himself to the Hospital of Paris, which was his last
Mansion house, wherein he died. See here to how pitiful and miserable an end
this man fell; that having been esteemed amongst the Mighties of this world,
for making no more account of God, and for following the illusions of Satan
(the common enemy of mannkdi) became so poor and wretched as to dye in an
Hospital among Cripples and Beggars.

It is not long since there was in Lorraine a certain man called Coulen, that
was over much given to this cursed Art: amongst whose tricks this was one to be
wondered at; that he would suffer harquebuses or pistols to be shot at him, and
catch their bullets in his hand without receiving any hurt: but upon a certain
time one of his servants being angry with him, hot him such a knock with a
pistol (notwithstanding all his great cunning) that he killed him therewith.

Moreover, it is worthy to be observed, That within these two hundred years
hitherto, more Monks and Priests have been found given over to these
abominations and devillishnesses, than of all other degrees of people
whatsoever, as it is declared in the second volume of Enguerran de Monstralet
more at large: where he makes mention of a Monk that used to practice his
sorceries in the top of a tower of an Abbey, lying near to Longin upon Marne,
where the Devils presented themselves to be at his commandment: and this was
in the reign of Charles the sixth. In the same book it is recorded, That in
the reign of Charles the seventh, one Master William Ediline Doctor in
Divinity, and Prior of Saint German in Lay, having been an Augustine Friar,
gave himself to the Devil for his pleasure, even to have his will of a
certain woman: he was upon a time in a place where a Synagogue of people were
gathered together; where to the end that he might quickly be (as he himself
confessed) he took a broom and rode upon it. He confessed also that he had don
homage to that enemy of God, the Devil* who appeared unto him in the shape of
a sheep, and A sweet kiss doubtless.
made him kiss his hinder parts, as he reported. For which causes he was
placed upon a scaffold, and openly made to wear a paper containing his own
faults, and afterward plotted to live prisoner all the rest of his life laden
with yrons, in the Bishop of Eureux his house, which was accordingly executed.
This happened in the year 1453.

In the reign of the same King, 1457, there was a certain Curate of a village
near to Soissons, who to revenge himself of a Farmer that retained from him
the tenths which were appointed to the Knights of the Rhodes, went to a Witch,
of whom he received in gift a fat toad in an earthen pot, which she had a long
while fed and brought up, which she commanded him to baptize; as he also did,
and called it by the name of John: albeit I tremble to recite so monstrous and
vile a fact; yet that every man Contempt of Sacraments, lib. 1. cap. 34.
might see how deadly besotted those sort of people are that give themselves
over to Satan, and with what power of error he overwhelmeth them, and beside,
how full of malice this unclean spirit is, that as it were in despite of God,
would profane the holy Sacrament of Baptism. This good holy Curate, after he
had consecrated the holy host, gave it also to the toade to eat, and afterward
restored it to the Witch again, who killing the toade, and cutting it in
pieces, with other such like sorceries, caused a young wench to carry it
secretly into the Farmers house, and to put it under the table as they were at
dinner; whereupon immediately the Farmer and his children that were at the
table fell suddenly sick, and three days after died: the Witch her self
being detected, was burned, but the Curate suffered only a little imprisonment
in the Bishop of Paris house, and that not long for what with friendship and
money he was soon delivered. Froissard, who was Treasurer and Canon of Chymay,
reports of another Curate in the country of Bear (under Charles the
seventh) that had a familiar spirit which he called Orthon: whose help he
used to the disturbance of the Lord of Corosse, by causing a terrible noise to
be heard every night by him and his servants in his castle, because the said
Lord withheld his tithes from him, and converted them to his own use.

In the yiare 1530, at Nuremburg a certain Priest studied Art Magic, Wierus.
and being very covetous of gold and silver, the Devil (whom he served) shed
him through a Crystal certain treasures hidden in the city: he by and by
(greedy of this rich prey) went to that part of the city where he supposed it
to have lien buried: and being arrived at the place, with a companion whom he
brought to this pretty pastime, fell a searching and digging up a hollow pit,
until he perceived a coffer that lay in the bottom of the hole, with a great
black dog lying by it: whither he was no sooner entered, but the earth fell
down and filled up the hole, and smothered and crushed him to death. So this
poor Priest was entrapped and rewarded by his master no otherwise than he
deserved; but otherwise than he expected or looked for.

Howbeit they are not only simple Priests and Friars that deal with Naucler.
vinc. etc.
these cursed Arts, but even Popes themselves. Silvester the second (as Platina
and others report) was first a conjuring Friar, and gave himself to the Devil
upon condition he might be Pope, as he was indeed; and having obtained his
purpose, as it seemed he began earnestly to desire to know the day wherein he
should die: which also his Schoolmaster the Devil revealed unto him, but under
such doubtful terms, that he dreamed in his foolish conceit, of immortality,
and that he should never die. It chanced on a time as he was singing Mass at
Rome in a Temple called Jerusalem (which was the place assigned him to die in)
and not Jerusalem in Palestina (as he made himself falsely to believe, he heard
a great noise of Devils that came to fetch him away (note that this was done in
Mass while) whereat A not wo^th the nothing.
he being terrified and tormented, and seeing himself not able any way to
escape, he desired his people to rend his body in pieces after his death, and
lay it upon a chariot, and let horses draw it whither they would; which was
accordingly performed: for as soon as he was dead, the pieces of his carcass
were carried out of the Church of Laterane by the wicked spirit, who as he
ruled him in life, so he was the chief in his death and funerals.

By like means came Benedict the ninth to the Popedom, for he was a detestable
B^nno Balleus.
Magitian; and in the ten years wherein he was Pope having committed infinite
villainies and mischiefs, was at last by his familiar friend the Devil
strangled to death in a forest, whither he went to apply himself the more
quieter to his conjurings.

Gregory the sixth, scholar to Silvester, as great a conjurer as his master,
Bal.
wrought much misery in his time, but was at last banished Rome, and ended his
life in misery in Germany.

John the two and twentieth, being of no better disposition than these we have
spoken of, but following judicial astrology, sed himself with a vain hope of
long life, whereof he vaunted himself among his familiars, one day above the
rest at Viterbum, in a chamber which he had lately builded, saying, that he
should live a great while, he was assured of it: presently the floor brake
suddenly in pieces, and he was found seven days after crushed to pieces under
the ruins thereof. All this notwithstanding, yet other Popes ceased not to
suffer themselves to be infected with this execrable poison: as Hildebrand, who
was called Gregory the seventh, and Alexander the sixth, of which kind we
shall see a whole legend in the next book. Do but mark these holy Fathers
how abominable they were, to be in such sort given over to Satan.

Cornelius Agrippa, a great Student in this cursed Art, and a man famous Iovius
in ellgiis virorumillustrium.
both by his own works and others report, for his Necromancy, went always
accompanied with an evil spirit in the similitude of a black dog: but when
his time of death drew near, and he was urged to repentance, he took off the
enchanted collar from the dogs neck, and sent him away with these terms; Get
thee hence thou cursed beast, which have utterly destroyed me Neither was the
dog ever after seen: some say he lept into Araris, and never came out again.
Agrippa himself died at Lions in a base and beggarly Inn.

Zeroastres King of Bactria is notified to have bin the inventer of Astrology
Theat, hist.
and Magic. But the Devil (whose ministry he used) when he was too
importunate with him, burned him to death.

Charles the seventh of France, put Egedius de Raxa^ Marshall of his Kingdom,
to a cruel and filthy death, because he practiced this Art, and in the Fulgos.
l. 9. c. 1.
same had murdered an hundred and twenty teeming women and young infants: he
caused him to be hanged upon a forke by a hot fire, and roasted to death.

Bladud the son of Lud King of Britain, now called England, in the year of
the World 3100, (he that builded the city of Bath, as our late Histories
witness, and also made therein the Bathes) addicted himself so much to the
Devilish art of Necromancy, that he wrought wonders thereby, insomuch that he
made himself wings, and attempted to flee like Dedalus: but the Devil (as
ever like a false knave) forsook him in his journey, so that he fell down
and brake his neck.

In the year of our Lord 1578, one ^^mon Penbrooke dwelling in Saint Georges
parish in London, being a figure setter, and vehemently suspected to be a
Conjurer, by the commandment of the Judge appeared in the parish Church of
Saint Savior at Court holden there: where whilst he was busy in eutertaining
a Proctor, and leaned his head upon a pew a good space, the Proctor began to
lift up his head to see what he ayled, and found him departing out of this
life, and straightwayes he fell down rattling in the throat, without speaking
any one word. This strange judgment happened before many witnesses, who
searching him, found about him five devilish books of conjuration and most
abominable practices, with a picture in tin of a man having three dice in his
hand, with this writing, Chance dice fortunately; and much other trash: so that
every one consessed it to be a just judgment against Sorcery, and a great
example to cause others to fear the just judgment of God. Now let every one
learn by these examples to fear God, and to stand firm and steadfast to his
holy Word, without turning from it on any side, so shall he be safe from such
like miserable ends as these wicked varlets come unto.

CHAP XXII. Of those that through pride and vainglory strove to usurp the
honor due unto God.
AForgetfull and unthankful mind for the benefits which God bestows upon
us, is a branch of this first Commandment, as well as those which went before:
And this is when we ascribe not unto God the glory of his benefits, to give him
thanks for them, but through a foolish pride extol our selves higher than we
ought, presuming above measure and reason in our own power, desire to place
our selves in a higher degree than is meet. With this sond and foolish
affection (I know not how) our first fathers Genesis 1.
were tickled and tainted from the beginning, to think to impair the glory of
God: and they also were puffed up with the blast of ambition, that I know not
with what fond, foolish, rash, and proud conceit, went about after the flood to
build a city and tower of exceeding height, by that means to win same and
reputation amongst men: In stead whereof they ought rather Genesis 11.
to have praised God by remembering his gracious goodness in their miraculous
deliverance in their fathers persons, from that general deluge and shipwreck
of the world: but forasmuch as with a proud and high stomach they lifted up
themselves against God, to whom all glory only appertains, therefore God
also set himself against them and against their over bold practices,
interrupting all their determined presumptuous purposes, by such a confusion
and alteration of tongues which he sent among them, that one could not
understand another: so that with shame they were constrained to leave their
begun work. And besides, in stead of that strong and sure habitation which
they dreamed on, to maintain and defend themselves by, against all enemies, and
(...) fortress and castle whereby they went about to keep other in subje^^^on
to them, they were forced to forsake the place by the just judgment of God,
who scattered and dispersed them hither and thither that he might bring them to
that estate and condition which they most of all feared, and strove to shun.
And thus God resists the proud, and favors the humble: lo here the
punishment wherewith God punished their sin, remaining still upon them this
day, for a chastisement of their proud spirits.

With the stain of this sin, most commonly, the mightiest Potentates of this
world are defiled, who although both by word and writing avouch and confess
their power to be by the grace of God, yet for the most part they are very
unthankful for the same, and so proud and high minded, that they show
themselves most obstinate and ungrateful of all men: for oftentimes they rob
him of the honor and glory which is peculiar unto himself, and attribute it
to themselves, in setting forth their brave and sumptuous shows and triumphs:
this is the sin whereof Nabuchadnezzar King of Babell was reproved; for God
having bestowed upon him a kingdom with such pomp and renown, that he made
whole nations to tremble before his face, and putting many people in subjection
under him, he (in stead of giving thanks for these great benefits) exalted
himself, suffering his heart to swell, and his understanding to wax hard with
pride, not regarding the Lord who extolled him so high: and yet notwithstanding
he was constrained to confess and acknowledge him for the true God, to have an
everlasting Kingdom, and an infinite power, as well by the forewarning of
dreams which Daniel interpreted, as by the miraculous deliverance of three
young men out of the burning furnace; therefore as he walked one day in his
royal palace at Babylon, and vaunted of his greatness, and magnificence,
saying to himself, Is not this great Babell, which I have built for the house
of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and Dan. 4.
for the honor of my Majesty? Now whilst the word was yet in his mouth, a
voice was heard from heaven, saying, O King, to thee it is spoken, Thy Kingdom
shall depart from thee: and according to the tenor of the voice he was
immediately deposed from his royal seat, spoiled of all his glory, driven from
the society of men, deprived of sense, and made a companion for the bruit
beasts, and wild asses, eating grass like oxen, even so long, until his
hair was grown stiff like Eagles feathers, and his nails like the claws of
birds. In which estate he continued the space of seven years; even he that a
little before was so proud and arrogant, and he that had conquered so many
kingdoms and nations, that triumphed over Jerusalem, with the Kings thereof.
This is a most excellent looking glass for Kings to behold the fickleness and
instability of all their power and pomp, when it pleases God to humble and
bring them under: there is neither Scepter, Crown, stay, or strength of man,
that is able to hinder and turn aside the hand of the Almighty, the King of
Kings, from abasing and weakening the most high and strong of this world, let
them be never so brave and jolly, and bringing them into a low, contemptible,
and brutish estate.

Besides this which we have already touched, there is another kind of pride
and presumption most damnable and detestable of all; and it is when a man does
so much forget himself, as to seize and take upon him that honor which only
appertains to God, ascribing to himself a certain deity. One would hardly
think that there were any such in the world, so proud as to commit this sin,
did not experience by certain examples teach us the contrary: As first of all
the King of Tire, whose heart was so exalted with the multitude of riches, and
the renown and greatness of his house, that he doubted not to esteem
himself a god, and to desire majesty and power correspondent thereunto. For
which presumption God by Chap. 28. 1, 2, 3, etc.
the Prophet Ezechiel reproved him, and threatened his destruction, which
afterward came upon him, when by the power of a strange and terrible nation,
his goodly godhead was overcome and murdered, feeling indeed that he was no
god, as he supposed, but a man subject to death and misery.

King Herod, surnamed Agrippa, which put James the brother of John to Acts 12.
death, and imprisoned Peter, with purpose to make him taste of the same cup,
was puffed up with no less sacrilegious pride; for being upon a time seated in
his throne of judgment, and arrayed in his royal robes, showing forth his
greatness and magnificence in the presence of the Ambassadors of Tire and
Sidon, that desired to continue in peace with him, as he spoke unto them, the
people shouted and cried, That it was the voice of God, and not of man: which
titles of honor he disclaimed not, and therefore the Angel of the Lord smote
him suddenly, because he gave not the glory to God: so that he was eaten with
worms, and gave up the ghost. Josephus reports the same story more at large
on this manner: Upon the second Jewish Antiquities, l. 19. c. 7.
day of the solemnization of the plays which Herod caused to be celebrated for
the Emperors health, there being a great number of Gentlemen and Lords
present, that came from all quarters to his feast, he came betime in the
morning to the Theater, clad in a garment all woven with silver of a mavelous
workmanship; upon which, as the Sun rising cast his beams, there glittered out
such an excellent brightness, that thereby his pernicious flatterers took
occasion to call him with a loud voice by the name of God: for the which
sacrilegious speech, he not reproving nor forbidding them, was presently taken
with most grievous and horrible dolours and gripes in his bowels, so that
looking upon the people he uttered these words: Behold here your goodly god,
whom you but now so highly honored, ready to die with extreme pain. And so he
died indeed most miserably, even when he was in the top of his honor and
jollity, and as it were in the midst of his earthly Paradise, being beaten
down and swallowed up with confusion and ignominy, not stricken with the edge
of sword or spear (for that had been far more honorable) but gnawne in pieces
with lice and vermin.

Simon Magus, otherwise called Simon the Samaritane, borne in a village Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 12. Phil. in Chron. Cen^. 1. l. 3. c. 11.
called Gitton, after he was cursed of Peter the Apostle, for offering to buy
the gifts of the Spirit of God with money, went to Rome, and there putting in
practice his magical arts, and working miracles by the Devil, was reputed a
god, and had an image erected in his honor, with this inscription, To Simon
the holy god: Besides, all the Samaritanes, and diverse also of other nations
accounted him no less, as appeared by the reverence and honor which they did
unto him: insomuch, as they called his companion, or rather his whore Helena
(for that was her profession in Tire a city of Phenicia) the first mover that
distilled out of Simons bosom. Now he, to foster this foolish and ridiculous
opinion of theirs, and to eternize his name, boasted that he would at a
certain time fly up into heaven, which, as he attempted to do by the help of
the Devil, Peter the Apostle commanded the unclean spirit to cast him down
again, so that he fell upon the earth and was bruised to death, and proved
himself thereby to be no more than a mortal, wicked, and detestable wretch.

Moreover elsewhere we read of Alexander the Great, whose courage Oros. lib. 3.
and magnanimity was so exceeding great, that he enterprised to go out of
Greece and set upon all Asia, only with an army of two and thirty thousand
footmen, five hundred horse, and an hundred and four score ships: and in this
appointment passing the seas, he conquered in short space the greatest part of
the world: for which cause he was represented to the Prophet Daniel in a
vision, by the figure of a Leopard with wings on his back, to notify the
great diligence and speedy expedition which he used in compassing so many
sudden and great victories; with pride he was so soon infected, that he would
brook no equal nor companion in his Empire; but as heaven had but one Sun,
so he thought the earth ought to have but one Monarch, which was himself:
which mind of his he made known by his answer to King Darius demanding peace,
and offering him the one Just. lib. 11.
half of his Kingdom to be quiet; when he refused to accord thereunto;
saying, He scorned to be a partner in the half, and hoped to be full possessor
of the whole. After his first victory had of Darius, and his entrance into
Egypt (which he took without blows, as also he did Rhodes and Cilicia) he
practiced and suborned the Priests that ministered at the Oracle of Hammon, to
make him be pronounced and entitled by the Oracle, The son of Jupiter (which
kind of juggling and deceit was common at that time.) Having obtained this
honor, forthwith he caused himself to be worshipped as a god, according to
the custom of the Kings of Persia: neither wanted he flatterers about him that
egged him forward, and soothed Just. lib. 12. Curt. lib. 8.
him up in this proud humor: albeit that many of the better sort endeavored
tooth and nail to turn him from it. It happened as he warred in India, he
received so sore a wound, that with pain thereof he was constrained to say,
Though he was the renowned son of Jupiter, yet he ceased not to feel the
infirmities of a weak and diseased body: finally, being returned to Babylon,
where many Ambassadors of diverse far countries, as of Carthage, and other
cities in Africa, Spain, France, Sicily, Sardinia, and certain cities of
Italy, were arrived to congratulate his good success, for the great renown
which by his worthy deeds he had gotten; as he lay there taking his rest many
days, and bathing himself in all kind of pleasure, one day after a great
feast, that lasted a whole day and a night, in a banquet after supper, being
ready to return home, he was poisoned; when before he had drunk his whole
draught, he gave a deep sigh suddenly, as if he had been thrust through with a
dart, and was carried away in a swoone, vexed with such horrible torment, that
had he not been restrained, he would have killed himself. And on this manner
he that could not content himself with the condition of a man, but would needs
climb above the clouds, to go in equipage with God, drunk up his own death,
leaving as suddenly all his worldly pomp, as he had suddenly gotten it: which
vanished like smoke, none of his children being any whit the better for it.

There was in Syracusa a city of Sicilia (which is now called Saragosse) a
Physician called Menecrates, whose folly and presumption was so great, that he
accounted himself a god, and desired to be so reputed by others; insomuch that
he required no other wages and recompense of the patients which he took in
hand (as Aelianus witnesses) but that they should only acknowledge him to be
Jupiter, and call him so, and avow themselves to his service. Upon a time Denis
the tyrant, desirous to make some pastime with him, made a feast, and invited
him amongst others to be his guest; but because he was a god, to do him honor
answerable to his name, he placed him at a table all alone, and set before him
no dishes, but only a censer with frankincense, which was a proper and
convenient service for the gods. This honorable duty pleased the Physician
very well at the first, so that he shuffed up the perfume most willingly: but
when this poor god saw the other guests eating and drinking indeed, and
himself not being able to be fed with smoke, ready to starve with hunger,
arose up and went away all enraged in himself, and derided of others; having
more need to purge his own brains of their superfluous humor, than others
from their sicknesses.

Caligula the first, Emperor, being become an ordinary despiser and open mocker
of all Religion, it came presently in his brain to believe (so drunken was he
with a draught of his own foolish conceit) that there was no other God but
himself; therefore he caused men to worship him, and to kiss his hands or his
feet in token of reverence (which honor afterward the Popes took upon them)
yea and was so besotted, that he went about by certain engines of art to
counterfeit thunder and lightnings: albeit in all this pride and arrogance, or
rather folly, there was none so timorous and fearful as he, or that could
sooner upon lighter occasion be dismayed. One day as he was by mount Aetna in
Sicily, hearing by chance the violent cracking of the flames which all that
season ascended out of the top of the hill, it struck so sudden and horrible a
fear into him, that he never ceased flying all night till he came to Phar in
Messina. Every little thunderclap put him in fear of death, for he would leap
up and down like a mad man when he heard it thunder; finding himself not able
by his god head to defend himself from the power thereof: but if there chanced
greater cracks than ordinary, then would not his hot bed hold him, but needs
must he run into the cold floor underneath the bed, to hide himself. Thus was
he compelled against his will to fear him whom willingly he would not deigne
to acknowledge. And thus it falls out with all wicked miserable Atheists,
whose hearts imagine there is no God; and therefore have so little assurance in
themselves, that there need no thunder and lightening to amase them; for the
shaking of every leaf is sufficient to make them tremble: To conclude, this
Atheist, void of all Religion and fear of God, and full of all profaneness,
was according to his due desert, murdered by one of his servants: of the which
will follow more at large in the next book.

Domitian likewise was so blinded with pride, that he would be called Gros. l.
7. c. 7.
a god, and worshipped: of whom also we will speak in the second book.

To these we may add them also, that to the end to make themselves Dion. Mal.
l. 1. Antiq. Roman.
feared and reverenced as gods, have counterfeited the lightnings and thunders
of heaven, as we read of one Alladius a Latin King that reigned before
Romulus: who being a most wicked Tyrant, and a contemner of God, invented a
trick whereby to present to the ear and eye, the rattling and swift shine of
both thunder and lightning; that by that means astonishing his subjects, he
might be esteemed of them for a god: but it chanced that his house being set on
fire by true lightning, and overthrown with the violent strength of
tempestuous rain, together with the overflowing of a pond that stood near, he
perished by fire and water, burnt and drowned, and all at once.

Did not the King of Elide the like, and to the same end also, by the devise of
a char^t drawn about with four horses, wherein were certain yronworks, Diod.
lib. 4.
which with wrinching about gave an horrible sound resembling thunder, and
torches and squibs which he caused to be thrown about like lightnings, in
such sort, that he oftentimes burnt the beholders: and in this manner he went
up and down braving it, especially over an iron bridge which he had of purpose
built to pass and repasse over at his pleasure; until Gods long suffering
could not endure any longer such outrageous and presumptuous madness, but sent
a thunderbolt from heaven upon his head, that all the world might see by his
destruction, the exceeding folly and vain pride which bewitched him in his
life time: which history the Poet in the person of Sibylla, sets down to
this effect:

I saw Salmon in cruel torments lie,
For counterfeiting thunder of the sky, Aenead. 6.

And Jove's clear lightning: whilst with torches bright,
Drawn with four steeds, and brandished his light,
He rode triumphantly through Elis streats,
And made all Grecia wonder at his feats.
Thinking to win the honor of a god,
(Mad as he was) by scattering fire abroad.
With brazen engines, and with courses faigning,
A noise like that which in the clouds is reigning,
And no where else: but God from thickest sky,
No torch, but such a thunderbolt let fly
At him, that headlong whirld him from his Cell,
And tumbled down into the deepest Hell.
Thus this arrogant King was punished according to the quality of his offense,
even in the same kind wherein he offended: which thing though it be found
written in a Poet, yet ought not be rejected for an old wives tale, seeing it
is not incredible, that a King might make such pastimes and yron-crashing
noises, nor that he might be justly punished for the same: and the rather,
because Caligula did the like, as we have heard before. And we read also, that
one Arthemesius, in the time of the Emperor Justinian, counterfeited Agath.
lib. 5. ^el. Gothu.
by certain engines and devises, in his own house in Constantinople, such
earthquakes, lightenings, and thunders, that would astonish a wise brain to
hear or behold them on a sudden.

But above all others that by darkning the glory of God, to increase their own
power, have proudly exalted themselves against him, the Popes are the
ringleaders, whose unbridled boldness has bin so much the more impudent and
pernicious; for that in terming themselves the servants of the servants of God,
in word, in deed, take unto them the authority and power of God himself: as of
pardoning and absolving sins, creating laws and ordinances at their
pleasure, in binding or unbinding men's consciences; which things appertain to
God only. Nay they have been so brazen-faced, as to command angels and devils,
as Clement the fifth did in one of his bulls: so impudent as to be carried like
Idols upon their vassals shoulders, and wear three crowns upon their heads;
so proud and arrogant, as to constrain Kings and Emperors to kiss their
feet, to make them their vassals, to usurp lordship and dominion over them, and
all their lands and possessions, and to dispossess whom they like not, of
Kingdoms, and install in their room whom they please; and all this by the
thunder of excommunication, whereby they make themselves feared and stood in
awe of. By which dealing of theirs, they verify in themselves that which the
Scripture speaks of Antichrist, which is the man of sin, the son of
perdition, an adversary, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
and one that exalts himself against all which is called God, or which is
worshipped, till he be set as a God in the Temple of God, showing himself that
he is God. Wherefore also the heavy vengeance of God is manifest upon them, by
the great and horrible punishments they have been tormented with: for some of
them have had their eyes pulled out; others have dyed in prisons; a third sort
have bin smothered to death; a fourth has bin killed with the sword; a fifth
has died with hunger; a sixth has been stoned; a seventh poisoned; and yet
there has not wanted an eighth sort, whom the Devil himself has stifled.

This it is to overreach the clouds, and not content with earthly power,
Sabel. Aenead. 9. lib. 7. John le Maire de Besges. Nich. Gyles, of the
Chronicles of France.
to usurp a supremacy and pre-eminence over Kings: such was the pride of Pope
Boniface the eighth, when he sent an embassage to Philip the Fair, King of
France, to command him to take upon him an expedition against the Sarazens
beyond the sea, upon pain of forfeiting of his Kingdom into his hands; and
when having his sword by his side he shamed not to say, that he alone, and none
else, was Emperor and Lord of all the world: in demonstration whereof, he
bestowed the Empire upon Duke Albert, together with the Crown of France; and
not content herewith, his insolency was so importunate, that he charged Philip
the Fair to acknowledge himself to be his subject in all causes, as well
spiritual as temporal, and to levy a subfidy for his holiness out of his
clergy, disabling his authority in bestowing Church livings, which prerogative
he challenged to his See: the conclusion of this bull was in these words: Aliud
credentes fatuos reputamus; as much to say, as, whosoever is of another mind
than this, we esteem him a fool. Whereunto the King answered in this wise,
Philippus Dei, gratia Francorum Rex, Bonifacio se gerenti pro summo pontifice
salutem modicam sive nullam. Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, in temporalibus nos
alicui non subesse, Ecclesiarum and Prebendarum vacantium collationem ad nos
jure regio pertinere: secus autem credentes fatuos reputamus deviantes. In
English thus: Philip by the grace of God King of France, to Boniface bearing
himself for Pope, little or no health. Be it known to thy exceeding great
foolishness, that we in temperall affairs are subject to none, that the
bestowing of Benefices belongs to us by our royal right: and if there be any
that think otherwise, we hold them for erroneous fools. A memorable answer,
well beseeming a true royal and French heart. Immediately he assembled
together a national Council of all the Barons and Prelates within his
dominion, at Paris, wherein Boniface being pronounced an Heretic, a Symonist,
and a Manslayer, it was agreed upon by a joint consent, that the King should
do no more obeisance, but reject as nothing worth, whatsoever he should
impose. Wherefore the King to tame his proud and malicious nature, dispatched
secretly two hundred men at arms under the conduct of one Captain Noguard,
toward Avian in Naples (whither his Holiness was fled for fear of diverse
whose houses and castles he had caused to be rased down) there to surprise him
on a sudden: which stratagem they speedily performed, and carried him prisoner
to Rome, where he died most miserably. Peter Mesie a Spanish Gentleman of
Sevill, says in many of his Lectures, that he died in prison enraged with
famine. Nicholas Gilles in his first volume of French Chronicles reports,
that he died in the castle Saint Angelo, through a flux of his belly, which
cast him into a frenzy, that he gnew off his own hands, and that at the hour
of his death there were heard horrible thunders, and tempests, and lightenings
round about: this is he in whose honor this fine Epitaph was made: Intravit ut
Vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est ut Canis, He entered like Sabel. Aenead. 9.
lib. 7.
a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. And this was he that on the
first day of Lent giving ashes to the Bishop of Genes, in stead of using the
ordinary form of speech, which is, Memento homo quod cinis es, and in cinerem
converter is, Remember man that thou art ashes, and into ashes thou shall
return said in despite and mockery, Memento homo quia Gibellinus es, and cum
Gibellinis in cinerem converter is: Rember that thou art a Gibelline, and
together with the Gibell nes thou shall be turned into ashes: and in stead of
laying the ashes upon his forehead, threw them into his eyes, and forthwith
deprived him of his Bishopric, and would have done worse, if it had been in
his power: mark what little account this holy father himself made of these
ceremonies; and therefore it is no marvel if others mock at them, seeing the
Popes themselves make them but matters of pastime.

If it be so therefore, that no man ought to arrogate to himself any title of
deity, then consequently it is no less unlawful to give that divine honor to
any other mortal creature; and therefore the people of Caesarea faulted
greatly, when blasphemously they called King Herod a god, as has been declared
before. Likewise it was high and proud presumption in the Senate of Rome, not to
receive any god to their Commonwealth, without their own fore-approbation and
consent. As if that God could not maintain his dignity, nor stand without the
good liking and assent of men; or as if that man could defy whom he li^ted,
which is a most ridiculous and absurd thing. And thus the Romans in time of
Tiberius consecrating Tertullian Apolog.
to themselves a whole legion, even thousands of false gods, would not admit of
the true God, and his Son Christ, but rejected him above all others.

Among all the vanities of the Athenians, this was one worthy noting, how they
ordained, that Demetrius, Alexanders successor (for re-establishing their
popular and ancient liberty) with his father Antigonus, should be called Kings,
and honored with the title of Saving gods, and to have a Priest that should
offer sacrifice unto them: and moreover caused their pictures to be drawn in
the same banner where the pictures of Jupiter and Minerva (the protectors of
their city) were drawn in broidered work: but this goodly banner as it was
carried about in procession, was rent in pieces by a tempestuous storm that
arose suddenly. God thereby manifesting how odious and displeasant both this
new and old superstition was in his sight: besides that, do but consider the
laudable virtues that so commended this new god Demetrius, to make them honor
him in such sort; they were violence and cruelties, intemperance, with all
inordinate lasciviousness, villainies, and whoredoms: so that it was no
marvel if they had made him a god, being unworthy altogether of humane
society. This new found god having gotten a great victory by sea, as he
triumphed and braved it with ships after the same, was so shattered with a
sudden tempest, that the greatest part of his navy went to wrecke, and
afterward was vanquished by Seleuchus in a battle, wherein his father
Antigonus was slain: and when he thought to return to Athens, they shut their
gates upon him, whom a little before they had canonized for a god: for which
cause he raised war against them, and so wearied them with onsets on each side,
and so enclosed them both by sea and land, that being brought to extreme
famine and necessity, they were compelled to entertain him again, and to behold
the horrible outrages of their own made god, to their grief and confusion.
But not long after, Seleuchus once again damped his courage, insomuch that
having lived three years in a country of Syria, like a banished outlaw; for
fear to be delivered into his hands, and weary of his own life, he stuffed
himself so with food, that he burst in pieces. Therefore let every man learn
by these examples, not to translate the honor and majesty of God to any
creature, but to leave it to him alone, who is jealous thereof, and will not
(as the Prophet says) give his glory unto another.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Epicures, and Atheists.
AS touching voluptuous Epicures and cursed Atheists, that deny the providence
of God, believe not the immortality of the soul, think there is no such thing
as life to come, and consequently impugn all divinity, living in this world
like bruit beasts and like dogs and swine, wallowing in all sensuality; they
do also strike themselves against this commandment, by going about to wipe
out and deface the knowledge of God; and if it were possible, to extinguish his
very Essence; wherein they show themselves more than mad and brutish, whereas
notwithstanding all the evident testimonies of the virtue, bounty, wisdom,
and eternal power of God, which they daily see with their eyes, and feel in
themselves, do nevertheless strive to quench his light of nature, which
enlighteneth and persuades them and all Nations of this, There is a God, by
whom we live, move, and have our being; who although in his Essence is
invisible, Acts 17. 22.
yet makes he himself known, and as it were seen by his works and
creatures, and mighty government of the world, that he that would seek after
him, may (as one might say) handle and feel him. Therefore they that would
persuade themselves that this glorious heaven and massy earth wanted a guider
and a governor, have their understanding blinded from fight of things
manifest, and their hearts perverted from all show of reason: for is there any
substance in this world that bath no cause of his subsisting? Is there a day
without a Sun? Are there fruit and no trees? Plants and no seeds? Can it rain
without a cloud? Be a tempest without wind? Can a ship sail without a Pylot?
Or a house be built without a Carpenter or builder? If then every part of this
world has his particular cause of being and dependence, is it likely that the
whole is without cause to be to it a furnishing and government? Say, you hogs
and dogs, do you not believe that which you see? or if your eyes be bored out
that you cannot see, must you think there is no Sun nor light, because your
eyes are in darkness and blindness? Can you behold all the secrets of nature?
Is there nothing but a voice, a singing of birds, or an harmonious consort of
musical instruments in the world? And yet who perceives these small things?
Can you behold the wind? Can you see the sweet smell of fragrant flowers along
the fields? Can you see the secrets of your own bodies, your entrails, your
heart and your brain? And yet you cease not to believe that there are such
things, except you be heartlesse and brainlesse indeed: Why then do you
measure God by your own sight, and do not believe there is a God, because he
is invisible, since that he manifests himself more apparently both to
understanding and sense, than either voice, smell or wind? Do not your own
oaths, blasphemies, and horrible cursings bear witness against you, when you
swear by, despite and maugre him whom you deny to be? Does not every
thunderclap constrain you to tremble at the blast of his voice? If any
calamity approach near unto or light upon you, or if death be threatened or set
before your eyes, do not you then feel, in spite of all your reason, that
the severe judgment of God does waken up your dull and sleepy conscience to
come to his trial? There was never yet any nation or people so barbarous,
which by the persuasion and instinct of nature has not always believed a
certain deity, and to think otherwise is not only a derestable thing, but
also most absurd, and so contrary to humane reason, that the very Paynims have
very little tolerated such horrible blasphemy. The Athenians are witnesses
hereof, who banished Protagoras their city and country, because in the Cic. of
the nature of the gods, lib. 1.
beginning of one of his books he called in question the deity, and caused his
books to be burned openly. Neither showed they any less severity toward
Diagoras, surnamed the Atheist: when being (as some say) injuriously Diodor. 13.
and falsely accused of this crime, and for fear of punishment, fled away, they
proclaimed, that whosoever did kill him should have a talent of silver in
recompense, which in value is as much as six hundred crowns, after the rate of
five and thirty shillings French to the crown. How much more then is the state
of Christendom at this day to be lamented, which we see in many places
infected with such a contagious pestilence, that diverse men invenomed with this
deadly poison, are so mischievous and wretched, as to make room for Atheism,
by forbidding and hindering by all means possible, the course of the Gospel:
wherein they make known what they are, and what zeal they bear to the
religion and service of God, and with what affection they are led toward the
good and safety of the commonwealth, and what hereafter is to be hoped of him:
for where there is no knowledge nor fear of God, there also is no bridle nor
bond to restrain and hold men back from doing evil: whereupon they grow to
that pass to be most insolent and profane. This is the Divinity and goodly
instruction that comes beyond the mountains, from that scientificall
University and College of the right reverend Masters, and from the excellent
holiness of some of their Popes: whose manner of life is so dissolute,
lascivious, dishonest, and Sardanapal like, that thereby their Vide li. 1. c.
20. Lucian, Porp^yry, ^ulian, etc. Bale.
Atheism is evidently and notoriously known and talked of by every one.

Hereof Pope Leo the tenth, a Florentine by birth, may serve for an example:
who as he was a very effeminate person, given to all manner of delights and
pleasure, having no other care but of himself, and his own filthy carcasses
ease; so had he no more taste at all, nor feeling of God and his holy Word,
than a dog: he made the promises and threats contained in holy Scripture, and
all else that we believe, matter to laugh at, and things frivolous and of no
weight; mocking at the simplicity, the faith, and belief of Christians: for
one day when Cardinal Bembus (who also showed himself to be none of the best
Christians in the world, by his Venetian history, where as ost as he speaks
of God be uses the plural number, after the manner of heathen writers)
alleged a place out of the Gospel, his damnable impudency was so great as to
reply, That this fable of Christ had brought to him and such as he, no little
profit. Oh stinking and cursed throat to belch out such monstrous blasphemy!
do not these speeches bewray a villainous and abominable Atheist, if ever any
were? Is not this to declare himself openly to be Antichrist? For he is
Antichrist which denies Jesus to be Christ, and which denies the Father and
the Son, according as Saint John says. Albeit in the mean while this cursed
1 John 2* 22.
caitife, that had as much religion as a dog, made show to be the protector and
defender of the Catholic Faith, making war with all his power against
Christ Jesus in the person of his servant Luther. Now after he had by his
pardons and indulgences drawn out a world of money, and heaped up great
treasures by the maintenance of courtizans and whores, and had enriched his
bastards, one day being at meat, he received news of the overthrow of the
French in Lombardy, whereat he rejoiced out of measure, and for that good
tidings doubled his good cheer; suddenly he was constrained to turn his copy
from joy into sadness, from pleasure into grief and gnashing of teeth, by a
most bitter and unlooked for death, which deprived him at once of all his
pleasures, to make him drink the cup of Gods fierce wrath, and to throw him
down headlong into everlasting pains and torments which were provided for
him. Pope Leo (says Saint Martin of Belay in his second book of memorable
things) hearing of the great loss which the Frenchmen sustained at Milan,
took so great joy thereat, that a catarrhe and an ague ensuing, killed him
within three days after; a happy man indeed to die with joy.

Pope Julius the third was one of the same stamp, nothing inferior to the
former in all manner of dissolute and infamous living, and vile and cursed
talk, making known by his impiety, that he had none other god but Vide lib.
1. cap. 21. Heresy.
his belly, and that he was none of Christ's fold, but one of Epicures crew; he
was such a glutton, and so passionate in his lusts, and so profane a despiser
of God and his Word, that once at supper being enraged, and blaspheming because
they had not served in a cold Peacocke which he commanded to be kept whole at
dinner, though there were other hot on the table; a Cardinal that was present,
desired him not to be so moved for so small a trifle: What (quoth he) if it
pleased God to be so angry for eating of an apple, as to thrust Adam and Eve
out of paradise, should not I which am his Vicar be angry for a Peacocke, which
is far more worth than any apple? See how this wicked wretch profaned the holy
Scripture, and like an Epicure and Atheist mocked God: but he died of the gout,
after he had been long plagued with it, together with other diseases, leaving
none other good name behind him, save the report of a most wicked and
abominable man.

Philip Strozze, whom Paulus Iovius reports to have bin commonly bruited T^m.
2. lib. 36.
to be an Atheist, was an Exile of Florence, and afterward prisoner there in
the time of Cosimus Medius, the Prince of that Commonwealth, (against whom this
Philip had enterprized to make war) and being in prison, he killed himself
with the sword of a Spaniard his keeper, which by oversight he had left
behind, setting the point against his throat, and falling down upon it: so
may all Atheists perish and come to naught.

Francis Rabelais having sucked up also this poison, used like a profane
villain, to make all Religion a matter to laugh and mock at; but God deprived
him of his senses, that as he had led a brutish life, so he might die a brutish
death; for he died mocking all those that talked of God, or made mention of
mercy in his ears.

How miserable was the end of Periers the author of that detestable book
entitled Symbolum mundi, wherein he openly mocked at God and his Religion,
even finally he fell into despair, and notwithstanding all that guarded him,
killed himself.

Iodelle also a French tragical Poet, being an Epicure and Atheist, made a
very tragical and most pitiful end; for he died in great misery and
distress, even pined to death, after he had rioted out all his substance, and
consumed his patrimony. Ligneroles the Courtier, to make himself seem a man
of service, made open profession of Atheism; but his end and destruction came
from thence whence he looked for credit and advancement.

To bring the matter to an end, I will here set down a notable and strange
thing that chanced in the reign of Lewis the ninth (as Enguerran de Monstrelet
in his second volume of Histories records it) upon the fifteenth day of June
in the year of our Lord God 1464, there happened a strange thing in the Palace
at Paris: So it was, that there was a matter in law to be tried betwixt the
Bishop of Angiers, and a rich citicen, whom the Bishop charged to have spoken
before many witnesses, that he believed not that there was either God or
Devil, Heaven or Hell. Now whilst the Bishops Lawyer laid to his charge these
things, the place began to tremble very much wherein they were, and a stone
fell down from the roof amongst them all, without hurting any; yet every man
was sore afraid, and departed out of the house until the morrow; then the
matter was begun again to be pleaded, which was no sooner in hand, but the
chamber began afresh to shake, and one of the summers came forth of his
mortisehole, falling downwards two foot, and there stayed: so that all that
were within the hall looking to have been slain outright, ran out so
violently, that some left behind them their caps, others their hoods, others
their slippers: summarily, glad was he that could get out first; neither durst
they plead any more causes in that place until it were mended. Thus much
reports Enguerran, without mention of any decision of that matter. Now
forasmuch as nothing happens by chance, it is most likely that God by that
accident would give us to understand, both how monstrous and detestable all
such speeches are, as also how men ought to fear and abhor them, seeing that
the dumb and senseless creatures, and wood, beams, planks, and stones, and
the earth it self (by nature steadfast and fixed) are so far from enduring them,
that they are moved withal.

There was a certain blasphemous wretch, that on a time being with his
companions in a common lnne, carowsing and making merry, asked them, Discipulus
de temp. s^rm. 132.
if they thought a man was possessed with a soul or no? Whereunto when some
replied, That the souls of men were immortal, and that some of them after
release from the body lived in heaven, others in Hell (for so the Writings of
the Prophets and Apostles instructed them) he answered and swore, that he
thought it nothing so; but rather that there was no soul in man to survive the
body, but that heaven and hell were mere fables, and inventions of Priests to
get gain by; and for himself, he was ready to sell his soul to any that
would buy it: then one of his companions took up a cup of wine and said, Sell
me thy soul for this cup of wine: Which he receiving, bad him take his soul;
and drank up the wine. Now Satan himself was there in a man's shape (as
commonly he is never far from such meetings) and bought it again of the other
at the same price, and by and by bad him give him his soul; the whole company
affirming it was meet he should have it, since he had bought it, not perceiving
the Devil: but presently he laying hold of this souleseller, carried him into
the air before them all, toward his own habitation, to the great astonishment
and amasement of the beholders; and from that day to this he was never heard
of, but tried to his pain that men had souls, and that hell was no fable,
according to his godless and profane opinion.

Pherecides (by birth a Syrian, a tragical Poet and a Philosopher by
profession) Aelianus de Var. bist. l. 4.
boasted impudently against his scholars of his prosperity, learning and
wisdom; saying, that although he offered no sacrifices unto the gods, yet he
led a more quiet and prosperous life, than those that were addicted to
Religion, and therefore he passed not for any such vanity. But ere long his
impiety was justly revenged; for the Lord struck him with such a strange
disease, that out of his body issued such a slimy and filthy sweat, and
engendered such a number of lice and worms, that his bowels being consumed by
them, he died most miserably.

At Hambourgh not long since there lived an impious wretch, that despised
Theatr. histor.
the preaching of the Gospel, and the Ministers thereof, accounting it as a
vain thing not worthy the believing of any man: neither did he thus himself
only; but also seduced many others, bringing them all to Atheism and
ungodliness. Wherefore the Lord justly recompensed him for his impiety: for he
that before had no sense nor feeling of God in his conscience, being touched
with the finger of the Almighty, grew to the contrary, even to too much feeling
and knowledge of God, that he fell into extreme despair, affirming now his
sins to be past forgiveness, because he had withdrawn others from the
truth, as well as himself, whereas before he thought himself guilty of no
sin; and that God was so just, that he would not forgive him, whereas before
he thought there was no God (so mighty is the operation of the Lord when he
pleases to touch the conscience of man) finally, continuing in this desperate
case, he threw himself from the roof of a house into a well, and not finding
water enough to drown him, he thrust his head into the bottom thereof, till
he had made an end of his life.

In the year of our Lord 1502 there lived one Hermannus Biswicke, a Theatr.
histor.
grand Atheist, and a notable instrument of Satan, who affirmed, that the world
never had beginning, as foolish Moses dreamed: and that there was neither
Angels, nor devils, nor hell, nor future life, but that the souls of men
perished with their bodies: besides, that Christ Jesus was nothing else but a
seducer of the people; and that the faith of Christians, and whatsoever else is
contained in holy writs, was mere vanity. These articles full of impiety and
blasphemy, he constantly avouched to the death; and for the same cause was
together with his books burnt in Holland.

A certain rich man at Holberstadium abounding with all manner of earthly
commodities, gave himself so much to his pleasure, that he became Theatr.
histor.
besotted therewith; in such sort, that he made no reckoning of Religion, nor
any good thing, but dared to say, that if he might lead such a life continually
upon earth, he would not envy heaven, nor desire any exchange. Notwithstanding
ere long (contrary to his expectation) the Lord cut him off by death, and so
his desired pleasure came to an end: but after his death there appeared such
diabolical apparitions in his house, that no man daring to inhabit it, it
became desolate: for every day there appeared the Image of this Epicure sitting
at a board, with a number of his ghests, drinking, carousing, and making good
cheer; and his table furnished with delicates, and attended on by many that
ministered necessaries unto them, beside with minstrels, trumpetters, and such
like. In sum, whatsoever he delighted in, in his life time, was there to be
seen every day. The Lord permitting Satan to bleare men's eyes with such
strange shows, to the end that others might be terrified from such Epicurisme
and impiety.

Not inferior to any of the former in Atheism and impiety, and equal to all
in manner of punishment, was one of our own nation, of fresh and late memory,
called Marlin, by profession a scholar, brought up from his Marl^w.
youth in the University of Cambridge, but by practice a Play-maker, and a Poet
of scurrility, who by giving too large a swing to his own wit, and suffering
his lust to have the full reins, fell (not without just desert) to that great
outrage and extremity, that he denied God, and his son Christ, and not only
in word blasphemed the Trinity, but also (as it is credibly reported) wrote
books against it, affirming our Savior to be but a deceiver, and Moses to be
but a seducer of the people, and the holy Bible to be but vain and idle
stories, and all Religion but a device of policy. But see what a hook the Lord
put in the nostrils of this barking dog: so it fell out, that as he purposed
to stab one whom he ought a grudge unto, with his dagger, the other party
perceiving, so avoided the stroke, that withal catching hold of his wrest, he
stabbed his own dagger into his own head; in such sort, that notwithstanding
all the means of surgery that could be wrought, he shortly after died thereof:
the manner of his death being so terrible (for he even cursed and blasphemed to
his last gasp, and together with his breath an oath flew out of his mouth)
that it was not only a manifest sign of Gods judgment, but also an horrible
and fearful terror to all that beheld him. But herein did the justice of God
most notably appear, in that he compelled his own hand which had written those
blasphemies, to be the instrument to punish him, and that in his brain, which
had devised the same.

Another also of our own nation is not to be overpassed, who for an Atheist
and an Epicure might compare with any of the former, and for the judgment of
God upon him does give place to none. It was a gentleman of Barkshire, whose
name I forbear to express, a man of great possessions. This man was an open
contemner of God and all Religion, a professed Atheist, and a scorner of the Word
of God and Sacraments; insomuch, as I have heard reported of very credible
persons, being a witness at the baptising of a child, he would needs have it
called Beelzebub. Besides this, he was given over to all sensuality of the
flesh, keeping in his house continually notorious strumpets, and that openly
without shame: his mouth was so accustomed to swearing, that he could scarce
speak without an oath. This miserable man, or rather beast, having continued
long in this damnable course of life, at last Gods heavy vengeance found him
out: for upon a certain day riding abroad a hunting with another companion, as
they were discoursing of many vain matters, it pleased Almighty God of a
sudden to strike him with sudden death: for falling suddenly to the crupper of
his horse backward, he was taken down stark dead, with his tongue hanging out
of his mouth after a fearful manner, and became a terrible example to all
wicked Atheists, of Gods justice.

Hither I might add the examples of others, who having been in high places of
favor in former times, are fallen like Lucifer from their heaven, that is,
their worldly felicity, and live like him in chains of imprisonments. These
had wont (being in their bravery) to mock at all Religion, and to make
themselves merry with scoffing at the holy Scripture, but the Lord has brought
them down, and plucked the feathers of their pride, to teach them to know
there is a God, and that Religion is no matter of policy, but Gods own
ordinance, to bring men to blessedness; and let them be assured, if they
repent not, the Lord will yet further execute his vengeance upon them, and make
them more manifest spectacles of his justice.

Many more modern and homebred examples I could add; of some that were
hanged, some that died desperate, some that were deprived of their senses,
having been notorious Atheists and Epicures in their lives; but I hope these
already named are sufficient to prove, that the Lord of heaven observes the
ways of men, and rewards every man according to his works, especially such
as strive to deny his Essence-or his son Christ. I would to God (and I pray
it from my heart) that all Atheists in this Realm, and in the world beside,
would by the remembrance and consideration of these examples either forsake
their horrible impiety, or that they might in like manner come to destruction;
and so that abominable sin which so flourishes amongst men of greatest name,
might either be quite extinguished and rooted out, or at least smothered and
kept under, that i^ durst not show it head any more in the worlds eye.

CHAP XXII. Touching the transgressors of the second Commandment, by Idolatry.
WE have hitherto seen how and in what sort they, that either by malice, or
impiety, or Apostasy, or heresy, or otherwise have transgressed the first
Commandment have been punished: Let us now consider the judgments that have
befallen Idolaters, the breakers of the second Commandment. But before we
proceed, we must know, that as it is required of us by the first Commandment,
to hold God for our true and only God, to repose all our whole trust and
confidence in him, and call upon him, serve and worship him alone; so in the
second to this the contrary to this is forbidden; which is, to do any manner
of service, honor, and reverence by devotion to Idols, forasmuch he is a
Spirit (that is to say, of a spiritual nature and Essence, which is infinite
and incomprehensible) so loves he a spiritual John 4.
worship and service, which is answerable to his nature, and not by Images and
pictures, and such other outward and corruptible means, which he has in no
wise commanded: wherefore Isaiah the Prophet reproving the folly and vanity of
Idolaters, says, To whom will you liken God, or what similitude will you set
up unto him: Therefore if it be not Gods will, that under pretense and color
of his own name, any Image or picture should be adored (being a thing not only
inconvenient, but also absurd and unseemly) much less can he abide to have
them worshipped under the name and title of any creature whatsoever. And for
this cause gave he the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image etc. which prohibition Chap. 40. 18.
the Israelites brake in the desert, when they set up a golden calfe, and bowed
themselves before it after the manner of the Paynims, giving it the honor
which was only due to God: whereby they incurred the indignation of Almighty
God, who is strong and jealous of suffe^ing any such slander to be done unto
his name: wherefore he caused th^^e thousand of them to be stricken and wounded
to death by the hand of the Levites, at the commandment of Moses, to make his
anger against Idolatry more Exodus 32.
manifest, by causing them to be executioners of his revenge, who were ordained
for the ministry of his Church, and the service of the Altar and Tabernacle.
Howbeit for all this, the same people not long after, fell back into the same
sin, and bowed themselves befere strange gods, and through the allurements of
the daughters of Moab, joined themselves to Belphegor: Numb. 27.
for which cause the Lord being insenced, stroke them with so grievous a
plague, that there died of them in one day about twenty and four thousand
persons.

And albeit that after all this, being brought by him into the land of promise,
he had forbidden and threatened them, for cleaving to the Idols of the nations,
whose land they possessed, yet were they so prone to Idolatry, that
notwithstanding all this, they fell to serve Baal and Astaroth: wherefore the
fire of Gods wrath was inflamed against them, and he gave them over to be a
spoil and prey unto their enemies on every side, so that for many years,
sometimes the Moabites oppressed them, otherwhiles the Madianites, and ever
after the death of any of their Judges and Rulers which God raised up for their
deliverance, some grievous punishment befell them: for then (being without law
or government) every man did that which seemed good in his own eyes, and so
turned aside from the right way.

Now albeit these examples may seem to have some affinity with Apostasy, yet
because the ignorance and rudeness of the people was rather the cause of their
falling away from God, than any wilful affection that reigned in them,
therefore we place them in this rank, as well as they have bin always brought
up and nuzled in Idolatry.

One of this c^^w was Ochosias King of Judah, son of Ioram, who having 2 Chronicles
22.
before him an evil president of his wicked father, and a worse instruction
and bringing up of his mother Athaliah, who together with the house of Achab
pricked him forward to evil, joined himself to them and to their Idols, and
for that cause was wrapped in the same punishment and destruction with Ioram
the King of Israel, whom Iehu slew together with the Princes of Judah, and many
of his near kinsmen.

And to be short, Idolatry has been the decay and ruin of the kingdom of
Judah, as at all other times, so especially under Ioachas son of Josias, 2
Kings 23.
that reigned not above three months in Jerusalem, before he was taken and led
captive into Egypt by the King thereof, and there died: from which time the
whole land became tributary to the King of Egypt.

And not long after, it was utterly destroyed by the forces of Nabuchadnezzar
King of Babel, that came against Jerusalem and took it, and carried 2 Kings
24. 25
King Ioachim with his mother, his Princes, his servants, and the treasurers of
the Temple, and his own house, into Babylon; and finally took Zedechias that
fled away, and before his eyes caused his sons to be slain: which as soon
as he had beheld, commanded them also to be pulled out, and so binding him in
chains of iron, carried him prisoner to Babylon; putting all the Princes of
Judah to the sword, consuming with fire the Temple, with the Kings Palace, and
all the goodly buildings of Jerusalem. And thus the whole kingdom (though by
an especial prerogative, consecrated and ordained of God himself) ceased to
be a kingdom, and came to such an end, that it was never re-established by
God: it is no marvel then if the like happened to the kingdom of Israel, which
was after a sort begun and confirmed by the filthy idolatry of Ieroboams
calves, which as his successors maintained or favored more or less, so were
they exposed U idel. 1. c. 19
to more or less plagues and encumbrances.

Nadab, Ieroboams son, being nuzled and nurtured up in Idol worship, 1 Kings
15. 27
after the example of his father, received a condign punishment for his
iniquity: for Baasa the son of Ahijah put both him and all the off spring of
Ieroboams house to the sword, and reigned in his stead: who also being no whit
better than those whom he had slain, was punished in the person of Ela his
son, whom Zambri also his servant slew. And this again usurping the crown,
enjoyed it but seven days, at the end whereof (seeing himself in danger in
the city of Tirza, taken by Amri, whom the people had chosen for their King)
went into the palace of the Kings house, and burned himself.

As for Achab, he multiplied Idolatry in Israel, and committed more wickedness
than all his predecessors, wherefore the wrath of God was stretched out against
him and his; for he himself was wounded to death in battle by the Syrians,
his son Ioram slain by Iehu, and threescore and ten of his children put to
death in Samaria by their governors and chief of the city, sending their heads
in baskets to Iehu.

Above all, a most notable and manifest example of Gods judgment was seen in
the death of Iezabel his wife, that had been his spur and provoker to all
mischief, when by her Eunuchs and most trusty servants, at the commandment of
Iehu, she was thrown down out of a window, and trampled under the horse feet,
and last of all devoured of dogs. Moreover, the greatest number of the kings of
Israel that succeeded him, were murdered one after another: so that the
kingdom fell to such a low decline, that it became first tributary to the King
of Assyria, and afterward invaded and subverted by him, and the inhabitants
transported into his land, whence they never returned, but remained scattered
here and there like vagabonds, and all for their abominable Idolatry. Which
ought to be a lesson to all people, Princes, and Kings, that seeing that God
spared not these two Realms of Judah and Israel, but destroyed and rooted them
out from the earth, much less will he spare any other kingdom and Monarchy
which continue by their Images and Idol-worship, to stir up his indignation
against them.

CHAP. XXV. Of many evils that have come upon Christendom for Idolatry.
IF we consider and search out the cause of the ruin of the East Empire, and
of so many famous and flourishing Churches as were before time in the greatest
part of Europe, and namely in Greece, we shall find that Idolatry has been
the cause of all: for even as it got footing and increase in their dominions,
so equally did the power of Saracens and Turkish tyranny take root and
foundation among them, and prospered so well, that the rest of the world
trembled at the report thereof; God having raised and fortified them, as before
time he had done the Assyrians and Babylonians, as whips and scourges to
chasten the people and Nations of the world that wickedly had abused his holy
Gospel, and bearing the name of Christians, had become Idolaters: for no other
name than this can be given them, that in devotion do any manner of homage to
Images and pictures, whatsoever may superficially be alleged to the contrary.
For be it the Image either of Prophet, Apostle, or Christ Jesus himself, yet
it is necessary that the law of God stand whole and sound, which says, Thou
shall make thy self no graven Image, nor any likeness of things either in
heaven above, or in earth beneath, thou shall not how down to them, nor
worship them, etc. Wherefore he performed the part of a good Bishop, that
finding a veil spread in the entrance of a Church door, wherein the Image of
Epiphan. John Bishop of Jerusalem.
Christ or of some other Saint was pictured, rent it in pieces, with these
words, That it was against the authority of the sacred Scriptures, to have any
Image of Christ set up in the Church. After the same manner, Serenus Bishop of
Marscilla, beat down and banished all Images out of his Churches, as occasions
of Idolatry: and to shun them the more, it was ordained in the Elibertine
Council, that no Image nor picture should be set up in any Church: for which
cause also the Emperor Leo the third, by an open Edict commanded his subjects
to cast out of their Temples all pictures Paul. Diacon. lib. 6. cap. 14.
and statues of Saints, Angels, and whatsoever else, to the intent that all
occasions of Idolatry might be taken away: yea and he burned some, and punished
diverse otherwise, that in this regard were not pliant, but disobedient to his
commandment. After which time, when Images were recalled into Greece and into
Constantinople (the chief city and seat of the East Empire) it came to pass
by a great and dreadful (yet just) judgment of God, that this famous and
renowned city, in the worlds eye impregnable, after long siege, and great and
furious assaults) was at length taken by the Turks, who having won the breach,
and entered with fury, drove the poor Emperor Palaeologus (even till then
fighting for the cities defense) to that extremity, that in retyring among the
prease of his own soldiers, he was thronged and trampled to death; and his
slain body being found, was beheaded, and his head contemptuously carried about
the city upon a lance. Now after the massacre of many thousand men, to make up
a complete, and absolute cruelty, they drew the Empress with her daughters and
many other ladies and gentlewomen to a banquet, where after many vile and
horrible wrongs and disgraces, they killed and tore them in pieces in most
monstrous manner. In all which, the execution of Gods most just wrath for
Idolatry did most lively appear: which sin, accompanied with many other
execrable and vile vices, must needs draw after it a grievous and terrible
punishment, to serve for example to others that were to come: neither was it a
thing by chance, or hap-hazzard, that the Christians were made a mocking stock
to them in that woeful day, when in their bloody triumphs they caused a
Crucifix to be carried through the streets in contempt, and throwing dirt upon
it, cried in their Language, This is the gallant god of Christians. And thus
did God license and permit these savage Turks to commit every day grievous
outrages, and to make great wastes and desolations in all Christendom, till
that they grew so mighty, that it is to be feared lest the saying Lactant. lib.
1. Institut. ca. 15.
of Lactantius touching the return of the Empire into Asia, be not verified
and accomplished very shortly, if there be no amendment practiced: for we see
by woeful experience, that almost all the forces which Christian Princes have
mustered from all quarters, in pretense to resist their fury and rage, have not
only been bootlesse and unprofitable, but also that which is worse, given them
further occasion by their bloody victories, and wonderful slaughter of so many
millions of men, to make them more obstinate in their detestable Mahometisme
and Turkish Religion than they were before: for they make their boasts thereof,
and rear up trophies of their cruelties, taking no more pity of the
vanquished, than the Butcher does of a Sheep allotted to the slaughter. Whereof
we have a pitiful example in the overthrow of the French army, which John the
son of Philip Duke of Burgondy led against the Turk Bajazet, and by the
treachery and cowardice of the Hungarians, who in the time of battle turned
their backs and fled, was overcome: in that this wicked and cruel Tygre
expressly charged, That all the prisoners (in number many) should be murdered
one after another, which was readily executed before his eyes; so that saving
the chief Captains and certain few Lords of the company, that were spared in
respect of great ransomes, there escaped not one alive.

Besides these general calamities, the Lord has particularly shown forth his
indignation against private persons and places for Idolatry: as in Spoletium at
one time there perished by an earthquake three hundred and Cent. 4. cap. 3.
fifty, whilst they were offering sacrifice unto Idols. At Rome under the
Empire of Alexander Severus, after that the left hand of the Image of Jupiter
Cent. 3. cap. 14.
was miraculously melted, the Priests going about to pacify the anger of their
gods with Lectisterns and sacrifices, four of them together with the Altar and
Idol were stricken in pieces with a thunderbolt, and suddenly such a terrible
darkness overspread all the city, that most of the inhabitants ran out into
the fields all amassed. Moreover, did not the Lord send lightning from heaven to
inflame that notorious Temple of Idolatry, of Apollo, or rather the Devil of
Delphos, in the time of Julian the wicked Theodor. lib: 3. cap. 9. and 10.
Apostate, whilst he was exercising tortures upon one Theodorus a Christian,
and did it not consume the Image of Apollo to ashes? The famous and rich Temple
of Jupiter at Apamea, how strangely did it come to ruin and destruction? For
when the President and Tribunes (who had in Nicephorus lib. 12. c. 27.
charge to destroy it) thought it a thing almost unpossible, by reason of the
strength of the walls, and matter of it; Marcellus the Bishop undertook the
labor, and found out a man that promised to shake and root up the foundation
of it by fire; but when he had put it in practice, a black Devil appeared and
hindered the natural operation of the fire: which when Marcellus perceived, he
by earnest and zealous prayer drove away the Devil, and so the fire rekindled
and consumed it to nothing. In all which examples we may see the wonderful
indignation of God against Idoll-worshippers when by such strange and
extraordinary means he brings them to destruction. And this doubtless is no
new course, for even since the beginning of the world (if we consult Histories)
we shall find, that well nigh all the kingdoms, places, persons, and
countries that have been any wise infected with this sin, have still come to
some ruin or other, and to some great overthrow, and their Idolatry suppressed
by some notable and strange accident. Whereof Saint Hierome may be a witness,
who affirms, That when Jesus being a child was carried into Egypt for fear
of Herod, all the Idols of Egypt fell down, and all their miracles became
mute, which the Prophet Isaias foreseeing, says, Behold, the Lord rides upon
a swift cloud. Isay 19. 1.
and shall come into Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt shall melt in the midst of
her. Besides, the general silence of the Devil in his Oracles throughout the
world presently upon Christ's Incarnation, is a thing known and confessed of all
men. Notwithstanding all which, the holy Pope will still maintain his Idolatry,
albeit the Lord has made manifest tokens of his indignation against it. As
appears by that which happened in the year 1451, being the Popes Iubile,
when such a concourse of people was made from all quarters of the world to
honor that superstitious day: for the people being upon Adrians bridge, were
so thrust together, that two hundred men and three horses lost their lives,
being trampled upon and stifled to death: many fell into the water over the
bridge, and so perished; of whom an hundred and thirty were buried at Saint
Celsus. And these are the fruits of their Indulgences, which are too much
bought and sought for, and of their Iubilies, proceeding from the Bishop of
Rome his impious and sacrilegious zeal. Now to eschew these and such like
misfortunes; the true and only means is, an unfeigned diversion from all
Idolatry and Superstition, and whatsoever else contrarieth the pure service of
God, and a conversation unto him, to serve him in spirit and truth, as the
Scripture exhorts.

CHAP. XXVI. Of those that at any time corrupted and mingled Gods Religion with
humane inventions, or went about to change or disquiet the discipline of the
Church.
NOw seeing that God has set down a certain form of doctrine and
instruction, according to which he would have us to serve him, and established
a kind of discipline to be observed and maintained of every man inviolably, it
behooves therefore every Christian to conform himself unto this order; and
not to be guided by every fickle imagination of his own brain, or every rash
presumption that arises in himself, but only by the direct rule of Gods
Word, which only we ought to follow. By means of neglecting which duty, many
vain and pernicious ceremonies and strange superstitions have been brought in
and swayed mightily: by reason whereof great Controversies and Disputations are
taken up at this day. Albeit indeed it be a thing manifest, that being not
grounded and propped upon the Anchor of the Scriptures, they ought to be
abolished, what brave outward show in appearance soever they bear.

And that they set abroach things are not blameless and excusable before God,
it appears by the punishment of Nadab and Abihu, who being Levit 20. Numb 34.
ordained Priests of God, to sacrifice and offer only those things which were
commanded in the Law, yet were so evil advised as to offer strange incense and
perfume upon the Altar, received at the very instant of the fact condign
punishment for their presumption: for suddenly this their strange fire invaded
them so fiercely, and so piercingly, that they were soon burned and consumed
therewith: and so they were not spared, albeit they were Aarons sons, even
his first borne, and Moses Nephews; that by them all other might fear and
take warning how to enterprise any thing in Gods service contrary to his
express Ordinance.

This moderation also ought to be observed in the Church Discipline, to wit,
that every man contain himself within the Precincts of his vocation, and that
none intrude themselves into any charge without being called of God thereunto:
whereof Corah greatly faulted, when being not Numb. 16.
content with the dignity of a Levites office which God had bestowed upon him,
he ambitiously aspired to the Priests office, and besides this stirred up and
drew to his faction Dathan and Abiram, and many others, to the number of two
hundred and fifty persons, against Moses and Aaron: but he drew withal the
vengeance of God down upon himself and all that took his part in most
horrible and fearful manner: for some of them, to wit, the two hundred and
fifty, who, notwithstanding Moses reproose, were so hardy and presumptuous as
to present themselves the next morrow after the tumult, openly before the
Tabernacle, to offer Incense, as if they had been true Priests, were for their
flame of Ambition and Pride, set on fire and consumed with the flame of Gods
wrath: others, to wit, Dathan and Abiram, for their audacious enterprise
against God, in the person of his servants, Moses and Aaron, and their high
mindedness and rebellion, in not coming out of their Tents at the commandment
of Moses, were thrown down into the lowest pit, the earth opening her mouth,
and swallowing them up alive with their Tents and Families, and all that
belonged unto them, to the fearful amasement of the whole people, that were
beholders of this Spectacle.

Oziah King of Judah, carried himself a long while uprightly and modestly 2 Chronicles. 26.
in the service of God: but after God had given him many great victories over
his enemies the Philistims, the Arabians, the Amorites, and that his renown
and fear was spread not only to his neighbors, but also to strange nations,
by and by his heart was puffed up with pride and selfeconceit, that he dared to
enter the Temple of God, and burn Incense upon the Altar, which belonged only
to the Priests office to do: and not obeying the strong resistance and
countermand of the good Priests that had charge of the Temple, he was stricken
with a Leprosy, and hastily carried out and sequestered from the society of men
all his life time. And so this proud King that foolishly took upon him more
than was lawful and convenient, was forced to recoile, and to be still, being
humbled under so grievous a scourge as never for sooke him till his death.

When the Arc of the Covenant was in bringing from Abinadabs house 1 Samuel 6: 1 Chronicles. 13.
in Kyriathjarim, in a Cart guided by Vzza and Ahio, Abinadabs sons, it fell
out on the way, that it being shaken by the Oxen, (unfit Servitors for such a
work) Vzza put forth his hand to hold it; but therein he went beyond his
charge, and therefore was punished forthwith with present death, for his
inconsiderate rashness: for albeit he was both a Levite, and thought no evil
in his heart, yet in no respect was be licenced to touch the Arc, being a
thing lawful for the Priests only. Let therefore every one be advised by
these Examples, to follow the rule in serving God, that is by him designed, in
all simplicity, modesty, and obedience, without altering or declining, or
undertaking any thing above or beside their calling.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Perjuries.
THe third Commandment (which is, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in vain) is first and especially broken by Perjury, when God is so lightly
esteemed, nay, so despised, that without any regard had to his Name, that is to
say, to his Greatness, Majesty, Power, Divine virtue, and fearful Justice,
(for these be his names) men by fraud and malice abuse their Oaths, either in
denying that which is true, or affirming that which is untrue, or neglecting
their promises made and vowed to others: for this is neither to have respect
unto his presence, who is every where, nor reverence to his Majesty, who is
God of Heaven and Earth, but rather to make him bear witness to our lie and
falsehood; as if he approved it, or had no power to revenge the injury and
dishonor done to him. And therefore against such, in threatening words he
denounces judgment, that He will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name
in vain. Howbeit very many over-boldly give themselves over to this sin,
making little or no conscience to cosen one another even by forswearings:
whereby they give most clear evidence against themselves, that they have very
little fear of God before their eyes, and are not guided by any other rule
save of their own affections by which they square out and build their oaths,
and pull them done again at their pleasures; for let it be a matter of
vantage, and then they will keep them, but straightway if a contrary
persuasion come in their brain, they will cancel them by and by: wherein they
deal far worse and more injuriously with God, than with their known
enemies; for he that contrary to his sworn faith deceives his enemy,
declares that therein he fears him, but fears not God; and cares for him,
but contemns God. It was therefore not without good reason that all antiquity
ever marked them with the coat of infamy that forswore themselves. And
thereupon it is that Homer so often taunteth the Trojans by reason of their so
usual Perjuries. The Egyptians Diod. l. 2. c. 2.
had them in detestation as profane persons, and reputed it so Capital a
crime, that whosoever was convinced thereof was punished by death. The ancient
Romans reverenced nothing more then faith in public affairs, for which cause
they had in their City a Temple dedicated to it: wherein for a more strait
bond they used solemnly to promise and swear to all the conditions of Peace,
Truces, and Bargains, which they made, and to curse those which went about
first to break them: for greater solemnity and confirmation hereof, they were
accustomed at those times to offer sacrifices to the image of faith for more
reverence sake. Hence it was that Attilius Regulus, chief Captain of the
Roman Army against the Carthaginians, was so highly commended of all men,
because when he was overcome and taken prisoner, and sent to Rome, he only for
his oaths sake which he had sworn, returned again to the enemy, albeit he
knew what grievous torments were provided for him at his return. Others also
that came with him, though they were entreated, and by their Parents, Wives,
and Allies, instantly urged not to return to Hannibals Camp, could in no wise
be moved thereunto: but because they had sworn to the enemy, if the Romans
did not accord to those conditions which were offered, to come again, they
preferred the bond and reverence of their promised faith, though accompanied
with perpetual captivity, before their private commodities, and nearest link
of affection. But two of these ten (for so many were they) falsified their
oath, and whatsoever mist they might cast to darken and disguise their Perjury
with, yet were they condemned of all men for cowards, and faint-hearted
Traitors: insomuch that the Censors also nored them with infamy for the fact;
whereat they took such grief and inward sorrow, that being weary of their
lives, they slew themselves. Now what can they pretend that profess themselves
Christians and Catholics, to excuse their Perjuries, seeing that the very
Heathen cry out so loud and clear, That an oath and Cic. offic. lib. 1.
faith is so sacredly to be kept toward our enemies? This is one of the
greatest virtues and commendations which the Psalmist attributes to the
faithful man, and him that fears God, and whom God avoucheth for his own,
Not to falsify his oath that he swears, though it be to his damage. The
Psalm. 15. Josh 9.
Gibeonites although they were so execrable a people, that for their great and
horrible wickednesses and ahominations they might be well esteemed for
Heretics, yet the Princes of Israel, after they had sworn and given their
faith unto them, would in no wise retract or go against their oath, albeit,
therein they were deceived by them, for fear of incurring the wrath of God,
that suffers not a Perjurer to go unpunished. Upon what ground or example of
holy Scripture then may that Doctrine of the Council of Constance be founded,
the purport whereof is, That a man ought not to keep his faith with Heretics?
I omit to speak how these good Fathers (by Heretics) meant those men who
fearing God, relied themselves upon his Word, and rejected the foolish and
superstitious inventions of men. And under what color can the Popes usurp
this Authority, to quit and discharge subjects of their oath wherewith they are
bound to their Superiors? yet this was the impious audacity of Pope Zacharia,
Pope Boniface the 8, and Pope Benedict de la Lune, who freed the Frenchmen from
their duty and obedience which they ought unto their Platina.
Kings. In like manner disgorged Gregory the 7 his choler and spite against
the Emperor Henry, by forbidding his Subjects to be his Subjects, Enguerran de
Monstrelet.
and to yield that obedience unto him which Subjects were bound to do.

How be it if an oath be made either against God, or to the damage and hurt of
our neighbor (it being for that cause unlawful) it behooves us to know that
we ought to revoke it, lest we fall into the sin of Saul and 1 Samuel 14.
Marc. 6.
Herod. Now what punishments God has laid upon Perjuries, these Examples that
follow shall make known unto us. Osee the last King of Israel, being made (by
Gods just judgment for his sins) subject and tributary to Salmanazar King of
Ashur, without regard to the bond wherewith 2 Kings 17.
he was bound, and to his faith which he had plighted, conspired and entered
league with the King of Egypt, against him: but he discovering their seditious
and privy conspiracies, assembled his forces, spoiled his country, and bad
them war on all sides; laying fiege to the chief City of his Kingdom,
after three years took it, together with the forsworn King, whom he put in
close prison, and kept very straightly, leading him and his whole Nation
captive into Syria, to end their days in misery: of which evil, as of all
others that happened in that war, the disloyalty and Treason of Osee was the
next and chiefest cause.

Among the bed-roll of sins which Zedechias the last King of Judah is noted
withal in holy Scripture, Perjury is one of the count: for notwithstanding he
received his Kingdom of Nabuchadnezzar, and had sworn 2 Chronicles. 36.
fealty to him, as to his Sovereign, yet brake he his oath in rebelling
against him; which was the very cause of his destruction: for Nebuchadnezzar to
be revenged on his disloyalty, sent a puissant Army against Jerusalem, which
took, spoiled, and burnt it, and overtooke the Perjurer in his flight, and
first made him a beholder of the slaughter of his own children, and then had
his own eyes bored out, and was carried in chains to Babylon, serving for a
spectacle to all posterity, of Gods wondrous judgments upon Perjurers. And
thus both the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah were for breach and falsifying their
Oath quite extinguished and rased out.

The great deceiver and most treacherous person, one of them, that ever
Plutarch.
Greece saw, was Lisander the Lacedemonian, a busie-body, full of cunning,
subtilty, and craft, and one that performed the most of his acts of War, more
by fraud and stratagems, than by any other means: this was he that said, That
when the Lions skin (meaning Fortitude) would not serve, it was needful then
to sow unto it the Foxes case (meaning subtilty) he made so little reckoning of
forswearing himself, that he would often say, That children were to be
cousened with trifles, as Dice and Cockles, and old men with Oaths: but with
deceitful tricks he was occasion of much evil, and diverse murders: but at
last this Fox making war against the Thebans, for that they had taken part
with the Athenians against him, and given them succor and means for
recovering their liberty, was taken in the trap, and slain at the foot of
their walls.

Metius Suffetius, General of the Albanes, procured the Fidenates to enter
Livie.
war against the Romans, contrary to his oath which he had sworn unto them,
and being called by the Romans to their succor, and placed in an out Wing to
help if need were, whilst the rest were fighting, he drove away the time in
ordering his men, and ranging them into squadrons, to see which part should
have the best, that he might join himself unto that side. But Tullus the
Roman King having obtained the victory, and seeing the cowardice, subtilty, and
treason of this Albane, adjudged him to a most strange and vile death,
answerable to his fact: for as he had in his body a double heart swimming
between two streams, and now ready to go this way, now that, so was his body
dismembered and torn in pieces by four horses, drawing four contrary ways:
to serve for an example to all others to be more fearful and true observers
of their oaths than he was.

In old time the Africans and Carthagenians were generally noted for perfidy
and falsehood above other Nations; the cause of which bruit was principally that
old subtle Soldier Annibal, an old deceiver, and a notorious Perjurer, who by
his crafts and cousenings which he wrought without Live. Decad. 3. lib. 1.
Religion or fear of God, raised up the evil report. This subtle Fox having
made war in Italy sixteen years, and all that while troubled and vexed the
Romans sore, after many victories, wastings of Countries, ruins, and sackings
of Cities, and cruel bloodshed, was at length overcome by Scipio in his own
Conntrey; and perceiving that his Countrymen imputed the cause of their fall
unto him, and sought to make him odious to the Romans, by laying to his charge
the breach of that league which was betwixt them, he fled to Antiochus King of
Syria, not so much for his own safeties fake, as to continue his war against
the Romans, which he knew Antiochus to be in hammering, because they came so
near unto his Frontiers: but he found his hope frustrate; for King Antiochus,
for the small trust he affied in him, and the daily suspicion of his treachery,
would not commit any charge of his Army into his hand, although for
valiantness and prowess he was second to none of that Age. It came to pass
therefore, that as soon as Antiochus was overthrown of the Romans, he was
constrained to fly to Prusius King of Bythinia, that took him into his
protection: but being as treacherous himself, he soon devised a means to
betray him to Quintius, the General of the Roman Army: which when Annibal
understood, and seeing that all passages for evasion were closed up, and that
he could not any way escape, he poisoned himself, and so miserably ended his
treacherous life. And thus the deceit which he practiced toward others, fell
at length upon his own Pate, to his utter destruction.

Albeit that Perjurers and forswearers were to the Egyptians very odious
Iustine.
and abominable (as we said before) yet among them there was one Ptolome, who
to bereave his sister Arsinoe of her Kingdom, stained himself with this
villainous spot, and thereby brought his purpose to pass; for pretending and
protesting great affection and love unto her in the way of marriage (for such
incestuous marriages were there through a perverse and damnable custom not
unlawful) and avowing the same by solemn oath before her Ambassadors, did
notwitstanding soon make known the drift of his intent, which was to make
himself King: for being arrived in show to consummate Marriage, at his first
approach he caused his Nephews (her sons which she had by her former
husband Lysimachus, and were come forth from their mother to give him
entertainment on the way) to be slain; yea, and lest they should escape his
hands, he pursued them even to their mothers bosom, and there murdered them,
and after (expelling her also from her Kingdom) caught the Crown, and reigned
Tyrant in her room: all which mischief he committed by reason of the
faithless oath which he had taken: and although that in such a case no oath
ought to be of force to confirm so lawful affiance (though it be pronounced
and taken by the name and in the Temple of their Idols) yet notwithanding it
being done with an evil conscience, and to an evil purpose, he that did it
can be no less then a Perjurer. But for this and other vices it came to pass,
that ere long he was conquered by the Gauls, who taking him in battle, slew
him and cut off his head, and having fastened it upon a Lance, carried it in
sign of victory and triumph up and down the host.

A most notable example of the punishment of Perjurie and falsehood in
Vladislaus King of Hungary and his Army destroyed by the Turks, is set down
in Bonfinus his Hungarian History, after this manner. It fell out Bonfinus.
that the King of Hungary had so well bestirred himself against the Turks,
that Amurathes was glad (upon unequal conditions, and even to his own hurt,
and their good) to conclude a peace with him: wherein it was agreed, that
certain Provinces should be restored to the Hungarian, which otherwise could
not have been recovered but by great loss of men. This league being made, and
the Articles thereof engrossed in both Languages, with a solemn oath taken on
both parties for the consirmation of the same; behold the Cardinal of
Florence, Admiral of the Navy which lay upon the Sea Hellespont (now called
Saint Georges Arm, which divides Turkey It is so called by the French men,
but more commonly, the Straits of Castile.
from Greece) sends Letters to the King of Hungary to persuade him to
disannull and repeal this new concluded peace: This practice likewise did
Cardinal Julian, the Popes Legate in Hungary, with might and maine help
forward: which two good pillars of the Church, inspired with on and the same
spirit, wrought together so effectually with the king, that at that instance he
falsified his oath, broke the peace, and sent to Constantinople to denounce
War afresh; and forthwith whilst their Ambassadors were retyring their
Garrisons out of Misia, to bring them into their hands again, and had sent
forty thousand crowns for the ransom of great men which were prisoners, and
had restored the Realm of Rascia and all their Captives, according to the
tenor of their late league, not knowing of this new breach: in the mean while
(I say) he set forward his Army toward the great Turks in all expedition.
Now the Turks secure and misdoubting nothing, were set upon unawares by the
King, yet putting themselves in defense, there grew a long and sharp battle,
till Amurathes perceiving his side to decline, and almost overcome, pulled out
of his bosom the Articles of the aforesaid peace, and lifting up his eyes to
heaven, uttered these speeches: O Jesus Christ, these are the leagues that thy
Christians have made and confirmed by swearing by thy name, and yet have broken
them again: if thou be a God, as they say thou art, revenge this injury
which is offered both thee and me, and punish those Truce-breaking Varlets. He
had scarce ended these speeches, but the Christians battle and courage began
to rebate, Vladislaus himself was slain by the I^nizaries, his horse being
first hurt; his whole Army was discomfited, and all his people put to the
sword, saving a few that fled: amongst whom was the right reverend Ambassador
of the Pope, who as soon as he had thrust in over the ears, withdrew himself
(forsooth) far enough from blows or danger. Then followed a horrible
butchery of people, and a lamentable noise of poor souls ready to be
slaughtered, for they spared none, but haled them miserably in pieces, and
executed a just and rigorous judgment of God for that vile treachery and
perjury which was committed.

CHAP. XXVIII. More examples of the like subject.
But let us add a few more examples of fresher memory, as touching this
ungodly Perjury: And first King Philip of Macedony, who never made reckoning of
keeping his oaths, but swore and unswore them at his pleasure, and for his
commodity: doubtless it was one of the chiefest causes why he and his whole
Progeny came quickly to destruction (as testifies Pausanias) for he himself
being 46 years old, was In Areadicis.
slain by one of his own servants; after which Olympias his wife made away
two of his sons, Anideus, and another which he had by Cleopatra, Attalus his
niece, whom she sod to death in a Cauldron: his daughter Thessalonicaes
children likewise all perished: and lastly, Alexander after all his great
victories, in the midst of his pomp, was poisoned at Babylon.

Gregory Tours makes mention of a wicked Varlet in France among the people
called Averni, that forswearing himself in an unjust cause, had his De
confessoribus.
tongue so presently tied, that he could not speak but roar, and so
continued, till by his earnest prayers and repentance the Lord restored to
himself the use of that unruly member.

There were in old time certain people of Italy called Aequi, whereof the
memory remains only at this day, for they were utterly destroyed Live. lib. 3:
by Q. Cincinnatus. These having solemnly made a league with the Romans, and
sworn unto it with one consent, afterward chose Gracchus Cluilius for their
Captain, and under his conduct spoiled the Fields and Territories of the
Romans, contrary to the former league and oath. Whereupon the Romans sent Q.
Fabius, P. Voluminous, and A. Posthumous Ambassadors to them, to complain of
their wrongs and demand satisfaction: but their Captain so little esteemed
them, that he bad them deliver their message to an Oak standing thereby,
whilst he attended other business. Then one of the three turning himself
toward the Oak, spoke on this manner: Thou hallowed oak, and whatsoever else
belongs to the gods in this place, hear and bear witness of this disloyal
part, and favor our just complaints, that with the assistance of the gods we
may be revenged on this injury. This done they returned home, and shortly
after gathering a power of men, set upon and over came that truce-breaking
Nation.

In the year of Rome built, 317, the Fidenates revolted from the friendship and
league of the Romans, to Toluminus the king of the Veyans, and adding cruelty
to treason, killed four of their ambassadors that came to know the cause of
their defection: which disloyalty the Romans not brooking, undertook war
against them, and notwithstanding all their private and foreign strength,
overthrew and slew them. In this battle it is said, that a Tribune of the
soldiers seeing Toluminus bravely galloping up and down, and encouraging his
soldiers, and the Romans trembling at his approach, said, Is this the breaker
of leagues, and violater of the law of nations? If there be any holiness on
earth, my sword shall sacrifice him to the souls of our slain ambassadors;
and therewithal setting spurs to his horse, he unhorst him, and fastening
him to the earth with his spear, cut off his perfidious head: whereat his army
dismayed, retired, and became a slaughter to the enemies.

Albertus Duke of Franconia having slain Conrade the Earl of Lotharingia,
Melanct. Chr. Lib. 4
brother to Lewis the fourth, then Emperor, and finding the Emperors wrath
incensed against him for the same, betook himself to a strong castle at
Bamberg; from whence the Emperor neither by force nor policy could remove him
for seven years space, until Atto the Bishop of Mentz by treachery delivered
him into his hands. This Atto under show of friendship repaired to the castle,
and gave his faith unto the earl, that if he would come down to parle with
the Emperor, he should safely return into his hold: the Earl mistrusting no
fraud, went out of the castle gates with the Bishop toward the Emperor; but
Atto (as it were suddenly remembering himself, when indeed it was his devised
plot) desires to return back and dine ere he went, because it was somewhat
late: so they do, dine, and return. Now the Earl was no sooner come to the
Emperor, but he caused to be presently put to death, notwithstanding he urged
the Bishops promise and oath for his return: for it was answered, that his
oath was quit by returning back to dine, as he had promised. And thus the
Earl was wickedly betrayed, though justly punished. As for Atto the subtle
traitor, indeed he possessod himself by this means of the Earls lands; but
withal, the justice of God seized upon him, for within a while after he was
stricken with a thunderbolt, and as some say, carried into mount Aetna, with
this noise, Sicpeccatalues, atque ruendorues.

Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia making war upon the Argives, surprised
Comp^fulgos. Lib. 7. c. 3.
them by this subtilty, he took truce with them for seven days, and the third
night whilst they lay secure, and unwarie in their truce, he oppressed them
with a great slaughter, saying, (to excuse his treachery, though no excuse
could clear him from the shame thereof) that the truce which he made was for
seven days only, without any mention of nights: howbeit for all this, it
prospered not so well with him as he wished: for the Argie vwomen, their
husbands slain, took arms like Amasons, Tolesilla being their captainesse,
and compassing the city walls, repelled Cleomenes, half amassed with the
strangeness of the sight. After which he was banished into Egypt, and there
miserably and desperately slew himself.

The Pope of Rome with all his heard of Bishops, opposed himself against
Chron. Carrion.
the Emperor Henry the fourth; for he banished him by excommunication from the
society of the Catholic Church, discharged his subjects from the oath of
fealty, and sent a crown of gold to Rodolph king of Suevia, to canonize him
Emperor: the crown had this inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema
Rodulpho; that is, The Rock gave unto Peter, and Peter gave unto Rodolph the
crown: Notwithstanding Rodolph remembering The Rock is Christ. 1 Cor. 10.
his oath to the Emperor, and how vile a part it was to betray him whom he had
sworn to obey and defend, at first refused the Popes offer: howbeit by the
persuasion of the Bishops sophistry, he was induced to undertake the name and
title of Caesar, and to oppugn the Emperor Henry by arms, even by four
unjust battles, in the last of which Rodolph being overcome, lost his right
hand, and was sore wounded otherwise: wherefore being ready to die, when one
brought unto him his hand that was cut off in the battle, he in detestation of
the Popes villainy, burst forth into these terms, (many Bishops standing by)
Behold here the hand wherewith I swore fealty to the Emperor, this will be an
argument of my breach of faith before God, and of your traitorous impulsion
thereunto. And thus he deceased, justly punished even by his own confession
for his perjurie. Howbeit for all this manifest example, the Pope and Bishops
continued to persecute the poor Emperor, yea and to stir up his own sons,
Conrade and Henry, to fight against him; so hardened are their hearts against
all Gods judgments.

Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, a man famous for his virtues, and sharp Eusebius.
li. 6. c. 8.
in reproving and correcting vice, was accused by three wicked wretches of
unchastity, and that falsely and maliciously; for to prove their accusation
true, they bound it with oaths and curses on this wise; the first said, If I
ly, I pray God I may perish by fire: The second, If I speak aught but truth, I
pray God I may be consumed by some filthy and cruel disease. The third, If I
accuse him falsely, I pray God I may be deprived of my sight, and become
blind. Thus Calumniation Lib. 2. Cap. 24.
although the honesty and chastity of Narcissus was so well known to all the
faithful, that they believed none of their oaths, yet the good Bishop, partly
moved with grief of this false accusation, and partly with desire of
quietness from worldly affairs, forsook his bishopric, and lived in a
desert for many years. But his forsworn accusers by their death witnessed his
innocence, which by their words they impugned: for the first, his house being
set on fire extraordinarily, perished in flame, with all his family and
progeny. The second languished away with an irksome disease that bespread his
body all over. The third seeing the woeful ends of his companions, confessed
all their villainy, and lamenting his case and crime, persisted so long
weeping, till both his eyes were out. Thus God in his just judgment sent upon
each of them their wishes, and thereby cleared his servant from shame and
opprobry.

Burghard Archbishop of Magdeburg, though in regard of his place and Chron
Er^esti, Brotanff.
profession, he ought to have given good example of honesty in himself, and
punish perjurie in others; yet he thrice broke his promise and oath with his
own Citisens, the Senate and people of Magdeburg: for first he besieged them
with a power of men, and though they redeemed their liberty with a sum of
money (he swearing not to besiege them any more) yet without respect of truth
and credit he returned afresh to the siege: but his persidie was soon tamed;
for they took him prisoner at that assault: howbeit he so assuaged their
angry minds, with his humble and lowly entreaties and counterfe it oaths,
never to trouble them any more, but to continue their steadfast friend, that
they not only freed him from imprisonment, but restored him to all his
dignities with solemnity: nevertheless the traitorous Archbishop returning to
his old vomit, got dispensation for his oath from Pope John the xxiij, and
began afresh to vex, molest, and murder them whom he had sworn to maintain:
but it was the will of God that he should be once again caught, and being
enclosed in prison, whilst his friends sought means to redeem him, the
jailer beat him to death with a door bar, or as some say, with an iron rod
taken out of a window; and so at last, though long, his perjurie found its
desert.

The small success that the Emperor Sigismund had in all his affairs, (after
the violation of his faith given to John Hus and Hierome of Prague Theatr.
histor.
at the Council of Constance, whom though with direct protestations and oaths
he promised safe conduct and return, yet he adjudged to be burned) does
testify the odiousness of his sin in the sight of God. But above all, this
one example is most worthy the marking, of a fellow that hearing perjury
condemned in a pulpit by a learned preacher, and how it never escaped
unpunished; said in a braverie, I have often forsworn my self, and yet my right
hand is not a whit shorter than my left. Which words he had scarce uttered,
when such an inflammation arose in that hand, that he was constrained to go to
the Surgeon and cut it off, lest it should infect his whole body; and so
his right hand became shorter than his left, in recompense of his perjurie,
which he lightly esteemed of.

About the year of our Lord 925, when King Ethelstane, otherwise called
Adelstane, reigned here in England, there was one Elfrede a Nobleman, who with
a faction of seditious persons conspired against the King presently after the
death of his Father, and at Winchester went about to put out his eyes: but the
King by the good providence of God escaped that danger; and Elfrede being
accused thereof, fled to Rome, to the end to purge himself of the crime by oath
before the Pope: who being brought to the Church of Saint Peter, and there
swearing, or rather forswearing, himself to be clear, when indeed he was
guilty, behold the Lords hand on him, suddenly as soon as his oath was
pronounced, he fell down in a strange sickness; and from thence being brought
to the English house in Rome, within three days after departed this life. The
Pope sent word hereof to King Ethelstane, with demand, Whither he would have
him buried among Christians or no: Who through the persuasions of his friends
and kinsfolk, granted, that though he neither lived nor died like a Christian,
yet he should have Christian burial.

In the town of Rutlinquen a certain passenger came into an Inn, and Joh. le
Gall. 1 vol. of his Table-talk.
gave a budget to his host to be kept, in the which there was a great sum of
money: but when he demanded it again at his departure, the host denied it, and
gave him injurious words, with many mocks and taunts. Whereupon the passenger
calls him in question before the Judge, and because he wanted witnesses,
desires to have him sworn: who without all scruple offered to swear and
protest, That he never received or concealed any such budget of money from him;
giving himself to the Devil if he swore falsely. The passenger seeing his
forwardness to damn himself, demanded respit to consider of the matter, and
going out, he meets with two men, who enquire the cause of his coming
thither, and being informed by him, offer their help unto him in his cause:
thereupon they return before the Judge, and these two unknown persons
justify that the budget was delivered unto the host, and that he had hidden
it in such a place: whereat the host being astonished, by his countenance and
gesture discovered his guiltiness: the Judge thereupon resolved to send him to
prison, but the two unknown witnesses (who were indeed two fiends of hell)
began to say, you shall not need, for we are sent to punish his wickedness;
and so saying, they hoisted him up into the air, where he vanished with them,
and was never after found.

In the year of our Lord 1055, Goodwine Earl of Kent sitting at the table
Stow. Chron.
with King Edward of England, it happened that one of the cupbearers stumbled,
and yet fell not: whereat Goodwine laughing, said, That if one brother had not
helped another (meaning his legs) all the wine had been spilt: with which words
the King calling to mind his brothers death, which was slain by Goodwine;
answered, So should my brother Alphred have helped me had not Goodwine been:
then Goodwine fearing the Kings new kindled displeasure, excused himself with
many words, and at last eating a morsel of bread, wished it might choke him if
he were not guiltless of Alphreds blood. But he swore falsely, as the judgment
of God declared, for he was forthwith choked in the presence of the King, ere
he removed one foot from that place; though there be some say he recovered life
again.

Long time after this, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in the city
of London, one Anne Averies widow, who forswore her self for Stow Chron.
a little money that she should have paid for six pounds of tow at a shop in
Woodstreet: for which cause being suddenly surprised with the justice of God,
she fell down speechless forthwith, and cast up at her mouth in great
abundance, and with horrible stink, that matter which by natures course should
have been voided downwards, and so died, to the terror of all perjured and
forsworn wretches. There are in histories many more examples to be found of
this hurtful and pernicious sin, exercised by one nation toward another, and
one man toward another, in most profane and villainous sort, neither shaming
to be accounted forsworn, nor consequently fearing to displease God and his
majesty. But forasmuch as when we come to speak of murderers in the next book,
we shall have occasion to speak of them more, or of such like, I will refer
the handling thereof unto that place: only this, let every man learn by that
which has been spoken, to be sound and fraudlesse, and to keep his faith and
promise toward all men, if for no other cause, yet for fear of God, who
leaves not this sin unpunished, nor holds them guiltless that thus takes
his name in vain.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Blasphemers.
AS touching Blasphemy, it was a most grievous and enormous sin, and contrary
to this third Commanmandement, when a man is so wretched and miseble, as to
pronounce presumptuous speeches against God, whereby his name is slandered and
evil spoken of: which sin cannot choose but be sharply and severely punished;
for if so be that God holds not him guiltles, that does but take his name in
vain must he not needs abhor him that blasphemeth his Name? See how
meritoriously that wicked and perverse wretch that blasphemed and murdered (as
it were) the name of God, among the people of Israel in the desert, was
punished: he was taken, put in prison, and condemned, and speedily stoned to
death by the whole multitude: and upon that occasion (as evil manners evermore
begat good laws) the Lord instituted a perpetual Levit. 24.
law and decree, that every one that should blaspheme and curse God, of what
estate or degree soever, should be stoned to death, in token of detestation:
which sentence, if it might now adays stand in force, there would not reign so
many miserable blasphemers and deniers of God as the world is now filled and
infected with. It was also ordained by a new law of Justinian, Cod. lib. 3.
tit. 43.
That blasphemies should be severely punished by the judges and magistrates of
Commonweales: but such is the corruption and misery of this age, that those men
that ought to correct others for such speeches, are oftentimes worst
themselves: and there are that think, that they cannot be sufficiently feared
and awed of men, except by horrible bannings and swearings they despite and
maugre God: nay it is further come to that pass, that in some places, to
swearc and ban be the marks and ensigns of a Catholic, and they are best
welcome that can blaspheme most. How much then is that good King Saint Lewis of
France to be commended, who Nich. Gil. vol. Of French Chronicles.
especially discharged all his subjects from swearing and blaspheming within
his realm, insomuch that when he heard a Lord of Ienville.
nobleman blaspheme God most cruelly, he caused him to be laid hold on, and his
lips to be slit with an hot iron, saying, he must be content to endure that
punishment, seeing he purposed to banish oaths out of his kingdom. Now we
call blasphemy (according to the Scripture phrase) every word that derogateth
either from the bounty, mercy, justice, eternity, and sovereign power of God.
Of this sort was that blasphemous speech of one of King Iorams Princes, who at
the time of the great famine in Samaria, when it was besieged by the Syrians,
hearing Elizeus the Prophet say, that the next morrow there should be plenty of
victuals and good cheap, rejected this promise of God made by his Prophet,
saying that it was impossible; as if God were either a liar, or not able to
perform what he would: for this cause this unbeleeving blasphemer received the
same day a deserved punishment for 2 King. 7.
his blasphemy, for he was trodden to death in the gate of the city under the
feet of the multitude that went out into the Syrians camp, forsaken and left
desolate by them, through a fear which the Lord sent among them.

Senaccherib King of Assyria, after he had obtained many victories, and ^^odued
much people under him, and also laid siege to Jerusalem, became 2 King 19.
^^proud and arrogant, as by his servants mouth to revile and blaspheme the
living God, speaking no otherwise of him than of some strange idol, and one
that had no power to help and deliver those that trusted in him; for which
blasphemies he soon after felt a just vengeance of God upon himself and his
people: for although in man's eyes he seemed to be without the reach of danger
(seeing he was not assailed, but did assail, and was guarded with so mighty an
army, that assured him to make him lord of Jerusalem in short space) yet the
Lord overthrew his power, and destroyed of his men in one night by the hand of
his Angel 185 thousand men, so that he was feign to raise his siege, and
return into his own kingdom, where finally he was slain by his own sons,
as he was worshipping on his knees in the temple of his god.

In the time of the Machabees, those men that were in the strong hold called
Gazara, fighting against the Jews, trusting to the strength of the 2 Match. 10.
place wherein they were, uttered forth most infamous speeches against God: but
ere long, their blasphemous mouths were encountered by a condign punishment:
for the first day of the siege, Machabeus put fire to the town, and consumed
the place (with the blasphemers in it) to ashes.

Holofernes, when Achior advanced the glory of the God of Israel, replied on
this fashion: Since thou have prophesied unto us, that Israel shall be defended
by their God, thou shall prove that there is no God but Nabuchadnezzar, when
the Iudeth 6. 7.
sword of mine army shall pass through thy sides, and thou shall fall among
their slain: but for this blasphemy the Lord cut him short, and prevented his
cruel purpose by sudden death, und that by the hand of a woman, to his further
shame.

Nay, this sin is so odious in the sight of God, that he punishes even them
that give occasion thereof unto others, yea though they be his dearest
children, as it appears by the words of the Prophet Nathan unto King David:
Because of this deed (says he) of murdering Vriah, and defiling 2 Kings 12.
Bathshabe, thou have made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child
that is borne unto thee shall surely die.

In the Empire of Julian the Apostata, there were diverse great men that for the
Emperors sake sake forsook Christ and his religion: amongst Theod. lib. 3.
cap. 11, and 12. Contempt of holy things. Lib. 1. cap. 3, 4.
whom, was one Julian, uncle to the Emperor, and Governor of the East;
another, Foelix the Emperors Treasurer: the first of which two, after he had
spoiled all Christian Churches and Temples, pissed against the table whereon
the holy Sacraments were used to be administered, in contempt, and struck
Euzoius on the care for reproving him for it: the other beholding the holy
vessels that belonged to the Church said, See what precious vessels Mary's
son is served withal. After which blasphemy, the Lord plagued them most
strangely: for Julian fell into so strange a disease, that his intrailes being
rotten, he voided his excrements at his mouth, because when they passed
naturally, he abused them to the dishonor of God. Foelix vomited blood so
excessively night and day at his blasphemous mouth, that he died forthwith.

About the same time there lived a famous sophister and Epicure called Theatr.
hist.
Libanius; who being at Antioch, demanded blasphemously of a learned and godly
schoolmaster, What the Carpenters son did, and how he occupied himself?
Marry (quoth the schoolmaster, full of the spirit of God) the Creator of this
world (whom thou disdainfully call the carpenters son) is making a coffin
for thee, to carry thee to thy grave: whereat the sophister jeasting, departed,
and within few days dying, was buried in a coffin, according to the prophecy
of that holy man.

The Emperor Heraclius sending Ambassadors to Cosroe the King of Persia to
entreat of peace, returned with this answer, That he would never Vide l. 1. c.
21. ^ares. Phil. Chron. Ab. Vrusperg.
cease to trouble them with war, till he had constrained them to forsake
their crucified Christ, and to worship the Sun. But ere long he bore the
punishment of his blasphemy: for what with a domestical calamity, and a
foreign overthrow by the hand of Heraclius, he came to a most woeful
destruction.

Michael that blasphemous Rabbine, that was accounted of the Jews, as their
Prince and Messiah, as he was on a time banqueting with his companions,
Fincelius de Miraculis. li. 2.
amongst other things this was chiefest sauce for their meat, to blasphme
Christ and his mother Mary, insomuch as he boasted of a victory already gotten
over the Christians God. But mark the issue: as he descended down the stayres,
his foot slipping, he tumbled headlong and broke his neck; wherein his late
victory proved a discomfiture and overthrow, to his eternal shame and
confusion.

Three soldiers (amongst the Tyrigetes, a people of Sarmatia) passing through
a Wood, there arose a tempest of thunder and lightening, which though commonly
it makes the greatest Atheists to tremble, yet one of them to show his
contempt of God and his judgments, burst forth into blasphemy and despightings
of God. But the Lord soon tamed his rebellious tongue: for he caused the wind
to blow up by the root a huge tree, that fell upon him and crushed him to
pieces, the other escaping to testify to the World of his destruction.

At a village called Benavides in Spain, two young men being together Anthonio
de Torquemeda.
in a field, there arose of a sudden a terrible tempest, with such violence of
weather and wind, and withal so impetuous a whirlwinde, that it amassed those
that beheld it. The two young men seeing the fury thereof coming amain
toward them, to avoid the danger ran away as fast as they possibly might: but
make what haste they could it overtooke them: who fearing lest the same should
swing them up into the air, fell flatlong down upon the earth, where the
whirlwinde whisking about them a pretty while, and then passing forth, the one
of them arose so altered and in such an agony, that he was scarcely able to
stand on his feet: the other lying still and not stirring, some others afar
off, that stood under a hedge, went to see how he did, and found him, to be
stark dead, not without marks upon him of wonderful admiration: for all his
bones were so crushed, that the pipes and joints of his legs and arms were
as easy to be turned the one way as the other, as though his whole body had
been made of moss; and besides, his tongue was pulled out by the roots, which
could not by any means be found, though they sought for it most diligently.
And this was the miserable end of this wretched man, who was noted to be a
great outrageous swearer and blasphemer of Gods holy name; the Lord therefore
chose him out, to make him an example to the world of his justice.

No less notable is the example of a young girl, named Denis Benesield, Acts
and Monuments of the Church.
of twelve years of age: who going to school amongst other girls, when they
fell to reason among themselves after their childish discretion about God, one
among the rest said that he was a good old father: What, he? (said the
foresaid Denis) he is an old doting fool: which being told to her mistress,
she purposed to correct her the next day for it: but it chanced that the next
day her mother sent her to London to the market, the wench greatly entreating
her mother that she might not go, so that she escaped her mistresses
correction. But the Lord in vengeance met with her: for as she returned
homeward, suddenly she was stricken dead, all the one side of her being black;
and buried at Hackney the same night. A terrible example (no doubt) both to old
and young, what it is for children to blaspheme the Lord and God, and what it
is for parents to suffer their young ones to grow up in blindness, without
nurtering them in the fear of God, and reverence of his Majesty, and therefore
worthy to be remembered of Paul Diacon. in the history of Anastatius. Sabel.
Aenead. 8. lib. 2.

Anton. Panor. of the acts of Alphonsus.

Aeneas Silvius of the acts of Alphonsus.


all.

In the year 510 an Arrian Bishop called Olympius, being at Carthage in the
bathes, reproached and blasphemed the holy and sacred Trinity, and that openly:
but lighting fell down from heaven upon him three times, and he was burnt and
consumed therewith. There was also in the time of Alphonsus King of Arragon and
Sicily, in an Isle toward Africa, a certain hermit called Antonius, a
monstrous and profane hypocrite, that had so wicked a heart to devise, and so
filthy a throat to belch out vile and injurious speeches against Christ Jesus
and the Virgin Mary his mother; but he was strieken with a most grievous
disease, even to be eaten and gnawne in pieces of worms until he died.

CHAP. XXX. Of those that by cursing and denying God give themselves to the
Devil.
AS concerning those that are addicted to much cursing, and as if their throats
were Hell it self, to despightings and reviling against God (that is blessed
for ever) and are so mad as to renounce him, and give themselves to the Devil:
truly they worthily deserve to be forsaken of God, and given over to the
Devil indeed, to go with him into everlasting perdition: which has been
visibly experienced in our time upon certain wretched persons, which have been
carried away by that wicked spirit to whom they gave themselves.

There was upon a time in Germany, a certain naughty pack of a most Luther
upon the' 15. chap. of the 1 Ep. to the Corinth.
wicked life, and so evil brought up, that at every word he spoke almost, the
Devil was at one end; if walking he chanced to tread awry, or to stumble,
presently the Devil was in his mouth: whereof albeit he was many times
reproved by his neighbors, and exhorted to correct and amend so vile and
detestable a vice, yet all was in vain: continuing therefore this evil and
damnable custom, it happened, that as he was upon a time passing over a
bridge, he fell down, and in his fall gave these speeches, Hoist up with an
hundred Devils: which he had no sooner spoken, bat the Devil whom he called
for so often, was at his elbow to strangle him, and carry him away with him.

A certain soldier traveling through Marchia, a country of Almaigne, Wirius 3
Book chap. 17. of the delusion of spirits.
and finding himself evil at ease in his journey, abode in an Inn till he
might recover his health, and committed to the hostesses custody certain money
which he had about him. Now a while after being recovered of his sickness,
required his money again; but she having consulted with her husband, denied
the receipt, and therefore the return thereof; and accused him of wrong, in
demanding that which she never received: The soldier on the other side fretted
amain, and accused her of cousenage: Which stir when the goodman of the house
understood (though privy to all before) yet dissembling, took his wives part,
and thrust the soldier out of doors: who being thoroughly cha^ed with that
indignity, drew his sword, and ran at the door with the point hereof: whereat
the host began to cry, Thieves, thieves, saying that he would have entered his
house by force: so that the poor soldier was taken and cast into prison, and
by process of law ready to be condemned to death: but the very day wherein
this hard sentence was to be pronounced and executed, the Devil entered into
the prison, and told the soldier that he was condemned to die; howbeit
nevertheless if he would give himself body and soul unto him, he would
promise to deliver him out of their hands: the prisoner answering, said, That
he had rather die being innocent, and without cause, than to be delivered by
that means: again the devil replied, and propounded unto him the great
danger wherein he was, yea and used all cunning means possible to persuade
him: but seeing that he lost his labor, he at length left his suit, and
promised him both help, and revenge upon his enemies, and that for nothing:
advising him moreover when he came to judgment, to plead not guilty, and to
declare his innocence and their wrong, and to entreat the Judge to grant him
one in a blew cap that stood by to be his advocate: (now this one in a blew cap
was the Devil himself) the soldier accepting his offer, being called to the
bar, and indicted there of Felony, presently desired to have his Attorney,
who was there present to plead his cause: then began the fine and crafty
Doctor of the laws to plead, and defend his client very cunningly, affirming
him to be falsely accused, and consequently unjustly condemned, and that his
host did withhold his money and had offered him violence, and to prove his
assertion he reckoned up every circumstance in the action, yea the very place
were they had hidden the money. The host on the other side stood in denial very
impudently, wishing the devil might take him if he had it: then the subtle
lawyer in the blew cap, looking for no other vantage, left pleading, and fell
to lay hold of the host, and carrying him out of the Sessions house, hoisted
him into the air so high, that he was never after seen nor heard of. And thus
was the soldier delivered from the execution of the law most strangely, to the
astonishment of all the beholders, that were eye witnesses of that which
happened to the for sworn and cursing host.

In the year of our Lord 1551, at Megalopole near Voildstat, it happened John
Wierus.
in the time of the celebration of the feast of Pentecost* the people being set
on drikingng and carousing, that a woman in the company commonly named the
Devil in her oaths; till that he being so often called on, came of a sudden,
and carried her through the gate aloft into the air before them all, who ran
out astonished to see whither he would transport her, and found her a while
hanging in the air without the town, and then falling down upon the ground
dead.

About the same time there lived in a City of Savoy one that was both a
monstrous swearer, and also otherwise very vicious, who put many good men to
much fruitless pains, that in regard of their charge employed themselves
often to admonish and reprove his wicked behavior, to the end he might amend
it: but all in vain, they might as well cast stones against the wind; for he
would not so much as listen to their words, much less reform his manners. Now
it fell out that the Pestilence being in the City, he was infected with it, and
therefore withdrew himself a part with his wife and another kinswoman into a
garden which he had: neither yet in this extremity did the Ministers forsake
him, but ceased not continually to exhort him to repentance, and to lay before
his eyes his faults and offenses to the end to bring him into the right way.
But he was so far from being touched or moved with these godly admonitions,
that he strove rather to harden himself more and more in his sins. Therefore
one day hasting forward his own mishap, as he was swearing and denying God,
and giving himself to the Devil, and calling for him with vehehemency, behold
even the Devil indeed snatched him up suddenly, and heaved him into the air,
his wife and kinswoman looking on, and seeing him fly over their heads. Being
thus swiftly transported, his cap tumbled from his head, and was found at
Rosne; but himself no man could ever after set eye on. The magistrate
advertised hereof, came to the place where he was taken, to be better informed
of the truth, taking the witness of the two women touching that which they had
seen. Here may we see the strange and terrible events of Gods just vengeance
upon such vile caitifes; which doubtless are made manifest to strike a fear
and terror into the heart of every swearer and denier of God (the world being
but too full at this day of such wretches) that are so inspired with Satan,
that they cannot speak but they must name him, even him that is both an enemy
to God and man, and like a roaring lion runs and roveth too and fro to
devour them: not seeking any thing but man's destruction. And yet when any
pain assaileth them, or any trouble disquieteth their minds, or any danger
threateneth to oppress their bodies, desperately they call upon him for aid,
when indeed it were more needful to commend themselves to God, and to pray for
his grace and assistance, having both a commandment so to do, and a promise
adjoined, that he will help us in our necessities, if we come unto him by true
and hearty prayer. It is not therefore without just cause, that God has
propounded and laid open in this corrupt age, a Theater of his Judgments, that
every man might be warned thereby.

CHAP. XXXI. More examples of Gods Judgments upon Cursers.
But before we go to the next commandment, we will adjoyne a few more
examples of this devilish cursing. Martin Luther has left registered unto us a
notable example In Coll. Luth.
shown upon a popish priest that was once a professor of the sincere religion,
and fell away voluntarily unto Papisme; whereof Adam Budissina was the
reporter: This man thundered out most bitter curses against Luther in the
pulpit, at a town called Ruthnerwald, and amongst the rest, wished, that if
Luthers doctrine were true, a thunderbolt might strike him to death. Now three
days after there arose a mighty tempest, with thunder and lightening: whereat
the cursed Priest, bearing in himself a guilty conscience, for that he had
untruly and maliciously spoken, ran hastily into the Church, and there fell
to his prayers before the Altar most devoutly; but the vengeance of God found
him out and his hypocrisy, so that he was stricken dead with the lightening,
and albeit they recovered life in him again, yet as they led him homewards
through the Churchyard, another flesh so set upon him, that he was burnt from
the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, as black as a shoo, so that he
died with a manifest mark of Gods vengeance upon him.

Theodorus Beza reports unto us two notable histories of his own Homil. 26.
in hist. passionis.
knowledge, of the severity of Gods judgment upon a curser and a perjurer; the
tenor whereof is this, I knew (said he) in France a man of good parts, well
instructed in Religion, and a master of a Family, who in his anger cursing,
and bidding the Devil take one of his children, had presently his wish; for
the child was possessed immediately with a Spirit: from which though by the
servent and continual prayers of the Church he was at length released, yet ere
he had fully recovered his health he died. The like we read to have happened to
a woman, whom her husband in anger devoted with bitter curses to the Devil;
for Satan assaulted her persently, and robbed her of her wits, so that she
could never be recovered.

Another example (says he) happened not far hence, even in this country,
Discipulus de Tempore Sermon. 116. Perjury. Lib. 1. cap. 29.
upon a perjurer that forswore him self to the end to deceive and prejudice
another thereby: but he had no sooner made an end of his false oath, but a
grievous Apoplexy assailed him, so that without speaking of any one word he
dyed within few days.

In the year of our Lord 1557, the day before good friday, at Forchenum Job.
Fincelius, lib. 3. de Mirac.
a city in the Bishopric of Bamburg, there was a certain crooked Priest both
in body and mind, through age and evil conditions, that could not go but upon
crutches, yet would needs be lifted into the pulpit to make a Sermon: his text
was out of the 11 chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, touching the
Lords Supper; whereout taking occasion to defend the Papisticall errors and
the Mass, he used these or such like blasphemous speeches, O Paul, Paul, if
thy doctrine touching the receiving of the Sacrament in both kinds be true, and
if it be a wicked thing to receive it otherwise, then would the devil might
take me: and (turning to the people) if the Popes doctrine concerning this
point be not true, then am I the devils bondslaue, neither do I fear to pawn
my soul upon it. These and many other blasphemous words he used, till the
Devil came indeed, transformed into the shape of a tall man, black and
terrible, sending before him such a fearful noise, and such a wind, that the
people supposed that the Church would have fallen on their heads: but he not
able to hurt the rest, took away the old Priest, being his devoted bondslave,
and carried him so far that he was never heard of. The bishop of Rugenstines
brother hardly escaped his hands: for he came back to fetch him; but he
defending himself with his sword, wounded his own body, and very narrowly
escaped with his life. Beside, after this there were many visions seen about
the city, as armies of men ready to enter and surprise them, so that well was
he that could hide himself in a corner. At another time after, the like noise
was heard in the Church whilst they were baptising an infant; and all this for
the abominable cursing and blasphemy of the profane Priest.

In the year of our Lorld 1556, at S. Gallus in Helvetia, a certain man that
earned his living by making clean rough and soul linen against the Sun,
entering a tavern, tasted so much the grape, that he vomited out terrible
curses against himself and others: amongst the rest he wished, if ever he went
into the fields to his old occupation, that the devil might come and break
his neck: but when sleep had conquered drink, and sobriety restored his
senses, he went again to his trade, remembering indeed his late words, but
regarding them not: howbeit the Devil to show his double diligence, attended
on him at his appointed hour in the likeness of a big swarthy man, and asked
him if he remembered his promise and vow which he had made the day before, and
if it were not lawful for him to break his neck; and withal stroke the
poor man, trembling with fear, over the shoulders, that his feet and his
hands presently dried up, so that he lay there not able to stir, till by help
of men he was carried home; the Lord not giving the Devil so much power over
him as he wished himself; but yet permitting him to plague him on this sort,
for his amendment, and our example.

Henry Earl of Schwartburg through a corrupt custom used commonly to wish he
might be drowned in a privy: and as he wished, so it happened Albert. Kirant.
Chron. Sax. l. 6.
unto him, for he was so served, and murdered at S. Peter's Monastery in
Erford, in the year of our Lord, 1148.

The like befell a young Courtier at Mansfield, whose custom was in any
earnest asseveration, to say, The Devil take me if it be not so: the Devil
Cyriac. Spangenb. in ^legan^ijs veter is Adami.
indeed took him whilst he slept, and threw him out of a high window, where
albeit by the good providence of God he o^ught no great hurt, yet he learnt by
experience to bridle his tongue from all such cursed speeches, this being but a
taste of Gods wrath that is to fall upon such wretches as he.

At Oster a village in the duchy of Megalopole, there chanced a most Theatr.
hist.
strange and fearful example upon a woman that gave her self to the Devil
both body and soul, and used most horrible cursings and oaths, both against
her self and others: which detestible manner of behavior, as at many other
times, so especially she showed at a marriage in the foresaid village upon S.
John Baptists day, the whole people exhorting her to leave off that monstrous
villainy: but she nothing bettered, continued her course, till all the company
were set at dinner, and very merry. Then lo, the Devil having got full
possession of her, came in person, and transported her into the air before
them all, with most horrible outcries and roarings, and in that sort carried
her round about the town, that the Inhabitants were ready to die with fear,
and by ct by tore her in four pieces, leaving in four several high ways a
quarter, that all that came by might be witnesses of her punishment. And then
returning to the marriage, threw her bowels upon the table before the Major of
the town, with these words, Behold, these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom
the like destruction awaiteth, if thou do not amend thy wicked life. The
reporters of this history were, John Herman the Minister of the said town,
with the Major himself and the whole Inhabitants, being desirous to have it
known to the world for example sake.

In Luthers conferences there is mention made of this story following: Luther:
Diverse noblemen were striving together at a horse race, and in their course
cried, The Devil take the last. Now the last was a horse that broke loose,
whom the Devil hoisted up into the air and took clean away. Which teaches
us, not to call for the Devil, for he is ready always about us uncalled and
unlooked for, yea many legions of them compass us about even in our best
actions to disturb and pervert us.

A certain man not far from Gorlitz provided a sumptuous supper, and Job.
Fincelius.
invited many guests unto it, who at the time appointed refused to come: he in
anger cried, Then let all the Devils in hell come. Neither was his wish
frivolous; for a number of those hellish fiends came forthwith, whom he not
discerning from men, came to welcome and entertain: but as he took them by
the hands, and perceived in stead of fingers, claws, all dismayed he ran out
of the doors with his wife, and left none in the house but a young infant,
with a fool sitting by the fire, whom the Devils had no power to hurt, neither
any man else, save the goodly supper, which they made away withal, and so
departed.

It is notoriously known in Oundle a town in Northamptonshire, amongst all
that were acquainted with the party, namely one Hacket, of whom more has
spoken before, how he used in his earnest talk to curse himself on this
manner; If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come upon me. Now he
wanted not his wish, for he came to a visible confusion indeed, as has been
declared more at large in the twentieth chapter of this book. At Witeberg,
before Martin Luther and diverse other learned men, a woman whose daughter was
possessed with a spirit, confessed, That by her curse that plague was fallen
upon her: for being angry at a time, she bad the Devil take her, and she had
no sooner spoken the word, but he took her indeed, and possessed her in most
strange sort.

No whit less strange and horrible is that which happened at Neoburg Theatr.
histor
in Germany, to a son that was cursed of his mother in her anger, with this
curse, she prayed God she might never see him return alive; for the same day
the young man bathing himself in the water, was drowned, and never returned to
his mother alive, according to her ungodly wish.

The like judgment of God we read of to have been executed upon Antonio de
Torquemeda.
another son that was banned and cursed by his mother, in the city of
Astorga. The mother in her rage cursed one of her sons with detestable
maledictions, betaking him to the Devils of hell, and wishing that they would
fetch him out of her presence, with many other horrible execrations: This was
about ten a clock at night, the same being very dark and obscure; the boy at
last through fear went out into a little court behind the house, from the
which he was suddenly hoised up into the ayte, by men in show of grim
countenance, great stature, and loathsome and horrible gesture, but indeed
cruel fiends of hell, and that with such swiftness (as he himself after
confessed) that it was not possible, to his seeming, for any bird in the world
to fly so fast: and lighting down amongst certain mountains of bushes and
briers, was trailed through the thickest of them, and so all torn and rent,
not only in his clothes, but also in his hands and face and almost his whole
body. At last the boy remembering God, and beseeching him of help and
assistance, the cruel fiends brought him back again through the air, and
put him in at a little window into a chamber in his fathers house, where after
much search and grief for him, he was found in this pitiful plight, and
almost besides himself. And thus though they had not power to deprive him of
his life, as they had done the former, yet the Lord suffered them to afflict
the parents in the son, for the good of both parents and son if they
belonged unto the Lord.

But above all, this is most strange which happened in a town of Misina, Theatr.
hist. Let not the strangenes of this example discredit the truth thereof,
seeing we read how Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. and
Corah with his Company swallowed of the earth, Numer. 16. which are stranger
than this. Acts and Monuments. page 2101.
in the year of our Lord God 1552, the eleventh of September; where a
choleric father seeing his son flacke about his business, wished he might
never stir from that place: for it was no sooner said, but done, his son
stuck fast in the place, neither by any means possible could be removed, no
not so much as to fit or bend his body, till by the prayers of the Faithful
his pains were somewhat mitigated, though not remitted: three years he
continued standing, with a post at his back for his ease, and four years
sitting, at the end whereof he died; nothing weakened in his understanding, but
professing the faith, and not doubting of his salvation in Christ Jesus. When
he was demanded at any time how he did: he answered most usually, That he was
fastened of God, and that it was not in man but in Gods mercy for him to be
released.

John Peter son in law to Alexander that cruel Keeper of Newgate being a most
horrible swearer and blasphemer, used commonly to say, If it be not true, I
pray God I may rot ere I die: and not in vain, for he rotted away indeed, and
so dyed in misery.

Hither we may add a notable example of a certain young gallant that was a
monstrous swearer, who riding in the company of diverse gentlemen, Acts and
Monuments. page 2105.
began to swear and most horribly blaspheme the name of God: unto whom one in
the company with gentle words said, he should one day answer for that: the
Yonker taking snuff thereat, Why (said he) take thou thought for me? Take
thought for thy winding sheet. Well (quoth the other) amend, for death gives
no warning, as soon comes a lambs skin to the market, as an old sheeps.
Gods wounds (said he) care not thou for me: raging still on this manner worse
and worse, till at length passing on their journey, they came riding over a
great bridge, upon which this gentleman swearer spurred his horse in such sort,
that he sprang clean over with the man on his back, who as he was going,
cried, Horse and man and all to the Devil. This terrible story Bishop Ridley
preached and uttered at Paul's cross: and one Haines a Minister of Cornwall
(the reprehender of this man) was the reporter of it to Master Fox, out of whom
I have drawn it. Let us refrain then (wretches that we are) our divelish
tongues, and leave off to provoke the wrath of God any longer against us: let
us forbear all wicked and cursed speeches, and acquaint our selves as well in
word as in deed to praise and glorisie God.

CHAP. XXXII. Punishments for the contempt of the Word and Sacraments; and
abuse of holy things.
NOw it is another kind of taking the Name of God in vain, to despise his Word
and Sacraments: for like as among earthly princes, it is accounted a crime no
less than treason, either to abuse their pictures, to counterfeit or deprave
their seals, to rent, pollute, or corrupt their letters patents, or to use
unreverently their messengers, or any thing that comes from them: So with the
Prince of heaven it is a fin of high degree, either to abuse his Word
profanely, which is the letters patents of our salvation; or handle the
Sacraments unreverently, which are the seals of his mercy; or to despise his
Ministers, which are his messengers untous. And this he makes known unto us
not only by Edicts and Commandments, but also by examples of his vengeance on
the heads of the offenders in this case. For the former, look what Paul says,
That for the unworthy receiving of the Sacraments, many were weak and sick
among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30.
and many slept. How much more then for the abusing and contemning the
Sacraments? And the Prophet David, That for casting the Word Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
of God behind them, they should have nothing to do with his Covenant. How
much more then for profaning and deriding his Word? And Moses, when the people
murmured against him and Aaron, says, That Exodus 16. 8.
their murmurings were not against them, which were but Ministers, but against
the Lord. How much more then is the Lord enraged, when they are scoffed at,
derided, and set at naught? Hence it is that the Lord denounces Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
and 12. 13. Apoc. 22. 18. Proverb 30. 6;
a Woe to him that adds or takes away from the Word; and calls them dogs
that abuse such precious pearls.

But let us come to the examples wherein the grievousnesse of this sin willly
more open than by any words can be expressed.

First, to begin with the house of Israel, which were the sole select people of
the Lord, whom he had chosen out of all other nations of the world, to be his
own peculiar flock, and his chief treasure, above all other people of the
earth, and a kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation; when Exodus 19 6.
as they contemned and despised his Word spoken unto them by his prophets, and
cast his law behind their back, he gave them over into the hands of their
enemies, and of Ammi made them Loammi; that is, of his people, made them not
his people: and of Ruhama, Loruhama; that is, of such as had found mercy and
favor at Gods hand, a nation that should obtain no mercy nor favor, as the
Prophet Hosea speaks. Hosea 1. 6, 7.


This we see plainly verified first in the ten tribes, which under Jeroboam
fell away from the Scepter of Judah: for after that the Lord had sundry times
scourged them by many particular punishments, as the famine, sword, and
pestilence, for their idolatry and rebellion to his law; at the last in the
ninth year of the reign of Hoshea King of Israel, he brought upon them a final
and general destruction, and delivered them into the hands of the King of
Ashur, who carried them away captive into Assyria; and placed them in Hala and
in Habor, by the river of Gosan, and in the cities of the Medes; and in stead
of them seated the men of Babel, of Cuthah, Ava, Hamath, and Sepharvaim, in the
cities of Samaria. Thus were they utterly rooted up, and spued out of the land
of their inheritance, and their portion given unto strangers, as was threatened
to them by the mouth of Moses the servant of the Lord: and the cause of all
this is set down by the Deu. 28. a King. 17. 13.
holy Ghost, 2 Kin. 17. 13. to be, for that though the Lord had testified to
them by all his prophets and seers, saying, Turn from your evil ways, and
keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the Law which I
commanded your fathers: nevertheless they would not obey, but hardened their
necks: and then it follows in the 18 ver, Therefore the Lord was exceeding
wroth with Israel, and put them out of his sight, and none was left but the
Tribe of Judah only.

Now though the kingdom of Judah continued in good estate long after the
desolation of the ten tribes, (for this happened in the reign of Ahaz. King of
Judah;) yet afterward in the reign of Zedekiah, the great and famous city
Jerusalem was taken by Nabuchadnezzar the King of Babel, and utterly ruined and
defaced: the glorious and stately temple of the Lord, built by Solomon, the
wonder of the world, was burnt down to ashes, together with all the houses of
Jerusalem, and all other great houses in the land: all the rich vessels and
furniture of the temple, of gold, silver, and brass, were carried to Babel by
Nabuzaradan the chief steward. The king himself was bound in chains, and
after he had seen his own sons slain before his eyes, had his own eyes put
out, that he might never more take comfort of the light. The priests and all
the greatest and richest of the people were carried away in captivity, and only
the poor were left behind to dress the vines and til the land. Now what was
the cause of this lamentable destruction of this holy City, of the Temple and
Sanctuary of the Lord, and of his own people? it is set down by the
Holy Ghost in express word, 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16. That, When the Lord sent unto
them by his 2 Chronicles, 36. 15, 16.
Messengers, rising early, and sending, because he had compassion on them, and
on his habitation, they mocked the Messengers of God, despised his words, and
misused his Prophets: and therefore the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, and there was no remedy. Behold here the grievous judgment of the Lord
upon such as contemned his Word, and despised his Prophets.

Thus was the first city and temple destroyed: and did the second fare any
better? no verily, but far worse: for as their sin was greater, in that the
former Jews contemned only the Word spoken by the Prophets which were but
servants, these despised the Word spoken by the Son himself, which is the
Lord of life; so their punishment was also the greater: for as the Apostle
says, If they which despised Moses Law died without mercy, how Heb. 10. 28. 29.
much sorer punishment are they worthy of which tread under foot the Son of
God, and count the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, and neglect so
great salvation, which first began to be preached by the Lord himself, and
afterward was Heb. 2. 3.
confirmed by them which heard him. Therefore the destruction of the second
city and temple by Titus and Vespasian Emperors of Rome, was far more
lamentable than that of the former: yea, so terrible and fearful was the
judgment of God upon that nation at this time, that never the like calamity
and misery was heard or read of: there at the siege of Jerusalem the famine was
so great within the walls, and the sword so terrible without, that within they
were constrained to eat not only leather and old shoo's, but horse-dung, yea
their own excrements, and some to devour their own children: and as many as
issued out were crucified by the Romans, as they had crucified the Savior of
the world, till they had no more wood to nail them on. So that it was most
true which our Savior foreprophesied, That such should be the tribulation of
that time, as was not from the beginning of Matthew. 24. 21.
the world, nor should be again to the end. At this destruction perished
eleven hundred thousand Jews, as Historians report; besides them which
Vespasian slew in subduing the country of Galilee: over and besides them also
which were sold and sent into Egypt and other provinces, to vile slavery, to
the number of seventeene thousand: two thousand were brought with Titus in
triumph; of which, part he gave to be devoured of wild beasts, and part
otherwise most cruelly were slain. By whose case all nations may take example,
what it is to reject the visitation of Gods verity being sent unto them, and
much more to persecute them which be sent of God for their salvation. And here
is diligently to be observed the great equity of this judgment: they refused
Christ to be their King, and chose rather to be subject unto Caesar; now they
are by the said (their own) Caesar destroyed, when as Christ's subjects the
same time escaped the danger.

The like example of Gods wrathful punishment is to be noted no less in the
Romans also themselves, for despising Christ and his Gospel: for when Tiberius
Nero the Emperor having received by letters from Pontius Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
Pilat, a true report of the doings of Christ Jesus, of his miracles,
resurrection, and ascension into heaven, and how he was received as God of many
good men, was himself moved with belief of the same, and did confer thereof
with the whole Senate of Rome, to have Christ adored as God. But they not
agreeing thereunto, refused him, because that contrary to the law of the
Romans, he was consecrated (said they) for a God before the Senate of Rome had
decreed and approved him. Thus the vain Senate which were contented with the
Emperor to reign over them, were not contented with the meek King of glory,
the Son of God, to be their King; yea they contemned also the preaching of
the two blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, who were also most cruelly put to
death in the later end of Domitius Nero his reign, and the year of Christ 69,
for the testimony and says of Christ. And therefore after much like sort to
the Jews were they scourged and entrapped by the same way which they did
prefer: for as they preferred the Emperor, and rejected Christ, so did Sueton.
Tacitus.
God stir up their own Emperors against them, in such sort, that both the
Senators themselves were all devoured, and the whole city most horribly
afflicted the space almost of three hundred years together. Neither were they
only thus scourged by their Emperors, but also by civil wars, whereof three
were sought in two years at Rome after Nero's death: as likewise by other
casualties: for in Suetonius is testified, five thousand were hurt and slain
by fall of a Theater.

How heavy and searefull the judgment of God has been toward those seven
famous Churches of Asia, to the which the holy Ghost writes his seven
Epistles, Revel. 2 and 3. histories sufficiently testify, and experience
shows: for whereas in the Apostles time, and long after in the days of
persecution, no Churches in the world more flourished; after, when they began
to make light account of the word of God, and to fall away from the truth to
errors, from godliness to impieties, the Lord also made light account of them,
and removed his Candlestick, that is, the ministry of his Gospel, from
amongst them, and made them a prey unto Revel. 2. 5.
their enemies: and so they which before were subjects to Christ, are now
slaves to Mahomet; and there where the true God was worshipped is now a filthy
Idol adored; and instead of the Gospel of Christ, is the Turks Alcoran; in
stead of the seven stars and seven candlesticks are seven thousand priests of
Mahomet, and worshippers of him: and thus for the contempt of the Gospel of
Christ, is the Chrurch of Christians made a cage of Devils.

Venerable Bede in his Ecclesticall history of England reports, That Beda li.
1. ca. 15.
about the year of our Lord 420, after that the Brittons had been long
afflicted by the Irish, Picts, and Scots, and that the Lord had given them rest
from all their enemies, and had blessed them with such great plenty of corn,
and fruits of the earth, as had not been before heard of, they fell into all
manner of sins and vices, and in stead of showing themselves thankful to the
Lord for his great mercies, provoked his indignation more fiercely against
them: for, as he says, together with plenty grew riot, and this was
accompanied with a train of many other foul enormities, especially the hatred
of the truth, and contempt of the Word, and that not only in the Laity and
ignorant people, but even also in the Clergy and Sheepheards of the people: for
which cause the Lord first sent among them such a contagious plague, that the
living were scarce sufficient to bury the dead: and when by this punishment
they were not reclaimed, then by their own counsels and procurement the Lord
brought upon them a fierce and mighty nation, even the Saxons of Germany; who
albeit they came at first as helpers and succorers of them against their
enemies, yet ere long proved their sorest foes themselves, and after much
bloodshed drove them almost quite out of their Kingdom, confining them into a
haven, nooke, and corner of the same, where they remain till this day: and all
this came upon them (says that reverend Author) for their ingratitude for
Gods mercies, and contempt of the Word of God.

Again, we read a little before this, how that God stirred up Gildas Acts and
Monuments, page 32.
a godly learned man, to preach to the old Brittons, and to exhort them to
repentance and amendment of life, and to forewarne them of plagues to come, if
they repented not: but what availed it? Gildas was laughed to scorn and taken
for a false Prophet; the Brittons, with whorish faces and unrepentant hearts,
went forward in their sins; and what followed? God to punish their contempt of
his Word and Ministers, sent in their enemies on every side, and destroying
them, gave their land to other nations.

Again, not many years past, Almighty God seeing idolatry, superstition, Acts
and Monuments. page 32.
hypocrisy, and wicked living used in this land, raised up that godly learned
man John Wickliffe to preach unto our fathers repentance, and to exhort them to
forsake their idolatry and superstition: but his exhortations were not
regarded, he with his sermons was despised, his books and himself after his
death, were burnt: What ensued? A most grievous and heavy vengeance: they slew
their lawful King, and set up three other on a row, under whom all the noble
blood was slain up, and half the Commons destroyed; what by war in France,
and civil discord among themselves, the cities and towns were decayed, and the
land brought half to a wilderness. O, extrem plagues of Gods just vengeance!

But these examples be general over whole nations: now let us descend to
particular judgments upon private persons, for contemning, scorning, or
despising the Word of God, the holy Sacraments, and the Ministers of the same.

Hemingius a learned Divine, in his exposition upon the first chapter of S.
John's Gospel reports, That about the year 1550 there was a certain Nich.
Heming.
lewd companion in Denmark, who had long made profession to mock at all
Religion, and at devout persons: This fellow entering into a Church where there
was a sermon made by the Minister of the place, began contrary to all those
that were present, to behave himself most profanely, and to show by lewd
countenances and gestures, his dislike and contempt of that holy exercise: to
whom the preacher (being instant upon his business in hand) spoke not a word,
but only sighing, prayed unto God, that this mocker might be suppressed: who
seeing that the Preacher would no^ contest against him, but contemned his
unworthy behavior, goes out of the Church, but yet not out of the reach of
Gods vengeance: for presently as he passed out, a tyle fell from the house upon
his head, and slew him upon the place: a just judgment upon so profane a
wretch. From whence all scorners and deriders of godly sermons, and the
preachers of the same, may take example for their amendment, if they have any
grace in them.

Christopher Turk a Counselor of Estate to a great Nobleman in Germany, Mart.
^ydius, Celebrat. deuteronomy. excels.
going one day to horse, and mocking at a certain godly Nobleman who was then
prisoner in his enemies hands, uttered these or such like speeches; See what is
become of these gallants, that sung so much one with another, When any one does
wrong us, God is our succor and defense: but he had scarce ended his words,
when as a sudden grief took him, so that he was forced to alight from his
horse, and to be carried to bed; where in stead of singing, he dyed in
despair, drawing forth his tongue as black as a cole, and hanging out of his
mouth. This happened the ninth of June, 1547.

The contempt of the Sacrament of baptism was most notably punished Georst. le
feure, lib. 3. Annal. Misniae.
in a certain Curate of Misnia in Thuring: whose custom was whenever he
had baptized any women children, in contempt of the foeminine sex, and without
any regard to the holy Sacrament, to say, That they should not carry them back
to the house, but cast them into the River. This profane Curate looking one
day over the bridge of Elbe (which is a large and a deep River) how the boats
did pass; no man touching him, nor his brain any way altered, but by a secret
judgment of God, fell over the bridge into the water, and was presently
drowned: that he which so impiously wished drowning to other, and that at the
Sacrament of Baptism, was drowned himself. This happened in the year 1505.

The contemptuous and irreverent handling of the Word of God in the Acts and
Monuments. page 1730.
pulpit, together with open hatred of the Gospel, was most famously revenged in
one Nightingale the Parson of Gondal besides Canterbury, in the reign of Queen
Mary, Anno 1555. This wretched Parson upon Shrove Sunday (which was the third
day of the month of March) making a Sermon to his parishioners, entered beside
his text, into an impertinent discourse of the Articles lately set forth by the
Popes authority, in commendation thereof, and to the disgrace of the Gospel:
saying more over thus unto the people, My masters and neighbors, rejoice and
be merry, for the prodigal son is come home: for I know that the most part
of you are as I am, I know your hearts well enough, and I shall tell you what
happened to me this week past: I was before my Lord Cardinal, and he has
made me as clean from sin as I was at the Font-stone; and he has also
appointed me to notify unto you the Bull of the Popes pardon; and so reading
the same unto them, he thanked God that ever he lived to see that day: adding
moreover, that he believed, that by the virtue of that Bull he was as clean
from sin as that night that he was borne: which words he had no sooner
uttered, but the Lord to show that he lied, stroke him with sudden death, and
so he fell down out of the pulpit, never stirring hand nor foot, not speaking
word, but there lay, an amazement and astonishment to all the people.

Denterius an Arrian Bishop being at Bizantium, as he was about to baptize one
Barbas after his blasphemous manner, saying, I baptize thee in the name of the
Father, through the Son, in the holy Ghost, (which form of words is contrary
to the prescript rule of Christ, that bad his disciples to baptize all nations,
In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost) the water suddenly
vanished, so that he could not then be baptized: wherefore Barbas all amassed,
fled to a Church of purer Religion, and there was entertained into the Church
by baptism. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History reports the like
accident to have happened to a Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 17.
Jew, who had been oftentimes baptized, and came to Paulus a Novatian Bishop,
to receive the Sacrament again; but the water as before vanished; and his
villainy being detected, he was banished the Church.

Vrbanus Formensis and Foelix Iducensis, two Donatists by profession, rushing
into Thipasa a city of Mauritania, commanded the Eucharist to be Op^at.
Meltuit. Lib 2 contra Paren^anum. Cent. 4. cap. 6.
thrown among the dogs; but the dogs growing mad thereby, set upon their own
Masters, and rent them with their teeth, as being guilty of despising the body
of Christ. Certainly a notable judgment to condemn the wicked behavior of
those miscreants, who were so profane, as not only to refuse the Sacrament
themselves, but also to cast it to their dogs, as if it were the vilest and
contemptiblest thing in the world. Vide lib. 1. cap. 17.


Theopompus a Philosopher being about to insert certain things out of the
writings of Moses, into his profane works, and so to abuse the sacred Word of
God, was stricken with a frenzy; and being warned of the cause thereof in a
dream, by prayers made unto God, recovered his senses again. This story is
recorded by Josephus. As also another of Theodectes Jeseph. Antiq: Liba 2. cap.
2.
a Poet, that mingled his Tragedies with the holy Scripture, and was therefore
stricken with blindness, until he had recanted his impiety.

In a town of Germany called Itzsith, there dwelt a certain husbandman Luther
in Coloq^ijs.
that was a monstrous despiser and prophaner of the Word of God and his
Sacraments: he upon a time amidst his cups, railed with most bitter terms upon
a Minister of Gods Word; after which, going presently into the fields to
overlooke his sheep, he never returned alive, but was found there dead, with
his body all scortched and burnt as black as a cole: the Lord having given him
over into the hands of the Devil, to be thus used for his vile profaneness
and abusing his holy things. This D. Iustus Ionus in Luthers Conferences
reports to be most true.

In the year of our Lord 1553, a certain Cobblers servant being brought up
among the professors of the reformed Religion, and having received Philip.
Melan.
the Sacrament in both kinds, after living under Popery, received it after
their fashion in one kind; but when he returned to his old Master, and was
admonished by him to go again to the Communion as he was wont, then his sleepy
conscience awaked and he fell into most horrible despair, crying that he was
the Devils bondslave, and therewithal threw himself headlong out of the
window, so that with the fall his bowels gushed out of his mouth, and he died
most miserably.

When the great persecution of the Christians was in Persia under king Sozomen
lib. 2. cap. ^1.
Sapor, in the year of our Lord 347, there was one Miles an holy Bishop, and
constant Martyr; who preaching, exhorting, and suffering all manner Vide lib.
1. cap. 16.
of torments for the truth of the Gospel, could not convert one soul of the
whole city whereof he was Bishop, to the faith: wherefore in hatred and
detestation of it he forewent it clean: but after his departure the Lord made
them worthily ^ue their contempt of his Word; for he sent the spirit of
division betwixt King Sapor and them, so that he came with an army of men and
three hundred Elephants against it, and quickly subverted it, that the very
appearance and memorial of a city was quile defaced and rooted out. For
certainly this is a sure position, where Gods word is generally despised, and
not regarded nor profited by, there some notable destruction approaches.

In a certain place there was acted a tragedy of the death and passion of
Christ in show, but in deed of themselves: for he that played Christ's part,
P^^lip. Melanct. in Collectane^ Manlij.
hanging upon the Cross, was wounded to death by him that should have thrust
his sword into a bladder full of blood tied to his side; who with his fall slew
another that played one of the women's part that lamented under the Cross: his
brother that was first slain seeing this, slew the murderer, and was himself
by order of justice hanged therefore: so that this tragedy was concluded with
four true, not counterfeit deaths, and that by the divine providence of God,
who can endure nothing less than such profane and rediculous handling of so
serious and heavenly matters. In the University of Oxford the history of Christ
was also played, and cruelly punished, and that not many years since: for he
that bore the person of Christ, the Lord struck him with such a giddiness of
spirit and brain, that he became mad forthwith, crying when he was in his best
humor, That God had laid this judgment upon him for playing Christ. Three
other Actors in the same play were hanged for robbing, as by credible report is
affirmed.

Most lamentable was the judgment of God upon John Apowel (sometimes a
Serving-man) for mocking and jeasting at the Word of God: This John Apowel
hearing one William Malden reading certain English prayers, mocked him after
every word, with contrary gaudes and flouting terms; insomuch that at last he
was terribly afraid, so that his hair stood upright on his head, and the next
day was found besides his wits, crying night and day without ceasing, The
Devil, the Devil, O the Devil of Hell, now the Devil of hell there he
goes: for it seemed to him as the Acts and Monuments, page 2103.
other read, Lord have mercy upon us, at the end of the prayer, that the Devil
appeared unto him, and by the permission of God depilved him of his
understanding. This is a terrible example for all those that be mockers, at the
Word of God, to warn them (if they do not repent) lest the vengeance of God
fall upon them in like manner. Thus we see how severely the Lord punishes all
despisers and propha^^rs of his holy things, and thereby ought to learn to
carry a most dutiful regard and reverence to them, as also to note them for
none of Gods flock, whosoever they be that deride or contemn any part of
Religion, or the Ministers of the same.

CHAP. XXXV. Of those that profane the Sabbath day.
IN the fourth and last Commandment of the first Table, it is said, Remember
to keep holy the Sabbath day: By which words it is ordained and enjoined us to
separate one day of seven from all bodily and servile labor, not to idleness
and looseness, but to the worship of God, which is spiritual and wholesome.
Which holy ordinance when one of the children of Israel in contempt broke, as
they were in the wilderness, by gathering sticks upon the Sabbath, he was
brought before Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregation, and by them put in
prison until such time as they knew the Lords determination concerning him:
knowing Number. 15.
well, That he was guilty of a most grievous crime. And at length by the Lords
own sentence to his servant Moses, condemned to be stoned to death without the
host, as was speedily executed. Wherein the Lord made known unto them, both
how unpleasant and odious the profanation of his Sabbath was in his sight, and
how seriously and carefully every one ought to observe and keep the same. Now
albeit that this strict observation of the Sabbath was partly ceremonial under
the Law, and that in Christ Jesus we have an accomplishment, as of all other,
so also of this ceremony, (He being the true Sabbath, and assured repose of our
souls) yet seeing we still stand in need of some time for the instruction and
exercise of our Faith, it is necessary that we should have at least one day in
a week to occupy our selves in and about those holy and godly exercises, which
are required at our hands; and what day fitter for that purpose than Sunday?
which was also ordained in the Apostles time for the same end, and called by
them Dies Dominicus, that is, the day of our Lord: because upon that day he
rose from the dead, to wi^, the morrow after the Jews Sabbath, being the first
day of the week: to which Sabbath it by common consent of the Church
succeeded, to the end that a difference might be put betwixt Christians and
Jews. Therefore it ought now religiously Cod li. 3. ^i. 12 (...). 10.
to be observed, as it is also commanded in the civil law, with express
prohibition not to abuse this day of holy rest, in unholy sports and pastimes
of evil example. Nevertheless in stead hereof we use the evil imployance,
abuse, and disorder of it for the most part, for beside the false worship and
plentiful superstitions which reign in so many places, all manner of disorder
and dissoluteness is in request, and bears sway in these days: this is the
day for tippling houses and tavernes to be fullest fraught with ruffians and
ribalds, and for villainous and dishonest speech, with lecherous and baudy songs
to be most ri^e: this is the day when dicing, dancing, whoring, and such
noisome and dishonest demeanors, muster their bands and keep rank together;
from whence foame out envies, hatreds, displeasures, quarrels, debates, blood
sheddings, and murders, as daily experience testifies. All which things are
evident signs of Gods heavy displeasure upon the people where these abuses are
permitted, and no difference made of that day wherein God would be served, but
is contrarily mostdishonored by the overflow of wicked examples.

And that it is a thing odious and condemned of God, these examples following
will declare. Gregory Turonensis reports, That a husbandman, who upon the
Lords day went to plough his field, as he cleansed his plowshare with an iron,
the iron stuck so fast into his hand, that for two years he could not be
delivered from it, but carried it about continually to his exceeding great
pain and shame. Another profane fellow, without any Discipulus de tempore.
^er. 103.
regard of God or his service, made no conscience to convey his corn out of
the field on the Lords day in Sermon time; but he was well rewarded for his
godless covetousness: for the same corn which with so much care he gathered
together, was consumed with fire from heaven, with the barn and all the grain
that was in it.

A certain Nobleman used every Lords day to go a hunting in the Sermon while;
which impiety the Lord punished with this judgment: he caused his wife to
bring forth a child with a head like a dog, that seeing Theatr. hist.
he preferred his dogs before the service of God, he might have one of his
own getting to make much of.

At Kimsta^ a town in France, there lived in the year of our Lord 1559, Job
Fincel. l. 3. de Mi^ac.
a certain covetous woman, who was so eager upon the world, and greedy of
gain, that she would neither frequent the Church to hear the word of God her
self, nor suffer any of her family to do it, but continually abode laboring
and toyling about drying and pilling flax, and doing other domestical
businesses: neither would she be reclaimed by her neighbors, who admonished
and dehorted her from such untimely works. One Sabbath day as they were thus
busily occupied, fire seemed to issue among the flax, without doing any hurt:
the next Sabbath day it took fire indeed, but was quickly extinct: for all
this she continued obstinate in her profaneness even the third Sabbath, when
the flax again taking fire, could not be quenched till it had burnt her and
two of her children to death; for though they were recovered out of the fire
alive, yet the next day they all three died. And that which was most to be
wondered at, a young infant in the cradle was taken out of the midst of the
flame, without any hurt. Thus God uses to exercise his judgments upon the
contemners of his commandments.

The Centuriators of Magdeburge, entreating of the manners of Christians, Cent.
12. cap. 6.
made report out of another history, that a certain husbandman (in Parochia
Gemilacensi) grinding corn upon the Lords day, the meal began to burn, Anno
Dom. 1126, which though it might seem to be a thing mere casual, yet they
set it down as a judgment of God upon him for breaking the Sabbath. As also
of that which they speak in the same place Eccles. hist. Cent. 12. ib.
of one of the Kings of Denmark, who when as he (contrary to the admonition
of the Priests, who desired him to defer it) would needs upon the day of
Pentecost make war with his enemy, died in the battle. But that may be
better known to us all, which is written in the second book of Macchabees, of
Nicanor the Jews enemy, who would needs set upon them on the Sabbath; from
which when other the Jews that were compelled to be with him, could no way
dissuade him, he was slain in the battle, and most miserably but deservedly
handled, even the parts of his body shamefully dismembered, as in that History
you may read more at large.

Therefore in the Council at Paris every one laboring to persuade unto a more
religious keeping of the Sabbath day, when they had justly Council. Paris. lib.
1. cap. 50.
complained, that (as many other things) so also the observation of the Sabbath
was greatly decayed through the abuse of Christian liberty; in that men too
much followed the delights of the world, and their own worldly pleasures, both
wicked and dangerous: They further add, Multi nanque nostrum visu, multi etiam
quorundam relatu dedicimus, etc. For many of us have been eyewitnesses, many
have intelligence of it by the relation of others that some men upon this day
being about their husbandry, have been stricken with thunder, some have been
maimed and made lame, some have had their bodies (even bones and all) burnt in
a moment with visible fire, and have consumed to ashes, and many other
judgments of God have been, and are daily; Whereby it is declared, that God is
offended with the dishonor of so high a day. And our time has not wanted
examples in this kind, whosoever has observed them, when sometimes in the
faires upon this day the Wares have swumme in the streets; sometimes the
scaffolds at Plays have fallen down, to the hurting and endangering of many;
sometime one thing, sometime another has fallen out, to the great damage and
hurt of many that have no conscience of this day; yea, often to the endangering
of their lives: and that which is most strange, within these late years, a
whole town has been twice burnt for the breach of the Sabbath, by the
inhabitants, as all men judged: The just report thereof I pass over here to
set down, until such time as I shall be better instructed.

Famous and memorable also is that example which happened at London in the
year 1583 at Paris garden, where, upon the Sabbath day were gathered together
(as accustomably they used) great multitudes of profane people, to behold the
sport of Bear baiting, without respect of the Lords day, or any exercise of
religion required therein: which profane impiety, the Lord that he might
chasten in some sort, and show his dislike thereof, he caused the scaffolds
suddenly to break, and the beholders to tumble headlong down; so that to the
number of eight persons, men and women, were slain therewith, besides many
others which were sore hurt and bruised, to the shortening of their days. The
like example happened at a town in Bedford shire called Risley, in the year
1607: Where the floor of a chamber, wherein a number were gathered together to
see a play on the Sabbath day, fell down, by means whereof many were sore
hurt, and some killed. Surely, a friendly warning to such as more delight
themselves with the cruelty of beasts, and vain sports, than with the works of
mercy and Religion, the fruits of a true faith, which ought to be the Sabbath
days exercise. And thus much for the examples of the first Table, whereof if
some seem to exceed credit, by reason of the strangeness of them, yet let us
know, that nothing is impossible to God; and that he does often work miracles
to control the obstinate impiety and rebellion of mortal men against his
commandment. Besides, there is not one example here mentioned, but it has a
credible or probable Author for the avoucher of it. Let us now, out of all this
that has been spoken, gather up this wholesome lesson, to love God with all our
heart and affection, to the end we may worship him, invocate his holy name, and
repose all the confidence of our salvation upon him alone through Christ Jesus,
seeking by pleasing and obeying his will, to set forth his glory, and render
him due thanks for all his benefits.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of rebellious and stubborn children toward their Parents.
We have seen in the former Book, what punishments they have incurred, that
either maliciously or otherwise have transgressed and broken the commandments
of the first Table: Now it follows to discover the chastisements which God
has sent upon the transgressors of the second Table. And first concerning the
first commandment thereof, which is, Honor thy father and mother, that thy
days may be prolonged in the land which the Lord thy God has given thee. Cham
one of old Noah's sons, was guilty of the breach of this Gen 9.
Commandment; who in stead of performing that reverence to his father which he
ought (and that presently after the deluge, which being yet fresh in memory,
might have taught him to walk in the fear of God) came so short of his duty,
that when he saw his nakedness, he did not hide it, but mocked and jeasted at
it: for which cause he was cursed both of his father, and of God, in the
person of his youngest son Chanaan, and made a servant to the servants of his
brethren: which curse was fulfilled in Number. 33. Deuteronomy. 7.
his posterity the Canaanites, who being forsaken of God, were rooted up and
spued out of their land, because of their sins and abominations.

Mavelous strange was the malice of Absolon, to rebel so furiously 2 Samuel 15.
against his father David, as to wage war against him: which he did with all
his strongest endeavors, without sparing any thing that might further his
proceedings; insomuch that he grew to that outrage and madness, through the
wicked and pernicious counsel of Achitophel, that he shamed not villanously
to commit incest with his fathers concubines, and 2 Samuel 16.
pollute his blood even before the eyes of the multitude: by which means being
become altogether odious and abominable, he shortly after lost 2 Samuel 18.
the battle: wherein though himself received no hurt nor wound, yet was he
not therefore quit; but being pursued by Gods just judgment, fell unwittingly
into the snare which he had deserved: for as he rode along the forest, to save
himself from his fathers army; his moyle carrying him under a thick oak,
left him hanging by the hair upon a bough betwixt heaven and earth, until
being found by Ioab, he was wounded to death with many blows. Whereby every
man may plainly see that God wants no means to punish sinners when it
pleases him; but makes the dumb and senseless creatures the instruments of
his vengeance: for he that had escaped the brunt and danger of the battle,
(and yet not having therefore escaped the hand of God) was by a bruit beast
brought under a senseless tree, which God had appointed to catch hold of him
as an executioner of his just judgment: which if we consider, is as strange
and wonderful an accident as may possible happen; and such an one as God
himself provided, to punish this wicked, proud, and rebellious wretch withal:
for seeing his outrage and villainy was so great as to rebel against his
father, and so good and kind a father toward him as he was, it was most just,
that he should endure so vile a punishment. Beside, herein doubtless God would
lay open to the eyes of all the world, a fearful spectacle of his judgments
against wicked and disobedient children, thereby to terrify the most impudent
and malicious wretches that live, from this horrible sin. And for the same
cause it was his pleasure, that that wicked and false Achitophel should fall
into extreme ignominy and confusion for forsaking David, and setting forward
with counsel and presence young Absolon against his father; for which cause
with despair he hung himself. Now by this example it is easy to perceive how
unpleasant this sin is in Gods sight, and how much he would have every man to
hate and detest it, seeing that Nature her self teaches and instructs us so
far, as to yield duty and obedience unto those that begat, nourished, and
brought us up.

Notwithstanding all this, yet is the world full of ill advised and ill
nurtured youth, that are little less disobedient unto their parents than
Absolon was, as Adramalech and Saraser, that slew their father Sennacherib as
he was worshipping in the Temple of Nisroth his god: but whereas they looked 2
King. 19. 37.
for the sovereignty, they lost the benefit of subjection, and were banished
into Armenia, their brother Esarhaddon reigning in their stead.

Gregory of Tours makes mention of one Crannius the son of Clotarius Greg. of
Tours fourth book.
King of France, who having conspired treacherously, and raised war against
his father, together with the Earl of Britain his supporter, were both
vanquished and put to flight; but the Earl was slain in the pursuit: The
Prince himself also (thinking to escape by sea, where lay provided certain
ships ready to receive him) was in the mid way overtaken, together with his
wife and children, whom he purposed to make partakers of his fortune, and were
altogether (by the express commandment of his father) shut up in a little
house, and there burned together. In this wise did Clotarius revenge the
treachery and rebellion of his son, after a more severe, cruel, and fierce
manner than King David did, who would have saved his son Absolons life,
notwithstanding all his wickedness, and malicious and furious rebellion: but
this man contrariwise being bereft of all fatherly affection, would use no
compassion toward his son, but commanded so cruel an execution to be
performed, not only upon him, but upon his daughter in law also, and their
children, perchance altogether innocent and guiltless of that crime. A very
rare and strange example, seeing it is commonly seen, that grandfathers use
more to cherish and cocker their childrens children than their own. Therefore
we must think, that it was the providence of God to leave behind a notable
example of his most just and righteous severity against disobedient and
rebellious children, to the end to amase and fear all others from enterprising
the like.

Philip Comineus has recorded the treacherous tragedy of a most wicked Philip
Comineus in the reign of Lewis the twelfth. cap. 63
and cruel son called Adolphus (for the world waxes every day worse than
other) that came in an evening suddenly to take his father the Duke of
Gilderland prisoner, even as he was going to bed, and would not give him so
much liberty as to pull on his hose (for he was bare legged) but carried him
away in all haste, making him march on foot without breeches five long Almaine
miles, in a most cold weather: and then clapped him up in the bottom of a deep
tower, where there was no light save by a little window, and there kept him
close prisoner six months together. After which cruel fact, he himself was
taken prisoner in like manner, and carried bound to Namur, where he lay a long
time, until the Gaunts reprived him forthwith, and led him with them against
Tournay, where he was slain: in the while of his imprisonment, his father
yielding to nature, disinherited him of all his goods, for his vile ingratitude
and unnatural cruelty, and left the succession of his dukedom to the Duke of
Bourgondy.

In the year of our Lord 1461, in a village called Iuchi, near to Cambray,
Enguerr. de Monstr. vol. 2.
there dwelt a certain man (or rather a beast) that in a great rage threw his
own mother out of his doors thrice in one day, and the third time told her in
fury, That he had rather see his house on fire, and burnt to coals, than that
she should abide there but one day longer. It happened that the very same day,
according to his cursed speech, his house was indeed fired, but how or whence
no man could judge: and the fire was so fierce, that it consumed to ashes not
only that house, but also twelve other houses adjoining: which was an evident
figure of Gods just judgment in punishing so vile and unnatural a deed by
fire, seeing he deserved at the least to lose his house for banishing her out
of it, that had borne him in her belly, and nourished him with the milk of her
paps.

In this place I may fitly insert two memorable examples of the same Alex. ab
Alex. general. dier. Lib. 4. cap. 14.
subject, gathered by an author of credit and fame sufficient, to this effect.
It is not long (says he) since a friend of mine, a man of a great spirit, and
worthy to be believed, recounted to me a very strange accident which, he said,
happened to himself, and proved his saying by the testimony of many witnesses:
which was this: That being upon a time at Naples at a kinsmans and familiars
house of his, he heard by night the voice of a man crying in the street for
aid, which caused him to rise and light a candle, and run out to see what the
matter was: being come out of the doors, he perceived a cruel and ougly
shaped devil, striving with all his force to catch and get into his clouches a
young man, that strove on the other side to defend himself, and for fear
raised that outcry which he had before heard: the young man seeing him, ran to
him forthwith, and catching fast hold by his clothes, and pitifully crying to
God, would in no case let go his hold until his cruel enemy forsook him: and
being brought into the house all dismayed and beside himself, would not let go
his hold until he came to his senses again out of that exceeding fear. The
cause of which assault was, he had led all his time a most wicked life, and had
been a contemner of God, and a Rebel against his parents, using vile railing
and bitter speeches against them, in such sort, that in stead of blessing, they
had laid a curse upon him. And this is the first example.

Concerning the second, I will also set down the Authors own words, as
follows. Of all the strange things (says he) that ever I heard report of,
that which happened not long since at Rome is most worthy to be remembered, of a
certain young man of Gabia, borne of a base and poor family, but endued with
terrible and furious nature, and addicted to a loose and disordinate life. This
gallant picking a quarrel with his own father, in his anger reviled him with
most gross and reproachful terms: In which mad fits, as one wholly given
over to the Devil, he purposely departed to Rome to practice some naughty
device against his father: but his ghostly father the Devil met him in the
way, under the shape of a cruel and ougly fellow with a thick bushie beard,
and hair hanging disorderly, and clothes all rent and tattered; who as they
walked together, enquired of him why he was so sad: He answered, that there had
passed some bitter speeches betwixt his father and him, and now he devised to
work him some mischief. The Devil by and by like a crafty knave soothed him
up and said, that he also upon the like occasion went about the same practice,
and desired that they might pursue both their voyage and enterprise together:
it was soon agreed upon betwixt them, being like to like, as the proverb
goes. Therefore being arrived at Rome, and lodged at the same Inn, one bed
did serve them both; where whilst the young man securely and soundly slept, the
old malicious knave watching his opprtunity, caught him by the throat to
strangle him: whereat the poor wretch awoke, and cried for help to God so that
the wicked spirit was constrained to forsake him without performing his
purpose, and to flee out at the chamber with such force and violence, that the
house roof cracked, and the tyles clattered down abundantly. The host of the
house being awaked with the noise, cried out to know what the matter was, and
running into the chamber where this noise was, with a candle in his hand, found
the poor young man all alone betwixt dead and alive, of whom (recovered) he
learnt out the whole truth, as has been told: but he after this terrible
accident repented him of his wicked life, and was touched with the sense of his
grievous sin so nearly, that ever after he led a more circumspect and honest
life. Thus much we find written in that Author.

Henry the fifth inspired with the furies of the Pope of Rome, made war upon
his father Henry the fourth, vexing him with cruel and often Philip. Melanc
lib 4. Chron.
battles, and not ceasing till he had spoiled him of his Empire, and till the
Bishop of Mentz had proudly and insolently taken from him his Imperial
ornaments even in his presence: but the Lord in recompense of his unnatural
dealing, made him and his army a prey unto his enemies the Saxons, and to fly
before them, stirring up also the Pope of Rome to be as grievous a scourge unto
him, as he had been before time to his father. Now as the ambition of a
Kingdom was the cause of this man's ingratitude, so in the example following,
pride and disdain ruled, and therefore he is so much the more to be condemned,
by how much a Kingdom is a stronger cord to draw men to vice, than a man's own
affection.

There was (says Manlius) an old man crooked with age, distressed with
poverty, and almost pined with hunger, that had a son rich, strong, and fat,
of whom he entreated no gold or silver, or possession, but food and In
Collectan.
sustenance for his belly, and clothes for his back, but could not obtain it
at his hands: for his proud heart, exalted with prosperity, thought it a shame
and discredit to his house, to be borne of so poor and base parentage, and
therefore not only denied him relief, but also disclaimed him from being his
father, and chased him away with bitter and crabbed reproaches. The poor old
man thus cruelly handled, let tears fall as witness of his grief, and
departed comfortless from his Tygre minded son. But the Lord that gathers
up the tears of the innocent, looked down from heaven in justice, and sent a
fury into the senses and understanding of this monstrous son, that as he was
void of nature and compassion, so he might bevoid of reason and discretion for
ever after.

Another not so cruel and disdainful as the former, yet cruel and
disdainful Manlius in collectan.
enough to pluck down vengeace upon his head, would not see his father beg
indeed, nor yet abjure him as the other did; but yet undertaking to keep him,
used him more like a slave than a father: for what should be too dear for him
that gives us life? yet every good thing was too dear for this poor father,
Upon a time a dainty morsel of meat was upon the board to be eaten, which as
soon as he came in he conveied away, and foisted in courser victuals in the
room. But mark what his Fides sit apud authorem.
dainties turned to: when the servant went to fetch it again, he found in
stead of meat snakes, and of sauce serpents, to the great terror of his
conscience: but that which is more, one of the serpents leaped in his face, and
catching hold by his lip, hung there till his dying day, so that he could
never feed himself, but he must feed the serpent withal. And this badge
carried he about as a cognizance of an unkind and ungrateful son.

Moreover this is another judgment of God, that commonly as children deal with
their parents, so do their children deal with them: and this in the law of
proportion is most just, and in the order of punishing most usual: for the
proof whereof, as experience daily teaches, so one example or two I will
subjoyne It is reported how a certain unkind and perverse Thearr. hist,
son beat his aged father upon a time, and drew him by the hair of his head
to the threshold: who when he was old was likewise beaten of his son, and
drawn also by the hair of the head not to the threshold, but out of doors
into the dirt; and how he should say he was rightly served, if he had left him
at the threshold, as he left his father, and not dragged him into the streets,
which he did not to his. Thus did his own mouth bear record of his impiety,
and his own conscience condemn him before God and men.

Another old man being persuaded by his son (that had married a young Guiliel.
Lugdi. Discipulus de ^emp.
wise) with fair and sugared promises of kindnesses and contentments, to
surrender his goods and lands unto him, yielded to his request, and found for a
space all things to his desire: but when his often coughing annoyd his young and
dainty wise, he first removed his lodging from a fair high chamber to a base
under room, and after showed him many other unkind and unchildly parts: and
lastly when the old man as ked for clothes, he bought four elnes of cloth,
two whereof he bestowed upon him, and reserved the other two for himself. Now
his young son marking this niggardise of his father toward his grandfather,
hid the two else of cloth, and being asked why he hid them (whether by
ingeniousnesse or instinct of God) he answered, To the end to reserve them for
his father, against he was old, to be a covering for him. Which answer touched
his father so near, that ever after he showed himself more loving and
obsequious to his father than he did before. Two great faults, but soon and
happily amended. Would it might be an example to all children, if not to
mitigate them, yet at least to learn them to fear how to deal roughly and
crookedly with their parents, seeing that God punishes sin with sin, and
sinners in their own kind, and measures the same measure to every man which
they have measured unto others. The like we read of another George Lanterde
disciplina liberorum.
that provided a trough for his old decrepit unmannerly father to eat his meat
in: who being demanded of his son also to what use that trough should serve,
answered for his grandfather: What (quoth the child) and must we have the like
for you when you are old? Which words so abashed him, that he threw it away
forthwith.

At Millan there was an abstinate and ungodly son, that when he was Theat.
hist.
admonished by his mother of some fault which he had committed, made a wry
mouth, and pointed his fingers at her in scorn and derision. Whereat his
mother being angry, wished that he might make such a mouth upon the gallows.
Neither was it a vain wish, for within few days he was taken Mandat. 3.
Cursing. li. 1. cap. 33.
with a theft, and condemned by law to be hanged; and being upon the ladder,
was perceived to wryth his mouth in grief, after the same fashion which he had
done before to his mother in derision.

Henry the second of that name, King of England, son of Geffrey Plantagenet,
and Maud the Empress, after he had reigned twenty years, was content to admit
his young son Henry (married to Margaret the French Kings daughter) into
participation of his Crown: but he like an unnatural son to requite his
fathers love, sought to dispossess him of the whole; for by inciting the King
of France and certain other Nobles, he took arms, and raised war against
his own natural father: betwixt whom diverse strong battles being fought, as
well in England by the Deputies and friends of both parties, as also in
Normandy, Poytou, Guian, and Britain; the victory always inclined to the
father, so that the rebellious son with his allies were constrained to bend to
his fathers will, and to desire peace, which he gently granted, and forgave his
offense. Howbeit the Lord for his disobedience did not so lightly pardon him,
but because his hasty mind could not tarry for the Crown till his fathers
death, therefore the Lord cut him short of it altogether, causing him to die
six years before his father, being yet but young, and like to live long.

Lothair King of Soissons in France, committed the rule of the province of
Guian to his eldest son Cramiris, who when (contrary to the mind of his father)
he oppressed the people with exactions, and was reclaimed home, he like an
ungratious and impious son, fled to his uncle Childebert, and provoked him
towarre upon his own father, wherein he himself was by the just vengeance of
God taken, and burned with his wife and children to death.

Furthermore it is not (doubtless) but to a very good end enacted in the law
of God, That he which curses his father or mother should die the death, and
that rebellious children and such as be incorrigible, should at the instance
and pursuit of their own parents, by order of law be stoned to death.

As children by all these examples ought not only to learn to fear to
displease and revile their parents, but also to fear and reverence them, lest
that by disobedience they kindle the fire of Gods wrath against them: so
likewise on the other side parents are here advertised to have great care in
bringing up and instructing their children in the fear of God, and obedience
to his will; lest for want of instruction and correction on their part, they
themselves incur a punishment of their careless negligence in the person of
their children. And this is proved by experience of the men of 2 Kin. 2.
Bethel, of whose children two and forty were torn in pieces by Bears, for
that they had been so evil taught as to mock the holy Prophet Elizeus, in
calling him bald-pate.

Heli likewise the high priest was culpable of this fault, for having two 1 Samuel 1. 2.
wicked and perverse sons, whom no fear of God could restrain, being
discontent with that honorable portion of the sacrifices allotted them by God,
like famished and unsatiable wretches fell to share out more than was their
due, and by force to raven all that which by fair means they could not get:
and that which is worse, to pollute the holy Tabernacle of God with their
filthy whoredoms, in such sort, that the Religion of God Contempt of holy
things. Lib. 1. cap. 34.
grew in disgrace through their profane dealings. And albeit it may seem that
their father did his duty in some sort, when he admonished and reproved them,
yet it is manifest by the reprehension of the man of God, that he did no part
of that at all, or if he did, yet it was in so careless, loose, and cold
manner, using more lenity than he ought, or less severity than was necessary,
that God turned their destructions (when they were slain at the overthrow of
Israel by the Philistines) to be his punishment: for understanding the doleful
news of his sons death, and the Arkes taking, at once, he fell backewards
from his stool, and burst his neck, being old and heavy, even fourscore and
eighteen years of age, not able either to help or stay himself.

David also was not free from this offense; for he so much cockered a Kin. 1.
16.
some of his children, that they proved the greatest plagues and scourges unto
him, especially Absolon and Adonijah: for the one openly rebelled against him,
and almost drove him out of his kingdom; the other usurped the title and
honor of the kingdom before his fathers death: of this it is recorded. That
David so cockered and pampered him, that he would never displease him from his
youth. But see how he was punished in them for this too great lenity; both of
them came to an untimely death, and proved not only the workers of their own
destruction, but also great crosses to their father.

Ludovicus Vives says, That in his time a certain woman in Flanders did Lib.
2. cap. 10. de institut: Christ. ^ami.
so much pamper and cocker up two of her sons, even against her husbands
will, that she would not suffer them to want money, or any thing which might
furnish their roiotous life, both in drinking, banqueting, and dicing; yea she
would stoale from her husband to minister unto them: but as soon as her
husband was dead, she was justly plagued in them both, for they fell from
royoting to robbing, (which two vices are commonly linked together) and for the
same one of them was executed by the sword, and the other by the halter, she
her self looking on as a witness of their destructions, whereof her
conscience told her that her indulgence was the chiefest cause. Hither may we
refer that common and vulgar story, and I suppose very true, which is almost
in every childs mouth, of him that going to the gallows, desired to speak
with his mother in her care ere he dyed; and when she came unto him, in stead
of speaking, bit off her care Cyriac. Spang.
with his teeth, exclaiming upon her as the causer of his death, because she
did not chastise him in his youth for his faults, but by her flatteries
established him in vice, which brought him to this woeful end: and herein she
was doubly punished, both in her sons destruction, and her own infamy,
whereof she carried about her a continual ma^ke. This ought to be a warning to
all parents, to look better to the education of their children, and to root
out of them in time all evil and corrupt manners; lest of small sprigs they
grow to branches, and of qualities to habits, and so either be hardly done off,
or at least deprave the whole body, and bring it to destruction: but above all
to keep them from idleness and vain pleasures, the discommodity and mischief
whereof this present example will declare. At a town called Hannuel in Saxony,
the Devil transforming himself Job. Fincelius, lib. de Myrac.
into the shape of a man, exercised many juggling tricks and pretty pastime to
delight young men and maids withal, and indeed to draw after him daily great
companies: one day they followed him out of the city gates, unto a hill
adjoining, where he played a juggling trick indeed with them, for he carried
them all away with him, so that they were never after heard of. This history is
recorded in the Annals of the aforenamed city, and avouched to be most true;
being a notable and fearful admonition to all parents, to set their children
to learning and instruction, and to withdraw them from all such vain and
foolish pastimes.

CHAP. II. Of those that rebel against their Superiors.
NOw as it is a thing required by law and reason, that children bear that
honor and reverence to their natural parents which is commanded; so it is
necessary by the same respect, that all subjects perform that duty of honor
and obedience to their Lords, Princes, and Kings, which is not derogatory to
the glory of God; and the rather, because they are as it were their fathers, in
supplying that duty toward their subjects which fathers owe their children: as
namely in maintaining their peace and tranquillity in earthly things, and
keeping them under the discipline of Gods Church; to which two ends they were
ordained. For this cause the Scripture bids every man to be subject to the
higher powers; not so much to avoid the punishment which might befall the
contrary, as because it is agreeable to the will Romans 13.
of God. And in another place, To honor the King; and, To give unto Caesar
that which is Caesar's, as unto God that which is Gods. So also in Moses law we
1 Pet. 2. Mat. 22. Exodus 22.
are forbidden to detract from, or speak evil of the Magistrate, or to curse
the Ruler of the people.

Yet for all this the children of Israel were not afraid many times to commit
this sin, but then especially when they charged Moses with conspiring the
murder of those Rebels that (under Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Number. 16.
Captains of that enterprise) set themselves against him and Aaron; whom not
he, but God for their pride and stubburnnesse, had rooted out and destroyed:
and thus they backbited and slandered Moses, and mutined against him, being
their sovereign Magistrate and Conductor, that so meekly and justly had
brought them out of Egypt, even by the special commission of Almighty God. But
the fury of Gods displeasure was so stirred up against them for this their
fact, that they were scourged with a grievous plague, whereof dyed about four
thousand and seven hundred persons.

In the time of King David's flight from Absalom, who pursued him to 2 Samuel 16.
bereave him of his kingdom, there was one Semei a Ieminite, that in his
wicked and perverse humor, in stead of service done unto his Sovereign,
especially in that extremity, not only presented not himself unto him as a
subject, but as a railer cursed him with most reproachful terms, as of
Mandat. 3. Cursers, lib. 1. cap. 33.
murderer, and wicked man, and also threw stones at him and his followers, in
most despightfull manner: for which his malicious and rebellious act, though
whilst David lived he was not once called in question: yet was he not exempted
from punishment therefore; for in the end his wickedness fell upon his own
head, and destruction overtooke him by desert of another fault, at the
commandment of Solomon. 1 King. 2.


The punishment of Shiba the son of Bichri tarried not all so long, 2 Samuel 20.
who having also with a proud and audacious heart stirred up the greatest part
of Israel to rebel against David, then when he thought to have been most at
quiet, enjoyed not long his disloyal enterprise; for being speedily pursued by
David's servants, and besieged in the city Abel, his head was cut off by the
citizens, and thrown over the wall, as a just reward for his rebellious act.

But let us pass over these sacred histories, and come to profane, yet
probable, and more near examples. When Camillus besieged the Phalischi, Live.
lib. 5.
a people in Hetruria, near to mount Floscon, a Schoolmaster of the city, who
had the rule over the chief men's sons, both touching instruction and
governance, led them out of the city gates one day in show to walk, but indeed
to betray them into Camillus hands: which unfaithful dealing Camillus did not
only mislike, but detest and refuse, thinking it an unhonest part by such
finister means to bring even his enemies in subjection; and therefore
reproving the trustlesse Schoolmaster, and binding his hands behind his back,
he gave every one of his scholars a rod, with commandment to whip him back
unto the parents, whom he had pretended so to deceive. A most noble act in
Camillus (would we could find the like among Christians) and a most deserved
punishment of the Schoolmaster, (would no traitor might be served better.)
Neither might that worthy Roman repent his deed, for the Phalischi in
admiration and love of this notable justice, freely yielded themselves and
their city to him, which otherwise in long time, and without great effusion of
blood he could not have achieved.

Did Tarpeia the daughter of Sp. Tarpeius speed any better, when sh^t betrayed
Live. lib. 1.
the tower whereof her father was the overseer; to Tatius King of the Sabines,
who at that season besieged Rome, upon condition of a sum of gold, or as
other writers say, of all that the soldiers wore on their left hands? No
verily, for the Sabines (as soon as they had obtained their purpose)
overwhelmed her with her left hand gifts; to wit, their shields, and not their
rings and bracelets, which she hoped: to the end to leave an example to the
posterity, how no promise nor oath ought to be of force to traitors, to keep
them from punishment.

Neither did these noble young men of Rome, amongst whom were the Tit. Live.
Consul Brutus sons, come to any better issue, when they conspired to
receive King Tarquinius into the city by night, who by the virtue and valor of
their father was worthily expulsed: for their secret and wicked counsel being
bewrayed to the Consuls Iunius and Pub. Valerius, by Vindicio a bondslave, they
were apprehended, having letters about them written to Tarquinius to the same
effect: and being condemned, were first shamefully scourged with rods, and
after executed to death.

Pausanias King of Sparta having conspired with the Persians against his
Thucyd, lib. 1^
own country, and as it were offered violence to his own bowels, fled into
the Sanctuary of Pallas for relief, when he saw the Ephori to go about to
Aelian. lib. 9.
call him in question for his treason. Now whereas it was irrelegious to take
him from thence by violence, they agreed to shut him up there continually, and
so to pine him to death. Which when his mother understood, she was the first
person that brought a stone to stop up the doors, to hinder him from getting
forth: and therein showed a notable example of godly cruelty to her child, and
cruel pity to her country: approving that saying of Aristippus, who being
demanded why he neglected his son being borne of his body? answered, Do we
not cast from us lice and phlegm which are also bred of our bodies?
Insinuating, That they which have nothing to commend them to their parents but
generation, are not to be esteemed as children; much less they that degenerate.

When Brennus, Captain of the Gauls, brother to Belinus, and son to
Moluntius King of Britain, besieged Ephesus, a devilish woman enticed with
the jewels which Brennus wore about him, betrayed the city into his hands. But
Brennus detesting this abominable covetousness, when he entered the city so
loaded her with gold, that he covered and oppressed her therewith.

In like manner Herodamon delivered up to the Emperor Aurelian his own native
city Tian^, in hope to save his own life by betraying his country. But it
fell out quite contrary to his expectation; for though Caesar had sworn not to
leave a dog alive within the walls, because they shut their gates against him,
and also his soldiers were instant and urgent upon his Eras. in Apoph. lib. 6.
promise, yet he spared the city, and destroyed the traitor, and quit himself
of his promise, by hanging up every dog in the city, contrary to his own
intent, and his armies expectation; yet agreeable to his words, and most
correspondent to equity and true fortitude.

In the year of our Lord 1270, the Bishop of Colonea practicing to spoil the
city of her privileges, and reduce it under his own jurisdiction: Hermanus
Grinu, Consul, and chief Magistrate, withstood his power and authority with
all his force, so that he could not bring his purpose about. Wherefore two
Cannons belonging to the Bishop, sought to undermine this their enemy by
policy, and to take him out of the way: for which end they invited him in very
kind manner to dinner, but when he was come they brought him into a young lions
den (which they kept in honor of the Bishop) and unawares shut the doors
upon him, bidding him shift for himself, thinking that it was impossible for
him to escape out alive.

But the Consul perceiving in what great danger he was, wrapped his cloak
about his left arm, and thrusting it into the mouth of the hungry Lion, killed
him with his right hand, and so by the wonderful providence of God, escaped
without hurt. But the two traitorous Canons he caught right soon, and hung
them at their Cathedral Church, to their own confusion, and tertor of all
traitors.

It was noble saying, and worthy the marking, of Augustus Caesar, to
Ramitalches King of Thracia, who having forsaken Anthony, to take part with
Augustus, boasted very insolently of his deserts toward him: then Caesar
dissembling his folly, drank to another King, and said, I love treason, but I
cannot commend nor trust a traitor. The same also in effect Philip of Macedony
and Julius Caesar were wont to say, That they loved a traitor at the first,
but when he had finished his treason, they hated him more than any other:
signifying, that traitors deserved no retribution of thanks, seeing their
office was accepted for a time, yet they themselves could never be counted
less than naughty and disloyal persons: for no honest man ever betrayed his
country or his friend: and what greater punishment can there be than this? But
for manifest proof hereof let this one example serve in stead of many, namely,
of Theodoricke King of Francia, Albert. Crantz
and Irminfride King of Thuringia, who being professed foes, and having sought
many cruel battles, at length the latter was conquered of the former, by the
lucky assistance of the Saxons. This Irminfride thus subdued, sued for pardon
and release at the conquerours hand, but he was so far from pitying his
estate, that he corrupted one Iringus a Nobleman, and Irminfride's subject, to
murder his master, which he performed kneeling before Theodoricke, running him
through with his sword at his back: which traitorous deed, as soon as it was
finished, Theodoricke, though the setter of it, yet he could not abide the
actour, but bad him be packing, for who could put trust in him that had
betrayed his own master? At which words Iringus (mad with anger and rage)
ran at Theodericke also with purpose to have slain him too; but his hand
missing the mark, returned his sword into his own bowels, so that he fell
down dead upon his masters carcass. What more notable and wonderful judgment
could happen? surely it is an example worthy to be written in golden letters,
and to be read and remembered of every one, to teach men allegiance and
obedience to their Princes and Superiors, lest more sudden destruction than
this fall upon them.

After the death of Ieronimus King of Siracuse, Andronodorus and Themistius,
Tit. Livius.
provoked by their wives descending of the blood royal, affected an usurpation
of the crown, and wrought much hurt to the commonwealth: but their practices
being discovered, the Pretors (by the consent of the Senators) slew them both
in the market place, as rotten members of their common body, and therefore fit
to be cut off. And when they understood, how their wives Damarata and Harmonia
were breeders and incensers of this mischief, they sent to kill them also; yea
and Heraclia, Harmonia her sister, guiltless and witless of the crime (for no
other cause, but because she was sister unto her) was plucked from the Altar,
and slain in the tumult, with two of her daughters that were virgins. And thus
is treason plagued not only in traitors themselves, but also in those that are
linked unto them in friendship and affinity.

The glory and reputation of Fabritius the Roman is eternised by that noble act
of his, in sending bound to Pyrrhus a traitor that offered to poison Cic.
offic. lib. 3.
him. For albeit that Pyrrhus was a sworn enemy to the Roman Empire, and also
made war upon it, yet would not Fabritius trecherously seek his destruction,
but sent back that traitor unto him, to be punished at his discretion.

What notable treasons did Hadrian the fourth, Pope of Rome, practice against
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, yet all was still frustrate; for the Lord
protected the Emperor, and punished the traitor with a sudden and strange
death; for he was choked with a fly which went down his throat and stopped
his breath, and could by no means be pulled out till it made an end of him.
Besides, many others that went about the same practice, were brought to notable
destructions: as that counterfeit fool whom the Italians set on to murder
Frederick in his chamber, which had been performed, had he not leaped out of a
window into a river, and so saved his life: for the fool being taken, was
thrown headlong out of the same window and broke his neeke. As also an Arabian
Doctor, a grand poysoner, who going about to infect with poison his bridle, his
saddle, his spurs, and stirrops, that as soon as he should but touch them,
he might be poisoned, was discovered and hanged for his labor.

In the year of our Lord 1364, when as the Emperor Charles the Albert. Crantz
fourth, and Philip Duke of Austria, were ready to join battle in the field,
Charles distrusting his own power, undermined his foe by subtilty on this
fashion: he sent for three of Duke Philips captains privily, and persuaded
them with promises of rewards to work some means to terrify the Duke, and
dissuade him from that battle: which they performed with all diligence; for
they told the Duke, that they had stolen into the Emperors tents by night, and
viewed his power, which they found to exceed his by three parts, and therefore
counseled him not to try the hazard of the battle, but to save his soldiers
lives by flight, which if they tarried, they were sure to loose. Wherewithal
the Duke mistrusting no fraud, sore affrighted, took the next occasion of
flight, and returned home with dishonor. Now when these three traitors came to
the Emperor for their compacted rewards, he caused them to be paid in
counterfeit money, not equivaling the sum of their bargain by the twentieth
part: which although at first they discerned not, yet afterward finding how
they were cousened, they returned to require their due, and complain of their
wrong. But the Emperor looking sternely upon them, answered* That counterfeit
money was good enough for their counterfeit service, and that if they tarried
long, they should have a due reward of their treason.

Ladislaus Lerezin, Governor of Alba Iulia in Hungary, under Maximilian
Leunclanias Annals of Turkey.
the Emperor, in the year 1566: the City being besieged, and in some danger
of losing, albeit he was advertised, That within two days he should receive
some relief, yet yielded the City traitorously into the hands of the Turks
upon composition. The cruel Turks forgetting their faith and all humanity,
massacred all the soldiers within the City, and sent Ladislaus the traitor
bound hand and foot to Selym the great Turk: where he was accused for his
cruel slaying of some Turkish prisoners, and delivered to his accusers to be
used at their pleasure; who (a just reward of his former treason) put him into
a great Pipe stickt full of long nails, and then rolled him down from a high
mountain, so as the nails ran through him, and ended his life in horrible
torment. Besides, his son that was also partaker of this treason, died
miserably without means, and abandoned of all men, in great poverty and
extremity.

When as the City of Rhodes was besieged by the Turk, there was in it a
certain traitorous Nobleman, who upon promise to have one of Solymans
daughters given him in marriage, did many services to the Turk in secret, to
the prejudice of the City. The Island and town being won, he presented
himself to Solomon, expecting the performance of his promise: but he in
recompense of his treason caused him to be flayed alive; saying, Camerarius
Historical meditat. cap. 7.
That it was not lawful for a Christian to marry a Turkish wife, except he put
off his old skin: being thus flayed, they laid him upon a bed all covered
with salt, and so poudered him, that in short space he died in unspeakable
tormenes.

CHAP. III. More examples of the same subject.
WHen Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople lay about Otto Frisingensis de
rebus Freder. pri^. lib. 1. cap. 47.
Antioch with an army prepared against the Turk, one of his chiefest officers,
namely, his Chancellor, put in practice this notable piece of treason against
him: he waged three desperate young men with an infinite sum of money to kill
him on a day appointed, and then with a band of soldiers determined to
possess himself of the Crown, and of the City, and to slay all that any way
crossed his purpose. But the treason being discoured secretly to the Empress,
she acquainted her Lord with it, who took the three traitors, and put them
all to cruel deaths: and as for the Chancellor, he first bored out his eyes,
and plucking his tongue through his throat, tormented him to death with a
rigorous and most miserable punishment.

When the Turk besieged Alba Graeca, certain soldiers conspired to betray
the City into his hands, for he had promised them large rewards Bonfinus, lib.
3. Decad. 5.
so to do; howbe it it succeeded not with them, for they were detected and
apprehended by Paulus Kynifius Governor of Hungary, who constrained them to
eat one another flesh, seething every dayone to feed the other withal, but he
that was last was feign to devour his own body.

Scribonianus a captain of the Romans in Dalmatia, rebelled against the
Lanquet. Chro.
Emperor Claudius, and named himself emperor in the army; but his rebellion
was miraculously punished, for though the whole army favored him very much, yet
they could not by any means spread their banners, or remove their standers out
of their places as long as he was called by the name of Emperor, with which
miracle being moved, they turned their loves into hatred, and their liking into
loathing, so that whom lately they saluted as Emperor, him now they murdered
as a traitor.

To rehearse all the English traitors that have conspired against their Lanquet.
Kings from the Conquest unto this day, it is a thing unnecessary, and almost
impossible. Howbeit, that their destructions may appear more evidently, and
the curse of God upon traitors be made more manifest, I will briefly reckon up
a catalogue of the chiefest of them. In the year 1295 Lewline Prince of Wales
rebelled against King Edward the first, and after much ado, was taken by Sir
Roger Mortimer, and his head set upon the Tower of London. In like sort was
David, Lewline's brother served. R^^s and Madok escaped no better measure in
stirring the Welchmen up to rebellion. No more did the Scots, who having of
their own accord committed the government of their kingdom to king Edward,
after the death of Alexander (who broke his neck by a fall from an horse, and
lest no issue male) and sworn fealty unto him; yet dispensed with their oath
by the Popes commission, and Frenchmens incitement, and rebelled diverse times
against King Edward: for he overcame them sundry times, and made slaughter of
their men, slaying at one time 32000, and taking diverse of their Nobles
prisoners. In like manner they rebelled against King Edward Lanquet. Stow.
the third, who made three voyages into that land in the space of four years,
and at every time overcame and discomfited them, insomuch that well near all
the nobility of Scotland, with infinite number of the common people were
slain. Thus they rebelled in Henry the sixths time, and also Henry the eights,
and diverse other kings reigns, ever when our English forces were busied about
foreign wars, invading the land on the other side most traitorously.

In the reign of King Henry the fourth there rebelled at one time against him
Sir John Holland, D. of Excester, with the Dukes of Aumarle, Surrey, Lanquet.
Salisbury, and Gloucester: and at another time Sir Thomas Percy Earl of
Worcester, and Henry Percy son to the Earl of Northumberland: at another, Sir
Richard Scroope Archbishop of York, and diverse others of the house of the Lord
Moubray: at another time Sir Henry Percy the father, Earl of Northumberland,
and the Lord Bardolph: and lastly, Ryce ap Dee and Owen Glendour, two Welchmen:
all which were either slain, as Sir Henry Percy the younger; or beheaded, as
the rest of these noble Rebels; or starved to death, as Owen Glendour was in
the mountains of Wales, after he had devoured his own flesh.

In the reign of Henry the fifth, Sir Richard Earl of Cambridge, Sir Richard
Scroope Treasurer of England, and Sir Thomas Gray were beheaded for treason.

No less was the perfidious and ungrateful treachery of Humphry Banister an
Englishman toward the Duke of Buckingham his Lord and master, whom the said
Duke had tenderly brought up, and exalted to great promotion, For when as the
Duke being driven into extremity, by reason of the separation of his army which
he had mustered together against King Richard the usurper, fled to the same
Banister as his trustiest friend, to be kept in secret until he could find
opportunity to escape; this false traitor, upon hope of a thousand pounds which
was promised to him that could bring forth the Duke, betrayed him into the
hands of John Mitton Shirife of Shropshire, who conveied him to the city of
Salisbury, where King Richard kept his household; where he was soon after put
to death. But as for ungrateful Banister, the vengeance of God pursued him to
his utter ignominy: for presently after, his eldest son became mad and died
in a bores sti^: his eldest daughter was suddenly stricken with a foul lepry:
his second son marvellously deformed of his lims, and lame: his youngest
son drowned in a puddle: and he himself in his old age arraigned and found
guilty of a murder, and by his Clergy saved: And as for his thousand pounds,
King Richard gave him not a farthing; saying, That he which would be nutrue to
so good a master, must needs be false to all other.

To pass over the time of the residue of the Kings, where in many examples of
treasons and punishments upon them are extant, and to come nearer unto our own
age, let us consider the wonderful providence of God in discovering the
notorious treasons which have been so oftenpretended, and so many, against our
late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and protecting her so fatherly from the dint
of them all. First therefore, to begin with the chiefest, the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, in the eleventh year of her reign began a
rebellion in the North, pretending their purpose to be sometimes to defend the
Queens person and government from the invasion of strangers, and sometimes for
conscience sake to seek reformation of Religion: under color whereof they got
together an army of men, to the number of six thousand soldiers; against whom
marched the Earl of Suffex, Lieutenant of the North, and the Earl of
Warwick, sent by the Queen to his aid: Whose approach struck such a terror
into their hearts, that the two Earls, with diverse of the arch Rebels, fled by
night into Scotland, leaving the rest of their company a prey unto their
enemies, whereof threescore and six, or thereabout, were hanged at Durham. As
for the Earls, one of them (to wit) of Northumberland, was after taken in
Scotland, and beheaded at York. Westmerland fled into another Country, and
left his house and family destroyed and undone by his folly.

A while after this, what befell to John Throgmorton, Thomas Brook, George
Redman, and diverse other Gentlemen at Norwich, who pretended a rebellion under
the color of suppressing strangers, were they not discovered by one of their
own conspiracy Thomas Ket, and executed at Norwich for their pains? The same
end came Francis Throgmorton to, whose trecheries as they were abominable, and
touching the Queens own person, so they were disclosed not without the
especial providence of God.

But above all, that vile and ungrateful traitor William Parry, upon whom the
Queen had powered plentifully her liberality, deserves to be had in
everlasting remembrance to his shame; whose treasons being discovered, he paid
the tribute of his life in recompense thereof. What shall I say of the Earl of
Arundell, and a second Earl of Northumberland? Did not the justice of God
appear in both their ends, when being attainted for treason, the one slew
himself in prison, and the other died by course of nature in prison also?
Notorious was the conspiracy of those arch traitors, Ballard, Babington,
Savadge, and Tylney, etc. yet the Lord brought them down, and made them
spectacles to the World of his justice. Even so that notorious villain Doctor
Lopez (the Queens Physician) who a long time had not only been an
intelligencer to the Pope and King of Spain of our English Counsels, but also
had poisoned many Noblemen, and went about also to poison the Queen her self,
was he not surprised in his treachery, and brought to sudden destruction? In
sum, the Lord preserved her Majesty not only from these, but many other
secret and privy foes, and that most miraculously, and contrary to all reason,
and spread his wings over her, evermore to defend her from all her enemies, and
in despite of them all brought her, being full of years, in peace to her
grave: All these treasons had their breeding and beginning from that filthy
sink of Romish superstition, from whence the poison was conveied into the
hearts of these traitorous wretches, by the means of those common firebrands of
the Christian World, the wicked Jesuits, whose chiefest art is Treason, and
whose profession is equivocation, and practice, to stir up rebellion; and
therefore as long as they breath in the world let us look for no better fruits
from such trees.

And has the reign of our now Sovereign King James been free from these
Sinons? He has as yet swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom not fully nine
years, and how many treasons have been complotted and practiced against his
Majesty and the State, and how miraculously has the Lord preserved him
evermore, even as the apple of his eye, and the signet on his right hand. To
omit the treason of Raleigh and Cobham, and that also of Watson and Clerk,
that late and last divellish and damnable practice of blowing up the Parliament
house with gunpowder, together with the King, Prince, and all the Nobles and
chief Pillars of the Land, is never to be omitted nor forgotten, but to be
remembered as long as the Sun and Moon endures, to the shame of their
religion, and the professors thereof: never Nation so barbarous, that ever
practiced the like: never any religion so odious, that maintained the like: but
such are the fruits of their so much advanced religion, such the clusters of
their grapes: How be it the Lord prevented their malice, and turned it upon
their own pates, not only by a Divine and miraculous discovery of their
treason (the very night before it should have been effected) but also by
bringing the chief plotters thereof unto confusion; some by the ordinary
proceeding of justice, and some by slaughter in resistance: and that which is
not to be overpast, some of the principal of them being together in a
chamber, were so scorched by their own powder, which was in drying, that they
were driven to confess the heavy judgment of God to be upon them. I pray God
such may ever be the end of all traitors, and that the religion which
brings forth such horrible fruits may not only be suspected but abhorred of
all.

Moreover, there is yet another kind of treason, and another rank of traitors
as pernicious as any of the former, and as odious before God and man. Such are
they which either upon private quarrels, or received injuries, or hope of
gain, or any other silly respect, forsake their countries, and take part with
the enemies to fight against it: or they that in time of necessity refuse to
fight, or dare not fight in defense of it: the former sort are called
fugitives, and the latter cowards. As touching the first, they havebeen always
in detestation in well governed Policies, and also evermore severely punished.
The Aeginates punished them with the loss of their right hand thumbs, to the
end they might no more handle a spear or a sword, but an oar: the Mitylenians
with loss of their lives: the inhabitants of Samos marked them in the face
with the picture of an Owl: and the Romans punished them after diverse
fashions. Fabius Maximus caused all those that had fled from the Roman succors
to the enemy to lose their hands. Africanus the former, though gentle and mild
by nature, yet in Valerius Maximus.
this respect he borrowed from foreign cruelty: for having conquered Carthage,
and got into his power all those Roman Rebels that took part against his
country, he hung the Romans as traitors to their country, and mitigated the
punishment of the Latins, as but perfidious confederates. Africanus the later,
when he had subdued the Punicke Nation, he threw all fugitives amongst wild
beasts to be devoured.

Lucius Paulus aftor the conquest of the King of Persia, committed these
fellows to the mercy of Elephants. Generally there is no Nation under the
Sun which holds them not in execration: and therefore our English
fugitives, who under cloak of Religion not only abandon their country, their
kindred, and their Prince, but also conspire the undoing, and swear the
destruction of them, are they not worthy to be handled like traitors, and to
have their quarters spectacles of perfidy? The bridge and gates of London bear
witness of the woeful ends that these runnagates come unto.

As touching cowards (I mean such as preferring their lives or liberty, or any
other by-respects, before their countries welfare, and either dare not or will
not stand stoutly in defense of it in time of war and danger) they deserve no
less punishment than the former, seeing that as they are open oppugners, so
these are close underminers of the good thereof. And therefore the Romans did
sharply chasten them in their government, as may appear by diverse examples
of the same: as first they were noted with this ignominy, never to eat their
meat but standing; and hereunto they were sworn: Nay, they were in such
hateful account amongst them, that when Annibal offered the Senate 8000
captives to be redeemed, they refused his offer; saying, That they were not
worthy to be redeemed, Alex. ab Alex.
that had rather be taken basely than die honestly and valiantly: The same
Senate dealt more favorably with the captives which King Pyrrhus took, for
they redeemed them, but with this disgrace, degrading them from their honors
and places, until by a double spoil they had won their reputation again. L.
Calpurnius Piso handled Titius the captain of his horsemen in Sicilia (one who
being overcharged with enemies, delivered his weapons unto them) on this
manner, he caused him to go bare footed before the army, wearing a garment
without seames, he forbad him society with any save such as were noted with the
same Valerius Max. lib. 2. cap. 2.
fault, and from a General over horsemen he debased him to a common soldier.
How did the same Senate correct the cowardice of Caius Vatienus (who to the end
to privilege himself from the Italicke war, cut off all the fingers of his
left hand:) even they proscribed his goods, and cast him into perpetual
prison, that that life which he refused to hazard in defense of his country,
he might consume in bondage and fetters.

Fulgosius says, That among the Germans it was so unhonourable Lib. 2. cap. 2.
a part to lose but a shield in the war, that whosover had happened to do
so, was suspended both from the place of common council, and from the temples
of Religion; insomuch, that many (as he reports) killed themselves to avoid
the shame. The people called Daci punished cowards on this sort: they suffered
them not to sleep but with their heads to the beds feet-ward; and besides, by
the law they made them slaves and subjects to their own wives. What viler
disgrace could there be than this? And yet the Lacedaemonians plagued them more
shamefully: for with Phi. Agesilaus.
them it was a discredit to marry in the stock of a coward; any man might
strike them lawfully; and in their attire they went with their clothes rent,
and their beards half shaven. Thus are all kind of traitors continually
punished of the Lord by one means or other; and therefore let us learn to
shun treason as one of the vilest and detestablest things in the world.

CHAP. IIII. Of such as have murdered their Rulers or Princes.
ZImri, Captain of half the chariots of Elah, King of All this whole chapter,
in regard of murder, belongs to the 6 commandment.

1. King. 16.


Israel, conspired against his Lord, as he was in Tirza drinking till he was
drunk in the house of Arze his Steward, and came upon him suddenly, and smote
him till he died, and possessed the Kingdom in his room. Howbeit, herein he
was the Lords rod to punish the house of Baasha, yet when the punishment was
past, the Lord threw the rod into the fire; for he enjoyed the Crown but seven
days: for all Israel, detesting his fact, made Omri King over them, who
besieged him in Tirza, and drove him into that extremity, that he went into
the palace of the Kings house, and burnt himself and the house with fire.

Iozachar the son of Shimeah, and Ieozabed the son of Shomer, came King.
12. 22.
to no better end for murdering Iehoash King of Judah: for Amaziah his son
after the kingdom was confirmed unto him, caused them both to be put to death:
but their children he slew not, according to that which is written in the Book
of the law; The fathers shall not be put to death for the 2 King. 14. 5.
children, nor the children for the fathers, but every man shall bear this
own sin.

Neither did Shallum, that slew Zacharia King of Israel, prosper any better; 2
King. 15.
for he reigned but one month in Samaria, when Menahim the son of Gadi
rebelled against him, and slew him as he had done his master.

Amon, the son of Manasseh, was slain by his own servants, but the Lord
stirred up the people of the Land to revenge his death, and to kill all them
that had conspired against their King.

But to let pass the holy histories of the sacred Scripture, wherein, ever
after any treason, the Holy Ghost presently sets down the punishment of
traitors, as it were of purpose to signify how the Lord hates all such
Rebels that rose up against his own ordinance: let us consider a little the
consequents of these in profane, yet credible authors, and apply them unto our
purpose.

Archelaus King of Macedonia had a minion called Cratenas, whom he loved most
entirely; but he again requited him not with love but Aelian. lib. 1.
with hatred, and stretched all his wits to install himself in his kingdom,
by deposing and murdering him: which though he accomplished, yet his deserts
were cut short by the vengeance of God: for he continued not many days in his
royalty, but he was served with the same sauce that he had made. Archelaus
before him to taste of, even betrayed and murdered, as he well deserved.

Lodovicus Sfortia to the end to invest himself with the Dukedom of Millain,
spared not to shed the innocent blood of his two Nephews, the sons of
Galenchus, together with their tutors, and one Francis Calaber, a worthy and
excellent man; but the Lord so disposed of his purposes, that he (in stead of
obtaining the kingdom) was taken prisoner by the King of France, so that
neither he nor any of his off spring enjoyed that which he so much affected.

When Numerianus was to succeed ^arus his father in the Empire, Arrius Axer his
father in law, to the end to translate the Empire unto himself, Philip Melanst
Cbro 1. lib. 3.
entered a conspiracy, and slew his son in law, that nothing mistrusted his
disloyalty: but the Pretorian army understanding the matter, discharged Arrius,
and elected Dioclesian in his room, who laying hold upon his competitour,
laid an action of treason to his charge, and put him to death in the sight of
the multitude.

Theodoricke and Frederick conspired against their own brother Thurismund
Chro. Sigebert.
King of the Visigothes, to the intent to succeed him in his Kingdom: And
albeit that nature reclaymed them from the act, yet they slew him without all
compassion. But after thirteen years reign the same Theodericke was requited
by his other brethren with the same measure that he before meted to his brother
Thurismund. And so though vengeance slept a while, yet at length it wakened.

Aelias Antonius Gordianus, Emperor of Rome, though so excellent Philip
Melanct Chron.
a young Prince, that he deserved to be called the Love and Jewel of the
World, yet was he slain by one promoted by himself to high honor, Aventin.
lib. 2.
called Philip Arabs, when he was but two and twenty years old: after whose
decease this Philip got himself elected Emperor by the Band, and confirmed by
the Senate. All which notwithstanding, after five years Decius rebelled, and
his own soldiers conspired against him, so that both he at Ingratitude
punished.
Verona, and his son at Rome, were slain by them about one time.

After the death of Constantine the Great, his three sons dividing the
Aventin. lib. 3.
Empire betwixt them, succeeded their father. Constantine the eldest had for
his share Spain, France, the Alps and England; Constance the second held
Italy, Africa, Graecia, and Illyricum; Constantine the younger was King and
Emperor of the East. But ambition suffered them not to enjoy quietly these
their possessions: for when the eldest being more proud and seditious than the
other, not content with his allotted portion, made war upon his brother
Constance his Provinces, and strove to enter Italy, he was slain in a battle
by Aquileia, when he was but five and twenty years old; by which means, all
the provinces which were his, fell to Constance, and therewithal such a
drowsinesse and Epicurisme for want of a stirrer up after his brothers death,
that he fell into the gout, and neglected the government of the Empire:
Wherefore in A^sourge and in Rhetia they created a new Emperor; one
Magnentius, whose life before time Constance had saved from the soldiers, and
therefore his treachery was the greater. This Magnentius deprived and slew
Constance, but was overcome by Constantine the third brother in Illyricum, yet
in such sort, that the conqueror could not greatly brag, for he lost Notable
ingratitude punished.
an infinite company of his men, and yet missed of his chief purpose, the
taking of Magnentius, for he escaped to Lions, and there massacring all that he
mistrusted, at last growing (I suppose) in suspicion with his own heart, slew
himself also: and so his traitorous, ungrateful, and ambitious murder was
revenged with his own hands.

Victericus betrayed Lnyba king of Spain, and succeeded in his place; seven
years after, another traitor slew him, and succeeded also in his Ritius lib.
1. de regib. Hispan.
place. Mauritius the Emperor was murdered by Phocas, together with his wife
and five of his children, he seating himself Emperor in his room: Howbeit,
traitors and murderers can never come to happy ends: for as he had slain
Mauritius; so Priscus, Heraclianus, and Phorius three of his chiefest
captains, conspiring against him, with three several armies gave him such an
alarm at once at his own doors, that they soon quailed his courage, and
after much mangling of his body, cut him shorter by the head and the kingdom
at one blow.

In the time of Edward the second and Edward the third in England, one Sir
Roger Mortimer committed many villainous outrages in shedding Lanquet.
much blood, and at last King Edward himself, lying at Barkley castle, to the
end that he might (as it was supposed) enjoy Isabel his wife, with whom he had
very suspicious familiarity. After this, he unjustly accused Edmund Earl of
Kent of treason, and caused him to be put to death therefore: and lastly, he
conspired against King Edward the third, as it was suspected, for which cause
he was worthily and deservedly beheaded.

Among this rank of murderers of Kings we may fitly place also Richard the
third, usurper of the Crown of England, and diverse others Stow.
which he used as instruments to bring his detestable purpose to effect: as
namely Sir James Tirrel Knight, a man for natures gifts worthy to have served a
much better Prince than this Richard, if he had well served God, and been
endued with as much truth and honesty as he had strength and wit: also Miles
Forest, and John Dighton two villains fleshed in murders. But to come to the
fact, it was on this sort: When Richard the usurper had enjoined Robert
Brackenbury to this piece of service of murdering the young King Edward the
fifth, his Nephew, in the Tower, with his brother the Duke of York, and saw it
refused by him: he committed the charge of the murder to Sir James Tirrel; who
hasting to the Tower, by the Kings Commission received the keys into his own
hands, and by the help of those two butchers, Dighton and Forest, smothered
the two Princes in their bed, and buried them at the stairs feet: which being
done, Sir James rode back to king Richard, who gave him great thanks, and as
some say, made him knight for his labor. All which things on every part well
pondered, it appears, that God never gave the world a notabler example, both
of the unconstancy of worldly w^ale, and also of the wretched end which ensues
such despightfull cruelty: for first, to begin with the ministers, Miles Forest
rotted away peecemeale at Saint Martins, Sir James Tirrel died at the Tower
hill beheaded for treason, King Kichard himself (as it is declared elsewhere)
was slain in the field, hacked and hewed of his enemies, carried on horseback
dead, his hair in despite torn and tugged like a dog: besides, the inward
torments of his guilty conscience were more than all the rest: for it is most
certainly reported, That after this abominable deed he never had quiet in his
mind; when he went abroad, his eye whirled about, his body was privily fenced,
his hand ever upon his dagger, his countenance and manner like one always
ready to strike, his sleep short and unquiet, full of fearful dreams,
insomuch that he would often suddenly start up and leap out of his bed, and
run about his chamber, his restless conscience was so continually tossed and
tumbled with the tedious impression of that abominable murder.

CHAP. V. Of such as rebelled against their Superiors, because of Subsidies and
Taxes imposed upon them.
AS it is not lawful for children to rebel against their parents, though they
be cruel and unnatural, so also it is as unlawful for subjects to withstand
their Princes and Governors, though they be somewhat grievous and burdensome
unto them: which we affirm, not to the end that it should be licensed to them
to exercise all manner of rigor and unmeasurable oppression upon their
subjects (as shall be declared hereafter more at large) but we entreat only
here of their duties which are in subjection to the power of other men, whose
authority they ought in no wise to resist, unless they oppose themselves
against the ordinance of God. Therefore this position is true by the word of
God, That no subject ought by force to shake off the yoke of subjection and
obedience due unto his Prince, or exempt himself from any tax or
contribution, which by public authority is imposed: Give (says the Apostle)
tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom pertains, fear to
whom fear is due, and honor to whom honor is owing. And generally in all
actions wherein the commodities of this life (though with some oppression and
grievance) and not the Religion and service of God, nor the conscience about
the same is called into question, we ought with all patience to endure
whatsoever burden or charge is laid upon us, without moving any troubles, or
showing any discontentments for the same: for they that have otherwise behaved
themselves, these examples following will show how well they have been appaied
for their misdemeanors.

In the year of our Lord 1304, after that Guy Earl of Flanders having Nich.
Gil. vol. 1
rebelled against Philip the Fair his Sovereign, was by strength of arms
reduced into subjection, and constrained to deliver himself and his two sons
prisoners into his hands, the Flemings made an insurrection against the Kings
part, because of a certain tax which he had set upon their ships that arrived
at certain havens: and upon this occasion great war, diverse battles, and
sundry overthrowes on each side grew, but so, that at last the King remained
conqueror, and the Flemings (for a reward of their rebellion) lost in the
battle six and thirty thousand men that were slain, beside a great number
that were taken prisoners.

Two years after this Flemmish stir, there arose a great commotion The same
author.
and hurly burly of the rascal and basest sort of people at Paris, because of
the alteration of their coins: who being not satisfied with the pillage and
spoilage of their houses, whom they supposed to be either causes of the said
alteration, or by counsel or other means any furtherers thereunto, came in
great troops before the Kings Palace, at his lodging in the Temple, with such
an hideous noise and outrage, that all the day after, neither the King nor any
of his officers durst once stir over the threshold: nay they grew to that
overflow of pride and insolency, that the victuals which were provided for the
Kings diet, and carried to him, were by them shamefully thrown under feet in
the dirt, and trampled upon in despite and disdain. But three or four days
after this tumult was appeased, many of them for their pains were hanged before
their own doors, and in the city gates, to the number of eight and twenty
persons.

In the reign of Charles the sixth, the Parisians (by reason of a certain
tax which he minded to lay upon them) banded themselves and conspired together
against him: they determined once (says Froissard) to have beaten down Loure,
and S. Vincents castle, and all the houses of defense Vol 2. cap. 120.
about Paris, that they might not be offensive to them. But the King (though
young in years) handled them so ripe and handsomely, that having taken away
from them their armor, the city gates and chains of the streets, and locked up
their weapons in S. Vincents castle, he dealt with Cap. 129.
them as pleased him. And thus their pride being quashed, many of them were
executed and put to death: As also for the like rebellion were at Cap. 130.
Nic. Gil. Vol. 2.
Troyes, Orlean, Chalon, Sens, and Rhemes.

About the same time the Flandrians, and especially the inhabitants of Gaunt
wrought much trouble against Lewis the Earl of Flanders, for diverse Froiss. v.
2. c. 97.
taxes and tributes which he had laid upon them, which they in no respect would
yield unto. The matter came to be decided by blows, and much blood was shed,
and many losses endured on both sides, as a means appointed of God to chastise
as well the one as the other. The Gaunts being no more in number than five or
six thousand men, overthrew the Cap. 92.
Earls army consisting of forty thousand, and in pursuit of their victory
took Bruges, whither the Earl was gone for safety, and lying in a poor
woman's house, was constrained (in the habit of a beggar) to fly the City. And
thus he fared till King Charles the sixth sent an army of men to his succor
(for he was his subject) by whose support he overcame those Rebels Cap. 180.
in a battle fought at Rose Bec, to the number of forty thousand: and the body
of their chiefetaine Philip Artevil, slain in the throng, he caused to be
hanged on a tree. And this was the end of that cruel Tragedy, the Nic. Gil.
vol. 2.
country being brought again into the obedience of their old Lord.

A while before this, whilst King John was held prisoner in England, there
arose a great commotion of the common people in France, against Froiss vol. 1.
cap. 182.
the nobility and gentry of the realm, that oppressed them: this tumult began
but with an hundred men that were gathered together in the country of
Beauvoisin, but that small handful grew right quickly to an armfull, ^^on to
nine thousand, that ranged and robbed throughout all Brie, along by the river
Marne to Laonoise, and all about Soissons, armed with great bats shod with
iron: an headless crew without Governor, fully purposing to bring to ruin
the whole nobility. In this disorder they wrought much mischief, broke up many
houses and castles, murdered many Lords; so that diverse Ladies and Knights, as
the Duchesses of Normandy and Orleance, were fain to fly for safeguard to Meaux:
whither when these Rebels would needs pursue them, they were there overthrown,
killed, and hanged by troops.

In the year of our Lord 1525, there were certain husbandmen of Souabe Sleid.
lib. 4.
that began to stand in resistance against the Earl of Lupsfen, by reason of
certain burdens which they complained themselves to be overlaid with by him:
their neighbors seeing this, enterprised the like against their Lords: And so
upon this small beginning (by a certain contagion) there grew up a most
dangerous and fearful commotion, that spread it self almost over all
Almaine: the sedition thus increasing in all quarters, and the swains being
now full forty thousand strong, making their own liberty and the Gospels a
cloak to cover their treason and rebellion, and a pretense of their
undertaking arms (to the wonderful grief of all that feared God) did not
only fight with the Roman Catholics, but with all other without respect, as
well in Souabe as in Franconia: they destroyed the greater part of the
Nobility, sacked and burnt many castles and fortresses, to the number of two
hundred, and put to death the Earl of Helfest, in making him pass through
their pikes. But at length their strength was broken, they discomfited and torn
in pieces with a most horrible massacre of more than eighteen thousand of them.
During this sedition there were slain on each side fifty thousand men. The
captain of the Souabian swains called Geismer, having betaken himself to
flight, got over the mountains of Padua, where by treason he was made away.

In the year of our Lord 1517, in the Marquesdome of the Vandales, the like
insurrection and rebellion was of the commonalty, especially the baser sort,
against the Nobility, Spiritual, and Temporal, by whom they were oppressed
with intolerable exactions: their army was numbered of ninety thousand men all
clowns and husbandmen, that conspired together to redress and reform their
own grievances, without any respect of civil Magistrate, or fear of Almighty
God. This rascality of swains raged and tyranized every where, burning and
beating down the castles and houses of Noblemen, and making their ruins even
with the ground: Nay, they handled the Noblemen themselves, as many as they
could attain unto, not contumeliously only, but rigorously and cruelly, for
they tormented them to death, and carried their heads upon spears, in token of
victory. Thus they swayed a while uncontrolled, for the Emperor Maximilian
winked at their riots, as being acquainted with what in juries they had been
overcharged: but when he perceived that the rude multitude did not limit their
fury within reason, but let it run too lavish to the damnifying as well the
innocent as the guilty, he made out a small troup of mercinary soldiers,
together with a band of horsemen, to suppress them, who coming to a city were
presently so environed with such a multitude of these swains, that like
locusts overspread the earth, that they thought it impossible to escape with
their lives; wherefore fear and extremity made them to rush out to battle
with them. But see how the Lord prospers a good cause, for all their weak
number in comparison of their enemies, yet such a fear possessed their enemies
hearts, that they fled like troops of sheep, and were slain like dogs before
them: insomuch, that they that escaped the sword, were either hanged by flocks
on trees, or roasted on spits by fires, or otherwise tormented to death. And
this end befell that wicked rebellious rout, which wrought such mischief in
that country, with their monstrous villainies, that the traces and steps
thereof remain at this day to be seen.

In the year of our Lord 1381, Richard the second being King, the Commons of
England (and especially of Kent and Essex) by means of a Stow Chron.
tax that was set upon them, suddenly rebelled, and assembled together on
Blackheath, to the number of 60000 or more: which rebellious rout had none but
base and ignoble fellows for their captains; as Wat Tiler, Jack Straw, Tom
Miller, but yet they caused much trouble and disquietnesse in the Realm, and
chiefly about the city of London, where they committed much villainy, in
destroying many goodly places, as the Savoy, and others; and being in
Smithfield, used themselves very proudly and unreverently toward the King: but
by the manhood and wisdom of William Walworth, Major of London (who arrested
their chief captain in the midst of them) that rude company was discomfited,
and the ringleaders of them worthily punished.

In like manner in the reign of Henry the seventh, a great commotion was
stirred up in England by the Commons of the North, by reason of a Stow Chron.
certain tax which was levied of the tenth penny of all men's lands and goods
within the land; in the which the Earl of Northumberland was slain; but their
rash attempt was soon broken, and Chamberlain their captain with diverse other
hanged at York, for the same. Howbeit their example feared not the Cornishmen
from rebelling upon the like occasion of a tax, under the conduct of the Lord
Audley, until by woeful experience they felt the same scourge: for the King
met them upon Blackheath, and discomfiting their troops, took their captains
and ring leaders, and put them to most worthy and sharp death.

Thus we may see the unhappy issue of all such seditious revoltings, and
thereby gather how unpleasant they are in the sight of God. Let all the people
therefore learn by these experiences to submit themselves in the fear of God
to the higher powers, whether they be Lords, Kings, Princes, or any other that
are set over them.

CHAP. VI. Of Murderers.
AS touching Murder, which is (by the second commandment of the second Table)
forbidden in these words, Thou shall not kill: the Lord denounces this
judgment upon it, That he which strikes a man that he dies, shall Exodus 21.
die the death. And this is correspondent to that Edict which he gave to Noah
presently after the universal flood, to suppress that general cruelty which
had taken root from the beginning in Cain and his posterity, being careful for
man's life; saying, That he will require the blood of man, at the hands of
either man or beast that kills him: adding moreover, That whosoever sheddeth
man's blood, by man also his blood shall be shed, seeing that God created him
after Genesis 9.
his own Image: which he would not have to be basely accounted of, but dear
and precious unto us. If then the bruit and unreasonable creatures Exodus 21.
are not exempted from the sentence of death pronounced in the law, if they
chance to kill a man: how much more punishable then is man, endued with will
and reason, when maliciously and advisedly he takes away the life of his
neighbor? But the heinousness and greatness of this sin is most lively
expressed by that ordinance of God set down in the 21 of Deutronomy, where it
is enjoined, That if a man be found slain in the field, Deuteronomy. 21.
and it be not known who it was that slew him, then the Elders and Judges of
the next town assembling together, should offer up an expiatory sacrifice by
the hands of the Priests, to demand pardon for that cruel murder, that the
guilt of innocent blood might not be imputed unto them. And if by oversight or
negligence without any malice, hatred, or pretense, one killed another, yet was
he not exempted from all punishment, but suffered to fly to the city of refuge,
to be kept, and as it were enclosed until his innocence Number. 35.
were made manifest, or at the least until the death of the high Priest. From
this (it may seem) arose the custom of Painims in the like case; which was,
that if a man had unwillingly committed murder, he did presently avoid the
country, and go unto some man of power and authority of a strange nation, and
present himself at his gate, sitting with his face covered, humbly entreating
pardon and reconciliation for his murder: and for one whole year he might not
return into his country. On this manner was the son of a certain King of
Phrygia entertained in King Craesus court, who unadvisedly had slain his own
brother. Whereby Herod. lib. 1.
it is manifest, how odious and execrable in all ages, and all places, and all
people, this murder has been: insomuch that men did shun their very meeting
and company, and abandon them out of their temples and public assemblies, as
people excommunicate and profane. And yet for all this, mankind (for the most
part) like savage beasts has by the instigation of that wicked spirit (who was
a murderer from the beginning) been too too addicted to this kind of cruelty,
not being afraid to offer violence to nature, and shed innocent blood. Such was
the frantic and perverse cruelty of the second man Cain, when without any
occasion, but only Genesis 4.
through envy, he slew his brother Abel, and that traitorously: which deed,
albeit it was done in secret and without the view of men, yet it could not shun
the piercing eye of God, who reproved him for it, saying, That the blood of
Abel cried for vengeance from the earth. And although this cursed and wicked
murderer received not immediately a condign punishment answerable to his
crime (God to the end to spare man's blood, using undeserved favor toward him)
yet escaped he not scot free, for he was pursued with a continual torment and
sting of confcience, together with such an incessant fear, that he became a
vagabond and a runnagate upon the earth: and seeing himself brought into so
miserable an estate, he fell to complaining, that the punishment was greater
than he was able to bear. Thus God permitted this wretch to draw out his life
in such anguish, that for a greater punishment he might pine away the rest of
his days without comfort. A man may find in this world many such brother
murdering Cains, who for no occasion stick not to cut their throats, whom
(for the bond of common nature wherein all men are linked together as branches
to one root) they ought to acknowledge for their brethren and friends: upon
whom the heavy hand of God has not been more slack to punish either by one
means or other, than it was upon their eldest brother Cain. But seeing the
number of them is so great, and it is not so convenient to heap up here so
huge a multitude together, it shall suffice only to recount the most famous
and notablest of them, as of those that have been men of note and reputation
of the world, or that through an ambitious desire of reigning, have by arms
sought to atchieve their purposes: for these for the most part are the greatest
murderers and butchers of all, that through their wicked affections, worldly
pomp, or desire of revenge, have no remorse of making the blood of men run
like rivers upon the earth, making no more account of the life of a man, than
of a fly or a worm.

Such an one was Abimelech one of the sons of Gedeon, who to the end Judge. 9.
to usurp the regiment of the people, (which his father before him refused)
got together a rout of rascal and vile fellows, by whose aid coming to his
fathers house, he slew seventy of his brethren, even all except Ioathan the
youngest, that stole away and hid himself. After which massacre, he reigned in
jolity three years, and at the end thereof was cut short by God, together with
the Sichemites his provokers and maintainers, who were also guilty of all the
innocent blood which he had shed: for God sent the spirit of division betwixt
them, so that the Sichemites began to despise him, and rebel against him; but
they had the worst end of the staff, and were overcome by him: who pursuing
the victory, took their city by force, and put them all to the edge of the
sword. And after he had thus destroyed their city, put fire also to the castle,
wherein he consumed near about a thousand persons of men and women, that were
retired thither to save their lives. And thus God brought upon them the
mischief which they had consented and put their hands unto: for as they had
lent him aid and furtherance to the shedding of his brethrens blood, so was
their own blood with their wives and childrens shed by him: yet this tyran not
content therewith, made war also with the inhabitants of Tebez, and took their
city, and would have forced the tower also, wherein the citisens had enclosed
themselves; but as he approached to the wall, a woman threw down a piece of a
millstone upon his head, wherewith finding himself hurt to death, he commanded
one of his soldiers to kill him outright. And thus this wicked murderer that
had shed the blood of many men, yea of his own brethren, had his brains
knocked out by a woman, and died a most desperate death.

The bloody treachery of Baana and Rechab, chief captains of Ishbosheth,
Saul's son, in conspiring against and murdering their master whilst 2 Samuel 4.
he slept, abode not long unpunished; for having cut off his head, they
presented it for a present to king David, hoping to gratify the king, and to
receive some recompense for their pains. But David being of an upright
Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. and 4.
and true kingly heart, could not endure such vile treachery, though against
the person of his enemy; but entertained them as most vile traitors and
master-murtherers, commanding first their hands and feet to be cut off, which
they had especially employed as instruments about that villainy, and afterward
caused them to be slain, and then hanged for an example to all others that
should attempt the like.

For the like cause was Ioab (General of king David's host) for killing Abner
traitorously (who forsaking Ishbosheth, had yielded himself to the King)
cursed of David, with all his house, with a most grievous and terrible Treason;
lib. 2. cap. 3.
curse. And yet notwithstanding a while after he came again to that pass, as
to murder Amasa one of David's chief captains, making show to salute and
embrace him. For which cruel deed, albeit that in David's time he received no
punishment, yet it overtooke him at last, and the same kind 2. Sam. 20.
of cruelty which he had so traitorously and villanously committed toward
others, fell upon his own head, being himself also killed as he had killed
others: which happened in king Solomon's reign, who executing the charge and
commandment of his father, put to death this murderer in the tabernacle 1.
King. 2.
of God, and by the Altar, whither he was fled as to a place privileged for
safety.

CHA. VII. A suit of examples like unto the former.
LEaving the Scripture, we find in other writers notable examples Herod. lib.
1.
of this subject* As first of Astyages king of the Medes, who so much swarved
from humanity, that he gave in strait charge that young Cyrus his own daughters
son, now ready to be borne, should be made away by some sinister practice, to
avoid by that means the danger which by a dream was signified unto him.
Notwithstanding the young infant finding friends to preserve him alive, and
growing up by means of the Peers favor (to whom his grandfather by his cruel
dealings, was become odious) obtained the Crown out of his hands, and
dispossessing him, seated himself in his room.

This Cyrus was that mighty and awful king of Persia, whom God used as an
instrument for the delivery of his people out of the captivity of Babylon, as
he foretold by the Prophet Isaiah: who yet (following kind) made cruel war in
many places for the space of thirty years: and therefore it was necessary that
he should taste some fruits of his insatiable and bloodthirsty desire, as he
indeed did: for after many great victories and conquests over Oros. lib. 2.
diverse countries achieved, going about to assail Scythia also, he and his
army together were surprised, overcome, and slain, to the number of two
hundred thousand persons: and for his shame received this disgrace at a woman's
hand, who triumphing in her victory, threw his head into a sack full of blood,
with these terms, Now glut thy self with blood which thou have thirsted
after so long time.

Cambyses, Cyrus son, was also so bloody and cruel a man, that one day he
Herod. lib. 3.
shot a noblemans son to the heart, with an arrow, for being admonished by
his father of his drunkenness, to which he was very much given, which he did
in indignation, and to show that he was not yet so drunken but he knew how to
draw his bow. He caused his own brother to be murdered privily, for fear he
should reign after him; and slew his sister for reproving him for that deed.
In his voyage to Aethiopia, when his army was brought into so great penury of
victuals, that they were glad to feed upon horse flesh, he was so cruel and
barbarous, that after their horses were spent he caused them to eat one
another: but at his return from Egypt, the Susians his chief citizens
welcomed him home with rebellion: and at last, as he was riding, it so
chanced, that his sword fell out of the scabberd, and himself upon the point
of it, so that it pierced him through, and so he dyed.

After that Xerxes by his overbold enterprise had disturbed the greatest part
of the world, passed the sea, and traversed many countries, to the Diodor. lib.
11.
end to assail Greece with innumerable forces, he was overcome both by sea and
by land, and compelled privily to retire into his country with shame and
discredit: where he had not long been, but Artabanus the captain of his guard
killed him in his palace by night: who also after that and many other
mischiefs committed by him, was himself cruelly murdered.

The thirty Governors which the Lacedaemonians set over the Athenians by
compulsion, were such cruel tyrants, oppressors, and bloudsuckers Iustine.
of the people, that they made away a great part of them, until they were
chased away themselves violently: and then being secretly dogged and pursued,
were all killed one after another.

Pyrrhus king of Epire that reigned not long after Alexander the great, was
naturally disposed to such a quicknes and heat of courage, that he could never
be quiet but when he was either doing some mischief to another, or when
another was doing some unto him: ever devising some new practice of molestation
for pastimes sake. This his wild and dangerous disposition began first to show
it self in the death of Neoptolemus, who was conjoined king with him, whom
having bidden to supper in his lodging under pretense of sacrifice to his gods,
he deceitfully slew: preventing by that means Neoptolemus pretended purpose of
poisoning him when occasion should serve. After this he conquered Macedonia by
arms, and came into Italy to make war with the Romans, in the behalf of the
Tarentines, and gave them battle in the field, and slew fifteen thousand of
them in one day: he took their camp, revoked many cities from their alliance,
and spoiled much of their country even to the walls of Rome: and all this in a
trice without breathing. Again by Ascolie he encountered them the second time,
where there was a great overthrow of each side of fifteen thousand men: but
the Romans had the worst, and took their heels. When he was entreated by
the Sicilian ambassadors to lend them aid to expulse the Carthaginians out of
their Isle, he yielded presently and chased them out. Being recalled by the
Tarentines into Italy for their succor, he was conquered by the Romans after
he had made war upon them six years. At his return to Epire he re-entred by
violence Macedonia, took many places, overcame the army of king Antigonus that
resisted him, and had all the whole realm rendered into his hand. Being
entreated by Cleominus to make war upon Sparta, to the end toreinstall him in
his kingdom which he was deprived of: forthwith he mustered his forces,
besieged the city, and spoiled and wasted all the whole country. Afterward
there being a sedition raised in the city of Argos between two of the chiefest
citizens, one of the which sent unto him for aid, he (what issue soever was
like to ensue, whether victory or vanquishment) could not abide in peace from
disquieting others and himself, but must needs go to take part in that
sedition: but to his cost, even to his destruction. For first in his way he
found an evill-favoured welcome by an ambush placed of purpose to interrupt his
journey, amongst whom he lost his son: which mishap nothing dismayed him, nor
abated any whit of his purpose or courage from pursuing this journey to Argos,
though the citizens themselves entreated him to retire, and though he had no
business there save only to look over the town^ being arrived by night, and
finding a gate left open for him to enter by, by the means of him that had
sent for him to his aid, he put his soldiers in, and possessed himself of
the town incontinently. But the city being aided by Antigonus and the King of
Sparta, charged and pressed him so sore, that he sought means to retire out of
the same, but could not. At which time being about to strike a young man of the
city that had done him some hurt, his mother being aloft upon the roof of an
house, perceiving his intent, threw down a tile with both her hands upon his
head, and hit him such a knock upon the neck through default of his armor,
that it so bruised his joints, that he fell into a sudden swound, and lost his
sight, his raines falling out of his hand, and he himself tumbling from his
saddle upon the ground, which when some of the soldiers perceived, they drew
him out of the gate, and there, to make an end of the tragedy, cut off his head.

The cruelty of the Ephori was mavelous strange, when being unwilling once to
hear the equality of lands and possessions to be named, which Agis Plutarch.
their King, for the good of the commonwealth (according to the ancient custom
and ordinance of Licurgus) sought to restore: they rose up against him and cast
him in prison, and there without any process or form of law sttangled him to
death, with his mother and grandfather. But it cost them very dear: for
Cleamenes who was joint King with Agis, albe it he had consented to the weaving
of that web himself, to the end he might reign alone; yet ceased he not to
prosecute revenge upon them, which he did not only by his daily and usual
practices openly, but also privily; for taking them once at advantage, being at
supper all together, he caused his men to kill them suddenly as they fat. And
thus was the good King Agis revenged. But this last murderer which was fullied
and polluted with so much blood, he went not long unpunished for his misdeeds:
for soon after, Antigonus King of Macedonia gave him a great overthrow in a
battle, wherein he lost Sparta his chief city, and fled into Egypt for
succor: where after small abode, upon an accusation laid against him, he was
cast into prison, and though he escaped out with his company by cunning and
craft, yet as he walked up and down Alexandria in armor, in hope that through
his seditious practices the citizens would take his part, and help to restore
him to his liberty; when he perceived it was nothing so, but that every man
forsook him, and that there was no hope left of recovery, he commanded his men
to kill one another, as they did. In which desperate rage and fury he himself
was slain, and his body being found, was commanded by King Ptolomey to be hanged
on a gibbet, and his mother, wives, and children that came with him into
Egypt, to be put to death. And this was the tragical end of Cleomenes King
of Sparta.

Alexander the tyrant of Pheres never ceased to make and spy out all occasions
of war against the people of Thessaly, to the end to bring them generally in
subjection under his dominion: he was a most bloody and cruel minded man,
having neither regard of person or justice in any action. In his cruelty he
buried some alive, others he clothed in bears and boares skins, and then set
dogs at their tails to rend them in pieces; others he used in way of pastime
to strike through with darts and arrows. And one day as the inhabitants of a
certain city were assembled together in counsel, he caused his guard to
enclose them up suddenly, and to kill them all even to the very infants. He
slew also his own uncle, and crowned the spear wherewith he did that deed with
garlands of flowers, and sacrificed unto him being dead, as to a god. Now
albeit this cruel Tygre was guarded continually with troops of soldiers that
kept night and day watch about his body wheresoever he lay, and with a most
ougly and terrible dog, unacquainted with any saving himself, his wife, and
one servant that gave him his meat, tied to his chamber door, yet could he not
escape the evil chance which by his wives means fell upon him: for she taking
away the stairs of his chamber, let in three of her own brethren provided to
murder him, as they did: for finding him asleep, one took him fast by the
heels, the other by the hair, wringing his head behind him, and the third
thrust him through with his sword, she all this while giving them light to
dispatch their business. The citizens of Pheres when they had drawn his
carcass about their streets, and trampled upon it their bellies full, threw it
to the dogs to be devoured; so odious was his very remembrance among them.

I^gurth, son to Manastabal, brother to Micipsa King of Numidia, by Salusti
birth a bastard, for he was borne of a concubine, yet by nature and
disposition so valiant and full of courage, that he was not only beloved of
all men, but also so dearly esteemed of by Micipsa, that he adopted him joint
heir with his sons Adherbal and Hiempsal, to his crown, kindly admonishing
him in way of entreaty to continue the union of love and concord without breach
between them, which he promised to perform.. But Micipsa was no sooner
deceased, but he by and by not content with a portion of the Kingdom,
ambitiously sought for the whole. For which cause he first found means to
dispatch Hiempsal out of his way by the hands of the guard, who in his lodging
by night cut his throat, and then by battle having vanquished Adherbal his
brother, obtained the sole regiment without controlment. Besides, he corrupted
so by bribes the Senators of Rome that had sovereign authority in and over his
Kingdom, that in stead of punishment which his murder cried for, he was by
the decree of the Senate allotted to the one half of the Kingdom. Whereupon
being grown yet more presumptuous, he made excursions and ryots upon
Adherbals territories, and did him thereby much injury: and from thence falling
to open war, put him to flight, and pursued him to a city, where he besieged
him so long, till he was constrained to yield himself. And then having gotten
him within his power, put him to the cruellest death he could devise: which
villainous deed gave just cause to the Romans, of that war which they
undertook against him, wherein he was discomfited: and seeing himself
utterly lost, fled to his son in law Bochus, King of Mauritania, to seek
supply of succor, who receiving him into safeguard, proved a false guard to him,
and delivered him into the hands of his enemies, and so was he carried in
triumph to Rome by Marius fast bound; and being come to Rome, cast into
perpetual prison, where first his gown was torn off his back by violence,
next a ring of gold plucked off his ear, lap and all; and lastly, himself
stark naked thrown into a deep ditch, where combating with famine six days,
the seventh miserably ended his wretched life, according to the merits of his
misdeeds. Orsius, says he, was strangled in prison.

Methridates king of Parthia put to death the king of Cappadocia, to Oras.
Sabel. Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
get his kingdom, and after under pretense of parlying with one of his sons,
slew him also: for which cause the Romans took up the quarrel, and made
war upon him, by means whereof much loss and inconvenience grew unto him as
well by sea as by land. After the first overthrow, where one of his sisters was
taken prisoner, when he saw himself in so desperate a case, that no hope of
help was left, he slew two other of his sisters, with two of his wives, having
before this war given his foruth sister (who also was his wife) a dram of
poison to make up the tragedy. Afterward being vanquished in the night by
Pompey the Roman, and put to flight with only three of his company, as he went
about to gather a new supply of forces, behold tidings was brought him of the
revolt of many of his Provinces and countries, and of the delivering up of the
rest of his daughters into Pompeyes hand, and of the treason of his young son
Pharnax, the gallantest of his sons, and whom he purposed to make his
successor, who had joined himself to his enemy, which troubled and astonished
him more than all the rest* so that his courage being quite dashed, and all
hope of bettering his estate extinguished, his other two daughters he poisoned
with his own hands, and sought to practice the same experiment upon himself,
but that his body was too strong for the poison, and killed the operation
thereof by strength of nature: but that which poison could not effect, his own
sword performed.

Though Pompey the great was never any of the most notorious offenders in Rome,
yet did this stain of cruelty, ambition and desire of rule, cleave Plutarch.
unto him: for first he joining himself to Silla, dealt most cruelly and
unnaturally with Carbo, whom after familiar conference, in show of friendship,
he caused suddenly to be slain, without show of mercy. And with Quintius
Valerius, a wise and well lettered man, with whom walking but two or three
turns, he committed to a cruel and unexpected slaughter. He executed severe
punishment upon the enemies of Sylla, especially those that were most of note
and reputation, and unmercifully put Brutus to death, that had rendered
himself unto his mercy. It was he that devised that new combat of prisoners
and wild beasts, to make the people sport withal; a most inhumane and bloody
pastime, to see humane and manly bodies torn and dismembered by brute and
senseless creatures: which, if we will believe Plutarch, was the only cause
of his destruction. Now after so many brave and gallant victories, so many
magnificent triumphs; as the taking of King Hiarbas, the overthrow of Domitius,
the conquest of Africa, the pacifying of Spain, and the overwelding of the
commotions that were therein, the clearing of the sea coasts from Pirates, the
victory over Methridates, the subduing of the Arabians, the reducing of Syria
into a Province, the conquest of Judea, Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, and
Paphlagonia: I say, after all these worthy deeds of arms and mighty victories,
he was shamefully overcome by Julius Caesar in that civil war, wherein it
was generally thought that he had undertaken the better cause in maintaining
the authority of the Senate, and defending the liberty of the people, as he
pretended to do: being thus put to flight, and making toward Egypt, in hope
the King (for that before time he had been his tutor) would protect and
furnish him, that he might recover himself again, he found himself so far
deceived of his expectation, that in stead thereof the Kings people cut him
short of his purpose, and of his head both at once, sending it for a token to
Caesar, to gratify him withal. Nevertheless, for all this, his murderers
and betrayers, as the young King, and all others that were causers of his death
were justly punished for their cruelty, by the hands of him whom they thought
to gratify: for as Cleopatra the Kings sister thr^w her self down at Caesar's
feet to entreat her portion of the kingdom, and he being willing also to show
her that favor, was by that means gotten into the kings palace; forthwith the
murderers of Pompey beset the palace, and went about to bring him into the
same snare that they had caught Pompey in. But Caesar after that he had
sustained their greatest brunt, frustrated their purposes, and recovered his
forces into his hands, assailed them with such valor and prowess on all
sides, that in short space he overcame this wicked and traitorous nation.
Amongst the slain, the dead body of this young and evil advised King was
found, overborne with dirt. Theodotus the kings schoolmaster (by whose
instigation ^lor. lib. 4.
and advice both Pompey was slain, and this war undertaken) being escaped
and fled toward Asia for his safety, found even there sufficient instruments
both to abridge his journey and shorten his life. As for the rest of that
murdering fellowship, they ended their lives some here, some there, in (that
merciless element) the sea, and by (that boisterous element) the wind, which
though senseless, yet could not suffer them to escape unpunished.

Although that Julius Caesar (concerning whom more occasion of speech Plutarch.
will be given hereafter) did tyrannously usurp the key of the Roman
Commonwealth, and intruded himself into the Empire against the laws,
customs, and authority of the people and Senate, yet was it accounted a most
traitorous and cruel part to massacre and kill him in the Senate, as he sat in
his seat misdoubting no mishap, as the sequel of their several ends which
were actors in this tragedy did declare: for the vengeance of God was so
manifestly displayed upon them, that not one of the conspirators escaped, but
was pursued by sea and land so eagerly, till there was Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
and 4. Plutarch.
nor one left of that wicked crew whom revenge had not overtaken. Cassius being
discomfited in the battle of Philippos, supposing that Brutus had been also
in the same case, used the same sword against himself (a mavelous thing)
wherewith before he had smitten Caesar. Brutus also a few days after, when a
fearful vision had appeared twice unto him by night, Eutrop.
understanding thereby that his time of life was but short, though he had the
better of his enemies the day before, yet threw himself desperately into the
greatest danger of the battle, for his speedier dispatch; but he was reserved
to a more shameful end., for seeing his men slain before him, he retired
hastily apart from view of men, and setting his sword to his breast, threw
himself upon it, piercing him through the body, and so ended his life. And
thus was Caesar's death revenged by Octavius and Anthony who remained
conquerors, after all that bloody crew was brought to naught: betwixt whom also
ere long burst out a most cruel division, which grew unto a furious and cruel
battle by sea, wherein Anthony was overcome, and sent flying into Egypt, and
there taught his own hands to be his murderers. And such was the end of his
life, who had been an actor in that pernicious office of the Triumvirship, and
a causer of the deaths of many men. And forasmuch as Cleopatra was the first
motive and fetter on of Anthony to this war, it was good reason that she
should partake some of that punishment which they both deserved; as she did:
for being surprised by her enemies, to the intent she might not be carried in
triumph to Rome, she caused an aspe to bite her to death. Mark here the
pitiful Tragedies that following one another in the neck, were so linkt
together, that drawing and holding each other, they drew with them a world of
miseries to a most woeful end: a most transparent and clear glass, wherein
the visages of Gods heavy judgments upon all murderers are apparently
deciphered.

CHAP. VI. Other examples like unto the former.
AFter that the Empire of Rome, declining after the death of Theodosius, was
almost at the last cast, ready to yield Procopius.
up the ghost, and that Theodorick king of the Goths, had usurped the dominion
of Italy under the Emperor Zeno, he put to death two great personages, Senators
and chief citizens of Rome, to wit, Simmachus and ^oeti^^, only for secret
surmise which he had, without probability, that they two should weave some she
web for his destruction. After which cruel deed, as he was one day at supper,
a fishes head of great bigness being served into the table, purposing to be
very merry, suddenly the vengeance of God assailed, amassed, oppressed, and
pursued him so freshly, that without intermission or breathing it sent his body
a senseless trunk into the grave in a most strange and mavelous manner: for
he was conceited (as himself reported) that the fishes head was the head of
Simmachus, whom he had but lately slain, which grinned upon him, and seemed to
face him with an overthwart threatening and angry eye: wherewith he was so
scarred, that he forthwith rose from the table, and was possessed with such an
exceeding trembling and icle ehilnesse that ran through all his joints, that he
was constrained to take his chamber and go to bed, where soon after with
grief and fretting and displeasure he died. He committed also another most
cruel and traitorous part upon Odoacer; whom inviting to a banquet, he
deceitfully welcomed with a mess of swords in stead of other victuals, to
kill him withal, that he might sway the Empire alone both of the Goths and
Romans without check.

It was not without cause that Attila was called the scourge of God: for with
an army of five hundred thousand men he wasted and spoiled all fields, Iornand.
Greg. de Tours.
cities and villages that he passed by, putting all to fire and sword, without
showing mercy to any: on this manner he went spoiling through France, and there
at one time gave battle to the united forces of the Romans, Vicegothes,
Frenchmen, Sarmatians, Burgundians, Saxons, and Almaignes: after that he
entered Italy, took by way of force Aquilea, sacked and destroyed Millan, with
many other cities, and in a word spoiled all the country: in fine, being
returned beyond Almaigne, having married a wife of excellent beauty, though he
was well wived before, he died on his marriage night suddenly in his bed: for
having well carowsed the day before, he fell into so dead a sleep, that lying
upon his back without respect, the blood which was often wont to issue at his
nostrils, finding those conduits stopped by his upright lying, descended into
his throat, and stopped his wind. And so that bloody tyrant that had shed the
blood of so many people, was himself by the effusion of his own blood
murdered and stifled to death.

Ithilbald king of Gothia at the instigation of his wife put to death very
unadvisedly one of the chief peers of his realm: after which murder, as he
sat banqueting one day with his princes, environed with his guard and other
attendants, having his hand in the dish, and the meat between his fingers, one
suddenly reached him such a blow with a sword, that it cut off his head, so
that it almost tumbled upon the table, to the great astonishment of all that
were present.

Sigismund king of Burgundy suffered himself to be carried away with Greg. of
Tours, lib. 3. hist.
such an extreme passion of choler, provoked by a false and malicious
accusation of his second wife, that he caused one of his sons which he had by
his former wife, to be strangled in his bed, because he was induced to think
that he went about to make himself king: which deed being blown abroad,
Clodomire son to Clodovee and Clotild king France, and cousin german to
Sigismund, came with an army for to revenge this cruel and unnatural Refer
this properly to lib. 2. cap. 11.
part; his mother setting forward and inciting him thereunto, in regard of the
injury which Sigismunds father had done to her father and mother, one of whom
he slew, and drowned the other. As they were ready to join battle, Sigismunds
soldiers forsook him, so that he was taken and presently put to death, and
his sons which he had by his second wife were taken also, and carried captive
to Orleance, and there drowned in a Well. Thus was the execrable murder of
Sigismund and his wife punished in their own children. As for Clodomire,
though he went conqueror from this battle, yet was he encountered with another
disastrous misfortune: for as he marched forward with his forces to fight with
Sigismunds brother, he was by him overcome and slain; and for a further
disgrace, his dismembered head fastened on the top of a pike was carried about
to the enterview of all men. He left behind him three young sons, whom his
own brethren and their uncles Clotaire and Childebert, notwithstanding their
young and tender years, took from their grandmother Clotildes custody, that
brought them up, as if they would install them into some part of their fathers
kingdom; but most wickedly and cruelly, to the end to possess their goods,
lands, and seigniories, bereft them all of their lives, save one that saved
himself in a Monastery. In this strange and monstrous act Clotaire showed
himself more than barbarous, when he would not take pity upon the youngest of
the two, being but seven years old, who hearing his brother (of the age of
ten years) crying pitifully at his slaughter, threw himself at his uncle
Childeberts feet with tears, desiring him to save his life: wherewith
Childebert being greatly affected, entreated his brother with weeping eyes to
have pity upon him, and spare the life of this poor infant: but all his
warnings and entreaties could not hinder the savage beast from performing this
cruel murder upon this poor child, as he had don upon the other.

The Emperor Phocas attained by this bloody means the imperial dignity,
Niceph. l. 18. 58.
even by the slaughter of his lord and master Mauricius, whom as he fled in
disguised attire for fear of a treason pretended against him, he being
beforetime the Lieutenant General of his army, pursued so maliciously and
hotly, that he overtooke him in his flight, and for his further grief, first
put all his children severally to death before his face, that every one of them
might be a several death unto him before he died, and then slew him also. This
murderer was he that first exalted to so high a point the popish horn, when at
the request of Boniface he ordained, That the Bishop of Rome should have
pre-eminence and authority over all other Bishops: which he did to the end that
the stain and blame of his most execrable murder might be either quite
blotted out, or at least winked at. Under his regency the forces of the Empire
grew wondrously into decay* France, Spain, Almaigne, and Lombardy, revolted
from the Empire: and at last himself being pursued by his son in law Priscus
with the Senators, was taken, and having his hands and feet cut off, was
together with the whole race of his offspring put to a most cruel death,
because of his cruel and tyrannous life.

Among all the strange examples of Gods judgments that ever were declared in
this world, that one that befell a King of Poland, called Popiel, for his
murders, is for the strangeness thereof most worthy to be had in memory: he
reigned in the year of our Lord 1346. This man amongst other of his particular
kinds of cursings and swearings, whereof he was no niggard, used ordinarily
this oath, If it be not true, would rats might devour me; prophesying Munst.
Cosmog. Mandat. 3. Cursing. l. 1. cyp. 30.
thereby his own destruction; for he was devoured by the same means which he
so often wished for, as the sequel of his history will declare. The father of
this Popiel seeling himself near death, resigned the government of his
kingdom to two of his brethren, men exceedingly reverenced of all men for the
valor and virtue which appeared in them. He being deceased, and Popiel being
grown up to ripe and lawful years, when he saw himself in full liberty,
without all bridle of government to do what he listed, he began to give the
full swinge to his lawless and unruly desires, in such sort, that within few
days he became so shameless, that there was no vice which appeared not in his
behavior, even to the working of the death of his own uncles, for all their
faithful dealing toward him, which he by poison brought to pass. Which being
done, he caused himself forthwith to be crowned with garlands of flowers, and
to be perfumed with precious ointments: and to the end the better to solemni^e
his entry to the crown, commanded a sumptuous and pompous banquet to be
prepared, whereunto all the Princes and Lords of his kingdom were invited. Now
as they were about to give the onset upon the delicate cheer, behold an army
of rats sallying out of the dead and putrified bodies of his uncles, set upon
him, his wife and children, amid their dainties, to gnaw them with their sharp
teeth, insomuch that his guard with all their weapons and strength were not able
to chase them away, but being weary with resisting their daily and mighty
assaults, gave over the battle: wherefore counsel was given to make great
cole ^ires about them, that the rats by that means might be kept off, not
knowing that no policy or power of man was able to withstand the unchangeable
decree of God; for, for all their huge forces they ceased not to run through
the midst of them, and to assault with their teeth this cruel murderer, Then
they gave him counsel to put himself, his wife, and children into a boat, and
thrust it into the midst of a lake, thinking that by reason of the waters the
rats would not approach unto them: but alas in vain; for they swum through the
waters amain, and gnawing the boat, made such chinkes into the sides thereof,
that the water began to run in: which being perceived of the boatman, amassed
them sore, and made them make post haste unto the shore, where he was no
sooner arrived, but a fresh muster of rats uniting their forces with the
former, encountered him so sore, that they did him more scath than all the rest.
Whereupon all his guard, and others that were there present for his defense,
perceiving it to be a judgment of Gods vengeance upon him, abandoned and for
sooke him at once: who seeing himself destitute of succor, and forsaken on
all sides, flew into a high tower in Chouzitze, whither also they pursued him,
and climbing even up to the highest room where he was, first eat up his wife
and children (she being guilty of his uncles death) and lastly gnew and
devoured him to the very bones.

After the same sort was an Archbishop of Mentz, called Hatto, punished Munster
cosmographle.
in the year 940, under the reign of the Emperor Otho the great, for the
extreme cruelty which he used toward certain poor beggars, whom in time of
famine he assembled together into a great barn, not to relieve their wants, as
he might and ought, but to rid their lives, as he ought not, but did: for he
set on fire the barn wherein they were, and consumed them all alive; and
Mandat. 8. Avarice and unmercifulnes
comparing them to rats and mice that devoured good corn, but served to no
other good use. But God that had regard and respect unto those poor wretches,
took their cause into his hand, to quit this proud Prelate with just revenge
for his outrage committed against them; sending toward him an army of rats and
mice to lay siege against him with the engines of their teeth on all sides,
which when this cursed wretch perceived, he removed into a tower that stands
in the midst of Rhine, not far from Bing, whither he presumed this host of
rats could not pursue him; but he was deceived: for they swum over Rhine thick
and threefold, and got into his tower with such strange fury, that in very
short space they had consumed him to nothing; in memorial whereof, this tower
was ever after called the tower of rats. And this was the tragedy of that
bloody arch-butcher that compared poor Christian souls to brutish and base
creatures, and therefore became himself a prey unto them, as Popiel King of
Poland did before him; in whose strange examples the beams of Gods justice
shine forth after an extraordinary and wonderful manner, to the terror and
fear of all men; when by the means of small creatures they made room for his
vengeance, to make entrance upon these execrable creature-murtherers,
notwithstanding all man's devises and impediments of nature: for the native
operation of the elements was restrained from hindering the passage of them,
armed and inspired with an invincible and supernatural courage, to fear
neither fire, water, nor weapon, till they had finished his command that sent
them. And thus in old time did frogs, flies, grasshoppers, and lice, make war
with Pharaoh, at the command of him that has all the world at his beck.

After this Archbishop, in the same rank of murderers we find registered many
Popes, of all whom the most notorious and remarkable are these two, Innocent
the fourth, and Boniface the eighth, who deserved rather to be called Nocents
and Malefaces than Innocents and Boniface, for their wicked and perverse lives:
for as touching the first of them, from the time that he was first installed in
the Papacy, he always bent his horns against the Emperor Frederick, and
fought with him with an army not of men, but of excommunications and cursings;
as their manner is: and seeing that all his thundering Bulls and Canons could
not prevail so far as he desired, he presently sought to bring to pass that
by treason which by force he could not: for he so enchanted certain of his
household servants with foul bribes and fair words, that when by reason of
his short draught, the poison which Hieron. Marius.
he ministered could not hurt him, he got them to strangle him to death.
Moreover, he was chief sower of that war betwixt Henry, Lantgrave of
Thuring, whom he created King of the Romans, and Conrade, Frederickes son,
wherein he reaped a crop of discomfitures and overthrowes: after which, he was
found slain in his bed, his body being full of black marks, as if he had
been beaten to death with cudgels.

Concerning Boniface, after he had by subtle and crafty means made his
predecessor dismiss himself of his Papacy, and enthronised himself therein,
Baleus.
he put him to death in prison, and afterward made war upon the Gibilines, and
committed much cruelty; wherefore also he dyed mad, as we heard Murdering Popes.
before. But touching Popes and their punishments, we shall see more in the 44
chapter following, whither the examples of them are referred, that exceeding in
all kind of wickedness, cannot be rightly placed in the treatise of any
particular commandment.

CHAP. IX. Other memorable examples of the same subject.
IF we descend from antiquities to histories of later and fresher memory, we
shall find many things worthy report and credit: as that which happened in the
year Euguerran de Monstr. Vol. 1.
1405 betwixt two Gentlemen of Henault; the one of which accused the other for
killing a near kinsman of his, which the other utterly and steadfastly denied:
whereon DWilliam, County of Henault, offered them the combat in the city of
Quesney to decide the controversy, when as by law it could not be ended:
whereunto they being come, and having broken their spears in two, and
encountered valiantly with their swords, at length he that was charged with and
indeed guilty of the murder, was overcome of the other, and made to confess
with his mouth in open audience the truth of the fact: Wherefore the Country
adjudged him in the same place to be beheaded; which was speedily executed, and
the conqueror honorably conducted to his lodging. Now albeit this manner of
deciding controversies be not approved of God, yet we must not think it
happened at all adventures, but rather that the issue thereof came of the Lord
of Hosts, that by this means gave place to the execution of his most high and
sovereign justice, by manifesting the murderer, and bringing him to that
punishment which he deserved.

About this very time there was a most cruel and out ragious riot practiced
and performed upon Lewis Duke of Orleance, brother to Charles the Enguerran de
Monstr. Vol. 1.
sixth, by the complot and devise of John Duke of Burgundy, who (as he was
naturally haughty and ambitious) went about to usurp the government of the
realm of France, for that the king by reason of weakness of his brain was
not able to manage the affairs thereof, so that great trouble and uncivil
wars were grown up by that occasion in every corner of the realm. As
therefore he affected and gaped after the rule, so he thought no means
dishonest to attain unto it, and therefore his first enterprise was to take
out of the way the Kings brother, who stood betwixt him and home. Having
therefore provided fit champions for his purpose, he found opportunity one
night to cause him to come out of his lodging late by counterfeit tokens from
the king, as if he had sent for him about some matters of importance: and being
in the way to S. Paul's hostle, where the kings lodging was in Paris, the poor
Prince suspecting nothing, was suddenly set upon with eighteen roisters at
once, with such fury and violence, that in very short space they left him dead
upon the pavement, by the gate Barbet, his brains lying scattered about the
street. After this detestable and odious act committed and detected, the cruel
Burgundian was so far from shaming, that he vanted and boasted at it, as if
he had achieved the most valorous and honorable exploit in the World (so
far did his impudency outstretch the bond of reason.) Nevertheless, to cast
some counterfeit color upon this rough practice, he used the conscience and
fidelity of three famous Divines of Paris, who openly in public assemblies
approved of this murder; saying, That he had greatly offended, if he had left
it undone. About this device he employed especially M. John Petit, a Sorbonist
Doctor, whose rashness and brasen-facednesse was so great, as in the
councelhouse of the King, stoutly to aver, That that which was done in the
death of the Duke of Orleance was a virtuous and commendable action, and the
author of it to be void of fault, and therefore ought to be void of punishment.
The preface which this brave Orator used, was, That he was bounden in duty to
the Duke of Burgundy, in regard of a goodly pension which he had received at
his hands, and for that cause he had prepared his poor tongue in token of
gratitude to defend his cause. He might better have said thus, That seeing his
tongue was poor and miserable, and he himself a senseless creature,
therefore he ought not to allow or defend so obstinately such a detestable and
traitorous murder committed upon a Duke of Orleance, and the same the Kings
brother, in such vile sort; and that if he should do otherwise, he should
approve of that which God and man apparently condemned, yea the very Turks and
greatest Paynims under heaven; and that he should justify the wicked, and
condemn the innocent, which is an abomination before God; and should put
darkness in stead of light, and call that which is evil, good: (for which
the Prophet Esaias in his fifth chapter denounces the jugdements of God against
false prophets) and should follow the steps of Balaam, which let out his tongue
to hire for the wages of iniquity: but none of these supposes came once into
his mind. But to return to our History: The Duke of Burgundy having the
tongues of these brave Doctors at his commandment, and the Parisians who bore
themselves partially in this quarrel (generally favorers of his side) came to
Paris in arms, to justify himself, as he pretended, and struck such a
dreadful awe of himself into all men's minds, that notwithstanding all the
earnest pursuit of the Duchess, the widow of Orleance, for justice, he
escaped unpunished, until God (by other means) took vengeance upon him:
which happened after a while, after that those his accomplices of Paris (being
become lords and rulers of the city) had committed many horrible and cruel
murders, as of the Constable and Chancellor, two head officers of the realm,
whose bodies fast bound together, they drew naked through the streets from
place to place in most despightfull manner: for the Daulphin escaping their
hands by night, and safeguard in his castle, after that he heard of the seizure
of the city; found means to assemble certuine forces, and marched to
Montereaufautyon with 20000 men, of purpose to be revenged on the Duke for all
his brave and riotous demeanors: hither, under color of parling and devising
new means to pacify these old civil troubles, he enticed the Duke, and being
come, at his very first arrival, as he was bowing his knee in reverence to
him, he caused him to be slain. And on this manner was the Duke of Orleance
death quitted, and the evil and cruelty showed toward him, returned upon the
murderers own neck; for as he slew him trecherously and cowardly, so was he
also trecherously and cowardly slain, and justly requited with the same
measure that he before Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
had measured to another: notwithstanding herein the Daulphin was not free from
a grievous crime of disloyalty and truth-breach, in working his death without
shame of either faith-breach or perjury, and that in his own presence, whom
he had so often with protestation of assurance and safety, requested to come
to him. Neither did he escape unpunished for it; for after his fathers decease
he was in danger of losing the Crown, and all for this cause: for Philip Duke
of Burgundy taking his fathers revenge into his hands, by his cunning devices
wrought means to displace him from the succession of the kingdom, by
according a marriage betwixt the King of England and his sister, to whom he in
favor agreed to give his kingdom in reversion after his own decease. Now
as soon as the King of England was seized upon the government of France, the
Daulphin was presently summoned to the marble Table, to give answer for the
death of the old Duke: whither, when he made none appearance, they presently
banished him the realm, and pronounced him to be unworthy to be succeeder to
the noble Crown: which truly was a very grievous chastisement, and such an
one as brought with it a heap of many mischiefs and discomfitures, which
happened in the war betwixt England and him, for the recovery of his kingdom.

Peter, son to Alphonsus King of Castile, was a most bloody and cruel F^ois.
lib. 1. hist.
Tyran: for first he put to death his own wife, the daughter of Peter Duke of
Burbon, and sister to the Queen of France: next he slew the mother of his
bastard brother Henry, together with many Lords and Barons of the realm, for
which he was hated not only of all his subjects, but also of his neighbor and
adjoining countries: which hatred moved the foresaid Henry to aspire unto the
Crown; which, what with the Popes avouch, who legitimated him, and the help
of certain French forces, and the support of the Nobility of Castile, he soon
achieved. Peter thus abandoned, put his safest guard in his heels, and fled to
Bordeaux, toward the Prince of Wales, of whom he received such good
entertainment, that with his aid he son re-entred his lost dominions, and by
maine battle chased his bastard brother out of the confines thereof: but being
re-installed, whilst his cruelties ceased not to multiply on every side,
behold Henry (with a new supply out of France) began to assail him afresh,
and put him once again to his shifts: but all that he could do, could not
shift him out of Henry's hands, who pursued him so hotly, that with his own
hands he soon rid him out of all troubles, and afterward peaceably enjoyed
the kingdom of Castille.

But above all the horrible murders and massacres that ever were heard or read
of in this last age of the World, that bloody massacre in France, under the
reign of Charles the ninth, is most famous, or rather infamous; wherein the
noble Admiral, with many of the nobility and gentry, which were Protestants,
were most traitorously and cruelly murdered in their chambers and beds in
Paris, the four and twentieth of August, in the night: in this massacre were
butchered in Paris that very night ten thousand Protestants, and in all France,
(for other cities followed the example of Paris) thirty, or as some say, forty
thousand. I will not stand to relate the particular circumstances and manner
thereof, it being at large described by diverse writers both in French and
English: only to our purpose, let us consider the judgments and vengeance of
Almighty God upon the chief practisers and plotters thereof, which were
these: Charles the ninth then King, by whose commission and commandment this
massacre was undertaken; his brother and successor the Duke of Aniou; the
Queen mother, his bastard brother, and the Duke of Guise, yea the whole town
of Paris; and generally all France was guilty thereof. Now observe Gods just
revenge: Charles himself had the thread of his life cut off by the immediate
hand of God, by a long and lingering sickness, and that before he was come to
the full age of 24 years: in his sickness blood issued in great abundance out
of many places of his body, insomuch that sometimes he fell and wallowed in his
own blood: that as he had delight to shed the blood of so many innocents, so
he might now at the latter end of his days be glutted with blood. And surely
by this means the Lord did put him in mind of his former bloody murders, to
draw him to repentance, if it were possible. The Duke of Anjou, who succeeded
this Charles in the Crown of France, and was called Henry the third, was
murdered by a young Iacobine Monk, called Friar Jacques Clement, at the
instigation of the duke de Maine and others of the league, and that (wherein
appears manifestly the hand of God) in the self same chamber at S. Cloves
wherein the Council for the great massacre had been taken and plotted, as it
is constantly affirmed. The Duke of Guise, in the year 1588, the 23 of
December, was murdered by the kings own appointment, being sent for into the
kings chamber out of the council chamber, where attended him 45 with rapiers
and poniards ready prepared to receive him. The Queen mother soon after the
slaughter of the Duke of Guise, took the matter so to heart, that she went to
bed, and dyed the first of January after. Touching all the rest that were
chief actors in the tragidie, few or none escaped the apparent vengeance of
God: and as for Paris and the whole realm of France, they also felt the severe
scourge of Gods justice, partly by civil wars and bloodshed, and partly by
famine and other plagues; so that the Lord has plainly made known to the
world, how precious in the sight of his most Holy Majesty, is the death of
innocents, and how impossible it is for cruel murderers to escape unpunished.

CHAP. X. Of diverse other Murderers, and their several punishments.
MAximinus from a shepherd in Thracia, grew to be an Emperor in Rome by these
degrees: his exceeding stength and swiftness in running commended him so to
Severus then Emperor, that he made him of his guard, from that he arose to be a
Tribune, and at last to be Emperor: which place he was no sooner in possession
of, but immoderate cruelty (all this while buried) began to show it self: for
he made havocke of all the Nobility, and put to death those that he suspected
to be acquainted with his estate: insomuch as some called him Cyclops, some
B^siris, others A^teus, for his cruelty. Wherefore the Senate of Rome seeing
his indignity, proclaimed him an enemy to their commonwealth. and made it
lawful for any man to procure his death: Which being known, his soldiers
lying at the siege of Aquileia, moved with hatred, entered his tent at noone
day, and flew him and his son together.

Justinian the younger (no less hateful to his subjects for his cruelty than
Maximinus) was deposed from the empire by conspiracy, and having his nosthrils
slit, exiled to Chersona, Leontius succeeding in his place. Howbeit ere long he
recovered his Crown and Scepter, and returned to Constantinople, exercising
more cruelty at his return, than ever he had done before: for he had not only
put to death Leontius and Tiberius, but also all that any way favored their
parts. It is said of him, that he never blew his mangled nose, but he caused
one of them to be executed to death. At last he was slain by Philippicus, to
verify the word of the Lord, That he which strikes with the sword shall
perish with the sword.

Albonius king of Lunbardy, drinking upon a time to his wife Rosimund in a cup
made of her fathers skull (whom he in battle had slain) so displeased her
therewith, that (attributing more to natural affection than unity of marriage)
decreed with her self to hazard life and kingdom, to be revenged upon this
grievous injury; wherefore she thus practiced: A knight called Hemichild was
enamoured with one of her maids; him she brought into a secret dark place by
policy, in show to enjoy his love, but indeed to be at her command; for she
supplied his loves place: and then discovering her self, put it to his choice,
either to kill her husband, or to be accused by her of this villainy. Hemichild
chose the former, and indeed murdered his Lord in his bed; and after the deed
done, fled with her to Ravenna. But mark how the Lord required this murder,
even most strangely; for they both which were linkt together in the fact, were
linkt together also in the punishment; and as they had been joint instruments
of another destruction, so he made them mutual instruments of their own for
Rosimund thinking to poison him too, made him drink half her medicine: but
he feeling the poison in his veins, stayed in the mid way, and made her sup
up the other half for her part: so they died both together.

The Electors of the Empire disagreeing in suffrages, Adolphus Duke Munst.
Cosm. Phi. Melan. lib.
of Nassavia, and Albertus Duke of Austria, took upon them the regiment and
managing of the State: whereupon grew grievous wars in all Germany, and
dissension between the two State-men, so that Adolphus was slain by the Duke
of Austria in battle by the city of Spire: whose death was thus notably
revenged. All that took part against him, or that were accessory to the
murder, perished most strangely; Albert Earl of Hagerloch was slain, Otto of
Ochsensteme was hanged, the Bishop of Mentz died suddenly of an apoplexy, in
his cellar, the Bishop of Strasbrough was butchered by a Butcher: the Earl of
Leimingen died of a frenzy, the Duke of Austria himself was slain by his
nephew John, from whom he had taken the government of Suevia, because of his
unthriftinesse: generally they all came to destruction, so grievous is the cry
of innocent blood, against those that are guilty thereof.

After the death of Woldimirus King of Rhythenia, his son Berisus succeeded
in the kingdom, who though he was a virtuous and religious Treason, lib. 2.
cap. 3.
Prince, yet could not his virtue or religion privilege him from the malice of
his brother Suadopolcus, who gaping and itching for the Crown, slew his
brother this good Prince as he was sleeping in his Chamber, together with his
Esquire that attended upon him: and Chron. Pol. lib. 2. cap. 10.
not content herewith, but adding murder to murder, he assaulted another of
his brethren by the same impiety, and brought him to the same end. Whereupon
the last brother Iorislaus (to be revenged on this villainy) set upon him with
an army of men, and killing his accomplices, drove him to fly to Crachus king of
Polonia for succor: who furnishing him with a new army, sent him back
against his brother, in which battle (his success being equal to the former)
he lost his men, and himself escaping the sword, dyed in his flight to
Polonia, and was buried in a base and ignoble sepulcher, fit enough for so base
and ignoble a wretch. And that we may see how hateful and ungodly a thing it
is to be either a protector or a saver of any murderer, mark the judgment of
God that fell upon this king of Polonia, though not in his own person, yet in
his posterity; for he being dead, his eldest son and heir Crachus Treason,
lib. 2. cap. 3.
was murdered by his younger brother Lechus, as they were hunting, so disguised
and torn, that every man imputed his death not to Lechus (whose eyes dropped
crocodiles tears) but to some savage and cruel beast: howbeit ere long (his
treachery being discovered, and disseised of his kingdom) he died with
extreme grief and horror of conscience. And thus we see that Crachus his
kingdom came to desolation for maintaining a murderer.

John the high Priest of Jerusalem, son and successor to Judas, had a brother
termed Jesus, to whom Bagoses the lieutenant of Artaxerxes army promised the
Priesthood, meaning indeed to depose John, and install him in his room: upon
which occasion this Jesus growing insolent, spared not Joseph. antiq. Iudaic.
li. 11. c. 7
to revile his brother, and that in the temple, with immodest and opprobrious
speeches, so that his anger being provoked he slew him in his rage; a most
impious part for the high Priest to pollute the holy temple with blood, and
that of his own brother, and so impious, that the Lord in Profanation of holy
things, Lib. 1. cap. 34.
justice could not choose but punish the whole nation for it most severely. For
this cause Bagoses imposed a tribute upon them, even a most grievous tribute,
that for every lamb they offered upon the altar, they should pay fifty groats
to the king of Persia, besides the profanation of their temple with the
uncircumcised Persians, who entered into it at their pleasures, and so polluted
the Sanctuary and holy things of God: this punishment continued upon them seven
years and all for this one murder.

Gerhardus Earl of Holsatia, after he had conquered the Danes in many and
sundry battles, was traitorously slain in the city Kanderhusen, by one
Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
Nicolaus Iacobus, a rich Baron: so that whom the open enemy feared in the
field, him the privy subtle foe murdered in his chamber. But the traitor and
murderer, albeit he fled to the castle Schaldenburg, and got a band of
soldiers to defend himself, yet he was surprised by the Earls sons, who
tormenting him as became a traitor to be tormented, at last rent his body into
four quarters, and so his murder and treason was condignely punished.

Above all, the execution of Gods vengeance is most notably manifested in the
punishment and detection of one Parthenius an homicide, treasurer Greg. of
Tours, lib. 1. cap. 36.
to Theodobert king of France; who having traitorously slain an especial
friend of his called Ausanius, with his wife ^apianilla, when no man suspected
or accused him thereof, he detected and accused himself after this strange
manner: As he slept in his bed, suddenly he roared out This example belongs
also to the 11. chap
most pitifully, crying for help, or else he perished: and being demanded
what he ailed, he half asleep answered, That his friend Ausanius and his
wife, whom he had slain long ago, summoned him to judgment before God:
upon which confession he was apprehended, and after due examination stoned to
death. Thus though all witnesses fail, yet a murderers own conscience will
betray him.

Pepin and Martellus his son, kings of France, enjoying prosperity and ease,
fell into diverse monstrous sins: as to forsake their wives Casp. Head. li. 6.
cap. 17.
and follow whores: which filthynesse when the Bishop of Tung^ia reproved, Dodo
the harlors brother murdered him for his labor: but he was presently taken
with the vengeance of God, even a lousie and most filthy disease, with the
grief and stink whereof being moved, he threw himself into the river of
Mosa, and there was drowned.

How manifest and evident was the vengeance of God upon the murderers Martian.
S^o^u^.
of Theodorick Bishop of Treverse ^ Conrade the author of it dyed suddenly: the
soldier that helped to throw him down from the rock, was Hermanus contract
us.
choked as he was at supper two other servants that laid to their hands to
this murder, slew themselves most desperately.

About the year of our Lord 700. Ge^lian the wife of Gosbere prince of
Wurtiburg, being reproved by Kilianus for incest (for she married her Casp.
Head. li. ^. cap. 10.
husbands brother) wrought such means, that both he and his brethren were
deprived of their lives: but the Lord gave her up to Satan in vengeance, so
that she was presently possessed with him, and so continued till her dying day.

A certain woman of Millaine in Italy hung a young boy, and after devoured
him instead of meat, when as she wanted none other victuals* and when she was
examined about the crime, she confessed that a spirit persuaded her to do it,
telling her, that after it she should attain unto whatsoever she desired: for
which murder she was to r^^^nted to death by a lingering and grievous
punishment. This Arlunus reports to have happened in his time. And surely how
soever openly the Devil shows not himself, yet he is the mover and
perswader of all murders, and commonly the doctor. For he delights in men's
bloods and their destruction, as in nothing more.

A gentleman of Chaleur in Fossignie, being in the Duke of Savoyes army, in
September the year of our Lord 1589, and grieving to behold the cruelties
which were exercised upon the poor inhabitants of that country, resolved to
depart from the said army: now because there was no safer nor nearer way for
him, than to cross the lake to Bonne, he entreated one of his acquaintance,
named John Villain, to procure him means of safe passage over the lake: who
for that purpose procured two watermen to transport him, with his horse,
apparel, and other things: being upon the lake, the watermen, whereof the
chiefest was called Martin Bourrie, fell upon him and cut his throat: John
Villain understanding hereof complained to the magistrates; but they being
forestalled with a present from the murderer, of the gentleman's horse, which
was of great value, made no inquisition into the matter, but said, that he was
an enemy which was dispatched: and so the murderers were justified; but God
would not leave it so unpunished: for about the fifteenth of July 1591, this
Bourrie going with diverse others to shoot for a wager, as he was charging the
harquebuse which he had robbed the gentleman of when he murdered him, it
suddenly discharged of it self, and shot the murderer through the heart, so
that he fell down stark dead, and never stirred nor spoke word.

In the first troubles of France, a gentleman of the troops which besieged
Moulins in Bourbonnois, was taken with sickness, in such sort that History
of France, Charles the ninth.
he could not follow his company when they dislodged; and lying at a Bakers
house which professed much friendship and kindness to him, he put such
confidence in him, that he showed him all the money that he had: but so far
was this wretch from either conscience or common honesty, that as soon as it
was night he most wickedly murdered him. Now mark how God revenged it: it
happened not long after, that the murderer being in sentinel, one of his own
fellows unawares shot him through the arm with a harquebuse, whereof he
languished the space of three months, and then died stark mad.

The town of Bourges being yielded by Monsieur D'yvoy, during the first
troubles in France, the inhabitants were inhibited from talking together, The
same history.
either within or without the town, or from being above two together at a
time: under color of which decree many were most cruelly murdered: And a
principal actor herein was one Garget captain of the Bourbonne quarter, who
made a common practice of killing innocent men, under that pretense. But
shortly after, the Lord that hears the cry of innocent blood met with him
for he was stricken with a burning fever, and ran up and down blaspheming
the Name of God, calling upon the Devil, and crying out if any would go along
with him to hell, he would pay his charges; and so died in desperate and
frantic manner.

Peter Martin, one of the Queries of the King of France his stable, and
Postmaster at a place called Lynge, in the way toward Poyctou, upon The same
history.
a slight accusation, without all just form of lawful process, was
condemned by a Lord to be drowned: The Lord commanded one of his Faulkners to
execute this sentence upon him, upon pain to be drowned himself: whereupon
he performed his masters command: But God deferred not the revenge thereof
long; for within three days after, this Faulkner and a Lackey falling out
about the dead man's apparel, went into the field and slew one another. Thus he
that was but the instrument of that murder was justly punished: how much more
is it likely that the author escaped not scot free, except the Lord gave him a
heart truly to repent?

It has been observed in the history of France, since the year of our Lord
1560, that of a thousand murders which remained unpunished in regard of men,
not ten of them escaped the hands of God, but came to most wretched ends.

In the year of our Lord 1546 John Diazius, a Spaniard by birth, living a
student and Professor in Paris, came first to Geneva, and then to Strasbrough,
and there by the grace of Gods spirit saw his Sorbonicall errors, and renounced
them, betaking himself to the profession of the purer religion, and the
company and acquaintance of godly men: amongst whom was Bucer that excellent
man, who sent him also to Nurnburge, to oversee the printing of a book which
he was to publish. Whilst Diazius lived at this Nurnburge (a city scituat upon
the river Dimow) his brother, a lawyer, and judge laterall to the Inquisition,
by name Alphonsus, came thither, and Sleid. lib. 17.
by all means possible endeavored to dissuade him from his religion, and to
reduce him again to Popery. But the good man persisted in the truth
notwithstanding all his persuasions and threats: wherefore the subtle fox took
another course, and faining himself to be converted also to his religion,
exhorted him to go with him into Italy, where he might do much good; or at the
least to Angust: but by the counsel of Bucer and his friends he was kept back,
otherwise willing to follow his brother. Wherefore Alphonsus departed, and
exhorted him to constancy and perseverance, giving him also fourteen crowns to
defray his charges. Now the wolf had not been three days absent, when he
hired a rakehell and common butcher, and with him flew again to Nurnburge in
post have: and coming to his brothers lodging, delivered him a letter, which
whilst he read, the villain his confederat cleft his head in pieces with an
axe, leaving him dead upon the floor, and so fled with all expedition. Howbeit
they were apprehended, yet quit by the Popes justice (so holy and sacred are
the fruits of his Holiness) though not by the justice of God, for within a
while after he hung himself upon his mules neck at Trent.

Duke Abrogastes slew Valentinian the Emperor of the West, and advanced
Eugenius to the crown of the Empire: but a while after, the same sword which
had slain his lord and master was by his own hands turned into his own bowels.

Mempricius the son of Madan, the fourth King of England, then called
Lanquet. Chro.
Britain after Brute, had a brother called Manlius, betwixt whom was great
strife for the sovereign dominion: but to rid himself of all his trouble at
once, he slew his brother Manlius by treason, and after continued his reign in
tyranny and all unlawful lusts, the space of twenty years: but although
vengeance all this while winked, yet it slept not, for at the end of this
space, as he was hunting, he was devoured of wild beasts.

In the year of our Lord God 745 one Sigebert was authorized king of the
Saxons in Britain, a cruel and tyrannous Prince toward his subjects. and one
that changed the ancient Laws and customs of his Realm after his own
pleasure: and because a certain Nobleman somewhat sharply advertised him of
his evil conditions, he maliciously caused him to be put to death. But see
how the Lord revenged this murder, he caused his Nobles to deprive him of his
kingly authority, and at last as a desolate and forlorn person, wandering alone
in a wood, to be slain of a swineheard, whose master he (being king) had
wrongfully put to death.

About the year of our Lord 793 Ethelbert king of the East Angles, a learned
and right godly Prince, came to the court of Offa the king of Acts and
Monuments.
Mercia, persuaded by the counsel of his nobles, to sue for the marriage of
his daughter, well accompanied like a prince with a great train of men about
him: whereupon Offa's Queen conceiving a false suspicion of that which was
never minded, That Ethelbert under the pretense of this marriage, was come to
work some violence against her husband, and the kingdom of Mercia, so
persuaded with king Offa and certain of his Council that night, that the next
day following Offa caused him to be trained into his palace alone from his
company, by one called Guymbertus, who took him and bound him, and after
struck off his head, which forthwith he presented to the king and Queen. Thus
was the innocent King wrongfully murdered, but not without a just revenge on
Gods hand: for the aforesaid Queen, worker of this villainy, lived not three
months after, and in her death was so tormented, that she bit and rent her
tongue in pieces with her teeth, which was the instrument to set abroach that
murtherous practice. Offa himself understanding at length the innocence of the
king, and the heinous cruelty of his fact, gave the tenth part of his goods to
the Church, bestowed upon the Church of Hereford, in remembrance of this
Ethelbert, great lands, builded the Abbey of S. Albons, with certain other
Monasteries beside, and afterward went to Rome for his penance, where he gave
to the Church of S. Peter, a penny through every house in his dominion, which
was commonly called Romeshot, or Peterpence, and there at length was
transformed from a king to a monk. Thus God punished not only him and his
wife, but the whole land, for this vile murder.

One principal cause of the conquest of this land by the Normans, was
Ranulphus.
a vile and horrible murder committed by one Goodwin, an Earl in England, upon
certain Mormans that came overwith Alfred and Edward, to visit their mother
Emma, that had been married to King Canutus. This matter thus fell out: When
these two came from Normandy to England, to visit their mother, as I have said,
Earl Goodwin having a daughter called Godith, whom he thought to marry to
Edward, and advance him to the kingdom, to bring his purpose to pass used
this practice, that is, to persuade King Hardeknout and the Lords, not to
suffer those Normans to be within the Realm, for jeopardy, but rather to
punish them for example: by which means he got authority to order the matter
himself: Wherefore he met them on Guild down, and there wretchedly murdered,
or rather martyred the most part of the Normans, killing nine, and leaving the
tenth alive throughout the whole company; and then tything again the said
tyth, he slew every tenth knight, and that by cruel torment, as winding their
guts out of their body, after a most savage manner: among the rest he put out
the eyes of the elder of the two brethren, Alfred, and sent him to an Abbey at
Elie; where being fed with bread and water, he ere long ended his life. Now
albeit he obtained his purpose hereby; and married his daughter to Edward, who
was after King, called Edward the Confessor, yet did not Gods justice sleep to
punish this horrible murder: for he himself died not long after suddenly,
having forsworn himself, and the Normanes with William their Duke ere long
came into this Island, to revenge this murder, as also to claim a right of
inheritance bequeathed unto him by Edward his Nephew: and how he succeeded,
and what misery he brought this whole Nation unto, who knows not. But here
is the justice of God: As the Normans coming with a natural English Prince,
were most cruelly and barbarously murdered of Englishmen; so afterward the
Englishmen were slain and conquered, by the Normans coming with a foreign
King, being none of their natural country.

In the year of our Lord six hundred threescore and eighteen, Childerich
King of France caused a Nobleman of his Realm, called Bolyde, to be bound to
a stake, and there beaten to death, without the pretense of any just crime or
accusation against him: For which cruelty his Lords and Commons, being
grievously offended, conspired together, and slew him and his wife as they were
hunting.

In the reign of Edward the second and Edward the third, Sir Roger Mortimer
committed many villainous outrages, in shedding much humane blood: but he was
also justly recompensed in the end; first he murdered King Edward the second,
lying in Barkeley Castle, to the end he might, as it was supposed, enjoy Isabel
his wife, with whom he had very suspicious familiarity. Secondly, he caused
Edward the third to conclude a dishonorable peace with the Scots, by restoring
them all their ancient writings, charters, and patents, whereby the Kings of
Scotland had bound themselves to be feudaries to the Kings of England. Thirdly,
he accused Edmund Earl of Kent, uncle to King Edward, of treason, and caused
him unjustly to be put to death. And lastly he conspi redagainst the King to
work his destruction; for which and diverse other things that were laid to his
charge he was worthily and justly beheaded.

In the reign of Henry the sixth, Humfrey the good duke of Gloucester, and
faithful protector of the King, by the means of certain malicious persons,
to wit, the Queen, the Cardinal of Winchester, and especially the Marquess
of Suffolk, (as it was supposed) was arrested, cast into hold, and strangled
to death in the Abbey of Bure: For which cause the Lords hand of judgment was
upon them all: for the Marquess was not only banished the land for the space
of five years, but also banished out of his life for ever; for as he sailed
toward France, he was met withal by a Ship of War, and there presently
beheaded, and the dead corpse cast up at Dover; that England wherein he had
committed the crime, might be a witness of his punishment. The Queen, that
thought by this means to preserve her husband in honor, and her self in
estate, thereby both lost her husband and her state: her husband lost his
realm; and the Realm lost Anjou, Normandy, with all other places beyond the
sea, Calice only excepted. As for the Cardinal, who was the principal
artificer of all this mischief, he lived not long after; and being on his
death bed, murmured and grudged against God, asking wherefore he should die,
having so much wealth and riches? and saying, That if the whole Realm would
save his life, he was able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it:
but death would not be bribed; for all his abundant treasure he died
miserably, more like a Heathen than a Christian, without any show of
repentence. And thus was the good Dukes death revenged upon the princiall
procurers thereof.

As the murder of a gentleman in Kent, called master Arden of Feversham, was
most execrable, so the wonderful discovery thereof was exceeding rare. This
Arden being somewhat aged, had to wife a young woman, no less fair than
dishonest, who being in love with one Mosbie more than her husband, did not
only abuse his bed, but also conspired his death with this her companion: for
together they hired a notorious Ruffin, one Black Will, to strangle him to
death with a towell as he was playing a game at tables: which though secretly
done, yet by her own guilty conscience, and some tokens of blood which
appeared in his house, was soon discovered and confessed. Wherefore she her
self was burnt at Canterbury: Michael, master Ardens man, was hanged in
chains at Feversham: Mosbie and his sister were hanged in Smithfield: Green
another partner in this bloody action was hanged in chains in the high way
against Feversham: And Black Will the Ruffian, after his first escape, was
apprehended and burnt on a seaffold at Flushing in Zeeland. And thus all the
murderers had their deserved dues in this life, and what they endured in the
life to come (except they obtained mercy by true repentance) is easy to judge.

CHA. XI. Of the admirable discovery of Murders.
AS the Lord has showed himself a most just Judge, in punishing most severely
this horrible sin of shedding man's blood, so has he always declared his
detestation thereof, and his will to have it punished by those who are in his
stead upon the earth, and have the sword of vengeance committed unto them: by
his miraculous and superhaturall detecting of such murderers from time to time,
who have carried their villainies so closely, as the eye of man could not espy
them: plainly showing thereby, that the blood of the slain cries to the Lord
for vengeance from the earth, as Abels did upon Cain* and that God will have
that law stand Genesis 4.
true and firm, which he made almost before all other laws: He that sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. If I should commit to writing Genesis
all the examples of this kind, which either are recorded in Authors, or which
daily experience does offer unto us, it would require rather a full Book than
a short Chapter for that subject: And therefore I will be content with some
few, and those for truth most credible, and yet for strangeness most
incredible.

And to begin with our own country: About the year of our Lord Ex historia
Iornlens.
867, a certain Nobleman of the Danes, of the kings stock, called Lothebrocus,
father to Inguar and Hubba, entering upon a certain time with his hawke into a
cockboat alone, by chance through tempest was driven with his hawke to the
coast of Northfolke in England, named Rodham: where being found, and detained,
he was presented to king Edmund, that reigned over the East Angles in
Northfolke and Suffolk at that time. The King (as he was a just and good man)
understanding his parentage, and seeing his cause, entertained him in his Court
accordingly; and every day more and more perceiving his activity, and great
dexterity in hunting and hawking, bare special favor unto him: insomuch that
the Kings Faulconer bearing privy malice against him, for this cause, secretly
as they were hunting together in a wood, did murder him, and threw him in a
bush. Lothebroke being thus murdered, and shortly missed in the Kings house,
no tidings could be heard of him, until it pleased God to reveal the murder
by his dog: which continuing in the wood with the corpse of his Master, at
sundry times came to the Court, and fauned on the King: so that the King
suspecting some such matter, at length followed the trace of the hound, and was
brought to the place where Lothebroke lay. Whereupon inquisition being made, at
length by some circumstances of words, and other suspicions, it was known that
he was murdered by Berik^ the Kings Faulconer: who for his punishment he was
set into the same boat of Lothebroke alone, and so committed to the mercy of
the sea: but the sea more merciful to him than he was to Lothebroke, carried
him directly to the coast of Denmark, from whence Lothebroke came; as it were
there to be punished for his murder. Here the boat of Lothebroke being well
known, hands were lay upon him, and by torments he was enquired into: but he
to save himself, uttered an untruth of King Edmund; saying, That the King had
put him to death in Northfolke. Whereupon revenge was devised, and to that end
an army of men prepared and sent over: which was the first occasion of the
Danes arrival in this land. Thus was this murder wonderfully discovered by
means of a dog.

Plutarch in his book Desolertia a^imalium, reports the like story of a
Plutarch. Sole^ria anim^.
soldier of King Pyrrhus, who being slain, his dog discovered the murderers:
for when as the dog could by no means be brought from the dead body, but
fauning upon the King, as it were desiring help at his hand; the King
commanded all his Army to pass by in good order by two and two, till at length
the murderers came; and then the dog flew upon them so fiercely, as if he
would have torn them in pieces; and turning to the king, ran again upon the
murderers. Whereupon being apprehended and examined, they soon confessed the
fact, and received condign punishment for their desert. Plutarch ascribes
this to the secret of Natures instinct: but we must rather attribute both this
and all such like, to the mighty finger of God. who to terrify men from
shedding humane blood, does stir up the dumb creatures to be revealers of
their bloody sin.

The like story the same Author reports of the murder of the Poet Hesiod, who
being slain by the sons of Ganyctor, the murder, though secret, The same.
and the Murderers, though unknown to all the world save to God and their own
conscience, were discovered and brought to punishment by the means of a dog
which belonged to him that was murdered.

The like also we read of two French Merchants, which travailing together
through a certain Wood, one of them rose against the other for the Blondus.
desire of his money, and so slew him, and buried him* but the Dog of the
murdered Merchant would not depart from the place, but filled the Woods with
howlings and cries. The murderer went forward on his journey, and the
Inhabitants near the said Wood, found out the murdered corpse, and also the
Dog, whom they took up and nourished till the Fair was done, and the
Merchants returned; at which time they watched the Highwayes, having the Dog
with them: who seeing the murderer, instantly made force at him without all
provocation, as a man would do at his mortal enemy: which thing caused the
people to apprehend him; who being examined, confessed the fact, and received
condign punishment for so foul a deed.

The same Author reports yet a more memorable and strange story of Blondus.
another murder discovered also by the means of a dog, which I may not omit.
There was (says he) a certain maid near Paris, who was beloved of two young
men; the one of whom as he was going to visit his love, happened to be
murdered by the way, and buried: now his dog which he had with him would not
depart from the grave of his master: at the last the young man being missed by
his father and brethren, was diligently sought for; but not finding him, at
last they found his dog lying upon his grave, that howled pitifully as soon
as he saw his masters brother: the grave was opened, and the wounded corpse
found, which was brought away, and committed to other burial, until the
murderer should be descryed: Afterward, in process of time, the dog in the
presence of the dead man's brethren espied the murderer, and presently assaulted
him with great fierceness: Whereupon he was appreliended, and examined, and
when by no means nor policy he would confess, the magistrate adjudged, That
the young man and the dog should combat together: The dog was covered with
a dry sod skin in stead of armor, and the murderer with a spear, and on his
body a thin linen cloth; and so they both came forth to fight: but behold
the hand of vengeance: the man offering at the dog with his spear, the dog
leaped presently at his face, and caught him fast by the throat, and overthrew
him: whereat the wretch amassed, cried out to the beholders, Take pity on me,
and pull off the dog from my throat, and I will confess all* the which being
done, he declared the cause and manner of the whole murder, and for the same
was deservedly put to death.

All these murders were discovered by dogs, the Lord using them as
instruments to reveal his justice and vengeance upon this bloody sin, but
these following by other means: The murder of the Poet Ibycus was detected by
Cranes; as you may see in the 36 chapter of this book more at large set forth.

Luther recites such another story as that of Ibycus, of a certain Almaigne,
Luther.
who in traveling fell among thieves, which being about to cut his throat, the
poor man espied a flight of Crows, and said, O Crows I take you for witnesses
and revengers of my death. About two or three days after, these murdering
thieves drinking in an Inn, a company of Crows came and lighted on the top of
the house: whereupon the thieves began to laugh and say one to another, Look
yonder are they which must revenge his death, whom we dispatched the other day.
The Tapster over-hearing them, told it to the magistrate; who presently caused
them to be apprehended, and upon their disagreeing in speeches and contrary
answers, urged them so far, that they confessed the truth, and received their
deserved punishment.

There was one Bessus (as Plutarch reports) who having killed his father, was
brought both to knowledge and punishment by the means of Plutarch.
Swallows: for his guilty conscience persuaded him, that the Swallows in
their chattering language did say to one another, That Bessus had killed his
father: whereupon not able to conceal his own guiltiness, he bewrayed his
horrible fact: and was worthily and deservedly for the same put to death.

But of all the examples that either reading or experience can afford, none in
my opinion is either more admirable, or a more clearer testimony of Gods
providence and justice, than that which happened about a Lucquois Merchant,
Pasquier, Recerche^* lib. 5. c. 20.
who coming out of England to Roan in France, and from thence making toward
Paris, was in the way, on a mountain near to Argentueil, murdered by a
Frenchman his servant, and his body thrown amongst the Vines. Now as this fact
was a doing, a blind man ran by, being led by his dog; who hearing one groan,
asked who it was? Whereunto the murderer answered, that it was a sick man
going to ease himself. The blind man thus deluded, went his way, and the
servant with his masters money, and with Papers of his takes up at Paris a good
sum of money, and sets up a shop at Roane. Now this Merchant being expected
at Luca a whole year together, whither he had sent word he would shortly
repair; when he came not, a messenger was dispatched to seek him out; and
after much enquiry at London and Roan, and elsewhere, he learnt at last in an
Inn, that a Lucquois Merchant about six months before had lodged there, and
was gone to Paris: where also not hearing any tidings of him, he suspected that
he was murdered, and made his complaint to the Court of Parliament at Roan:
Which embracing this business (being directed by Gods providence) made enquiry
up and down the Town, Whether there were any that within seven or eight
months had set up a new shop; and finding one, caused him to be arrested for a
supposed and a pretended debt: but in the end examined him upon this murder,
and laid it to his charge: herewith the prisoner, solicited partly bythe
remorse of his conscience, and partly by hope of freeing himself by a bribe,
confessed the fact in private to the Justice but as soon as he perceived that
he went about to call in witnesses to his confession, he denied it again: in
brief, the new Merchant is committed to prison, and he sueth the Justice for
forgerie and false imprisonment: the Justice can by no means clear himself,
but only by the assurance that all men had of his honesty. The matter hangs
thus in suspense, till at length the dead carcass of the Lucquois was ^eard
of, and the blind man also came to light who heard the noise of the murder: to
make short, this blind man was brought to confront the prisoner; and twenty men
were caused to speak one after another, and still the blind man was
demanded, whether he knew their voices, and said, That that was the man that
answered him on the mountain. This course being ofttimes re-iterated, the
blind man hit always on the right, and never missed. Whereupon the Court
condemned him to death, and before he dyed he confessed the fact, to the great
glory of Gods Justice, and the great amazement and strange astonishment of all
men.

At Paris, in the year of our Lord 1551, a certain young woman was brained by
a man with a hammer, near unto Saint Opportunes Church, Pasquier, Recerches,
lib. 5. c. 20.
as she was going to midnight Mass, and all her rings and jewels taken from
her: This hammer was stolen from a poor Smith there by the same evening; who
therefore being suspected of the murder, was cruelly handled, and put to
extraordinary torture, by reason of the vehement presumptions made against him;
in such sort, that he was quite lamed and deprived of the means to get his
living; whereby being reduced into extreme poverty, he ended his life in great
misery. All this while the murderer remained unknown almost for the space of
twenty years, and the memory of the murder seemed to be buried with the poor
woman in her grave: now mark the justice of God, who has promised, that
nothing shall be so hid but shall be brought to light. It happened, that one John
Flaming, Sergeant of the Subsidies at Paris, being upon occasion of business
at S. Leups, a Village by Montmorency, chanced among other talk at Supper to
say, how he had left his wife at home sick, and no body with her but a little
boy: there was an old man then present, named Monstier, and a son in law of
his, who immediately upon this speech went away that night, with each of them a
basket of cherries and a green goose, and came about ten of the clock the next
morning to Flamings house, where they intended to murder both the woman and the
boy, and to possess themselves of all the goods that they could conveniently
carry away: but the Lord prevented them of their purpose: for being let in at
the doors by the boy, pretending that they came from the husband with th^se
remembrances to his wife, they presently slew the boy, thinking also to
surprise the woman; but she hearing the cry of the boy, locked fast her chamber
door, and cried for help out at her window, whereupon the neighbors running to
the house took these two villains, one hidden in the funnell of the Chimney;
and the other in a Well in the Cellar, with nothing but his nose above water.
Now these two wretches being thus apprehended, arraigned, and condemned, being
on the seaffold at the place of execution, the old man desired to speak with
the Smithes widow, whose husband was suspected for the first murder: of whom
when she came, he asked forgiveness; saying, that it was he which had killed
the young woman by S. Opportunes Church. Thus the Lord discovered both the
innocence of the Smith, and the guiltiness of this vile murderer, and that
twenty years after the fact was committed.

Not long since the like discovery of a murderer was made here in England in
Leicestershire, not far from Lutterworth, almost twenty years after the fact
committed, The murder was committed by a Miller upon one in his Mill, whom he
buried in the ground hard by: This Miller removed unto another country, and
there dwelt a long space, until at last guided by Gods Almighty providence, to
the manifestation of his justice, he returned unto that place to visit some of
his friends. Now in the mean time whilst he was there, the Miller that now
possessed the former Mill, had occasion to dig deep into the ground, where he
found the carcass of a dead man, presently it was suspected that some had
been murdered, and was there buried: whereupon the Lord put it into their
hearts to remember, how about twenty years before a certain neighbor of
theirs was suddenly missed, and could never be heard of, insomuch that all
supposed him to have been dead in some strange country: this carcass they
suspected to be his, and bethinking themselves who was then Miller of that
Mill, behold he was there ready in the town, not having been there for many
years before. This man was suspected, nd thereupon examined, and without much
ado confessed the fact, and received deserved punishment.

Who sees not here manifest traces and footsteps of Gods providence? First in
reducing the murderer to that place at that time: Secondly, in stirring up the
Miller to dig at the same time also: thirdly, in putting into the hearts of
the people the missing of such a man, whose memory was almost forgotten: and
lastly, in causing the murderer to confess his deed, when as no proof nor
witness could be brought against him: but here is the justice of God against
all such, Vengeance will not suffer the murderer Acts 28. 4.
to live.

Henry Ranzovius, Lieutenant for the King of Denmark in the Duchy of
Ranzovius.
Holsace, makes relation in a letter of his, of an ordinary means of finding
out Murderers, practiced in the kingdom of Denmark by King Christiernus the
second, and permitted over all his Kingdom; the occasion whereof (he says)
was this: Certain Gentlemen being on an evening together in a stove, fell out
among themselves, and from words grew to blows (the Candles being put out)
insomuch that one of them was stabbed with a punyard. Now the deed doer was
unknown by reason of the number; although the Gentleman accused a Pursevant of
the Kings for it, who was one of them in the stove. The King to find out the
homicide, caused them all to come together in the stove, and standing round
about the dead Corpse, becommanded that they should one after another lay their
right hand on the slain Gentleman's naked breasts, swearing they had not killed
him: the Gentlemen did so, and no sign appeared to witness against them; the
Pursevant only remained, who condemned before in his own conscience, went
first of all and kissed the dead man's feet, but as soon as he laid his hand
on his breast, the blood gushed forth in abundance, both out of his wound and
nosthrils, so that urged by this evident accusation, he confessed the murder,
and by the Kings own sentence was incontinently beheaded: whereupon (as I said
before) arose that practice which is now ordinary in many places of finding out
unknown Murders; which by the admirable power of God are for the most part
revealed, either by the bleeding of the corpse, or the opening of the eye, or
some other extraordinary sign, as daily experience does teach.

The same Author reports another example far more strange, in the same
letter written to David Chytreus, which happened at Itzehow in Denmark. A
Traveller was murdered by the highway side, and because the murderer could not
be found out, the Magistrates of Itzehow caused the body to be taken up, and
one of the hands to be cut off, which was carried into the prison of the Town,
and hung up by a string in one of the Chambers: about ten years after, the
murderer coming upon some occasion in to the prison, the hand which had been a
long time dry began to drop blood on the Table that stood underneath it: which
the Jailer beholding, stayed the fellow, and advertised the Magistrates of it;
who examining him, the Phi. Lonicer. Theat. hist. Fides sit apud authorem.
Though strange, yet not incredible, since God can as well turn Calves heads
into men's, as a rod into a serpent, or water into blood.
murderer giving glory to God, confessed his fact, and submitted himself to
the rigor of the Law, which was inflicted on him, as he very well deserved.

At Winsheime in Germany, a certain Thief after many Robberies and Murders
committed by him upon Travelers and Women with child, went to the Shambles
before Easter, and bought three Calves heads, which when he put into a Wallet,
they seemed to the standers by to be men's heads: whereupon being attached and
searched by the Officers, and he examined how he came by them, answered and
proved by witnesses, that he bought Calves heads, and how they were
transformed ^hee knew not: whereupon the Senate amazed, not supposing this
miracle to arise of naught, cast the party into prison, and tortured him to
make him confess what villainy he had committed; who confessed indeed at last
his horrible murders, and was worthily punished for the same, and then the
heads recovered their old shapes. When I read this story, I was half afraid to
set it down, least I should seem to insert fables into this serious Treatise
of Gods Judgments: but seeing the Lord does often work miraculously for the
disclosing of this foul sin, I thought that it would not seem altogether
incredible.

Another murderer at Tubing betrayed his murder by his own sighs, which were
so deep and incessant, in grief not of his fact, but of his small Lonicer.
booty, that being but asked the question, he confessed the crime, and
underwent worthy punishment.

Another murderer in Spain was discovered by the trembling of his heart; for
when many were suspected of the murder, and all renounced it, the Judge caused
all their breasts to be opened, and him in whom he saw most trembling of breast,
he condemned, who also could not deny the fact, but presently confessed the
same.

At Isenacum a certain young man being in love with a maid, and not having
wherewith to maintain her, used this unlawful means to accomplish his desire;
upon a night he slew his host, and throwing his body into a Cellar, took away
all his money, and then hasted away; but the terror of his own conscience and
the judgment of God so besotted him, that he could not stir a foot until
he was apprchended. At the same time Martin Luther, and Philip Melancthon abode
at Isenacum, and were eyewitnesses of this miraculous judgment, who also so
dealt with this murderer, that in most humble and penitent confession of his
sins, and comfort of soul, he ended his life.

By all these examples we see, how hard it is for a murderer to escape without
his reward: when the justice of man is either too blind, that it cannot search
out the truth, or too blunt, that it does not strike with severity the man
appointed unto death, then the justice of God rises up, and with his own arm
he discovers and punishes the murderer; yea, rather than he shall go
unpunished, senseless creatures and his own heart and tongue rise to give
sentence against him. I doubt not but daily experience in all places affords
many more examples to this purpose, and especially the experience of our Judges
in criminal causes, who have continual occasion of understanding such matters
in their Circuits: but these shall suffice for our present purpose.

CHAP. XII. Of such as have murdered themselves.
WHen the Law says, Thou shall not kill, it not only condemns the killing
of others, but much more of our selves: for charity springs from a man's
self; and therefore if they be guilty of murder that spill the blood of others,
much more guilty are they before God that shed their own blood: and if nature
binds us to preserve the life of all men as much as lies in our power, then
much more are we bound to preserve our own lives, so long as God shall give us
leave. We are here set in this life as soldiers in a station, without the
license of our Captain we must not depart: our soul is married to the body by
the appointment of God, none must presume to put a sunder those whom God has
coupled: and our life is committed to us as a thing in trust, we must not
redeliver it, nor part with it, until he require it again at our hands that
gave it into, our hands. Saint Augustine in his first Book De Civitate Dei,
does most Aug. de civit. lib. 1. cap. 26.
strongly evince and prove, That for no cause voluntary death is to be
undertaken: neither to avoid temporal troubles, least we fall into eternal;
nor for fear to be polluted with the sins of others, lest by avoiding other
men's sins, we increase our own; nor yet for our own sins that are past,
for the which we have more need of life that we might repent of them: nor
lastly: for the hope of a better life, because they which are guilty of their
own death, a better life is not prepared for them. These be the words of
Augustine: wherein he alleges four causes, by which men are moved to this
unnatural act; and concludes, that for none of them, nor for any other cause
what soever, a man ought to lay violent and bloody hands upon himself; yea,
concludes peremptorily, that a better life after death does not receive such,
to wit, that wilfully and desperately murder themselves, and die without
repentance, as commonly they do. But here it is to be observed, that many
which seem to make away themselves, are murdered and made away by the Devil,
and not by themselves: for otherwise it were not possible that then should
perish so strangely as they do: as when some have been hanged with their
knees almost touching the ground; others upon a weak twigge, not strong enough
to bear the weight of the tenth part of their body: others been drowned in a
puddle of water: which plainly shows, that the Devil, either as the
principal actor, or at least as a helper, was the procurer of their murders,
and not always themselves: And therefore I must needs say with Luther, That
both charity and conscience inhibites resolutely to judge all such to be damned
that seem to have made havocke of their own lives; for the mercy of God is
incomprehensible, and why may he not save the souls of them, whose bodies he
gave leave to the Devil to torment, yea to destroy? Besides, we read of many
holy women, who in the time of persecution cast themselves into the deep stream
to preserve their chastity from the violence of the wicked persecutours; and
yet were reputed in the Church for holy Martyrs. Saint Augustines judgment is
worthy to be learned and imitated of all concerning this matter, who thus
defines the case: Of these (says he) I dare avouch nothing rashly: it may be
the Church of God was persuaded by divine authority to receive them into the
number of Martyrs; or it may be they did this act, not being deceived, after
the manner of men, but being commanded of God, not erring, but obeying; as also
we are to judge of Sampson: now when God bids, and without all doubt makes
known his will, who can call this obedience a crime? who can accuse a duty of
piety? But a little after he gives a caveat, Ne divina iussio ullo nutet
incerto; that is, that we be sure God bids; for often times the devil
translates himself into an Angel of light, and will feine a message from God,
which proceeds from his own malice. All this is to be conceived only
touching that extraordinary case of those holy women that drowned themselves,
and yet were held for Martyrs in the Church of God: as for others that shall
wilfully and woefully shed their own bloods, and rob themselves of that
precious jewel of life which God has given them to keep, no doubt but as they
commit a horrible and heinous crime, so they incur a horrible and fearful
judgment: yea, the very act it self is both a crime and a judgment; a crime
deserving a further judgment, even eternal damnation in hell fire; and a
judgment and punishment of some notable sins comm^^ed by them before, and of
an ungodly and wicked life unrepented of. The drift therefore and purpose of
these examples following is this, to show how the Lord punishes oftentimes in
men an ungodly life with voluntary and wilful murder of themselves, and this
wilful murder of themsel^es with eternal damnation after this life ended, as
a just recompense of their deserts; and all to teach us repentance, the only
means to prevent both these.

The first we read of in holy Scripture that cruelly murdered himself 1 Samuel
31. 4.
with his own hands, was King Saul; who, as it is recorded of him, was a most
wicked man and a Tyran: for being chosen from among all the people of Israel to
be King by the Lords own appointment, and advanced as it were from the Plough
to the Scepter, he like a most ungrateful wretch kicked against his advancer,
and rebelled against his God that had done so great things for him: yea, he
not only contemned his laws, and cast his commandments behind his back but
also proved a most cruel Tyran, and shed much innocent blood: amongst the rest
of his cruelties, this was the chief; upon the false accusation of Doeg the
Edomite, he caused fourscore 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19.
and five persons, that were Priests, and wore a linen Ephod, to be stain at
one time, and Nob the City of the Priests to be smote with the edge of the
sword, both man and woman, child and suckling, Ox and Ass: yea, so wicked
was he, that when the Lord would not answer him neither by Prophets, nor by
dreams, nor by any other means, he went to take counsel of the Devil, at
the mouth of the Witch of Endor: for all which his 1 Samuel 28. 15.
abominable wickedness, the Lord gave him over at last to so desperate a
mind, that rather than he would fall into the hands of his enemies, he fell
upon his own sword, and murdered himself.

Zimri also, the King of Israel, is set forth by the holy Ghost to be a wicked
man, and a traitor: for he conspited against his master Ela, the son 1 King.
16. 10, 18, 19.
of Baasha King of Israel, and flew him as he was drinking in Tirza, and
proclaimed himself King in his room: but the army hearing thereof, made Omri,
the Captain of the host, King: who coming to besiege Tirza, wherein Zimri
was, Zimri seeing that the City was taken, went into the palace of the Kings
house, and there, together with the house burnt himself, rather than he would
fall into the hands of his enemy: Now the holy Ghost sets it down in plain
words, that the Lord sent this judgment upon him for his sins which he had
sinned, in doing that which was evil in the of the Lord, and walking in the
way of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin.

Achitophel, that great Counselor of State to King David, of whom it is 2 Samuel
17, 20.
said, that the counsel which he counseled was like the Oracle of God, when
he saw that the counsel which he gave was not followed, but despised, he
sadled his Ass, and arose and went home into his own city, and put his
household in order, and hanged himself: And that this was Gods just vengeance
upon him for his former wickedness, it may appear both by his conspiracy
with Absalom against his liege lord king David, 2 Samuel 16. 21, 22.
and also that wicked counsel which he gave unto him, of going in unto his
fathers concubines in the sight of the people.

In the second book of the Machabees is recorded a notable story of one 2 Mac.
14. 37, 38.
Raz is an Elder of Jerusalem, who is there set forth to be a man of very good
report, constant in religion, a father of the Jews, and a lover of the city:
yet notwithstanding, this man rather than he would fall into the hands of
Nicanor his enemy, murdered himself after a most fearful and savage manner,
for first he fell upon his sword, and when as for haste that stroke dispatched
him not, he ran boldly or rather furiously to the wall, and cast himself
down headlong; after which yet breathing, he got up on a steep rock, and
rending out his bowels with his own hands, threw them amongst the people,
calling upon the Lord of life, that he would restore them again unto him. The
author of that book commends this fact for a valiant and noble deed; but
surely we are taught out of the book of God by Gods spirit, that it was a
most bloody, barbarous, and irreligious act: for rather should a man endure all
the reproaches and torments of an enemy, than embrue his own hands in his own
blood; and therefore if he were not extraordinarily stirred up hereunto by the
spirit of God, this must needs be a just punishment of some former sin
wherein he lay without repentance, and a forerunner of an eternal punishment
after this life.

Let us join Judas and Pilate together, the one being the betrayer of his Lord
and Master Jesus Christ our Savior, the other the condemner of him, and that
against his conscience: as they both agreed in one malicious practice against
the life of Christ, so they disagreed not in offering violence to their own
lives: for Judas hanged himself, and his bowels gushed out, and Pilat being
banished to Vienna, and oppressed with the torment of conscience Acts 1. Eusebius.
and fear of punishment for his misdeeds, to prevent all killed himself, and
so became a notable spectacle of Gods justice, and Christ's innocence.

The Jews, as they are recorded in Scripture to be a stiff-necked and
stubborn Nation, above all the Nations under the Sun, so none were ever more
hardy and daring in this bloody practice of selfe-murther than they were; which
may be thought a portion of Gods just judgment upon them for their sins:
three examples of greatest note I will propound, which I think can hardly be
matched.

When the City of Jerusalem was taken by Herod and Sosius, there was a certain
Jew that had hidden himself in a den with his wife and seven Josephus de
bell. Iud. lib. 1. c. 12. 13.
children; to whom Herod offered both life and liberty, if he would come
forth: but the stiffe-hearted wretch had rather die than be captive to the
Romans: therefore refusing Herod's offer, he first threw down his children
headlong from a high rock, and burst their necks, next he sent his wife
after them, and lastly tumbled himself upon their carcasses to make up the
tragedy: a horrible and lamentable spectacle of a proud and desperate mind.

The second example is nothing inferior to the former. After the siege and
sacking of Jotapata by the Romans, forty Jews (among whom was Josephus the
writer of this story) having hid themselves in a cave, by mutual consent
killed one another, rather than they would fall into the hands of Josephus
Fulgol. lib. 3. c. 2.
the Romans* Josephus only, with one other, by his persuasion, by great art
and industry, after the other were slain, proceeded not in that bloody
enterprise, but yielded themselves to the mercy of the enemies, and so escaped
with their lives. This fearful obstinacy may well be imputed to the justice
of God upon them, as for their other sins, so especially for crucifying the
Lord of life, whose blood they imprecated might fall on them and on their
children.

The third example surpasses both the former both in cruelty and obstinacy:
Eleazer the Jew after the taking of Jerusalem fled into the tower of Messada
with nine hundred followers; being besieged there by Sabinus Flavius, a Roman
Captain, when he saw that the walls were almost beaten Fulgos. lib. 3. cap. 2.
down, and that there was no hope of escaping, he persuaded his companions by
a pithy and vehement Oration, and drew them to this resolution, that ten
should be chosen by lot, which should kill all the rest, together with their
wives and children, and that afterward they themselves should kill each other.
The former part of this Tragedy being performed, the surviving ten first set
on fire the Tower, that no prey might come unto the enemy (the victuals only
preserved, to the end it might be known, that not hunger, but desperate valor
drew them to this bloody massacre*) then according to their appointment, by
mutual wounds they dispatched one another: and of so great a number not one
remained, besides one woman with her five children, who hearing the
horriblenesse of their determination, hid her self in a cave in the ground,
and so escaped with the life of her self and her children, and became a
reporter of this whole story.

The like story is recorded by Livie touching the Campagnians; who being
besieged by the Romans, and constrained to yield up their City unto them upon
composition, Vibius, a chief nobleman of the City, with seven Live. lib. 26.
and twenty other Senators, that they might not fall into their enemies hands,
after they had glutted themselves with wine and good cheer, drank all of them
poison, and so bewayling the state of their country and embracing each other,
and taking their last farewell, died ere the enemies were received into the
city.

Buthes, otherwise called Boges by Herodotus, Governor of Thracia, being
besieged in the city Eion, by Cymon the Athenian captain, to the end that
Fulgos. l. 3. c. 2.
the enemy might receive no benefit nor great glory by his victory, first
caused the city to be fired, and then by one consent they all killed
themselves. So likewise did Ariarathes king of Capadocia, when he was besieged
by Perdicca. Cato Vticensis, rather than he would fall into the hands of Julius
Caesar, his enemy, after his victory over Pompey, fell upon his own sword, and
slew himself; having first read Plato's book of the immortality of the soul.
So likewise did Marcus Antonius, after that he was over come by Augustus. And
Cleopatra the Egyptian Queen, when as by her allurements she could not entice
Augustus to her lust, as she had done Anthony, but perceived that she was
reserved for triumph, escaping out of prison, and placing her self in her
sumptuous sepulcher, near to the body of her dead paramour, set an Aspe to her
left arm, by the venom whereof she died as it were in a sleep. Thus the Lord
does infatuate the minds of wicked and ungodly persons, and such as have no
true knowledge nor fear of the true God in their hearts, making them
instruments of his vengeance, and executioners of his wrath upon themselves.

Hannibal the son of Amilchar, after many victories and much bloodshed Fulgos.
of the Romans, at last being overcome, and doubting of the faith of Prusia the
King of Bythinia, to whom he was fled for succor, poisoned himself with
poison which he always carried in a Ring to that purpose.

At the destruction of Carthage, when as Asdrubal the chief Captain Fulgos.
submitted himself to the mercy of Scipio, his wife cursing and railing on him
for his base mind, threw her children into the midst of a fire, and there ended
her days: and Asdrubal himself not long after followed her by a voluntary and
violent death.

When Cinna besieged the city of Rome, two brothers chanced to encounter
Philip. Melan. Chron. 2.
together in single fight, one of Cinna's army, the other of the contrary: and
the one having slain the other, after that the Conqueror perceived that it
was his brother whom he had slain, he slew himself also, to make
satisfaction for his brothers blood: and so they were both buried in one grave.

Norbanus a Consul of Rome flying from Scylla, slew himself at Rhodes, rather
than he would fall into his enemies hands: and so did likewise Marius the
son, at Praeneste.

Of the murderers of Julius Caesar, almost all became also the murderer of
themselves: Cassius stabbed himself with the same dagger wherewith he had
stabbed Caesar: Brutus the night before his overthrow at Philippi, saw in his
chamber a vision of a great fearful man; and he demanding who he was, and
what he would, he answered, I am (O Brutus) thy evil spirit, and to morrow
thou shall see me at Philippi: To whom Brutus with a bold courage answered, I
will therefore see thee there. The next day Brutus being conquered by Augustus
and Anthony, at Philippi, fell upon his own sword and slew himself.

Methridates that bloody and mighty King of Pontus being overcome of Lucullus
and Pompey, and set upon by his own son, went about to make away himself by
poison: which when it took not effect, by reason of his daily taking of
Antidotes, he forced a French soldier of his to lay violent hands upon him;
and so he became a wilful spiller of his own blood, that had caused the
blood of so many thousands to be spilt. His two wives Monica and Veronica,
hearing of the miserable end of the king, made likewise themselves away; for
the one hanged her self, but when the weight of her body broke the cord, she
committed her self to Bochis the Eunuch to be slain: the other received
poison, which when it wrought not so speedily as she desired, Bochis also was
made an instrument to dispatch her.

Most famous and notorious is the story of Lucretia, who being ravished Livit.
by Tarquinius the younger, and impatient of that injury and disgrace, slew her
self openly, and gave cause by her death of the change of the Roman State,
from the government of Kings to Consuls.

Sophronia another Roman woman, but a Christian, when as she could by Eusebius.
no means escape the lust of Decius the Emperor, daily assaulting her
chastity, took a sword, and by her husbands consent slew her self; and so to
prevent one sin, she committed another far worse than that she feared.

Portia the daughter of Cato, and wife of Brutus, hearing of the death of her
husband at Philippi, sought for a knife to kill her self; which being denied
her, she eat burning coals, and so ended her life by a strange kind of death.

We read of many wanton and lewd Poets that have thus made an end of
themselves: who as for the most they are Epicures and Atheists, so seldom come
to a good end: Labienus the railing Poet (who for that cause was called
Rabienus) understanding that his books were adjudged to be burned by a
public Decree, would not survive his own writings, and therefore killed
himself. Lucretius the Atheist taking a love potion to incite his lust, was by
the force thereof deprived of his senses, and so deprived himself also of life
in his rage. Empedocles the vainglorious Poet, affecting the name of a god, and
of immortality, threw himself headlong into mount Aetna, and so perished.
Silvius Italicus being taken with an incurable disease, chose rather to be his
own murderer, than to endure the torment of his sickness. Cornelius Gallus an
amatorius Poet, having robbed the City Thebes, over which he was set to be
governor by Augustus Caesar, and fearing Ammianus Marcellinus.
to be called to account, prevented the punishment of humane justice, by
executing the justice of God upon himself with his own hands.

Of those that persecuted the Church of Christ, very many were given over by
God to be persecutors of themselves, and spoylers of their own lives: as Nero
for example, the first Emperor that took in hand to persecute Suet.
Christians, he seeing himself in danger to be murdered by one appointed for
that purpose, to prevent the malice of the murderer, murdered himself.
Magnentius another tyrant, and enemy to Christ's Church, being overcome by
Constantius, brother to Constans, whom he had slain, fled to Lions, and there
became his own Butcher: whose death as soon as his brother Decentius
understood, he also hanged himself.

Galerius the Emperor, after he had tormented the Christians by all cruel
means, and left no way unattempted whereby he might root them out of his
Kingdom, fell into a grievous disease, through the torment whereof, not being
able to endure any longer, he thrust a sword into his own bowels, and so
miserably ended his days.

And to come nearer to our own age, in King Edward the sixths days one Clerk
an open enemy to the Gospel, hanged himself in the Tower: so did Pavier
Towne-clerke of London: so did the son of one Levar a husbandman, that mocked
and scorned at the holy Martyr master Latymer: so likewise did Henry Smith a
Lawyer, another open adversary to Gods truth.

Richard Long, another enemy to Gods truth, drowned himself at Calice, in King
Henry the eights days. John Plankney, a Fellow of New College in Oxford, did
the like Anno 1566. and likewise one Hanington, a Fellow of the same College,
in a well at Padua; or, as some think, at Rome. Of these you may read more in
the first book.

Hither I might add many examples of modern experience, as namely of a
covetous wretch in the Isle of Elie, who being cast in a suit of Law, through
impatience of grief, came home and hanged himself: of another that had been
a great dealer in worldly matters, and an undoer of a Family or two of good
credit and revenue, by usury, and taking forfeiture of bonds, and that by his
own flattering persuasion: being himself arrested at Huntington for debt,
rather then he would satisfy it, though he was able enough, cut his own
throat, after a most fearful and horrible manner: another being a man of note
and good possessions, threw himself down headlong from the top of a Church.
Many such like examples I could adjoyne, with their names and places of abode,
but I forbear, least by reporting Gods judgments upon the dead, I should
offend some that are alive.

These therefore already proposed may be a sufficient taste of this kind of
judgment, inflicted by God upon wicked persons: and also may serve for a
caveat and warning to all men to take heed how they offer violence to their
own lives, seeing it is not only a punishment of sin past, but a fearful
sin it self, and a forerunner and causer of punishment to come, even of
eternal punishment, except the Lord extraordinarily and miraculously show
mercy, which none ought to presume of.

CHAP. XIII. Of Paricides, or Parent Murderers.
IF all effusion of humane blood be both horrible to behold, and repugnant to
nature, then is the murdering of Parents especially detestable, when a man is
so possessed with the Devil, or transported with a hellish fury, that he
lifts up his hand against his own father or mother, to put them to death:
this is so monstrous and inormous an impiety, that the greatest Barbarians ever
have had it in detestation: wherefore it is also expressly commanded in the Law
of God. That whosoever smites his father or mother Exodus 21.
in what sort so ever, though not to death, yet he shall die the death. If the
disobedience, unreverence, and contempt of children toward their Parents, are
by the just judgments of God most rigorously punished (as has been declared
before in the first commandment of the second Table) how much more then when
violence is offered, and above all, when murder is committed? Thus the
Egyptians punished this sin: they put the committants upon a stacke of
thorns, and burnt them alive, having beaten their Diodor. Sic.
bodies beforehand with sharp reeds made of purpose. Solon being demanded why
he appointed no punishment in his Laws for Paricides; answered, that there was
no necessity, thinking that the wide world could not afford so wicked a wretch.
It is said, that Romulus for the same cause ordained no punishment in his
Common wealth for that crime, but called every murderer a Paricide; the one
being in his opinion a thing execrable, and the other impossible. And in truth
there was not for 600 years space (according to Plutarchs report) found in
Rome any one that had committed this execrable fact. The first Paricide that
Rome saw, was Lucius Ostius, after the first Punicke war; although other
Writers affirm, that M. Malliolus was the first, and Lucius the second: how
soever it was, they both underwent the punishment of the Law Pompeia, which
enacted, That such offenders should be thrust into a sack of Leather, and an
Ape, a Cock, a Viper, and a Dog, put in to accompany them, and then to be
thrown into the water, to the end that these beasts being enraged and animated
one against another, might wreke their teene upon them, and so deprive them of
life after a strange fashion, being debarred of the use of the air, water, and
earth, as unworthy to participate the very Elements with their deaths, much
less with their lives: which kind of punishment was after practiced and
confirmed by the constitution of Constantine the Great. And albeit the regard
of the punishment seemed terrible, and the offense it self much more
monstrous, yet since that time there have been many so perverse and exceeding
wicked, as to throw themselves headlong into that desperate gulf.

As Cleodoricke son of Sigebert King of Austria, who being tickled with an
unsatiable lust of reign through the deceivable persuasions of Cleodovius
Greg. of Tours, lib 2.
King of France, slew his father Sigebert as he lay asleep in his Tent in a
forest at noone time of the day; who being weary with walking, laid himself
down there to take his rest: but for all that, the wicked wretch was so far
from attaining his purpose, that it fell out clean contrary to his
expectation: for after his fathers death, as he was viewing his treasures, and
ransacking his coffers, one of Cleodovius factors struck him suddenly, and
murdered him, and so Cleodovius seized both upon the Crown and Treasures.

After the death of Hircanus, Aristobulus succeeded in the government of
Joseph. antiq.
Judea, which whilst he strove to reduce into a kingdom, and to wear a
crown, contrary to the custom of his predecessors, his mother and other
brethren contending with him about the same, he cast in prison, and took
Antigonus his next brother to be his associate: but ere long (a good grateful
son) he famished her to death with hunger that had fed him to life with her
tears, even his natural mother: And after persuaded with false accusations,
caused his late best beloved Antigonus to be slain by an ambush that lay by
Strato's tower, because in the time of his sickness he entered the Temple with
pomp. But the Lord called for quittance for the two bloodsheds immediately
after the execution of them: for his brothers blood was scarce washed off the
ground, ere in the extremity of his sickness he was carried into the same
place, and there vomiting up blood at his mouth and nosthrils, to be mingled
with his brothers, he fell down stark dead, not without horrible tokens of
trembling and despair.

Nero that unnatural Tyran surpassed all that lived, as in all other vices,
Corn. Tacit lib. 14.
so in this; for he attempted thrice by poison to make away his mother
Agrippina: and when that could not prevail, by reason of her usual Antidotes
and preservatives, he assayed diverse other means: as first a devise, whereby
she should be crushed to death as she slept, a loosened beam that should fall
upon her; and secondly by shipwreck: both which when she Sueton. cap 33.
escaped, the one by discovery, and the other by swimming, he sent Anic^tus the
Centurion to slaughter her with the sword: who with his companions breaking up
the gate of the City where she lay, rushed into her Chamber, and there murdered
her. It is written of her, that when she saw there was no remedy but death, she
presented her belly unto the murderer, and desired him to kill her in that part
which had most deserved it, by bringing into the world so vile a monster: and
of him, that he came to view the dead carcass of his mother, and handled the
members thereof, commending this, and discommending that, as his fancy led him,
and in the mean time being thirsty, to call for drink: so far was he from
all humanity and touch of Nature: but he that spared not to embrue his hands in
her blood that bred him, was constrained ere long to offer violence to his own
life, which was most dear unto him.

Henry the son of Nicolotus Duke of Herulia, had two wicked, cruel, and Munst.
Cosmog. lib. 3.
unkind sons, by the younger of whom, with the consent of the elder, he was
traitorously murdered, because he had married a third wife: for which cause
Nicolotus, their cousin-german, pursued them both with a just revenge; for he
deprived them of their kingdom, and drove them into exile, where they soon
after perished.

Selymus the tenth Emperor of Turks was so unnatural a child, that he
Philip. Melan. Chron. lib. 5. ^ Munst. Cosmog. lib. 4.
feared not to dispossess his father Bajazet of the crown by treason; and next
to bereave him of his life by poison. And not satisfied therewith, even to
murder his two brethren, and to destroy the whole stock of his own blood. But
when he had reigned eight years, vengeance found him out, and being at his
back* so corrupted and putrified his reins, that the contagion spread it self
over all his body: so that he dyed a beast-like and irksome death, and that in
the same place where he had before oppressed his father Bajazet with an army,
to wit, at Chiurle a city of Thracia, in the year of our Lord 1520. in the
month of September.

Charles the younger, by surname called Crassus son to Lodouick the third,
Casp. Hedian. lib. ^. cap. 29.
was possessed and tormented with a devil in the presence of his father, and
the Peers of the Realm; which he openly confessed to have justly happened
unto him, because he had pretended in his mind to have conspired his fathers
death and deposition: what then are they to expect, that do not pretend, but
perform this monstrous enterprise?

A certain degenerate and cruel son longing and gaping after the inheritance
of his father, which nothing but his life kept him from, wrought this means to
accomplish his desire: he accused his father of a most filthy unnameable crime,
even of committing filt^inesse with a Cow; knowing that if he were convicted
thereof, the law would cut off his life: and herein he wroght a Theat. hist.
double villainy, in going about not only to take away his life (which by the law
of nature he ought to have preserved) but also his good name, without
respecting that the stain of a father redoundeth to his posterity, and that
children Mandat. 8. Calumniation lib. 2. cap.
commonly do not only inherit the possessions, but also imitate the conditions
of their parents: but all these supposes laid aside, together with* all fear
of God, he indicted him before the Magistrate, of incest, and that upon his own
knowledge: insomuch that they brought the poor innocent man to the rack, to
the end to make him confess the crime; which albeit amidst his tortures he
did, as soon as he was out, he denied again: howbeit his extorted confession
stood for evidence, and he was condemned to be burned with fire, as was
speedily executed, and constantly endured by him, exclaiming still upon the
false accusation of his son, and his own unspotted innocence; as, by the issue
that followed, most clearly appeared; for his son not long after fell into a
reprobate mind, and hanged himself: and the Judge that condemned him, with the
witnesses that bare record of his forced confession, within one month died
all, after a most wretched* and miserable sort. And thus it pleased God both to
revenge his death, and also to quit his reputation and innocence, from ignominy
and discredit in this world.

Manfred Prince of Tarentum, bastard son to Frederick the second, smothered
Philip. Melan. Chron. lib. 4. No better fruit to be expected of any bastard imp.
his father to death with a pillow, because (as some say) he would not bestow
the kingdom of Naples upon him: and not content herewith, he poisoned also the
heirs of Frederick, to the end he might attain unto the crown, as Conrade his
elder brother, and his nephew the son of Henry the heir, which Henry died in
prison; and now only Conradinus remained betwixt him and the kingdom, whom
though he assayed to send after his father, yet was his intention frustrate,
for the Pope thundered out his curses against him, and instigated Charles Duke
of Angiers to make war against him: wherein bastard and unnatural Manfred was
discomfited and slain, and cut short of his purpose, for which he had
committed so many tragedies.

Martin Luther was wont to report of his own experience this wonderful history
of a Locksmith, a young man, riotous and vicious, who to find fuel for Luther.
his luxury, was so bewitched that he feared not to slay his own father and
mother with a hammer, to the end to gain their money and possessions: after which
cruel deed, he presently went to a shoemaker and bought him new shoes,
leaving his old behind him, by the providence of God to be his accusers: for
after an hour or two the slain bodies being found by the Magistrate, and
inquisition made for the murderer, no manner of suspicion being had of him, he
seeming to take such grief thereat. But the Lord that knows the secrets of
the heart discovered his hypocrisy, and made his own shoes which he had
left with the Shoemaker rise up to bear witness against him: for the blood
which ran from his fathers wounds besprinckled them so, that thereof grew the
suspicion, and from thence the examination, and very soon the confession, and
last of all his worthy and lawful execution. From hence we may learn for a
general truth, that murder, never so secret, will ever by one means or other
be discovered; the Lord will not suffer it to go unpunished, so abominable it
is in his sight.

Another son at Basil, in the year of our Lord God, 1560, bought a quantity of
poison of an Apothecary, and ministered it to none but to his own father, Casp.
Head. 4. part. Chron.
accounting him worthiest of so great a benefit: which when it had effected his
wish upon him, the crime being detected, in stead of possessing his goods which
he aimed at, he possessed a vile and shameful death; for he was drawn through
the streets, burnt with hot Irons, and tormented nine hours in a wheel, till
his life forsook him.

As it is repugnant to nature for children to deal thus cruelly with their
parents, so it is more against nature for parents to murder their children:
insomuch as natural affection is of greater force in the descent than in the
ascent, and the love that parents bear their children, is greater than that
which children redound to their Parents; because the child proceeds from the
father, and not the father from the child, as part of his fathers essence, and
not the father of his: Can a man then hate his own flesh, or be a rooter out of
that which himself planted? It is rare, yet sometimes it comes to pass.
Howbeit as the offense is in an high degree, so it is always punished by some
high judgment: as by these examples that follow shall appear.

The ancient Ammonites had an Idol called Moloch to the which they offered
their children in sacrifice: this Idol, (as the Jews write) was of a great
stature, and hollow within, having seven chambers in his hollownesse, whereof
one was to receive meat, another turtle Doves, the third a sheep, the fourth a
ram, the fifth a calfe, the sixth an ox, and the seventh a child: his hands
were always extended to receive gifts; and when a child was offered, they
were made fire hot to burn it to death: none must offer the child but the
father: and to drown the cries of it, the Chemarims (for so were the Priests
of that Idol called) made a noise with bells, cymbals and horns: thus is it
written, that king Ahab offered his son, yea, and many of the children of
Israel beside, as the Prophet David affirms: They offered (says he) their
Psalm. 106. 37, 38.
sons and daughters to Devils, and shed innocent blood, etc. this is the
horrible crime. Now mark the judgment concerning the Canaanites: the
landspued them out for their abominations, Achab with his posterity was accur
sed, himself being slain by his enemies, and the crown taken from his
posterity, not one being left of his offspring to pis against the wall,
according to the saying of Elias: as for the Jews, the Prophet David in the
same place declares their punishment, when he says, That the wrath of the
Lord was Verse 40.
kindled, and he abhorred his inheritance, and gave them into the hands of the
heathen, that they that hated them were lords over them.

In the year of our Lord 1551, in a town of Hassia called Weidenhasten, Job
Fincelius, lib. 1. de Mirac.
The twentieth day of November, a cruel mother inspired with Satan, shut up
all her doors, and began to murder her four children on this manner: she
snatched up a^ sharp axe, and first set upon her eldest son, being but eight
years old, searching him out with a candle behind a hogs-head, where he hid
himself, and presently (notwithstanding his pitiful prayers and complaints)
clave his head in two pieces, and chopped off both his arms: Next she killed
her daughter of five years old, after the same manner: another little boy of
three years of age (seeing his mothers madness) hid himself (poor infant)
behind the gate, whom as soon as the Tygre espied, she drew out by the hair
of the head into the floor, and there cut off his head: the youngest lay crying
in the cradle but half a year old, him she (without all compassion) plucked
out and murdered in like sort. These murders being finished, the Devil
incarnate (for certain no womanly nature was left in her) to take punishment
of her self for the same, cut her own throat; and albeit she survived nine
days, and confessing her fault, dyed with tears and repentance, yet we see
how it pleased God to arm her own hands against her self, as the fittest
executioners of vengeance.

The like tragical accident we read to have happened at Cutzenborff, a Theat.
hist.
City in Silesia, in the year 1536, to a woman and her three children; who
having slain them all in her husbands absence, killed her self in like manner
also to make up the tragedy.

Concerning stepmothers, it is a world to read how many horrible murders they
have usually practiced upon their children in law, to the end to bring the
inheritance to their own brood, or at least to revenge some injury supposed to
be done unto them: of which, one or two examples I will subnect as a taste out
of many hundred, leaving the residue to the judgment and reading of the Learned.

Constantius, the son of Heraclius, having reigned Emperor but one year,
Zonor as com. 5.
was poisoned by his stepmother Martina, to the end to install her own son
Heraclon in the Crown: but for this cruel part becoming odious, to the Senate,
they so much hated to have her or her son reign over them, that in stead
thereof they cut off her tongue and his nose, and so banished them the City.

Fausta the wife of Constantine the great fell in love with Constantine her
son in Law, begotten upon a Concubine: whom when she could not Zonor as 3.
Annl. Sex. Aur.
persuade unto her lust, she accused unto the Emperor, as a solicitor of her
chastity; for which cause he was condemned to die: but after the truth known,
Constantine put her into a hot bath, and suffered her not to come forth, until
the heat had choked her, revenging upon her head her sons death, and her
own unchastity.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Subject Murderers.
SEeing then they that take away their neighbors lives do not escape
unpunished, (as by the former examples it appears) it must needs follow, that
if they to whom the sword of Justice is committed of God, to repress wrongs,
and chastise vices, do give over themselves to cruelties, and to kill and slay
those whom they ought in duty to protect and defend, must receive a greater
measure of punishment, according to the measure and quality of their offense.
Such an one was Saul the first king of Israel; who albeit he ought to have
been sufficiently instructed out of the law of God in his duty in this
behalf: yet was he so cruel and bloody-minded, as contrary to all Justice,
to put to death Abimelech the high Priest, with fourscore and five other
Priests, of the family of his father, only for receiving David into his house:
a small, or rather no offense. And yet not satisfied therewith, he vomited out
his rage also against 1 Samuel 22.
the whole city of the Priests, and put to the merciless sword both man,
woman, and child, without sparing any. He slew many of the Gibeonites, who
though they were relics of the Amorites that first inhabited that land, yet
because they were received into league of amity by a solemn oath, and
permitted of long continuance to dwell amongst them, should not have been
awarded as enemies, nor handled after so cruel a fashion. Thus therefore he
tyrannizing and playing the Butcher amongst his own subjects (for which cause
his house was called the house of slaughter) and practicing many other foul
enormities, he was at the last overcome of the Philistims, and sore wounded:
which when he saw, fearing to fall alive into his enemies hands, and not
finding any of his own men that would lay their hands upon him, desperately
slew himself. The same day three of his sons, and they that followed him of
his own household, were all slain. The Philistims the next day finding his
dead body dispoyled among the carcasses, beheaded it, and carried the head in
triumph to the temple of their god, and hung up the trunk in disgrace in one
of their Cities, to be seen, looked upon, and pointed at. And yet for all this
was not the fire of Gods wrath quenched: for in King David's time there arose a
famine that lasted three years, the cause thereof was declared by God to be
the murder which Saul committed upon the Gibeonites: wherefore David delivered
Saul's seven 2 Samuel 21.
sons into the Gibeonites hands that were left, who put them to the most
shameful death, that is, even to hanging. Amongst all the sins of King Achab 1
Kings 21.
and Iezabel, which were many and great, the murder of Naboth stands in the
fore front; for though he had committed no such crime as might any way deserve
death, yet by the subtle and wicked devise of Iezabel, foolish and credulous
consent of Achab, and false accusation of the two suborned witnesses, he was
cruelly stoned to death: but his innocent blood was punished first in Achab,
who not long after the War which he made with the King of Syria, received so
deadly a wound, that he dyed thereof, the dogs licking up his blood in the same
place where Naboths blood was licked, according to the foretelling of Elias the
Prophet. And secondly of Iezabel, whom her own servants at the commandment of
Iehu (whom 2 Kings 9.
God had made executor of his wrath) threw headlong out of an highwindow unto
the ground, so that the walls were dyed with her blood, and the horses trampled
her under their feet, and dogs devoured her flesh, till of all her dainty body
there remained nothing saving only her skull, feet, and palm of her hands.

Ioram son of Iehosaphat King of Judah, being after his fathers death 2 Chronicles. 21.
possessed of the Crown and Scepter of Judah, by and by exalted himself in
tyranny, and put to death six of his own brethren, all younger than himself,
with many Princes of the Realm: for which cause God stirred up the Edomites to
rebel, the Philistines and Arabians to make war against him, who forraged
his country, sacked and spoiled his cities, and took prisoners his wives and
children, the youngest only excepted, who afterward also was murdered, when
he had reigned King but a small space. And lastly, as in doing to death his own
brethren, he committed cruelty against his own bowels, so the Lord stroke him
with such an incurable disease in his bowels, and so perpetual (for it
continued two years) that his very entrails issued out with torment, and so he
dyed in horrible misery.

Albeit that in the former book we have already touched the pride and
arrogance of King Alexander the Great; yet we cannot pretermit to speak of him
in this place, his example serving to fit for the present subject; for although
as touching the rest of his life he was very well governed in his private
actions, as a Monarch of his reputation might be, yet in his declining age (I
mean not in years, but to deathward) he grew exceeding cruel, not only
toward strangers, as the Cosseis, whom he destroyed to the sucking babe, but
also to his household and familiar friends: Insomuch that being become odious to
most, fewest loved him, and diverse wrought all means possible to make him
away, but one especially, whose son in law and other near friends he had put
to death, never ceased until he both ministered a deadly draught unto himself,
whereby he deprived him of his Iustin^.
wicked life, and a fatal stroke to his wives and children after his death, to
the accomplishment of his full revenge.

Phalaris, the Tyran of Agrigentum, made himself famous to posterity by no
other means than horrible cruelties, exercised upon his subjects, inventing
Orose.
every day new kinds of tortures to scourge and afflict the poor souls
withal. In his dominion there was one Perillus artificer of his craft, one
expert in his occupation, who to flatter and curry favor with him, devised a
new torment, a brazen bull of such a strange workmanship, that the voice of
those that were roasted therein, resembled rather the roaring of a Bull, then
the cry of men. The Tyran was well pleased with the Invention, but he would
needs have the Inventor make first trial of his own work, as he well
deserved, before any other should take taste thereof. But what was the end of
this Tyran? The people not able any longer to endure his Cic, Off. 2.
monstrous and unnatural cruelties, ran upon him with one consent, with such
violence, that they soon brought him to destruction: and as some say, put him
into the brazen Bull (which he provided to roast others) to be roasted
therein himself: deserving it as well for approoving the devise, as Perillus
did for devising it.

Edward the second of that name, King of England, at the request and desire
Enguerran de Monstr. Vol. 1.
of Hugh Spencer his darling, made war upon his subjects, and put to death
diverse of the Peers and Lords of the Realm, without either right or form of
the law, insomuch that queen Isabel his wife fled to France with her young son,
for fear of his unbrideled fury, and after a while finding opportunity and
means to return again, guarded with certain small forces which she had in those
countries gathered together, she found the whole people discontented with the
Kings demeanours, and ready to assist her against him: so she besieged him with
their succor, and took him prisoner, and put him into the Tower of London to
be kept, till order might be taken for his deposition; so that shortly after by
the Estates (being assembled together) he was generally and jointly reputed and
pronounced unworthy to be King, for his exceeding cruelties sake which he had
committed upon many of his worthy Subjects; and so deposing him, they crowned
his young son Edward (the third of his name) King in his room, he yet living
and beholding the same.

John Maria Duke of Millan may be put into this rank of Murderers: Paul.
Iovius.
for his custom was diverse times when any Citizen offended thim, yea, and
sometimes without offense too, to throw them amongst cruel Mastives to be torn
in pieces and devoured. But as he continued and delighted in this unnatural
kind of murder, the people one day incensed and stirred up against him, ran
upon him with such rage and violence, that they quickly deprived him of life.
And he was so well beloved, that no man ever would or durst bestow a Sepulcher
upon his dead bones, but suffered his body to lie in the open streets
uncovered, save that a certain harlot threw a few Roses upon his wounds, and
so covered him.

Alphonsus the second, King of Naples, Ferdinands son, was in tyranny toward
his subjects nothing inferior to his father: for whether of them Sabell.
Guicciar. li. 1. Philip. de Com. Bemb. Histor. Vent. lib. 2.
imprisoned and put to death more of the Nobility and Barons of the Realm it
is hard to say; but sure it is, that both were too outrageous in all manner of
cruelty: for which, so soon as Charles the eight, King of France departing
from Rome, made toward Naples, the hatred which the people bore him secretly,
with the odious remembrance of his fathers cruelty, began openly to show it
self by the fruits; for they did not nor could not dissemble the great desire
that every one had of the approach of the Frenchmen: which when Alphonsus
perceived, and seeing his affairs and estate brought unto so narrow a pinch,
he also cowardly cast away all courage to resist, and hope to recover so huge a
tempest: and he that for a long time had made war his trade and profession,
and had yet all his forces and armies complete and in readiness, making
himself banquerupt of all that honor and reputation, which by long experience
and deeds of arms he had gotten, resolved to abandon his kingdom, and to
resign the title and authority thereof to his son Ferdinand, thinking by
that means to assuage the heat of their hatred, and that so young and innocent
a King, who in his own person had never offended them, might be accepted and
beloved of them, and so their affection toward the French rebated and cooled.
But this devise seemed to no more purpose than a salve applied to a sore out of
season, when it was grown incureable, or a prop set to a house that is already
fallen. Therefore he tormented with the sting of his own conscience, and
finding in his mind no repose by day, nor rest by night, but a continual
summons and advertisement by fearful dreams, that the Noblemen which he had
put to death, cried to the people for revenge against him, was surprised with
so terrible terror, that forthwith, without making acquainted with his
departure either his brother or his own son, he fled to Sicilie, supposing
in his journey, that the Frenchmen were still at his back, and starting at
every little noise, as if he feared all the Elements had conspired his
destruction. Philip Comineus, that was an eyewitness of this journey,
reports, That every night he would cry, that he heard the Frenchmen, and that
the very trees and stones echoed France into his ears: And on this manner was
his flight to Sicilie. King Charles in the mean while having by force and
bloodshed to terrify the rest, taken two passages that were before him, the
whole Realm without any great resistance yielded it self unto his mercy,
albeit that the young King had done what he could to withstand him. But at
length seeing the Neapolitanes ready to rebel, and himself in danger to be
taken prisoner, he fled from the Castle of Naples, and with a small company got
certain Brigandines, wherein he sailed to the Island Ischia, thirty miles from
Naples: saying at his departure this verse out of the Psalms, How vain are
the watchmen and gards of that City which is not guarded and watched by the
Lord? which he often repeated, and so long as Naples was in his view. And thus
was cruelty punished both in Ferdinand the father, and Alphonso the son.

Artaxerxes Ochus the eight King of the Persians began his reign with thus
many murders: he slew two of his own brethren first: secondly, Herodot.
Euagoras King of Cyprus, his partner and associate in the kingdom; thirdly,
he took Gidon traitorously, and was the cause of forty thousand men's deaths
that were slain and burned therein; beside many other private murders and
outrages which he committed: for which cause the Lord in his justice rained
down vengeance upon his head: for Bagoas one of his Princes ministered such a
fatal cup to his stomach, that it mortified his senses, and deprived him of
his unmercifull soul and life, and not only upon his head, but upon his
Kingdom and his son Arsame also, for he was also poisoned by the same
Bagoas, and his Kingdom was translated to Darius Prince of Armenia; whom when
the same Bagoas went about to make taste of the same cup, which his
predecessors did, he was taken in his own snare; for Darius understanding his
pretense, made him drink up his own poison which he provided for him: and
thus murder was revenged with murder, and poison with poison, according to the
Decree of the Almighty, who says, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. Exodus 22.
24.


In the year of the World 3659. Morindus a most cruel and bloody Stow.
minded Prince reigned here in England, who for his cruelties sake came to an
unhappy and bloody end: for out of the Irish seas came forth a Monster which
destroyed much people: whereof he hearing, would of his valiant courage needs
fight with it, and was devoured of it: so that it may truly here be said, that
one Monster devoured another.

There was (as Aelianus reports) a cruel and pernicious Tyran, who Aelianus.
to the end to prevent all practices of conspiracy and treason (as Tyrans are
ever naturally and upon desert timorous) that might be devised against him,
enacted this Law among his subjects, That no man should confer with another,
either privately or publicly, upon pain of death: and so indeed he abrogated
all civil society: (For speech, as it was the beginning and birth of
fellowship, so it is the very joint and glue thereof) but what cared he for
society, that respected nothing but his own safety? he was so far from
regarding the common good, that when his subjects, not daring to speak,
signified their minds by signs, he prohibited that also: and that which is
yet more, when not daring to speak, or yet make signs, they fell to weeping
and lamenting their misery, he came with a band of men even to restrain their
tears too: but the multitudes rage being justly incensed, they gave him such a
desperate welcome, that neither he nor his followers returned one of them alive.
And thus his abominable cruelty came to an end, together with his life; and
that by those means (which is to be observed) by which he thought to preserve
and maintain them both.

Childericus, who in the year 697, succeeded in the Kingdom of France
Michael. Ric. lib. 1. de regibus Franc. l. 2. c. 46.
Theodoricke (that for his negligence and sluggish government was deposed, and
made of a King, a Friar) exercised barbarous and inhumane cruelty upon his
subjects: for he spared neither noble or ignoble, but mixtly sent them to their
graves, without respect of cause or justice. One of the noble sort he caused to
be fastened to a stake, and beaten with clubbes, not to death, but to
chastisement: which monstrous cruelty so incensed the peoples mind against him,
that there wanted no hands to take part with this club-beaten man against the
Tyran his enemy. Wherefore they laid wait for him as he came one day from
hunting, and murdered him, together with his wife great with child, no man
either willing or daring to defend him.

Tymocrates the King, or rather Tyran of the Cyrenians, will give place to none
in this commendation of cruelty: For he afflicted his subjects with many and
monstrous calamities, insomuch that he spared not the priests of his gods,
which commonly were in reverent regard among the Heathen; As the bloody death
of Menalippus (Apollo's priest) did witness, whom to the end to marry his
fair and beautiful wife Aretaphila, he cruelly put to death: how beit, it
prospered not with him as he desired: for the good woman not contented with
this sacrilegious contract, sought rather means to revenge her first husbands
death, than to please this new letchers humor: Wherefore she assayed by poison
to effect her wish; and when that prevailed not, she gave a young daughter she
had to Leander, the Tyrans brother, to wife, who loved her exceedingly; but
with this condition, that he should by some practice or other work the death
and destruction of his brother: which indeed he performed; for he so bribed one
of the grooms of the Tyrans chamber, that by his help he soon rid wicked
Tymocrates out of the way by a speedy and deserved death. But to abridge these
long discourses, let us look into all times and ages, and to the histories of
all Countries and Nations, and we shall find, that Tyrans have ever come to
one destruction or other.

Diomedes the Thracian King fed his horses with man's flesh as with provender,
but was made at last provender for his own horses himself by Plut. in Dion.
Hercules.

Calippus the Athenian, that slew Dion his familiar friend, and deposed
Dionisius the Tyran, and committed many other murders amongst the people, was
first banished Rheginum, and then living in extreme necessity, slain by
Leptines and Polysperchon. Phil. Melanct. lib. 2.

Valemar.




Clephes the second King of the Lumbards, for his savage cruelty toward his
subjects was slaughtered by one of his friends.

Damasippus that massacred so many Citizens of Rome, was cut off by Scylla.

Ecelinus that played the Tyran at Taurisium, guelding Boys, deflowring
Maids, mayming Matrons of their Dugs, cutting children out of their mothers
bellies, and killing 1200 Patavians at once that were his friends, was cut
short in a battle. In a Word, if we read and consult Histories of all Sabel.
l. 8. c. 3.
Countries and times, we shall find seldom or never any notorious Tyran and
oppressor of his subjects that came to any good end, but ever some notable
judgment or other fell upon them.

CHAP. XV. Of those that are both cruel and disloyal.
NOw if it be a thing so unworthy and evil beseeming a Prince, as nothing
more, to be stained with the note of cruelty, how much more dishonorable is
it, when with cruelty, disloyalty and falsehood is coupled? and when he is not
ashamed not only to play the Tyran, but also the traitor, dissembler, and
hypocrite; to the end he may more freely pour out the ^ome of his rage
against those that put confidence in him. This is one of the foulest and vilest
blots that can be, wherewith the honor and reputation of a man is not only
stained, but blasted and blotted out, not ever to be recovered: for what
persuasion can one have of such? Or who is so fond as to put affiance in them?

This was one of the notorious vices of King Saul, when maligning the
prosperity of David, he cunningly promoted him to be General of his Army, and
married him to one of his daughters, to this end, that by exposing 2 Samuel 18.
him to the hazards and perils of war, he might bring him to speedy
destruction; seeking besides other unlawful means to put him to death by* but
what was the end of this unjust murderer, we have declared in the former
Chapter.

But above all that by treason and deceit made way unto their cruelty, the
Emperor Antonius, surnamed Caracalla, was the chief* who to revenge Herodian.
himself more at full upon the Citizens of Alexandria in Egypt, feyned as if
he would come see their City, built by Alexander, and receive an Oracle from
their god: Which when he approached near unto, the Alexandrians prepared to
entertain him most honorably: and being entered, he went first to visit their
Temples where to cast more colors upon his treachery, he offered many
sacrifices, and in the mean while perceiving the people gathered together from
all quarters to bid him welcome, finding opportunity fitting his wicked and
traitorous enterprise, he gave commandment, that all the young men of the
City should assemble together at one place; saying, That he would acquaint
them to range themselves in battle after the manner of the Macedonians, in
honor of King Alexander. But whilst they thus assembled together in mirth and
bravery, he making as though he would bring them in array by going up and down
amongst them, and holding them in talk, his army enclosed them on all sides:
then with drawing himself with Kis guard, he gave the watchword, that they
should rush upon them; which was performed with such outrage, that the poor
credulous people being surprised at unawares, were all most cruelly massacred.
There might you see the most horrible, barbarous, and incredible butchery of
men that ever was heard of: for besides those that were actors in this bloody
tragedy, there were others that drew the slain bodies into great ditches, and
very often haled in them that were scarce dead, yea and sometimes that were
altogether alive; which was the cause that diverse soldiers perished at the
same time, when those that having some strength of life left, being haled to
the ditch, held so fast by the halers, that diverse times both fell in together.
The blood that was shed at this massacre was so much, that the mouth of the
River Nilus, and the sea shore were died with the streams thereof, that ran
down by smaller Rivers into those plain places. Furthermore, being desirous to
obtain a victory over the Parthians, that he might get himself fame and
reputation thereby, he passed not at what rate he bought it: he sent therefore
Ambassadors with Letters and Presents to the King of Parthia, to demand his
daughter in marriage, though he never intended any such thing, and being
nonsuted at the first with a denial, yet pursued he his counterfeit purpose
with much earnestnes, and with solemn Oath protested his singular good
affection and love that he bore unto her; so that in the end the match was
condescended unto by all parties, whereof the Parthian people were not a little
glad, in hope of so durable a peace, which by this marriage was like to be
established betwixt them. The King therefore with all his subjects being ready
to entertain this new Bridegroom, went out with one consent to meet him in the
midway: their encounter was in a fair plain, where the Parthians having sent
back their horses, being unarmed, and prepared, not for a day of battle, but
of marriage and disport, gave him the most honorable welcome they could: but
the wicked varlet finding opportunity so fit, set his armed soldiers upon the
naked multitude, and hewed in pieces the most part of them; and had not the
King with a few followers bestirred him well, he had been served with the like
sauce. After which worthy exploit and bloody stratagem he took his voyage
Treason, lib 2. cap 3
backward, burning and spoiling the towns and villages as he went, till he
arrived at Charam, a City in Mesopotamia; where making his abode a while, he
had a fancy to walk one day into the fields, and going apart from his company
to unburden nature, attended upon by one only servant, as he was putting down
his breeches, another of his company ran in and struck him through with his
dagger. Thus God blessed the World, by taking out of it this wicked Tyran, who
by treason and treachery had spilt so much innocent blood.

Seturus Galba, another bird of the same feather, exercised no less perfidious
cruelty upon the people of three Cities in Lusitania: for he assembled them
together, in color of providing for their common affairs: but when he had
gotten them into his hands unarmed and weaponlesse, he took nine thousand of
the flower of their youth, and partly committed them to the sword, and partly
sold them for bondslaves.

The disloyal and treacherous dealing of Stilico toward the Goths, Iornand.
Paul. demil.
how dear it cost him and all Italy beside, Histories do sufficiently
testify: for it fell out, that the Goths (under the conduct of Allaricus)
entered Italy with a puissant and fearful Army, to know the cause why the
Emperor Honorius withheld the pension which (by virtue of a league, and in
recompense of their aid to the Empire in time of war) was due unto them: which
by riper judgment and deliberation of the Council was quieted; and to
preserve their Country from so imminent a tempest, offer was made unto them of
the Spaniards and Frenchmen, if they could recover Treason, lib. 2 cap. 3.
them out of the hands of the Vandales; which usurped over them; so that
incontinently they should take their journey over the Alps toward them, and
depart their Coasts. Which offer and gift the Goths accepting, did accordingly
fulfill the condition, and passed away, without commiting any riot or any
damages in their passages. But as they were upon mount Cinis, making toward
France, behold Stilico, Honorius his father in law (a man of a stirring,
stubborn, and rash spirit) pursues and charge them with battle unawares,
and dreaming of nothing less: whereat they, being at the instant amazed,
quickly gathered their spirits together, and putting themselves in defense,
fought it out with such courage and eagerness, that the traitors Army was
wholly discomfited, and he himself with one of his sons, slain. The Goths
having gotten this victory, broke off their voyage to France, and turned their
course back again to Italy, with purpose to destroy and spoil; and so they
did; for they laid waste all the Country of Piemont and Lumbardy, and
elsewhere, and besieged Rome it self: so that from that time Italy never
ceased to be scourged and tormented with the Goths for the space of eighteen
years. Moreover, whosoever else have been found to follow the steps of these
truce, peace, and promise-breakers (void of truth and regard of reputation)
always underwent worthy punishment for their unworthy acts, and fell headlong
into confusion and ignominy, making themselves subjects worthy to be cursed and
detested of all men.

CHAP. XVI. Of Queens that were Murderers.
IF these and such like cruelties as we have spoken before, be strange and
monstrous for men, what shall we then say of wicked and bloody women, who
(contrary to the nature of their sex) addict themselves to all violence and
bloudshedding, as cursed Iezabel Queen of Israel did; of whom sufficient has
been spoken before.

Athaliah, Ahabs daughter, and wife to Ioram King 2 Kings 11.
of Judah, was a bird of the same feather: for she was possessed with such a
spirit of fury and rage, that after the death of her son Ochosias (that died
without issue) she put to death all the blood royal, to wit, the posterity of
Nathan, Solomon's brother, to whom by right of succession the inheritance of the
Crown appertained, to the end that she might install her self into the kingly
diadem: after this cruel butchery of all the royal male children, except
Ioas, who (by Gods providence) was preserved alive, she usurped the Crown and
Scepter of Juda full seven years; at the end of which date, Ioas was exalted
to the Crown, and she not only deposed, but slain by the hands of her Guard
that attended upon her.

Semiramis the Queen of Assyria was a woman of an ambitious spirit, who through
her thirst of reigning counterfeited her sex, and attired her Sabellic.
self like a man to get more authority and reverence to her self. She was the
destruction of many thousand people, by the unjust war which she stirred up;
besides that, she was a notorious strumpet, and withal a murderer of those
that satisfied her lust; for still as they came from her bed, some lay privily
in watch to kill them, lest they should bewray her villainy: it is reported,
that she was so shameless, that she solicited her own son to commit incest
with her; who in detestation of her filthiness and cruelty raised a power
against her, and conquering her in one great battle, caused her most
deservedly to be put to death.

Brunchild (whom Histories call Brunhault) a Queen of France by marriage,
Aimon. Nic. Gil. vol. 1.
but a Spaniard by birth, was a woman that bred much mischief in her age, and
that wrought many horrible and death-deserving crimes: for partly with her
subtle devices, and partly with her own hands, she murdered ten Kings of
France one after another: she caused her husband to slay his own brother: she
procured the death of her nephew Meroveus, whom against all equity and honesty
she had secondly espoused for her husband; for he being hated of his father for
that vile incest, and perceiving himself in danger of taking, made one of
servants thrust him through. After she had committed these and many other foul
facts, she went aboutalso to defraud Clotairius the son of Chilpericke, of the
right of the Crown, which pertained unto him, and to thrust in another in his
room: whereupon arose great war, in the which as she dealt more boldly and
manfully than the condition of her sex would bear, so she received the due
wages of her brave and virtuous deeds for she was taken prisoner, with three of
her nephews, whose throats she saw cut before her face, and after her self
was set upon a Camel, and led through the host three days together, every
man reviling, mocking, reproaching, and despighting her; and at last by the
award and judgment of the Princes and Captains of the Army she was adjudged
to be tied by the hair of her head, one arm and one foot to the tail of a
wild and un^^med horse, and so to be left to his mercy to be drawn miserably
to her destruction: which was no sooner executed, but her miserable carkase
(the instrument of so many mischiefs) was with men's feet spurned, bruised,
trampled, and wounded after a most strange fashion: and this was the woeful end
of miserable Brunchild.

Edilburga, the daughter of Offa King of Mercia, in England, who was married to
Brigthricus King of the West Saxons, was a woman so passing Malmesbur.
all the bounds of humanity, and so given to cruelty and other beastly
conditions, that she first poisoned diverse of the Nobles of the Kingdom: and
then having practiced this wickedness upon them, she at length poisoned also
the King her husband: for which cause flying over into France unto Charles the
Great for fear of punishment among her own people, when by reason of her
beauty it was offered unto her, that she should marry either with the King
himself or with his son; because she chose the son before the father, married
neither the one nor yet the other, but was thrust into a Monastery, where she
not forgetting her old trade, playing the harlot with a Monk, was expulsed
from thence, and ended her life in great penury and misery.

About the same time that this Edilburga was thus working her feats in Acts and
Monuments.
England, Irene, another most idolatrous and cruel minded woman, being
Emperesse of the Greeks, was as busy for her part at Constantinople. This
wicked woman, through the means of Pope Adrian, took up the body of
Constantine Emperor of Constantinople, her own husbands father; and when she
had burned the same, she caused the ashes to be cast into the sea, because he
disannulled images. Afterward reigning with her son Constantine the sixth, son
to Leo the fourth, and being at dissension with him for disallowing the
worshipping of images, caused him to be taken and laid in prison: who
afterward, through power of friends, being restored to his Empire again, at
last she caused the same her own son to be cast in prison, and his eyes to be
put out so cruelly, that within short space he died. After this, the said
Emperesse as it were triumphing in her cruelty and idolatry, caused a Council
to be held at Nice, where it was decreed, That images should again be restored
to the Church* but this Council was after repealed by another Council holden
at Frankford by Charles the Great: and at length this wicked woman was deposed
by Nicephorus (who reigned after) and was expulsed the Empire, and after the
example of Edilburga above mentioned (being condignely punished for her
wickedness) ended her life in much penury and misery.

Alexius Emperor of the Greeks dying, left behind him a wicked Sabel. lib.
7. Decad. 1.
and cruel woman, his late wife now widow. this widow being exhorted by the
Peers of the Empire to a second marriage, and to that end choice being offered
unto her of all the Nobility, to choose whom she should best affect,
notwithstanding refused all: for she was so linked in familiarity with one of
her own household called Grifo (who afterward when he came to be Emperor
called himself Emanuel) that for his love she refused all other matches: with
this Grifo this wicked woman enters a secret and bloody practice: she
consulted with him, that he should bring into the Court a number of his
servants secretly armed; which coming in at diverse times, and by diverse ways,
to avoid suspicion, she disposed in the house in secret places, to be ready at
her call to execute her bloody designement. This being thus plotted, she called
together the Peers of the Empire, and demanded of them, if they were content
that she should choose to her husband whom she pleased, and that they would
acknowledge him for their Emperor whom she should choose; when as the Noblemen
hereunto consented, supposing that she would have chosen one fitting for her
estate, she presently saluted this Grifo, her old adulterous companion, for her
husband and Emperor, and commanded them all to swear fealty unto him; which
when as they all utterly refused and disdained, the wicked woman forthwith
called the bloody troop prepared for that purpose, and caused them all to be
murdered, not one escaping alive. Thus to satisfy her wicked lust, she spared
not to spill the blood of the most part of her Nobility after a most savage and
cruel manner: and indeed she enjoyed her desire, but behold the issue of it:
from this time forward the race of Constantine ceased to sit in the Imperial
throne, and no doubt but Gods vengeance also fell upon her and her wicked
husband.

In the year of our Lord 700. Gracus the famous King of Poland being Herbutus.
Hist. Polon. lib. 1. cap. 6.
deceased, the Crown and Government descended upon his only daughter Venda,
by full consent of the whole Realm. This Venda being of a proud and stately
nature, refused to be joined in marriage with any; saying, That she had rather
be a Prince her self, and governed by her own power, than the wife of the
greatest Prince in the World. Among many that were suitors unto her, there was
one Ritigerus, a noble and mighty Prince of the Theutons; whose suit being not
only denied, but scornefully rejected, and he notwithstanding greatly inflamed
with her love, went about to enforce her by strength to his will: but she as
valiant as he, raised a great power to withstand his violence: when the matter
was ready to come to deciding by blows, Ritigerus his army perceiving the
resolution of Queen Venda, and the danger and loss which was like to arise to
them, and that upon so slight an occasion, refused to fight: so that Ritigerus
being thus forsaken, for grief and shame slew himself: and Queen Venda
returning to Cracovia, and there sacrificing to her gods for her good success;
at last, least her succesfull government should be stained with some disastrous
misfortune, and so her pride abated, to prevent this fear, desperately threw
her self from an high bridge into the River Vistula, and there ended her
glorious and proud days with a shameful and ignominious death.

Let every one both great and small learn by these examples to contain
themselves within the limits of humanity, and not be so ready and prompt to the
shedding of humane blood, knowing nothing to be more true than this, That he
that smites with the sword, shall perish with the sword.

CHAP. XVII. Of such, as without necessity, upon every light cause, move war.
AS in Surgery, so in a Commonwealth we must account war as a last refuge, and
as it were a desperate medicine, which without very urgent necessity, when all
other means of maintaining our estate against the assaults of the enemy fail,
ought not to be taken in hand: and indeed the chief scope and mark that all
those that Cic. Off. lib. 1.
lawfully undertake war, ought to propound to themselves, should be nothing
else, but the good and quiet of the Commonwealth, with the peace and repose of
every member thereof. And therefore so ost as any reasonable offers and
conditions of peace are propounded, they ought to be accepted, to the end to
avoid the mass of evils (as ruins, bloudsheds, robberies) which always
accompany war as necessary attendants: for whosoever does not so, but upon
every light occasion runs to Arms, and to try the hazard of battle, they
manifest their own foolish and pernicious rashness, and their small
conscience in shedding humane blood.

Amongst the good Kings of Judah, Josias for piety and zeal in the service of
God, was most renowned: for he purged the Realm from all dross of idolatry,
repaired the decayed Temple, and restored it to the first glory; and yet for
all this for committing this one crime, he lost his life: for as Necho King of
Egypt was passing with an Army toward the King of Babylon in Charcamis, beside
Euphrates, to bid him battle, he would 2 Chronicles. 35.
needs encounter him by the way, and interrupt his journey by unprovoked war;
yea, though Necho had by embassage assured him not to meddle with him, but
entreated only free passage at his hand: yet would not Josias in any wise
listen (so opinionative and selfe-willed was he) but gave him battle in the
field, without any just cause, save his own pleasure, which turned to his
pain: for he caught so many wounds at that skirmish, that shortly after he
died of them, to the great grief of the whole people, and the Prophet Jeremy
also, that lamented his death.

King John of France (for refusing reasonable conditions of peace at the
English men's hands) was overthrown by them two miles from Poytiers, Froiss.
vol. 1. Nic. G^l. 2.
with a great overthrow: for the Englishmen in regard of their own small
number, and the huge multitude of the French to encounter with them, timorously
offered up a surrender of all that they had either conquered, taken, or
spoiled, since their coming from Bourdeaux, and so to be sworn not to bear
Arms against him for seven years, so that they might quietly depart. But the
King, that crowed before the Conquest, affying too much in the multitude of his
Forces, stopped his ears to all conditions, not willing to hear of any thing but
war, war, even thinking to hew them in pieces, without one escaping: but it
fell out otherwise, for the English men intrenching themselves in a place of
advantage, and hard of access, enclosed with thick hedges and brambles,
disturbed and overthrew with their Archers, at the first onset, the French
Horsemen, and wounded most of their men and horses with multitude of arrows:
it tarried not long ere the footmen also were put to flight on the other side,
and the whole Army of threescore thousand men, by bare eight thousand English,
discomfited: diverse great Lords were found slain in the field, and diverse
others with the King himself carried Prisoners into England: which was a great
shake to the whole Realm, and the occasion of many tumults and disorders that
ensued afterward.

Moreover, as it is a rash part to hazard the doubtful event of battle
indiscreetly, and without cause, so it is a point of no less folly to thrust
ones self voluntarily into any action of war without charge, not being
particularly called and bound thereunto, or having a body unsufficient and
unfit for the same. And this was also one of the warlike points of Discipline
which the ancient Romans used; That none should presume to fight for his
Country, before he had been admitted by some Captain by a solemn Oath.

Of all the Histories that I ever read, I know none more strange in matter of
war, than this which I now go about to recite, of Henry of Luxenbourg, Froiss.
vol. 1. cap* 130.
Emperor of Germany, who when he heard that his son Charles King of Bohemia
was in the French Army, and that Philip of Valois, King of France, was ready to
give battle to the English, albeit he was blind, and consequently unfit for
war, yet would needs take part with the French: and therefore commanded his men
at Arms to guide him into the place where the Field was to be fought, that he
might strike one blow. They as foolish as himself, not willing to cross his
mind, and fearing to lose him in the prease, tied him fast to the raines of
their bridles, being by this means so coupled together, as if they meant all
to perish together if need were, as indeed they did, for they were overcome in
battle, and the next day found all dead, horse and men fast bound together.
This accident befell at Crecy near Abrevile, in which journey the French King
sustained an inestimable damage, for he lost fifteen of his chiefest Princes,
fourscore Ensigns, twelve hundred Knights, and about thirty thousand men.

In the year 1455. the Hungarians without any just cause or pretense, Theatr.
Histor.
made war upon the Emperor Otto, only moved with a desire of bringing under
their subjection the Germane powers; and the rather at this time, because they
supposed the Emperors strength of war to be weakened, and his power of men
lessened, by those continual troubles and wars which he had been daily
occupied in: notwithstanding Otto, as by his former deeds of Arms, he deserved
the surname of Great, so in this exploit especially, for he conscribed eight
Legions of men out of Franconia, Bavaria, and Bohemia, and with that small
valiant handful, overturned and destroyed the huge unchristened multitude of
his enemies: for albeit the Bohemians being placed in the Rereward, were as
suddenly and unexpectedly assaulted by the enemy, that craftily passed over the
River Lycus to set upon them behind, as unhappily put to flight with the loss
of the carriages and victuals, which they were set to protect; yet Otto with
his other Legions renewing the battle, and encouraging his soldiers, gave the
enemy such an encounter and repulse, that he put them to flight and slew them
with a miserable slaughter: three of their Kings he took Prisoners, and few of
that vaste Army escaped with their lives. On the Emperors side died many
worthy men, among whom Conrade the Emperors son in law, and Burghard Duke of
Suevia were two, beside many other. In this successive battle, it is to be
noted above the rest, how religiously the Emperor both began and finished it:
the day before the Fight he enjoined a Fast in his Army, and directed his
prayers to the Almighty, relying more upon the presence of Gods help, than his
own power: after the Conquest gotten, he caused solemn thanks to be given in
all Churches to God, for the great deliverance. I would our modern Generals
and Captains would learn by this example to follow his footsteps, and not to
make their prayers quaffings, and their thanksgiving carousings, as they use to
do, even as it were purposely to tempt the Lord, and to stir up his wrath
against them.

Penda King of middle England, making war upon Anna King of East Angles, slew
him in open field: with which victory being puffed up by Lanq. Chron.
pride, he sent defiance to Osway King of Northumberland also: who hearing of
his approach proffered him great gifts, and fair conditions of peace, which
when Penda obstinately refused, he was slain in battle with thirty of his most
noble Captains, although he had thrice the number of people which Osway had.
And thus the heathen and bloody Pagan ended his cruelty, and paid dear for his
too much forwardness in war.

CHAP. XVIII. Of such as please themselves overmuch in seeing Cruelties.
THe Romans were so accustomed by long use of war to behold fightings and
bloodshed, that in time of peace also they would make themselves sports and
pastimes therewith: for they would compel poor captives and bondslaves either
to kill one another by mutual blows, or to enter combat with savage and
cruel beasts, to be torn in pieces by them. The first (according to Seneca)
that devised and put in practice this unkindely Combat of Beasts and
Malefactors, was Pompey, who provided an Army of Seneca.
eighteen Elephants to fight with men, and thought it a notable and commendable
spectacle to put men to death after this new and strange fashion. Oh how men's
minds are blinded with over much prosperity! He esteemed himself at that time
to be higher in dignity than all other, when he thus threw to wild beasts
people of far Countries, and in the presence of the people caused so much
blood to be shed: but not long after himself was betrayed by the treachery of
the Alexandrians, and slain by a bondslave (a just quittance for murdering so
many of that condition:) thus much of Seneca. Now it is manifest that this was
an ordinary pastime among the Romans, albelt it is strange, that any pastime or
pleasure could arise by seeing poor Creatures interchangeably strike one
another to death, and humane blood to run like water along the streets.

It was not then without cause, but by a special will of God to revenge
cruelty, Flor.
that the bondslaves (conducted by Spartacus the Fencer) rebelled against their
masters in Rome, after they had broken through the guards of Lentulus his
house, and issuing out of Capua, gathered together above ten thousand fighting
men, and encamped themselves in mount Vesuvius; where being besieged by Clod^us
Glaber, they sallied so rudely and boisterously upon him, that the victory and
spoil of their enemies tents remained on their sides: after this they ran over
all the Land, forraged the Country, and destroyed many Villages and Towns,
but especially these four, Nola, Nocera, Terrenevae, and Metaponte, were by
them sacked and spoiled with a strange and bloody overthrow: after all which,
having encountered two Consuls, they overcame Lentulus on mount Appennine, and
discomfited Gaiu^ Cassius near Modene* all which victories and lucky
proceedings did so embolden and puff up the courage of Captain Fencer, that he
determined to give an alarm to Rome, and to lay siege unto it: but the Romans
preparing and directing all their Forces to withstand their practices, gave him
and his crew so sore a repulse, that from Rome they were fain to fly to the
uttermost parts of Italy, and there seeing themselves pent in on all sides,
and driven to deep extremity, they gave so desperate an onset on their enemies,
that both their Captain and they were all slain. And thus the Romans made jolly
pastime with their Fencers and bondslaves, and more (I think at this time)
than they either looked or wished for: for four hundred of them being taken by
the bondmen, were enforced to show them pastime at the same game whereat they
had oftentimes made themselves merry at their costs; and to kill one another,
as they had before Oros. l. 5. c. 24.
time caused them to do.

How curious and desirous the people of Rome was wont to be of beholding Corn.
Tacit. Annal. l. 4.
these bloody and mischievous games, Cornelius Tacitus in the fourth book of
his Annals declares at large: where he reports, That in the City of the
Fidenates (in the twelfth year of the Reign of Tiberius) the people being
gathered together to behold the Fencers prizes were fifty thousand of them hurt
and maimed at one time, by the Amphitheatre that fell upon them; a cruel
pastime indeed, and a strange accident, not coming by adventure (as some
suppose) but by the just vengeance of God, to suppress such pernicious and
uncivil sports. The same story is registered by Paulus Orosius in his seventh
book, with this adjection, That at that time were slain more than twenty
thousand persons.

I cannot pass over in silence two notable and memorable Histories of Senec.
l. 1. de benefic.
two Lions, recorded by two famous Authors, Seneca the one, and Aulu^ Gellius
the other. The first of whom reports, That he saw on the Theater a Lion, who
seeing a slave that sometimes had been his keeper, thrown among the beasts to
be devoured, acknowledged him, and defended him from their teeth, and would not
suffer any of them to do him hurt. The second brings the testimony of one
Appianus, that affirms himself to Aul. Gel. N^ct. A. tic. l. 5. c. 14.
have seen at Rome a Lion, who for old acquaintance sake which he had with a
condemned servant, fawned upon him, and cleared him in like manner from the
fury of the other beasts. The History was this:

A certain bondslave too roughly handled by his master, forsook him, and fled
away, and in his flight retiring into a desert, and not knowing how to bestow
himself, took up a cave for his lodging, where he had not long abode, but a
mighty Lion came halting to his den, with a sore and bloody leg: the poor slave
all forgone at this strange and ugly sight, looked every minute to be devoured,
but the Lion in another mood came fawningly and softly toward him, as if he
would complain unto him of his grief: whereat (somewhat heartened) he bethought
himself to apply some medicine to his would, and to bind up the sore as well
as he could; which he had no sooner done, but the Lion made out for his prey,
and ere*long returning, brought home to his Host and Surgeon certain gobbets
of raw flesh, which he half roasting upon a rock by the Sunbeams, made his
daily sustenance, for the time of his abode there: notwithstanding at length
wearied with this old and savage life, and hating to abide long in that estate,
he for sook the desert, and put himself again to adventure: now it chanced
that he was taken by his old master, and carried from Egypt to Rome, to the
end to be an actor in those beastly Tragoedies; but by chance his old patient
the Lion (taken also since his departure, being ready amongst other beasts to
play his part) knew him by and by, and ran unto him, fawning and making much of
him: the people wondering at this strange accident, after enquiry made of the
cause thereof, gave him the Lion, and caused him to lead him in a string
through the City for a miracle: for indeed both this and the former deserve no
other name. Thus God reproves the savage inhumanity of men, by the example of
the wild and furious beasts at whose teeth poor servants found more favor
than at their masters hands.

The Emperor Constamine weighing the indignity of these and such like
pastimes, and knowing how far they ought to be banished from the society of
men, by a public Edict abolished all such bloody and monstrous spectacles, In
like manner these monomachies and single combats performed in places enclosed
for the purpose, wherein one at the least, if not both, must of necessary die,
ought to be abrogated in a Christian policy, as by the Laterane Council it was
well enacted, with this penalty, That whosoever should in that manner be slain,
his body should be deprived of Ecclesiastical burial: and truly most
commonly it comes to pass, that they that presume most upon their own
prowess and strength, and are most forward in offering combat, either lose
their lives, or gain discredit, which is more grievous than death.

CHAP. XIX. Of such as exercise too much rigor and severity.
FUrthermore we must understand, that God does not only forbid murder and
bloodshed, but also all tyranny and oppression; therein providing for the weak
against the strong, the poor against the rich, and bondslaves against their
masters: to the end that none might be trod under foot, and oppressed of
others, under pain of his indignation. Insomuch therefore as the Romans used
such rigor toward their servants, it came to pass by a just judgment of
God, that they being Lords over all the World, were three sundry times driven
by their servants into great extremities. As first in Rome within the walls, at
the sametime when they also were troubled with the seditious factions of their
Tribunes. Secondly in Sicily, where they horribly laid waste the whole
Country: the cause of which commotion was, because the Romans had chained a
multitude of slaves together, and in that order sent them to ma^^ur and till
the ground: for a certain Syrian first assembled two thousand men of them that
came next hand, then breaking up the Prisons, multiplied his Army to forty
thousand, and with them pulled down Castles, rased up Towns, and destroyed
every where. The third undertaken by a Shepherd, who having killed his master,
set at liberty all the ^ondmen, and prepared an Army of them, wherewith he
spoiled Cities, Towns, Castles, and discomfited the Armies of Servilius and
Lucullus who were pretors at that time: but at last they were destroyed and
rooted out by little and little: and this good service got the Romans at their
servants hands.

As every Nation has his proper virtue and vice ascribed to it, so the
Spaniards for their part are noted famous for cruelty toward their subjects
and vassals, insomuch that (as experience in many witnesses) they are
intolerable in that kind: for which cause they have bor^^ the marks of Gods
Justice, for their rigorous and barbarous handling of the poor West Indians,
whom they have brought to that extremity by putting them to such excessive
travels in digging their mines of Gold (as namely in the island Hispagnola)
that the most part by sighs and tears wish by death to end their miseries:
many (first killing their children) have desperately Benzon. Milan. of the new
world.
hung themselves on high trees; some have thrown themselves headlong from
steep mountains, and others cast themselves into the sea to be rid of their
troubles; but the Tyrans have never escaped scot-free, but came always to some
miserable end or other: for some of them were destroyed by the inhabitants,
others slew one another with their own hands, provoked by insatiable avarice:
some have been drowned in the sea, and others starved in the Desert; in fine,
few escaped unpunished.

Bombadilla, one of the Governors of Hispagnola, after he had swayed there a
while, and enriched himself by the sweat and charge of the inhabitants, was
called home again into Spain: whitherward (according to the commandment
received) as he imbarqued himself, shipping with him so much treasure as in
value mounted to more than an hundred and fifty thousand ducats, beside many
pieces and grains of Gold, which he carried to the Spanish Queen for a
Present, whereof one weighed three thousand ducats, there arose such a
horrible and outrageous tempest in the broad sea, and beat so violently against
his ships, that four and twenty vessels were shivered in pieces, and drowned at
that blow: there perished Bombadilla himself with most of his Captains, and
more than five hundred Spaniards, that thought to return full rich into the
Country, and became with all their treasures a prey unto the fishes.

In the year of our Lord 1541. The eight day of September, there chanced in the
City Guatimala (which lies in the way from Nicaragna Westward) The same
Author.
a strange and admirable judgment. After the death of Alvarado, who subdued
this province, and founded the City; and was but a little before slain in
fight, it rained so strangely and vehemently all this whole day and night, that
of a sudden so huge a deluge and flood of waters overflowed the earth,
streaming from the bottom of the mountains into the lower grounds, with such
violence, that stones of incredible bigness were carried with it; which
tumbling strongly downwards, bruised and burst in pieces whatsoever was in
their way. In the mean while there was heard in the air fearful cries and
voices, and a black Cow was seen running up and down in the midst of the
water, that did much hurt. The first house that was Overthrown by this
tempest, was dead Alvarado's, wherein his widow (a very proud woman, that held
the Government of the whole Province in her hand, and had before despited God
for her husbands death) was slain with all her household, and in a moment the
City was either drowned or subverted: there perished in this tempest of men
and women sixscore persons: but they that at the beginning of the flood ^ted,
saved their lives. The morrow after the waters were surceased, one might see
the poor Spaniards lie along the fields, some maimed in their bodies, other
with broken arms or legs, or otherwise miserably wounded. And thus did God
revenge the monstrous Spanish cruelties exercised upon those poor people, whom
instead of in^icing by fair and gentle means to the knowledge of the true God
and his Son Christ, they terrified by extraordinary tyranny (for such is the
Spanish nature) making them think that Christians were the cruellest and most
wicked men of the earth.

In the year of our Lord 1514. happened the horrible sedition and butchery of
the Croysadoes in Hungary: the story is this, There was a general discontent
amongst the people, against the King and chiefest of the Realm, because they
went not about to conquer those places again from Ioach. Curcu^ in his Annals
of Silesia.
the Turk which he held in Hungary. Thereupon the Popes Legate published
Pardons for all those that would cross themselves to go to war against the
Turk. Whereupon suddenly there gathered together a wonderful company of
thieves and robbers, from every corner of Hungary, who together with great
multitudes of the common people that were oppressed by the insolency of the
Nobility (creating themselves a General) committed a most horrible spoil
almost over all Hungary; murdering all the Gentlemen and Bishops they could
meet withal: the richest and those which were noblest descended, they empailed
alive. This cruel rage continuing, at last the King raised Forces against
them, and ere long they were defeated in a set battle, by John the son of
Vayvod Stephen, who having cut the most of them in pieces, took their Leaders,
and put them to death by such strange torments as I have horror to remember:
for the General of this seditious troop, called George, he caused to be stripped
naked, and a Crown of hot burning iron to be set upon his head; then some of
his veins to be opened, and made Lucatius his brother to drink the blood
which issued out of them. After that, the chiefest of the Peasants, who had
been kept three days without meat, were brought forth, and forced to fall up
on the body of George (yet breathing) with their teeth, and every one to tear
away and eat a piece of it. Thus he being torn in pieces, his bowels were
pulled out, and cut into morsels, whereof some being boiled, and the rest
roasted, the Prisoners were constrained to feed on them: which done, all that
remained were put to most horrible and languishing deaths. An example of
greater cruelty can hardly be found since the world was a world, and therefore
no marvel if the Lord has punished the King and Realm of Hungary, for such
strange cruelties, by suffering the cruel Turks to make spoil of them. Cruel
chastisements are prepared for them that be cruel and inhumane.

During the Peasants war in Germany, in the year 1525. a certain Gentleman not
content to have massacred a great number even of those which had humbly craved
pardon of him, used in all company to glory of his exploits, and to tell what
murders and thefts he had committed. But some months after he fell sick, and
languished many days of an extreme pain in the reins of his back; through the
torment whereof he fell into despair, and ceased not to curse and deny his
Creator, who is blessed for ever, until that both speech and life failed him.
Neither did the severity of Gods justice here stay, but showed it self on his
posterity also; for his eldest son seeking to exalt the prowess and valor of
his father, vaunted much of his fathers exploits in an open assembly at a
banquet; wherewithal a countriman being moved, stabbed him to the heart with
his dagger: and some few days after the Plague falls among the residue of his
Family, and consumes all that remains.

CHAP. XX. Of Adulteries.
IT follows by the order of our subject now to touch the transgression of the
third Commandment of the second Table; which is, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: in which words, as also in many other Texts of Scripture, Adultery is
forbidden, and grievous threatenings denounced against all those that defile
their bodies with filthy and impure actions, estrange themselves from God, and
conjoyne themselves to whores and ribauds.

This sin did the Israelites commit with the woman of Madian, by means whereof
they were to follow strange gods, and to fall into Gods heavy displeasure, who
by a cruel Plague destroyed 24000. of them for the same sin. And forasmuch as
the Madianites (through the wicked and pernicious counsel of Balaam) did lay
this snare for them, and were so villainous and shameless, as to prostitute and
be Bauds to their own wives; therefore they were by the express Commandment
of God discomfited, their Kings and false prophets, with all their men and
women, except only their unpolluted virgins that had known no man, slain: and
all their Cities and dwellings burned and consumed to ashes. As every one ought
to have regard and care to their honesty, so maids especially, whose whole
credit and reputation hangs thereupon; for they that make no account thereof,
but suffer themselves to be polluted with any filthiness, draw upon them not
only most vile infamy, but also many great miseries: as is proved by the
daughter of Hippomenes Prince of Athens, who being a whore, her father shut up
in a stable with a wild horse, giving him no provender, nor other meat to eat,
that the horse (naturally furious enough, but more enraged by famine) might
tear her in pieces, and with her carkase refresh his hunger, as he did. Pontus
Aufidian understanding that his daughter had been betrayed and sold into a
lechers hands by a slave of his that was her schoolmaster; put them both to
death. In like manner served Pub. Atilius, Falisque his daughter, that fell
into the same infamy. Vives reports, that in our fathers Lud, Vives.
days, two brothers of Arragon perceiving their sister (whom they ever
esteemed for honest) to be with child, (hiding their displeasure until her
delivery was past) came in suddenly, and stabbed her into the belly with their
daggers, till they killed her, in the presence of a sage matron that was
witness to their deed. The same Author says, That when he was a young man,
there were three in the same Country, that conspired the death of a companion
of theirs, that went about to commit this villainy, and as they conspired, so
they performed it, strangling him to death with a napkin, as he was going to
his filthiness. As for Adulterers, examples are infinite both of their wicked
lives and miserable ends. In which number many of them may be scored, that
making profession of a single life; and undertaking the vow of chastity, show
themselves monstrous knaves and ribauds, as many of the Popes themselves have
done. As we read of John the Eleventh, Petr. pramonst.
bastard son to Lando his predecessor, who by means of his Adulteries with
Theodora, then Governesse of Rome, came by degrees to the Papacy; so he passed
the blessed time of his holy Popeship with this virtuous Dame, to whom he
served instead of a common Horse to satisfy her insatiable and disordinate
lust: but the good and holy father was at last taken and castin prison, and
there smothered to death with a pillow. Benedict the Eleventh, di^ing on a time
with an Abbess, his familiar, was poisoned with Bal.
certain figs that he eat. Clement the Fifth was reported to be a common Bawd
and a protector of whores: he went apart into Avignion, and there stayed of
purpose to do nothing but whore-hunt: he died in great torment of the bloody
flux, plurisie, and grief of the stomach.

In our English Chronicles we read of Sir Roger Mortimer Earl of March, in the
time of Edward the Third, who having secret familiarity with Isabel, Edward the
Seconds wife, was not only the cause to stir her up to make war against her
husband, but also when he was vanquished by her, and deposed from his Crown,
his young son being installed in his Throne, caused him most cruelly to be put
to death, by thrusting a hot spit into his body, at his fundament. He also
procured the Earl of Kent, the Kings uncle, to be arraigned and beheaded at
Winchester, for that he withstood the Queens and his dealings, and would not
suffer them to do what they listed. All these mischiefs sprung out from the
filthy root of Adultery. But the just judgment of God not permitting such
odious crimes to be unpunished nor undetected, it so fell forth at the length,
that Isabel the old Queen was discovered to be with child by the said
Mortimer: whereof complaint being made to the King, as also of the killing of
King Edward his father, and conspiring and procuring the death of the Earl of
Kent the Kings uncle, he was arreigned and indicted, and by verdict found
guilty, and suffered death accordingly like a Traitor, his head being exalted
upon London Bridge, for a spectacle for all murderers and adulterers to behold,
that they might see and fear the heavy vengeance of God.

CHAP. XXI. Of Rapes.
NOw if Adultery, which with liking and consent of parties is committed, be
condemned, how much more grievous and heinous is the offense and more guilty
the offendour, when with violence the chastity of any i^, assailed, and
enforced? This was the sin wherewith Sichem the son of Hemor the Levite is
marked in holy Scripture; for he ravished Dina, Jacobs daughter, for Go^.
which cause Simeon and Levi revenged the injury done unto their sister upon
the head of not only him and his father, but all the Males that were in the
City, by putting them to the sword.

It was a custom amongst the Spartans and Messenians during the time, of peace
betwixt them, to send yearly to one another certain of their daughters, to
celebrate certain feasts and sacrifices that were amongst them: now in
continuance of time it chanced that fifty of the Lacedemonian virgins being
come to those solemn feasts, were pursued by the Messenian gallants, to have
their pleasures of them: but they jointly making resistance, and fighting for
their honesties, strove so long, not one yielding themselves a prey into their
hands, till they all died: whereupon arose so long and miserable a war, that
all the Country of Messena was destroyed thereby.

Aristoclides a Tyran of Orchomenus a City of Arcadia, fell enamored with a
maid of Stymphalis: who seeing her father by him slain, because he seemed to
stand in his purposes light, fled to the Temple of Diana, to take Sanctuary,
neither could once be plucked from the image of the goddess, until her life
was taken from her but her death so incensed the Arcadians, that they fell to
Arms and sharply revenged her cruel injury.

Appius a Roman, a man of power and authority in the City, inflamed Titus 1.
vius.
with the love of a virgin, whose father hight Virginius, would needs make her
his servant, to the end to abuse her the more freely, and whilst he
endeavored with all his power and policy to accomplish his immoderate lust,
her father slew her with his own hands, more willing to prostitute her to
death, than to so soul an opprobry and disgrace: but every man stirred up with
the woefulness of the event, with one consent pursued, apprehended, and
imprisoned the foul lecher; who fearing the award of a most shameful death,
killed himself to prevent a further mischief.

In the year of our Lord 1271. under the Reign of the Emperor Rodolph, the
Sicilians netled and enraged with the horrible whoredoms, adulteries Nic. Gil.
vol. 1.
and Rapes, which the Garrisons that had the government over them committed,
not able any longer to endure their insolent and outrageous demeanor, entered
a secret and common conspiracy upon a time appointed for the purpose, which was
on Easter Sunday, at the shutting in of the evening, to set upon them with one
accord, and to murder so many as they could: as they did, for at that instant
they massacred so many throughout the whole Island, that of all the great
multitude there survived not one to bear tidings, or bewail the dead.

At Naples it chanced in the Kings Palace, as young King Frederick, Ferdinands
son, entered the Privy Chamber of the Queen his mother, to ^emb. lib. 3. bist.
Venet.
salute her and the other Ladies of the Court, that the Prince of Bissenio
waiting in the outward chamber for his return, was slain by one of his own
servants, that suddenly gave him with his sword three deadly strokes in the
presence of many beholders; which deed he confessed he had watched three years
to perform, in regard of an injury done unto his sister, and in her to him,
whom he ravished against her will.

The Spaniards that first took the Isle Hispaniola, were for their whoredoms
and Rapes, which they committed upon the wives and virgins, all Benzon. Milan.
of the newfound Land.
murdered by the inhabitants.

The inhabitants of the Province Cumana, when they saw the beastly outrage of
the Spanish Nation, that lay along their Coasts to fish for The same Author.
Pearl, in forcing and ravishing (without difference) their women young and
old, set upon them upon a Sunday morning with all their force, and slew all
that ever they found by the Seacoasts Westward, till there remained not one
alive: and the fury of the rude uncivil people was so great, that they spared
not the Monks in their Cloisters, but cut their throats as they were mumbling
their Masses; burnt up the Spanish houses, both religious and private, burst in
pieces their bells, drew about their Images, hurld down their Crucifixes, and
cast them in disgrace and contempt overthwart their streets to be trodden upon:
nay, they destroyed whatsoever belonged unto them, to their very dogs and
hens, and their own countrymen that served them in any service, whether
religious or other, they spared not, they beat the earth, and cursed it with
bitter curses, because it had upholden such wicked and wretched Caitises. Now
the report of this massacre was so fearful and terrible, that the Spaniards
which were in Cubagna doubted much of their lives also; and truly not without
great cause: for if the Indians of the Continent had been furnished and
provided with sufficient store of barks, they had passed even into that
Island, and had served them with the same sauce which their fellows were
served with; for they wanted not will, but ability to do it. And these are the
goodly fruits of their Adulteries and Rapes, which the Spanish Nation has
reaped in their newfound land.

The great calamity and overthrow which the Lacedaemonians endured at Lectria,
wherein their chiefest strength and powers were weakened and consumed, was a
manifest punishment of their inordinate lust committed upon Phil. Melanct. lib.
2.
two virgins, whom after they had ravished, in that very place they cut in
pieces and threw them into a pit: and when their father came to complain him of
the villainy, they made so light account of his words, that in stead of redress
he found nothing but reproach and derision, so that with grief he slew himself
upon his daughters sepulcher: but how grievously the Lord revenged this injury,
Histories do sufficiently testify, and that Leuctrian calamity does bear
witness.

Brias a Grecian Captain being received into a Citizens house as a guest,
Pausan. lib. 2.
forced his wife by violence to his lust: but when he was asleep, to revenge
her wrong, she put out both his eyes; and afterward complained to the Citizens
also, who deprived him of his Office, and cast him out of their City.

Macrinus the Emperor punished two Soldiers that ravished their Hostess on
this manner: he shut them up in an Oxes bowels with their heads out, and so
partly with famishment, and partly with worms and rottenness, they consumed
to death.

Rodericus King of the Goths in Spain forced an Earls daughter to his lust;
for which cause her father brought against him an Army of Sarasens Johan.
Magnus.
and Moors, and not only slew him with his son, but also quite extinguished
the Gothicke kingdom in Spain: in this war, and upon this occasion, seven
hundred thousand men perished, as Histories record, and so a kingdom came to
ruin by the perverse lust of one lecher, Anno 714.

At the sacking and destruction of Thebes by King Alexander, a Thracian Captain
which was in the Macedonian Army took a noble Matron prisoner, Plut. in vita
Alexand. Sabel. lib. 5 c. 6.
called Timoclea, whom when by no persuasion of promises he could entice to his
lust, he constrained by force to yield unto it: but this noble minded woman
invented a most witty and subtle shift both to rid her self out of his hands,
and to revenge his injury: she told him, that she knew where a rich treasure
lay hid in a deep pit; whither when with greediness of the gold he hastened,
and standing upon the brinke, pried and peered into the bottom of it, she
thrust him with both her hands into the hole, and tumbled stones after him,
that he might never find means to come forth: for which fact she was brought
before Alexander, to have justice; who demanding her what she was, she
answered, that Theagenes, who led the Thebane Army against the Macedonians, was
her brother. Alexander perceiving the mavelous constancy of the woman, and
knowing the cause of her accusation to be unjust, manumitted and set her free
with her whole Family.

When C^. Manlius having conquered the Gallo-Grecians, pitched his Live. l. b. 33
Army against the Tectosages (people of Narbonia toward the Pyrene monntaines)
amongst other prisoners, a very fair woman, wife to Orgiagous Regulus, was in
the custody of a Centurion, that was both lustful and covetous: this lecher
tempted her first with fair persuasions, and seeing her unwilling, compelled
her with violence to yield her body, as slave to fortune, so to infamy and
dishonor: after which act, somewhat to mitigate the wrong, he gave her promise
of release and freedom, upon condition of a certain sum of money; and to that
purpose, sent her servant that was captive with her to her friends to purvey
the same: which he bringing, the Centurion alone, with the wronged Lady met him
at a place appointed, and whilst he weighed the money, by her counsel was
murdered of her servants: so she escaping, carried to her husband both his
money, and threw at his feet the villains head that had spoiled her of her
chastity.

Andreas King of Hungary having undertaken the voyage into Syria for the
recovery of the Holy Land, together with many other Kings and Princes, Chronica
Hun^ariae.
committed the charge of his Kingdom and Family to one Bannebanius, a wise and
faithful man, who discharged his Office as faithfully as he took it willingly
upon him. Now the Queen had a brother called Gertrude, that came to visit and
comfort his sister in her husbands absence, and by that means sojourned with
her a long time, even so long, till he fell deadly in love with Bannebanius
Lady, a fair and virtuous woman, and one that was thought worthy to keep
company with the Queen continually: to whom when he had unfolded his suit, and
received such steadfast repulse, that he was without all hope of obtaining his
desire, he began to droup and pine, until the Queen his sister perceiving his
disease, found this perverse remedy for the cure thereof; she would often give
him opportunity of discourse, by withdrawing her self from them being alone,
and many times leave them in secret and dangerous places, of purpose that he
might have his will of her, but she would never consent unto his lust; and
therefore at last, when he saw no remedy, he constrained her by force, and made
her subject to his will against her will: which vile disgraceful indignity
when she had suffered, she returned home sad and melancholy, and when her
husband would have embraced her, she fled from him, asking him, if he would
embrace a whore, and related unto him her whole abuse, desiring him either to
rid her from shame by death, or to revenge her wrong, and make known unto the
world the injury done unto her. There needed no more spurs to prick him
forward for revenge: he posteth to the Court, and upbraiding the Queen with her
ungrateful and abominable treachery, runs her through with his sword, and
taking her heart in his hand, proclaims openly, that it was not a deed of
inconsideration, but of judgment, in recompense of the loss of his wives
chastity: forthwith he flies toward the King his Lord, that now was at
Constantinople, and declaring to him his fact, and showing to him his sword
besmeared with his wives blood, submits himself to his sentence, either of
death in rigor, or pardon in compassion: but the good King enquiring the truth
of the cause, though grieved with the death of his wife, yet acquit him of the
crime, and held him in as much honor and esteem as ever he did; condemning
also his wife as worthy of that which she had endured, for her unwomanlike and
traitorous part. A notable example of justice in him, and of punishment in her,
that forgetting the law of womanhood and modesty, made her self a Bawd unto
her brothers lust: whose memory as it shall be odious and execrable, so his
justice deserves to be engraven in marble with characters of gold.

Equal to this King in punishing a Rape, was Otho the first: for as he passed
through Italy with an Army, a certain woman cast her self down Albert,
Crantz. lib. 3.
at his feet for justice against a villain that had spoiled her of her
chastity; who deferring the execution of the law till his return, because his
haste was great, the woman asked, who should then put him in mind thereof? he
answered, This Church which thou see shall be a witness betwixt me and thee,
that I will then revenge thy wrong. Now when he had made an end of this
warfare, in his return, as he beheld the Church, he called to mind the woman,
and caused her be fetched; who falling down before him, desired now pardon for
him whom before she had accused, seeing he had now made her his wife, and
redeemed his injury with sufficient satisfaction: not so I swear (quoth Otho)
your compacting shall not infringe, or colludo the sacred Law, but he shall die
for his former fault, and so he caused him to be put to death. A notable
example for them, that after they have committed filthiness with a maid,
think it no sin, but competent amends, if they take her in marriage whom they
abused before in fornication.

Nothing inferior to these in punishing this sin, was Gonzaga Duke of Ferrara,
as by this History following may appear. In the year 1547. a Citizen Theat.
hist.
of Comun was cast into Prison upon an accusation of murder, whom to deliver
from the judgment of death, his wife wrought all means possible: therefore
coming to the Captain that held him Prisoner, she sued to him for her husbands
life; who upon condition of her yielding to his lust and payment of two hundred
Ducats, promised safe deliverance for him; the poor woman seeing that nothing
could redeem her husbands life, but loss and shipwreck of her own honesty,
told her husband: who willed her to yield to the Captains desire, and not to
pretermit so good an occasion; wherefore she consented: but after the pleasure
past, the traitorous and wicked Captain put her husband to death
notwithstanding: which injury when she complained to Gonzaga Duke of Ferrara,
he caused the Captain first to restore back her two hundred Ducats, with an
addition of seven hundred Crowns, and secondly to marry her to his wife; and
lastly, when he hoped to enjoy her body, to be hanged for his treachery. O
noble justice, and comparable to the worthiest deeds of Antiquity, and
deserving to be held in perpetual remembrance!

As these before mentioned excelled in punishing this sin, so this fellow
following excelled in committing it, and in being punished for it; his Theat.
hist.
name is Novellus Cararius, Lord of Pavie, a man of note and credit in the
World for his greatness, but of infamy and discredit for his wickedness. This
man after many cruel murders and bloody practices, which he exercised in every
place where he came, fell at last into this notorious and abominable crime;
for lying at Vincentia, he fell in love with a young maid of excellent beauty,
but more excellent honesty, an honest Citizens daughter, whom he commanded her
parents to send unto him, that he might have his pleasure of her: but when they
regarding their credit, and she her chastity, more than the Tyrans command,
refused to come, he took her violently out of their house, and constrained her
body to his lust; and after, to add cruelty to villainy, chopped her into small
pieces, and sent them to her parents in a basket for a present: wherewith her
poor father astonished; carried it to the Senate, who sent it to Venice,
desiring them to consider the fact, and to revenge the cruelty. The Venetians
undertaking their defense, made war upon the Tyran, and besieging him in his
own City, took him at last prisoner, and hanged him with his two sons, Francis
and William.

Diocles, son of Pisistratus, Tyran of Athens, for ravishing a maid was slain
by her brother; whose death when Hippias his brother undertook to Lanquet.
revenge, and caused the maidens brother to be racked, that he might discover
the other conspiratours, he named all the Tyrans friends (which by commandment
being put to death) the Tyran asked, whether there were any more? None but
only thy self (quoth he) whom I would wish next to be hanged; whereby it was
perceived how abundantly he had revenged his sisters chastity: by whose notable
stomach all the Athenians being put in remembrance of their liberty, expelled
their Tyran Hippias out of their City.

Mundus, a young Gentleman of Rome, ravished the chaste Matron Paulina in this
fashion: when he perceived her resolution not to yield unto his Lanq. ^^ron.
lust, he persuaded the Priests of Isis to say, that they were warned by an
Oracle, how that Anubius the god of Egypt, desired the company of the said
Paulina: to whom the chaste Matron gave light credence, both because she
thought the Priests would not lie, and also because it was accounted a great
renown to have to do with a god: and thus by this means was Paulina abused by
Mundus in the Temple of Isis, under the name of Anubius. Which thing being
after disclosed by Mundus himself, he was thus justly revenged; the Priests
were put to death, the Temple beaten down to the ground, the Image of Isis
thrown into Tiber, and the young man banished.

A principal occasion of the Danes first arrival here in England (which after
conquered the whole Land, and exercised among the Inhabitants most (...)
historia Iornalo^^i.
horrible cruelties and outrages) was a Rape committed by one Osbright a deputy
King, under the King of the West Saxons in the North part. This Osbright upon a
time journeying by the way, turned into the house of one of his Nobles called
Bruer, who having a wife of great beauty (he being from home) the King after
dinner (allured with her excellent beauty) took her to a secret Chamber, where
he forcibly, contrary to her will, ravished her: whereupon she being greatly
dismayed and vexed, made her moan to her husband at his return, of this
violence and injury received. The Nobleman forthwith studying revenge, first
went to the King, and resigned to his hands all such services and possessions
which he held of him, and then took shipping and sailed into Denmark, where he
had great friends, and had his bringing up: there making his moan to Codrinus
the King, desired his aid in revenging of the great villainy of Osbright against
him and his wife. Codrinus glad to entertain any occasion of quarrel against
this Land, presently levied an Army, and preparing all things for the same,
sends forth Inguar and Hubba, two brethren, with a mighty Army of Danes into
England; who first arriving at Holdernesse, burnt up the Country, and killed
without mercy both men, women, and children: then marching toward York,
encountered with wicked Osbright himself, where he, with the most part of his
Army was slain and discomfited: a just reward for his villainous act; as also
one chief cause of the Conquest of the whole Land by the Danes.

In the year of our Lord 955. Edwine succeeding his uncle Eldred, was Lanquet.
King of England: this man was so impudent, that in the very day of his
Coronation he suddenly withdrew himself from his Lords, and in sight of
certain persons ravished his own kinswoman, the wife of a Nobleman of his
Realm, and afterward slew her husband, that he might have unlawful use of her
beauty: for which act he became so odious to his Subjects and Nobles, that they
jointly rose against him, and deprived him of his Crown, when he had reigned
four years.

CHAP. XXII. Other examples of Gods Judgments upon Adulterers.
AMongst all other things, this is especially to be noted, how God (for a
greater punishment of the disordinate lust of men) struck them with a new (yet
filthy and stinking) kind of Disease called the French Pox; though indeed the
Spaniards were the first that were infected therewith, by the heat which they
caught Paul. Iovius. Bembus.
among the women of the newfound lands, and sowed the seeds thereof first in
Spain, and from thence sprinkled Italy therewith, wherethe French men caught
it, when Charles the Eighth their King went Guicciardine.
against Naples. From whence the contagion spread it self throughout diverse
places of Europe. Barbary was so over-growne with it, that in all their Cities
the tenth part escaped not untouched, nay almost not a Family but was infected.
From thence it ran to Egypt, Syria, and the graund Cair; and it may near hand
truly be said, that there was not a corner of the habitable world, where this
not only new and strange (for it was never heard of in ancient ages) but
terrible and hideous scourge of Gods wrath stretched not it self. They that
were spotted with it, and had it rooted in their bodies, led a languishing
life, full of aches and torments, and carried in their visages filthy marks of
unclean behavior, as ulcers, boyles, and such like, that greatly disfigured
them. And herein we see the words of Saint Paul verified, That an Adulterer
sins against his own body. Now for so much as the world is so brutishly
carried into this sin, as to none more, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
the Lord therefore has declared his anger against it in diverse sorts, so that
diverse times he has punished it in the very act, or not long after, by a
strange death. Of which, Alcibiades, one of the great Captains of Athens,
Sabell.
may stand for an example; who being polluted with many great and odious vices,
and much given to his pleasures, and subject to all uncleanness, ended his
life in the midst thereof: for as he was in company of a Phrygian strumpet
(having flowne thither to the King of Phrygia for shelter) was notwithstanding
set upon by certain Guards, which the King (induced by his enemies) sent to
stay him; but they though in number many, through the conceived opinion of his
notable valor, durst not apprehend him at hand, but set fire to the house,
standing themselves in arms round about it, to receive him if need were: he
seeing the fire, leaped through the midst of it, and so long defended himself
amongst them all, till strength failed in himself, and blows increasing upon
him, constrained him to give up his life amongst them.

Pliny tells of Cornelius Gallus and Q. Elerius, two Roman Knights, Plin.
lib. 7.
that died in the very action of filthiness.

In the Irish History we find recorded a notable judgment of God upon
Holinshed.
a notorious and cruel lecher, one Turgesnis, a Norwegian, who having twice
invaded Ireland, reigned there as King for the space of thirty years. This
Tyran not only cried havocke and spoil upon the whole Country, abusing his
victory very insolently, but also spared not to abuse virgins and women at his
pleasure, to the satisfying of his filthy lust. Omalaghlilen King of Meth was
in some trust with the Tyran: his only daughter Turgesnis craved for his
Concubine; but he having a ready wit, and watching his opportunity, seemed not
only not to deny his daughter, but to offer him the choice of many other his
neeces and cousins, endowed (as he s^^ them forth) with such singular beauty,
as they seemed rather Angels than mortal Creatures. The Tyran as it were
ravished, and doting in love with those pecrlesse pieces, could endure no
delay, but must needs possess himself of their bodies, and that very
speedily: to which Omalagblilen condescending, attired his daughter in
princelike apparel, and with her sixteen proper young men, beautiful and
amiable to behold, in like array, and so being sent unto the King, were
presented unto him in his Privy Chamber, having none about him but a few
dissolute youthful persons: whereupon those disguised young striplings drew
forth from under their long womanish garments their skenes, and valiantly
bestirring themselves, first stabbed their weapons points through the body of
the Tyran, and then served all those youths about him with the like sauce,
they making small or no resistance. And thus the abominable lecher, together
with his rabble of filthy Pandars, received the due reward of their ugly
filthiness; and by this means the Irish Nation was freed from the slavery of a
cruel Tyran.

Theodebert, the eldest son of Glotharius, died amidst his whores, to whom
Mich. Rit. Neap.
he was (though married) too too much addicted. The like befell one Bertrane
Ferrier at Barcelone in Spain, according to the report of Pontanus. Lib. de
obedi.
In like manner there was one Giachet Geneve of Saluces, a man that had Fulgos.
lib. 6. cap. 12.
both wife and children of his own, of good years, well learned, and of good
esteem amongst his neighbor Citisens, that secretly haunted the company of a
young woman; with whom being coupled one evening in his study, he suddenly
died: his wife and children seeing his longtariance, when time required to go
to bed, called him, and knocked at his door very hard, but when no answer was
made, they broke open the doors that were locked on the inner side, and found
him (to their great grief and dismay) lying upon the woman stark dead, and her
dead also.

Claudius of Asses, Counselor of the Parliament of Paris, (a man very
evill-affected toward the Professors of the Gospel) committed villainy with one
of his waiting-maids, in the very midst whereof he was taken with an Apoplexy,
which immediately after made an end of him.

Not long since, here in our own Country, a Noblemans servant of good credit
and place with his master, having familiarity with another man's wife, as he was
about to commit villainy with her in a chamber, he fell down stark dead with
his ho^e about his heels: which being heard (by reason of the noise his fall
made) of those which were in the lower room, they all ran up hastily, and
easily perceived both the villainy he went about, and the horrible judgment of
God upon him for the same. This happened in Northamptonshire, as it was
testified by very godly, honest, and sufficient witnesses.

Another in Hertfordshire about Barkway, having the company of a harlot in a
Wood, was also surprised by the judgment of God, and struck dead as it seemed
in the very committall of that filthy act: his name I conceal, as also of the
former, that none might think themselves disgraced thereby, but all learn to
fear the wrath of God, and tremble at his judgments.

We read also of a Surgeon, who disdaining his honest wife, had abandoned
himself to a strumpet; and going on a time to horseback, and asked by his
wife whither he went, he answered scornefully, To the Stews, going indeed
presently to his Adulteress. After a while he returns to horse, and offering
to manage his round, the horse leapes and bounds extraordinarily, and casts
this wretched man out of the saddle, in such sort, as one of his feet hung in
the bridle. The horse being hot, ran so furiously upon the stones, as he beat
out his brains, and never stayed until he came before the Stues, where this
miserable man remained dead upon the place.

The Spaniards in the West Indies going to seek gold near unto the gulf Benzo.
Gomar^. Hist. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 57.
of Uruba, their Captain, called Horeda, carried away the daughter of the
Cacique or Lord of the place prisoner, and abused her as his Concubine: the
Cacique soon after came to the Captain, making show that he came to redeem his
daughter, but being come into his presence, he reproached him with injurious
words, and shot a poisoned arrow at him, with an intent to kill him; but he
wounded him only in the thigh: whereupon the Spaniards rushing in suddenly
with their swords drawn, slew the Cacique, his wife, and all his company. But
this villainous Captain escaped not the arrow of Gods wrath: for he was driven
to retire out of that Country into Hispaniola, where he died of his wound
within few days after in extreme pains: all his company being imbarqued to
Spain-ward, were driven back by the wind, and after infinite toiles, some of
them were slain by the Indians, and the rest died miserably of diverse Diseases:
and this was the fruit of that Adultery.

In the year 1533. a certain religious man in the Town of Clavenne in
Stumpsius. lib. 10. bist. of Swisse.
the Grisons Country, being enamoured with a certain beautiful maid, assayed
by all means to corrupt her chastity, and to allure her to his will: but when
by no means he could obtain his desire, he counterfeited certain apparitions
and revelations, abusing the sacred Name of God, and of the Virgin Mary, and so
seduced this poor maid to his lust: but his imposture being discovered, he was
committed to prison, and notwithstanding his Order, was publicly beheaded, and
his body burnt.

CHAP. XXIII. Showing that Stues ought not to be suffered among Christians.
BY this which has been spoken it appears manifestly, how infamous a thing
is it among Christians to privilege and allow public places for Adulteries,
albeit it is a common thing in the greatest Cities of Europe; yea, and in the
very bowels of Christendom, where no such villainy should be tolerated. There is
nothing that can cast any color of excuse upon it, seeing it is expressly
contrary to Gods ediet in many places: as first, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: and in Lev. 19. 29. Thou shall not pollute thy daughter in
prostituting her to be a where, lest the land be defiled with wheredom, and
filled with wickedness: and in Deuteronomy. 23. 17. Let there be no where of the
daughters of Israel, neither a where-keeper of the sons of Israel. This is
the decree of God, and the rule which he had given us to square our affections
by, and it admits no dispensation. But some do object, that those things are
tolerated to avoid greater mischiefs: as though the Lord were not well advised
when he gave forth those Commandments, or that mortal men had more discretion
than the immortal God. This truly is nothing else but to reject and disannull
that which Saint Paul requires as a duty of all Christians; namely, That
fornication Ephesians. 5.
and all uncleanness should not once be named amongst us, neither filthiness,
foolish talking, or jesting, which are things not comely; for so much as no
whoremonger nor unclean person can have any inheritance in the Kingdom of God.
Plate the Philosopher, though a Panim, and Dial. 3.
ignorant of the knowledge of the true God, for bad expressly in his common
wealth Poets and Painters to represent or set to the view any unclean and
lascivious counterfeit, whereby good manners might be any ways depraved.
Aristotle following his masters steps, ordained in his Politiques, That all
filthy communication should be banished out of his City. How Lib. 7. cap. 17.
far then were they from giving leave and liberty for filthy and stinking
brothel-houses to be erected and maintained? In this therefore the very Heathen
are a shame and reproach to those that call themselves Christians and
Catholics. Besides, the goodly reason which they allege for their upholding
of their Stues is so far from the truth, that the contrary is ever truer;
namely, that by their odious and dishonest liberty more evil arises to the
world than otherwise would, insomuch as it sets open a wide door to all
dissoluteness and whoredoms, and an occasion of lechery and uncleanness even
to those that otherwise would abstain from all such filthy actions. How many
young folk are there, as well men as women, that by this means give
themselves over to looseness, and undo themselves utterly? How many murders
are, have been, and still will be committed thereby? What a disorder,
confusion, and ignominy of nature is it, for a father to lie with her with whom
his son had been but a little before? Or the son to come after the father? and
such like: but by the just judgment of God it comes to pass, that that
which is thought to be enclosed within the precincts of certain appointed
places, spreads it self at large so far, that oftentimes whole streets and
Cities are poisoned; yea, even their houses, who in regard of their place
either in the Law or policy, ought to stop the stream of such vices: nay, which
is more marvel, they that with open mouth vaunt themselves to be Gods
Lieutenants on earth, Christ's Vicars, and Successors to his Apostles, are so
filthy and abominable, as to suffer public bauds and whores to be under their
noses uncontroled; and which is more, to enrich their treasures by their
traffic. Cornelius Agrippa says, That of all the ^e-bauds of his time, Pope
Sextus was most infamous: for he builded a most glorious and stately Stues (if
any state or glory can abide in so bad a place) as well for common Adultery, as
unnatural Sodomy, to be exercised in. He used (as Heliogabalus was wont to do)
to maintain whole herds of whores, with whom he participated his friends and
servants as they stood in need, and by Adulteries reared yearly great revenues
into his purse. Baleus says, That at this day every whore in Rome pays
tribute to the Pope, a Iulle; which amounted then to twenty thousand Ducats by
the year at least; but now the number is so increased, that it arises to
forty thousand. I think there is none ignorant, how Pope Paul the third had
by computation five and forty thousand whores and curtezans, that paid him a
monthly tribute for their whoredoms: and thus also this holy Father was a
protector and upholder of the Stues, and deserved by his villainous behavior
(for he was one of the lewdest Adulterers of that time) to bear the name of the
master and erectour of these filthy places: and herein both he and the rest of
that crew have showed themselves enemies to God, and true Antichrists indeed,
and have not only imitated, but far surpassed shameless and wicked Caligula
in all filthy and monstrous dealings. Thou shall not (says Moses) bring the
hire of a whore into the house of the Lord Deuteronomy. 23.
thy God for any vow: by what title then can these honest men exact so great
rent from their whorish Tenants, seeing it is by the Law of God a thing so
abominable? Truly it can no otherwise be but a kind of art of baudery, as may
be gathered out of the Law which is in F. deritu nupt. L. palem. Qui habet
mancipia, etc. The meaning whereof is, That he which for gain prostituteth his
slaves to the lust of men, and draws thereby commodity to himself, is a
Baud: He is also stained with infamy by the Law Athletas, that partaketh the
gain or wages of a whore. How much more then is that Law of Justinian to be
commended, which commands all whores to be banished out of the confines of
Cities and Commonwealths? It was also a worthy and memorable act of Theodosius,
when he rooted the S^cr. l 5. c. 18. Ecclesiast. hist.
Stues out of Rome; and of Saint Lewis King of France, that pulled down the
Stues at Paris, and chased away, as near as he could, all loose and whorish
women from his Dominions. The ancient Romans permitted no woman to become an
open whore, before she had made a formal declaration Lib. de pud.
of her intent before the Aediles; thinking by this means to quench their hot
lust, because they would be ashamed to make such an open confession. And by a
decree of the Senate it was enacted, That no woman coming of gentile stock
should be suffered to give her self over to this Trade, it being a stain and
blot to true Nobility.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Whoredoms committed under color of Marriage.
SEeing that oftentimes it falls out, that those which in show seem most
honest, think it a thing lawful to converse together as man and wife by some
secret and private contract, without making account of the public celebration
of Marriage as necessary, but for some worldly respects, according as their
foolish and disordinate affections misperswadeth them, to dispense therewith:
It shall not be impertinent as we go, to give warning how unlawful all such
conversation is, and how contrary to good manners, and to the laudable customs
of all civil and well governed people. For it is so far from deserving the
name of Marriage, that on the other side it can be nothing but plain whoredom
and fornication: the which name and title Tertullian gives to all secret and
privy meeting which have not been allowed Corn. Tacit.
of, received, and blessed by the Church of God. Again, besides the evil
examples which is exhibited, there is this mischief moreover, that the children
of such a bed cannot be esteemed legitimate, yea God himself accurseth such
law less familiarity, as the mischiefs that arise therefrom do declare,
whereof this one example which we allege shall serve for sufficient proof.

In the reign of Lewis the Ninth, King of France, and Julius the Second, Pope
of Rome, there was a Gentleman of Naples called Antonio Bologne, that had been
Governor of Frederick of Arragons house, when he was King of Naples, and had
the same Office under the Duchess of Malfi after she was widow; with whom in
protract of time he grew to have such secret and privy acquaintance (albeit
she was a princess and he her servant) that he enjoyeed her as his own wife.
And thus they conversed secretly together under the color of Marriage accorded
betwixt them, the space of certain years, until she had bore unto him three
children: by which means their private dealings which they so much desired to
smother and keep close, burst out and bewrayed it self. The matter being come
to her brothers ears, they took it so to the heart, that they could not rest
until they had revenged the vile injury and dishonor which they pretended to
have been done to them and their whole house, equally by them both. Therefore
when they had chased them first from Ancona, whither in hope of quietness they
had fled out of Naples, they drove them also out of Tuscane: who seeing
themselves so hotly pursued on every side, resolved to make toward Venice,
thinking there to find some safety: But in the midway she was overtaken, and
brought back to Naples, where in short space she miserably ended her life: for
her brothers Guard strangled her to death, together with her chambermaid, who
had served in stead of a Baud to them; and her poor infants which she had by
the said Bologne. But he by the goodness of his horse escaping, took his
flight to Milan, where he sojourned quietly a long while, until at the instant
pursuit of one of her brothers, the Cardinal of Arragon, he was slain in the
open streets, when he least mistrusted any present danger. And this was a true
Cardinal like exploit indeed, representing that mildness, mercifulness, and
good nature which is so required of every Christian, in traitorously murdering
a man so many years after the first rancour was conceived, that might well in
half that space have been digested, in fostering hatred so long in his cruel
heart, and waging ruffians and murderers to commit so monstrous an act: wherein
albeir the Cardinals cruelty was most famous, as also in putting to death the
poor infants, yet Gods justice bare the sway, that used him as an instrument to
punish those who under the vail of secret Marriage thought it lawful for them
to commit any villainy. And thus God busieth sometime the most wicked about his
will, and makes the rage and fury of the Devil himself serve for means to
bring to pass his fearful judgments.

CHAP. XXV. Of unlawful Marriages, and their issues.
NOw to redres all such evils as have before been mentioned, and to avoid all
inconveniences in this case, God of his bountiful mercy has ordained Marriage
as a remedy to be applied to all such as have not the gift of continency, least
they should fall into fornication: which notwithstanding many shameless
creatures that blush not at their own filthiness, but rather rejoice therein,
make no account of. Such are they that making Marriage one of the Sacraments of
the Church, do nevertheless despise as a vile and profane thing; albeit that
the Apostle says, That Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed
undefiled; but whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. But they have it not
in that estimation, seeing by authority they are deprived of the use thereof,
and not of Adultery. That which is honest and laudable is forbidden, and that
which is sinful and unlawful, allowed of. This (says Sleiden) is the custom
of the Germane Bishops, for money to suffer their Lib. 4.
Priests to keep harlots, not exacting any other punishment, saving their
purses, to privilege their knaveries. But these reins of liberty were let more
loose in certain Villages of the Cantons of Switzers, where it was Lib. 3.
not only winked at, but also commanded, That every new Priest should have his
private whore for his own tooth; that he might not intermeddle with other
men's. Neither was it without reason that John le Maire said, how under the show
and color of chastity, Priests whoredoms did overflow, being men abandoned to
all dissolute and riotous living. Now then it were far better to marry than to
burn; yet in such sort to marry, that all giddiness and inconsideration set
aside, every one should matched himself according to his degree and age, with
great respect and good advisement had unto them both, to the end to avoid those
mischiefs and enormities which oftentimes happen, when either by an
over-hardy, foolish, and rash presumption, a man would nestle himself in an
higher nest than his estate and calling requires, or by a sensual and fleshly
lust passing the bounds of reason, goes about to constrain and interrupt the
law of nature. The chiefest thing that is required in Marriage, is the consent
of parties, as well of themselves that are to be joined together, as of each of
their parents; the contrary whereof is constraint, where either party is
forced: as it happened to those two hundred maids which the Benjamites took by
force and violence to be their wives. Judge. 21.


This was a reproach to Romulus the first King of Rome, when he ravished the
Sabine virgins that came to see their sports, which was cause of great war
betwixt them. Moreover besides the mutual joint of love which ought to be
betwixt man and wife, it is necessary that they that marry do marry in the
Lord, to serve him in greater purity, and with less disturbance; which cannot
be if a Christian marry an Infidel, for the great difficulties and hindrances
that usually spring from such a root. Therefore it was straightly forbidden the
people of God to contract Marriages with Idolaters; yea, and the holy
Patriarchs before any such law was given, had Exodus 34. 16. Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
carefully great regard (in the Marriages of their children) to this thing, as
the example of Abraham does sufficiently declare. Therefore they that have any
manner of government and authority over unmarried folks, whether they be
fathers, morthers, kinsmen, or Tutors, ought to have especial care and regard
thereof. Yea, Christian Princes and Lords, or Rulers of Commonwealths, should
not in this respect be so supine and negligent in the performance of their
Offices, as once to permit and suffer this amongst them, which is so directly
contrary to the Word of God; but rather by especial charge forbid it, to the
end that both their Laws might be conformable, and in every respect agreeable
to the holy Ordinance of God; and that the way might be stopped to those
mischiefs which were likely to arise from such evil concluded Marriages. For
what reason is it that a young maid baptized and brought up in the Church of
Christ, should be given in marriage to a worshipper of Images and Idols; and
sent to such a Country where the worship of God is not so much as once thought
upon? Is not this to pluck a soul out of the House of God, and thrust it into
the house of the devil? out of Heaven, into Hell? than which, what greater
apostasy or falling from God can there be? whereof all they are guilty, that
either make up such Marriages; or give their good will or consent to them, or
do not hinder the cause and proceedings of them, if any manner of way they can.
Now that this confusion and mixture of Religion in Marriages is unpleasant and
noysom to God, it manifestly appears Genesis 6. where it is said, that because
the sons of God (to wit, those whom God had separated for himself from the
beginning of the world to be his peculiar ones,) were so evil advised, as to
be allured with the beauties of the daughters of men, (to wit, of those which
were not chosen of God to be his people; and to marry with them, corrupting
themselves by this contagious acquaintance of profane people, with whom they
should have had nothing to do) that therefore God was incensed against them,
and resolved simply to revenge the wickedness of each party without respect.
Beside, the monstrous fruits of those profane Marriages, do sufficiently
declare their odiousness in Gods sight: for from them arose giants of strength
and stature, exceeding the proportion of men, who by their hugeness did much
wrong and violence in the world, and gained fearful and terrible names to
themselves: but God (provoked by their oppressions) drowned their tyrannies in
the Flood, and made an end of the world for their sakes.

In the time of the Judges in Israel, the Israelites were chastised by the hand
of God for this same fault; for they took to wives the daughters of the
uncircumcised, and gave them their daughters also. In like sort framed Judges 3.
they themselves by this means to their corrupt manners and superstitions, and
to the service of their Idolatrous gods: but the Lord of heaven reigned down
anger upon their heads, and made them subject to a stranger, the King of
Mesopotamia, whom they served the space of eight years.

Look what happened to King Solomon for giving his heart to strange women 1
Kings 11.
that were not of the household of Gods people: he that before was replenished
with such admirable wisdom, that he was the wonder of the world, was in his
old age deprived thereof, and besotted with a kind of dullness of
understanding, and led aside from the true knowledge of God to serve Idols, and
to build them Altars and Chapels for their worship; and all this to please
forsooth his wives humors, whose acquaintance was the chief cause of his
misery and Apostasy.

CHAP. XXIV. Touching incestuous Marriages.
NOw as it is unlawful to contract marriages with parties of contrary
religion, so it is as unlawful to marry those that are near unto us by any
degree of kindred or affinity, as it is inhibited not only by the law of God,
but also by civil and politic constitutions: whereunto all nations have ever
by the sole instinct of nature agreed and accorded, except the Egyptians and
Persians, whose abominations were so great, as to take their own sisters and
mothers to be their wives. Cambyses King of Media and Persia, married his own
sister, but it was not long ere he put her to death: a just proof of an unjust
and accursed marriage. Many others there were in protract of time, that in
their insatiable lusts showed themselves no less unstaied and unbriedled in
their lawless affections then he: One of which was Antigonus King of Judea,
Joseph. antiq. lib. 17. cap. 15.
son of Herodes, surnamed Great, who blushed not to marry his sister, the late
wife of his deceased brother Alexander, by whom she had borne two children: but
for this and diverse other his good deeds, he lost not only his goods (which
were confiscated) but was himself also banished out of his country into a
foreign place, from Judea to Vienna, in France.

Herod also the Tetrarch was so impudent and shameless, that he took The
same, l^b. 18. cap. 3.
from his brother Philip his wife Herodias, and espoused her unto himself:
which shameless and incestuous deed John Baptist reproving in him, told him
plainly how unlawful it was for him to possess his brothers wise: but the
punishment which befell him for this, and many other his sins, we have heard in
the former book, and need not here to be repeated.

Anton. Caracalla took to wife his mother in law, allured thereunto by her
fair enticements: whose wretched and miserable end has already been touched
in the former book.

The Emperor Heraclius, after the decease of his first wife, married his own
niece the daughter of his brother: which turned mightily to his undoing; for
besides that, that under his reign, and as it were by his occasion, the
Saracens entered the borders of Christendom, and spoiled and destroyed his
dominions under his nose, to his foul and utter disgrace, he was over and
above smitten corporally with so grievous and irksome a disease of dropsy,
that he dyed thereof.

Thus many men run riot, by assuming to themselves too much liberty, and break
the bounds of civil honesty required in all Contracts, and too audaciously set
themselves against the commandment of God, which ought to be of such authority
with all men, that none (be they never so great) should dare to derogate one
jot from them, unless they meant wholly to oppose themselves as professed
enemies to God himself, and to turn all the good order of things into
confusion. All which notwithstanding, some of the Romish Popes have presumed to
encroach upon Gods right, and to disanull by their foolish decrees the laws of
the Almighty: As Alexander the sixth did, who by his Bull approved the
incestuous marriage of Ferdinand Sleid. lib. 9.
King of Naples with his own Aunt his father Alphonsus sister by the fathers
side: which otherwise (says Cardinal Bembus) had been against all law and
equity, and in no case to be tolerated and borne withal.

Henry the seventh, King of England, after the death of his eldest son Arthur,
caused (by the special dispensation of Pope Julius) his next son named Henry,
to take to wife his brothers widow called Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando
King of Spain, for the desire he had to have this Spanish affinity continued:
who succeeding his father in the Crown, after continuance of time, began to
advise himself, and to consult whether this marriage with his brothers wife
were lawful or no; and found it by conference both of holy and profane laws
utterly unlawful: whereupon he sent certain Bishops to the Queen to give her
to know, That the Popes dispensation was altogether unjust, and of none effect
to privilege such an act: to whom she answered, That it was too late to call
in question the Popes Bull which so long time they had allowed of. The two
Cardinals that were in Commission from the Pope to decide the controversy, and
to award judgment upon the matter, were once upon point to conclude the decree
which the King desired, had not the Pope impeached their determination in
regard of the Emperor Charles, nephew to the said Queen, whom he was loath to
displease: wherefore the King seeing himself frustrate of his purpose in this
behalf, sent into diverse Countries to know the judgment of all the learned
Divines concerning the matter in controversy, who (especially those that dwelt
not far off) seemed to allow and approve the divorce: Thereupon he resolved
(rejecting his old wife) to take him to a new, and to marry (as he did) Anne
of Bulloine one of the Queens maids of honor, a woman of most rare and
excellent beauty. Now as touching his first marriage with his brothers wife,
how unfortunate it was in it own nature, and how unjustly dispensed withal by
the Pope, we shall anon see by those heavy, sorrowful, and troublesome events
and issues which immediately followed in the neck thereof.

And first and formest of the evil fare of the Cardinal of York, with whom
the King being highly displeased for that at his instance and request, the Pope
had opposed himself to this marriage, requited him (and not undeservedly) on
this manner: first he deposed him from the office of the Chancellorship:
secondly, deprived him of two of his three bishoprics which he held: and
lastly, sent him packing to his own bouse, as one whom he never purposed more
to see: yet afterward being advertised of certain insolent and threatening
speeches which he used against him, he sent again for him: but he not daring
to refuse to come at his call, dyed in the way with mere grief and despite.
The Pope gave his definitive sentence against this act, and favored the cause
of the divorced Lady: but what gained he by it, save only that the King,
offended with him, rejected him and all his trumpery, retained his yearly
tribute levied out of this Realm, and converted it to another use: and this was
the recompense of his goodly dispensation with an incestuous marriage: wherein
although, to speak truly and properly, he lost nothing of his own, yet it was
a deep check and no shallow loss to him and his successors, to be deprived of
so goodly a revenue, and so great authority in this Realm, as he then was.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Adultery.
SEeing that marriage is so holy an institution and ordinance of God, as it
has been showed to be; it follows by good right that the corruption thereof,
namely Adultery, whereby the bond of marriage is dissolved, should be
forbidden: for the woman that is polluted therewith, despises her own
husband, yea and for the most part hates him, and foisteth in strange seed
(even his enemies brats) in stead of his own, not only to be fathered, but
also to be brought up and maintained by him, and in time to be made inheritors
of his possessions: which thing being once known, must needs stir up coals
to set anger on fire, and set abroach much mischief: and albeit that the poor
infants are innocent and guiltless of the crime, yet does the punishment and
ignominy thereof redound to them, because they cannot be reputed as
legitimate, but are even marked with the black coal of bastardy whilst they
live: so grievous is the guilt of this sin, and uneasy to be removed. For this
cause the very Heathen not only reproved adultery evermore, but also by
authority of law prohibited it, and allotted to death the offenders therein.

Abimelech King of the Philistims, a man without circumcision, and Genesis 26.
therefore without the covenant, knowing by the light of nature (for he knew
not the law of God) how sacred and inviolable the knot of marriage ought to be,
expressly forbad all his people from doing any injury to Isaac in regard of his
wife, and from touching her dishonestly upon pain of death. Out of the same
fountain sprang the words of queen Hecuba in Euripides, speaking to Menelaus
touching Helen, when she admonished him to enact this law, That every woman
which should betray her husbands credit, and her own chastity to another man,
should die the death.

In old time the Egyptians used to punish adultery on this sort; the Diedor.
man with a thousand jerkes with a reed, and the woman with cutting off her
nose; but he that forced a free woman to his lust, had his privy members cut
off. By the law of Iulia, adulterers were without difference adjuged to death,
insomuch that Julius Antonius, a man of great parentage and reputation among
the Romans, whose son was nephew to Augustus sister (as Cornelius Tacitus
reports) was for this crime executed to death. Aurelianus Lib. 4. Annal.
the Emperor did so hate and detest this vice, that to the end to scare and
terrify his soldiers from the like offense, he punished a soldier which had
committed adultery with his hostess in most severe manner, even by causing him
to be tied by both his feet to two trees bent down to the earth with force,
which being let go, returning to their course, rent him cruelly in pieces, the
one half of his body hanging on the one tree, and the other on the other. Yea
and at this day amongst the very Turks and Tartarians, this sin is sharply
punished. So that we ought not wonder that the Lord should ordain death for
the Adulterer. If a man (says the law) lie with another man's wife, if (I say)
he commit adultery with his neighbors Levit. 20. 10.
wife, the Adulterer and the Adulteress shall die the death. And in another
place, If a man be found lying with a woman married to a man, they Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
shall die both twain; to wit, the man that lay with the wife, and the wife,
that thou may put away evil from Israel. Yea, and before Moses time also,
it was a custom to burn the Adulterers with fire, as it appears by Genesis 38.
the sentence of Judah (one of the twelve Patriarchs) upon Thamar his daughter
in law, because he supposed her to have played the whore. Beside all this, to
the end this sin might not be shuffled up and kept close, there was a means
given, whereby if a man did but suspect his wife for this sin, though she could
by no witness or proof be convinced, her wickedness notwithstanding most
strangely and extraordinarily might be discovered. And it was this: The woman
publicly at her husbands suit called in question before Number. 5.
the Priest, who was to give judgment of her after diverse ceremonies and
circumstances performed, and bitter curses pronounced by him, her belly would
burst, and her thigh would rot, if she were guilty, and she should be a curse
amongst the people for her sin; but if she was free, no evil would come unto
her. Thus it pleased God to make known, that the filthiness of those that are
polluted with this sin, should not be hid. This may more clearly appear by
the example of the Levites wife, of whom it is spoken in the 19, 20, and 21.
Chapters of Judges, who having forsaken her husband to play the whore, certain
months after he had again received her to be his wife, she was given over
against her will to the villainous Rape, l. 2. c. 19.
and monstrous lusts of the most wicked and perverse Gibeonites, that so abused
her for the space of a whole night together, that in the morning she was found
dead upon the threshold: which thing turned to a great destruction and
overthrow in Israel; for the Levite, when he arose, and found his wife newly
dead at the door of his lodging, he cut and dismembered her body into twelve
pieces, and sent them into all the countries of Israel, to every tribe one, to
give them to understand, how vile and monstrous an injury was done unto him:
whereupon the whole nation assembling and consulting together, when they saw
how the Benjamites (in whose tribe this monstrous villainy was committed) make
no reckoning of seeing punishment executed upon those execrable wretches, they
took arms against them, and made war upon them; wherein though at the first
conflict they lost to the number of forty thousand men, yet afterward they
discomfited and overthrew the Benjamites, and slew of them 25000. rasing and
burning down the City Gibea (where the sin was committed) with all the rest
of the Cities of that Tribe, in such sort that there remained alive but six
hundred persons, that saved their lives by flying into the desert, and there
hid themselves four months, until such time as the Israelites taking pity
of them, lest they should utterly be brought to naught, gave them to wife (to
the end to repeople them again) four hundred virgins of the inhabitants of
Jabes Gilead, reserved out of that flaughter of those people, wherein man,
woman, and child, were put to the sword, for not coming forth to take part
with their brethren in that late war. And forasmuch as yet there remained two
hundred of them unprovided for, the Ancients of Israel gave them liberty to
take by force two hundred of the daughters of their people: which could not be
but great injury and vexation unto their parents, to be thus robbed of their
daughters, and to see them married at all adventures, without their consent or
liking. These were the mischiefs which issued and sprang from that vile and
abominable adultery of the wicked Gibeonites with the Levites wife, whose first
voluntary sin was in like manner also most justly punished by this second
rape: and this is no new practice of our most just God, to punish one One sin
punished with another.
sin by another, and sinners in the same kind wherein they have offended.

When King David, after he had overcome the most part of his enemies, 2 Samuel 11.
and made them tributaries unto him, and enjoyed some rest in his kingdom,
whilst his men of war pursuing their victory, destroyed the Ammonites, and
were in besieging Rabba their chief City, he was so enflamed with the beauty
of Bathshabe, Vriahs wife, that he caused her to be conveyed to him to lie
with her: to which sin he combined another more grievous; to wit, when he saw
her with child by him (to the end to cover his adultery) he caused her husband
to be slain at the siege, by putting him in the Vantgard of the battle at the
assault; and then thinking himself cocksure, married Bathshabe. But all this
while, as it was but vain allurements, no solid joy that fed his mind, and
his sleep was but of sin, not of safety, wherein he slumbred: so the Lord
awakened him right soon by afflictions and crosses, to make him feel the
burden of the sin which he had committed: first therefore the child (the
fruit of this adultery) was stricken with sickness and dyed: next his daughter
Thamar, Absaloms sister, was ravished by Ammon one of his own sons: 2 Samuel
12. 2 Samuel 13.
thirdly Ammon for his incest was slain by Absalom: and fourthly Absalom
(ambitiously aspiring after the kingdom, and conspiring against him) 2 Samuel 15.
raised war upon him, and defiled his Concubines, and came to a woeful
destruction. All which things (being grievous crosses to K. David) were
inflicted by the just hand of God, to chastise and correct him for his good,
not to destroy him in his wickedness: neither did it want the effect in him,
for he was so far from swelling and hardening himself in his sin, that
contrariwise he cast down and humbled himself, and craved pardon and
forgiveness at the hand of God with all his heart, and true repentance: not
like to such as grow obstinate in their sins and wickedness, and make
themselves believe all things are lawful for them, although they be never so
vile and dishonest. This therefore that we have spoken concerning David, is not
to place him among the number of lewd and wicked livers, but to show by his
chastisements (being a man after Gods own heart) how odious and displeasant
this sin of Adultery is to the Lord, and what punishment all others are to
expect that wallow therein, since he spared not him whom he so much loved and
favored.

CHAP. XXVIII. Other examples like unto the former.
THE history of the ravishment of Helene, registered by so many worthy and
excellent Authors, and the great evils that pursued the same, is not to be
counted altogether an idle fable, or an invention of pleasure, seeing that it
Herod. l^. 2.
is sure, that upon that occasion great and huge war arose between the
Graecians and the Trojanes; during the Thucyd.
which the whole Country was havocked, many Cities and Towns destroyed, much
blood shed, and thousands of men discomfited; among whom the ravisher and
adulterer himself (to wit Paris, the chief mover of all those miserable
tragedies) escaped not the edge of the sword; no nor that famous city Troy
(which entertained and maintained the adulterers within her walls) went
unpunished, but at last was taken and destroyed by fire and sword. In which
sacking, old and gray headed King Pri^m, with all the remnant of his half
slain sons, were together murdered, his wife and daughters were taken
prisoners, and exposed to the mercy of their enemies: his whole kingdom was
entirely spoiled, and his house quite defaced, and well nigh all the Trojane
Nobility extinguished: and as touching the whore, Helene her self (whose
disloyalty gave consent to the wicked enterprise of forsaking her husbands
house, and following a stranger) she was not exempt from punishment: for as
some writers affirm, Ant. Vols. upon Ovidi epist. of Hermione to Orestes.
she was slain at the sack: but according to others, she was at that time
spared, and entertained again by Menelaus her husband; but after his death,
she was banished in her old age, and constrained for her last refuge (being
both destitute of relief and succor, and forsaken of kinsfolks and friends)
to fly to Rhodes, where at length (contrary to her hope) she was put to a
shameful death, even hanging on a tree, which she long time before deserved.

The injury and dishonor done to Lucrece, the wife of Collatinus, by Sextus
Tit. Livius.
Tarquinius, son to Superbus the last King of Rome, was cause of much trouble
and disquietnesse in the City and elsewhere: for first she (not able Rape, l.
2. c. 19.
to endure the great injury and indignity which was done unto her, pushed
forward with anger and despite) slew her self in the presence of her husband
and kinsfolk, notwithstanding all their desires and willingness to clear her
from all blame: with whose death the Romans were so stirred and provoked
against Sextus the son, and Tarquinius the father, that they rebelled
forthwith, and when he should enter the City, shut the gates against him,
neither would receive or acknowledge him ever after for their King. Whereupon
ensued war abroad, and alteration of the state at home^ for after that time
Rome endured no more King to bear rule over them, but in their room created
two Consuls to be their governors; which kind of government continued to
Julius Caesar's time. Thus was Tarquinius the father shamefully deposed from his
crown, for the adultery, or rather, rape of his son; and Tarquinius the son
slain by the Sabians, for the robberies and murders which by his fathers
advice he committed against them; and he himself not long after in the war
which by the Tuscane succors he renewed against Rome to recover his lost
estate, was discomfited with them, Plutarch.
and slain in the midst of the rout.

In the Emperor Valentinianus time, the first of that name, many women of
great account and parentage, were for committing adultery put to death, as
testifies Ammianus Marcellinus.

When Europe, after the horrible wasting and great ruins which it suffered by
the furious invasion of Attila, began to take a little breath and Li. 28.
find some ease, behold a new trouble, more hurtful and pernicious than the
former, came upon it, by means of the filthy lechery and lust of the Emperor
Valentinianus, the third of that name, who by reason of his evil bringing up,
and government under his mother Placidia, being too much Procop.
subject to his own voluptuousness, and tied to his own desires, dishonored
the wife of Petronius Maximus, a Senator of Rome, by forcing her to his
pleasure; an act indeed that cost him his life, and many more beside, and that
drew after it the final destruction of the Roman Empire, and the horrible
besacking and desolation of the City of Rome: For the Emperor being thus taken
and set on fire with the love of this woman, through the excellent beauty
wherewith she was endued, endeavored first to entice her to his lust by fair
allurements; and seeing that the bulwark of her virtuous chastity would not by
this means be shaken, but that all his pursuit was still in vain, he tried a
new course, and attempted to get her by deceit and policy; which to bring
about, one day setting himself to play with her husband Maximus, he won of him
his Ring, which he no sooner had, but secretly he sent it to his wife in her
husbands name, with this commandment, That by that token she should come
presently to the Court, to do her duty to the Empress Eudoxia: she, seeing
her husbands Ring, doubted nothing, but came forthwith, as she was commanded;
where, whilst she was entertained by certain suborned women, whom the
Emperor had set on, he himself comes in place, and discloseth unto her his
whole love, which he said he could no longer repress, but must needs
satisfy, if not by fair means, at least by force and compulsion, and so he
constrained her to his lust. Her husband advertised hereof, intended to Rape,
li. 2. cap. 19.
revenge this injury upon the Emperor with his own hand: but seeing he could
not execute his purpose, whilst Actius, the Captain General of Valentinianus
army lived (a man greatly reverenced and feared for his mighty and famous
exploits, achieved in the wars against the Burgundians, Goths, and Attila) he
found means by suggesting a false accusation of treason against him (which
made him to be hated and suspected of the Emperor) to work his death. After
that Actius was thus traitorously and unworthily slain, the grief of infinite
numbers of people for him, in regard of his great virtues and good service
which he had done to the Commonwealth, gave Maximus ^it occasion to practice
the Emperors destruction, and that by this means: He set on two of Actius
most faithful followers, partly by laying before them the unworthy death of
their master, and partly by presents and rewards, to kill the Emperor; which
they performed as he was sitting on his seat of judgment in the sight of the
whole multitude; among whom there was not one found that would oppose himself
to Maximus in his defense, save one of his Eunuchs, who stepping betwixt to
save his life, lost his own: and the amazement of the whole City with this
sudden accident was so great, that Maximus having revenged himself thus upon
the Emperor, without much ado not only seized upon the Empire, but also upon
the Empress Eudoxia, and that against her will, to be his wife (for his own
dyed but a little before:) Now the Empress, not able to endure so vile an
indignity (being above measure passionate with grief and desire of revenge)
conspired his destruction on this manner: She sent secretly into Africa to
solicit and request most instantly Gensericus King of the Vandales, by prayers
mingled with presents, to come to deliver her and the City of Rome from the
cruel tyranny of Maximus, and to revenge the thrice unjust murder of her
husband Valentinian; adding moreover, that he was bound to do no less, in
consideration of the league of friendship which by oath was confirmed betwixt
them. Gensericus well pleased with these news, laid hold upon the offered
occasion, which long time he had more wished than hoped for, and forthwith
(being already tickled with hope of a great and inestimable booty) rigged his
ships and made ready his army by Sea, lanching forth with three hundred
thousand men, Vandales and Moors, and with this huge fleet made straight for
Rome. Maximus mean while mistrusting no such matter, especially from those
parts, was sore affrighted at the sudden brute of their coming; and not yet
understanding the full effect of the matter, perceiving the whole City to be
in dismay, and that not only the common people, but also the Nobility had for
fear forsaken their houses, and fled to the Mountains or Forests for safety:
he I say destitute of succor, took himself also to his heels, as his
surest refuge; but all could not serve to rid him from the just vengeance of
God prepared for him, for the murders which he had been cause of: for
certain Senators of Rome, his private and secret foes, Mandat. 6. lib. 2.
cap. 8.
finding him alone in the way of his flight, and remembering their old
quarrels, fell upon him suddenly and felled him down with stones, and after
mangled him in pieces, and threw his body into Tiber. Three days after arrived
Gensericus with all his forces, and entering Rome, found it naked of all
defense, and left to his own will and discretion: where (albeit he professed
himself to be a Christian) yet he showed more pride and cruelty, and less
pity than either Attila or Allaricus, two heathen Kings: For having given his
soldiers the pillage of the City, they not only spoiled all private houses,
but also the Temples and Monasteries in most cruel and riotous manner. All the
best and beautifullest things of the City they took away, and carried a huge
multitude of people prisoners to Africa, amongst the which was Eudoxia the
Empress (with her two daughters Eudocia and Placidia) who was the cause of all
this calamity; but her treachery saved not her self nor them from thraldom. And
thus was Rome sacked and destroyed more than ever it was before; insomuch, that
the Roman Empire could never Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
after recover it self, but decayed every day, and grew worse and worse. These
were the calamities which the adultery of Valeutinian brought upon himself and
many others, to his own destruction, and the utter ruin of the whole Empire.

Childericke King of France, son to Merouce, for laying siege to the chastity
Paulus Aemil. Nic. Gil.
of many great Ladies of his Realm, the Princes and Barons conspired against
him, and drove him to fly for his life.

Eleonor the wife to King Lewis of France (he that first cut through the Paulus
Aemil.
sea surrowes toward Jerusalem, against the Turks and Saracens) would needs
courageously follow her husband in that long and dangerous voyage; but how?
Marry, whilst he travailed night and day in peril of his life, she lay at
Antioch bathing her self in all delights, and that more licentiously than the
reputation or duty of a married woman required: wherefore being had in
suspicion, and evil reported of for her lewd behavior, it was thought meet
that she should be divorced from the King under pretense of consanguinity, to
the end she should not altogether be defamed.

The fair daughters of Philip the fair King of France escaped not at so
Fulgos. li. 6. c. 1.
good a rate: for the King as soon as he smelt out the haunt of their
unchastity, caused them to be apprehended and imprisoned presently: howbeit one
of them (namely, the Countess of Poictiers) her innocence being known, was
set at liberty, and the other two (to wit, the Queen of Navarre, and the wife
of John de le March) being found guilty by proof, were adjudged to perpetual
imprisonment: and the Adulterers (two brethren of the country of Anjou) with
whom these Ladies had often lain, were first cruelly flaine, and after hanged.

Charles, son of the aforesaid Philip the fair, had to wife the daughter of
Froiss. vol. 1. cap. 22.
the Earl of Artois, that also offended in the like case, and in recompense
received this dishonor and ignominy to be divorced, and put in prison, and to
see him married to another before her face.

In the reign of Charles the sixth there befell a notable and memorable Frois.
Vol. 3. cap. 45.
accident, which was this: one Jacques le Gris, of the Country of Alanson being
enamoured with a Lady no less fair than honorable, the wife of the Lord of
Carouge, came upon a day when he knew her husband to be from home, to her
house; and faining as if he had some secret message to unfold unto her on her
husbands behalf (for their familiarity was so great) Rape, lib. 2. cap. 19.
entered with her all alone into a most secret chamber, where as soon as he had
gotten her, he locked the door, and throwing himself upon her, forced her
unto his lust, and afterward saved himself by speedy flight. Her husband at
his return understanding the injury and wrong which was done him by this vile
miscreant, sought first to revenge himself by justice, and therefore put his
cause to be heard by the Parliament of Paris; where being debated, it could not
well be decided, because he wanted witnesses to convince the crime, except his
own wives words, which could not be accepted: so that the Court, to the end
that there might some end be made of their quarrel, ordained a combat betwixt
them; which was forthwith performed: for the two duellists entering the lists,
fell presently to strokes, and that so eagerly, that in short space the
quarrel was decided: the Lord of Carouge, husband of the wronged Lady,
remained conqueror, after he had slain his enemy that had wronged him so
wickedly and disloyally: the vanquished was forthwith delivered to the hangman
of Paris, who dragged him to mount Falcon, and there hanged him. Now albeit
this form and custom of deciding controversies has no ground nor warrant
either from humane or divine Law (God having ordained only an Oath to end
doubts, where proofs and witnesses fail) yet doubtless the Lord used this as
an instrument to bring the treacherous and cruel Adulterer to the deserved
punishment and shame, which by denial he thought to escape.

A certain Seneschall of Normandy perceiving the vicious and suspicious
behavior of his wife with the Steward of his house, watched them so Fulgos li.
6. c. 1.
narrowly, that he took them in bed together; he slew the Adulterer first, and
after his wife for not all her pitiful cryings for mercy, with innumerable
tears for this one fault, and holding up in her arms the children which she
had borne unto him, no nor her house and parentage, being sister to Lewis the
eleventh then King, could not withhold him from killing her with her companion:
Howbeit, King Lewis never made show of anger, or offense for her death.

M^ssel^na, the wife of Claudius the Emperor, was a woman of so notable
incontinency, that the would contend with the common harlots in filthy Lanq.
Chron.
pleasure: at last she fell in love with a fair young Gentleman called Silius,
and to obtain more commodiously her desire, she caused his wife Sillana to be
divorced; and notwithstanding she was wife to the Emperor then living, yet she
openly married him; for which cause, after great complaint made to the Emperor
by the Nobles, she was worthily put to death.

Abusahed King of Fez was with six of his children murdered at once by his
Secretary for his wives sake whom he had abused. And it is not long sithence
Paul. Iovius, Tom. 2. lib. 38. Sleid. lib. 10.
the two Cities Dalmendine and Delmedine were taken from the King of Fez, and
brought under the Portugals dominion, only for the ravishment of a woman, whom
the Governor violently took from her husband to abuse, and was slain for his
labor.

CHAP. XXIX. Other examples like unto the former.
MArie of Arragon, wife to Otho the third, was so unchaste and lascious a woman,
and withal barren (for they commonly Munst. Cosmog lib. 3.

Casp. Head. Mist. Ecclesiast.


go together) that she could never satisfy her unsatiable lust ^ she carried
about with her continually a young lecher in woman's clothes to attend upon her
person, with whom she daily committed filthiness: who being suspected, was in
the presence of many, untyred, and found to be a man; for which villainy he was
burnt to death. Howbeit the Empress, though pardoned for her fault, returned
to her old vomit, and continued her wanton traffic with more than either
desired or loved her company: at last she fell in love with the County of
Mutina, a gallant man in personage, and too honest to be allured with her
stale, though he was often solicited by her: wherefore like a Tvgre she accused
him to the Emperor (for extreme love converts to extreme hatred if it be
crossed of offering to ravish her against her will; for which cause the
Emperor Otho caused him to lose his head: but his wife being privy to the
innocence of her husband, traversed his cause, and required justice, that
though his life was lost, yet his reputation might be preserved: and to prove
his innocence, she miraculously handled Iron red with heat without any hurt;
which when the Emperor saw, searching out the cause very narrowly he found out
his wives villainy, and for her pains caused her to be burned at a stake, but
on the Earls wife he bestowed great rewards, even four Castles in recompense
of her husband, though no reward could countervaile that so great a loss.

Rodoaldus the eighth King of Lumbardy being taken in Adultery even in the
fact, by the husband of the Adulteress, was slain without delay. Anno Chron.
Philip. Melanct lib. 3.
659. In like sort, John Malatesta slew his wife and the Adulterer together,
when he took them amidst their embracements. So did one Lodowicke, steward of
Normandy, kill his wife Carlotta and her lover John Lavernus, as they were in
bed together.

Hedion in his Chronicle tells of a Doctor of the Law that loved his Proctors
wife, with whom as he acquainted himself over familiarly and unhonestly, Casp.
Head. part. 4.
both at her own house, when her husband was absent, and at a bath in an old
woman's house hard by, the Proctor watched their haunt so near, that he caught
them naked together in the bath, and so curried the lecherous Doctor with a
curry-combe, that he scraped out his eyes, and cut off his privy members; so
that within three days after he dyed: his wife he spared, because she was with
child, otherwise she should have tasted the same sauce.

Another story like unto this he tells of a Popish Priest, that never left
to lay siege to the chastity of an honest Matron, till she condescending to his
desire, brought him into the snare, and caused her husband to geld him. I would
to God that all that dishonor their profession by filthy actions might be
served after the same manner, that there might be fewer bastards and bauds and
common strumpets than there are now adays, and that since the fear of God is
extinguished in their souls, the fear and certainty of sudden judgments
might restrain them.

Wolfius Schrenk reported to Martin Luther, how in Vaitland four murders were
committed upon the occasion of one Adultery; for whilst the Adulteress
strumpet was banqueting with her lovers, her husband came in with a hunting
spear in his hand, and struck him through that sat next unto her, and then her
also; other two in the mean while leapt down stairs with fear and haste,
broke their arms and shortly after dyed.

A certain Cardinal committed daily Adultery with a man's wife, that Theatr.
histor.
winked and as it were subscribed unto it: wherefore her brother taking this
dishonor to his house in evil part, watched when the lecher had promised to
come, but upon occasion came not, and in the dark slew his sister and her
husband, supposing it to have been the Cardinal: but when he perceived his
error, he fled the country for fear of the Law: Howbeit, before his
departure he wrought such means, that whom he missed in his purpose of the
sword, him he murdered by poison. This judgment is not only for Adulterers,
but for Wittals also, that yield their consents to the dishonouring of their
own wives; a monstrous kind of creatures, and degenerate not only from the
law of humanity, but of nature also.

Martin Luther has left recorded in his writings many examples of judgments
on this sin, but especially upon Clergy men, whose profession as it requires a
more strict kind of conversation, so their sins and judgments were more
notorious, both in their own natures, and in the eye and opinion of the world,
some of which, as it is not amiss to insert in this place, so it is not
unnecessary to believe them, proceeding from the mouth of so worthy a witness.

There was (says he) a man of great authority and learning, that forsaking his
secular life, betook himself into the College of Priests (whether Luther in
Epist. consolat ad Lucum Cranach.
of devotion, or of hope of liberty to sin, let them judge that read this
history) this new adopted Priest fell in love with a Masons wife, whom he so
wooed, that he got his pleasure of her; and what fitter time but when Mass was
singing did he daily choose for the performing of his villainy? In this haunt he
persisted a long season, till the Mason finding him in bed with his wife, did
not summon him to law nor penance, but took a shorter course and cut his
throat.

Another Nobleman in Thuringa being taken in adultery, was murdered after this
strange fashion by the Adulteresses husband; he bound him Luther.
hand and foot and cast him into prison; and to quench his lust, seeing that
Ceres, that is, gluttony, is the fuel of Venus, that is, lust, denied him all
manner of sustenance, and the more to augment his pain, set hot dishes of
meat before him, that the smell and sight thereof might more provoke his
appetite, and the want thereof torment him more. In this torture the wretched
lecher abode so long, until he gnew off the flesh from his own shoulders, and
the eleventh day of his imprisonment ended his life. His punishment was most
horrible, and too too severe in respect of the inflicter, yet most just in
respect of God, whose custom is to proportion his judgments to the quality of
the sin that is committed. Luther affirms this to have happened in his
childhood, and that both the parties were known unto him by name, which for
honor and charity sake he would not discose.

There was another nobleman that so delighted in lust, and was so inordinate in
his desires, that he shamed not to say, that if his life of pleasure, Luther.
Mandat. 1. Atheism, Lib. 1. cap. 25.
and passing from harlot to harlot might endure ever, he would not care for
heaven or life eternal. What cursed madness and impiety is this? a man to be
so forgetful of his Maker and himself, that he preferred his whores before
his Savior, and his filthy pleasure before the grace of God? Does it not
deserve to be punished with Scorpions? Yes verily, as it was indeed; for the
polluted wretch dyed amongst his strumpets, being stricken with a sudden stroke
of Gods vengeance.

In the year 1505. a certain Bishop well seen in all learning and eloquence,
and especially skillful in languages, was notwithstanding so filthy in his
conversation, that he shamed not to defile his body and name with many
adulteries: but at length he was slain by a Cobbler, whose wife he had often
corrupted, being taken in bed with her, and so received a due reward of his
filthiness.

In the year of our Lord 778. Kenulphus King of the West Saxons in Britain,
as he usually haunted the company of a certain harlot which he Lanquet. Chr.
kept at Merton, was slain by one Clito the kinsmun of Sigebert that was late
King.

Sergus a King of Scotland was so foul a drunkard and glutton, and so
outragiously given to harlots, that he neglected his own wife, and drove The
same.
her to such penury, that she was feign to serve other noble-women for her
living; wherefore she murdered him in his bed, and after slew her self also.

Arichbertus eldest son unto Lotharius King of France, dyed even as he was
embracing his whores.

In sum to conclude this matter, our English Chronicles report, that in the
year of our Lord 349, there was so great a plenty of corn and fruit in
Britain, that the like had not been seen many years before: but this was the
cause of much idleness, gluttony, lechery, and other vices in the land: (For
usually case and prosperity are the nurses of all enormity:) but the Lord
requited this their riotous and incontinent life with so great a pestilence and
mortality, that the living scantly sufficed to bury the dead.

Petrarch makes mention of a certain Cardinal, that though he was Petrarch.
seventy years old, yet every night, would have a fresh whore, and to this end
had certain bauds purveyours and providers of his trash: but he dyed a
miserable and wretched death. And Martin Luther reported, that a bishop being a
common frequenter of the stews in Hidelberg, came to this mistrable end; the
boards of the chamber whither he used to enter went loosened, that as soon as
he came in he slipped through and broke his neck.

But above all, that which we find written in the second book of Fincelius
Job Fincel. Lib. 2.
is most strange and wonderful, of a priest in Albenthewer, a town near
adjoining to Gaunt in Flanders, that persuaded a young maid to reject and
disobey all her parents godly admonitions, and to become his concubine: when
she objected how vile a sin it was, and how contrary to the Law of God, he told
her, that by the authority of the Pope, he could dispense with any wickedness,
were it never so great, and further alleged the discommodities of marriage,
and the pleasure that would arise from that kind of life: in fine, he
conquered her virtuous purpose, and made her yield unto his filthy lust. But
when they had thus pampered their desires together a while, in came the devil,
and would needs conclude the play: for as they were banqueting with many such
like companions, he took her away from the Priests side, and notwithstanding
her pitiful crying and all their exorcising and conjuring, carried her quite
away, telling the Priest that very shortly he would, fetch him also, for he was
his own darling.

I may not here pass over in silence an Irish history, famous both for
Holinshed.
notorious villainy, and excellent in justice; wherein we may see by the
adultery of one filthy Friar occasion given not only of much bloodshed, but of
the ruin of a famous City, called Rosse, situate in Leinster. This City being
first an unwalled town, was (to prevent the sudden invasion of the Irish)
compassed about with a large and strong wall, by the advice and charges of one
Rose, a chaste widow and bountiful Gentlewoman: This Rose had issue three
sons, who being bolstered out by their mothers wealth and their own traffic,
made diverse prosperous voyages into far countries: but as one of the three
chapmen was employed in his traffic abroad, so the pretty poppet his wise
began to play the harlot at home, and that with none but a fat religious
cloysterer of the town: they wallowed so long in this stinking puddle, that
suspicion began to creep into men's brains, and from suspicion the matter was
so apparent, that it grew to plain proof: her unfortunate husband was no
sooner come home, but notice hereof was blown in his ears, so that with
grief and anger he grew (for such is the nature of jealous^e) almost stark
mad; and not only he, but the whole town took themselves as extremely wronged
by this shameful fact: whereupon diverse of them conspiring together, agreed
(as being a deed of charity) to grub away such wild shrubs from the town, and
so flocking together in the dead of the night to the Abbey, wherein this Fryet
was cloystered (the monument of which Abbey is yet to be seen at Rosse on the
South side) they undersparred the gates, and breaking open the doors, stabbed
the Adulterer, with the rest of the Covent, through with their weapons; where
they left them goaring in their blood, and gasping up their ghosts in their
couches: a cruel act, I must needs confess, in the executioners; who being
carried away with private revenge, had no measure in their cruelty; but yet a
just vengeance upon the executed, that harbored and maintained so wretched a
person: but secret and deep are the judgments of God, who punishes one sin
with another, and makes one wicked man a rod to plague another, and after
casts the rod also into the fire: for so did he here; stirring up the rest of
the Clergy to be a means to punish this cruelty: for when as these three
brethren not long after sped themselves into some far country to continue
their trade, the religious men being informed of their return homeward, every
night did not miss to set a lantorne on the top of a high rock (which was used
to be set upon the Hulk tower, a notable mark for Pilots, in directing them
which way to stern their Ships, and to eschew the danger of the rocks, which
are there very plentiful) and so by this practice these three passengers
bearing sail with a good wind, made right upon the lantorne, supposing it had
been the Hulk tower, and so ere they were aware their Ship was dashed upon the
rocks, and all the passengers over-whirled in the Sea. And thus was Adultery
punished with cruelty, and cruelty with treason: but see the end; upon this
there grew so great quarrels and discontentments between the townsmen and the
religious, the one cursing the other, that the estate of that flourishing town
was turned upside down, and from abundance of prosperity, quite exchanged to
extreme penury.

CHAP. XXX. More examples of the same argument.
I Cannot pass over in silence a history truly tragical, touching the death
of many men, who by reason of an Adultery slew one another in most strange and
cruel manner, and indeed so strangely, that (as far as I ever read or knew)
there was never the like particular deed heard of, wherein God more evidently
poured forth the stream of his displeasure, turning the courage and valor of
each part into rage and fury, to the end that by their own means he might be
revenged on them. In the Dukedom of Spaleto, which is the way from Ancona to
Rome (of the ancient Latins called Umbria) there were three brethren, who kept
in their possession three Cities of the said Dukedom, namely Faligno, Nocera,
and Trevio: the eldest of whom, whose surname was Nicholas, as he passed from
one town to the other, being at Nocera, lodged diverse times in the Castle in
the keepers and Captains house, whom he had there substituted to defend the
place with an ordinary band of soldiers. Now as he made his abode there a few
days, he grew to cast a more lascivious eye upon the Captains wife than was
meet, and from looking fell to lusting after her; in such sort, that in short
space he got very privy and familiar acquaintance with her, and oftentimes
secret and suspicious meetings: which being perceived by her husband, he after
watched so narrowly their haunts, that once he spyed them together without
being seen of them: nevertheless, digesting and swallowing up this sorrow with
silence, and without giving forth any tokens thereof, he consulted in himself
to revenge the injury by the death and rasing out, not only of the Adulterer,
but also of the whole race and fraternity. Now when he had hampered this
enterprise, and laid forth the plot thereof in his head, he dispatched
presently a messenger to the three Gentlemen brethren, to invite them against
the next day to the hunting of the fairest wild Bore that was this many a day
seen in the forests of Nocera. Seignior Nicholas failed not to come at the
time appointed, accompanied with Duke Camerino, who desired to be one of this
jolly crew: they supped in the town, but lodged in the castle, where being at
rest, about midnight the Captain rushed into his chamber with the greatest
part of his guard, and there handled Seignior Nicholas on this manner; he first
cut off his privy members, as being principal in the offense, then thrust him
through on both sides with a spear, next plucked out his heart, and lastly,
tore the rest of his body into a thousand pieces. As for the Duke Camerino, he
shut him up in a deep and dark dungeon with all the strangers of his retinue.
At day break another of the brethren called Caesar, that lay that night in the
town, was sent for to come and speak with his brother, and as soon as he was
entered into the Court of the Castle, seven or eight of the guard bound him and
his followers, and carried him into the chamber where his dead brother lay
chopped as small as flesh to the pot, and there murdered him also. Conrade the
third brother, being by reason of a Marriage absent from this feast, when he
received the report of these pitiful news, gathered together a band of men
from all quarters, and with them (assisted with the friends and allies of the
Duke Camerino then prisoner) laid siege to the Castle, they battered the
walls, made a breach, and gave the assault of entrance, and were manfully
resisted five hours long, till the defendants being but thirty or forty men at
the most, not able to stand any longer in defense, were forced to retire and
lay open way of entrance to the enemy: then began a most horrible butchery of
men; for Conrade, having won the fort, first hewed them in pieces that stood
in resistance, then finding the Captains father, slew him, and cast him
piece-meale to the dogs; some he tied to the tails of wild horses, to be
drawn over hedges, ditches, thorns, and briars; others he pinched with hot
Irons, and so burnt them to death: which when the Captain from the top of the
dungeon where he had saved himself, beheld, he took his wife whom he held
there prisoner, and binding her hand and foot, threw her headlong from the top
of the tower upon the pavement: which the soldiers perceiving, put fire to the
tower, so that he was constrained through heat and smoke (himself, his
brother, and his little child) to sally down the same way which he had taught
his wife a little before to go, and so all three broke their necks: their
carcasses were cast out to be meat for Wolves, as unworthy of humane
sepulture. And this was the catastrophe of that woeful tragedy, where by the
occasion of one Adultery (so heavy is the curse of God upon that sin) a number
of men came to their ends.

In the histories of our time we find recorded a fearful story of many
murders springing from one Adultery, together with the hand of God upon the
Adulterers themselves; the story is this: an Advocate of Grass in Provence,
called Tolonio, that having the managing of the affairs of the Seignior of
Chabrye, and by that means familiar access to him and his Lady, by this
familiarity allured the Lady, who was then forty years old, and had four
children, to his filthy lust: and being plunged into this gulf, Satan did
thrust them headlong into others: for first they practiced and performed the
massacre of her husband, walking in his Warren, by two murderers suborned to
that end: and secondly, when her eldest son seemed to dislike her wicked
behavior with the Advocate, they also wrought his death, by loosing certain
boords in a gallery, where he used ordinarily to walk, so that as soon as he
set his foot on these disjoynted boords, he fell down headlong, and had his
brains beaten out. And thirdly, when her younger son showed his discontent to
their brutish conversation, yet nothing misdoubted them to be guilty of the
former parricides, these wicked wretches resolved to prevent him also, lest he
should interrupt their resolved filthiness. Wherefore they hired a murderer to
make him away; who watching his opportunity, thrust him headlong down a steep
rock, so that he was at the bottom sooner slain then he felt the murderer.
After all this, these two miserable wretches, finding that they were observed
by all men, and noted, did practice to marry together: but there was one
betwixt them, namely the Advocates wife; wherefore they conspired her death to
make up the mess, and indeed the villainous lecher, her husband, lying one
night by her, strangled her with a napkin; and then cried out with a loud voice
for help, pretending that a catarre had suffocated her in her sleep. But for
all his cunning, the father of his wife mistrusted her death to be violent, and
caused him to be strictly examined upon the same; who presently by silence
bewrayed his guilty conscience, and after without torture confessed both his
fact, and all the murders before mentioned: for which he was condemned to be
quartered alive in the market place of Grass, where he dwelled, and where his
murders were committed. As for that cruel Lady his associate, because she
could not be found, being fled the country, she was condemned by contempt, and
executed in picture. But though she escaped the hand of justice among men, yet
the hand of God pursued her: for flying to Genoa, she was first robbed by a
servant of all she had, and after being constrained to serve an old widow,
and to teach her daughters, being tormented with the sting of her own
conscience, within short space dyed in great misery.

In the time of Pope Stephen the eighth, there was a varlet Priest that was
Chaplain in the house of a Marquess of Italy, who although he was very Luth.
prand. lib. 5. cap. 15.
misshapen and evil favored, yet was entertained of the Lady Marquess his
mistress to her bed, and made her paramour: upon a night as he was going to
lie with her according to his wont (his Lord being from home) behold a dog
barked so fiercely, leaping and biting at him, that all the servants of the
house being awaked ran thitherward, and finding this gallant in the snare, took
him, and for all his bauld crown stripped him naked, and cut off clean his
privy and adulterous parts: and thus was this lecherous Priest served.

Pope John the thirteenth, a man as of wicked conversation in all things* Luth.
prand. lib. 6. cap. 6.
so especially abominable in whoredoms and adultery, which good conditions
whilst he pursued, he was one day taken tardy in the plain fields, whither he
went to disport himself; for he was found in the act of adultery, and slain
forthwith: and these are the godly fruits of those single life-lovers, to whom
the use of marriage is counted unlawful, and therefore forbidden, but Adultery
not once prohibited nor disallowed.

CHAP. XXXI. Of such as are divorced without cause:
BY these and such like judgments, it pleases God to make known unto men how
much he desires to have the estate of marriage maintained and preserved in the
integrity, and how much every one ought to take heed how to deprave or corrupt
the same: now then to proceed. If it be a sin to take away, ravish, or entice
to folly another man's wife, shall we not think it an equal sin for a husband
to forsake his wife, and cast her off to take another, she having not
disanulled and cancelled the bond of marriage by adultery? Yes verily; for as
concerning the permission of divorce to the Israelites under the law, our
Savior himself expounds the meaning and intent thereof in the Gospel, to
be nothing else Matt. 19.
but a toleration for the hardness and stubbornness of their hearts, and not
a constitution from the beginning; upon which occasion speaking of marriage,
and declaring the right and strength of the same; he says, That whosoever
puts away his wife, except it be for adultery, and marries another,
commits adultery; and he that marries her that is put away, commits
adultery also. All which notwithstanding the great men of this world let loose
themselves to this sin too licentiously, as it appears by many examples: as
of Antiochus Theos, son of Antiochus Soter, King of Syria, who to the end to
go with Ptolomie Philadelphus, King of Egypt, and marry his daughter
Bernice, cast off his wife Laodicea, that had borne him children, and took
Bernice to be his wife: but ere long he rejected her also, and betrayed her to
her enemies (namely his son Callinicus) who slew her with one of her sons, and
all that belonged unto her: and then he took again his old wife, for which
cause Ptolemie Euergetes (son to Philadelphus) renewed war upon him.

Herod the Tetrarch was so bewitched with the love of Herodias his brother
Joseph. of the Jewish antiquity, lib. 18. cap. 7. 9.
Philips wife, that, to the end he might enjoy her, he disclaimed his lawful
wife, and sent her home to her father King Aretas; who being touched and netled
with this indignity and disgrace, sought to revenge himself by arms: and
indeed made so hot war upon him, and charged his army so furiously, that it was
discomfited by him: after which shameful loss, he was by the Emperor
Caligula's commandment banished to Lions, there to end the residue of his
days.

Among the Romans Marcus Antonius was noted for the most dissolute and
impudent in this case of divorce, for albeit that in the beginning of his
Plutarch.
triumvirship he forsook his first wife to marry Octavius his sister, yet he
proceeded further, not content herewith, but must needs forsake her also, to be
with Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt, from whence sprung out many great evils,
which at length fell upon his own head, to his final ruin and destruction:
for when he saw himself in such straits, that no means could be found to
resist Octavius, be sheathed with his own hands his sword into his bowels,
when all his servants being requested, refused to perform the same; and being
thus wounded, he fell upon a little bed, entreating those that were present, to
make an end of his days; but they all fled and left him in the chamber crying
and tormenting himself, until such time that he was conveyed to the
monument wherein Cleopatra was enclosed, that he might die there. Cleopatra
seeing this pitiful spectacle, all amassed let down chains and cords from
the high window, and with the help of her two maids drew him up into the
monument, uniting their forces, and doing what they could to get his poor
carcass, though by a shameful and undecent manner, for the gate was locked
and might not be opened; and it was a lamentable sight to see his poor body
all besmeared with blood, and breathing now his last blast (for he dyed as
soon as he came to the top) to be drawn up on that cruel fashion. As for
Cleopatra, who by her flattering allurements ravished the heart of this
miserable man, and was cause of his second divorce, she played her true part
also in this woeful tragedy, and as she partaked of the sin, so she did of the
punishment: For after she saw her self past hope of help, and her sweetheart
dead, she beat her own breasts, and tormented her self so much with sorrow,
that her bosom was bruised, and half murdered with her blows, and her body
in many places exulcerate with inflammations: she pulled off her hair, rent her
face with her nails, and altogether infrensied with grief, melancholy, and
distress, was found fresh dead, with her two maids lying at her f^^t: and this
was the miserable end of those two, who for enjoying of a few foolish and
cursed pleasures together, received in exchange infinite torments and
vexations; and at length, unhappy deaths together in one and the same place:
verifying the old proverb, For one pleasure a thousand dolours.

Charles the eighth, King of France, after he had been long time married to the
daughter of the King of the Romans, sister to the Archduke of Austria, Philip.
de com.
was so evil advised as to return her home again upon no other occasion but
to marry the Duchess of Britain, the sole heir to her fathers Dukedom:
wherein he doubly injured his father in law the Roman King; for he did not
only reject his daughter, but also deprived him of his wife the Duchess of
Britain, whom by his substitute (according to the manner of great Princes) he
had first espoused. Bembus in his Venetian history Bembus.
handling this story, somewhat mollifieth the fault, when he says that the
Roman Kings daughter was never touched by King Charles in the way of marriage
all the while she was there, by reason of her unripe and overyoung years.
After a while, after this new married King had given a hot alarm to all Italy,
and conquered the Realm of Naples; as the Venetians were deliberating to take
the matter in hand of themselves, and to resist him, Maximilian the Roman King
solicited them in the same, and thrust them forward, as well that he might
confederate himself with the Duke of Milan, as that he might revenge the
injury touching his repelled daughter: so that by this means the French K. was
fore troubled at his return, having to withstand him all the Venetian forces,
with the most part of the Potentates of Italy: notwithstanding he broke
through them all, after he had put the Venetians to the worst: but being
returned after this victorious and Phil. de Com.
triumphant voyage, it happened that one day as he led the Queen to the Castle
of Amboise, to see some some sport at Tenise, he stroke his forehead against
the upper door-poste of the gallery, as he went in, that he fell presently to
the ground speechless, and died incontinently in the place, Surs^vil.
from whence (though the filthiest and sluttishest place about the Castle) they
removed not his body, but laid it on a bed of straw to the view of the world
from two of the clock in the afternoon till eleven at midnight, and this good
success followed at last his so much desired divorce.

CHAP. XXVII. Of those that either cause or authorize unlawful Divorcements.
ALthough the Commandment of our Savior Christ be very plain and manifest,
That man should not separate Matthew. 19.
those whom God has joined together, yet there are some so void of
understanding and judgment, that they make no conscience to dissolve those
that by the bond of marriage are united: Of which number was Sampsons father in
Law, who took his daughter, first Judges 15.
given in marriage to Sampson, and gave her to another; without any other
reason, save that he suspected that Sampson loved her not. But what got he by
it? Marry this; the Philistims provoked against him, consumed him and his
daughter with fire, because that by the means of his injury Sampson had burned
their corn, their vineyards and their olive trees.

After the same sort dealt Saul with David, when he gave him his daughter 1 Samuel 25.
Michol to Wife, and afterward in despite and hatred of him took her away
again, and bestowed her upon another: wherein, as in many other things, he
showed himself a wicked and profane man, and was worthily punished therefore,
as has been before declared.

Hugh Spencer, one of King Edward of Englands chiefest favorites, insomuch
Frois. Vol. 1.
that his ear and heart was at his pleasure, was he that first persuaded the
King to forsake and repudiate the Queen his Wife (daughter to Philip the Fair,
King of France) upon no other occasion, but only to satisfy his own
appetite, and the better to follow his delights: And thus by this means she
was chased out of England, and driven to retire to King Charles her brother;
where hoping to find rest and refuge, she was deceived: for what by the crafts
and practices of the English, and what by the Popes authority (who thrust
himself into this action, as his custom is) she was constrained to dislodge
her self, and to change her country very speedily: wherefore from thence she
went to crave succor of the County of Henault, who furnished her with certain
forces, and sent her toward England: where being arrived, and finding the
people generally at her command, and ready to do her service, she set upon her
enemy Hugh Spencer, took him prisoner, and put him to a shameful death, as he
well deserved: for he was also the causer of the deaths of many of the Nobles
of the Realm: therefore he was drawn through the streets of Hereford upon an
hurdle, and after his privy members, his heart, and head, were cut off, his
four quarters were exalted in four several places, to the view of the world.

Now if these be found guilty, that either directly make, or indirectly
Guicciar. l. 4.
procure divorcements, shall we accuse them that allow and authorize the same,
without lawful and just occasion? No verily, no though they be Popes that take
it upon them: as we read Pope Alexander the sixth did, who for the advancement
of his haughty desires, to gratify and flatter, Lewis the twelfth, King of
France, sent him by his son a dispensation to put away his Wife, daughter to
King Lewis the eleventh, because she was barren and counterfeit, and to
recontract Anne of Bretaigne, the widow of Charles the eighth lately deceased.
But herein, though barrenness of the former was pretended, yet the Duchy of
the later was aimed at, which before this time he could never attain unto. But
of what force and virtue this dispensation by right was, or at least ought to
be, it is easy to perceive, seeing it is not only contrary to the words of
the Gospel, Matthew. 19. but also to their own decrees, secund. part. quest. 7.
Hi qui matrimonium: where in is imported, that marriage ought not to be
infringed for any default or imperfection, no not of nature. But Popes may maim
and clip both the Word of God and all other writings, and do what soever
themselves likes, be it good or bad.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Incestuous persons.
ALthough Incest be a wicked and abominable sin, and forbidden both by the Law
of God and man, in so much that the very heathen held it in detestation, yet
are there some so inordinately vicious and dissolute, that they blush not once
to pollute themselves with this filthiness, Reuben the Patriarch was one of
this Genesis 35.
vile crew, that shamed not to defile himself with Bilha his fathers
concubine; but he was cursed for his labor: for whereas by right of eldership
and birth he ought to have had a certain prerogative and authority over his
brethren, his excellency shed it self Genesis 49.
like water, and he was surpassed by his brethren both in increase of progeny
and renown. Ammon one of King David's sons was so strongly 2 Samuel 13.
enchanted with the love of his sister Thamar, that to the end to fulfill his
lust, he traitorously forced her to his will: but Absalom her natural brother
(hunting for opportunity of revenge for this indignity toward his sister)
Rape. Lib. 2. cap. 21.
invited him two years after to a banquet with his other brethren, and after
the same, caused his men to murder him for a farewell.

The same Absalom that slew Amnon for Incest with his sister, committed
himself incest with his fathers concubines, moved thereto by the wicked 2 Samuel
16.
counsel of Achitophel, that advised him to that infamous deed of defiling his
fathers bed: but it was the forerunner of his overthrow, as we have already
heard.

Diverse of the Roman Empetours were so villainous and wretched, as to Suct.
Lamprid.
make no bones of this sin with their own sisters, as Caligula, Antonius, and
Commodus: and some with their mothers, as Nero, so much was he given over and
transported to all licentiousness.

Plutarch tells us of one Cyanippus, that being overcome with wine, defloured
Oros. l. 7. c. 4.
his own daughter Cyane, but he was slain of her for his labor. Neither do I
think it so unnatural a part for her to kill her father, as in him to commit
incest with his own daughter: for the Oracle lessened, or rather approved her
fault, when it abhorred and chastened his crime: for when Syracusa was
grievously infected with the pestilence, it was pronounced by the Oracle, That
the plague should continue till the wicked person was sacrificed: which dark
speech when no man knew, Cyane haled her father by the head to the Altar;
telling them, that he was that wicked person pointed at by the Oracle, and
there sacrificed him with her own hands, killing her self also with the same
knife, that her innocence might be witnessed even by her blood. Thus it pleased
God even among the idolatrous heathen, to execute justice and judgment upon
the earth, though by the means of the devil himself, who is the author of
all such villainy.

Valeria Thusculana was in love with her own father, and under color of
another maid got to lie with him: which as soon as he understood, he slew
Plutarch.
himself in detestation of his own ignorant abomination and wickedness:
nay, so monstrous and horrible is this sin, even in the sight of man, that
Nausimenes (a woman of Athens) taking her own son and daughter together,
Valerius.
was so amazed and grieved therewith, that she never spoke word after that
time, but remained dumb all the rest of her life time: as for the incestors
themselves, they lived not, but became murderers of their own lives.

Papyrius a Roman, got with child his own sister Canusia: which when their
father understood, he sent each of them a sword, wherewith they slew themselves.

But above all, the vengeance of God is most apparent in the punishment Zodar.
lib. 3.
of Heraclius the Emperor, who to his notorious wickednesses, heresies,
persecutions, and paganism, he added this villainy, to defile carnally his
Paul. Diac. l. 18
own sister; so to his notorious punishments (the Sarasins sword, dropsy, and
the ruin of the Empire) the Lord added this infamous and cruel judgment,
that he could not give passage to his urine, but it would fly into his face,
had not a pentise been applied to his belly to beat it downward. And this last
plague was proper to his last sin; wherein the very member which he had abused,
sought revenge of him that had abused it; for that he had confounded nature,
and most wickedly sinned against his own flesh.

Agathias writing of the manners of the Persians, reports, That certain
Agathias.
Philosophers coming out of Egypt into Greece, where they had seen all manner
of unnatural mixtures, found the carkase of a man without sepulcher; which
when in charity they buried, the next day it was found unburied again: and as
they went about to bury it the second time, a spirit appeared unto them, and
forbad them to do it; saying, that it was unworthy that honor, seeing that
when it lived he had committed incest with his own mother. A notable story,
showing that the very earth abhors this monstrous confusion of nature: the
truth whereof let it lie upon the Authors credit.

Most abominable was the incest of Artaxerxes King of Persia; for first he
took to himself Aspasia his brother Cyrus concubine, having overcome Herodot.
lib. 9.
him in war; and afterward gave the same Aspasia to his own son Darius to
wife; from whom, after carnal knowledge, he took her again, committing
incest upon incest, and that most unnaturally: but mark how the Lord punished
all this; first, Darius his eldest son was put to death for treason; then Othus
(succeeding in the inheritance) slew Arsame another of his brethren; and albeit
Artaxerxes himself dyed without note of judgment, yet his seed after him was
punished for his offense; for so miserable a calamity pursued them all, that in
the second generation not one was left to sit upon his throne.

Now to teach us how execrable and monstrous this kind of sin is, and how much
to be abhorred of all men, the example of a bruit beast may stand in stead of a
lesson for us; it being so worthy of remembrance, that I thought meet to make
rehearsal of it in this place. It is reported by Varro Varro.
a learned and grave Writer (whom S. Augustine often commends in his Lib. 2.
de Rerustica, cop. 7.
book de Civitate Dei) of a certain horse which by no means could be
brought to cover a mare that was his damme, until by hiding her head they
beguiled his senses: but after when he perceived their guile, and knew his
damme being uncovered, he ran so furiously upon the keeper with his teeth, that
incontinently he tore him in pieces. Truly a miraculous thing, and no doubt
divinely caused, to reprove the enormous and too unruly lusts of men.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of effeminate persons, Sodomites, and other such like Monsters.
SArdanapalus King of Assyria was so lascivious and effeminate, that to the end
to set forth his beauty, he shamed not to Frog. lib. 1.
paint his face with ointments, and to attire his body with the habits and
Ornaments of women, and on that manner Cic. lib. 5. Tusc. quest.
to sit and lie continually among whores, and with them to commit all manner of
filthiness and villainy: wherefore being thought unworthy to bear rule over
men, first Arbaces his lieutenant rebelled; then the Medes and Baby lonians
revolted, and jointly made war upon him, till they vanquished and put him to
flight: and in his flight he returned to a tower in his palace, which (moved
with grief and despair) he set on fire, and was consumed therein.

Such like was the impudent lasciviousness of two unworthy Emperors, Commodus
and Heliogabolus, who laying aside all Imperial gravity, showed Lamprid.
themselves oftentimes publicly in woman's attire; an act as in nature
monstrous, so very dishonest and ignominious: but like as these cursed monsters
ran too much out of frame in their unbridled lusts and affections, so there
wanted not many that hastened and emboldened themselves to conspire their
destruction, as unworthy in their judgments to enjoy the benefit of this
light: wherefore to one of them poison was ministered, and when that would take
no effect, strangling came in the room thereof, and brought him to his end*
the other was slain in a jakes where he hid himself, and his body (drawn
like carrion through the streets) found no better sepulcher then the dunghill.

Touching those abominable wretches of Sodom and Gomorrah which Genesis 19.
gave themselves over with all violence, and without all shame and measure, to
their infamous lusts, polluting their bodies with unnatural sins, God sent
upon them an unnatural rain, not of water, but of fire and brimstone, to
burn and consume them, that were so hot and fervent in their cursed vices: so
that they were quite rooted and raked out of the earth, and their Cities and
habitations destroyed, yea and the very soil that bore them, made desolate and
fruitless; and all this by fire, whose smoke ascended like the smoke of a
furnace: yea and in sign of a further curse for to be a witness and a mark
of this terrible judgment, the earth and face of that country continues
still parched and withered: and (as Josephus says) whereas before it was a
most plentiful and fertile soil, and as it were an earthly paradise, bedecked
with five gallant Cities; now it lies desert, unhabitable, and barren,
yielding fruit in show, but such as being touched, turns to cinders. In a
word, the wrath of God is so notoriously and fearfully manifested therein,
that when the holy Ghost would strike a terror into the most wicked, he
threateneth them with this like punishment, saying:

The Lord will rain upon each wicked one, Psalm. 11. 6.
Fire, snares, and brimstone, for their portion.
Howbeit this makes not but that still there are too many such monsters in the
World, so mightily is it corrupted and depraved: neither is it any marvel,
seeing that diverse Bishops of Rome, that take upon them to be Christ's Vicars,
and Peter's successors, are infected with this filthy contagion: As namely,
Pope Julius the third, whose custom was to promote none to Ecclesiastical
livings save only his buggerers: Amongst whom was one Innocent, whom this holy
father (contrary to the Suffrages of the whole College) would needs make
Cardinal: nay, the unsatiable and monstrous lust of this beastly and stinking
goat was so extraordinary, that he could not abstain from many Cardinals
themselves. John de la Casae, a Florentine by birth, and by office Archbishop
of Benevento, and Deane of his Apostaticall chamber, was his Legate and
Intelligencer in all the Venetian Seigniories* a man equal, or rather worse
then himself; and such a one, as whose memory ought to be accursed of all
posterity, for that detestable book which he composed in commendation and
praise of Sodomie; and was so shameless, nay rather possessed with some
devilish and unclean spirit, as to divulgate it to the view of the world.
Here you may see (poor souls) the holiness of those whom you so much
reverence, and upon whom you build your belief and religion: you see their
brave and excellent virtues, and of what esteem their laws and ordinances
ought to be amongst you. Now touching the end that this holy father made, it is
declared in the former book among the rank of Atheists, where we placed him.
And albeit that he and such like villains please their own humors with their
abominations, and approve and clear themselves therein, yet are they rewarded
by death, not only by the law of God, but also by the law of Iulia. Levit. 20.


When Charlemaigne reigned in France, there happened a most notable judgment
of God upon the Monks of S. Martin in Tours, for their disordinate lusts: they
were men whose food was too much and dainty, whose case was too easy, and
whose pleasures were too immoderate, being altogether addicted to pastimes and
merriments: in their apparel they went clad in silk like great Lords; and (as
Nichol. Gill. in his first Volume of Nic. Gil. Vol. 1.
French Chronicles says) their shoes were gilt over with Gold, so great was
the super fluity of their riches and pride: in sum, their whole life was
luxurious and infamous: for which cause there came forth a destroying Angel
from the Lord (by the report of Budes the Abbot of Clugnie) and slew them all
in one night, as the first born of Egypt were slain, save one only person
that was preserved, as Lot in Sodom was preserved. This strange accident moved
Charlemaigne to appoint a brotherhood of Canons to be in their room, though
little better, and as little profitable to their Commonwealth as the former.

It is not for nothing that the law of God forbids to lie with a beast, and
denounces death against them that commit this foul sin: for there have been
such monsters in the world at some times, as we read in Calius Levit. 18.
and Volaterranus, of one Crathes a shepherd, that accompanied carnally Exodus
22. Levit. 20. Deuteronomy. 27.
with a she Goat; but the Buck finding him sleeping, offended and provoked
with this strange action, ran at him so furiously with his horns, that he left
him dead upon the ground. God that opened an Asses mouth to reprove the
madness of the false Prophet Balaam, and sent Lions to kill the strange
inhabitants of Samaria, employed also this Buck about his service in executing
just vengeance upon a wicked varlet.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the wonderful evil that arises from this greediness of lust.
IT is to good reason, that Scripture forbids us to abstain 1 John 2.
from the lust of the flesh and the eyes, which is of the world and the
corruption of man's own nature; for so much as by it we are drawn to evil, it
being as it were a corrupt root which sends forth most bitter, sour, and
rotten fruit and this happens not only when the goods and riches of James 1.
the world are in quest, but also when a man hunteth after dishonest and
unchaste delights: this concupiscence is it that brings forth whoredoms,
adulteries, and many other such sins, whereout spring forth oftentimes floods
of mischiefs, and that diverse times by the self-will and inordinate desire of
private and particular persons: what did the lawless lust of Potiphars Wife
bring upon Joseph? Was not his life endangered, and his body Genesis 29.
kept in close prison, where he cooled his feet two years or more?

We have a most notable example of the miserable end of a certain woman, with
the sacking and destruction of a whole City, and all caused by her intemperance
and unbridled lust.

About the time that the Emperor Phocas was slain by Priscus, one Gysulphus
Sabel.
(Governor and Chieftain of a Country in Lumbardy) going out in defense of
his Country against the Bavarians (which were certain relics of the Hunnes)
gave them battle, and lost the field and his life withal: Now the Conquerours
(pursuing their victory) laid siege to the chief City of his Province, where
Romilda his Wife made her abode; who viewing one day from the walls the young
and fair King, with yellow curled locks galloping about the City, fell
presently so extremely in love with him, that her mind ran of nothing but
satisfying her greedy and new conceived lust: wherefore (burying in oblivion
the love of her late husband, with her young infants yet living, and her
Country, and preferring her own lust before them all) she sent secretly unto
him this message, That if he would promise to marry her, she would deliver up
the City into his hands: he, well pleased with this gentle offer (through a
desire of obtaining the City, which without great bloodshed and loss of men he
could not otherwise compass) accepted of it, and was received upon this
condition, within the walls: and lest he should seem too perfidious, he
performed his promise of marriage, and made her his wife for that one night;
but soon after (in scorn and disdain) he gave her up to twelve of his
strongest lechers, to glut her unquenchable fire: and finally nailed her on a
gibbet, for a final reward of her tre^cherous and boundless lust. Mark well
the misery whereinto this wretched woman threw her self, and not only her
self, but a whole City also, by her boiling concupiscence, which so dazzled her
understanding, that she could not consider how undecent it was, dishonest, and
inconvenient, for a woman to offer her self, nay to solicit a man that was an
enemy, a stranger, and one that she had never seen before, to her bed, and
that to the utter undoing of her self and all hers. But even thus, many more
(whose hearts are passionate with love) are blindfolded after the same sort
(like as poetical Cupid is fained to be) that not knowing what they take in
hand, they fall headlong into destruction ere they be aware. Let us then be
here advertised to pray unto God that he would purify our drossie hearts, and
divert our wandering eyes from beholding vanity, to be seduced thereby.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of unlawful gestures, Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Dancing, and other such like dissoluteness.
LIke as if we would carry our selves chastely and uprightly before God, it
behooves us to avoid all filthiness and adultery, so we must abstain from
uncivil and dishonest gestures, which are (as it were) badges of
concupiscence, and coals to set lust on fire, and instruments to injure others
withal. From hence it was, that Pompey caused one of his soldiers Sabel.
eyes to be put out in Spain, for thrusting his hand under a woman's garment
that was a Spaniard: and for the same or like offense did Sertorius command a
footman of his band to be cut in pieces. O that we had in these days such
minded captains, that would sharply repress the wrongs and ravishments which
are so common and usual amongst men of war at this day, and so uncontrolled!
they would not then doubtless be so rise and common as in these days they are.

Kissing is no less to be eschewed than the former, if it be not betwixt those
that are tied together by some bond of kindred or affinity, as it was by
ancient custom of the Medes and Persians, and Romans also; according to the
report of Plutarch and Seneca: and that which is more, Tiberius Caesar forbad
the often and daily practice thereof in that kind, as a thing not Suet.
to be freqented, but rather utterly abhorred, though it be amongst kinsfolks
themselves. It was esteemed an indignity among the Graecians, to kiss any maid
that was not in blood or assinity allied unto them; as it manifestly appears
by the earnest suit and request of the wife of Pisistratus the Tyran of Athens,
to put to death a young man for kissing her daughter in Valor. li. 1. c. 5.
the streets, as he met her, although it was nothing but love that moved him
thereto. Saint Augustine also affirms, That he which wantonly kisseth a De
civitat. Dei lib. 21. cap. 11.
woman that is not his wife, deserves the whip. It is true, that the holy
Scripture often mentions kissing, but either betwixt father and child, or
brethren or kinsfolks, or at least in a manner of salutation betwixt one
another Genesis 27. 45.
of acquaintance, according to the custom of the people of God* and 2 Samuel 20.
9.
sometimes also it is mentioned as a token of honor and reverence, which the
subject performs to his superior in this action. In the former ages 1 Samuel
10.
Christians used to kiss also; but so, that it was ever betwixt parties of
acquaintance; and in such sort, that by this manner of greeting they testified
to each other their true and sincere charity, peace, and union of heart and
soul in the Lord. Such chearings and loving embracings were pure and Just.
Apolog. 2. Tertull.
holy, not lascivious and wanton, like the kisses of profane and leacherous
wretches and strumpets, whereof Solomon makes mention.

Furthermore, every man ought to shun all means and occasions which Prove. 7.
13.
may induce or entice them to uncleanenesse; and amongst the rest especially
Idleness, which cannot choose but be as it were a wide door and passage for
many vices to enter by, as by experience we see in those that occupy themselves
about no good nor profitable exercises, but mispend their time in trifling and
doing nothing, and their wits either upon vain and foolish conceit to the hurt
of others; or upon lascivious and unchaste thoughts, to their own overthrow;
whereas on the contrary, to them that are well employed either in body or
mind, no such thing betideth; wherefore we ought to be here advertised every
one of us to apply our selves to some honest and seemly trade, answerable to
our diverse and several estates and conditions, and not to suffer our selves to
be overgrowne with Idleness, lest thereby we fall into mischief; for whom the
adversary (that malicious and wicked one) finds in that case, he knows well
how to fit them to his purpose, and to set them about filthy and pernicious
services.

Next to idleness, the too much pampering the body with dainty and much food
is to be eschewed: for like as a fat and well fed horse winceth and kicketh
against his rider, so the pampered flesh rebelleth against God and a man's own
self. This fullness of bread, and abundance of ^^shly delights, was the cause
of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah: and therefore our Savior to good
purpose warns us, to take heed to our selves, that we Ey^ch. 16. ^^.
be not oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness: and the Apostle, to take no
thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but to walk honestly, not
Luke 21. 34.

Romans 13. 13.

Ephesians. 5.


being given to gluttony and drunkenness, chambering, and wantonness: and in
another place, not to be drunk with wine, wherein is excess: for besides the
loss of time and mispence of goods, the grievous diseases and pangs of the
body, and dulling and besotting of the wit, which spring from intemperance,
many other great evils depend and wait thereon; as whoredoms, adulteries,
uncleanness, quarrels, debates, murders, with many other such like disorders
and mischiefs.

Noah, that holy Patriarch, by drinking too much wine, not only discovered Genesis
9.
his own shame, but also was the occasion of that cruel curse which the Lord
sent upon the posterity of Cham, which even to this day lies heavy upon them.

Lot, though he hated the sin of Sodom, and escaped the punishment of Genesis 19.
Sodom, yet being overcome with the wine of the mountains, he committed
incest with his own daughters, and made a new Sodom of his own family.

Balthazar, rioting and revelling amongst his pots, had the end both of life
and kingdom denounced against him, by a bodilesse handwriting upon the Dan. 5.
wall, the Lords decree. Whilst Holofernes besotted his senses with excess
Judith. 13.
of wine and good cheer, Judith found means to cut off his head.

The Emperors Septimius Severus, and Iovinianus, dyed with eating and drinking
too much.

Likewise a certain African called Donitius, overcharged his stomach Eusebius.
with so much food at supper, that he dyed therewith.

Gregory of Tours reports of Childericke a Saxon, that glutted himself so
full of meat and drink over night, that in the morning he was found choked in
his bed.

In our memory there was a Priest in Rovergne, near Milan, that (dining with a
rich farmer for his years dinner) cheared himself so well, and filled his
belly so full, that it burst in two, and he dyed suddenly.

Alexander the great having invited many of his favorites and captains to
supper, propounded a crown in reward to him that should drink most: Plutarch.
now the greatest drinker swallowed up four steanes of wine, and won the
prize, being in value worth six hundred crowns; but lost his life (a jewel of
greater worth) for he survived not three days after the vile excess: besides,
the rest that strove with him in this goodly conflict of carousing, one and
forty of them dyed to bear him company.

The same Alexander was himself subject to wine, and so distempered diverse
times therewith, that he often slew his friends at the table in his
drunkenness, whom in sobriety he loved dearest.

Plutarch tells us of Armitus and Ciranippus, two Syracusians, that being
Incest, lib. 2. cap. 31.
drunk with wine, committed incest with their own daughters.

Cleomenes, King of Lacedemonia, being disposed to carouse after the manner of
the Scythians, drank so much, that he became, and continued ever after,
senseless.

Anacreon the Poet, a grand consumer of wine, and a notable drunkard, was
choked with the husk of a grape.

The monstrous and riotous excesses of diverse Roman Emperors (as Tiberius by
name, who was a companion of all drunkards) is strange to be heard, and almost
incredible to be believed: he loved wine so well, that in stead of Tiberius
they called him Biberius, and in stead of Claudius, Caldus, and in stead of
Nero, Mero; noting by those nicknames, how great a drunkard he was.

The Earl of Aspremont (after he had by infinite excess exhausted all his
substance) being upon a day at S. Michael, drank so excessively, that he dyed
therewith.

Cyrillus a Citizen of Hippon, had an ungracious son, who leading a riotous and
luxurious life, in the midst of his drunkenness killed his own Aug. tom.
10. Ver. 33.
mother great with child, and his father, that sought to restrain his sury,
and would have ravished his sister, had she not escaped from him with many
Parricid. li. 2. cap. 11.
wounds.

Bonosus the Emperor is reported to have been such a notorious drunkard, that
he was said to be borne not to live, but to drink: if any Ambassadors Flavius
Vopis.
came unto him, he would make them drunk, to the end to reveal their secrets:
he ended his life with misery, even by hanging, with this Epitaph, That a tun,
not a man, was hanged in that place.

Philostrates, being in the bathes at Sinuessa, devoured so much wine, that he
fell down the stairs, and almost broke his neck with the fall. Martid. li. 11.


Zeno, the Emperor of the East, was so notoriously given to excess of meats
and drinks, that his senses being benumbed, he would often lie as Platina.
one that was dead: wherefore being become odious to all men by his beastly
qualities, his wife Ariadne fell also in detestation of him, and one day as he
lay senseless, she transported him into a tomb, and throwing a great stone
upon it, pined him to death, not suffering any to remove the stone, or to yield
him any succor; and this was a just reward of his drunkenness.

Pope Paulus the second, beside the exceeding pomp of apparel which he used,
he was also very careful for his throat: for (as Platina writes of him) he
delighted in all kind of exquisite dishes, and delicate wine, and that in
superfluity: by which immoderate and continual surfeiting he fell into a
grievous Apoplexy, which quickly made an end of his life. It is reported of
him, that he eat the day before he dyed two great Melons, and that in a very
good appetite; when as the next night the Lord struck him with his heavy
judgment.

Alexander the son of Basilius, and brother of Leo the Emperor, did so wallow
and drown himself in the gulf of pleasure and intemperance, that Philip.
Melanct. lib. 4.
one day, after he had stuffed himself too full of meat, as he got upon his
horse, he burst a vein within his body, whereat upwards and downwards issued
such abundance of blood, that his life and soul issued forth withal.

The modern examples of Gods fearful judgments upon drunkards, not only in
other countries, but even in this Nation of ours, are many and terrible: all
which if I should stand to report, it would be matter for a whole book. Our
reverend Judges in their several circuits do find by experience, that few
murders and manslaughters are committed, which are not from this root of
drunkenness: for when men's brains are heat with wine and strong drink, then
their tongues are let loose to opprobrious speeches, and thence proceed both
sudden quarrels, and deliberate challenges, wherewith thousands are brought to
their untimely ends: Besides, the Lord punishes the Drunkard many ways;
first, in his soul, with impenitency and hardness of heart: which commonly
follows this vice: for as Saint Augustine says, As by too much rain the
earth is resolved into dirt, and made unfit for tillage; so by excessive
drinking, our bodies are altogether unfitted Aug. de Vitand. Ebriet. Ser. 231.
for ^he spiritual tillage, and so can bring forth no good fruits of holiness
and righteousness; but rather like biggest and marshes; are fit to b^^ed
nothing but serpents, frog^, and vershine, that is, all manner of abominable
sins and leathsome wickedness. Secondly in his body, with deformednesse of
feature; filthy diseases, and unseasonable death: for excessive drinking
breeds crudities, Rheumes, Imposthumes, Gouts, Consumptions, Apoplexies, and
such like; whereof men perish before they are come to the half of their
natural years: and this is one principal cause why men are now so short
lived in respect of that they have ^^en heretofore. Thirdly, in his estate, for
commonly poverty, yea penury follows this vice at the heels; as Solomon
teaches. P^ov. 21. 27. And lastly, with sudden death and destruction, even in
the midst of their drunken fits, as woeful experience does make manifest
every day, and almost in every corner of this land. Within these few years, of
mine own knowledge, three not far from Huntington being overcome with drink,
perished by drowning; when being not able to rule their horses, they were
carried by them into the maine stream, from whence they never came out alive
again, but left behind them visible marks of Gods justice, for the terror
and example of others; and yet what sin is more commonly used and less feared
than this.

Concerning Dancing (the usual dependants of feasts and good cheer) there is
none of sound judgment that know not, that they are baits and allurements to
uncleanenesse, and as it were instruments of bawdrie: by reason whereof they
were always condemned among men of honor and reputation, whether Romans or
Greeks, and left for vile and base minded men to use. And this may appear by
the reproach that Demosthenes the Orator gave to Philip of Macedony and his
Courtiers, in an Oration to the Athenians, wherein he termed them common
dancers, and such as shamed not as soon as they had glutted their bellies with
meat, and their heads with wine, to fall scurrilously a dancing. As for the
honorable Dames of Rome, truly we shall never read that any of them
accustomed themselves to dance, according to the report of Salust touching
Sempronia, whom he judged to be too fine a dancer and singer to be honorable
withal: as if these two could no more agree then fire and water.

Cicero in his apology of Muraena rehearses an objection of Cato against
Muraena.
his client, wherein he challenged him for dancing in Asia; which he makes a
matter of so great reproach, that not daring to maintain or excuse the fact, he
flatly denies it; saying, That no sober and discreet man ever would commit
that fault, unless his sense and reason was bereft him. Plutarch also setting
forth the virtues of women, puts in this among the rest, that she ought to
be no dancer: and speaking in another place to all others as well as women,
bids them to repulse even their friends, if they should lead and entice them
to that exercise.

Besides, all the ancient Doctors of the Church have utterly condemned them as
unlawful: Thou learnest to sing profane and idle songs (says Basil) and
forgettest the godly Psalms and Hymns which were enact ^ught thee* thou
caperest and leapest with thy feet in dances (unwise, as thou art) when a^ thou
should rather bend thy knees in prayer to the almighty but what gain (...)
got thereby (...) Marry this, that virgins return robbed of their virginities
and married wives of their tr^th to their husbands: both, and all, less chaste
than they went; and more dishonest than they should, if not in act, which
peradventure may be, yet stainedin thought, which cannot be eschewed. Hear
(says Chrysostom.) you maids and wives, which are not ashamed to dance and trip
it at others marriages, and to pollute your se^es; wheresoever a lascivious
dance is danced, there the devil bears the other part, and is the author of
it. It is better (says Ambrose) to dig and delve upon holy days than to
dance. And in another place writing to his sister, he says, That he ^eed not
care for dissolute behaviors and songs which are used as marriages to make him
merry withal; for when banquets are concluded with dances, then is chastity in
an evil case and in great danger to suffer shipwreck by those suspicious
allurements. Besides this, dancing has been absolutely forbidden by consent of
the whole Church of Christ before time, Orig. lib. i. contr. Ce^s. Can. 5. and
52.
under pain of excommunication; as it may appear by the Constantinopolitan
Council under Justinian the Emperor: what answer can they make then to this,
that are Christians, and allow of these forbidden sports? Is it the denying of
a man's self? The spiritual regeneration? The putting off the old man touching
our conversation in this life? And if all adultery Ephesians. 5. 4.
and uncleanenesse, all filthiness and foolish talking, jesting and such like,
ought not once to be named amongst us, because they are things not comely: If I
say it be not lawful to jest or speak the least lascivious word that is, how
shall it be lawful to do an action with the motion and consent of the whole
body, which represents nothing else but folly, vanity, and lasciviousness?
And this is for them that demand where dancing is forbidden in the Scripture;
which I touch as it were by the way, and do but point at, not minding to frame
any long discourse thereof, seeing there is a particular treatise touching the
same matter, which he may read that desires to know any more touching it. Now
let us see what goodly fruits and commodities have risen therefrom. The
daughters of the children of Israel being dancing in Silo upon a festival day,
after the manner of the uncircumcised Idolaters, were ravished by the
Benjamites for to be their wives, and that mixtly without regard of one or
other, were they of never so high or base condition. Judge. 1^.


At the feast which Herod the Tetrarch made to the Princes and Captains and
Nobles of Galilee, the daughter of Herodias pleased him and his company so well
with her dancing, that to gratify this filthy strumpet the incestuous Tyran
caused John Baptist to be beheaded. Mark. 6.


Lodowicke, Archbishop of Magdeburge, celebrating a solemn feast at a town
called Calven, invited many of the worthy Citizens to make merry with him: the
place for their joyalty was the great hall wherein judicial causes were
appointed to be discussed. Here after the banquet ended they fell a dancing,
men and women mixtly together, such a ridiculous roundelay, and such a
multitude, that what with the weight of their bodies, or rather the indignation
of God against them for this scurrilous and immodest behavior, the beams of
the house began to crack and threaten a certain ruin; whereat the Archbishop
affrighted, caught hold by a fair dame, and began first to go down the
stairs; but the steps before loosened, as soon as he trod upon them, tumbled
down, and he and his consort headlong withal, and were crushed in pieces. And
thus he that was principal of the feast and sport, was made an example to all
the rest, of the Lords vengeance* because he dishonored his calling and
profession by such lewd and light behavior: and this was one goodly effect of
dancing.

Another we read of in the Chronicles of the same City to this effect, Chron.
Magdeburg.
in a village called Ossemer, adjoining to Stendell: As the Popish Priest
played the minstrell to his parishioners that danced the morris before him, and
rejoiced in their merry May-games, a tempest arose, and a thunderbolt struck
off his night hand, together with the harp which he played on, and consumed
about twenty four men and women of the company: a just punishment of so
profane a Priest, who in stead of dehorting them (as his duty bound him) from
that lascivious custom, played the chief part in their madness, and was an
inticer of them unto it.

Moreover, in many places, by dances grievous and spiteful quarrels have been
stirred up, and many murders executed, the examples whereof are so evident and
notorious, that it is not needful now to stand upon them: to conclude
therefore this point with the saying of Lodovicus Vives, There Lodovicus Vives.
is not a greater vanity in the world than dancing; for (says he) I heard of
certain men of Asia, that coming into Spain, when they first saw the
Spaniards dance, were so sore affrighted, that they ran away for fear,
supposing them to have been either possessed with some spirit, or out of their
wits at least: and truly I think if a man had never seen a woman dance before,
he could hardly be of another judgment, there being nothing that resembles
frenzy and lunacy more than the strange shakings and motions of the body at
the noise of a beaten sheep-skin: verily it is a pastime to mark the grave
behavior, the measurable march, the pomp and ostentation of women dancers, and
the great care they have to perform wisely so foolish an action* it is very
likely that all their wit at that time is distilled from their head into their
feet, for there it is more requisite and needful than in their brain. Thus
much says Lodovicus Vives.

Now touching Mummeries and Maskes, I place them in the same rank with the
other; for so much as they are derived from the same fountain, and communicate
the same nature, and produce the same effects, and oftentimes are so
pernicious, that diverse honorable women have been ravished and conveyed away
by their means: nay, and some Masquers have been well chastised in their own
vices: as it happened in the reign of Charles the sixth, to six that masqued
it to a marriage at the hostle of S. Paul's in Paris, being attired like wild
horses, covered with loose flax, dangling down like hair, all beda^bed with
grease for the fitter hanging thereof, and fast bound one to another, and in
this guise entered the hall, dancing with torches before them: but behold
suddenly their play turned to a tragedy; for a spar^^ of one of their torches
fell into the greasy flax of his neighbor, and set it immediately on fire, so
that in the turning of an hand they were all on ^lame then gave they out a most
horrible ou^^ry: one of them threw himself headlong into a tub of water
provided to ^ince their drinking cups and goblets, and upon that occasion
standing not far off: two were burnt to death, without stirring once from the
place: The bastard Foix and the Earl of Jouy escaped indeed present death; but
being conveyed to their lodgings, they survived not two days: the King
himself being one of the s^^, was saved by the Duchess of Berry, that
covering him with her loose and tide garments (...) the fire before it could
seize upon his flesh. Froyssard the Vol. 4 cap. 5^.
reporter of this tragedy, ^aith* That the next morrow every man could say,
tha^ this (...) wonderful sign and advertisement sent by God to the King to
warn him to renounce all such fond and foolish devices which he delighted too
much in, and more then it became a King of France to do: and this was the
event of that gallant Masque.

It rests now that we speak somewhat of Plays and Comedies, and such like
toys and May-games, which have no other use in the world but to deprave and
corrupt good manners, and to open a door to all uncleanenesse: the ears of
young folk are there polluted with many filthy and dishonest speeches, their
eyes are there infected with lascivious and unchaste gestures and countenances,
and their wits are there stained and embrued with so pernicious liquor, that
(except Gods good grace) they will ever savor of it: the holy and sacred
Scripture ordained to a holy and sacred use, is oftentimes by these filthy
swine profaned, to please and to delight their audience: in few words, there
is nothing else to be found among them, but nourishment to our senses of
foolish and vain delights. For this cause many of the sager Romans, as Nasica
and diverse other Censors, hindered the building of the Theaters in Rome, for an
opinion they had, that their sports and Tertul. Oros.
pastimes which were exercised therein, served to no other purpose but to make
the people idle, effeminate, and voluptuous: and besides, the masters, guiders,
and actors of Plays were always debarred as men infamous, from bearing any
public Office or dignity in the Commonwealth.

Tiberius Caesar himself, though of most corrupt and rotten manners and Tacit.
lib. 4.
conversation, yet in open Senate complained and found fault with the immodesty
of Stage Players, and banished them at that same time out of Italy. When
Domitian was Censor, he put out of the Senate a Citizen of Rome, because he was
too much addicted to the imitation of the fashions of Fulgos. D^^^riositate.
Players and Dancers. And Plutarch says, that we ought to shun all such
spectacles.

If then such pastimes were by the judgments of the Romans noted with infamy,
shall we have their equals in follies in better account? Basil calls such
sports and pastimes, the workhouse, forge, and common shop of all Homil. 4.
wickedness: and therefore Chrysostom prays and admonishes the faithful
of his time to abstain from frequenting such places. S. Augustine also for
bids to bestow our money upon tumblers, juglers, and players, and Homil. 6.
in 1. cap. Genesis Can. 51.
such like. Beside, by the Constantinopolitan Council under Justinian, it was
inhibited to be once present at such sports, under the pain of
excommunication: and that the ancient Christians did by common consent not only
condemn, but also utterly abstain from such pastimes, it may appear by the
testimony of Tertullian writing to the Gentiles to this effect: We renounce and
send back (faith he) sports and plays unto you, as to the head and fountain
from whence they were first derived: we make no reckoning of th^se Apolog.
things which we know were drawn from superstition: we love not (...) be h^ld
the folly of turning with Chariots, nor the unchastity of the Theater, nor the
cruelty of sword playing, nor the vanity of leaping, ^r^stling and dancing: but
take pleasure in exercises of better report, and less h^r^.

Moreover, how odious and irksome in the sight of the Lord such spectacles are,
and what power and sway the devil bears therein, they (...) of God upon a
Christian woman (reported by, Tertullian) may sufficiently instruct us. There
was a woman (says he) that went to the (...) to see Tertull. de spect.
a play, and returned home possessed with an unclean spirit: who being rebuked
in a conjuration for daring to assault one of the ^aith, that professed Christ;
answered, that he had done well, because he found her upon his own ground.

The same author reports another example as strange, of a woman also that
went to see a Tragedy acted, to whom the night following appeared in a dream
the picture of a sheet (a presage of death) casting in her teeth that which
she had done; and five days after, death himself seized upon her.

As touching wanton songs, and unchaste and ribald books (that I may be
(brief) I will content my self only with that which is alleged by Lodovicus
Vives Lib. of instruction of a Christian woman.
concerning that matter. The Magistrate (says he) ought to banish out of his
dominion all unhonest Songs and Poems, and not to suffer novelties to be
published day by day in rimes and ballads, as they are: as if a man should
hear in a City nothing but foolish and scurrilous Ditties, such as would make
even the ^onger sort that are well brought up to blash, and stir up the
indignation of men of honor and gravity: this ought Magistrates to prevent,
and to discharge the people from reading Amadis, Tristram, Lancelot due Lake,
Melusine, Poggius scurrillities, and Boccace novelties; with a thousand more
such like toys: and thus much out of Vives.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Thieves and Robbers.
IT follows that we speak in the next place of such as by their greedy
covetousness and unquenchable desire of lucre, transgress the fourth
commandment of the second Table; to wit, Thou shall not steal: wherein not
only simply theft, but also Sacrilege is condemned: and first of Sacrilege.

Into this sin fell wretched Aehan in the time of Joshua, Joshua 7.
when in the sack of Jericho he seeing a Babylonish garment, with certain gold
and silver, covered it and stole it away, and hid it in his Tent, contrary to
the commandment of the Lord: for which cause the Lord was offended with his
whole people, as if they all had been accessory to the crime, and en^eebled
them so before their enemies, that they were beaten down at Hay, and
shamefully put to flight: neither was his anger appeased, until that the
offendant being divinely and miraculously descryed, was stoned to death and
burnt with his children and all his substance.

But to come unto profane stories, let us begin with Heliodorus, Treasurer
Josephus.
of Seleuchus King of Asia; who by the Kings commandment and suggestion of one
Simon Governor of the Temple, came to take away the gold and silver which was
kept in the Treasury of the Temple, and to transport it unto the Kings
Treasury; whereat the whole City of Jerusalem put on sackeloth, and poured out
prayers unto the Lord: so that when Heliodorus was present in the Temple with
his soldiers ready to seize upon the treasure, the Lord of all spirits and
power showed so great a vision, that he fell suddenly into extreme fear and
trembling: for there appeared unto him an horse with a terrible man sitting
upon him, most richly barbed, which came fiercely and smote at him with his
forefeet: moreover, there appeared two young men, notable in strength, excellent
in beauty, and comely in apparel, which stood by him on either side, and
scourged him with many stripes: so that Heliodorus that came in with so great a
company of soldiers and attendants, was stricken dumb, and carried out in a
litter upon men's shoulders; for his strength was so abated, that he could not
help himself, but lay destitute of all hope of recovery, so heavy was the hand
of God upon him, until by the prayers of Onias the high Priest he was
restored; then lo he confessed, that he which dwelt in heaven had his eye on
that place, and defended it from all those that came to hurt and spoil it.

Another of this crew was in Crassus the Roman; who entering Jerusalem,
Josephus. Zonar.
robbed the Temple of two thousand talents of silver and gold, beside the rich
ornaments, which amounted in worth to eight thousand Talents, and a beam of
beaten gold containing three hundred pound in weight: for which sacrilege, the
vengeance of God so pursued him, that within a while Camposul. lib. 1.
after he was overcome by the Parthians, and together with his son slain, his
evil gotten goods being dispersed, and the skull of his head being made a
ladle to melt gold in, that it might be glutted with that being dead, which
alive it could be never satisfied with.

Herod following the steps of Hircanus his predecessor, that took out of
Josephus l. 17. Zonar. Annal. 1
the sepulcher of King David three thousand talents of money, thinking to find
the like treasure, broke up the sepulcher in the night, and found no money, but
rich ornaments of gold, which he took away with him; howbeit to his cost: for
two of his servants perished in the vault, by a divine fire, as it is reported,
and he himself had small success in his worldly affairs ever after.

Julian the Apostata robbed the Church of the revenues thereof, and took away
all benevolences and contributions to schools of learning, to the end the
children might not be instructed in the liberal Arts, nor in any other good
literature. He exaggerated also his sacrilege with scornful jeasts; saying,
That he did further their salvation by making them poor; seeing it was written
in their own Bibles, Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven: but how this sacrilegious thief was punished, is already declared in
the former book.

Leo Groponymus took out of the Temple of Constantinople an excellent Lib. a.
cap. 20. Zonar as.
crown of gold beset with precious stones; which Mauritius had dedicated to
the Lord; but as soon as he had set it on his head, a cruel fever seized upon
him, that he dyed very shortly.

The punishment of the sacrilege of Queen Vrraca in Spain was most wonderful
and speedy* for when in her war against her son Alphonsus she Fulgos. l. 1. c.
a.
wanted money, she robbed the Church dedicated to S. Isidore, and took with
her own hands the treasures up, which her soldiers refused to do: but ere she
departed out of the Church vengeance overtooke her, and struck her dead in the
place.

Moreover, the Lord so hates this irreligious sin, that he permits the
devil to exercise his cruelty upon the spoilers of profane and Idolatrous
temples, as he did upon Dyonisius the Tyran of Syracusa; who after many
robberies of holy things, and spoiling the Churches, dyed suddenly with
extreme joy, as authors report. He spoiled the Temple of Proserpina at Locris,
and shaved off the golden beard of Aesculapius at Epidamnum; saying, It was an
unseemly thing for Apollo to be beardlesse and his son bearded: he deprived
Jupiter Olympus of his golden ra^ment, and gave him a woollen coat instead
thereof; saying it was too heavy for him in the Summer, and too cold in winter,
and this was more convenient for both seasons. The pretext of all his
sacrilege was this, That seeing the gods were good, why should not he be
partaker of their goodness.

Such another was Cambyses King of Persia, who sent fifty thousand men Sabel.
l. 1. c. 3. Herod. lib. 4.
to rob and destroy the temple of Jupiter Ammon; but in their journey so mighty
a tempest arose, that they were overwhelmed with the sand, not one of them
remaining to carry news of their success.

Brennus was constrained to slay himself, for enterprising to rob the Temple
Fulg. lib. 1. c. 2.
of Apollo at Delphos: Philomelus, Onomarchus, and Phayllus, went about the
same practice, and indeed robbed the Temple of all the treasures therein; but
one of them was burned, another drowned, and the third broke his neck: to
conclude, the Athenians put to death a young child, for taking but a golden
plate out of Diana's Temple; but first they offered him other jewels and
trinkets, which when he despised in respect of the plate, they rigorously
punished him as guilty of sacrilege.

Cardinal Wolsey being determined to erect two new Colleges, one at Stow.
Chron.
Oxford, and the other at Ipswich, obtained license and authority of Pope
Clement the seventh, to suppress about the number of forty monasteries, to
furnish and set forward the building of his said College: which irreligious
sacrilege (I call it sacrilege both because he was persuaded in conscience
that those goods belonged to the Church, and so to him it was sacrilege: as
also for that he did it in pride of his heart) was furthered by five persons,
who were the chief instruments of the dissolution of Daintry Monastery,
because the Prior and Covent would not grant them certain lands in farm at
their own price. But what punishment ensued upon them at Gods hand the world
was witness of: for of these five persons, two fell at discord amongst
themselves, and the one slew the other, for the which the survivor was hanged;
the third drowned himself in a well; the fourth, being then worth two hundred
pounds, within three years became so poor that he begged until his dying
day; and the fifth (called Doctor Allen) was cruelly maimed in Ireland* The
Cardinal himself falling into the Kings displeasure, was deposed from his
bishopric, and dyed miserably: the Colleges which he meant to have made so
glorious a building, came never to any good effect, the one at Ipswich being
clean defaced, the other at Oxford unfinished.

And thus much of sacrilege: Now let us come and see the punishment of simple
theft, the principal cause whereof is covetousness; which is so unruly an
evil, and so deep rooted in the heart of man, that ever yet it has used to
encroach upon the goods of others, and to keep possession of that which was
none of its own; breaking all the bonds of humanity, equity, and right,
without being contained in any measure or mean; whereof we have a most
notable example in the old world before the flood, which (by Moses report)
overflowed with iniquity and extortion, the mighty ones oppressed the weak, the
greater trod under foot the less, and the rich devoured the poor. When the
Lord saw the general deluge of sin and disorder thus universally spread (which
indeed was a sign of great defection and contempt of him) he like a just judge
that could not endure these monstrous iniquities, sent a deluge of waters
amongst them, by opening the windows of heaven, and breaking up the fountains
of the great deepes, and giving passage to the waters both by heaven and earth,
so that it reigned forty days, and forty nights without ceasing, and the
waters prevailed upon the earth, and overcovered the high mountains by fifteen
cubits, the earth being reduced into the same estate which it had in the
beginning before the waters were took away from the face thereof: verily it
was a most hideous and sad spectacle, to see first the valleys, then the hills,
and last the highest mountains so overflowne with water, that no show or
appearance of them might be perceived; it was a dreadful sight to behold whole
houses, tossed to and fro up and down in the waves, and at last to be shivered
in pieces: there was not a City nor village that perished not in the deep, not
a tree nor tower so high that could overpeere the waters: as they increased
more and more in abundance, so fear, horror, and despair of safety increased
in the heart of every living soul. And on this fashion did God punish those
wicked rebels, not at one blow, but by little and little increasing their
pain, that as they had a long time abused his patience, and made no reckoning
of amendment, so the punishment of their sin might be long and tedious. Now in
this extremity one could not help another, nor one envy another, but all were
concluded under the same destruction, all surprised, assieged, and environed
alike, as well he that roved in the fields, as he that stayed in the houses, he
that climbed up into the mountains, as he that abode in the valleys, the
merciless waters spared none: it was to no purpose that some ascended their
high houses, some climbed upon trees, and some scaled the rocks, neither one
nor other found any refuge or safety in any place, the rich were not saved by
their riches, nor the strong by the pith of their strength, but all perished
and were drowned together, except Noah and his family: which punishment was
correspondent unto the worlds iniquity, for as the earth was corrupted and
polluted with abundance of sin, so God sent abundance of water to purge and
cleanse away the filthiness thereof, as at the latter day he will send fire
to purify and refine heaven and earth from their dregs, and restore them to
their first and purest estate. And thus God revenged the extortion and cruelty
of that age.

But yet for all this, those sins were not then so defaced and rooted up, but
that they be burnished again and grown in time to as big a bulk: for even at
this day the greatest part of the world is given to practice fraud and deceit,
and by unlawful means to incroach upon others goods: which subtilties though
they desire never so to disguise and cloak, yet will they ever be condemned and
reputed kinds of theft before God: now as some are of greater power and
authority than others in the world, so answerable to themselves is the quality
of their sins, and by consequence the punishment: the greater of power, the
greater thieves, and the greater judgment; for if a poor man that through
poverty and necessity cutteth a purse or steals any other trifle, be
culpable, how much more culpable shall he that is rich be, that usurpeth the
goods of his neighbor?

Draco the lawgiver of Athens, appointed death to be the punishment of sheft:
Solon mitigated that rigor, and punished it with double restitution: The
Locrians put out his eyes that had stolen ought from his neighbor: The
Hetrurians stoned them to death: The Scythians abhorred them more than all
creatures, because they had a community of all things except their cups the
Vatoeiane used such severity toward this kind of men, that as (...) taken a
handful of (...) he was sure to die for it.

(...) being Censor, (...) demeed his own son Buteo to death, being
apprehended for theft. Tiberius the Emperor punished a soldier after the time
(...) for stealing i^ ^eaco^ke in sum, there was no Commonwealth (...) was
not highly detested, and sharply (...) the (...) where it was permitted and
tolerated, (...) of (...).

(...) yet as (...) a just dead of Tamberlaine that Tbeatr. histor.
mighty (...) and Conqueror of Asia, when a poor woman complained (...) of
his soldiers, that had taken from her a little milk and a (...) the caused
the soldiers belly to be ripped to see that her (...) had falsely accused him
on no, and finding the milk in his stomach; adjudged him worthy of that
punishment, for stealing from poor ^^ woman.

When Theophilus reigned Emperor in the East there was a certain Zonar.
Annal. 3
soldier possessed of a very gallant and brave horse which his Captain by all
mea^es possible sought to get from him* but he would not in any case (...) he
put him forth of pay, and took his horse, from him by force, and sent him for
a present to the Emperor Theophilus: now it chanced that this poor soldier
was slain in the battle for want of his horse, and his wife and children lest
destitute of succor, insomuch that through necessity she was constrained to
fly to Constant inople, and to complain to the Emperor of the injury done
unto her husband; with this resolution entering the City, she met the Emperor
riding upon her husbands horse, and catching the horse bridle, challenged him
not on^y for stealing the horse, but also being the cause of her husbands
death. The Emperor wondering at the woman boldness, examined her more
narrowly* and found out the whole practice of that wicked Captain whom he
banished presently, his Empire, and bestowed his possession in recommence upon
the distressed widow.

Ibicus the Poet being set upon by Thieves, when he saw that they would not
only spoil him of his money but of (...) he also cried for help and revenge to
the cranes that flew over his head a while after ^^ these murdering (...)
together in the market Place, the same cranes appearing unto (...) they
whispered one another in the care, and said, ^onder (...) which though secretly
spoken, yet was overhe^rd (...) they being examined and found guilty, were put
to death for their (...). The like story Martin Luther reports touching a
traveller; Luther.
only (...) in this that as Cranes detected the former: so Crows laid open the
latter.

In the year 138^* when as all Saxony was so infested with Theeyes that
Albert. Crantz. lib. 10. cap. 7.
no man could travel safely in the country the Princes calling a Council,
for down this order. That not only the Thieves themselves should be severely
punished* but all that did protect, or harbor any of them; which (...) as
Theodoricke Country of We^ingr^de impugned, the body of (...) Council sent for
him, and adjudged him to a most cruel and shameful (...).

In the year 1410* Henry Duke of Luneburg a most just and severe Crantz. lib.
10. cap. 30.
Prince, went about to purge his Country from all thefts and robberies*
insomuch that the least offense committed in that kind he suffered not to go
unpunished: now it happened as the Duke went toward Lun^burge, he seen before
him one of his chiefest officers to provide necessaries against his coming:
who riding without a cloak, the weather being cold, (...) a ploughman to lend
him his cloak till his return: which when the clown refused to do, he took it
without leave, but it cost him his life for ^^, for the ploughman awaited the
Dukes coming and directed his complaint unto him on this manner: What avails
i^ (O^ most noble Prince^ to seek to suppres the courage of thieves and
spoilers, when as thy chiefest officers dare commit such things uncontrolled,
a^ the Lieutenant of (...) but now taken from me my cloak? The Duke hearing
this complaint, and considering the cause, dissembled his counsel (...) his
return (...) from Luneburge unto the same place, where calling for his
Lieutenant, and rating him for his injury, he commanded him to be hunged upon a
tree. A wonderful severity in justice, and worthy to be commended: for what
hope is it to root out small and pity thieves, if we suffer grand thieves to go
uncorrected?

There is another kind of these practiced of them that be in authority, who
under the title of confiscation assume unto themselves stolen goods, and so
much the re^dilier, by now much the value of the things amounts to more
worth: an action altogether unjust, and contrary to both divine and humane
laws, which ordain to restore unto every man his own: and truly he that in
stead of restitution withholdeth the goods of his neighbor in this manner,
differs no more from a (...) than that the one steals boldly without fear,
the other ^n^orously and with great danger: and what greater corruption of
justice can there be than this? For who would follow the Law upon a thief,
when he knows he shall rather run into further charge, than recover any of
his old loss? Beside this, it happens that poor small thieves are often drawn
to the whip, or driven to banishment, of sent to the gallows, when rich grand
thieves lie at their case, and escape uncontrolled, albeit the quality of their
(...) be far unequal: according to the Poet:

The simple dove by law is censured, Dat veniam cervis, vexat censura columbas.
When ravenou^ (...) escape unpunished. The world was ever yet full of such
ravenou^ Ra^ens; so nimble in pilling others goods, and so greedy of their own
gain, that the poor people in stead of being maintained and preserved in the
peaceable enjoying of their portions, are gnawne to the very bone^ amongst
them: for which cause Homer in the person of Agamemnon calls them devourers
of men. Likewise also the Prophet David in the (...) Psalm calls them Eaters
of his people: and yet want they not flatterers and (...) friends (canker
worms of a Commonwealth) that urge them forwards, and devise daily new kind
of exactions, like horse-lead^es to sucked out the very blood of men's purses:
showing so much the more wit and deceit therein, by how much the more they hope
to gain a great part (...) of unto their selves: being like hunger-starved
Harpeis, that will never be fortified, but still match and catch all that
comes near their (...): and these are they that do good to no man, but hurt
to all; of whom the Merchant finds himself agrieved, the Artificer trodden
under foot, the poor labourer oppressed, and generally all men endammaged.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the excessive burdenings of the Comminalty.
AS it is a just and approved thing before God, to do honor and reverence to
Kings and Princes, and to be subject under them in all obedience; so it is a
reasonable and allowable duty to pay such tributes and subsidies (whereby their
great charges and honorable estate may be maintained) as by right or equity
are due unto them: and this is also commanded by our Savior Christ in express
words, when he says, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And by the
Apostle Paul more expressly, Pay tributes, render unto Mat. 22. 21. Romans 1^. 7.
all men their due: tribute to whom tribute belongs, and custom to whom
custom: Mark how he says, Give unto all men their due: and therein observe,
that Kings and Princes ought of their good and just disposition to be content
with their due, and not seek to load and overcharge their subjects with
unnecessary exactions, but to desire to see them rather rich and wealthy, than
poor and needy; for thereby comes no profit unto themselves. Further it is
most unlawful for them to exact that above measure upon their Commons, which
being in mediocrity is not condemned: I say it is unlawful both by the law of
God and man (the Law of God and man is termed all that which both God and man
allow and agree upon, and which a man with a safe conscience may put in
practice:) for the former we can have no other schoolmaster nor instruction,
save the holy Scripture, wherein God has manifested his will unto us
concerning this very matter; as in Deuteronomy the eighteenth, speaking of the
office and duty of a King, he forbids them to be hoorders up of gold and
silver, and espousers of many wives, and lovers of pride: signifying thereby,
that they ought to contain themselves within the bounds of modesty and
temperance, and not give the raines to their own affections, nor heap up
great treasures to their peoples detriment, nor to delight in war, nor to be
too much subject to their own pleasures: all which things are means of
unmeasurable expense: so that if it be not allowable to muster together
multitudes of goods, for the danger and mischief that ensues thereof, as it
appears out of this place; then surely it is much less lawful to levy
excessive taxes of the people; for the one of these cannot be without the
other: and thus for the Law of God it is clear, that by it authority is not
committed unto them, to surcharge, and as it were trample down their poor
subjects, by unmeasurable and unsupportable impositions.

As for that which the Prophet Samuel in the Name of God gives notice to the
Israelites of, touching the right of a King; wherein he seems to allow him
the disposition of the goods and persons of his subjects: I answer first, That
God being an immovable Truth, cannot contradict himself by commanding and
forbidding the same thing; and secondly, that the word of the Text in the
Original signifies nothing else but a custom or fashion, as it appears by
the 1 Samuel 11. 13. besides, the speech that the Prophet uses, imports not a
commandment, but an advertisement of the subjection, whereunto the people were
about to thrust themselves, by desiring a King after the manner of other
Nations, whose customs amongst them was to exercise authority and dominion as
well over their goods as their persons: for which cause God would have them
forewarned, that they might know how vile a yoke they put their owneneckes
under, and what grievous and troublesome servitude they undertook, from the
which they could no ways be delivered, no though they de^^^ed it with tears.

Furthermore, that a King in Israel had no power (in right and eq^ity) to take
away the possessions of any of his subjects, and appropriate it to himself, it
appears by Naboaths refusal no King Achab, to give him his 1 Kings 12.
vineyard, though he requested it (as it may seem) upon very reasonable
conditions, either for his money, or for exchange, so that a man would think
he ought not to have denied him: howbeit his desire being thus crossed, he
could not mend himself by his authority, but fell to vex and grieve himself,
and to champe upon his own bit, until by the wicked and detestable complot of
Iezable, poor Naboath was falsely accused, unjustly condemned, and cruelly
murdered; and then he put in possession of his vineyard: which murder
(doubtless) she would never have attempted, nor yet Naboath ever have refused
to yield his vineyard, if by any pretense of Law they could have laid claim
unto it: but Naboath knowing that it Numb. 36. 9.
was contrary to Gods Ordinance, for him to part with his patrimony (which he
ought most carefully to preserve) would not consent to sell over his vineyard,
neither for love nor money, nor other recompense: and herein he did but his
duty, approved by the holy Scripture. Now how odious a thing before God the
oppression of poor people is, it is manifest by his own words in the Prophecy
of Ezechiel, where he says, Let it suffice, O Princes of Israel, learn off
cruelty and oppression, and execute judgment Chap. 45. 9.
and justice: take away your exactions from my people, and cease to thrust them
from their goods and heritages. Now concerning the law of man, which all men
agree unto, because it is grounded upon reason and equity, we find no
permission given to Kings to use the goods of other men at their pleasures; for
that was far from equity: neither was there any such liberty bestowed upon
them, by those that first in the beginning exalted them to that degree of
dignity: but rather (as diverse worthy Authors avouch) their own virtues and
good behavior which won them credit amongst the better sort, installed them
first unto that honor. And truly there is Cic. lib. 3. de legibus. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, lib. 4. ca. 6.
nothing more rightful and justin man's society, than that every one should
possess and enjoy that which is his own in peace and quietness, without
disturbance or violence; in which respect also, rules of justice are
established, called laws, which no good Kings will ever seek to stand against.
They are indeed Lords of the earth, a^ some say, and truly; but so, that their
Lordships stretch no further than right, and pass not the rule of equity: and
notwithstanding, the propriety of goods and possessions remains untouched. To
Kings (says So^^ca) pertains the sovereignty over all things, but to private
men the propriety. Lib. 7. c. 4. and 5. de beneficiis.


Tiberius Caesar being solicited by the Governors of the Provinces, to lay
heavier tributes, and levy larger subsidies from his people, made (though a
Painim) this notable answer, That a good shepherd ought to shear his sheep, not
to flea them. Saint Lewis, that good King, amongst all his other wife and
virtuous exhortations which he gave to his son before his death, this was none
of the least nor last; That he should never crave any tax or subsidy of his
subjects, but upon urgent necessity, and very just Nic. Gil.
cause; and that if he did otherwise, he should not be reputed for a King, but
for a tyran.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of those that have used too much cruelty to wards their subjects
in Taxes and Exactions.
IT is clear then by these foresaid assumptions, that a King may not impose
upon his Subjects unmeasurable taxes and subsidies, least he make himself
guilty of extortion, the root and fountain many times of many great mischiefs
and inconveniences, and in very deed from whence oftener changes, seditions, and
ruins of Commonwealths have proceeded, than from any other cause beside.

What happened to Roboam King of Israel, for showing himself too rigorous on
this behalf to his subjects, but the defection of the greater part of his
Kingdom from him; for being come to the Crown after the death of his father
Solomon, when the people came and made a supplication to him, to be eased from
his fathers burdens, he (despising the counsel of his sage 1 Kings 12.
and ancient. Counselors, and following the giddy advice of his young
companions) gave them a most sharp and sour reply; saying, That if his father
had laid an heavy yoke upon them, he would increase it; and if he had chastised
them with rods, he would correct them with scourges; which when they of Israel
heard, they revolted from him (all save the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin)
and stoned to death his Collectours, and chose them another King to rule over
them. Thus Roboam was deprived often parts of his Kingdom through his own
unadvised tyranny, and fled all amazed unto Jerusalem, where he lived all his
days without recovery of the same.

Achaeus King of Lydia was hanged up against a hill, and his head thrown into
a River running by, because of the great subsidies which he exacted of his
people.

Dionysius, the first of that name, a notorious and renowned Tyran, not
Plutarch. de Reg.
only in regard of his exceeding cruelty, but also of his unjust rackings and
exactions, was so violent in that practice of doing wrong, that alboit he well
knew the griefs and vexations of the people, that ceased not to complain and
lament their case continually, yet he diminished not their burdens, but
multiplied them more and more, and sucked and gnew out all that ever he could,
until he left them naked, empty, and despoiled: To Frog. lib. 21.
conclude, this grand thief, that durst not trust his wife nor own daughters,
after he had been discomfited by the Carthaginians, was slain by his servants.

Of the Roman Emperors that most vexed the Commonalty with tribures and taxes,
these three were chief, Caligula, Nero, and Caracalla; of whom this latter did
most pill and pull the people, and would often say, That the gold and silver of
the Kingdom pertained in right to none but Dion. and Xiph.
him. Being reproved of his mother at a time, for his immoderate and excessive
expenses; saying, That there was almost not so much more treasure left as he
had already spent; he made her this answer, That she should take no care for
that; for as long as his hand was able to wield his sword (which he held naked
before her) he would not want money. This is the sword which many now adays
(after the example of Caracalla) have taken up, to cut out (by force and
violence) a way to their own wills, and to cut the throat of equity and
justice, and to compel the poor people to forgo their goods, and surrender
them into their hands: Now how odious and hateful these three were made unto
the people by their own wicked demeanours, their miserable ends do
sufficiently testify; which we have already before meant ioned, and mean
afterward more at large to speak of.

The Emperor Constance, son to Constantine, whose father was Heraclius,
coming at a time out of Greece into Rome, abode there but five days; but
^ulg. lib. 9. c. 4.
in that short space committed so much outrage in ransacking the Temples and
other public places, and carrying away so many rich ornaments and pictures
(whereof those places then abounded) that in man's remembrance no foreign
barbarous enemy, having taken the City by force of war, ever went away with the
like spoil: besides, he did so oppress the Allies and Tributaries of the
Empire (and chiefly the Sicilians) with taxes and imposts, that many of them
were constrained to sell their children for money to satisfy his extortion:
and by this means he scraped together an infinite mass of rapines and evil
gotten goods; but enjoyed the sweet of them not very long; for very soon after
he was murdered by his own men of wat, in his return out of Sicily and all
that spoil which he had unjustly surprised, was suddenly taken and transported
into Africa by the Sarasens, that then inhabited the City Panorme.

Lewis the eleventh, King of France, after he had overcharged his subjects with
too grievous burdens of payments and taxes, fell into such a timorous conceit
and fear of death, as never any man did the like; he attempted all means of
avoiding or delaying the same; as first, during his sickness, he gave his
Physician monthly ten thousand crowns, by that means to creep into his
favor: wherein he, being in all other things a very niggard and pinch-penny,
showed himself on the other side more than prodigal: next he sent into
Calabria for an Hermit, reported to be an holy and devout man, to whom at his
arrival, he performed so much duty and reverence, as was wonderful and
unseemly: for he threw himself on his knees, and besought him to prolong his
decaying life, as if he had been a God, and not a man: but all that he could do
was to no purpose; no nor the relics which Pope Sextus sent him to busy
himself withal, nor the holy vial of the Rheimes which was brought him,
could prorogue this life of his, nor privilege him from dying a discontent and
unwilling death: he suspected the most part of his nearest attendants, and
would not suffer them to approach unto him in his sickness: after he had thus
prolonged the time in hope, and yet still languished in extreme distress of
his disease, it was at length told him in all speed, that he should not set his
mind any longer upon those vain hopes, nor upon that holy man, for his time
was come, and he must needs die. And thus he that during his Reign showed
himself rough and cruel to his subjects, by too many and heavy impositions,
was himself in his latter end thus roughly and hardly dealt withal.

Christierne the eleventh, King of Denmark, Norway; and Suecia, after the
death of King John his father, reigned, the year of our Lord 1514. and was too
intolerable in imposing burdens and taxes upon his subjects; for which cause
the Suecians revolted from his government: whom though after many battles and
sieges he conquered, and placed amongst them his garrisons to keep them in awe,
yet ceased they not to rebel against him, and that by the instigation of a
mean Gentleman, who very quickly got fo^ting into the Kingdom, and possessed
himself of the Crown and government. Now Christierne having lost this
Province, and being also in disdain and hatred of his own Country, and
fearing least this inward heat of spite should grow to some flame of danger to
his life, seeing that the inhabitants of Lubecke conspiring with his uncle
Frederick, began to take arms against him, he fled away, with his wife
(sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth) and his young children, to Zealand,
a Province of the Emperors, after he had reigned nine years: after which the
Estates of the Realm (aided by them of Lubecke) assembling together, exalted
his uncle Frederick, Prince of Holsatia (though old and ancient) to the
Crown; and publishing certain writings, addressed them to the Emperor and the
Princes of his Empire, to render a reason of their proceeding, and to make
known unto them upon how good considerations they had deposed and banished
Christierne, for the tyranny which he exercised among them. Ten years after
this he got together a new Army by sea, in hope to recover his losses, but
contrary to his hope he was taken prisoner, and in captivity miserably ended
his days.

Henry King of Suecia was chased from his Scepter for enterprising to Nic. Gil.
vol. 1
burden his Commons with new contributions: those that were devisers of new
Taxes and Tributes, for the most part ever lost their lives in their labors:
for proof whereof, let the example of Parchenus or Porchetes serve; who for
giving counsel to King Theodebert touching the raising of new subsidies, was
stoned to death by the multitude, in the City Trieves.

Likewise was George Presquon cruelly put to death by the people, for
persuading and setting forward Henry of Suecia, to the vexation and exaction of
his subjects.

CHAP. XL. More examples of the same subject.
AIstulphus the nineteenth King of Lumbardy, was not only a most cruel Tyran,
but also a grievous oppressor Platina invita Zacharia.
of his subjects with taxes and exactions; for he imposed this upon every one
of them, to pay yearly Phil. Melanct. lib. 1.
a Noble for their heads: against this man Pope Stephen provoked King Pepin of
France, who coming with an Army drove the Tyran into Tycinum, and constrained
him to yield to partial conditions of peace. Howbeit Pepin was no sooner gone,
but he returned to his old byas; wherefore the second time he came and drove
him to as great extremity; insomuch as another peace was concluded: after the
accomplishment whereof, perverse Aistulph still vexing his subjects, was
plagued by God with an Apoplexy, and so died.

Justinian the Emperor, as he was profuse and excessive in spending, so was he
immoderate and insatiable in gathering together riches, for he exercised Zonar.
lib. 3.
his wit in devising new tributes and payments, and rejoiced his heart in
nothing more; for which causes there arose a grievous sedition at
Constantinople against him; wherein not only the excellent and famous
monuments of the Empire were burned, but also forty thousand men slain; and
this was no small punishment for his oppression.

At Paris there is to be seen in the corn market, a certain monument hard at
the mouth of the common sink, which conveyeth away all the filth Eras. in
lingua
out of the City; the occasion whereof is reported to be this: A certain
courtier seeing the king sad and melancholy for want of treasure, counseled
him to exact of every countriman that brought ware into the city but one penny,
and that but for two years together: which when the King put in practice, and
found the exceeding commodity thereof, he not only continued that tax, but
also invented diverse others, to the great damage of the commonwealth, and
enriching of his own treasury. Wherefore he that put it first into his head,
when he saw that he had not so much authority in dissuading, as he had in
persuading it, to take punishment of himself for that inconsiderate deed; and
to warn others from attempting the like, he commanded by his testament, that
his body should be buried in that common sink, to be an example of exaction
and the filthiness thereof.

Barnabe, Vicount of Milan, by the report of Paulus Iovius, was an
unconscionable oppressor of his subjects and tenants: for he did not only
extort Tom. 2. Virerum illustrium.
of them continual imposts and payments, but enjoined them to keep every one
a dog: which if they came to any mishap, or were either too fat or too lean,
the keeper was sure to be beaten, or at least some fine to be set on his head.
This Tyran was taken by John Galeacius, and after seven months imprisonment
poisoned to death.

Archigallo, brother to Gorbonianus in nature, though unlike in conditions
Lanquet.
(for he was a good Prince, whereas this was a tyran) was crowned King of
Britain in the year of the world 3671: we may well place him in the rank, of
oppressors; for he deposed the Noblemen, and exalted the ignoble, he extorted
from men their goods, to enrich his treasure; for which cause the Estates of
the Realm deprived him of his royal Dignity, and placed his younger brother
Elydurus in his room, after he had reigned five years.

Hardiknitus King of Denmark, after the death of Harold was ordained The same.
King of England, in the year of our Lord 1041. This King as he was somewhat
cruel (for he caused the body of Harold to be taken up out of the Sepulclire,
and smiting off his head, to be cast out into the River Thames, because he had
injured his mother Emma when he was alive;) so he was burdensome to his Subjects
in tributes and exaction: for which cause growing into hatred with God and his
Subjects, he was stricken with sudden death, not without suspicion of
poisoning, after he had reigned three years.

William Rufus, second son of William the Conqueror, succeeded his father, as
in the Kingdom of England, so in disposition of nature: for they The same.
were both cruel, inconstant, and covetous, and burdened their people with
unreasonable taxes; insomuch, that what by the murraine of men by postilence,
and oppressions of them by exactions, the tillage of the earth was put off for
one year, being the year 1099, whereby ensued great scarcity the year following
throughout all the Land: but for the oppression William was justly punished by
sudden death, when being at his disport of hunting he was wounded with an arrow
glauncing from the bow of Tyrill a French Knight, and so his tyranny and life
ended together.

And here is further to be noted, that the place where this King was slain, was
called New Forest; in which same place Richard, the Cousin germane of King
William, son to Duke Robert his brother, was likewise slain. This New Forest
was made by William the Conqueror their father, who plucked down and
depopulated diverse Towns and Churches the compass of 30. miles about, to make
this a Forest for wild Beasts: a most beastly sin, yea a bloody crying sin,
too too much practiced in these days, and that by great persons, that make no
conscience to turn Towns into pastures, and men into sheep: but let all them
behold the just vengeance of God upon this Kings posterity: for when then
either cannot or will not revenge, then God revengeth either in them or their
posterity.

In the year 1548. the Commons of Guyenne, Santonge, and Augoulemois fell into
a great Rebellion, by reason of the extortions of the Customers Annals of
France, Henry 2.
and Farmours of Salt: the Rebels in a few weeks grew to the number of forty
thousand men, armed with clubs and staves; who joining with the Islanders, by a
general consent ran upon the Officers of the Custom, and with extreme sury
put to sword all that they could take, notwithstanding the King of Navarre
sought by all means to appease them. About the same time the Commons of
Gascoigne rose in diverse places, upon the same causes, and notwithstanding all
that the Lord of Monneins, the Kings Lieutenant, and all other Officers could
do, they made a great spoil of many honorable Houses, and massacre of much
people: insomuch, that the Lord of Moneins himself was slain by them, whilst
he was making an Oration to them to pacify their rage: but at length these
Rebels were suppressed by Francis of Lorraine, Earl of Aumale, and Anne of
Mommorancye, high Constable of France, and the chief Kingleaders and Captains
of them executed according to their deserts. La Vergne was drawn in pieces by
four horses: L'Estonnac, and the two brothers of Saulx, had their heads cut
off: Tallemoigne and Galefer^, the two Colonels of the Commons, were broken
upon the Wheel, being first crowned with a crown of burning iron, as a
punishment of the Sovereignty which they had usurped. Thus the Lord punished
both the one and the other, and the one by the other; the exactors for their
oppression, and the tumultuous Commons for their Rebellion.

Neither does the Lord thus punish oppressors themselves, but also they that
either countenance, or having authority, do not punish the same; as Lanquet.
it appears by this example following. In the year of our Lord 475. there
lived one Corrannus a King of Scots; who though he governed the people in peace
and quietness a long space, and was indeed a good Prince, yet because his
Chancellor Tomset used extortion and exaction amongst his Subjects, and he
being advertised thereof, did not punish him, he was slain traitorously by his
own Subjects.

It is not unworthy to be noted, how Edward the Third, King of England,
prospered a long while in the wars against France, and got many worthy and
wonderful victories: but when Prince Edward, son unto the aforesaid Edward,
after conditions of peace concluded, began to set taxes and impositions upon
the Country of Aquitain, then did King Edwards part begin to incline, and the
success of war, which the space of forty years never forsook him, now
frowned upon him; so that he quickly lost all those lands which by composition
of peace were granted unto him.

CHAP. XLI. Of such as by force of arms have either taken away, or would have
taken away, the goods and lands of other men.
NOw if they that oppress their Subjects, and devour them in this manner be
found guilty, then must they In this whole chapter note the nature of Ambition,
and the frui^^ thereof.
needs be much more, that are carried with the wings of their own hungry
ambitious desire to invade their lands and Seigniories, attended on with an
infinite retinue of pillages, sackings, ruins of Cities and people; which are
always necessary companions of furious unmercifull war. There are no floods so
broad, nor mountains so steep, nor rokces so rough and dangerous, nor sea so
long and furious, that can restrain the rash and headstrong desire of such
greedy minded Sacres: so that if their body might be proportioned to the square
and greatness of their minds, with the one hand they would reach the East,
and with the other hand the West (as it is said of Alexander:) howbeit hereof
they boast and glory no less than they that took delight to be surnamed
City-spoilers: others burners of Cities; some conquerours, and many Eagles and
Faulcons, seeking as it were fame by infamy; and by vice, eternity. But to
these men it often comes to pass, that even then when they think to advance
their Dominion, and to stretch their bounds and frontiers furthest, they are
driven to recoil, for fear of being dispossessed themselves of their own lands
and inheritances: and even as they dealt, with others rigorously and by
strength of weapons, so shall they be themselves rehandled and dealt withal
after the same measure; according to the Word of the Prophet denounced against
such as they: Cursed be th^^ that spoilest and dealest unfaithfully; when thou
have made an end of spoiling others, th^^ the self shall be spoiled; and when
thou have done dealing traitorously, then treason shall begin to be practiced
against thee. And this curse most commonly never fails to seize upon these
great Thieves and Robbers, or at least upon their children and successors; as
by particular examples we shall see, after we have first spoken of Adonias, who
not content with his own estate of being a Kings son, which God had allotted
him, went about to (...) the 1 Kings 12.
Crown and Kingdom from his brother Solomon, to whom by right it appertained
Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
(for God had manifested the same by the mouth of his father David) but both he
and his assistants, for their overbold and rash enterprise, were justly by
Solomon punished with death.

Crassus King of Lydia was the first that made war against Ephesus, and Herod.
that subdued the Greeks of Asia: to wit, the Phrygians, Mysians. Chalybeans,
Paphlagonians, Thracians, Bythinians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians, and
Pamphilians, and made them all tributeries unto him: by means whereof he being
grown exceeding rich and puissant, by the detriment and undoing of so many
people, vanted and gloried in his greatness and power, and even then thought
himself the happiest man in the world, when most misery and adversity, grief
and distress of his estate and wholehouse, approuched nearest: for first and
foremost one of his sons that was dear unto him, was by oversight slain at the
chase of a wild Bore: next himself having commenced war with Cyrus, was
overcome in battle, and besieged in Sardis the chief City of his Kingdom, and
at last taken and carried captive to Cyrus, despoiled of all his late glory and
dominion. And thus Crassus (as says Plutarch after Herodotus) bore the
punishment of the offense of his great Grandfather Gigas: who being but one of
King Ca^daules attendants, slew his master, and usurped the Crown at the
provokement of the Queen his mistress, whom he also took to be his wife: And
thus this Kingdom decayed by the same means by which it first increased.

Polycrat^s the Tyran was one that by violence and tyrannous means grew from a
base condition to an high estate: for being but one of the Herod.
vulgar sort in the City Samos, he with the assistance of fifteen armed men
seized upon the whole City, and made himself Lord of it: which dividing into
three parts, he bestowed two of them upon his two brethren, but not for
perpetuity; for ere long the third part of his usurpation cost the elder of
them the best part of his life, and the younger his liberty, for he chased him
away, that he might be sole possessour of the whole Island. After this, he
invaded many other Islands, besides many Cities in the same Land: he raised the
Lacedaemonians from the fiege of Samos, which they had begirt: and when he saw
that all things fell out so well to his own wish, that nothing could be more,
fearing so great prosperity could not but carry in the ^ail some terrible sting
of adversity and mischance, attempted by voluntary loss of something of value
to prevent the mischief which he feared to ensue: and this by the advice of his
dear friend and allie (the King of Egypt) therefore he threw a ring which he
had of great price into the sea, to the end to delude Fortune (as he thought)
thereby: ^ut the ring was after found in a fishes belly, and offered as a
present unto him: and this was an evident presage of some inevitable this for
tune that waited for him: neither did it prove vain and frivolous; for he was
hanged upon a gibbet of Sardis, by the commandment of Orates the Governor of
the City; who under pretense of friendship, and color of rendering his treasure
into his hands, and bestowing upon him a great part thereof, promising also to
pass the rest of his days under his wing, for fear of the rage of Cambyses,
drew him to come privately to speak with him, and so easily wrought his will
upon him.

Aristodemus got into his hands the government of C^ma, after he had made away
the principal of the City: and to keep it the better being obt^ined, Dlonis.
Halic. lib. 7.
he first worm the vulgars hearts by presents, then banished out of the City
their children whom he had put to death, and entertained the rest of the youth
with such variety of pleasures and delights, that by those devices he kept
himself in his tyrannous estate many years: but as soon as the children of
those slain Citizens were grown to ripe years of strength and discretion,
being desirous to revenge their fathers deaths, they set upon him in the night,
so at unawares, that they put him and all his family to the slaughter.

Timophanes usurped a principality, power, and rule in Corinth a free City, and
became so odious thereby to the whole people, yea and to his Plutarch.
own brother Tymoleon also, that laying aside all respect of nature, he slew
him with his own hands, preferring the liberty of his Country before any
unity or bond of blood. When the Cities of Greece (says Orosius) would needs
through too greedy a desire and ambition of reign* get every Lib. 3. cap. 12.
one the mastery and sovereignty of the rest, they all together made shipwreck
of their own liberties by encroaching upon others: as for instance, the
Lacedaemonians, how hurtful and incommodious the desire of bringing their
neighbor adjoining Cities under their dominion was unto them, the sundry
discomfitures and distresses within the time of that war, undertaken upon that
only cause, befell them, bear sufficient record. Oros. l. 3. c. 2.


Servius Tullus, the son to a bondsman, addicted himself so much to the Titus
Livius.
exploits of war, that by prowess he got so great credit and reputation among
the Romans, that he was thought ^it to be son in law of King Tarquinius, by
marrying one of his daughters; after whose death he usurped the Crown, under
color of the Protectorship of the Kings ^oo young sons; who when they came
to age and bigness, married the daughters of their brother in law Tullus; by
whose exhortation and continual provokement the elder of them, which was
called Tarquinius, conspired against his father in law, and practiced to make
himself King, and to recover his rightful inheritance, and that by this
means: he watched his opportunity when the greatest part of the people were
out of the City about gathering their fruit in the fields, and then placing his
companions in readiness, to serve his turn if need should be, he marched to
the palace in the royal robes, guarded with a company of his comederates; and
having called a Senate, as he began to complain him of the treachery and
impudency of Tullus, behold, Tullus himself came in and would have run
violently upon him; but Tarquinius catching him about the middle, threw him
headlong down the stairs, and presently sent certain of his guard to make an
end of the murder which he had begun. But herein the cruelty of Tullia was most
monstrous; that not only first moved her husband to this bloody practice, but
also made her coach to be driven over the body of her father, which lay
bleeding in the midst of the street, scarce dead.

Manlius, after he had maintained the fortress of Rome against the Parricide,
lib. 2. cap. 11.
Gauls, glorying in that action, and envying the good hap and prosperity of
Camillus, went about to make himself King, under pretense of restoring the
people to their ancient entire liberty: but his practice being discovered, he
was accused, found guilty, and by the consent of the multitude adjudged to be
thrown headlong down from the top of the same fortress, to the end that the
same place which gave him great glory, might be a witness and a memorial of
his shame and last confusion: for all his valiant deeds before done were not of
so much force with the people, to excuse his fault or save his life, as this
one crime was of weight to bring him to his death.

In former times there lived in Carthage one Hanno, who because he had Oros.
lib. 4. cap. 6.
more riches than all the Commonwealth beside, began to aspire to the
domination of the City: which the better to accomplish, he devised to make
show of marrying his only daughter, to the end that at the marriage feast he
might poison the chiefest men of credit and power of the City whom he knew
could or would not any ways withstand or countermand his purpose: but when
this devise took no effect, by reason of the discovery thereof by certain of
his servants, he sought another means to effect his will: He got together a
huge number of bondslaves and servants, which should at a sudden put him in
possession of the city but being prevented herein also by the Citizens, he
seized upon a castle with a thousand men of base regard, even servants for the
most part; whither thinking to draw the Africans and King of the Moors to his
succor, he was taken and first whipped, next had his eyes thrust out, and then
his arms and legs broken in pieces, and so was executed to death before all
the people: his carcass being thus mangled with blows, was hanged upon a
gallows, and all his kindred and children put to death, that there might not
one remain of his strain, either to enterprise the like deed, or to revenge
his death.

That great and fearful warrior Julius Caesar, one of the most hardy and
valiant pieces of flesh that ever was, after he had performed so many notable
exploits, overcome all his enemies, and brought all high and haughty purposes
to their desired effect, being pricked forward with the spur of ambition and a
high mind, through the means and assistance of the mighty forces of the
commonwealth, which (contrary to the constitution of the Senate) were left in
his hands, he set footing into the State, and making himself master and Lord
of the whole Roman Empire, usurped a Plutarch. Suet. Eutrop.
soveraigntie over them: but as he attained to his dignity by force and
violence, so he enjoyed it not long, neither gained any great benefit by it,
except the loss of his life may be counted a benefit, which shortly after in
the open Senate was bereft him: for the conspirers thereof, as soon as he was
set down in his seat, compassing him about, so vehemently overcharged him on
all sides, that notwithstanding all the resistance he could make for his
defense, tossing amongst them, and shifting himself up and down, he was
overthrown on the earth, and abode for dead, through the number of blows that
were given him, even three and twenty wounds.

The Monarchy of Assyria was at one instant extinguished in Sardana palus; and
of Babylon in Balthazar, Arbaces being the worker of the first, and Darius King
of Persia, of the later; both of them receiving the wages, not of their
wickedness, but also of their predecessors, and great grandfathers cruelty and
oppressions, by whom many people and nations had been destroyed.

Moreover, as the Babylonian Empire was overthrown by Darius of Persia, so was
his Persian Kingdom (in Darius the last King of that country his time, this
man's successor) overturned by Alexander. Again, the great dominion of Alexander
(who survived not long after) was not continued to any of his by inheritance,
but divided like a prey amongst his greatest captains, and from them the most
part of it in short time descended to the Romans; who spreading their wings,
and stretching their greedy tallons far and near, for a while ravened and
preyed over all the world, and enriched and bedecked themselves with the
spoils of many nations; and therefore it was necessary that they also should
be made a prey, and that the far fetched Goths and Vandales should come upon
them, as upon the body of a great Whale that suffers shipwreck upon the sea
shore: since which time the Roman Empire went to decay, and grew every day
weaker than other; yea, and many Princes setting themselves against and above
it, have robbed it of the realms and provinces which it robbed others of
before. And thus we may see how all things run as it were in a circle, and how
great the uncertainetie of this world is, seeing that the mightiest are subject
to so many and great changes: for if there be any thing under the Sun that may
carry any show of stability or continuance, surely it is a Monarchy or
Commonwealth, grounded upon the unity and consent of all people, maintained
by the authority of the greatest and most mighty, and underpropped with the
shores of much strength and wealth, as the Roman Empire was; and yet for all
that, there was never any, though never so well reared and furnished, and deep
rooted, which at the length has not bin demolished, ransacked, and pulled up
by some notable and strange calamity. And this is that which the spirit of God
would give us to know, by the vision of that great image, represented to
Nabuchadnezzar in a dream, according to Daniels interpretation thereof; to
wit, that the four great and puissant Monarchies of the world should at last
be ruined and dispersed, like the chafe before the wind, till they were
consumed and brought to nothing, albeit they were glorious and excellent as
gold and silver, or strong and mighty as brass and iron.

How much more foolish and evil advised are they then, that for a certain
apparent splendor and show of worldly honor (which is as frail as any rose,
as variable as the wind, as light and vain as a shadow or smoke, as unassured
as a rotten planke) have the eyes of their mind so dazeled, and their wits so
bewitched, and all their affections so transported, as to mingle heaven and
earth together, to dash the East against the West, to stir up discord and
dissension betwixt man and man, and to shed so many thousand men's blood, and
all for a paltrie desire of reign, though to their own final ruin and
destruction.

And thus it came to pass in the time of the emperor Otho to a Duke of Sabell.
Venice, called Peter Caudian, who (not content with his Dukedom) went about
to usurp a tyrannical rule over the whole Seigniorie, and that by pride and
threats, desiring rather to make himself terrible to the people by those bad
means, than amiable and beloved by any means whatsoever; and thus daily he
grew as in age so in insolency: he placed a garrison of men about his palace,
and so fortifying himself, presently he showed himself in his colors, namely
a cruel Tyran: which when the multitude perceived, and remembered withal their
liberty, which they were like to lose, they took up arms forthwith, in
purpose to beat down his haughty mind: therefore they first set on fire his
house, and caused him to forsake his fortress, and to betake himself to his
shifts: but when by reason of the stopping of the passages he could not escape,
they took him and his young son also which was with him, and put them to a
most cruel and sudden death, and cast their carcasses to be devoured of dogs.

In the Empire of Maximilian, Lewis Sforce, a Prince of an inconstant Bembus,
lib. 2. Of the Venetian history.
and turbulent spirit, ambitious, and one that made no account of his promises
nor faith, took upon him the government of Milan, after the death of his
brother Galeaz, Duke of Milan, who was traitorously slain: in which action the
first wrong which he did was to his brothers widow, whom he deposed; the
second to his young nephew, his brother Galeaz son, whom he so brought up as if
he never meant he should come to honor or goodness; for he suffered him not
to be trained up either in learning or arms, but let him run into all
possible occasions that might corrupt and spoil his tender age. Thus he
enjoyed the principality thirteen years, all the while under his nephews
reign; to whom when Alphonsus King of Naples had given in marriage one of his
daughters, and perceived what small reckoning his uncle made of restoring him
his Dukedom; after he had often and instantly entreated him without
prevailing, at length he fell to threaten him with war: he fearing to have
the worse, and to lose so great a dignity, wrought so by his own shifts and
devices, together with the helping hand of Pope Alexander, that he put in the
head of Charles the eighth of France to go and conquer Naples, for the hatred
which his heart possessed against Alphonsus; supposing by this means the
better to accomplish his affairs to his own desire. The King of France
Guicciard. li. 1
was no sooner entered Italy, but Lewis Sforce ministered an Italian posset to
his young nephew John Galeaz, that he immediately died upon it, and then he
proclaimed himself Prince of the Duchy, by the aid of the principal of the
Council, whom he had won to refer that honor unto him, by deposing the
young son of John Galeaz, being then but five years old: but he declared
presently his inconstant and perfidious nature, in breaking promise with the
King of France, whom he had induced with so many fair speeches to undertake
that voyage, and entering a new league with the Venetians both against him and
the Pope, although ere long he served them with the same measure: but Lewis the
twelfth, succeeding in the Crown of France, could not brook this injury done
to his predecessor, but pretending a title to the Duchy of Milan, he
dispatched an army thitherward, that bestirred it self so well, that in short
space they brought under their subjection all the Cities and Towns near
adjoining: which the citizens perceiving, began to rebel against their Duke,
and killed his Treasurer: whereupon he (being not able to make his part good
with the French abroad, nor daring to put any confidence in his own at home)
left his castle to the charge and custody of a captain, and fled himself
with his children to Almaine, toward the Emperor Maximilians court, hoping to
find succor at his hand, as indeed he did: for he returned to Milan with five
hundred Burgundians, and eight thousand Switzers, and was received again into
the City. Being thus refortified with these and other more troops that came
unto him, he encamped before Navarre, and by composition got the City into his
hands from the Frenchmen. The French King in the mean while sent a new supply
of men into the Duchy, amongst whom were many Switzers, who so dealt with
their countrymen that were on the Dukes side, that they brought them also to
favor the King of France, and to forsake the Duke: which when he understood,
he presently departed the city, and posting to the camp, hardened his
soldiers, desiring them to play the men, and not to shrink, for he meant to
give battle without delay: but the captains made answer, that they might not
fight against their own nation, without especial leave from their Lords. Now
in the mean while, whilst these things were in doing, they took order, that
the Frenchmen should approach to Navarre, and intercept all the passages, that
the Duke might not escape: He therefore laid aside his horse, and marched on
foot in the squadron of Switzers, now joined to the French, in attire and
armor like a Switzer, thinking by this trick to save his life: but all his
counterfeiting could not save him from being taken, and from lying ten years
prisoner in the Tower of Loches, where he also died: and so all his high and
ambitious thoughts (which scarcely Italy could contain) were pend up in a
strait and narrow room. Guicciard. lib. 4.


With the like turbulent and furious spirit of ambition have many Roman Bishops
been inspired, who what by their juggling tricks, cousenages, and subtle
devises, and what by force, have prospered so well, that of simple Bishops
(which they were wont to be) they are grown temporal Lords, and as it were
Monarchs; having in their possessions lands, cities, castles, fortresses,
havens, garrisons, and guards, after the manner of Kings; nay they have exalted
themselves above Kings (so intolerable is Mark 10. Luke 22.
their impudence) and made them subject to their wills; and yet they call
themselves the Apostles pedigree, whom Christ forbad all such domination. But
what of that? It pertains not to them to succeed in virtue, but in authority
the Apostles: for if that charge had concerned them, then Pope Lucius the
second would never have been so shameless, as to request Bal.
in right of his Popeship the soveraigntie over Rome as he did: neither when
it was denied him, to have gone about to usurp it by force, and to bring his
mind about to have laid siege to the Senate house with armed men, to the end
that either by banishing or murdering the Senators then assembled together, he
might invest himself with the Kingly dignity: but what got he by it? Marry
this, the people being in an uprore in the City, upon the sight of this holy
fathers proud attempt, took themselves to arms, and ran with such violence
upon master Pope, that they forthwith stoned his Holiness to death; but not
like Stephen the Martyr for the profession of Christ Jesus, but like a vile and
seditious thief for seeking the Commonwealths overthrow.

Pope Adrian the fourteenth, a monks son, succeeding Lucius both in the
Papacy, and also in ambition, took in hand his omitted enterprises; Sabel.
Bal.
for he excommunicated the Romans, until they had banished Arnold a Bishop,
that gave them counsel to retain the power of electing their magistrate, and
governing their city in their hands (a thing repugnant to his intent) and
after he had degraded the Consuls, to make his part the stronger, he caused
the Emperor Frederick to come with an army to the city; whom
notwithstanding he handled but basely for his pains: for he did not only
check him openly for standing on his feet, and holding the stirrup of his
horse with his left hand, but also denied him the crown of the Empire, except
he would restore to him Poville, which (he said) pertained unto him: how beit
he got the Crown notwithstanding, and before his return from Rome into
Germany, more than a thousand citizens that would not yield nor subscribe unto
the Popes will, were slain. After Frederickes departure, the Pope seeing
himself destitute of his further aid, first excommunicated the King of
Sicilie, that in right of inheritance possessed the foresaid Poville: but when
this served him to small purpose, he practiced with Emanuel the Emperor of
Greece to set upon him; which thing turned to his final confusion. After this
(through his intolerable pride) he fell out with Frederick the Emperor, and
to revenge himself upon him, discharged his subjects from their fealty to
him, and him from his authority over them. Now mark his end: As he walked one
day toward Aviane, a fly got in at his mouth and down his throat so far,
that it stopped the conduit of his breath, so that for all that his physicians
could do, he was choked therewith. And thus he that sought by all the means
he could to make himself greater than he ought to be, and to get the masterie
of every thing at his own will and pleasure, and to take away other men's
rights by force, was cut short and rebated by a small and base creature, and
constrained to leave this life, which he was most unworthy of.

Hither may be referred that which befell the Emperor Albert, Duke of Austria,
and one of his lievtenants in Switzerland, for going about to usurp and
appropriat certain lands and dominions to him, which belonged not unto him.
This Emperor had many children whom he desired to leave rich and mighty, and
therefore by all means possible he endeavored to augment his living, even by
getting from other men whatsoever he could; and amongst all the rest, this was
one especial practice, wherein he labored tooth and nail to alienate from
the Empire the land of the Switzers, and to leave it for an everlasting
inheritance to his heirs: which although the Switzers would in no case
condescend nor agree unto, but contrariwise sued earnestly unto his Majesty for
the maintenance of their ancient liberties and privileges which were confirmed
unto them by the former Emperors, and that they might not be distracted from
the Empire; yet notwithstanding were constrained to undergo for a season the
yoke of most grievous tyranny and servitude imposed by force upon them: and
thus the poor communaltie endured many mischiefs, and many grievous and
cruel extortions and indignities at the hands of the Emperors officers,
whilst they lived in this wretched and miserable estate.

Amongst the rest there was one called Grislier that began to erect a strong
fort of defense upon a little hill near unto Altorfe, to keep the country in
greater awe and subjection; and desiring to descrie his friends from his foes,
he invented this devise: He put a hat upon the end of a long pole, and placed
it in the field before Altorfe, where were great multitudes of people, with
this commandment, That every one that came by should do but dies ere he
awaketh; so money taken in usurie, delights and contenteth at the first, but
it infecteth all his possessions, and sucketh out the marrow of them ere it be
long: Seeing then it is abominable both by the law of God and nature, let us
shun it as a toad, and fly from it as a cockatrice: But when these persuasions
will not serve, let them turn their eyes to these examples following, wherein
they shall see the manifest indignation of God upon it.

In the Bishopric of Collen a notable famous Usurer lying upon his deathbed
ready to die, moved up and down his chaps and his lips, as if he Discipul. de
tempore.
had bin eating something in his mouth; and being demanded what he eat, he
answered, his money, and that the devil thrust it in his mouth perforce, so
that he could neither will nor choose but devour it: in which miserable
temptation he died without any show of repentance.

The same author tells of another Usurer, that a little before his death
called for his bags of gold and silver, and offered them all to his soul, upon
condition it would not forsake him: But if he would have given all the world,
it could not ransom him from death: wherefore when he saw there was no remedy
but he must needs die, he commended his soul to the Devil, to be carried
into everlasting torments: which words when he had uttered he gave up the
ghost.

Another Usurer being ready to die, made this his last Will and Testament: My
soul (quoth he) I bequeath to the devil who is owner of it, my wife likewise
to the devil who induced me to this ungodly trade of life, and Iohanaes Anglut.
my deacon to the devil for soothing me up, and not reproving me for my
faults; and in this desperate persuasion he died incontinently.

Usury consists not only in lending and borowing, but buying and selling
also, and all unjust and crafty bargaining, yea and it is a kind of usurie to
detain through too much covetousness those commodities from the people which
concern the public good, and to hoord them up for their private gain, til
some scarcity orwant arise; and this also has evermore been most sharply
punished, as by these examples may appear. About the year 1543. at what time
a great famine and dearth of bread afflicted the world, there was in Saxony a
country peasant, that having carried his corn to the market, and sold it
cheaper than he looked for, as he returned homewards he fell into most heavy
dumpes and dolours of mind with grief that the price of grain was abated:
and when his servants sang merrily for joy of that blessed cheapnesse, he
rebuked them most sharply and cruelly, yea and was so much the more tormented
and troubled in mind, by how much he more he saw any poor soul thankful
unto God for it: but mark how God gave him over to a reprobate and desperate
sense: Whilst his servants rode before, he hung himself at the cart tail,
being past recoverie of life ere any man looked back or perceived him. A
notable example for our English cormorants, who join barn to barn, and heap
to heap, and will not sell nor give a handful of their superfluity to the
poor, when it bears a low price, but preserve it till scarcity and want
come, and then they sell it at their own rate; let them fear by this, lest
the Lord deal so or worse with them.

Another covetous wretch, when he could not sell his cornesodear as he desired,
said the mise should eat it rather than he would lessen one jot of the price
thereof: Which words were no sooner spoken, but vengeance took them: for all
the mise in the country flocked to his barnes and fields, so that they left
him neither standing nor lying corn, but devoured all. This story was written
to Martin Luther: upon occasion whereof he inveying mightily against this
cruel usurie of husbandmen, told of three misers Luther.
that in one year hung themselves, because grain bore a lower price than they
looked for: adding moreover, that all such cruel and muddy extortioners
deserved no better a doom, for their unimercifull oppression.

Another rich farmer, whose barnes were full of grain, and his stacks D.
Pomeranus.
untouched, was so covetous withal, that in hope of some dearth and deerenesse
of corn, he would not diminish one heap, but hoorded up daily more and more,
and wished for a scarcity upon the earth, to the end he might enrich his
coffers by other men's necessities. This cruel churl rejoiced so much in his
abundance, that every day he would go into his barnes, and feed his eyes with
his superfluity: Now it fell out as the Lord would, that having supped and
drunk very largely, upon a night as he went, according to his custom, to
view his riches, with a candle in his hand, behold the wine, or rather the
justice of God, overcame his senses, so that he fell down suddenly into the
mow, and by his fall set on fire the corn, being dry and easy to be incensed,
in such sort that in a moment all that which he had scraped together and
preserved so charily, and delighted in so unreasonably, was consumed and
brought to ashes, and scarce he himself escaped with his life.

Another in Misnia, in the year 1559, having great store of corn hoordedup,
Ioh. Fincel li. 2.
refused to succor the necessity of his poor and half famished neighbors:
for which cause the Lord punished him with a strange and unusual judgment,
for the corn which he so much cherished, assumed life, and became feathered
fowls, flying out of his barnes in such abundance, that the world was
astonished thereat, and his barnes left empty of all provision, in most
wonderful and miraculous manner.

No less strange was that which happened in a town of France called The same
Author.
Stenchansen, to the Governor of the town, who being requested by one of his
poor subjects to sell him some corn for his money, when there was Fides fit
apud authorem.
none to be gotten elsewhere; answered, he could spare none, by reason he had
scarce enough for his own hogs: which hoggish disposition the Lord requited in
it own kind; for his wife at the next litter brought forth seven pigs at one
birth to increase the number of his hogs: that as he had preferred filthy and
ougly creatures before his poor brethren, in whom the image of God in some
sort shined forth, so he might have of his own getting more of that kind to
make much of, since he loved them so well.

Equal to all the former both in cruelty touching the person, and miracle The
same.
touching the judgment, was that which is reported by the same author, to
have happened to a rich covetous woman in Marchia, who in an extreme dearth of
victuals, denied not only to relieve a poor man whose children were ready to
starve with famine, but also to sell him but one bushel of corn, when he
wanted but a penny of her price: for the poor wretch making great shift to
borrow that penny, returned to her again, and desired her he might have the
corn: but as he paid her the money, the penny fell upon the ground by the
providence of God, which as she stretched out obeisance, and veil bonnet to
the hat, and in every respect show themselves as dutiful unto it, as to his
own person, imagining that his greatest enemies could not endure nor find in
their hearts to do it, and therefore upon this occasion he might apprehend
them, and discover all their close practices, and conspiracies, which they
might brew against him: now there was one, a stout hearted man, that passing
every day up and down that ways, could in no wise be brought to reverence
the dignity of the worthy hat, (so unreasonable a thing it seemed in his eyes)
whereupon being taken, the tyran commanded him (for punishment of his open
contempt) to shoot at an apple laid upon the crown of the head of his dearest
child, and if he mist the apple, to be put to death: the poor man after many
excuses, and allegations, and entreaties that he might not hazard his childs
life in that sort, was notwithstanding enforced to shoot, and shooting, God so
directed his shaft, that the apple was hit, and the child untoucht; and yet
for all this, he adjudged him to perpetual prison: out of which he
miraculously escaping, watched the tyrans approach in so fit a place, that with
the shaft that should have been the death of his son, he struck him to the
heart; whose unluckie end, was a luckie beginning of the Switzers deliverance
from the bondage of tyrans, and of the recovery of their ancient freedom,
which ever after they wisely and constantly maintained. Nic. Gil. vol. 1.


The Emperor Albert, purposing to be revenged upon them for his injury, as
also for slaying many more of his men, and breaking down his castles of
defense which he had caused to be builded in their country, determined to make
war upon them; but he was slain ere he could bring it hat determination to
effect by one of his own nephews, from whom (being his overseer and gardant
for bringing up) he withheld his patrimony against all equity; neither by
prayers or entreatie could be persuaded to restore it. These things (according
to Nic. Gils report in his first volume of the Chronicles of France) happened
about the reign of Saint Lewis.

Hither may be referred the history of Richard the first, King of England,
called Richard Coeur de Lion: though not so much a fruit of ambition Ex
Bibliotbeca Cariensi, etc.
in him, as of filthy covetousness. This King, when as Widomarus Lord of
Linionice in little Britain having found a great substance of treasure in the
ground, sent him a great part thereof, as chief Lord and Prince of the
country, refused it; saying, That he would either have all or none; but the
finder would not condescend to that: whereupon the King laid siege to a castle
of his called Galuz, thinking the treasure to lie there: but as he with the
Duke of Brabant went about viewing the Castle, a soldier within stroke him
with an arrow in the arm, the iron whereof festering in the wound, caused that
the King within nine days after died: And so because he was not content with
the half of the treasure that another man found, lost all his own treasure
that he had, together with his life the chiefest treasure of all.

CHAP. XLII. Of Usurers, and their theft.
IF open larcenies and violent robberies and extortions are forbidden by the
law of God, as we have seen they are, then it is no doubt but that all deceit
and unjust dealings and bargains used to the damage of others are also
condemned by the same law; and namely Usurie, when a man exacteth such
unmeasurable gain for either his money or other thing which he lends, that
the poor borrower is so greatly indammaged, that in stead of benefitting and
providing for his affairs, which he aimed at, he hitteth his further loss and
final overthrow. This sin is expressly prohibited in Leviticus, 25,
Deuteronomy 23, and Psalm, 15; where the committants thereof are held guilty
before Gods judgment Seat, of iniquity and injustice: and against them it is
that the prophet Levit. 25. 36 Deuteronomy. 23. 19. Psalm. 15. 5.
Ezechiel denounces this threatening: That he which oppresses or vexes the
poor and afflicted, he which robs or gives to usurie, and receives the
increase into their bags, shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon his
Eze. 18. 12. 13
pate.

Neither truly does the justice of God sleep in this respect, but takes
vengeance upon all such, and punishes them after one sort or other, either in
body or goods, as it pleases him: I my self knew a grand usurer in the
country of Vallay that having scraped together great masses of gold and silver
by these unlawful means, was in one night robbed of fifteen hundred crowns
by thieves that broke into his house. I remember also another usurer dwelling
in a town called Argental, nigh unto Anovay under the jurisdiction of Tholosse
in high Vivaria, who being in hay time in a meadowe, was stung in the foot by a
serpent, or some other venomous beast, that he died thereof: an answerable
punishment for his often stinging and biting many poor people with his cruel
and unmercifull usurie.

Nay it is so contrary to equity and reason, that all nations led by the
instinct of nature, have always abhorred and condemned it; insomuch that the
conditions of thieves has bin more easy and tolerable than usurers; for
theft was wont to be punished but with double restitution, but usurie with
quadruple: and to speak truly, these rich and gallant usurers do more rob the
common people and purloine from them, than all the public thieves that are
made public examples of justice in the world. It is to be wished that some
would examine usurers books, and make a De officio princip. lib. 4. ca. 14
bond-fire of their obligations, as that Lacedemonian did when Agesilaus
reported that he never saw a ^leerer fire: or that some Lucullus would deliver
Europe from that contagion, as the Roman did Asia in his time. Licurgus Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 1 cap. 7.
banished this canker worm out of his Sparta: Amasis punished it severely in
his Egypt: Cato exiled it out of Sicilie; and Solo condemned it in Athens; how
much more should it he held in detestation among Christians? S. Chrysostom
compares it fitly to the biting of an aspe; Chrysostom. in Mat. cap. 5.
as he that is stung with an aspe, falls asleep as it were with delectation,
her hand to reach, it miraculously turned into a serpent, and bit her so fast,
that by no means it could be loosened from her arm, until it had brought her
to a woeful and miserable end.

Sergius Galba, before he came to be Emperor (being President of Africa under
Claudius, when as through penury of victuals, corn, and other food Fulgos.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
was very sparingly shared out and divided amongst the army) punished a
certain soldier that sold a bushel of wheat to one of his fellows for an
hundred pence, in ^ope to obtain a new share himself, in this manner, he
commanded the Quaestor or Treasurer to give him no more sustenance, since he
preferred lucre before the necessity of his own body and his friends welfare;
neither suffered he any man else to sell him any; so that he perished with
famine, and became a miserable example to all the army, of the fruits of that
foul droupsie covetousness.

And thus we see how the Lord rained down vengeance upon all covetous Usurers
and oppressors, plaguing some on this fashion, and some on that; and never
passing any, but either in this life some notable judgment overtakes them,
either in themselves or their offsprings (for it is notoriously known that
usurers children, though left rich, yet the first or second generation became
always beggars) or in the life to come they are thrown into the pit of
perdition, from whence there is no redemption nor deliverance.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Dicers and Card-players, and their theft.
IF any recreation be allowed us, as no doubt there is, yet surely it is not
such as whereby we should work the damage and hurt of one another, as when by
gaming we draw away another man's money with his great loss, and this is one
kind of theft, to usurp any man's goods by unlawful means: wherefore no such
sports ought to find any place amongst Christians, especially those wherein
any kind of lot or hazard is used, by the which the good blessings of God are,
contrary to their true and natural use, exposed to chance and fortune, as they
term it: for which cause Saint Augustine is of this opinion concerning them:
That the gain which arises to any party in play, should be bestowedupon the
poor, to the end that both the Epist. 54. ad Maced.
gamesters, as well the winner as the loser might be equally punished, the one
by not carrying the stake being won, the other by being frustrated of all his
hope of winning. Players at dice, both by the Elibertine and Constantinopolitan
Council under Justinian, were punished with excommunication: and by a new
constitution of the said Emperor it was enacted, That no man should use
Dice-play either in private or public, no nor approve Can. 77. Can. 50.
the same by their presence, under pain of punishment: and Bishops were there
appointed to be overseers in this behalf, to epsy if any default was Cod. li.
3. tit. 43
made.

Od. 14. l. 2. Ludere doctior seu Graeco jubeas trocho, seu malis vetital^gibus
alea.
Horace an heathen Poet avouched the unlawfulness of this thing even in his
time, when he says that Dice-playing was forbidden by their law. Lewis the
eighth, King of France, renouned for his good conditions and rare virtues;
amongst all the excellent laws which he made, this was one, That all sports
should be banished the Commonwealth, except shooting (whether with long bow or
Cross bow) and that no Cards nor Dice should be either made or sold by any; to
the end that all occasion of gaming might be taken away. Surely it would be
very profitable and expedient for the Weale-publique, that this Ordinance might
stand in use at this day, and that all Merchants and Mercers whatsoever,
especially those that follow the reformation of Religion, might forbear the
sale of all such paltry Wares: for the fault in selling such trash is no less
than the abuse of them in playing at them, for so much as they upon greediness
of so small a gain, put as it were a sword into a mad man's hand, by ministering
to them the instruments not only of their sports, but also of those mischiefs
that ensue the same. There a man may hear curses as rife as words, bannings,
swearings, and blasphemies, banded up and down; there men fret themselves to
death, and consume whole nights in dark and divelish pastimes; some lose their
horses, others their cloakes, a third sort all that ever they are worth, to the
undoing of their houses, wives, and children; and some again from braulings
fall to buffetings, from buffets to bloudshedding, from bloudshedding to
hanging: and these are the fruits of those gallant sports.

But this you shall see more plainly by a few particular examples. In a
Discip^. de tempor. ser. 12.
town of Campania a certain Jew playing at dice with a Christian, lost a
great sum of money unto him; with which great loss being enraged, and almost
beside himself, as commonly men in that case are affected, he belched out
most bitter curses against Christ Jesus, and his mother the blessed Virgin, in
the midst whereof the Lord deprived him of his life and sense; and struck him
dead in the place: as for his companion the Christian, indeed he escaped sudden
death, howbeit he was robbed of his wit and understanding, and survived not
very long after: to teach us not only Blasphemy, Lib. 1. cap. 31.
what a grievous sin it is to blaspheme God, and to accompany such wretches,
and not to shun, or at least reprove their outrage; but also what monstrous
effects proceed from such kind of ungodly sports, and how grievously the Lord
punishes them, first by giving them over to blasphemy, secondly to death, and
thirdly and lastly to eternal and irrevocable damnation: Let our English
gamesters consider this example, and if it will not terrify them from their
sports, then let them look to this that follows, which if their hearts be
not as hard as adamant, will mollify and persuade them.

In the year 1533. near to Belissana a city in Helvetia, there were three
Job. Fincell. Andreas Muscabus in diabol. blasphemiae.
profane wretches that played at dice upon the Lords day without the walls of
the city, one of which called Vlrich Schraelerus having lost much money, and
offended God with many cursed speeches, at last presaging to himself good
luck, he burst forth into these terms, If fortune deceive me now, I will
thrust my dagger into the very body of God as far as I can: now Mandat. 4.
Breach of Saboth, li. 1. 6. 35. Mandat. 3. Blasphemy, lib. 1. cap. 31.
fortune failed him as before, wherefore forthwith he drew his dagger, and
taking it by the point, threw it against heaven with all his strength: behold,
the dagger vanished away, and five drops of blood distilled upon the table
before them, and without all delay the devil came in place, and carried away
the blasphemous wretch with such force and noise, that the whole city was
amassed and astonished thereat: the other two (half beside themselves with
fear) strove to wipe away the drops of blood out of the table, but the more
they wiped it, the more clearly it appeared; The rumor of this accident flew
into the city, and caused the people to flock thick and threefold unto the
place, where they found the other two gamesters washing the board; whom (by the
decree of the Senate) they bound with chains, and carried toward the prison;
but as they passed with them through a gate of the city, one of them was
stricken suddenly dead in the midst of them, with such a number of lice and
worms creeping out of him, that it was both wonderful and loathsome to behold:
the third they themselves (without any further inquisition or trial) to avert
the indignation which seemed to hang over their heads, put incontinently to
death; the table they took and preserved it for a monument, to witness unto
posterity, both how an accursed pastime dicing is, and also what great
inconveniences and mischiefs grow thereby.

But that we may see yet more the vanity and mischievous working of this
sport, I will report one story more out of the same author, though not equal
to the former in strangeness and height of sin, yet as tragical, and no
less pitiful.

In the year 1550, there lived in Alsatia one Adam Steckman, one that Job
Fincel. l. 2
got his living by tximming, pruning, and dressing vines; this man having
received his wages, fell to dice, and lost all that he had gotten; insomuch
that he had not wherewith to nourish his family, so that he fell into such a
grief of mind, and withal into such pains of the head, that he grew almost
desperate withal: one day his wife being busy abroad, left the care of her
children unto him; but he took such great care of them that he cut all their
throats, even three of them, whereof one lay in the cradle, and lastly would
have hanged himself, had not his wife come in the mean while, who beholding
this pitiful tragedy, gave a great outcrie, and fell down dead; whereupon
the neighbors running in, were eye witnesses of this woeful spectacle: as for
him, by law he was judged to a most severe and cruel punishment: and all these
pitiful events arose from that cursed root of Diceplay.

We ought therefore to learn by all these things that have been already
spoken, to abstain not only from this cursed pastime, but also from
extortion, robberies, deceit, guile, and other such naughty practices that tend
to the hurt and detriment of one another; and in place thereof to procure the
good and welfare of each one in all kindness and equity, following the
Apostles counsel, where he says, Let them that stole steal no more, but
rather Ephesians. 4. 28.
travel by laboring with his hands in that which is good, that he may have
wherewith to succor the necessity of others. For it is not enough not to do
evil to our neighbor, but we are tied to do him good, or at least to endeavor
to do it.

CHAP. XLIV. Of such as have been notorious in all kind of sin.
BY these fore placed examples we have seen how heavy the judgments of God
have been upon those that through the These examples of this Chapter may be
referred to all the commandments for the most part.
untamednesse of their own lusts and affections, would not submit themselves
under the holy and mighty will of God, but have countermanded his
commandments, and withstood his precepts, some after one sort, and some after
another: now because there have bin some so wicked and wretched, that being
wholly corrupted and depraved, they have over flowed with all manner of sin
and iniquity, and as it were maugred God with the multitude and heinousness of
their offenses; we must therefore spend sometime also in setting forth their
lives and ends, as of the most vile and monstrous kind of people that ever
were. In this rank we may place the ancient Inhabitants of the land of Canaan;
an irreligious people, void of all fear and dread of God, and consequently
given over to all abhominabl wickedness, as to conjurings, witchcrafts, and
unnameable adulteries: for which causes the Lord abhorring and hating them, did
also bring them to a most strange destruction; for first and foremost Jericho
(the frontier city of their country) being assaulted by the Israelites, for
hindering their progress into the country; were all discomfited, not so much
by Iosuah his sword, as by the huge stones which dropped from heaven upon their
heads: and lest the night overtaking them should break off the final and full
destruction of this cursed people, the day was miraculously prolonged, and the
Sun made to rest himself in the midst of heaven for the space of a whole
day: and so these five Kings hiding themselves in a cave, were brought out, and
their necks made a footstool to the captains of Israel, and were hanged on
five trees.

The tyran Pertander usurped the government over Corinth after he had Sabell.
slain the principal of the city: he put to death his own wife, to the end
to content and please his concubine; nay and was so execrable, as to lie with
his own mother: he banished his natural son, and caused many children of
his subjects to be gelded: finally fearing some miserable and monstrous end,
and want of sepulcher, in conscience of his misdeeds, he gave in charge to two
strong and hardy soldiers, that they should ga^d a certain appointed place,
and not fail to kill the first that came in their way, and to bury his body
being slain: now the first that met them was himself, who offered himself
unto them without speaking any word, and was soon dispatched and buried
according to his commandment* but these two were encountered with four other,
whom he also had appointed to do the same to them which they had done to them.

In this rank deservably we may place the second Dionysius his son, that
Sabell.
for his cruelties and extortions was slain by his own subjects: who though
at the first made show of a better and milder nature than his father was of,
yet after he was installed in his Kingdom, and grown strong, his wicked nature
showed forth it self; for first he rid out of the way his own brethren, then
his nearest kindred, and lastly, all other that but any way displeased him;
using his sword not to the cutting down of vice, as it ought, but to the
cutting the throats of his innocent and guiltless subjects: with which
tyranny the people being incensed, began to mutiny, and from mutinies fell to
open rebellion, persecuting him so, that he was compelled to fly and take
harbor in Greece: where notwithstanding he ceased not his accustomed manners,
but continued still freshly, committing robberies, and doing all manner of
injuries and outrages, in wronging men; and forcing both women and maids to his
filthy lusts: until he was brought to so low and so base an ebb of estate,
that of a King being become a beggar and a vagabond, he was glad to teach
children at Corinth to get his poor living, and so died in misery.

Clearchus, another tyran, after he had put to death the most part of the
Sabell.
Nobles, and chief men of account in the city of Heraclea, usurped a
tyrannous authority over the rest: amongst many of whose monstrous enormities
this was one, that he constrained the widows of those whom he had slain,
against their wills to marry those of his followers whom he allotted them to;
insomuch that many of them with grief and anger slew themselves: now there
were two men of stouter courage than the rest, who pitying the miserable
condition of the whole city, undertook to deliver the same out of his cruel
hands: coming therefore accompanied with fifty other of the same mind and
resolution, as though they would debate a private quarrel before his presence,
as soon as convenience served, they diverted their swords from themselves into
the tyrans bosom, and hewed him in pieces in the very midst of his guard.

Agathocles, King, or rather tyran of Sicilie, from a porters son, growing
Sabell.
to be a man of war, took upon him the government of the country, and
usurped the crown, contrary to the consent of his people: he was one given to
all manner of filthy and unclean pollutions, in whom treachery, cruelty,
and generally all kind of vice reigned, and therefore was worthily plagued by
God; first by a murder of his youngest son, committed by his eldest sons
son, that aspired unto the crown, and thought that he might be an obstacle in
his way for obtaining his purpose: and lastly, having sent his wife and
children into Egypt for safety, by his own miserable and languishing death
which shortly after ensued.

Romulus the first King of Rome was (as Florus testifies) transported by
Florus.
a devil out of this earth into some habitation of his own, for the monstrous
superstitions, conjurings, thefts, ravishments, and murders, which during his
pomp he committed; and moreover (he says) that Plutarch, Plutarch.
the most credible and learned Writer amongst Historiographers, both Greek and
Latin, that ever writ, avoucheth the same for true; That he was carried away
one day by a spirit in a mighty tempest of thunder and lightening, before the
view of the whole multitude, to their great astonishment, insomuch that they
fled at the sight thereof.

What shall we say of Silla, that monster in cruelty, that most odious and
execrable Tyran that ever was, by whom all civil order and humane policy was
utterly defaced, and all vice and confusion in stead thereof set up? did he
not procure the death of six thousand men at one clap, at the Plutarch.
discomfiture of Marius? And having promised to save the lives of three
thousand that appealed unto his mercy, did he not cause them to be assembled
within a Park, and there to have their throats cut, whilst he made an
oration to the Senate? It was he that filled the channels of the streets of
Rome, and other cities in Italy, with blood and slaughters innumerable: and
that neither spared Altar, Temple, or other privileged place or house
whatsoever, from the pollution and distainment of innocent blood: husbands were
stain in their wives arms, infants in their mothers bosoms, and infinite
multitudes of men murdered for their riches: for if any were either rich, or
owners of fair houses, or pleasant gardens, they were sure to die: besides, if
there were any private quarrel or grudge betwixt any citizen, and some of his
crew, he suffered his side to revenge themselves after their own lusts, so
that for private mislike and enmity many hundreds lost their lives; he that
saved an outlaw or proscribed person in his house, (of which there were too
many of the best sort in his time) or gave him entertainment under his roof,
whether he were his brother, son, or parent whatsoever, was himself for
recompense of his courtesy and humanity, proscribed and sold, and condemned
to death: and he that killed one of them that was proscribed, had for reward
two talents (the wages of his murder) amounting in value to twelve hundred
crowns, whether it was a bondslave that slew his master, or a son that
murdered his father: coming to Preneste, he began to proceed in a kind of
justiciall form amongst the citizens, and as it were by law and equity to
practice wrong and injury: but ere long, either being weary of such slow
proceedings, or not at leisure to prosecure the same any further, he caused to
meet together in one assembly two thousand of them, whom he committed all to
the massacre without any manner of compassion: As he was sitting one day in
the midst of his palace in Rome, a soldier to whom he had granted the
proscription of his dead brother, as if he had been alive (whom he himself
before the civil war had slain) presented him in lieu of thanks for the
great good turn the head of one Marcus Marius of the adverse faction, before
the whole city, with his hands all imbrued in blood, which he also washed in
the holy water sta^ke (...) Apolloes temple, being near unto that place; and
all this being commended and countenanced by Silla: he decreed a general
disanulment and abrogation of all titles and rights that were passed before his
time, to the end to have the more liberty both to put to death whom he pleased,
and to confiscate men's goods, and also to unpeople and repeople cities, sack,
pulldowne, and build, and to depose and make Kings at his pleasure: the goods
which he had thus seized, he shamed not to sell with his own hands; sitting in
his tribunal sear, giving oftentimes a fair woman a whole country, or the
revenues of a city for her beauty, and to Players, Jesters, Juglers,
Minstr^^s, and other wicked effranchised slaves, great and unnecessary rewards:
yea, and to diverse married women also, whom (pleasing his eye) he deprived
their husbands of perforce, and espoused them to himself, maugre their wills:
being desirous to ally himself with Pompey, he commanded him to cast off his
lawful wife, and taking from Magnus G^abri^ his wife Aemilia, made him marry
her, though already great with child by her former husband; but she died in
travel in his house. In seasts and banket^ings he was too immoderate, for it
was his continual and daily practice: the wine that he drank usually was
forty years old, and the company that he delighted to keep was compact of
ministriss, tumblers, players, singers, and such like rascals, and with these
he would spend whole days in drinking, carousing, dancing, and all
dissoluteness. Now this disinordinate life of his did so augment a disease
which was grown in his body, to wit an imposthume; that in time it corrupted
his flesh, and turned it into lice; in such sort, that though he had those
that continually followed him to sweep them off, and to louze him night and
day, yet the increase was still so plentiful, that all would not serve to
clear him for a moment: insomuch, that not his apparel, though never so new
and changeable; nor his linen, though never so fresh, nor his bath, nor his
laver, no nor his meat and drink could be kept unpolluted from the flux of
this filthy vermin, it issued in such abundance: oftentimes in a day he would
wash himself in a bath, but to no great purpose; for his shame increased the
more. The day before he dyed he sent for one Granius, who attending his death,
delayed to pay that which he ought to the Commonwealth; and being come in his
presence, he commanded him to be strangled to death before his face: but with
straining himself in crying after his execution, his imposthume burst, and
vomited out such streams of blood, that his strength failed him withal; and
passing that night in great distress, the next day made up his wicked and
miserable end.

After that Caligula began to addict himself to impiety and contempt of Dion.
God, presently being not curbed with any fear nor shame, he became most
dissolute in all kind of wickedness; for at one time he caused to be slain a
great number of people for calling him young Augustus, as if it had been an
injury to his person to be so entitled: and to say briefly of all his murders,
there were so many of his kindred, friends, senators, and citizens, made away
by his means, that it would be too long and tedious here to recite: wherefore
seeing that he was generally hated of the people for his misdeeds, he wished
that they all had but one head, to the end (as it might seem) that at one blow
he might dispatch them all. In sumptuousness and costlinesse of dishes and
banquets, he neither found nor left his equal, Sueton.
for he would sup up most precious stones melted by art, and swallow down
treasures into his belly: his banquets were often served with golden loaves and
golden meats: in giving rewards he was sometime too too prodigal, for he
would cast great sums of money amongst the people certain days together,
until his bags were drawn dry, and then new strange shifts must be practiced
to fill them up again: his subjects he over charged with many newfound and
unjust taxes, exacting of them a tribute even for their meat: if there were any
money controversies to be decided, the fourth part of the same was his share,
which way soever the matter inclined: the eight penny of every Porters gain
throughout the city (which with travel they earned) he took into his purse:
yea, and that which is more filthy and dishonest, the very whores and common
strumpets paid him a yearly revenue for their bauderies; which act, though
most villainous and slandrous, yet is made a samplar to some of our holy Popes
to imitate, and indeed has of many been put in practice: but to our purpose;
whereas before his prodigality was so great as to scatter money like seed
amidst the people; now his niggardliness grew on the other side so miserable,
that he would have the people upon the first day of the year, every one to
give him a new-yeares-gift, he himself standing at the door of his house like
a beggar, receiving the peoples alms. Moreover, of all that ever gave their
lusts the bridle to abuse other men's wives, he was most impudent and
notorious; for diverse times he used to feast many fair Ladies and their
husbands, and after his good cheer ended, to overview them severally a part,
as Merchants do their wares; and to take her that pleased his fancy best into
some secret place, to abuse at his pleasure: neither after the deed done to be
ashamed to glory and vaunt himself in his wicked and filthy act. He committed
incest with his own sisters, forcing them to his lust, and by one of them had
a daughter borne, whom (says Eutropius) his abominable concupiscence abused
also in most filthy and preposterous manner: At length many conspired his
destruction, but especially one of the Tribunes, which office we may after the
custom of our French nation rightly term the Marshalship, and the officer one
of our four Marshals, as Budeus says) who showed himself more eagerly
affected in the cause than the rest, pursued this enterprise in more speedy and
desperate manner: for as the Tyrant returned from the Theater by a by-way to
his Palace (the third day of the feast, which he celebrated in honor of
Julius Caesar) the Tribune presented himself, as if in regard of his office,
to import some matter of importance unto him: and having received a currish
word or two at his hands (as his custom was) he gave him such a stroke
between the head and the shoulders, that what with it and the blows of his
accomplices, that going for the same intent, rushed upon him, he was ^laine
amongst them, no man stirring a foot to deliver him out of their hands, though
many looked on, and might have aided him if they would: he was no sooner
slain, but his wife incontinently was sent after, and his daughter also that
was crushed to death against a wall; and thus came his wretched self, with his
filthy progeny, to a wretched and miserable end.

Nero showed himself not only an enemy to God in persecuting his Church, but
also a perverter and disturber of humane nature, in embruing Sueton.
his hands in the blood of his own mother and grandmother, whom he caused to
be put to death, and in killing his own wife and sister, and infinite numbers
of all kind of people: beside, in adulteries he was so monstrous, that it is
better to conceal them from modest ears, than to stir up the puddle of so
stinking and noisome a dunghill: for which his villainies the Senate condemned
him to a shameful and most ignominious death, and his armies and forces
forsook him: which when he understood, he betook him to flight, and hid
himself in an out way amongst thorns and bushes, which with great pain
having past through, being weary of his life, he threw himself down into a
pit four foot deep; and when he could get none of his men to lay their hands
upon him, he desperately and miserably slew himself.

Vitellius, for the murders and other outrageous misdeeds which he committed,
Sueton.
was taken in his shirt, and drawn through the streets with a halter about his
neck, and his hands bound behind him, and the point of a dagger under his
chin; the people casting dirt and dung upon him in detestation, and calling him
makebate and seditious villain, with other opprobrious reproaches: and at last
being massacred with many blows, was drawn with a hook into Tyber, like a
carrion.

Domitian was a cruel enemy of the Christians* he rejected his own Sueton.
wife to take a new, and being covertly reproved by Helvidius for the same, in
a Play of the divorce of Paris and Enon, which he presented unto him, he put
him to death for his labor. Many worthy Senators and chief men, and such as
had borne the office of the Consul, without just cause given of reprehension,
were murdered by him: he spared not his own blood and nearest allies, no nor
his own brother Titus, but what with poison and sword, destroyed them all to
confusion. But in the end, when he saw that the world hated him for his
outrageous cruelties, he consulted with the Astrologians and Conjurers, what
death did wait for him; one of the which amongst the rest told him that he
should be slain, and that very shortly: wherewithal being sore troubled, he
first caused him that had prognosticated this evil unto him, to be slain:
then he compassed himself with a strong guard, and to the end to see them that
should come near, he made his gallery walls where he walked, of such a kind
of glistring and shining stone, that he might see in them all about him, both
behind and before. When the day and hour which was fore-calculated for his
death was come, one of the Conspirators came in with his left arm in a scarf,
as if he had been sore hurt; feigning that he would bewray the whole treason
which he so much feared; and being entered his Chamber, he presented him with a
long discourse in writing, touching the matter and manner of the Conspiracy:
and when in reading the same, he saw him most astonished; then he took
occasion to strike him suddenly into the belly with his dagger, his own
servants making up the murder, when they saw him go about to resist. And thus
by all his wisdom and providence he could not rid himself from being
surprised, nor hinder the execution of Gods just fore-appointed judgment. And
these were the ends of those wicked Emperors, who in regard of their vile
lives, were rather monsters than men; and not only they whom we have named,
but many more also, as Antonius, Caracalla, Heliogabalus, and other like may be
worthily placed in this rank.

But of all, Heliogabalus is most famous: of whom is recorded in histories,
that he was so prodigious in all gluttony, filthiness, and ribauldrie, that
the like I think was never heard of, except those monsters that went before;
and yet I suppose he surpassed them too. Such was the exceeding and luxurious
pomp of this beast-like Emperor, that in his lamps he used baulme, and
filled his fish ponds with rose water: the garments which he wore were all of
the finest gold and most costly silks: his shoes glistered with precious
stones, curiously engraven: he was never two days served with one kind of
meat, nor wore one garment twice; and so likewise for his fleshly wickedness,
he varyed it every time: Some days he was served at meals with the brains
of Ostriches, and a strange foul called a Phylocapterie, another day with the
tongues of Popingayes, and other sweet singing birds, being nigh to the sea;
he never used fish in places far distant from the sea: all his house was
served with most delicate fish: at one supper his table was furnished with
seven thousand fishes, and five thousand fowls: At his remoovals in his
progress, there followed him commonly six hundred chariots: he used to
sacrifice with young children, and preferred to the best advancements in the
Commonwealth most light persons; as Bawdes, Minstrels, Players, and such like:
in one word, he was an enemy to all honesty and good order. And when he was
foretold by his Sorcerers and Astronomers, that he should die a violent death,
he provided ropes of silk to hang himself, swords of gold to kill himself,
and strong poisons in Jacinths and Emerauds to poison himself, if needs he
should thereto be forced: Moreover, he made an high tower, having the boorded
floor covered with gold plate, and broidered with precious stones, from the
which tower he might throw himself down, if he were pursued of his enemies.
But notwithstanding all this provision, (Gods vengeance not permitting him to
die as he would) he was slain of the soldiers, drawn through the city,
and cast into Tiber, after he had reigned two years and eight months.

Tigellinus, one of the Captains of Neroes guard, and a chief procurer and
setter forward of his tyranny, was the cause of the death of many great
personages in Rome: and being enriched by their spoil and other such like
robberies, after the death of Nero (whom in his extremity he forsook) plunged
himself, and wallowed in all manner of licentious and disordinate delights.
Now though he was worthy of a thousand deaths for his cruelties toward many
good citizens, yet by the means of one Iunius, the Emperor Galba his chief
minion, whose favor he had by great sums of money bought and obtained (for
he gave unto his daughter at one time five and twenty thousand crowns, and to
himself at another time a carknet worth fifteen thousand crowns for a
present) he was spared and kept in safety: but as soon as Otho was installed in
the Empire, his downfall and destruction began presently to follow: for Otho,
to the end to gratify the Romans, sent to apprehend him, who was then in his
houses of pleasure in the field, banqueting and sporting with his harlots, and
using all manner of riot, albeit by reason of a deadly disease which was upon
him, he was even at deaths door. When he saw himself thus taken, and that
no means of escape was left, (no not by the vessels which he had prepared at
the sea shore for purpose, if need were, to convey him away) and that he which
had commission to take him, would give him no advantage of escaping, though he
offered him great rewards for the same, he entreated only leisure to shave his
beard before he went; which being granted, he took a rasor, and in stead of
shaving, cut his own throat.

CHAP. XLV. More examples of the same argument.
HIeronymus, a true Tyran of Sicily, enured and fashioned Tit. Live.
to all pride, and of most corrupt and rotten manners, began right after the
death of his father Hiero, (that left him a peaceable and quiet Kingdom) to
show ^orth his arrogance; for he quickly made himself fearful to his
Subjects, both by his stately and proud manner of speech, as also by the
hardness of access unto him, together with a kind of disdainful contempt of
all men: but most of all did the inward pride of his heart appear when he had
gotten a guard about his body; for then he ceased not to bait, bite, and
devour, and to exercise all kind of cruelty against every man, and all kind
of riot and excess of filthiness against himself: so that he became so
odious and contemptible to his subjects, that they conspired against him, to
deprive him both of his life and kingdom: which conspiracy though it came to
light, yet for all that wanted not his due effect: for after he had (through
listening to false reports) put to death unjustly his truest and dearest
friends, and those that would indeed have helped him in his necessity, both
with good advice and other succor, he was surprised as he walked in a narrow
and strait way, and there cruelly murdered. Now there was one Andronodorus his
brother in law, that aspired to the crown, had corrupted his manners, and
thrust him forward to all these misdemeanors, to the end by those practices he
might make him odious to his people, that by that means he might obtain his
own purpose, as indeed he did: for after his death he seized upon the Scepter,
though with no long enjoyance; for through the troubles and commotions which
were raised in the country by his means, both he, his wife, and whole race,
together with the whole progeny of Hieronymus, whether innocent or guilty,
were all utterly rooted out and defaced.

Andronicus was one of the most wickedest men that lived on the earth in his
time; for he excelled in all kind of evil: in ambition, boldness in doing
mischief, cruelty, whoredom, adultery, and incest also to make up the whole
number: besides, he was so treacherous and disloyal, that he traitorously
slew the son and heir of the Emperor Emanuel, shutting him in a sack, and
so throwing him into the sea; after which, by violence he took possession of
the Empire of Constantinople, and like a strong thief seized upon that which
was none of his own; but as soon as he had gotten his desire, then began his
lusts to rage and rave, then he fell to whoreing and forcing women and maids to
his lust, whom after he had once robbed of their chastities, he gave over to
his bands and ruffians to abuse; and that which is more than all this, he
ravished one of his own sisters, and committed incest with her: moreover, to
maintain and uphold his tyrannous estate, he slew most of the nobility, and
all else that bore any show of honesty or credit with them, and lived
altogether by wrongs and extortions: wherefore his subjects (provoked with
these multitudes of evils which reigned in him, and not able to endure any
longer his vile outrages and indignities) rebelled against him and besieged
him, got him into their merciless hands, and handled him on this fashion
following: first they degraded him and spoiled him of his imperial ornaments,
then they pulled out one of his eyes, and set him upon an ass backward, with
the tail in his hand in stead of a Scepter, and a rope about his neck in
stead of a crown; and in this order and attire they led him through all
Constantinople, the people shouting and reviling him on all sides, some
throwing dirt, others spittle, diverse dung, and the women their pispots at his
head: after all which banqueting dishes, he was transported to the gallows,
and there hanged, to make an end of all.

Charles King of Navarre, whose mother Iean was daughter to Lewis Lutton Frois.
vol. 3. cap. 100.
King of France, was another that oppressed his subjects with cruelty and rough
dealing: for he imposed upon them grievous taxes and tributes, and when many of
the chiefest of his Commonwealth came to make known unto him the poverty of
his people, and that they were not able to endure any more such burdens, he
caused them all to be put to death for their boldness: he was the kindler of
many great mischiefs in France, and of the fire wherewith diverse places of
strength, and castles of defense were burned to ashes: he counseled the Count
of Foix his son to poison his father, and not only so, but gave him also the
poison with his own hands, wherewith to do the deed: Moreover, above all this,
lechery and Adultery Nich. Gilles.
swayed his powers, even in his old age; for at threescore years of age, he
had a whore in a corner, whose company he daily hanted; and so much, that she
at length gave him his deaths wound; for returning from her company one day (as
his use was) and entering into his chamber, he went to bed all quaking and half
frozen with cold, neither could he by any means recover his heat, until by
art they sought to supply nature, and blew upon him with brazen bellows
Aquavitae and hot blasts of air; but withal, the fire unregarded flew betwixt
the sheets, and inflamed the dry linen together with the Aquavitae, so
suddenly, that ere any help could be made, his late quivering bones were now
half burned to death. It is true that he lived fifteen days after this, but
in so great grief and torment, without sense of any help or assuagement by
Physic or Surgery, that at the end thereof he died miserably: and so, as
during his life his affection over burnt in lust, and his mind was always
hot, upon mischief and covetousness, so his days were finished with heat and
cruel burning.

Lugtake, King of Scots, succeeding his father Galdus in the Kingdom, Lanquet.
was so odious and mischievous a Tyran, that every man hated him no less for
his vices, than they loved his father for his virtues: he slew many rich and
noblemen for no other cause, but to enrich his treasury with their goods: he
committed the government of the Realm to most unjust and covetous persons, and
with their company was most delighted: he shamed not to defloure his own
aunts, sisters, and daughters, and to scorn his wise and grave counselors,
calling them old doting fools: all which monstrous villainies (with a thousand
more) so incensed his Nobles against him, that they slew him after he had
reigned three years: but as the Proverb goes, Seldom comes a better;
another or worse Tyran succeeded in his kingdom; namely Mogallus, cousin
germane to Lugtake, a man notoriously infected with all manner of vices: for
albeit in the beginning of his reign he gave himself to follow the wisdom
and manners of his uncle Galdus; yet in his age his corrupt nature burst forth
abundantly, but chiefly in avarice, lechery, and cruelty: this was he that
licensed thieves and robbers to take the goods of their neighbors without
punishment, and that first ordained the goods of condemned persons to be
confiscate to the kings use, without respect either of wives, children, or
creditors; for which crimes he was also slain by his nobles.

Besides these, there was another king of the Scots, called Atherto, in the The
fame.
year of our Lord 240. who showed himself also in like manner a most
abominable wretch: for he so wallowed in all manner of unclean and effeminate
lusts, that he was not ashamed to go in the sight of the people playing upon a
flute, rejoicing more to be accounted a good Fiddler, than a good Prince; from
which vices he fell at last to the deflouring and ravishing of maids and women,
insomuch as the daughters of his nobles could not be safe from his insatiable
and intolerable lust: wherefore being pursued by them, when he saw no means
to escape, he desperately slew himself.

The great outrages which the Spaniards have committed in the West Indies, are
apparent testimonies of their impiety, injustice, cruelty, insatiable
covetousness, and luxury; and the judgment wherewith God has hunted them up
and down both by sea and land, (as late and fresh histories do testify) are
manifest witnesses of his heavy anger and displeasure against them: amongst all
which, I will here insert none but that which is most notorious and worthy
memory, as the wretched accident of Pamphilius Novares, and his company: This
man with six hundred Spaniards making for the coast of Florida, to seek the
gold of the river of Palme-trees, were so Benzon. Mil.
turmoyled with vehement winds and tempests, that they could not keep their
vessels from dashing against the shore, so that their ships did all split in
sunder, and they for the most part were drowned, save a few that escaped to
land, yet escaped not danger; for they ran roving up and down this savage
country so long, till they fell into such extreme poverty and famine, that
for want of victuals twelve of them devoured one another; and of the whole six
hundred that went forth, there never yet returned above ten, all the rest being
either drowned or pined to death.

Francis Pizarre, a man of base parentage, for in his youth he was but a Benzon.
hogheard, and of worse qualities and education, for he knew not so much as the
first elements of learning, giving himself to the West Indian wars, grew to
some credit in bearing office, but withal showed himself very disloyal,
treacherous, and bloudy-minded, in committing many odious and monstrous
cruelties: entering Peru with an army of soldiers, to the end, to conquer new
lands and dominions, and to glut his unsatiable covetousness with a new surfeit
of riches (after the true Spanish custom) he committed many bloody and
traiterous acts, and exercised more than barbarous cruelty: for first under
pretense of friendship feyning to parle with Artabaliba, King of Cusco; the
poor King coming with five and twenty thousand of unarmed men, in ostentation
of his greatness, not in purpose to resist, he welcomed him and his men so
nimbly with swords and curtleaxes, that they had all soon their throats cut by
a most horrible slaughter, and the King himself was taken and put in chains:
yea, and the City after this massacre of men abroad, felt soon the
insolences of these brave warriors within: in fine, though Pizarre promised
Artabaliba to save his life, in regard of a ransom, amounting to more than two
millions of gold; yet after the receipt thereof he traitorously caused him to be
hanged, contrary to both his oath, and all equity and reason: but this cruel
perfidie of his went not long without punishment; for both he and all the rest
that were any ways accessarie, or consenting to the death of this King, came
to a wretched end: but especially his four brethren, Ferdinand, Gonsal, John
Martin of Alcantara, and Diego of Almagro; who as they were principal in the
action, so were they in the punishment: the first that was punished was John
Pizarre, who with many other Spaniards was surprised in the City of Cusco, and
slain by the men of war of Mangefrem and Artabaliba: next after that there
arose such a division and heart-burning betwixt the Pizarres and Almagro, and
their partakers, that after they had robbed and wasted and shared out the great
and rich Country of Peru, they slew one another by mutual strokes: and albeit
that there was by common consent an agreement accorded betwixt them, for the
preserving of their unity and friendship; yet Francis Pizarre, envying that
Almagro should be Governor of Cusco, and he not, interrupted all their
agreements, by starting from his promises; and re-kindled the halfe-quenched
fire of war by his own ambition: for he presently defied Amagro, and sent
his brother Ferdinand before to bid him battle; who so well behaved himself,
that he took Almagro prisoner, and delivered him bound to his brother
Francis, who caused him to be strangled in prison secretly, and after to be
beheaded in public. Now Ferdinand being sent by his brother toward Spain,
with a great mass of gold to clear himself of the death of Almagro, could
not so well justify the fact, as that all his treasure could save him from the
prison; and what became of him afterward, known it is to God, but not to the
world. A while after, the fellows and friends of Almagro, whose goods the
Pizarrists has seized upon, took counsel with Don Diego Almagro his son,
to revenge the death of his father; therefore being in number but twelve, with
unsheathed swords, they desperately burst into Francis Pizarres house, (then
Marquess and Governor of Peru) and at the first brunt slew a Captain that
guarded the entrance of the Hall, and next him Martin of Alcahtara, and other
more, that kept the entrance of the Chamber, so that he fell dead even at his
brother the Marquesses feet: who albeit his men were all slain before his
eyes, and himself left alone amiddest his enemies, yet gave not over to defend
himself stoutly and manfully, until all of them setting upon him at once, he
was stabbed into the throat, and so fell dead upon the ground; and thus
finished he and his accomplices their wretched days, answerable to their cruel
deserts: but their murderers (though they deserved to be thus dealt withal)
yet for dealing in this sort without authority, were not faultlesse, but
received the due wages of their furious madness: for Don Diego himself, after
he had been a while Governor of Peru, had his army overcome and discomfited
by the Emperors forces, and was betrayed into their hands by his own
Lieutenant of Cusco, where he thought to have saved himself, and right soon
lost his head, with the greatest Captains and favorites that he had, who were
also quartered. Now of the five brethren we have heard four of their
destructions, only one remains (namely Gonzalle Pizarre) to be spoken of;
who being sent for by the Conquerours to be their Chieftaine and Protector
against the Viceroy, that went about to make them observe the Emperors laws
and decrees, touching the liberty of the Indian Nation, was betrayed and
forsaken by the same men that sent for him, and so fell into his enemies hands,
that cut off his head: The General of his army, a covetous and cruel man,
that in short space made away above three hundred Spaniards, and all as it were
with his own hand; was drawn up and down at a horse tail the space of half a
quarter of an hour, and then hanged upon the gallows, and quartered in four
parts. The Monk of Vauvard, called Vincent, who with his cross and porteise
had encouraged Pizarre and his army against Artabaliba, and was for that cause
created Bishop of Peru, when Diego came to the government, fled into the
Island Puna to escape his wrath; but in seeking to avoyde him, he fell into as
great a snare; for the Islanders assaulted him one night, and knocked him to
death with staves and clubs, together with forty Spaniards of his fellowship,
that accompanied him in his flight, and started not from him in his death. And
thus the good and holy Monk, for meddling with, and setting forward the murder
of so many poor people, was for his pains and good deeds justly rewarded by
the Indians of that Island.

Moreover, after and beside all these troubles, seditions, and civil wars of
Peru, all they that returned from Spain, suffered shipwreck for the most
part: for their fleet had scarce attained the midst of their course, when there
arose so terrible a tempest, that of eighteen ships, thirteen so perished, that
they were never heard of after; and of the five which remained, two were
tumbled back to the coast of Saint Dominick, all berent and shivered in
pieces; other three were driven to Spain, whereof one hitting against the bay
of Portugal, lost many of her men: The Admiral her self of this fleet
perished near unto Saint Lucar de Baramede, with two hundred persons that were
within her, and but one only of them all got safe into the haven of Calix,
without damage. Here we may see how mightily the hand of God was stretched
forth to the revenge of those wicked deeds and villainies which were committed
by the Spaniards in those quarters.

Peter Loys, bastard son to Pope Paul the third, was one that practiced many
horrible villainies, robberies, murders, adulteries, incest, and Sodomitries;
Sleid. lib. 19. Ball.
thinking that because his father was Pope, therefore no wickedness was
unlawful for him to commit. He was by the report of all men, one of the most
notorious, vilest, and filthiest villains that ever the world saw: he forced
the Bishop of Faence to his unnatural lust, so that the poor Bishop, with mere
anger and grief that he should be so abused, died immediately. Being made Duke
of Plaisence and Parma, he exercised most cruel tyranny toward many of his
subjects; insomuch, that diverse Gentlemen that could not brook nor endure his
injuries, conceived an inward hate against him, and conspired his death: and
for to put in practice the same, they hired certain Ruffians and Roysters to
watch the opportunity of slaying him; yea, and they themselves oftentimes went
apart with these Roysters, keeping themselves upon their guards, as if some
private and particular quarrels had been in hand. One day as the Duke went in
his horselitter out of his Castle, with a great retinue, to see certain
Fortifications which he had prepared, being advertised by his father the Pope
(by the help of Magic which he practiced) to look diligently to himself the
tenth day of September: in which notwithstanding he was slain; for as he
returned into his Castle, the Conspiratours, to the number of thirty six,
marched before him, as it were to do him honor, but indeed to do him villainy:
for as soon as he was entered the Castle, they drew up the drawbridge for fear
of his retinue that were without, and coming to him with their naked swords,
cast in his teeth his tyranny, and so slew him in his litter, together with a
Priest, the master of his horse, and five Almaignes that were of his Guard: his
dead body they hung by a chain over the walls, and shaking it to and fro to the
view of the people, threw it down headlong at last into the ditch; where the
multitude to show their hates, wounded it with daggers, and trampled it under
their feet: and so whom they durst not touch in his life, being dead they thus
abused: and this befell upon the tenth day of September, in the year of our
Lord 1547.

Some of the Bishops of Rome for their rare and notable virtues, and the glory
of their brave deeds, may be honored with this dignity, to be placed in this
worthy rank; for their good conditions and behaviors were such, that no
tyran, butcher, thief, robber, ruffian, nor any other, ever excelled them in
cruelty, robbery, adultery, and such like wickedness, or deserved more the
credit and reputation of this place than they. And hereof we have a manifest
example in John the thirteenth, who pulling out the eyes of some of his
Cardinals, cutting out the tongues of others, hewing off the hands, noses, and
privy members of others, showed himself a pattern of such cruelty, as the
world never saw the like: he was accused before the Emperor Otho, in a Synod,
first for incest with two of his own sisters: secondly, for calling the devil
to help him at dice: thirdly, for promoting young infants to Bishoprics,
bribed thereto by certain pieces of Gold; fourthly, for the ravishing of maids
and wives, and lying with his fathers concubine: yea, and lastly, for lyingwth
his own mother, and many other such monstrous villainies: for which cause he was
deposed from the Papacy, though re-installed again by the suit and cunning
practice of his Whores; by whom as he recovered his triple Crown, so he lost
shortly after his vicious life, by the means of a married whore that betrayed
him.

Pope Hildebrand, surnamed Gregory the seventh, was adorned with all Benno.
Ball.
these good qualities, namely to be bloody minded, a poysoner, a murderer, a
conjurer, also a consulter with spirits, and in a word, nothing but a lump and
mass of wickedness: he was the stirrer up of many battles against the
Emperor Henry the fourth, and a provoken of his own son to depose and poison
his father, as he did: but this wicked (I would say holy) Pope, was at last
banished his Cathedral City, to Salernum, where he ended his days in misery.

Pope Clement the sixth, of name contrary to his nature, for his inclemency,
cruelty and pride toward the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, was intolerable; he
procured many horrible wars against the Empire, and caused the destruction of
twenty thousand Frenchmen by the King of England, yea and poisoned the good
Emperor also, so well he wished to him: Howbeit ere long himself was stifled
to death, and that suddenly* not by any practice of man, as it was thought, but
by the especial hand of God, in recompense of all his notable acts.

John the four and twentieth was deposed by the Council of Constance, for
these crimes following; heresy, Simony, manslaughter, poysonings, Benno. Ball.
cousenings, adultery, and sodomitry, and was cast into prison; where remaining
three years, he falsely made show of amendment of his wicked life, and
therefore was graced with a Cardinals hat, but it was not that which he
expected; for which cause with despite and grief he died.

It would be too long to run over the discourse of every particular Pope of
like conditions, and therefore we will content our selves in brief with the
legend of Pope Alexander the sixth, reported by by two authors of credit and
renown, and unsuspected; to wit, Guicciardine a Florentine Guicciard. l. 2.
Bembus.
Gentleman, and Bembus a Venetian Cardinal: This man (says Guicciardine)
attained to the Papacy not by worthiness of virtues, but by heaviness of
bribes, and multitude of fair promises made to the Cardinals for his election,
promising large recompense to them that stood on his side; whereupon many that
knew his course of life were filled with astonishment, amongst whom was the
King of Naples, who hearing of this election, complained to his Queen with
tears, that there was such a Pope created that would be a plague to Italy and
all Christendom: beside, the great vices which swayed in him, of which the same
Author speaking, makes this Catalogue and pedigree in his own Language, which
follows: Costum (dit il) escensimi non sincerita, non verita, non feed, non
religione; avaritia insatiabile, ambitione immoderata, crudelta pinque barbara,
^o ardentissima cupidi^^ di escalt are in qualunque mode, i figli voli, i
qualierano molti: (that is Guicciard. lib. 2.
to say) He was endued with most filthy conditions, and that neither sincerity,
truth, faith, nor religion, was in him, but in stead of them, covetousness
unquenchable, ambition unmeasurable, more than barbarous cruelty, and a burning
desire of promoting his own children (for he had many) by what means soever.
He persuaded King Charles the eighth of France to undertake war against Naples,
and after he had brought him to it, presently he forsook him, and entered a new
league with the Venetians, and the other Princes of Italy, to drive him home
again. This was he (says Cardinal Venetian. hist. lib. 6.
Bembus) that set Benefices and Promotions to sale, that he which would give
most might have most; and that poisoned John Michel the Cardinal of Venice at
Rome, for his gold and treasure which he abounded with: whose insatiable
covetousness provoked him to the committall of all mischief, to the end he
might maintain the forces of his son, who went about to bring the whole lands
and dominions of all Italy, into his possession^ in adulteries he was most
filthy and abominable, in tyranny most cruel, and in Magic most cunning, and
therefore most execrable: supping one night with Cardinal Adrian, his very
familiar friend, in his garden, having foreappointed his destruction that night
by poison; through the negligence and oversight of his butler, to whom he had
given the exploit in charge, that was deceived by mistaking the bottles, he
drank himself the medicine which he had prepared for his good friend the
Cardinal: and so he died (says Bembus) not without an evident mark of Gods
heavy wrath, in that he which had slain so many Princes and rich men to enjoy
their treasures, and went now about to murder his host which entertained him
with friendship and good cheer into his house, was caught in the same snare
which he had laid, and destroyed by the same means himself, which he had
destinated for another: being thus dead, the whole City of Rome (says
Guicciardine) ran out with greediness and joy to behold his carcass, not
being able to satisfy their eyes with beholding the dead Serpent, whose venom
of ambition, treachery, cruelty, adultery, and avarice, had impoysoned the
whole world. Some say, that as he purposed to poison certain Cardinals, he
poisoned his own father, that being in their company, chanced to get a share of
his drugs: and that he was so abominable to abuse his own sister Lucrece in the
way of filthiness. When Zemes the brother of Bajazet the Emperor of the
Turks came and surrendered himself into his hands, and was admitted into his
protection, he being hired with two hundred ducats by Bajazet, gave poison to
his new Client, even to him to whom he had before sworn and vowed his
friendship: besides, that he might maintain his tyranny, he demanded and
obtained aid of the Turk against the King of France, which was a most
unchristian and antichristian part: he caused the tongue and two hands of
Anthony Mancivellus (a very learned and wise man) to be cut off, for an
excellent Oration which he made in reproof of his wicked demeanours and
dishonest life. It is written moreover by some, that he was so affectionated to
the service of his good lord and master the devil, that he never attempted any
thing without his counsel and advice; who also presented himself unto him at
his death in the habit of a post, according to the agreement which was betwixt
them: and although this wretched Antichrist strove against him for life,
alleging that his term was not yet finished; yet he was enforced to dislodge,
and depart into his proper place, where with horrible cries and hideous
fearful groans he died.

Thus we see how miserably such wretched and infamous miscreants, and such
pernicious and cruel tyrants have ended their wicked lives, their force and
power being execrable and odious, and therefore (as says Seneca) not In his
book of the clemency of a Prince.
able to continue any long time, for that government cannot be firm and
stable, where there is no shame nor fear to do evil, nor where equity,
justice, faith, and piety, with other virtues, are contemned and trodden under
foot: for when cruelty once begins to be predominate, it is so insatiable,
that it never cease, but grows every day from worse to worse, by striving
to maintain and defend old faults by new, until the fear and terror of the
poor afflicted and oppressed people, with a continual source and enterchange
of evils which surcharge them, converteth it self from sorced patience, to
willing fury, and breaks forth to do vengeance upon the tyrants heads with
all violence; whence arises that saying of the Satyricall Poet to the same
sense; where he says,

Few Tyrans dye the death that nature sends, Ad generum Cereris sine caede and
sanguine pauc^, Descendunt reges and s^cca morte tyranni.
But most are brought by slaughter to their ends. CHAP. XLVI. Of Calumniation
and false witness bearing.
WE have seen heretofore what punishments the Lord has laid upon those that
either vex their neigbours in their persons, as in the breakers of the fifth,
sixth, and seventh Commandments; or damage them in their goods, as in the
eighth: now let us look unto those that seek to spoil them of their good names,
and rob them of their credit by slanderous reproaches, and false and forged
calumniatious, and by that means go against the ninth Commandment, which
says, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: In which words
is condemned generally all slanders, all false reports, all defamations, and
all evil speeches else whatsoever, whereby the good name and credit of a man
is blemished, stained, or impoverished; and this sin was not only inhibited by
the divine Law of the Almighty, but also by the laws of Nature and Nations:
for there is no Country and People so barbarous, with whom these pernicious
kind of Creatures are not held in detestation: of tame beasts (says Diogenes)
a flatterer is worst, and of wild beasts a backbiter or a slanderer: and not
without great reason, for as there is no disease so dangerous as that which is
secret, so there is no enemy so pernicious as he which under the color of
friendship biteth and slandereth us behind our backs: but let us see what
judgment the Lord has shown upon them, to the end the odiousness of this
vice may more clearly appear.

And first to begin with Doeg the Edomite, who falsely accused Achimelech the
High Priest unto Saul, for giving succor unto David in his necessity and
flight: for though he told nothing but that which was true, yet of that 1 Samuel
22. 9.
truth some he maliciously perverted, and some he kept back: and falsehood
consists not only in plain lying, but also in concealing and misusing the
truth: for Achimelech indeed asked counsel of the Lord for David, and
ministered unto him the Shewbread and the sword of Goliath, but not with any
intent of malice against King Saul for he supposed, and David also made him
believe, that he went about the Kings business, and that he was in great
favor with the King: which last clause the wicked accuser left out, and by
that means not only provoked the wrath of Saul, against the High Priest, but
also when all other refused, became himself executioner of his wrath, and
murdered Achimelech, with all the nation of the Priests, and smote Nob the City
of the Priests with the edge of the sword, both man, and woman, child, and
suckling, ox and ass, not leaving any alive (so beastly was his cruelty) save
Abiathar only, one of the sons of Achimelech, that fled to David, and brought
him tidings of this bloody massacre. But did this (...) Spirit of God in the
52. Psalm proclaims his judgment: Why boastest thou in Psalm. ^^. 1. 2. ^.
thy wickedness thou Tyran? Thy (...), and is like a sharp rasor that cutteth
deceitfully, etc. but God shall destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee and
pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the Land of the living.

Next to this man we may justly place Achab the King of Israel, and Iesabel 1
King. 21.
his wife, who to the end to get possession of Naboths vineyard (which being
his inheritance he would not part from) suborned by his wives pernicious
counsel false accusers, wicked men, to witness against Naboth, that he had
blasphemed God and the King, and by that means caused him to be stoned to
death: but mark the judgment of God denounced against them both by the mouth
of Elias, for this wicked fact: Have thou killed (says he) and taken
possession? Thus says the Lord, In the place where the dogs licked the blood
of Naboth, shall dogs even lick thy blood also: and as for Jesabel, dogs shall
eat her by the wall of Iesrael: thy house shall be like the house of Jeroboam
the son of Nabat: I will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall,
etc. Neither was this only denounced, but executed also; as we may read, 1
Kin. 22. 38. and 2 Kin. 9. 36, 37, etc. and 2 Kin. 10. 7, etc.

Amaziah the Priest of Bethel under Jeroboam the wicked King of Israel, Amo^ 7.
17.
perceiving how the Prophet Amos prophesied against the Idolatry of that place,
and of the King, he falsely accused him to Jeroboam, to have conspired against
him; also he exhorted him to fly from Bethel, because it was the Kings
Chapel, and fly into Judah, and prophecy there; but what said the Lord unto
him by the Prophet? Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, thy sons and thy
daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line, and
thou shall die in a polluted land: Lo there was the punishment of his false
accusation.

How notable was the judgment that the Lord manifested upon Hamon Ester 7. 10.
the Syrian for his false accusing of the Jews, to be disturbers of the
Commonwealth, and breakers of the laws of King Ahasuerosh? Did not the Lord
turn his mischief upon his own head? The same day that was appointed for their
destruction, the Lord turned it to the destruction of their enemies, and the
same gallows which he prepared for Mordecai was he himself hanged upon.

The men that falsely accused Daniel to King Darius, for breaking the Dan. 6.
Kings edict, which was, that none should make any request unto any for thirty
days space, save only to the King himself, fared no better: for when as they
found Daniel praying unto God, they presently accused him unto the King; urging
him with the stability which ought to be in the Decrees of the Kings of Media
and Persia, that ought not to be altered; in such sort, that King Darius
(though against his will) commanded Daniel to be thrown amongst the Lions, to
be devoured of them; but when he saw how miraculously the Lord preserved him
from the teeth of the Lions, and thereby perceived his innocence, he caused his
envious accusers to be thrown into the Lions den, with their wives and
children, who were devoured by the Lions ere they could fall to the ground.

Notorious is the example of the two Judges that accused Susanna, both how she
was delivered, and they punished.

But let us come to profane ^istories: Apelles that famous Painter of Ephesus,
felt the sting and ^^tternesse o^ this venomous vi^er, for he was falsely
accused by Antiphilus another Painter, an envier of his art and excellent
workmanship, to have conspired with Theodota against King Ptolomie, and to
have been the cause of the defection of Pelusium from him: which accusation he
laid against him, to the end that seeing he could not Theat. Hist.
attain to that excellency of art which he had, he might by this false pretense
work his disgrace and overthrow; as indeed he had effected, had not great
persuasions been used, and manifest proofs alleged of Apelles innocence and
integrity: wherefore Ptolomie having made trial of the cause, and found out
the false and wrongful practice, he most justly rewarded Apelles with an
hundred talents, and Antiphilus the accuser with perpetual servitude: upon
which occasion Apelles in remembrance of that danger painted out Calumniation
on this manner; a Woman gayly attired, and dressed with an angry and furious
countenance, holding in her left hand a torch, and with her right a young man
by the hair of the head, before whom marched an evil favored sluttish usher,
quicke-sighted, and palefaced, called Envy, at her right hand sat a fellow with
long ears like King Midas to receive tales, and behind her two waiting maids,
Ignorance and Suspicion. And thus the witty Painter, to delude his own evil
hap, expressed Vide l. 1. c. 12. Example of Nero.
the lively Image and nature of that detracting sin.

This trick used Maximinus the Tyran to deface the Doctrine and Religion of
Christ in his time; for when he saw that violence and torments Eusebius. l. 9. c.
6.
prevailed not, but that like the Palm, the more it was trodden and oppressed,
Nicep. l. 7. c. 27.
the more it grew, he used this subtilty and craft to undermine it: he
published diverse books full of Blasphemy, of a conference betwixt Christ and
Pilate, and caused them to be taught to children in stead of their first
elements, that they might no sooner speak than hate and blaspheme Christ:
Moreover, he constrained certain wicked lewd women to avouch that they were
Christians, and that vile filthiness was daily committed by them in their
assemblies; which also he published far and near in writing: howbeit, for all
this the Lords truth quailed not, but swum as it were against the stream, and
increased in despite of Envy: and for these false accusers, they were punished
one after another with notable judgments; for one that was a chief doer
therein became his own murderer, and Maximinus himself was consumed with
worms and rottenness, as has been showed in the former Book.

It was a law among the Romans, that if any man had enforced an accusation Eus.
l. 5. cap. 21.
against another, either wrongfully, unlawfully, or without probability, both
his legs should be broken, in recompense of his malice: which custom, as it
was laudable and necessary, so was it put in execution at diverse times, as
namely under the Emperor Commodus, when a profane Nicep. l. 4. c. 26.
wretch accused Apollonius (a godly and professed Christian, and afterward a
constant martyr of Christ Jesus) before the Judges, of certain grievous
crimes, which when he could by no color or likelihood of truth convince and
prove, they adjudged him to that ignominious punishment to have his legs
broken, because he had accused and defamed a man without cause.

Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, a man famous for eloquence in speech, Nicep. l.
8. c. 46.
and uprightness of life, when as he impugned the heresy of the Arrians, was
circumvented by them, and deposed from his Bishopric by this means: they
suborned a naughty strumpet to come in with a child in her arms, and in an
open Synod of two hundred and fifty Bishops to accuse him of adultery, and to
swear that he had got that child of her body: which though he denied
constantly, and no just proof could be brought against him, yet the impudent
strumpets oath took such place, that by the Emperors censure he was banished
from his Bishopric; howbeit ere long his innocence was known, for the said
strumpet being deservedly touched with the finger of Gods justice in extreme
sickness, confessed the whole practice, how she was suborned by certain
Bishops to slander this holy man, and that yet she was not altogether a liar,
for one Eustathius a handy-crafts man got the child, as she had sworn, and
not Eustathius the Bishop.

The like slander the same heretics devised against Athanasius in a Synod
Philip Melanct. Chron. lib. 3. Nicep. l. 9. c. 23.
convocated by Constantine the Emperor, at Tyrus; for they suborned a certain
lewd woman to exclaim upon the holy man in the open assembly, for ravishing of
her that last night against her will: which slander he shifted off by this
devise, he sent Timotheus the Presbyter of Alexandria into the Synod in his
place, who coming to the woman, asked her before them all, whether she durst
say that he had ravished her; to whom she replied, yea, I swear and vow that
thou have done it (for she supposed it to have been Athanasius, whom she
never saw) whereat the whole Synod perceived the cavil of the lying Arrians,
and quitted the innocence of that good man. Howbeit these malicious heretics
seeing this practice not to succeed, invented another worse then the former;
for they accused him to have slain one Arsenius, whom they themselves kept
secret; and that he carried one of his hands about him, wherewith he wrought
miracles by enchantment: but Arsenius, touched by the spirit of God, stole away
from them, and came to Athanasius, to the end he should receive no damage by
his absence, whom he brought in to the Judges, and showed them both his hands,
confounded his accusers with shame of their malice, insomuch as they ran away
for fear, and satisfied the Judges both of his integrity, and their envious
calumniation: the chief Broker of all this mischief was Stephanus Bishop of
Antioch, but he was degraded from his Bishopric, and Leontius elected in his
room.

In our English Chronicles we have recorded a notable history to the like
effect of King Canutus the Dane, who after much trouble, being established in
the Kingdom of England, caused a Parliament to be held at London; where
(amongst other things there debated) it was propounded to the Bishops, Barons,
and Lords of that Assembly, Whether in the composition made betwixt Edmond and
Canutus any special remembrance was made for the children or brethren of
Edmond, touching any partition of any part of the land? which the English
Lords, flattering the king, though falsely and against the truth, yea and
against their own consciences, denied to be; and not only so, but for the
Kings pleasure confirmed their false words with a more false oath, that to the
uttermost of their powers they would put off the blood of Edmond from all right
and interest: by reason of which oath and promise they thought to have
purchased with the King great favor; but by the just retribution of God it
chanced far otherwise: for many of them, or the most part, especially such as
Canutus perceived to have sworn fealty before time to Edmond and his heirs,
he mistrusted and disdained ever after: insomuch, that some he exiled, many he
beheaded, and diverse by Gods just judgment died suddenly.

In the Scottish Chronicles we read how Hamilton the Scot was brought unto his
death by the false accusation of a false Friar called Campbel: who being in the
fire ready to be executed, cited and summoned the said Friar to appear before
the high God, as general Judge of all men, to answer to the innocence of his
death, and whether his accusation were just or not, betwixt that and a certain
day of the next month, which he there named. Now see the heart and hand of God
against a false witness, ere that day came the Friar died without any remorse
of conscience; and no doubt he gave a sharp account to Almighty God of his
malicious and unjust accusation.

In the year of our Lord 1105, Henry Archbishop of Mentz, being complained of
to the Pope, sent a learned man, a special friend of his, to excuse him, named
Arnold; one for whom he had much done, and promoted to great livings and
promotions: but this honest man in stead of an excuser became an accuser; for
he bribed the two chiefest Cardinals with gold, and obtained of the Pope those
two to be sent Inquisitors about the Archbishops case: The which coming into
Germany, summoned the said Henry, and without either law or justice, deposed
him from his Archbishopric, and substituted in his place Arnold, upon hope of
his Ecclesiastical gold: Whereupon that virtuous and honorable Henry is
reported to have spoken thus unto those perverse Judges: If I should appeal to
Acts and Monuments.
the Apostolic Sea, for this your unjust process had against me, perhaps I
should but lose my labor, and gain nothing but toil of body, loss of goods,
affliction of mind, and care of heart: Wherefore I do appeal to the Lord
Jesus Christ, as to the most highest and just Judge, and cite you before his
judgment seat, there to answer for this wrong done unto me; for neither
justly, nor godly, but corruptly, and unjustly, have you judged my cause.
Whereunto they scoffingly said, Go you first, and we will follow. Not long
after, the said Henry dyed: whereof the two Cardinals having intelligence, said
one to the other jestingly, Behold he is gone before, and we must follow
according to our promise. And verily they spoke truer than they were aware; for
within a while after they both dyed in one day: the one sitting upon a jakes to
ease himself, voyded out all his entrails into the draught, and miserably
ended his life: the other gnawing off the fingers of his hands, and spitting
them out of his mouth, (all deformed in devouring of himself) died. And in
like wise not long after the said Arnold was slain in a sedition, and his body
for certain days lying stinking above the ground unburied, was open to the
spoil of every rascal and harlot. And this was the horrible end of this false
accuser, and those corrupted Judges.

Thus were two Cardinals punished for this sin: and that we may see that the
holy father the Pope is no better than his Cardinals, and that God spares not
him no more than he did them; let us hear how the Lord punished one of that
rank for this crime.

It is not unknown, that Pope Innocent the fourth condemned the Emperor
Frederick at the Council at Lions, his cause being unheard, and before he
could come to answer for himself: For when the Emperor, being summoned to
appear at the Council, made all haste he could thitherward, and desired to
have the day of hearing his cause prorogued, till that he might conveniently
travel thither; the Pope refused, and contrary to Gods law, to Christian
Doctrine, to the prescript of the law of nature and reason, and to all
humanity, without probation of any crime, or pleading any cause, or hearing
what might be answered, taking upon him to be both Adversary and Judge,
condemned the Emperor being absent. What more wicked sentence was ever
pronounced? What more cruel fact (considering the person) might be committed?

But mark what vengeance God took upon this wicked Judge. The writers of the
Annals record, that when Frederick the Emperor, and Conrade his son were
both dead, the Pope gaping for the inheritance of Naples and Sicilie, and
thinking by force to have subdued the same, came to Naples with a great host
of men: where was heard in his court manifestly pronounced this voice; Veni
miser ad judicium Dei, Thou wretch come to receive thy judgment of God. And
the next day the Pope was found in his bed dead, all black and blew, as though
he had been beaten with bats. And this was the judgment of God which he came
unto.

To this Pope and these Cardinals let us add an Archbishop, and that Acts and
Monuments, page 700.
of Canterbury; to wit, Thomas Arundel, upon whom the justice of God appeared
no less manifestly than on the former: For after he had unjustly given
sentence against the Lord Cobham, he died himself before him; being so stricken
in his tongue, that he could neither swallow nor speak for a certain space
before the time of his death.

Hither might be adjoined the vengeance of God upon Justice Morgan, who
condemned to death the innocent Lady Jane; but presently after fell mad, and
so dyed, having nothing in his mouth but Lady Jane, Lady Jane.

In the reign of King Henry the eighth, one Richard Long, a man of arms in
Calice, bore false witness against master Smith, the Curate of our Lady Parish
in Calice, for eating flesh in Lent, which he never did: but he escaped not
vengeance; for shortly after he desperately drowned himself. A terrible
example unto all such as are ready to forswear themselves on a Book upon
malice, or some other cause: a thing in these days over rise every where, and
almost of most men little or nothing regarded.

About the same time one Gregory Bradway committed the same crime of false
accusation against one Broke, whom being driven thereunto by fear and
constraint, he accused to have robbed the Custom House, wherein he was a
Clerk, of four groats every day; and to this accusation he subscribed his
hand: but for the same presently felt upon him the heavy hand of God; for being
grieved in his consciene for his deed, he first with a knife enterprised to
cut his own thro^t; but being not altogether dispatched therewith, the Jailer
coming up and preventing his purpose, he fell forthwith into a furious
frenzy; and in that case lived long time after.

Hitherto we may add the example of one William Feming, who accused an Acts
and Monuments.
honest man called John Cooper, of speaking traiterous words against Queen
Mary, and all because he would not sell him two goodly bullockes which he much
desired: for which cause the poor man being arraigned at Berry in Suffolk,
was condemned to death by reason of two false witnesses which the said Feming
had suborned for that purpose, whose names were White and Greenwood; so this
poor man was hanged, drawn, and quartered, and his goods taken from his poor
wife and nine children, which are left destitute of all help: but as for his
false accusers, one of them died most miserably; for in harvest time being well
and lusty, of a sudden his bowels fell out of his body, and so he perished: the
other two what ends they came unto, it is not reported; but sure the Lord has
reserved a sufficient punishment for all such as they are.

Many more be the examples of this sin, and judgments upon it; as Acts and
Monuments, page 2100.
the Pillories at Westminster, and daily experience bears witness; but these
that we have alleged shall suffice for this purpose: because this sin is
cousin Germane unto perjury, of which you may read more at large in the former
book. It should now follow by course of order, if we would not pretermit any
thing of the law of God, to speak of such as have offended against the tenth
Commandment, and what punishment has ensued the same: but for so much as all
such offenses for the most part are included under the former, of which we
have already spoken; and that there is no adultery, nor fornication, nor theft,
nor unjust war, but it is annexed to, and proceeds from the affection and
the resolution of an evil and disordinate concupiscence, as the effect from
the cause: therefore it is not necessary to make any particular recital of
them, more than may well be collected out of the former examples added
hereunto; that in evil concupiscence and affection of doing evil, which
comes not to act, (though it be in the sight of God condemned to everlasting
torments) yet it does not so much incur and provoke his indignation, that a
man should for that only cause be brought to apparent destruction, and be made
an example to others, to whom the sin is altogether dark and unknown:
therefore we will proceed in our purpose without intermeddling in special with
this last Commandment.

CHAP. XLVII. That Kings and Princes ought to look to the execution of
Justice, for the punishment of naughty and corrupt manners.
NO man ought to be ignorant of this, that it is the duty of a Prince, not
only to hinder the course of sin from bursting into action, but also to punish
the doers of the Jame; making both civil justice to be administered uprightly,
and the law of God to be regarded and observed inviolably: for to this end are
they ordained of God, that by their means every one might live a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: to the which end the maintenance
and administration of justice being most necessary, they ought not so to
discharge themselves of it, as to translate it upon their Officers and Judges,
but also to look to the execution thereof themselves, as it is most needful:
for if law (which is the foundation of justice) be (as Plato says) a
speechless and dumb Magistrate; who shall give voice and vigor unto it, if
not he that is in supreme and sovereign authority? For which cause the King
is commanded in Deuteronomy, To have before him always the Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19.
Book of the Law, to the end to do justice and judgment to every one in the
fear of God. And before the creation of the Kings in Israel, the chief
Captains and Sovereigns amongst them were renowned with no other title nor
quality, than of Judges. In the time of Deborah the Prophetess, though she was
a woman, the weaker vessel; yet because she had the conducting and governing
of the people, they came unto her to seek judgment. It is said of Samuel,
that he judged Israel so long, till being tired with age, and not able to bear
that burden any longer, he appointed his sons for Judges in his stead: who
when through covetousness they perverted Judge. 4. 1 Samuel 7. 8.
justice, and did not execute judgment like their father Samuel, they gave
occasion to the people to demand a King, that they might be judged and
governed after the manner of other Nations: which things sufficiently declared,
that in old time the principal charge of Kings was personally to administer
justice and judgment, and not as now to transfer the care thereof to others.

The same we read of King David, of whom it is said, That during his reign he
executed justice and judgment, among his people: and in another 1 Chronicles. 18.
place, That men came unto him for judgment, and therefore he disdained 2 Samuel
15.
not to hear the complaint of the woman of Tekoah; showing himself herein a
good Prince, and as the Angel of God, to hear good and evil: for this cause
Solomon desired not riches, nor long life of the Lord, but a wise 2 Samuel 14.
and discreet heart to judge his people, and to discern betwixt good and
evil: which request was so agreeable and acceptable to God, that he granted 1
King 3.
it unto him; so that he obtained such an excellent measure of incomparable
wisdom, that he was commended and reputed more for it, than for all his great
riches and precious treasure beside. There is mention made in the Book of the
Kings of his judicial throne wherein he used to sit and hear the causes of
the people, and execute justice among them; and albeit he was the most puissant
and glorious King of the earth, yet notwithstanding he scorned not to hear two
harlots plead before him about the controversy of a dead infant.

Ioram King of Israel, son of Achab, though a man that walked not uprightly 2
King. 6.
before God, but gave himself to work abomination in his sight; yet he
despised not the complaint of the poor affamished woman of Samaria, when she
demanded justice at his hands, although it was in the time of war when Laws
use to be silent, and in the besieging and famishment of the City; neither did
he reject the Sunamites request, for the recovery of 2 King. 8.
her house and lands, but caused them to be restored unto her. So that then it
is manifest, that those Kings which in old time reigned over the People of God,
albeit they had in every City Judges, yea and in Jerusalem also, as it
appears in the nineteenth Chapter of the second Book of Chronicles; yet they
ceased not for all that to give ear to suits and complaints that were made unto
them, and to decide controversies that came to their knowledge: and for this
cause it is that Wisdom says, That by her Kings Prove. 8. 15.
reign, and Princes decree justice: whereunto also belongs that which is
said in another place, That a King sitting in the Throne of judgment Proc. 20.
8.
chaseth away all evil with his eyes.

Moreover, that this was the greatest part of the Office and duty of Kings in
ancient times to see the administration of justice, Homer the Poet may be a
sufficient witness, when he says of Agamemnon, That the Scepter and Law was
committed to him by God, to do right to every man: answerable to the which,
Virgil (describing the Queen of Carthage) says, She sat in judgment in the
midst of her People: as if there was nothing more beseeming such a person than
such an action. And therefore the Poets not without cause feign Jupiter
always to have Themis (that is to say, Justice) at his elbow; signifying
thereby, not that whatsoever Kings and Princes did was just and lawful, be it
never so vile in it own nature (as that wanton flatterer Anaxarchus said to
Alexander) but that equity and justice should always accompany them, and never
depart from their sides. And hereupon it was that Eacus, Minos, and Radamanthus
the first King of Graecia, were so renowned of old antiquity, because of their
true and upright execution of Justice, and therefore were not honored with any
greater title than the name of Judges.

It is said of King Alexander, that although he was continually busied in
Plutarch.
affairs of war, and of giving battles, yet he would sit personally in
judgment to hear criminal causes and matters of importance pleaded; and that
whilst the accuser laid open his accusation, he would stop one ear with his
hand, to the end that the other might be kept pure and without prejudice, for
the defense and answer of the accused. The Roman Emperors Sueton.
also were very careful and diligent in this behalf: as first Julius Caesar,
who is recorded to have taken great pains in giving audience to parties, and
in dealing justice betwixt them. In like manner Augustus Caesar is commended
for his care and travel in this behalf: for he would ordinarily sit in
judgment upon causes and controversies of his subjects, and that with such
great delight and pleasure, that oftentimes night was fain to interrupt his
course, before his will was to relinquish it: yea, though he found himself
evil at case, yet would he not omit to apply himself to the division of
judgment, or else calling the parties before him to his bed.

The Emperor Claudius, though a man otherwise of a dull and gross spirit, yet
in this respect he discharged the duty of a good Prince, for that he would
intermeddle with hearing his subjects causes, and do right unto them: he
chanced once to make a very pretty and witty end of a suit betwixt a son and
his mother, who denying and disclaiming him to be her son, was by the Emperor
commanded to marry him; and so lest he should agree to that mischief, was
constrained to acknowledge and avow him for her son: and to be short, it was
very ordinary and usual among the Emperors, to take knowledge of matters
controverted, but especially of criminal and capital causes; by means
whereof the Apostle Paul, desirous to shun the judgment and lyings in wait of
his enemies the Jews, appealed from them to Caesar; which he would never have
done, if Caesar had not in some sort used to meddle with such affairs; and for
further proof hereof, hither may be added the saying which is reported of Nero,
in the beginning of his reign, That when he should sign with his hand a
sentence of death against a condemned person, he wished that he could neither
write nor read, to the end to avoid that necessary action.

The bold answer of an old woman to the Emperor Adrian is very worthy Fulgos.
lib 6. cap. 2.
to be remembered; who appealing and complaining to the Emperor of some wrong,
when he answered that he was not at leisure then to hear her suit, she told him
boldly and plainly, That then he ought not to be at leisure to be her Emperor:
which speech went so near the quick unto him, that ever after he showed more
facility and courtesy toward all men that had any thing to do with him. The
Kings of France used also this custom of hearing and deciding their subjects
matters, as we read of Charlemaigne the King and Emperor, who commanded that
he should be made acquainted with all matters of importance, and their issues,
throughout his Realm. King Lewis the first treading the steps of his father
Charlemaigne, accustomed himself three days in a week to hear publicly in
his palace the complaints and grievances of his people, and to right their
wrongs and injuries. King Lewis, surnamed the Holy, a little before his death
gave Alm^.
in charge to his son that should succeed him in the Crown, amongst other, this
precept, To be careful to bear a stroke in seeing the distribution of justice,
and that it should not be perverted nor depraved.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of such Princes as have made no reckoning of punishing vice, nor
regarded the estate of their People.
IT cannot choose but be a great confusion in a Commonwealth, when justice
sleeps, and when the shameless boldness of evil doers is not curbed in
with any bridle, but runs it own swinge; and therefore a Consul of Rome
could say, That it was an evil thing to have a Prince, under whom license and
liberty is given to every man to do what him lists: for so much then as this
evil proceeds from the carelessness and slothfulness of those that hold the
stern of government in their hands, it cannot be but some evil must needs
fall upon them for the same: the truth of this may appear in the person of
Philip of Macedony (whom Demosthenes the Orator notes for a treacherous and
false dealing Prince:) after that he had subdued almost all Greece, not so much
by open war, as by subtilty, craft, and surprise, and that being in the top of
his glory, he celebrated at one time the marriage of his son Alexander, whom he
had lately made King of Epire, and of one of his daughters, with great pomp
and magnificence; as he was marching with all his train betwixt the two
bridegroomes (his own son and his son in law) to see the sports and pastimes
which were prepared for the solemnity of the marriage, behold suddenly a young
Macedonian Gentleman called Pausanias, ran at him, and slew him in the midst of
the prease, for not regarding to do him justice, when he complained of an
injury done unto him by one of the Peers of the Realm.

Tatius, the fellow King of Rome with Romulus, for not doing justice in
Plutarch.
punishing certain of his friends and kinsfolks that had robbed and murdered
certain Ambassadors which came to Rome, and for making their impunity an
example for other malefactors by deferring and protracting, and disappointing
their punishment, was so watched by the kindred of the slain, that they slew
him even as he was sacrificing to his gods, because they could not obtain
justice at his hands.

What happened to the Romans for refusing to deliver an Ambassador, Titus
Livius. Plutarch.
who (contrary to the law of Nations coming unto them) played the part of an
enemy to his own Country, even well nigh the total overthrow of them and
their City: for having by this means brought upon themselves the calamity of
war, they were at the first discomfited by the Gauls; who pursuing their
victory, entered Rome, and slew all that came in their way, whether men or
women, infants or aged persons, and after many days spent in the pillage and
spoiling of the houses, at last set fire on all, and utterly destroyed the
whole City.

Childericke King of France is notified for an extreme dullard and blockhead,
Paulus Aemil.
and such a one as had no care or regard unto his Realm, but that lived idly
and slothfully, without intermedling with the affairs of the Commonwealth:
for he laid all the charge and burden of them upon Pepin his Lieutenant
General, and therefore was by him justly deposed from his royal Dignity, and
mewed up in a Cloister of Religion to become a Monk, because he was unfit for
any good purpose: and albeit that this sudden change and mutation was very
strange, yet there ensued no trouble nor commotion in the Realm thereupon; so
odious was he become to the whole land for his drousie and idle disposition.
For the same cause did the Princes Electors depose Venceslaus the Emperor from
the Empire, and established another in his room. Paulus Aemil.


King Richard of England, among other foul faults which he was guilty of,
incurred greatest blame for this, because he suffered many thieves and robbers
to rove up and down the Land unpunished: for which cause the Citizens of London
commenced a high suit against him, and compelled him having reigned two and
twenty years, to lay aside the Crown, and resign it to another, in the
presence of all the States, and died prisoner in the Tower.

Moreover, this is no small defect of justice, when men of authority do not
only pardon capital and detestable crimes, but also grace and favor the
doers of them: and this neither ought nor can be done by a sovereign Prince,
without overpassing the bounds of his limited power, which can in no ways
dispense with the law of God, whereunto even Kings themselves Exodus 21.
are subject: for as touching the willing and considerate murderer, Thou shall
pluck him from my Altar (says the Lord) that he may die, thy eye shall Deuteronomy.
19.
not spare him, to the end it may go well with thee: which was put in practice
in the death of Ioab, who was slain in the Tabernacle of God, holding his 1
King. 2.
hands upon the horns of the Altar: for he is no less abominable before God
that justifies the wicked, than he that condemns the just: and hereupon
Prove. 17.
that holy King S. Lewis, when he had granted pardon to a malefactor, Nich.
Gilles.
revoked it again, after better consideration of the matter; saying, That he
would give no pardon, except the case deserved pardon by the law, for it was a
work of charity and pity to punish an offender; and not to punish crimes was
as much as to commit them.

In the year of our Lord 978, Egelrede the son of Edgare and Alphred, King
of England, was a man of goodly outward shape and visage, but wholly given to
idleness, and abhorring all Princely exercises: besides, he was a lover of
riot and drunkenness, and used extreme cruelty toward his subjects, having
his ears open to all unjust complaints; in feats of arms of all men most
ignorant: so that his cruelty made him odious to his subjects, and his
cowardice encouraged strange enemies to invade his kingdom; by means whereof
England was sore afflicted with war, famine and pestilence. In his time (as a
just plague for his negligence in Government) decayed the noble Kingdom of
England, and became tributary to the Danes: for ever when the Danes oppressed
him with war, he would hire them away with sums of money, without making
any resistance against them: insomuch, that from ten thousand pounds by the
year, the tribute arose in short space to fifty thousand: wherefore he devised
a new trick, and sought by treachery to destroy them, sending secret
Commissioners to the Magistrates throughout the Land, that upon a certain day
and hour assigned, the Danes should suddenly and jointly be murdered: Which
massacre being performed, turned to be the cause of greater misery: for Swain
King of Denmark hearing of the murder of his contrymen, landed with a
strange army in diverse parts of this Realm, and so cruelly without mercy and
pity spoiled the Country, and slew the people, that the Englishmen were
brought to most extreme and unspeakable misery, and Egelrede the King driven
to fly with his wife and children to Richard Duke of Normandy, leaving the
whole Kingdom to be possessed of Swain.

Edward the second of that name may well be placed in this rank: for Stow
Chron. Phil. Com.
though he was fair and well proportioned of body, yet he was crooked and
evil favored in conditions: for he was so disposed to lightness and vanity,
that he refused the company of his Lords and men of honor, and haunted amongst
villains and vile persons; he delighted in drinking and riot, and loved
nothing less than to keep secret his own counsels, though never so
important; so that he let the affairs of his Kingdom run at six and at
sevens: To these vices he added the familiarity of certain evil disposed
fellows, as Pierce de Gaueston, and Hugh the Spencers; whose wanton counfell
he following, neglected to order his Commonwealth by sadness, discretion, and
justice: which thing caused first great variance betwixt him and his nobles, so
that shortly he became to them most odious, and in the end was deprived of his
kingdom: for the Scots that were so curbed in his fathers days, now played rex
through his negligence, and made many irruptions into his land, killing and
discomfiting his men at three sundry battles: besides, Charles of France did
him much scath upon his lands in Gasconie and Guyan; and at last Isabell his
own wife, with the help of Sir John of Henault and his Henowaies (to whom the
nobles and commons gave their assistance) took him and deprived him of his
crown, installed his young son Edward in his place, keeping him in prison at
Bartcley, where not long after he was murdered by Sir Roger Mortimer.

CHAP. XLIX. How rare and geason good Princes have been at all times.
IT appears by all these former histories, what a multitude there has been
of dissolute, proud, cruel, and vicious Princes, and of tyrans and oppressors,
so that the number of good and virtuous ones seems to have been but small in
comparison of them: which is also intimated by the tenor of the histories of
the Kings of Juda and Israel, of whom (being in number forty) but ten only
were found that pleased God in their reigns, and they of Juda; and yet of them
ten, one was corrupted in his old age, and fell away to vile iniquities: but of
Israel there was not one that demeaned not himself evil in his estate, and
dealt not unjustly and wickedly before the Lord. As for the first Emperors,
what manner of men they were for the most part, we have already sufficiently
declared: Wherefore it was not unfitly spoken of him, that jeasting-wise told
the Emperor Claudius, That all the good Caesar's might be engraven in one little
ring, they were so few: so that then a King or Prince endued with virtue,
bounty, and clemency, and that loves his subjects, ends strifes, and
kindles concord, is a special note of Gods favor, and a gift inestimable;
and that people that has such a Prince for their support and stay, are
infinitely blessed; they lie as it were upon a sunnie bank, and ride in a most
safe and quiet haven, whilst others are exposed and laid open to the cruelty
of time, and are tossed and turmoyled with the waves of calamity and
oppression; therefore this may be their song of mirth and rejoicing, whilst
other nations sing nothing but welladaies:

A sad afflicted soul, all pale with grief and wrong,
Being eased from sense of dole, does straitway change his song
From moan to mirth, for why his thick and cloudy night,
Is turned to purity of Titans glorious light.
The raging storm is past, and fear of shipwreck gone,
Their weary ships at last a calmie shore have won.
The Pilot safely lies reposed under lee,
Not fearing frown of skies, or other misery.
The strong and mighty blasts of furious winds are still,
They do no more cast down huge Fur trees at their will:
A pleasant gale succeeds of fruitful Zephyrus,
Which recreates the seeds of spring voluptuous.
Pack hence you wicked ones, with all your equipage
Of murdering champions, envenomed with rage:
Your horse are tired with toil, and all your strength's plucked down,
Your swords have caught a foil by lovely peaces crown.
O blessed glorious peace (that beautifiest each land,
And make all dangers cease, whereof in fear we stand)
Distill thy favors pure (which are immortal things)
On us that lie secure in shadow of thy wings.
Even those thy holy train, which still attendance yield,
Let them wax young again, and flourish in our field:
Justice and verity, which balance right from wrong,
Let them attend on thee with equity among.
Then shall the Swains rejoice under a Fig Tree lien,
And sing with cheerful voice until the Suns decline:
And all the world shall ring with echoes of our praise,
Which to the Lord our King we warble out always.
The simple harmless Lamb no greedy Wolf shall fear,
Nor Kid new wain'd from dam shall stand in awe of Bear:
But Sheep and Wolf shall make like friends one flock and fold,
A fearelesse child shall take the rule of Tigres old.
You flocks of Sion hill which through so many fears
Of war and crosses, still have sown your field with tears,
Take comfort to your hope, strait comes the joyful hour
To reap a fruitful crop for all your torments sour.
But alas it comes to pass through the sins and wickedness of men, that
Realms are oftentimes scarred with the alarmes and assaults of foes, and
strangely afflicted with many evils, when as the State of government Esaias 3.
is troubled and changed by the iniquities of the people.

CHAP. L. That the greatest and mightiest Cities are not exempt from punishment
of their iniquities.
WHereas great and populous Cities are as it were the eyes of the earth (as
Athens and Sparta were said to be of Greece) there is no question but that they
are so much the more blameable for glutting and overcharging themselves with
sins, by how much the more they abound with all manner of temporal goods and
commodities, and that at length they tumble into utter ruin and desolation;
for instead of being a pattern and direction unto others, of wisdom and good
government, as they ought; they are for the most part examples of folly and
vanity: for where is more evils and dissoluteness reigning, than in them? the
principal cause whereof is that greedy worm Avarice, which begets in all
estates much fraud, cousening, and other naughty practices, with many such like
children: for through it every man looks to provide for his own affairs,
and to get any commodity or ease whatsoever to himself, even with all his
power; not caring who be damnified, so he be enriched: The plenty of riches
which there abounds, instilleth pride and haughtiness of mind into some,
makes others dissolute and effeminate, and besotteth others with carnal and
unhonest pleasures; from which head spring rivers of evils, as envies,
quarrels, dissentions, debates, and murders; all which things happen to them,
that being transported and distracted with the furious contrariety of their
disordinate affection, can find no contentment nor agreement with themselves,
but must needs burst out into some outward mischiefs; Hence is that wonderful
pomp and bravery, as well of apparel as other things: hence all gourmandise
and drunkenness are so common, yea and adulteries so much frequented;
wherefore the anger of the Almighty must needs be kindled, to consume them in
their sins.

One of the notablest Cities of the world for greatness and antiquity was
Ninive, the capital and chief City of the Assyrian Empire: howbeit her
greatness and power could not so protect her, but that after she had once
been spared by the means of the Prophet Jonas, who foretold her of her
destruction, being returned to her former vomit again; to wit, of robberies,
extortions, wrongful dealings, and adulteries, she was wholly and utterly
subverted, God having delivered her for a prey into the hands of many of her
enemies, that spoiled and pilled her to the quick; and lastly, into the hands
of the Medes, who brought her to a final and unrecoverable desolation, as it
was prophesied by the Prophet Nahum.

Babylon was wont to be the seat of that puissant Monarchy under
Nabuchadnezzar, where flourished the famous Astrologers, and notable wise men
of the world, where the spoils and riches of many nations and countries were
set up as Trophies, and kept as the remembrance of their victories; where also
vices reigned, and all manner of excess and villainy overflowed: for by the
report of Q. Curtius, the City did so exceed in whoredom Lib. 5. of the acts
of Alexander.
and adulteries, that fathers and mothers were not ashamed to be bawdes unto
their daughters, no nor husbands to their wives; a thing most strange and
odious: wherefore it could not choose but in the end be sacked, and Oros. lib.
2.
quite destroyed with an extreme ruin and destruction, the signs and
appearance whereof yet are seen in the ruin of old walls and ancient buildings
Paul. Jovius, Com. 2. lib. 33.
that there remain.

Amongst sea-bordering Cities, and for renown of merchandise, Tire in former
ages was most famous: for thither resorted the merchants of all Countries for
traffic of Palestina, Syria, Egypt, Persia, and Assyria; they of Tarshis
brought thither Iron, Lead, Brass, and Silver: the Syrians sold their
Carbuncles, Purple, broidered work, fine linen, coral, and pearl: the
Jews, Honey, Oil, Treacle, Cassia, and Calamus: the Arabians traffiqued with
Lambs, Muttons, and Goats: the Sabeans brought merchandise of all exquisite
spices and Apothecary stuff, with gold and precious stones; by means whereof
it being grown exceeding wealthy, enriched by fraud and deceit, and being
lifted up to the height of pride, and plunged in the depth of pleasures, it was
at length by the just judgment of God, so sacked and ruinated, that the very
memory thereof at this day scarce remains.

The like judgment fell upon Sidon, and upon that rich and renowned Sabell.
City of Corinth, which through the commodiousnesse of the haven, was the most
frequented place of the world, for the intercourse of Merchants out of Asia and
Europe; for by reason of her pride and corruption of manners, Thucyd.
(but especially for her despising and abuse of the heavenly graces of Gods
spirit) which were sowed and planted in her, she underwent this punishment,
Contempt of the word. Lib. 1. cap. 34. Eutrop. Oros. lib. 9.
to be first finally destroyed, and brought into cinders by the Romans; and
then after her re-edification, to be debased into so low and v^le an estate,
that that which remains is no wise comparable to her former glory.

Again, Athens the most flourishing and famous City of Greece for her fair
buildings, large precincts, and multitude of inhabitants, but especially for
her Philosophy, by means whereof recourse was made from all parts to her, as
the fountain and wellspring of Arts, and the School and University of the
whole world; whose policy and manner of government was so much esteemed by
the Romans, that they drew from thence their laws; but now she lies dead and
buried in forgetfulness, not carrying any of her former proportion or
appearance.

Carthage that noble City, mistress of Africa, and paragon to Rome, may not
brag of any better issue than her fellows: for though she resisted and made
her part good with Rome for many years, yet at length by means of her own
inward and civil jarres, she was utterly destroyed by them: for the
inhabitants, not able to stand any longer in defense, were constrained to Oros.
Eutrop.
yield themselves to the mercy of their enemies: the women, to the number of
five and twenty thousand marching first forth, and after them the men in number
thirty thousand following; all which poor captives were sold for bondslaves,
a few only of the principal excepted; and then fire was put to the City,
which burnt seventeene days without ceasing, even till it was Eutrop.
clean consumed. It is true that it was re-edified after this, but which
lasted not long, for it was again brought to destruction; that at this day
there remains nothing but old and rotten ruins. And thus fared many other
Cities, of which may be verified that which was spoken of Troy, that fields and
corn are where Cities were. Nunc seges est ubi Tr^ia fuit.


Numantium in Spain being besieged by the Romans, after it had borne the brunt
of war and sacking, a long while made many desperate sallies upon their
enemies: and lastly, seeing themselves consumed with famine, rather than they
would bow their necks to the yoke of servitude, barring their gates, set fire
on all: and so burning themselves with their whole City, left the enemy nothing
but ashes for his prey and triumph: as the Saguntines not long before served
Anniball. Titue Livius.


It is a mavelous and strange thing to consider, how that proud City has
lifted up her head above all others, and usurped a tyranny over Nations, and
which Lactantius, Jerome, and Augustine, three learned fathers, entitled
Babylon: how I say she has been humbled for all her pride, and Rome he
means.
impoverished for all her riches, and made a prey unto many Nations. It was
sacked and ransacked twice by the Visigothes, taken once by the Herulians,
surprised by the Ostrogothes, destroyed and rooted up by the Vandales, annoyed
by the Lumbards, pilled and spoiled by the Graecians, and whipped and chastised
by many others; and now (...) Sodom and Gomorrah it is to expect no more
punishment, but the last blow of the most mightiest his indignation, to throw
it headlong into everlasting and horrible desolation.

CHAP. LI. Of such punishments which are common to all men in regard of their
iniquities.
THese and such like effects of Gods wrath ought to admonish and instruct every
man to look unto himself for doing evil, and to abhor and detest sin,
since it brings forth such sour and bitter fruits: for albeit the ways of
the wicked seem in their own eyes fair and good, yet it is certain, that
they are full of snares Prove. 22.
and thorns to entrap and prick them to the quick: for after that, being fed
with the licorous and deceitful sweetness of their own lusts, they have
sported themselves their fills in their pleasures and wicked affections, then in
stead of delights and pastimes, they shall find nothing but punishment and
sadness; their laughter, joy, pomp, magnificence, and glory, shall be turned
into torments and dolors, weepings, opprobries, ignominies, confusion, and
misery everlasting: for if God spared not great Cities, Empires, Monarchies,
and Kings, in their obstinate misdeeds, shall we think he will spare little
Cities, Hamlets, and Villages, and men of base estate, when by their sins
they provoke him to anger? no, it cannot be; for God is always of one and the
same nature, always like unto himself: A God executing justice and judgment
upon the earth; a God that loves not iniquity; ^ with whom the wicked cannot
dwell, nor Jerem. 19.
the fools stand before his presence. It is he that huteth the workers of
unrighteousness, Psalm. 5.
and that destroys the liars, and abhors all deceitful, disloyal,
perjurous, and murdering persons: as with him there is no exception of persons,
so none, of what estate or condition soever, be they rich or poor, noble or
ignoble, gentle, or carter-like, can exempt themselves from his wrath and
indignation when it is kindled but a little, if they delight and continue in
their sins: for as S. Paul says, Tribulation and Romans 2. 9.
anguish upon the soul of every man that does evil.

Now according to the variety and diversity of men's offenses, the Lord in his
most just and admirable judgment, uses diversity of punishments: sometimes
correcting them one by one, particular; otherwhiles altogether in a heap:
sometimes by storms and tempests, both by sea and land; other times by
lightning, hail, and deluge of waters* often by overflowing and breaking out
of rivers, and of the sea also: and not seldom by remediless and sudden
fires, heaven and earth, and all the elements being armed with an invincible
force, to take vengeance upon such as are traitors and rebels against God ^
sundry times he scourges the world (as it well deserves) with his usual and
accustomed plagues, namely of war, and famine, and pestilence, which are
evident signs of his anger, according to the threats denounced in the law
t^^^hing the same: and therefore if at any time he defer the punishment of
the wicked, it is for no other end, but to expect the fullness of their sin,
and to make them more inexcusable, when contrary to his bountifulness and long
suffering (which inviteth and calls them to repentance) they harden
themselves and grow more obstinate in their vices and rebellion, drawing upon
their heads the whole heap of wrath, the more grievously to assail them. And
thus the vengeance of God marches but a soft pace (as says Valerius Maximus)
to the end to double and aggravate the punishment for the slacknesse thereof.

CHAP. LII. That the greatest punishments are reserved and laid up for the
wicked in the world to come.
NOtwithstanding all which has been spoken, and howsoever sinners are
punished in this life, it is certain, that the greatest and terriblest
punishments are kept in store for them in another world: And albeit that during
this transitory pilgrimage, they seem to themselves oftentimes to live at
their ease, and enjoy their pleasures and pastimes to their hearts contentment;
yet doubtless it is so, that they are indeed in a continual prison, and in a
dungeon of darkness, bound and chained with fetters of their own sin, and
very often turmoyled and but chered with their own guilty conscience,
overcharged with the multitude of offenses, and fore-feeling the approach of
hell: And in this case many languish away with fear, care, and terror, being
toyled and tired with uncessant and unsupportable disquietnesse, and tossed and
distracted with despair, until by death they be brought unto their last
irrevokable punishment; which punishment is not to endure for a time, and then
to end, but is eternal and everlastingly inherent both in body and soul: I
say in the body, after the resurrection of the dead; and in soul, after the
departure out of this life till all eternity: for it is just and equal, that
they which have offended and dishonored God in their bodies in this life,
should be punished also in their bodies in the world to come with endless
torments: of which torments when mention is made in the holy Scripture, they
are for our weak capacity sake called Gehenna, or a place of torment, utter
darkness and hell fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc.
again, eternal fire, a poole and pit of fire and brimstone, which is prepared
for the devil and his darlings: and how miserable their estate is that fall
therein, our Savior Christ gives us to know in the person of the rich
glutton, who having bathed himself in the pleasures and Luke 16.
delights of this world, without once regarding or pitying the poor, was
after cast into the torments of hell, and there burns in quenchlesse flames,
without any ceasing or allaying of his griefs: therefore whatsoever
punishments the wicked suffer before they die, they are not quitted by them
from this other, but must descend into the appointed place to receive the
surplus of their payments which is due unto them: For what were it for a
notorious and cruel Tyran that had committed many foul and wicked deeds, or
had most villanously murdered many good men, to have no other punishment but to
be slain, and to endure in the hour of death some extraordinary pain; could
such a punishment balance with his so many and great offenses? Whereas
therefore many such wretches suffer punishment in this world, we must think
that this is but a taste and scantling of those torments and punishments which
are prepared and made ready for them in the world to come. And therefore it
often comes to pass, that they pass out of this life most quietly, without
the disturbance of any cross or punishment; but it is that they might be more
strangely tormented in another world. Some not considering this point, nor
stretching the view of their understanding beyond the aspect of their carnal
eyes, have fallen into this foolish opinion, to think that there is neither
justice nor judgment in heaven, nor respect of equity with the Highest: when
they see the wicked to flourish in prosperity, and the good and innocent to be
overwhelmed with adversity, yea and many holy men have fallen into this
temptation, as Job and David did, who when they considered the condition Job.
12. and Psalm. 73.
of the wicked and unjust, how they lived in this world at their hearts ease,
compassed about with pleasures and delights, and waxing old in the same, were
carried to their sepulchers in peace; they were somewhat troubled and perplexed
within themselves, until being instructed and resolved by the Word of God,
they marked their final end and issue, and the everlasting perdition which was
prepared for them, and by no means could be escaped. And thus it comes to
pass (says S. Augustine) that many sins Epist. 54.
are punished in this world, that the providence of God might be more apparent;
and many, yea most reserved to be punished in the world to come, that we might
know that there is yet judgment behind.

CHAP. LIII. How the afflictions of the godly, and the punishment of the wicked
differ.
WHich seeing it is so, it is necessary that the wicked and perverse ones
should feel the rigor of Gods wrath for the presumption and rebellion
wherewith they daily provoke him against them; and although with those that
fear God, and strive to keep themselves from evil, and take pains to live
peaceably and quietly, it oftentimes goes worse here below than with others,
being laid open to millions of injuries, reproaches, and cruelties, and as it
were sheep appointed to the slaughter; whereof some are massacred, some
hanged, some headed, some drowned, some burned, or put to some other cruel
death; yet notwithstanding their estate and condition is far happier than
that of the wicked, for so much as all their sufferings and adversities are
blessed and sanctified unto them of God, who turns them to their advantage,
according to the saying of S. Paul, Romans 8. 28.
That all things work for the good to them that fear God: for whatsoever
tribulation befalls them, they cannot be separated from the love of God,
which he bears unto them in his welbeloved son Christ Jesus: be it then that
God visits them for their faults, (for there is none that is clear of sin) it
is a fatherly chastisement to bring them to amendment: be it that he
exercises them by many afflictions, as he did Job, it is to prove their faith
and patience, to the end they may be better purified like gold in the furnace,
and serve for example to others. If it be for the truth of the Gospel that
they suffer, then they are blessed, because they are conformed to the image of
the son of God, that they might also be partakers of his glory, for they that
suffer with him, are assured to reign^ with him: hence it is, that in the midst
of their torments and oppressions, in the midst of fires and fagots flaming
about them, being comforted with the consolations of Gods spirit, through a
sure hope of their happy repose and incorruptible crown which is prepared for
them in the heavens, they rejoice and are so cheerful: contrariwise the
wicked, seeing themselves ensnared in the evils which their own sins brought
upon them, gnash their teeth, fret themselves, murmur against God, and
blaspheme him, like wretches, to their endless perdition. There is therefore
great difference betwixt the punishments of each of these, for the one tends
to honor and life, the other to shame and confusion: and even as it is not the
greatness of torments that makes the martyr, but the goodness of the cause;
so the infliction of punishment unjustly, neither makes the party afflicted
guilty, nor any whit diminishes his reputation: whereas the wicked that are
justly tormented for their sins, are so marked with infamy and dishonor,
that the stain thereof can never be wiped out.

Let every one therefore learn to keep, himself from evil, and to contain
himself in a kind of modesty and integrity of life, seeing that by the
plagues and scourges wherewith the world is ordinarily afflicted; Gods fierce
wrath is clearly revealed from heaven upon all impiety and injustice of men,
to consume all those that rebel against him. Think upon this you inhabitants
of the earth, small and great, of what quality or condition soever you be.

If you be mighty, puissant, and fearful, know that the Lord is greater than
you, for he is almighty, all-terrible, and all-fearefull: in what place soever
you are, he is always above you, ready to hurl you down and overturne you, to
break, quash, and crush you in pieces as pots of earth: he is armed with
thunder, fire, and a bloody sword, to destroy, consume, and cut you in pieces:
heaven threatens from above, and the earth which you trample on from below;
shaking under your feet, and being ready to spue you out from her face, or
swallow you up in her bowels: in brief, all the elements and creatures of God
look askew at you in disdain, and set themselves against you in hatred, if
you fear not your Creator, your Lord and Master, of whom you have received
your Scepters and Crowns, Esaias 40.
and who is able (when he please) to bring Princes to nothing, and make the
Rulers of the earth a thing of naught. Forsake therefore, if you tender the
good, honor, and repose of your selves and yours, the evil and corrupt
fashions of the world, and submit your selves in obedience under the Scepter of
Gods Law and Gospel, fearing the just retribution of vengeance upon all them
that do the contrary: for it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the
Lord. And you which honor and reverence Heb. 10. 31.
God already, be now more quickened and stirred up to his love and obedience,
and to a more diligent practicing of his will, and following his commandments,
to the end to glorify him by your lives looking for the happy end of your
hope reserved in the heavens for you by Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom (...)
everlasting,

Amen.
A brief Summarie of more Examples, annexed to the former by the same Author.
CHAP. I. Of such as have persecuted the Church of Christ.
ZAcharias the son of Barachias, of whom S. Matthew speaks in the three and
twentieth chapter; and Saint Augustine in the 242 Sermon, de Tempore, in these
words; Zachary the High Priest, reproving the rebellious people for the
neglect of the worship of God, and the sacred laws, was slain of the people;
and the detestable band of the Jews dyed the pavement with his blood, in the
ninth year of the reign of Ioas King of Judah: which cruelty against this
good man the whole nation of the Jews paid dear for; for when a year was
past, an army of the Syrians came up against Ioas, and slew all the Princes of
the people in Judah and Jerusalem: and there being but a small number of the
Syrians, God delivered into their hands the whole multitude of the Jews. Rabbi
Iohosua reports, that two hundred and eleven thousand were slain in the
field, and ninety four thousand in the City, for the expiation of the blood
of Zacharias, which blood boiled out of the earth till that day, as it were out
of a seething Caldron.

Eg^as Patrensis, a Prefect of the Emperor in Achaia, when he had crucified
Phil. Lonicer.
Saint Andrew, was possessed of Satan, and slain.

Incommodous Emperor Commodus, which was judged by the Senate more cruel than
Domitian, and more impure than Nero, had a tragical end, both for his other
vices, and principally for persecuting the Church of Christ.

In the time of Constantine, one Teredates a great man in Armenia, grievously
persecuted the Church: at which time Gregory the Great, famous for miracles,
suffered many indignities from him, and at the last was shut up into a dark
and muddie pit for the space of fourteen years. But Teredates the Prince of
that nation, felt the horrible vengeance of God upon himself, his household,
and his Nobles, for they were all transformed into swine, and lived like swine
together, and devoured one another. Whether this story be true or fabulous,
let the Reader judge: But it is reported by Nicephorus, lib. 8. cap. 35.

In the reign of Constantius, after the Antiochian Synod, in the which Zozom.
lib. 3. cap. 6.
great Athanasius was condemned, the Eastern Cities, and especially Antioch,
were shaken and quashed with wonderful Earthquakes, in revenge of the injuries
done to that good man.

Neither did Constantius the Emperor, an assertor and maintainer of the Cent.
4. cap. 3.
Arrian heresy, escape unpunished for his perfidie and impiety. For first his
warre-like affairs in the East prospered not: then a little before the end of
his life he grievously complained, that he had innovated the faith in his
kingdom. At last in those sighings and complaints he parted this life, with a
grievous and violent disease.

The Uncle of Julian the Apostata, called also Iulianus, at Antioch, in the
Phil. Lonicer.
temple profaned the holy table with pissing upon it. And when Eusoius the
Bishop rebuked him for it, he stroke him with his fist. Not long after he was
taken with a grievous disease of his bowels putrefying, and miserably died, his
excrements coming from him not by their ordinary passages, but by his wicked
mouth.

Under the Emperor Valence, a wonderful hail, the stones being as big as a
man could hold in his hand, was sent upon Constantinople, and slew Fascic. Temp.
many, both men and beasts, for that the Emperor had banished many famous men
that would not communicate with Eudoxius the Arrian: and for the same reason a
great part of Germa, a City of Hellespont, was thrown down by an earthquake;
and in Phrygia such a famine succeeded, that the Inhabitants were feign to
change their habitation, and to ^lee to other places.

After the martyrdom of Gregory the Bishop of Spoleta, Flacchus the Phil.
Lonicer.
Governor, who was author thereof, was struck with an Angel, and vomited out
his entrails at his mouth, and died.

Under the Empire of Alexander, Mammea Agrippitus fifteen years old, Cent. 3.
cap. 12.
because he would not sacrifice to their Idols, was apprehended at Praeneste,
whipped with scourges, and hanged up by the heels, and at last slain with the
sword; in the midst of whose torments the Governor of the City fell from
the Tribunal seat dead.

Bajazet, a most cruel enemy of the Christians, was taken by Tamerlane Chr.
Phil. lib. 5.
the Tartarian King, and bound in golden chains, and carried about by him in
an iron cage, latised and shown unto all, being used for a stirrup unto
Tamerlane, when he got upon his horse.

Gensericus the King of the Vandales, exercising grievous cruelty against the
Orthodox Christians, he himself being an Arrian, was possessed of the Sigeb.
in Chro.
Devil, and died a miserable death, in the year 477.

Honoricus the second, King of the Vandales, having used inexplicable Chro.
Phil. l. 3.
cruelty against the Orthodox Christians, hanging up honest matrons and virgins
naked, burning their bodies with torches, cutting off their dugges and arms,
because they would not subscribe to the Arrian heresy, was surprised himself
with the vengeance of God: for his land was turned into barrenness through an
exceeding drought, so that numbers of men, women, and beasts, died with famine;
the pestilence also seized upon them, and he himself was stricken with such a
disease of his body, that his members rotted off one after another.

Anastatius Dicorus, a grievous persecutor of the Church of Christ, being
Zonar. lib. 3.
admonished in a dream, that he should perish with thunder, built him an
house, wherein he might defend himself from that judgment; but in vain, for
in a great thunder he fled from chamber to chamber, and at last was found dead,
blasted with lightning, to the great horror of the beholders.

Chasroes the King of Persia, a grievous enemy to Christ and Christians, Paul*
Diaconus lib. 18. de reb. Romany.
committed horrible outrages against them; for first he slew at Jerusalem
ninety thousand men, with Zachari^ the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and also raged
in like manner in Egypt, Lybia, Aethiopia, and would grant them no condition
of peace, unless they would forsake Christ, and worship the Sun; he also put
to death with most cruel torments Anastatius a godly Monk, because he
constantly confessed the faith of Christ. But God met with him to the full; for
his eldest son Syroes took him prisoner, and handled him in most vile
manner; he hanged an iron weight upon his neck, and imprisoned him in an high
tower, which he had built to keep his treasure; denying him food, and bidding
him eat the gold which he had gathered together; then he slew all his children
before his face, and exposed him to the scoffs and railings of the people, and
lastly caused him to be shot to death: and so that great terror of the world,
and shedder of Christian blood, breathed out his soul after a miserable manner.

Regnerus the King of Denmark, abrogating Christian Religion, and setting
Crantz. lib. 3. cap. 2.
up Idolatry in his Kingdom anew, the divine vengeance overtooke him: for
Helles, whom he had cast out of the Kingdom, returned upon him with an army of
the Gauls, and overcomming him in battle, took him prisoner, and shut him up
in a filthy prison full of serpents, which setting upon him, with their
venomous bitings and stings, brought him to a most horrible end.

Lysius the Emperor gave Heri^a his daughter, a virgin, because she was Offic.
Ravisi.
a Christian, to be trampled under foot of horses; but he himself was s^ain by
the biting of one of the same horses.

A Popish Magistrate having condemned a poor Protestant to death, before his
execution caused his tongue to be cut out, because he should not confess the
truth: in requital whereof, the next child that was borne unto him, was borne
without a tongue.

CHAP. II. Of Perjurie.
P^ilip King of Macedon, who was a great contemner of all oaths, and held the
Religion thereof as a vain thing; for this cause (as all Writers affirm) the
vengeance of God followed him and his posterity; for when he had lived scarce
forty and six years, he himself was slain, and all his whole house in short
time in short time after utterly extinguished; (...) one of his sons was
slain by Olympias his wife. Also another son, which he had by Cleopatra the
(...) of A^^alus, ^he tormented to death in a brazen vessel, compassed about
with fire. The ^est of his sons periffied in like manner, and at last Pausan.
in Arc.
the famous Alexander his son, after great conquest achieved by him, in the
middle course of his victories periffied miserably, some think by poison.

In the Country of Arbernum, there was a certain wicked man that used
ordinarily to for swear himself: but at one time after he had thus sinned,
Greg. Turon.
his tongue was tied up that he could not speak, but began to low like an o^e:
yet repenting and grieving for his sin, he found the bond of his tongue
loosed, and a readiness of speech given unto him again: whereby we see both
the Justice of God in punishing them that sin in this kind, and his mercy,
in pardoning when they truly repent.

At this day we have an example fresh and famous, of a certain maid that had
stolen and pilfered many things away out of her mistresses house; of which
being examined, she forswore them, and wished that she might rot if she ever
touched them, or knew of them: but notwithstanding she was carried to prison,
and there presently began so to rot and stink, that they were forced to thrust
her out of prison, and to convey her to the Hospital, where she lies in
lamentable misery; repenting as they say of her foul sin: The Lord be
merciful unto her.

CHAP. III. Of Epicures and Atheists.
BArges^, otherwise called Elima^, a sore of implety, and a horrible Magitian
and Atheist, oftenly resisting the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, before Sergius
Paulus the Deputy; was presently stroke with blindness by the hand of God:
This man Saint Luke speaks of, Acts 13.

Justin Martyr that lived not long after the Apostles Chron. Philip.
times, a famous Christian, writes thus to (...) the Emperor: viz. after the
ascension of Christ into Heaven, certain men stirred up by the Devil, called
themselves gods; of which number was Simon the Samaritane, borne in a Village
called Gitton. This man in the time of Claudius Caesar, by the power of the
Devil, exercising Magical Arts, and working great wonders, was esteemed for a
god, and a Statue erected unto him with this inscription; Simon^ deo sancto, To
Simon the holy god: The Samaritans also, with many of other Nations worshipped
him as a god; but this Atheist meeting with Saint Peter at Rome, had great
contentions with him; and boasting that he would ascend into Heaven in the
sight of all was (...) up into the air by Devils; but Peter commanded the
Devils in the name of Christ to let him go, and so he fell down upon the
(...) a pieces.

Caius Caligula Emperor of Rome, raging against both (...) Jews, caused
himself to be worshipped and his Images (...) places: He also dedicated the
Temple of Jerusalem to (...); Eusebius. l. 2. c. 7.
commanding it to be called the Temple of famous Jupiter, (...) ^o he styled
himself; but to show that he was but a wretched simple man, he reigned Sueton.
but three years and three months, and was stain by Pherius a Tribut.

Herod Agrippa when he suffered himself to be saluted and honored as a Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 9.
god, was presently smitten with horrible plagues in his bowels, when detesting
the voice of his flatterers; said, I that was called but lately a god, (...) in
the bonds of death.

Daphida, a biting and contentious Sophister, and hating all Religion (...)
(...) lib. 1. cap. 8.
both Heathenish and Christian, came to Delphos, and in a scoff asked the
Oracle of Apollo, Whether he might find his horse or no; when he had none to
find: the Oracle answered, That he should find a ^orse, but it should be his
destruction. At his return from the Oracle, King A^talus his enemy ceased upon
him, and set him upon a rock, the name whereof was a horse; causing him to be
thrown down headlong, to learn what it is to mock the gods.

CHAP. IV. Of Idolatry.
THe wonderful Idolatry of the Heathens was so abominable, that their
madness would astonish any reasonable man; not to speak of their Jupiter,
Mars, Mercury, Apollo, and the rest; Hesiod does report that they had thirty
thousand gods upon the earth, and some most strange ones. Troglodites
worshipped Snayles; the Syrians Pigions; the Romans Geese; because by their
squ^aking the Capitol was saved from the Gauls; the A^b^acians a Lioness;
because a Lioness had killed a Tyrant of theirs: The Delphians a Wolf, the
Samians a Sheep; the Tenedians a Cow with Calfe; the Albanians a Dragon; the
Egyptians Rats and Mise, and Cats, and a Calfe; wherein the Jews are said to
imitate them in the Wilderness. But the Idolatry of the Romans was beyond
all, for they worshipped not only the higher gods, as they called, but the
basest things that could be named in the World: as the Ague, and the Gout, the
Privy; yea and Priapus that filthy Idol of the Gardens. Now who sees not
but the vengeance of God has been poured down upon all these Nations, for
their impious Idolatry, having been delivered up into the hands of the Goths
and Vandals, Turks and Tartarians, and make a prey unto them.

Neither do the Papists come short of these Heathens in their Idolatry; for
they turn the blessed Saints into Idols, and worship them in stead of God:
Every country, and every city, and every house, has his protecting Saint,
which they daily invocate; yea, they ascribe a certain god to every member,
and for their several Cattle, beside their abominable Idolatry in
worshipping their breaden god: but as God has taken already in part vengeance
upon that Idolatrous Whore of Babylon; so I doubt not but he will fulfill the
full measure of his wrath upon them, in his due time, except they repent.

CHAP. V. Of Blasphemy.
A Certain holy man passing by a Wine-Taverne, went to prayer; wherein
certain young men having passed the whole night in drinking and playing, and
blaspheming the name of God, he met with a poor man horribly wounded in his
body, and asked him of whom he had received those wounds; the poor man
answered, that he had received them of those young men that were in that
Tavern: whereupon the good man returned back, and enquired of them, why they
had so wounded the poor man? The young men astonished answered, that there
were none in the Tavern with them all that night but themselves; and presently
went out to see the poor man thus wounded, but he was not to be found:
whereupon being more amazed, they Discip. de Tem.
judged that it was Christ whom they had thus wounded with their blasphemies.

Anno 1551. in the coasts of Magnapolis, certain men abusing the feast Job.
Fincel.
of Pentecost with much drinking, a certain woman in their company blasphemed
God strangely, and called upon the Devils, who presently snatched her away, and
carried her aloft into the air, from whence the ^ell down dead, the whole
company beholding of her.

At the coasts of Bohemia; Anno 1551. five dr^nken men quaffing together, with
horrible blasphemies profaned the name of God; and the picture of the Devil
being painted upon the wall, they caroused healths unto Job. Fincel. lib.
him: to which the Devil answered immediately, for the next-morning all five
were found dead, their necks being broken, and quashed to places, a^ though a
wheel had gone over them, blood running out of their mo^^hes, nostrils, and
ears, to the great astonishment of the beholders.

Not many years since, two men contended together which of them should Lonicer.
pour forth most blasphemies against God, but whilst they were exercising
this devilish contention, one of them was stricken with madness, and so
continued till his lives end.

In like manner at Rome certain young men agreed together, that he should
have the victory that could swear most: which wicked strife as soon as they
entered into, one of them was deprived of the use of his tongue, Lonicer.
another of his reason and understanding, and the rest remained as dead men;
God reserving them alive for repentance.

At Eslinga in Germany, upon Saint Katharines day, a certain Nobleman Lonicer.
having lost much money at play, with horrible execrations and blaphemies,
commanded his man to bring him his horse that he might ride home, in a very
dark night; but his servant dissuaded him from his journey, affirming how
dangerous the way was, by reason of the waters and the fennes that lay in the
midst: whereat he began to rage and swear the more, and go he would. But
he was encountered by the way with an army of infernal soldiers, which beset
the nobleman on all sides, and threw him from his horse: Now there was in his
company a virtuous and valiant gentleman, who set him again upon his horse,
and held him on one side; whom when the spirits durst not attempt by reason of
his innocence, they vanished out of sight; and they conveyed the nobleman into
a monastery that was hard by, where he lay three days and died: such is the
end of horrible and fearful blasphemers.

A Vintner that accustomed himself to blaspheming, swearing, and drunkenness,
and delighting to entertain such that were like himself, to swallow down his
wine; upon the Lords day standing at the door with a pot in his hand to call in
more guests, there came suddenly a violent whirlew inde, and carried him up
into the air in the sight of all men, and he was never seen more.

CHAP. VI. Of Conjucers, Magitians, and Witches.
John Faustus, a filthy beast, and a sink of many devils, led about with him
an evil spirit in the likeness of a dog; being at Wittenberg, when as by the
Edict of the Prince he should have been taken, he escaped by his magical
delusions; and after at Noremberg being by an extraordinary sweat that came
upon him as he was at dinner, certified that he was beset, paid his host
suddenly his shot, and went away: and being scarce escaped out of the walls of
the City, the Sergeants and other officers came to apprehend him. But Gods
vengeance following him, as he came into a Village of the Dukedom of
Wittenberg, he sat there in his Inn very sad: the host required of him what
was the cause of his sadness; he answered, that he would not have him
terrified, if he heard a great noise and shaking of the house that night; which
happened according to his presage: for in the morning he was found dead, with
his neck wrung behind him; the Devil whom he served having carried his soul
into hell. This story is set down by many in other terms; but Philip
Lonicerus expresses it in this manner, in his Theater of Histories.

Anno 1553. two Witches were taken which went about by tempest, hail, and
frost, to destroy all the corn in the country; these women stole away a
little infant of one of their neighbors, and cutting it in pieces, put it into
a Cauldron to be boiled: but by Gods providence the mother of the child came
in the mean while, and found the members of her child thus cut in pieces and
boiled. Whereupon the two Witches were taken, and being examined, answered,
That if the boiling had been finished, such a tempest of ^aine and hail would
have followed, that all the fruits of the earth in that country should have
been destroyed; but God prevented them by his just judgment, in causing them
to be put to death.

Anno 1558. in a Village near to Ihaena in Germany, a certain Magitian being
instructed by the Devil in the composition of diverse herbs, restored many
unto their healths. He had daily commerce with that evil spirit, and used his
counsel in the curing of diseases: but it happened that there fell a quarrel
betwixt him and a neighbor of his a carpenter: who so exasperated him with his
taunting words, that in few days after he caused the Carpenter, by his
magical art, to fall into a grievous disease. The poor Carpenter sent for
this Magitian, and entreated him to help him in his need. The Magitian
feigning an appeased mind, but desiring to revenge the injuries done unto him,
gave unto him a potion confected of such venomous herbs and roots, that being
taken, the poor man presently died. Whereupon the Carpenters wife accused the
Magitian of murder: the cause is brought to the Senate of Ihaena, who
examining the matter, caused him by torments to confess the murder, and many
other wickednesses, for which he was fastened to a stake and burnt to death.

CHAP. VII. Of the profanation of the Sabbath.
A Certain nobleman (profaning the Sabbath usually in hunting) had a child
by his wife with a head like a dog, and with ears and chaps crying like a
hound.

Stratford upon Sluon was, twice on the same day twelvemonth (being the Lords
day) almost consumed with fire; chiefly for profaning the Lords day, and
contemning his Word in the mouth of his faithful Minister.

Feverton in Devonshire (whose remembrance makes my heart bleed) was oftentimes
admonished by her godly Preachers, that God would bring some heavy judgment
on the Town for their horrible profanation of the Lords day, occasioned
chiefly by their Market on the day following. Not long after his death, on the
third of April, Anno Dom. 1598. God in less than half an hour consumed with
a sudden and fearful fire the whole Town, except only the Church, the
Courthouse, and the Almes-houses, or a few poor peoples dwellings; where a
man might have seen four hundred dwelling houses all at once on fire: and
above fifty persons consumed with the flame. And now again since the former
Edition of this book, on the fifth of August last 1612, (fourteen years
since the former fire) the whole Town was again fired and consumed, except
some thirty houses of poor people, with the School-house, and Almes-houses;
they are blind which see not in this the finger of God: God grant them grace
when it is next built, to change their Market Day, and to remove all occasions
of profaning the Lords day. Let other Towns remember the Tower of Siloe, Luke
13. 4. and take warning by their neighbors chastisements: Fear Gods
threatenings, Jeremy 17. 27. and believe Gods Prophets if they will prospet, 1 Chronicles. 20. 20.

CHAP. VIII. Of Drunkenness.
AN Ale-wise in Kesgrave near to Ipswich, who would needs force three
Serving-men (that had been drinking in her house, and were taking their leaves)
to stay and drink the three outs first: that is, Wit out of the head, Money
out of the purse, Ale out of the barrel: as she was coming toward them with
the pot in her hand, was suddenly taken speechless and sickher tongue swollen
in her head; she never recovered speech, but the third day after died. This Sir
Anthony Felton the next Gentleman and Justice, with diverse others,
eyewitnesses of her in sickness, related to me; whereupon I went to the house
with two or three witnesses, and enquired the truth of it.

Two servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for a rumpe of a Turkey,
struggling in their drink for it, fell into a scalding Caldron backwards;
whereof the one died presently, the other lingringly, and painfully, since my
coming to Ipswich.

A man coming home drunk, would needs go and swim in the mill pond; his
wife and servants knowing he could not swim, dissuaded him, once by entreaty
got him out of the water, but in he would needs go again, and there was
drowned. I was at the house to enquire of this, and found it to be true.

In Barnewell near to Cambridge, one at the sign of the Plough, a lusty young
man, with two of his neighbors, and one woman in their company, agreed to
drink a barrel of strong beer; they drunk up the vessel, three of them
died within four and twenty hours, the fourth hardly escaped after great
sickness. This I have under a Justice of Peace his hand near dwelling,
besides the common fame.

A Butcher in Haslingfield hearing the Minister inveigh against drunkenness,
being at his cups in an Alehouse, fell a scoffing at the Minister and his
Sermons. As he was drinking, the drink, or something in the cup quackned him,
and stuck so in his throat, that he could neither get it up not down, but
strangled him presently.

At Tillingham in Dengy hundred in Essex, three young men meeting to drink
strong waters, fell by degrees to half pintes: one fell down dead in the
room, and the other, prevented by company coming in, escaped not without much
sickness.

At Bungey in Norfolk, three coming out of an Alehouse in a very dark
evening, swore they thought it was not darker in hell it self: one of them
fell off the bridge into the water, and was drowned; the second fell off his
horse; the third sleeping on the ground by the river side was frozen to death.
This have I often heard, but have no certain ground for the truth of it.

A Bay life of Hedly upon the Lords day being drunk at Melford, would needs
get upon his mare to ride through the street, affirming (as the report goes)
that his mare would carry him to the Devil: his mare casts him off, and broke
his neck. Instantly reported by sundry sufficient witnesses.

Company drinking in an Alehouse at Harwich in the night over against one
Master Russels, and by him once or twice willed to depart; at length he came
down and took one of them, and made as he would carry him to prison, who
drawing his knife, fled from him, and was three days after taken out of the
sea with the knife in his hand. Related to me by Master Russel himself, Mayor
of the town.

At Tenby in Pembroke-shire, a drunkard being exceeding drunk, broke himself
all to pieces from an high and steep rock, in a most fearful manner; and yet
the occasion and circumstances of his fall so ridiculous, as I think not fit
to relate, least in so serious a judgment I should move laughter to the Reader.

A Glasier in Chancery lane in London, noted formerly for profession, fell to a
common course of drinking; whereof being often by his wife and many Christian
friends admonished, yet presuming much of Gods mercy to himself, continued
therein, till upon a time having surcharged his stomach with drink, he fell a
vomiting, broke a vein, lay two days in extreme pain of body, and distress
of mind, till in the end, recovering a little comfort, died. Both these
examples were related to me by a Gentleman of worth upon his own knowledge.

Four sundry instances of drunkenness, wallowing, and tumbling in their
drink, slain by carts; I forbear to mention, because such examples are so
common and ordinary.

A Yeomans son in Northamptonshire being drunk at Wellingbrough on a market
day, would needs ride his horse in a brayery over the ploughed lands, fell from
his horse, and brake his neck. Reported to me by a kinsman of his own.

A Knight notoriously given to drink, carrying sometime payles of drink into
the open field to make people drunk withal: being upon a time drinking with
company, a woman comes in, delivering him a ring with this poesy, Drink and
die; saying to him, This is for you; which he took and wore: and within a week
after came to his end by drinking. Reported by sundry, and justified by a
Minister dwelling within a mile of the place.

One of Aylesham in Norfolk, a notorious drunkard, was drowned in a shallow
brook of water, with his horse by him.

Two examples have I known of children that murdered their own mothers in
drink; and one notorious drunkard that attempted to kill his father; of which
being hindered, he fired his barn, and was afterward executed one of these
formerly in print.

At a Tavern in Bread-street in London, certain Gentlemen drinking healths to
their Lords, on whom they had dependence; one desperate wretch steps to the
tables end, lays hold on a pottle pot full of Canarie Sack, swears a deep
oath, What, will none here drink a health to my noble Lord and Master? and so
setting the pottle pot to his mouth, drinks it off to the bottom; but was not
able to rise up, or to speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoaring
sleep, and being removed, laid aside, and covered by one of the servants in
the house, attending the time of his waking, was within the space of two hours
irrecoverably dead. Witnessed at the time of the printing hereof, by the same
servant that stood by him in the act, and help to remove him.

In Dengy hundred near Mauldon, about the beginning of his Majesty's reign,
there fell out an extraordinary judgment upon five or six that plotted a
solemn drinking at one of their houses; laid in Beer for the purpose, drunk
healths in a strange manner, and died thereof within a few weeks, some sooner,
and some later. Witnessed to me by some that was with one of them on his
deathbed to demand a debt, and oftentimes spoken of by Master Heyd^n, late
Preacher of Mauldon, in the hearing of many? the particular circumstances were
exceeding remarkable, but having not sufficient proof for the particulars, I
will not report them.

A man in Suffolk overtaken with wine, (though never in all his life before,
as he himself said, a little before his fall, seeming to bewail his present
condition, and others that knew him so say of him) yet going down a pair of
stairs against the persuasion of a woman (sitting by him in his chamber) fell,
and was so dangerously hurt, as he died soon after, not being able to speak
from the time of his fall to his death.

The names of the parties thus punished, I for bear for the kindreds sake yet
living.

These examples before going, are taken out of the report of that worthy
Preacher of Gods word in Ipswich, Master Samuel Ward, in his Sermon called A
woe to Drunkards: to the which I will add one more of mine own knowledge
lately executed.

A young Gentleman of good fame, credit, and behavior, being in July last
overtaken by drink, and riding homeward void of wit and fear, was thrown by
his horse, and his brains knocked out with the pummell of his sword. An
example more remarkable for two causes: first, because he was not formerly
given to that vice; and secondly, in that a friend of his meeting him by the
way, entreated him that he would ride softly, and he would conduct him home;
but he desperately spurring his horse over rough ways, was thus overthrown
and perished: but I hope God had mercy on his soul.

Saint Augustine in his three and thirtieth Sermon Ad fratres in eremo,
relates this strange example of one Cyril, a Citizen of Hippo, a man well
esteemed and beloved in the City: He having one only son, did so cocker
him, forbearing either to check him or correct him; but loving him (as that
holy Father says) not only above all things, but even above God himself;
that by his too much liberty and indulgence, his son grew wonderful
debaushed, and gave himself to filthy drunkenness. Upon a time, being vilely
overtaken with drink, he came home, and tumbled over his mother being great
with child, would have ravished his sister, slew his father, and wounded to
death two of his other sisters. O fearful effect of drunkenness! thus God
punished the father for his too much love and indulgence of his son, and the
son for his vile impiety.

Not unlike to this I find in Philip Lonicerus, Page 486. A certain man, says
he, that gave himself to the study of Godliness, was daily assaulted with
the temptation of the Devil, who persuaded him if he would be quiet, to
choose one of these three sins, either to make himself drunk, or to commit
adultery with his neighbors wife, or to kill his neighbor himself. The
poor man thinking drunkenness the least sin, chose that; but being enraged
with wine, he was easily drawn to the committall of the other sins; for being
with wine enflamed, with lust he feared not to vitiate his neighbors wife, nor
yet to kill her husband, coming in the mean while seeking to be revenged of
him: so giving himself to drunkenness, he wraps himself in all other
wickedness.

On the eighteenth of August 1629, one Thomas Wilson labourer, a known and
common blasphemer of Gods name by oaths and curses, and given much to drinking
to excess, upon a slight occasion moved to displeasure against his wife, and
not daring to do much violence unto her, turned it upon himself, and with his
knife stabbed himself, many of his friends and neighbors being present; and
so he died.

On the 10 day of May 1629, one John Bone of Ely, (coachman unto one Master
^alu^^^ of Beenham) a fellow very vicious, and exceeding in those two evils of
profane swearing and drunkenness, on the Sabbath day in the Sermon-time,
drank himself drunk; so that when he was to sit in the coach-box to drive
the coach, he fell out thereof under the horses feet, where he was trodden to
death, or so hurt at least, that he died shortly.

On the six and twentieth of November 1621, one Richard Borne, servant to
Iasp^r B^rch Gardener of Ely, accustomed to travel upon the Lords day, and
making no reckoning of the Sabbath, seldom or never coming to Church on that
day, but went onwards to Saint I^es market, and so spent the day; and being
drunk, was at length overtaken by the just judgment of God: and going up the
stream in his boat, which he had laden with marketable wares, he fell into
the river, and was so drowned.

On the third day of August 1618, one Thomas Alred of Godmanchester, in the
County of Huntington Butcher, an accustomed Drunkard, being entreated by a
neighbor to unpitch a load of hay, and being at that very time in drink,
letting his pitch-forke slip out of his hand, and stooping to take it up
again, slipped from the cart with his head down-wards, his fork standing (...)
with the tines, he fell directly upon them, which it once ran into his breast,
and stroke his heart so, that he died suddenly.

On the sixteenth day of July 1628, one John Vintner of (...) Gardener, a
known drunkard, and one that would profanely (especially in his (...)) scoff
at religion, and abuse good men* fell from the top of a (...) the ground and
brake his neck, and so died.

These ^ive lust examples were reported unto me, and written with his own
hand, by a worthy Minister Master Goorge Nelson, Preacher of the Word of God in
Godmanchester.

CHAP. IX. Of rebellious and disobedient Children to their Parents.
AGathias in his Book of the Persian manners, reports this story, That
certain Philosophers, going into Egypt, and finding there a promiscuous
commixture of fathers and mothers with their daughters and sons, and a
miserable neglect of children toward their parents; returned speedily into
Greece, and in a certain City there, finding the dead body of a man wanting
burial, they in compassion committed the same into the earth; the next day
coming the same way again, they found the same body dug out of the earth:
which whilst they went about to bury the second time, a fearful spectrum
appeared unto them, and forbad them to do it, saying, That he was a man
unworthy to be buried, because he had committed incest with his mother, and
despised and contemned his father. This narration shows, that the very earth
does execrate and abhor such unnatural lust and disobedience.

La^terbius in his Book of the discipline of children, reports a story of a
certain young man, who had a father very old, that had bestowed upon him all
his substance. This old man, being by the fault of age unmannerly at the table
of his son, his son caused a wooden trough to be made for his father, to
eat his meat in like a hog: which when his sons young child perceived,
he asked his father for what use it should serve; his father answered, That it
was for his Grandfather to eat his meat in; and (what says the child) must
I provide the like for you when you are old: Whereat his father being
astonished threw away the trough, and ever after entertained his old father
with greater reverence and obedient respect.

CHAP. X. Of Murderers.
ROmulus having marked out with a plough the compass of the walls of the City
of Rome which he was a building, and had forbidden that no man should leap
over the same, his brother, Rh^mus in scorn leaped over the wall; which
Romulus taking in evil part, slew his brother, and reigned alone but at length
being hated of the people for his insolency, he himself was slain by the
fathers of the Senate at Caprea.

Constantine the Great, after he had overcome Licinius his partner in the
Empire, and obtained the sole Monarchy, grew both insolent and cruel; for he
first put to death his own sisters; next his own son Crisp^^ which he had
by Minervea; then he slew his own wife Fausta in the bathes; and lastly a
number more of his friends. For which cruelty, though he was a man endued with
excellent virtues, yet God struck him with a filthy Leprosy, which continued
upon him until such time that he was converted to the faith of Christ, and
baptized by Pope Silvester: after which he proved a most famous protector of
the Church of Christ.

Perillus that devised the brazen Bull for the Tyrant Phalaris, wherein men
being enclosed and scorched with the heat that was under the Bull, did im^tate
the lowing of an Ox, to the end that there should be no compassion showed unto
them by the King, if they had uttered a humane voice: but the author thereof
was the first that endured the torment thereof; and after the Tyrant Phalaris
himself was constrained to endure the same miserable end.

In a famous City of Germany, at a nuptial festivitie, a certain virgin
Theat. Hist.
was brought by a young man a Shoemaker, that made love unto her, to the
solemn and usual dancing: when the maid should return home, the young man
by chance was absent, so that she was conducted home by another; which when the
Shoemaker knew, supposing himself to be wronged, he went presently to her
fathers house; and calling out the young student which guided her home, he slew
him as soon as he came out of the doors. His father hearing the death of his
only son, died within three days with grief, and was buried in the same
grave with his son: the Shoomakers mother died also with grief; and the
murderer himself falling into desperation, threw himself headlong into a
running river, and was drowned.

Anno 156, a certain Nobleman abounding with wealth, not far from Augusta of
the Vindiletians, brought up in his house a young Blackamore: which villain
when his Master was from home, rose up in the night, and slew not only his
Lady, but the whole family: excepting one little daughter of the Noblemans. The
Nobleman returning home after two days, and finding his gate shut, rode nearer
to the walls of the house, wondering. Where the Blackamore upon the top of the
house, with a fearful countenance, spoke unto him these words: O thou cruel
man, thou rememberest how unworthily thou beatest me (not long since) for no
fault, the memory whereof I still retained in my mind, and have revenged this
wrong upon thine; behold here part of the carcass of thy wife, whom I have
slain, with thy whole family, except this little child which I have reserved;
and will restore it, if thou will promise me my life. The father being
wonderfully disturbed, promised that which he desired: but the devilish Moore
answered, I know thou will not keep promise with me, therefore take thy child
unto thee; and threw her out of the window, where she was quashed in pieces;
and then threw himself down headlong from the top of the house, that he
might avoid the vengeance of his Master. This story was related unto Philip
Count Nassau, by the Secretary of the Count of Hanault.

CHAP. XI. Of Adultery.
ANobleman in Burgundy, having taken in war a captive, a Gentleman that was
his prisoner; the Gentleman's wife came to this Nobleman to redeem her husband;
he promised that he should be set free, if that he might have the use of her
body: the woman returned to her husband, and told him upon what terms he
stood. The Gentleman said, that she could not show her love better unto him,
than in yielding to his desire: which Author Phil. Lonicer.
being accomplished, the traiterous adulterous Nobleman next day cut off the
prisoners head, and gave his body to his wife: which horrible fact being
complained of by her to the Duke of Burgundy, he presently sent for the
Nobleman, and first constrained him to marry her; but before night he cut off
his head, and gave her all his possessions.

A like example is reported by the same Author of a Spanish Captain, who kept
in prison a certain man that had violated the laws. This man having a
beautiful wife, sent her to the Captain to desire his favor and freedom;
which he promised, upon condition that she should yield to his lust; wherewith
her husband being acquainted, advised her to yield for the saving of his life:
the Spaniard after he had satisfied his lust upon her, commands over and
above two hundred Ducats to be paid unto him; which being received, she
conceiving a certain hope of her husbands liberty, the perfidious Spaniard
brought him forth out of prison unto her, and presently remanded him back
again into prison, and there commanded his head to be cut off. Which horrible
fact, when the poor lamentable woman complained of to the Duke of Ferara,
called Gonsaga, he presently sent for this Captain; and finding the accusation
true, first commanded him to pay back again the two hundred Ducats, with an
addition of seven hundred crowns more; next he sent for a Priest, and
married the woman to the Captain: which being done, when as he hoped to enjoy
his new married wife, Gonsaga sent him presently to the gallows, and there he
ended his miserable days.

The wife of a certain Duke, being a lascivious woman, wrote two letters; one
to the Duke her husband, and another to her Lover: but it happened by chance,
that her letter written to her Lover, was delivered to her Husband the Duke;
who thereby knowing her wickedness, came no sooner home, but slew her with his
own hand.

Anno 1056, a certain Doctor of the Law, an advocate in Constance, extremely
lusted after the wise of the Kings Procurator; which Procurator finding the
Doctor and his wife together in a bath, playing and sporting, and afterward in
an old woman's house hard by; he got unto him a sharp curry-combe, and leaving
three at the door, to watch that no man should come in, he so curryed the
Doctor, that he pulled out his eyes out of his head, and rent his whole body
and members, that he died within three days: the like he had done to his wife,
but that she was with child.

In the year 1488, a certain Priest did so long assault the chastity of a
Citizens wife, that she was constrained to declare the same unto her husband;
who forbad him his house, threatening that if ever he came there, he would geld
him: but this bold Priest came again when he imagined an opportunity; the
husband fell upon him, and bound him hand and foot, and performed what he had
threatened, so that he went home in a miserable case.

In Voitland, four murders were committed upon the cause of one Adultery:
For when the adulterous woman was banqueting with her lovers, her husband came
of a sudden into the Chamber, and slew first him that sat next his wife; the
other two amazed, ran down the stairs and brake both their shoulders, and
died within a short space: Then he slew his adulterous wife. This story
Wolsi^s Schrencke reported to Martin Luther, as he himself confesses.

In a certain City of Germany, a Gentleman of good note did solicit and
seduce to his lust a Citizens wife, which her husband coming to the knowledge
of, watched them so narrowly, that he found them in bed together; and rushing
into the chamber, first slew the adulterer himself, and then his wife, being
crept under a bed, and imploring his mercy till she could confess her self to
a Priest; her husband asked her, Whether she were sorry for what she had done?
Who answered, that she was grieved for it; which words were no sooner
pronounced, but he thrust her through the heart with his sword, and was for the
same adjudged by the City to have done justly. This story is reported in
Colloq. of Luther.

Luther does report, that a man of great name and fame, did so burn with
continual lust, that he blasphemously said, That if that pleasure was
perpetual, he would never desire to have any part in the Kingdom of Heaven;
so that he might be carried from one Stews to another, and from one Harlot
unto another. I could add more examples of this kind; but these shall
suffice, to show that God does not only punish this horrible sin in the life
to come, but also in this life with fearful judgments.

CHAP. XII. Of Thieves and Robbers.
SPiredon, a Bishop of a certain City in Cyprus, was also delighted with
keeping of irrational sheep; upon a night certain thieves entered into his
sheepe-fold, with an intent to steal away some of his sheep: but God
protecting the shepherd and his sheep, infatuated the thieves, that they
could not stir out of that place till the morning: at what time the Bishop
coming to view his flock, found them thus bound; who presently prayed to God
for their delivery, and wished them to get their living hereafter by honest
labor, and not by stealth; yet withal gave them a Ram with this pleasant
tant: I give you this Ram that you may not seem to watch it in vain; and so
set them free.

A certain young man being bitten with a mad dog, fell presently after into
madness himself; and was feign to be bound with chains. The parents of this
young man brought their son to an Abbot called Ammon; entreating him, that by
his prayers he would restore him to his former health; the holy Abbot
answered, that they demanded that of him that passed his power: But this I can
signify unto you, that the Devil holds you all bound in his chains, by
reason of a Bull which you stole from a poor widow; and until you restore
that Bull back again to the widow, your son shall never be healed. The
parents presently confessed their fault, restored the Bull, and presently their
son was delivered from this grievous disease.

A certain Baker merrily talking with his neighbor, bragged, that in that
great time of dearth which was then, he gained out of every bushel of Wheat
above a crown: which words being related unto the Governor of the City, he
sent for the Baker to supper, and examined him about those speeches; which the
Baker could not deny: whereupon the Governor commanded him presently to put
off his upper garments, and to knead so much dowe before him, that he might
find out the manner of his deceit; which being done, he and all his fellow
Bakers in the town was cast into prison, to their great disgrace.

The same Author reports, That at Prague in Bohemia a Jew being dead, his
friends desired that he might be buried at Ratisbone, forty miles off; which
beca^se it could not be done without paying of great tribute, they put his
carcass into a hog she^d full of sweet wine, and committed it to a carter to
convey to Ratisbone. The theevish carters in the way being greedy of the wine,
pierced the hogshead, and drinking themselves drunk with the wine, mixed with
the stink of the dead carcass, most of them died.

The same Luther reports, that at Wittenberge three thieves having stolen a
silver dish, brought it to a Goldsmiths wife to sell; who desired them to come
again within an hour, and then she would bargain with them. In the mean
while she related this business unto the Magistrates; who sending presently
the Sergeants to apprehend the thieves, they seeing themselves to be betrayed,
resisted with their swords: but notwithstanding one of them was taken and
executed, another escaped by flight, and the third being pursued over a bridge,
leaped into the river Albis, and there was drowned. This example is more
remarkable (says Luther) because this fellow was a most notorious wicked
wretch, and had cut off two fingers of his own fathers; at which very instant
his father not knowing of it, being asked what was become of his son,
answered, that he wished he was drowned in the river Albis; which wish was
really performed at that very instant; for it was the voice of Gods anger out
of the mouth of a father.

About Ailton in Huntington-shire, a lewd fellow stole one of his neighbors
fat weathers; and bringing him home bound about his neck, (...) upon a great
stone in the field to ^ase himself, where the weather st^^gling, fell over the
stone, and pulled the thief after him; and so both striving, one for life,
another for liberty, the thief was found dead in the morning, and the weather
alive.

CHAP. XIII. Of Treachery.
WHen the two Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland had rebelled against Q.
Elizabeth, and being defeated in the field, fled into Scotland; the Earl of
Northumberland hid himself in the house of Hector of Harlawe an Armestrange,
having confidence in him that he would be true to him: he notwithstanding for
money betrayed him to the Regent of Scotland, from whence the Earl was sent
into England, condemned of high treason, and beheaded. But it was observed,
that this Hector, being before a rich man, fell poor of a sudden, and was so
hated generally, that he never durst go abroad; insomuch that the Proverb (to
take Hectors cloak) is continued to this day among them, when they would
express a man that betrayeth his friend who trusted him. The like example we
have of Banister who betrayed the Duke of Buckingham, in the reign of Richard
the third.

CHAP. XIV. Of the molestation of evil Spirits, and their execution of Gods
Judgments upon men.
ALmighty God sometimes does execute his judgments himself, as he did upon
Pharaoh in the Red Sea, and upon Sodom and Gomorrah; sometimes he uses the
creatures as instruments, as frogs and lice, etc. to plague Pharaoh and the
Egyptians: Sometimes he imployeth the good Angels to that purpose, as an
Angel to destroy the Army of Zenacherib before Jerusalem: but most
ordinarily, he uses the ministry of evil Angels, who being forward enough of
their own malice, he gives more strength unto by his command, to execute
vengeance upon wicked men. Thus Satan under the shape of a Serpent, beguiled
our first parents Adam and Eve, and promised them great good, in the stead of
punishments, which God had threatened unto them, Genesis 3. The same Satan vexed
King Saul, 1 Reg. 16. This Satan rose against Israel, and stirred up David to
number the people; whereat God being offended, struck Israel with a grievous
peltilence, 1 Chronic. 21. It was Satan that got leave of God, that he might
torture Job with loathsome botches and boyles, Job 2. It was Satan that slew
seven husbands, to whom Sarah the daughter of Raguel had married: Tobit. It
was Satan that entered into Judas Iscariots heart, and moved him to betray
Christ, and hang himself, John 13. Acts 7. It was Satan that instigated
Ananias and Saphira to lie to the Holy Ghost, whereupon they both died
suddenly, Acts 5. Lastly, it was Satan that si^ted Peter, and buffered Paul.

But to leave the Holy Scripture; Philip Melancthon reports, That he heard of
two men credible and faith-worthy, that a certain Bottonian young woman, two
years after her death, returned again to humane shape, and went up and down
in the house, and sat at meat with them, but eat little. This young seeming
woman, being at a time amongst other virgins, a certain Magitian came in,
skillful in diabolical Arts; who said to the beholders, This woman is but a
dead carcass, carried about by the Devil; and presently he took from under
her right arme-hole, the charm; which he had no sooner done, but she fell
down a dead filthy carcass.

Martin Luther reports the like of a woman at Erford in Germany, who being
animated by the Devil, accompanied a young student that was in love with her,
and went up and down diverse years: but at last, the Devil being cast out by
the prayers of the Church, she returned to a dead and filthy carcass.

The same Luther in his Colloquies tells us, how Satan oftentimes steals
away young children of women lying in childbed, and supposteth others of their
own begetting in their stead in the shapes of Incubus and Suco^bus; one such
child Luther reports of his own knowledge at Halbersted; which being
carried by the parents to the Temple of the Virgin Mary to be cured, the
Devil asked the child (being in a basket upon the river) whither it was
going? the young infant answered, That he was going to the Virgin Mary:
whereupon the father threw the basket and the child into the river: The like
he reports of another at Pessovia, which representing in all lineaments a
humane shape, it was nothing else but a mere elusion of the Devil: this
child, says he, delighted in nothing but in stuffing it self with food, and
egesting the same in a filthy manner, but was discovered, and disrobed, and
cast out by the Prayers of the Church.

At Babylon in the Temple of Apollo, a soldier breaking open a golden Chest,
there flew out such a pestilent spirit, that infected the whole world with the
plague: thus Aventine, lib. 2. cap. 17.

Bruno the Bishop of Herbipolis, accompanying the Emperor through an arm of
the Sea, heard this voice sounding in his ears; Ho, Ho, thou Bishop, I am thy
Malus Genius, and whithersoever thou go thou art mine; at this time I have
no power to hurt thee, but thou shall see me shortly again; and so it came to
pass: For not long after, being in a room with diverse others, part of the
roof fell down, and flew this wicked Bishop alone, all the rest remaining
safe and sound.

Vrbanus Regius in a Sermon at Wittenberge, Anno 1538, concerning good and bad
Angels, relates a story of a certain young maid possessed by the Devil;
for whom when prayers were made in the Church, he seemed to be quiet for the
time, as if he were departed out of her, watching an opportunity to do her
further mischief, as he did indeed; for, when as less care was taken of her,
supposing her to be found, she going to wash her hands at the brinke of a
river running by, the Devil tumbled her headlong in, and drowned her in a
fearful manner.

Platina, Nauclerus, and other Historiographers write of Pope Bennet the ninth,
who died in the year 1405, that he appeared (or the Devil for him) in a
prodigious and bestiall form, like a Bear in his body, and in his head and
tail, like an Ass: and when he was asked by some, Why he showed himself in
so ougly a shape, answered, That this shape was imposed upon him for his wicked
and bestiall behavior when he was alive.

In the hill countries of Bohemia, there used to appear an evil Spirit in the
habit and shape of a Monk, whom the country people called Rubezall: This
devilish Monk used to join himself unto travelers over those hills, and to
bid them be of good courage, for he would lead them the right way through the
woods: but when as he had purposely led them out of the way, so that they could
not tell which way to turn themselves, he would leap^ into a tree and laugh at
them, with such a loud noise, that the whole wood would ring of him: This was a
morrie Devil, such as our Robin-Goodfellow is said to be; but yet in his mirth
he always affected mischief. Theat. Hist. page 120.

Chunibert King of Lumbardie, consulted with one of his trusty counselors,
about putting to death his two brothers, Aldo and Grauso. Whilst they were
thus consulting in a by-window, there sat a great fly by them; one of the
feet whereof, the King with his knife which he had in his hand cut off; in the
mean while Aldo, and Grauso, entering into the Palace, met with a man with
one of his feet cut off; who told them the King was purposed to slay them if
they passed on: whereupon they returned and hid themselves in the Temple of
Romanus the Martyr. The King hearing thereof, was much troubled how his
Counsel might be revealed, and charged his Privy Counselors with
infidelity: But the Counselor answered, That he had not departed from his
presence since the matter was contrived, but there sat a fly whose foot they
cut off, which no question was the Devil (as it was) had revealed this secret
in the shape of a man. Hereupon the King was reconciled to his brethren, and
embraced them with love ever after. Thus the Devil sometimes does good, but it
is with an intent of greater mischief: Et sinon aliqua nocuisset mortuus
esset* Cronica Hedion.

While certain Mariners were sailing in the Sea, a Monster was taken by them,
in every thing like unto a woman; which being detained in the ship a good
while, one of the Mariners fell in love with her, took her to his wife, and
begot one child of her: after three years they returning to the same place
again where the same Monster was taken, this woman-Devill leaped into the Sea
with her child in her arms; the child was drowned, but she vanished away.
Thus it is easy for the Devil to take upon him the shape of a man or a woman.
Ex Colloquiis Lutheri.

A certain Nobleman invited Martin Luther, and other learned men to his house:
the Nobleman after dinner went out a hunting, where a Hare of great bigness,
and a Fox of great swiftness, offered themselves unto his hounds. The Nobleman
riding upon a good horse, followed them amain, but his horse falling down
under him, dyed, and the Hare vanished into the air: This was certainly a
diabolical delusion. Luther.

The same Luther writes, That certain Noblemen riding a race, they cried out,
let the last be the Devils; one of the Noblemen having a spare horse, hasted
forward with the rest of his company; but his horse that was le^t free, came
softly behind, and was carried up by the Devil into the air. The Devil is
not to be invited, for he is ready to come uncalled.

Philip Lonicerus in his Historical Theater, reports, that in a great
plague, one carcass was seen to devour it self in a grave: which, the
people being superstitious, thought it was a presage of the continuance of the
pestilence; whereupon they sent unto Wittenberge to Luther and other godly
Ministers, for their advise and counsel: he answered, that it was a delusion
of the Devil, and if they gave credit thereunto, the sickness would increase;
and therefore advised them that despising this delusion of the Devil; they
should join together in prayer in Gods holy Temple, to repress the fury and
malice of the old Serpent; which by that means they obtained.

At Rotingburge an honest and worthy Citizen having a beautiful daughter, to
whom many Suitors frequented, there came also one in gallant apparel, and two
men attending upon him, to be a Suitor unto that beautiful maid: but her
father being displeased at his importunity, invited the godly Minister of the
Town, and some other good men to supper; where entering into conference of
divine matters, this gallant abhorring the same, desired them to talk of some
other merry matters; which they refusing to do, he showed himself what he
was, and with his companions disparished into the air, leaving a filthy stink
behind him: thus the Devil does go about to delude both men and women.
Manlius in Col.

A certain man abounding with wealth, invited to supper a company of his
neighbors and friends; who, when they refused to come upon occasions, he
wished that all the Devils in Hell would come: which wishes were not in vain,
for presently great troops of Devils came unto his house, which he
entertained at the first; and afterward (as my Author says) perceiving by
their fingers and feet to be infernal Spirits, he with his wife, trembling,
ran out of the house, leaving a young infant in a cradle, and a fool rocking
of it; both which were preserved alive after the departure of the Devils: Job.
Fincel.

The Devil also appeared unto a Soldier that was given to play, swearing, and
drinking; and having played with him all night, and won his money, he told
him it was time to depart, and carried him away with him into the air, whither
God knows; for he never was seen after.

In the year of our Lord 1536, there was at Franckford a maid grievously
tormented with a pain in her head, and a kind of frenzy, at the last she
came to that pass, that it was manifest that she was possessed with the
Devil; for if she touched any thing of any man's, either head, garment, or
anything else, she drew money out of it of the usual coin of that country,
and presently put it into her mouth and swallowed it; but sometimes they caught
her hand, and wrung their money from her, and showed it up and down as a great
wonder: She also in her fits spoke the high Dutch tongue perfectly, which she
never learned not heard of; with many other things of great admiration. Luther
being demanded, What course was to be taken to dispossess her of this evil
Spirit; advised, that she should duly be brought unto the Church to hear
Sermons, and to be prayed for publicly in the Congregation; by which means,
shortly after she was delivered from Satan, and restored to her former
health: this relation the wise Senators of Frankeford caused to be published
in Print, Anno 1538.

Certain learned men in the Counsel of Basil, went into a wood for recreation
sake, friendly to confer about the controversies of that time: Whilst they
were there walking, they heard a bird like unto a nightingall singing most
sweetly, above any Nightingall in the World, and also s^w a bird upon an arm
of a tree, not like unto any bird: one of the company more hearty than the
other, said thus unto her; I abjure thee in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ;
to tell us what thou art; to whom the bird answered, That she was one of the
damned souls, and appointed to stay in that place until the last day, and
then to endure everlasting punishments; whereupon she flue from the tree, and
cried, O perpetual and infinite (...) M^l^ncthon judged this to be an evil
spirit, and so the event prooved: for all that were present at this abjuration
fell presently very sick, and shortly after died. Manl. Collecta.

A certain panish Clerk (as C^sariu^ reports) ex^elled all men in
sweetness of singing, whom when at a time a godly and holy man heard, he said,
This is the voice not of a man, but of the Devil; (...) he had abjured in the
name of Christ, the Devil departed out of the body of the Clerk, and the
body fell down into a dead carcass. Discip. de tempore.

Paulus Diaconius in his sixteenth Book witnesses, That in the reign of
Anastasius the Emperor, there were in Alexandria many women and children,
possessed of the Devil, which being taken with fury, uttered no other voice
but like the barking of a dog.

In the year of our Lord 1545, an evil spirit haunted the City Rotuill,
sometimes in the shape of an hare, sometimes of a Weesell, sometimes of a
G^ose, and with a clear voice threatened that he would fire the City, which
malice of his, though God prevented, yet it struck great terror into the minds
of the people. Job. Finc. lib. 1.

In the Dukedom of Luneberge, a certain woman possessed of the Devil, used to
speak in her fits most pure Latin and Greek to the great admiration of all
that heard her. Man. in Collect.

At Fribuge in Misnia, a certain man of great piety and holiness, lying
sick and near unto death, the Devil came unto him in the habit of a Bishop
(he being alone) and exhorted the man to confess all his sins which he had
committed in his life time, and that having pe^ne and Inkehorne he would write
them down in order; but the old man being importuned by him, answered, Seeing
thou urgest this, write down first this sentence: The seed of the woman shall
bruise the Serpents head: which the Divell-Bishop no sooner heard but he
vanished away, leaving a filthy savor behind him, and the man died in peace.
Manl. in Collect.

Job Fincelius in his third book of miracles, writes a strange story of a
godly young maid, infested long, and possessed at length by the Devil, who in
her acted strange things to the admiration of all men: but at length she was
freed from his malicious molestation, by the earnest prayers of godly Ministers
in the Church, the Devil flying out of her in the form of a swarm of flies
out of a window. This story is at large related with many strange
circumstances, by Philippus Lonicerus in his Historical Theater. Page a
hundred twenty and six.

The same Author relates a story of a maid of excellent beauty, whom the
Priest of the town so induced and inveigled by his persuasions (saying that
the Pope had pardoned him for all such offenses) that she became his
Concubine: Now when he had invited many of his companions to a feast, together
with his Concubine, the Devil entered in amongst the guests, snatching away
the young woman, and saying, Thou art mine: neither could the Priest or any of
the company deliver her out of his hands. And thou also (says the Devil to
the Priest) and I mean to fetch thee shortly.

Martin Luther reports this story out of the mouth of Doctor Gregorius
Pontanus, how two Noblemen falling out in the Court of the Emperor Maximilian,
vowed each others death. Now the Devil taking occasion out of this malicious
vow, slew the one of the Noblemen in the night with a sword taken out of the
others sheath, into the which he put the same again all bloody; whereupon
this Nobleman was arraigned of this murder, and had bin condemned, but that it
was prooved that he stirred not out of his chamber all that night: and
therefore they concluded that it was the malicious fact of Satan. And yet the
Nobleman because he intended this murder, though he acted it not, was
condemned by the Emperor to perpetual banishment.

And thus much concerning persons infested by the Devil. Now a word or two for
places.

Saint Augustine in his two and twentieth Book De Civitate Dei, chapter the
eighth, reports of a certain Gentleman that lived not far from him in
Africa, who had his house so infested with evil Spirits, that both his
servants and his Cattle died frequently. This man getting unto him the company
of the Priests, and offering up the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ
in his house, with servent prayers unto God against these evil Spirits, was
thereby freed from any further molestation by them, as this holy Father writes.

Saint Gregory tells us of the Spirit of one Paschasius, that haunted the
Bathes, and was seen by Sermanus the Bishop of Capua, by whose means and
prayers the place was freed from that Ghost, or rather the Ghost was freed from
that place. Greg. lib. 4. Dialog. Cap, 39.

Gregory Nissen writes also of a certain Bath which was grievously infested
by evil Spirits, wherein they took away the lives of many men.

The like whereof is reported by Georgius Presbyter, of another house thus
molested, where the evil Spirits would throw stones upon the table while they
were at dinner, and filled the house with myce and Serpents, so that no man
durst dwell therein.

The like story reports mataphrastes in the life of Saint Pautheneus; and
Lycas, in the life of the Emperor Anastasius.

Pliny in his seventh Book, the twenty seventh Epistle, tells us, that in
an house in Athens there appeared continually a tall and lean shape of a man
drawing chains after him; which when it was seen to sink down and vanish
into a certain place of the ground, they dug and found the dead body of a
man: which being removed, the house was freed from the molestation.

What should I speak of the house of Eubatis in Corinth, written by Lucian? or
of Pausanias the King of the Spartans, whose house was haunted by an evil
spirit presently after he had slain his wife Cleonice, as Plutarch writes? Or
of the evil spirits that haunted the grave of that cruel Tyrant Caesar
Caligula? Suet. Or of Nero that slew his mother Agrippina, who was continually
after pursued with a spirit in his mothers shape? or of Otto that slew his
predecessor Galba; after which he never ceased to be molestred with fearful and
terrible visions? Or a number more which I might insert; but these shall suffice
as a taste of a number more that Tyraeus the Jesuit has set down in his Book
De infestis Locis. I add only two or three, and so an end.

Alexander of Alexandro dwelling in Rome, in an house so infamous for strange
sights, that no man durst dwell therein, reports, that beside the night
tumults and horrible and fearful noyses, there appeared unto him the shape of
a map, of a filthy look, threatening countenance, and black and fearful in
body, from which the house could by no means be set free.

Cardanus, Lib. 26. c. 93. De rerum varietate, reports the like to hay
happened to an house of a certain Nobleman in Parma. In which house always
before the death of some of the family, an old woman of an hundred years old
appeared sitting in the chimney corner*

In an Island near unto the Articke Pole, there is an hill out of the which,
like mount Aetna, there bursteth out continually fire and smoke. There every
night appears a company of evil Spirits, representing perfectly the shape
of some friends which they know: whom when they go to speak unto, they
presently vanish out of their sight. Olaus magnus.

But enough, enough, of this unsaverie subject: only let us learn hereby to
beware of this ambitious enemy of mankind, who as Saint Peter says, Goes
about sometime like a Lion to devour us: Other times like a subtle Serpent to
molest us, but all with a desire of our destruction.

I may be thought too prolix in this Argument of Gods Judgments; but
considering the fierceness of Gods wrath against notorious sinners, and the
hardness of men's hearts to be drawn to repentance, nothing I think can be
judged too much. But yet to sweeten these sour pills, let me cover them a
little with the sugar of Gods merciful protection of his children by his holy
Angels.

CHAP. XV. The conclusion, concerning the protection of holy angels, over such
as fear God.
NOtwithstanding all these Judgments upon the wicked, yet God is good unto
Israel, even to those that are of an upright heart. Psalm seventie three,
Verse the first: for as he executes his Judgments upon the one, so he
defends the other, by his mighty providence; especially by the protection of
Angels. Of which I purpose to give you many examples in this place: and first
out of the holy Scriptures.

Two Angels came to Let in Sodom, struck the inhabitants with blindness and
led Lot by the hand out of Sodom, ready to be destroyed by fire and brimstone,
Genesis the nineteenth. When Abraham was about to sacrifice his son Isaac, an
Angel held his hand, and forbad him to kill his son, promising him from God
a blessing for his obedience, Genesis 22. Jacob in his return homeward, was
comforted and strengthened against his brother Esau by the blessed Angels,
Genesis the two and thirtieth.

An Angel of the Lord when the children of Israel came out of Egypt, stood
betwixt the camp of the Egyptians and the Israelites in a pillar of clouds by
day, to protect the Israelites against the Egyptians, Exodus 14. Balaam when
being sent for by Balaac King of Moab to curse the Israelites, an Angel with a
sword drawn in his hand withstood him in the way, and commanded him to speak
nothing but what the Lord should put into his mouth. Numbers 22.

An Angel of the Lord apeared unto Gedeon, comforted him, and appointed him
captain over the people, to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Madianites,
Judges, Chapter 6.

An Angel of the Lord appeared unto Manoa and his wife who was barren,
promising them a son, to be called Sampson, that should deliver the
Israelites out of the hands of the Philistims, Judge. 13.

It was an Angel in David's time which struck the Israelites with the
pestilence, whereof died threescore and ten thousand; and when David prayed,
put his sword up into his sheath, and saved the rest: the second book of
Samuel, and twenty fourth Chapter.

Elias the Prophet was refreshed with meat and drink, and in the strength
thereof he traveled forty days and forty nights; even to Mount Horeb, by
the Ministry of an Angel, 1. Kings, 19.

Many legions of Angels environed the Prophet Elisha, which his servant, at his
prayer, (his eyes being opened) saw and beheld, and all to defend him from the
Assyrians that besieged Samaria; 2. Kings, 6.

An Angel of the Lord slew in the camp of the Assyrians in one night an
hundred fourscoure and five thousand men; 2. Kings, 19.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, being cast into the fiery Furnace by
Nabuchadnezzar, for not worshipping his golden Image, were preserved alive and
kept from hurt by an Angel of the Lord, Daniel 3.

It was an Angel that stopped the mouths of the Lions, that they could not hurt
Daniel that was cast into their Den, Daniel, 10.

The Angel Gabriel declared unto Zacharias, that his wife should conceive with
child, and bring forth John the Baptist in her old age, Luk^ 1.

It was the same Angel that announced to the Virgin Mary, that she should
bring forth Jesus Christ our Savior, Luke 1.

The same told the shepherds in the field, of Christ his Nativitie and
witnessed his resurrection and ascension into the heavens, Matthew 28 Mark 16.
Acts the first.

An Angel delivered the Apostles out of Prison, Acts 5.

An Angel freed Peter from his chains, Acts 12. and Paul and Silas, Acts 16.

An Angel comforted Paul upon the Sea, and all those that were with him, and
delivered them from the Tempest, Acts twenty seven.

All these Examples are out of the holy Scriptures, which is of infallible
truth, and shows that to be which is spoken by the Prophet David in the four
and thirtieth Psalm, That the Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tents round
about them that fear him.

Now follow examples out of humane Writes; and first to begin with a story in
Socrates, lib. 6. cap. 6. and Sozomen. lib. 8. cap. 4.

When Arcadius was Emperor of Rome, and Saint Chrysostom Bishop of
Constantinople, there was Gainas, an Arrian, and a Barbarian by profession, who
being powerful and great, went about to thrust Arcadius out of his Seat; but
the Emperor compounding with him, sent him unto Constantinople with a troop
of horse and foot, under the pay of the Emperor. This man desired to have a
peculiar Church for them of his own Sect, for the free exercising of their
Religion: which being denied by the Emperor, at the persuasion of Saint
Chrysostom, the Tyrant raised his forces in the night to spoil and havocke
the City. But they were resisted the first and second night, by the show of a
great Army of tall and lusty men, and so terrified, that they durst do
nothing. The third night the Tyrant himself, thinking this to be but a fable,
came in his own person with his whole Army, and found the same resistance:
wherewith being terrified, he fled into Tracia; where he was slain most
miserably. Thus this great City was protected by the ministry of Angels, as
Jerusalem once was from the Tyran Zenacherib.

In the reign of Pompilius King of Poland, as the Polonian Chronicles do
report, in the first book, and twelfth Chapter, there came two men o^ a
venerable countenance and habit to the Court gate, desiring entrance and
entertainment; but they were repulsed by the Porter. Then they went to one
Pyastus, a man of excellent holiness and charity, who entertained them into
his house very lovingly, broached a Vessel of sweet Wine for their drink, and
killed a fat Hog for their meat, which he had prepared against the first
tonsure of his son, according to the custom of that Country. These men, or
rather Angels, finding this kind entertainment, caused the Vessel of sweet
Wine to multiply, so that the more they drank, the more still remained
behind; and the Hog also in like manner. At last they wrought means, that
Pompilius the King being dead, this good man was chosen King in his stead; and
then disparished and were never more seen.

Nicephorus in his seventeenth book, Chapter thirty five, reports a strange
story of a Jewish child. This boy playing among other Christian children, was
brought into the Temple by the Priest to care the relics of the Sacrament, as
the custom was: who took it amongst his follows. Which as soon as the Jew
his father understood, he put him into a fiery oven to be tormented to death:
his mother sought him up and down the City, not knowing what was done; and at
last, after three days, found him alive in the Oven: from whence being taken,
there was no smell of fire about him. Thus God protected by his Angel this
poor child. Instinian the Emperor, after he knew thereof, caused the boy
and his mother to be baptized; and the father, who refused, he caused to be
crucified to death.

Under the Emperor Mauritius the City of Antioch was shaken with a terrible
Earthquake, after this manner: There was a certain Citizen so given to
bountifulness to the Poor, that he would never suppe nor dine, unless he
had one poor man to be with him at his Table. Upon a certain evening seeking
for such a guest, and finding none, a grave old man met him in the
Marketplace, clothed in white, with two companions with him, whom he
entreated to suppe with him: But the old man answered him, That he had more
need to pray against the destruction of the City; and presently shook his
handkerchiefe against one part of the City, and then against another; and
being hardly entreated, forbore the rest. Which he had no sooner done, but
those two parts of the City, terribly shaken with an Earthquake, were thrown
to the ground, and thousands of men slain. Which this good Citizen seeing,
trembled exceedingly. To whom the old man in white answered and said, By
reason of charity to the poor his house and Family were preserved. And
presently these three men (which no question were Angels) vanished out of
sight. This story Sigubert in his Chron. reports, Anne 585.

Philip Melancthon reports, That in a certain Village near unto the City
Sygnea, a woman sent her son into the wood to fetch home her Kine: in the
mean while, such a snow fell, that the boy could not return home again: his
parents the next day (taking more care for the boy then for the kine) went out
to seek him; and within three days, found him in the midst of the wood,
sitting in a fair place where no snow had fallen: They demanded of him, Why he
made not haste home: He answered, That he tarryed till it was evening; being
insensible both of the time and of the cold: They asked him again, Whether he
had received any food or no? The boy answered, That a certain man brought unto
him bread and cheese, which he did eat. Thus without doubt the child was
preserved by an Angel, and the man that brought him the bread and cheese was
an Angel of God.

Tiburtius the Governor of Areciam, a Heathen man, forbad two Christian
brothers, Pergentinus and Laurentinus, to preach Christ: First, he allured them
by flattering speeches; which when it succeeded not, he caused them to be
beaten with clubbes. But the arms of them that beat them were so withered,
that they could not strike a stroke: Then he went about to starve them in
prison, but they were nourished by an Angel of God: After, he commanded them
to walk barefooted upon burning coals, which they did without any sense of
hurt: Lastly, the Image of Jupiter being brought unto them to worship, they
calling upon the name of Jesus, the brazen Image resolved into dust: whereupon
many of the Heathen people forsook their Idols, and turned unto the faith of
Christ. This story is written by Marullus Spalatensis, lib. 1. cap. 8.

In that battle wherein Judas Machabeus overcame Timotheus, five men appeared
in golden Armor; whereof two defended Machabeus, and the other three assaulted
the enemies; the second of Machabees, Chapter the tenth. Likewise in the
eleventh Chapter of the same Book, it is declared how two men in goodly Armor,
and upon white horses, fought for the Jews against their enemies; as Castor
and Pollux were seen to fight for the Romans against the Tusculans, at the
Lake Regillum.

When the Locrians made war with the Crotolians, there was seen two goodly
young men upon white horses, fighting for the Locrians; who as soon as the
victory was gotten, were never seen more: which victory, at the same instant
that it was gotten, was declared at Athens. Lacedemon, and Corinth; places
far distant from Locris and Crothon.

When Attila the King of the Hunnes, calling himself the scourge of God, had
with furious rage destroyed and wasted many Cities in Italy; he came at last to
Rome, purposing also to destroy it: But Pope Leo the Great, by the commandment
of Valentinian the Emperor, came out unto him, and by his prayers and
entreaties made him so mild, that presently without doing any hurt he returned
into his own Country. Hereupon, being demanded by his Nobles, Why he showed
himself so obedient to the Roman Bishop; he answered, That it was not in
honor of the Pope, but that he saw another man standing by in Priestly
garments, threatening him with a naked sword in his hand, unless he would
yield unto Pope Leo. This doubtless was an Angel protecting of the City of
Rome from that cruel and merciless Enemy.

We read in the lives of the Fathers, how a certain religious Christian was
cast into prison by the soldiers of Julian the Apostata, whom when Apolonius
another godly Christian came to visit, the Centurion cast him also into prison,
to accompany the other, and set soldiers to watch the prison lest they should
escape; but late in the night an Angel of God was seen in a most clear light,
and broke open the prison door: which being seen, the Watch fell down before
those holy men, and the Centurion that night having his house sore shaken with
an Earthquake, and some of his servants slain; the next morning came and
delivered the two holy men out of prison with great trembling and fear.

We read in the lives of the Fathers, of one Copres a holy man, that disputed
with Manichee, and when he could not put him down in words, it was agreed
between them, that the trial of the truth of their religion should be made by
fire: whereupon a fire being made in the Marketplace, Copres went into it, and
stood a time in it unhurt, being protected by the Angel of God; then the
Manichee refusing to do the like, was thrust into the midst of the fire by
the people, and was so scortched, that he scarce escaped with his life; so that
the people abhorring his wicked doctrine, thrust him out of the City; saying,
This seducer burns alive.

Baratanes the King of Persia made war upon the Romans; against whom
Narsaeus the Emperors General prepared an Army: and when the
Constantinopolitanes were in great fear, two Angels in Bythinia charged
certain men that went to Constantinople, to tell the Citizens that they should
give themselves to prayer and fasting, and fear nothing, for they were sent of
God to defend the Army of the Romans against the Persians; which they did
accordingly for the Persian Army was defeated by Narsaeus, and the Saracens
that came to help them in great multitudes, were drowned in the river
Euphrates. This Socrates reports, Lib. 7. Capitul^ 18.

But to come to examples of later memory. Melancthon in his explication of the
tenth Chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, relates a story of Gryneus a famous
learned and godly man, who having offended the Bishop of Vienna, called Faba,
in a disputation about Religion, returned unto his sociates assembled together,
whereof Melancthon was one: where discoursing of the disputation between him
and the Bishop, I (says Melancthon) was called out of the chamber, to speak
with a certain grave man, of a venerable countenance and habit, who told me
that we should remove Gryneus out of that place presently, for the Sergeants
were come to apprehend him, and to cast him into prison: whereupon we presently
conducted him through the City, and brought him unto the rivers side, where we
had him conveyed over into another Jurisdiction: and at our return to the
Inn, found that the Sergeants had been there. Thus, says Melancthon, we see
that this grave old man was an Angel of God, that came to protect the good man
from his enemies.

In the year 1539, not far from Sitta in Germany, in the time of a great
dearth, and famine, a certain godly matron having two sons, and destitute of
all manner of sustenance, went with her children to a certain fountain hard
by, praying unto Almighty God, that he would there relieve their hunger by his
infinite goodness: as she was going, a certain man met her by the way, and
saluteth her kindly, and asked her whither she was going; who confessed that
she was going to that fountain there, hoping to be relieved by God, to whom
all things are possible; for if he nourished the children of Israel in the
desert forty years, how is it hard for him to nourish me and my children with
a draught of water: and when she had spoken these words, the man, (which was
doubtless an Angel of God) told her, that seeing her faith was so constant,
she should return home, and there should find six bushels of meal for her
and her children. The woman returning, found that true which was promised.

In the year 1558, a cruel tempest raged in Thuringea, beating down houses,
pulling up trees by the roots, and drowned by the violence of the water above
forty persons, men and women. In this fearful inundation of waters, a notable
and miraculous example of Gods protection by Angels showed it self: for there
was a woman newly brought to bed of a child, drowned, but the infant lying in
a cradle, was carried with the violence of the water a great way off, and at
last the cradle stopping at the bough of an apple tree, was fastened till the
waters decreased, and after diverse days was found alive.

The like example of a child miraculously preserved in the waters, is
described by Husan^^ in most elegant verses; the copy whereof you may read in
the Historical Theater of Lonicerus, page 196.

Another child at Friburge in Misnia falling into the river, was carried
violently a great space, until it came unto a Mill, where it stopped, and was
miraculously taken up alive by Gods protection, and his holy Angels.

The like we read of concerning another child, miraculously preserved at
Rotinberge, in the year 1565, as Lonicerus reports.

I will add one more of my own knowledge, concerning an Inf^^t.

(...) Town in Cambridge-shire, there was a cra^ie Steeple ready to (...),
under which a poor man with one child, had built a little cottage, and lived
therein: it chanced that the Steeple fell upon that little cottage, the woman
being in the town, and the child in the house: all men supposed the child
had been crushed to pi^^es; but it pleased God, by the protection of his holy
Angels, that certain pieces of the Bell-free fell cross over the little
cottage, and kept off the sto^^es from hurting of the child; which crying was
heard, and they removing the stones and rubbidge, found the child alive.

The like happened at Huntington; where Saint Mar^^s Church, having a decayed
Steeple, the Parishioners for (...) to repair it; who about noone coming
down to ^h^ir (...), left certain children which were taught by the Minister,
playing in the body of the Church, who had no sooner run into the Chancell to
their victuals, but the Steeple tumbled down into the Church, beating down a
great part of the Church: withal, behold the wonderful protection of God, if
the Steeple had fallen upon the Lords day, many hundreds had been slain; and
if at any other time of the day, the Masons and the children had all perished:
but blessed be the name of the Lord for this safe deliverance.

Another example was related unto me by men of good credit, upon their own
knowledge; how a certain man riding between two woods in a great tempest of
thundering and lightening, rode under an Oak to shelter himself; but his
horse would by no means stay under that Oak, winching, and kicking, and
running away, whether his Master would or no: which his master perceiving, went
unto another Oak hard by, where the horse stayed very quietly: but they had
not long staid there, but the first Oak with a grievous clap of thunder and
lightening was torn all to fitters, and the man and horse in the other place
escaped safely: Oh the wonderful protection of God, and that by the ministry
of his holy Angels!

In the year 1565, so great a tempest of rain and waters arose at Islebia,
that it bare down houses before it; it fell most violently upon the house of
one Barthold Bogt, so that it broke down the forepart of his house, where lay
a child in a cradle; which the father, with hazard of his life, brought forth
and carried into his adjoining neighbors house: two other of his children
endeavoring also to save, he took in his arms to carry forth of the house,
but the rage of the water hindered him, so that they rested upon a beam; from
whence the one of his children was violently taken out of his arms, and he and
the other being shaken from the post, were carried into the Orchard; where
finding footing, stood up to the neck in water, with the child in his arms;
and looking about for his other child, he found it sitting upon a piece of
timber, and coming toward him, which he also took into his arms, and got
up into a high pile of wood, where he rested all night, none being able to
afford him any help. The next morning, when the waters were decreased, he came
down to look for two other of his children which he had left in an upper part
of the house, whom he found fast asleep; now he had no sooner taken them from
thence, but that part of the house fell down also: where we may see a visible
sign of Gods protection by his holy Angels, who not only preserved all the
family, but also kept that part of the house from falling, wherein the children
lay sleeping, until they were brought forth.

Many more examples of this kind might be added, but these shall suffice to
show Gods great providence toward his children; who as he punishes the wicked
with most severe Judgments, so he protecteth those that fear him with
extraordinary providence by his holy Angels: to show the truth of that, which
the Apostle speaks; that They are ministering Spirits, sent forth to wait
upon them who shall be heirs of salvation, Hebrews 1. Verse 14.

(...)
(...)

