A Brief DISCOVERY Of SOME of the Blasphemous and Seditious Principles and
Practices Of the People, Called QUAKERS: Taken out of their Most Noted and
Approved Authors.

Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the KING, and both Houses of
PARLIAMENT. BY Edward Beekham D.D. and Rector of Gayten-Thorpe. Hen. Meriton,
Rector of Oxborow. Lancaster Topcliffe, L.B. sometimes Sen. Fell. of Gone. and
Caius Coll. Cambr.
NORFOLK.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in LittleBritain. MDCXCIX.

A Brief DISCOVERY of some of the Blasphemous and Seditious Principles and
Practices of the People called Quakers.
1. The Quakers teach, That the Light within, by which they are guided, is not
Conscience,
GEO. FOX, the first Founder and great Apostle of this Sect, Gr. Mist. p. 209.
says against his Opponent thus; 'This Light that does Enlighten every one that
comes into the World, which he calls Conscience, is not Conscience.' And in p.
331. he further says, 'The Light, which every one that comes into the World,
is Enlightened withal, is not Conscience, for the Light was before any thing
was made, or Conscience named.'

But the True Eternal God and Christ.
And G. F. Jun. in his Works, Reprinted 1665. p. 50. 'I the Light will fall upon
you, and Grind you to Powder. All -- who will not own me the Light in you. And
-- I will make you know, That I the Light am the True Eternal God, which
Created all things; and that by me, the Light, all things are upheld, and that
there is not another besides me, that can Save.'

In Geo. Fox's Book, styled, The Pearl found in England for the Scattered ones
in Foreign Nations, the Royal Seed of God, and Heirs of Salvation, called
Quakers, who are the Church of the Living God, per G. F. Printed 1658. where
speaking in the Person of the Quakers Light, he has these Passages, p. 15, 16.
'I'll break in Pieces: I Will make Nations like Dirt: I Will tread them into Mire:
I Will make Religions, Professions and Teachings -- Gatherings on Heaps:
Gatherings of Multitudes; Gatherings which they call Churches: -- I Will make
Mire of them: I Will make Mortar: I Will make Dirt of them. The wrath of the Lamb
is Risen upon all Apostates; who are gathered in the Apostasy. Apostatized from
the Prophets Life; the Apostles Life; the Life of the Lamb: The Lamb is Risen:
The Scepter is gone out: The Throne is Set: -- You shall be Shaken -- ye
Diviners, ye Dreamers, ye Notionists, -- I Will Whirl you under Hailstones,
Viols, Plagues, Thunders, Woes, Judgments are come amongst you; upon your Heads
all Nations: -- The pure Life of God is Risen: -- From the Life of my Apostles;
of my Prophets, have ye been all Scattered, and Apostatized: -- But the Rod (
i. e. our Light) is over you; which must Rule all Nations: Trumpets sounding;
and Sounded, the Just will Rule: The Lamb will have the Victory: Woes, Woes,
and Miseries, are out-going upon all the Heads of the Wicked. -- What our Hands
have handled; and what our Eyes have seen; what was from the Beginning, the
Word of Life; this Declare we unto you.'

Again, G. Fox in his Book styled, The Teachers of the World unvailed, etc. who
in p. 27. thus says: 'I am the Light of the World, HIM by whom the World was
made: If you love the Light with which you are Enlightened withal, you love
Christ, who says, Learn of me: But if you hate that Light, there is your
Condemnation: From HIM who is one with the Truth in every Man; Who of the Lord
WAS moved THIS to WRITE: -- Whose Name of the World is called Geo. Fox.'

And to this another of their Eminent Teachers, one of their Prophets, say
Amen, in his Book, The Quakers Challenge, etc. Printed 1668. in these Words, p.
6. 'Stand up Muggleton the Sorcerer, whose Mouth is full of Cursing, Lies, and
Blasphemy; who calls thy last Book, A Looking-Glass for GEO. FOX, whose Name
thou art not worthy to take into thy Mouth, who is a PROPHET indeed, and has
been Faithful in the Lord's Business from the beginning. It was said of Christ,
That he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not: SO it may be said of THIS true Prophet [ Geo. Fox] whom John said he was
not: But thou will feel this Prophet [ G. Fox] one Day as heavy as a Millstone
upon thee: And although the World knows him not, yet he is known.' And page 2,
3. 'Come Protestants, Presbyters, Independents and Baptists; the Quakers denies
you all. -- The Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they,' etc. Now from
such Protestants as these, Good Lord deliver us; notwithstanding their now
Wording the Matter otherwise, whilst they mean the same thing; and their
Principles the same that ever they were, as they themselves say, and that in
every part; of which here is but a Specimen.

Edward Buroughs (styled a Son of Thunder, and Consolation; a true Prophet,
and faithful Servant of God, in his Works Reprinted 1672.) p. 149. has an
Answer to this Question; 'Is that very Man, with that very Body within you, Yea
or Nay?' He says, 'The very Christ of God is within us, we dare not deny him.'

2. That they are one Soul with God.
G. F. Great Mist. p. 91. 'They shall see the Bishop of their Souls, Christ the
Power of God, which is Immortal, brings the Immortal Soul into the Immortal
God. Christ their Sanctification, who sanctifies their Spirits and Bodies, and
brings the Soul up into God, from whence it came, whereby they came to be one
Soul.' p. 100. 'And is not that which came out from God, which God has in his
Hand ( speaking of the Soul) taken up into God again, which Christ the power of
God is Bishop of, is not this of God's Being?'

That their Soul is part of God.
Idem, p. 273. The Priest says, 'That it is Horrid Blasphemy, to say the Soul
is part of God.' G. F. Answers, 'It is not Horrid Blasphemy to say the Soul is
a part of God, for it came out of him, and that which came out of him, is of
him, and rejoiceth in him.' And p. 100. 'God who has all Souls in his Hand;
and is not this that comes out from God, which is in God's Hand, part of God?'

That it is Infinite in it self, without Beginning or Ending.
Page 90. 'Is not the Soul, without beginning, coming from God -- And Christ
the power of God, the Bishop of the Soul, which brings it up into God, which
came out from him, Has this a Beginning or Ending? And is not this infinite in
it self, and more than all the World?'

They make themselves Equal with God.
G. F. Readiness Errand to Damascus, Printed 1654. p. 8. 'He that has the same
Spirit, that raised up Jesus Christ, is Equal with God.'

Fr. Howgil's Works, Printed 1676. p. 232. says to his Opponent; 'The first
thing that thy dark mind stumbleth at, is, that some have said, That they that
have the Spirit of God, are Equal with God:' Whereunto he Replies, 'He that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit, there is Unity, and the Unity stands in
Equality it self. When the Son is revealed and speaks, the Father speaks in
him, and dwells in him, and he in the Father, in that which is Equal, in
Equality it self, there is Equality in Nature, though not in Stature.'

3. That they Assert themselves to be Infallible.
G. F. Gr. Mist. p. 107. He says ( speaking of the Priest) 'The Holiest Man
that is, is not able to give an Infallible Character of another Man.' To which
he Answers: 'Hast not thou in this discovered thy self to be no Minister of
Christ, or of the Spirit, who cannot give an Infallible Character of another
Man? How can thou Minister to his Condition?' Page 96. 'And thou not being
Infallible, thou art not in the Spirit, and so art not a Minister of Christ,
and art not able to judge of Powers that is not Infallible, nor Magistrates,
nor Kingdoms, nor Churches.' Page 33. 'And are they Ministers of Christ, that
are Fallible?'

Edw. Burr. p. 862. 'Such (i. e. Heretics) are Infallibly known, and
discerned, by the Spirit of God, in the True Church of Christ, and by every
Member of the same.'

That they are Perfect as God.
Geo. F. Gr. Mist. p. 282. Whereas Mr. Cawdry said, 'Surely they cannot be
Perfect here, or hereafter, in Equality, but only in Quality.' Fox Answers,
'Christ makes no distinction in his Words, but says, Be ye Perfect, even as
your Heavenly Father is: And as he is, so are we: And that which is Perfect, as
he is Perfect, is in Equality with the same thing; which is of God, and from
God.'

That they are without Sin.
G. F. Mist. p. 101. says, 'It is the Doctrine of Devils, that Preaches, That
Men shall have Sin, and be in a WARFARE, so long as they be on Earth.' Page
231. 'All who come to Christ the Second Adam, they come to Perfection; and all
who attain to him, they attain to Perfection in the Life of God, out of the
First Adam.' Page 271. 'For who are Sanctified, have perfect Unity, perfect
Knowledge, perfect Holiness.'

And William Penn, in his Truth Exalted, Reprinted 1671, p. 9. laughs at the
Church of England-Men, for Confessing themselves Sinners, or Praying to God for
Mercy: -- 'Alas, poor Souls! ( says he) are not you at, Have Mercy upon us,
miserable Sinners; there is no Health in us, from Seven to Seventy.'

And Edw. Burr. p. 33. says, 'That God does not accept any, where there is any
Failing: All who do not fulfill the Law, and Answer every Demand of Justice.'

4. That they have Immediate Revelation, Equal with the Prophets and Aposiles.
In Truth defending the Quakers, written from the Spirit of Truth, in George
Whitehead and George Fox Junior, Printed 1659. p. 7. The Question being put,
'Whether the Quakers did esteem their Speakings, to be of as great Authority,
as any Chapter in the Bible?' It Is Answered, 'That which is spoken from the
Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters
are, and GREATER.'

G. F. Gr. Mist. p. 242. tells us, that the Priest says, 'That the Apostles
were Eyewitnesses, and understood by Immediate Revelation from God, Inspired
with the Gift of the Spirit, more than any Man could hope for since:' And
says, 'They do not pretend any such Gift, nor depend upon such any Immediate,
Miraculous Revelation from Heaven.' To which G. F. answers, 'Then all may see
now in this, what ye have received, that has been from Man, which is not from
Heaven immediate, nor the Gifts of the Spirit, nor received the Gospel, by the
same means the Apostles did, who were not the Eyewitnesses, as the Apostles
were: Neither have ye attained to the same Knowledge and Understanding, as the
Apostles did, nor received it from Heaven. Now let all People question, Whether
it is the same Gospel, which is not received from Heaven, nor Immediately, nor
by Revelation, for the Gospel is Immediate, which is the Power of God, Romans 1.
They (i. e. Quakers) are in the same Power, Understanding, Knowledge, and
Immediate Revelation from Heaven, that the Apostles were in.'

Geo. Fox further tells us, p. 213. that the Priest says, 'Thou do not speak
in that Degree of the Holy Ghost, as the Prophets and Apostles did, that spoke
forth Scriptures:' To which he Answers, 'Then thou must take heed of Exalting
thy self above thy measure, for thou can not know Scripture, but by the same
Degree of the Spirit, the Prophets and Apostles had.'

5. They Vilify and Speak Contemptuously of the Scriptures.
News coming up out of the North, written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one
who is Naked, and stands Naked before the Lord, Clothed with Righteousness,
whose Name is not known in the World, risen up out of the North, which was
Prophesied of, but now it is fulfilled, CALLED G. F. Printed 1655. p. 14. 'Your
Original is Carnal, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and your Word is Carnal the
Letter, and the Light is Carnal the Letter: -- Their Original is but Dust,
which is but the Letter, which is Death: -- And their GOSPEL IS BUT DUST,
MATTHEW, MARK, LVKE, and JOHN, which is the Letter.'

Tho. Lawson in his Brief Discovery of a Threefold Estate of Antichrist,
Printed 1653. written from the Spirit of the Lord, p. 9. Calls the Ministers, '
Babylon's Merchants, selling Beastly Wares, for a large Price, -- the LETTER,
which is DUST and DEATH.'

Readiness Errand to Damascus, Printed 1654. p. 7. It was Objected to the Quakers,
that they had said, Whoever took a place of Scripture, and made a Sermon of it,
or from it, was a Conjurer, and his Preaching was Conjuration. To which G. Fox
Answered, 'All that do Study to Raise a Living Thing out of a Dead, to Raise
the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and draw Points and Reasons, and
so do speak a Divination of their own Brain, they are Conjurers and Diviners,
and their Teaching is from Conjuration, which is not Spoken from the Mouth of
the Lord.'

Truths Defense, given forth by the Light and Power of God, appearing in G. Fox
and Rich. Hubberthorn, Printed 1653. p. 101. It is DANGEROUS to read ( viz. the
the Scriptures) which the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles spoke forth
freely. And p. 2. speaking of some of their Queries, which were looked upon as
frivolous, and should have been Burnt: They said, You might as well have
Condemned the SCRIPTVRES to the FIRE. And p. 104. they give their reason why,
saying, Our giving forth Papers or Printed Books, is from the Immediate Eternal
Spirit of God.

Edw. Burr. p. 47. of his Works, having this Charged upon him, as the Principle
of the Quakers, that Saints were not to do Duties, by, or from a Command
without, but from a Command within; and that the word Command in Scripture, was
not a Command to them, till they had a Word within them: He Answers, 'That is
no Command from God to me, what he Commands to another; neither did any of the
Saints which we read of in Scripture, act by the Command, which was to another,
not having the Command to themselves. -- And thou, or any other, who go to
Duty, as you call it, by imitation from the Letter without, which was a Command
to others, in your own Wills and Time, your Sacrifice is not Accepted, but is
Abomination to the Lord; for you go without the moving of the Spirit, in your
own Wills and Strength, which God Hates, and which his Wrath is upon.'

Agreeable to which, William Penn in his Quakerism a new Nick Name, etc.
Printed 1673. p. 71, 72. Asserts, 'No Command in the Scripture, is any further
Obliging upon any Man, than as he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience;
otherwise, Men should be engaged without, if not against, Conviction; a thing
unreasonable in a Man: -- So that Conviction can only Oblige to Obedience: And
when any Man is Convinced, That what was Commanded another, is Required of him,
then, and not till then, he is rightly Authorized to perform it.'

And also assert, That the Scriptures are No Rule.
A Shield of the Truth, written from the Spirit of the Lord, by Jam. Parnell,
Printed 1655. p. 11. 'He that says, the Letter is the Rule, and Guide of the
People of God, is Without, feeding upon the Husk, and is Ignorant of the True
Light.'

Edw. Bur. p. 515. tells us, 'That the Scriptures, are not the Rule and Guide
of Faith and Life, unto the Saints, but the Spirit of God, that gave forth the
Scriptures.'

And further, in a Testimony from the Brethren, met together at London, in the
Third Month, 1666. to be Communicated to the faithful Friends and Elders, in
the Countries, by them to be read in their several Meetings, and kept as a
Testimony among them, Signed by Rich. Farnsworth, Alex. Parker, George
Whitehead, and Eight more; who, by the Operation of the Spirit of Truth, being
brought into a Serious Consideration of this present State of the Church of
God, etc. Declare in the Third Section, 'If any Difference arise in the Church,
or amongst them, that Profess themselves Members thereof, we do Declare and
Testify, That the Church, with the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, have Power
(without the Assent of such as Dissent from their Doctrines and Practices) to
Hear and Determine the same: If any pretend to be of us, and, in Case of
Controversy, will not admit to be Tried by the Church of Christ Jesus, nor
submit to the Judgment given by the Spirit of Truth, in the Elders and Members
of the same, but kick against their Judgment, as only the Judgment of Man, it
being Manifested according to Truth, and Consistent with the Doctrine of such
Good Ancient Friends, as have been, and are Sound in the Faith, agreeable to
the Witness of God in his People, then we do Testify in the Name of the Lord
(if that Judgment so given be Risen against, and Denied by the Party
Condemned,) then he or she ought to be Rejected, as having Erred from the
Truth; and persisting therein Presumptuously, are joined in one with Heathens
and Insidels.'

And pursuant to which, Mr. Keith was Proceeded against, in Pensylvania, as
guilty of Heresy; not from the Scriptures, as he desired, but from Friends
Books; and was told by Sam. Jennings, (a great Teacher, and Justice of Peace
there) in the Public Meeting: 'We are not to prove it from Scripture, but from
Friends Books; for the Question between us and G. K. is not, who is the best
Christian, but the best Quaker?' And accordingly they produced, instead of
Scripture, a Citation out of William Penn's Christian Quaker, to prove him a
Heretic. See G. K's Heresy and Hatred, Printed at Philadelphia, 1693.

6. They assert that Christ's Flesh is a Figure.
Readiness Errand to Damascus, p. 14. The Question was put to Geo. Fox, Whether
Christ in the Flesh be a Figure or not; and if a Figure, How, and in What? To
which he Answers, Christ is the Substance of all Figures, and his Flesh is a
Figure. And in Truth defending the Quakers, by G. Whitehead, etc. p. 20. It is
said expressly, That Christ's coming in the Flesh, is but a Figure.

And that Christ was Crucified within us, and any other was Antichrist.
G. F. Gr. Mist. p. 206. 'The Apostles Preached Christ that was Crucified
within, and not another; him that was Raised up from the Dead, was Risen that
Lord Jesus Christ within: -- It was he that was manifest in the Saints, that
was, and is not another. FOR THE OTHER IS THE ANTICHRIST. -- Now I say, if
there be any other Christ, but HE THAT WAS CRUCIFIED WITHIN, HE IS THE FALSE
CHRIST. -- And he that has not this Christ, that was Risen and Crucified,
within, is a Reprobate; the Devils and Reprobates may make a talk of him
without.'

7. They Vilify and Deny the Sacraments, viz. Baptism by Water, and the Lord's
Supper by Bread and Wine.
G. F. News coming up, etc. p. 14. 'Your Baptism is Carnal -- And their
Sacrament, as they call it, is Carnal -- And their Communion is Carnal; a
little Bread and Wine.' And p. 34. 'A Voice and a Word, to all you Deceivers,
who deceive the People; and Blasphemers, who utter forth your Blasphemy, and
Hypocrisy; that tell People of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance
of God; Blush, Blush and Tremble before the Almighty, for Dreadful is he that
will pour forth his Vengeance upon you.'

Smith's Primer, Printed 1668. p. 6. 'I would know Father ( says the Child)
how it is concerning those things called Ordinances, as Baptism, and Bread, and
Wine, which are much used in their Worship? The Father Answers: Why Child, as
to those things, they arose from the Pope's Invention, who has had Power in
the Night of Apostasy: And has set up his Devices, which are yet continued in
England, though he seeming'y is denied: And the whole practice of those things,
as they use them, had their INSTITUTION BY THE POPE, and were never so Ordained
of Christ.'

William Penn's Reason against Railing, Printed 1673. p. 108, 109. 'I affirm,
by that one Scripture ( Hebr. 9.10.) that Circumcision is as much in force as
Water Baptism; and the Paschal-Lamb, as Bread and wine; they were both Shadows,
and both Elementary, and Perishable: -- For a Continuance of them had been a
Judaizing of the Spiritual Evangelical Worship, the Gospel would have been a
State of Figures, Types, and Shadows. -- And we can Testify, from the same
Spirit, by which Paul renounced Circumcision, that they are to be rejected, as
not now required: Neither have they, since the False Church Espoused and
Exalted them, ever been taken up afresh by God's Command, or in the Leadings of
his Eternal Spirit; and the Lord will appear, to Gather a People out of them,
but never to Establish or Keep People in them: No, they Served their time, and
now the False Church has got them; yea, and the Whore has made Merchandise with
them, and under such Historical, Shadowy, and Figurative Christianity, has she
managed her Mystery of Iniquity, unto the beguiling of Thousands.'

G. F. News coming up, etc. p. 4. 'Your Baptism and Sacraments, as you call it,
and all your Ordinances, and Churches, and Teachings, it is Cain's Sacrifice.'
p. 14.

8. They allow No Liberty to any who differ from them.
One Quaker writes to another in a bemoaning Letter, called, The Spirit of the
Hat, Printed 1673. p. 12. Complaining of Geo. Fox's not allowing any Liberty;
He speaks thus: 'My Friend, Observe what difference is there in these things,
between G. F. and the Papists? The one says, No Liberty out of the Church; the
other, No Liberty out of the Power: Says the Papist, What! Liberty to the
Sectary? No. What! Liberty to the Heretic? No. And G. F. says: What! Liberty
to the Presbyter? No. What! Liberty to the Independent? No. What! Liberty to
the Baptist? No. Liberty ( says he) is in the Truth: The difference lies only
here, the one has greater Power to Compel than the other.'

William Penn in his Brief Examination, and State of Liberty Spiritual, Printed
1681. p. 3. where the Question is: Must I Conform to things, whether I can
receive them or no? Ought I not to be left to the Grace and Spirit of God in my
own Heart? To the first he says, Nay; to the last, Yea. But he bids them
Consider, Whether it is from their Weakness or Carelessness; telling them, It is
a dangerous Principle, and pernicious to True Religion: Nay, it is the Root of
Ranterism, to Assert, That nothing is a Duty Incumbent upon thee, but what thou
art persuaded is thy Duty. And in p. 11. I affirm from the Understanding I have
received of God, not only that the Enemy is at Work, to scatter the Minds of
Friends, by that loose Plea; What have thou to do with me, leave me to my
Freedom, and to the Grace of God in my self. But this Proposition, as now
Understood and Alleged, is a Deviation from, and a Pervertion of, the Ancient
Principle of Truth, etc.

And in p. 12. 'Some under pretense of Crying down MAN, FORMS, AND
PRESCRIPTIONS, are Crying down the Heavenly Man Christ Jesus, his blessed Order
and Government, which he has brought forth by his own Revelation and Power,
through his Faithful Witnesses.' Which Revelation, p. 13. was concerning Men
and Women's Meetings: 'Wherefore I warn all, (says Penn) that they have a Care,
how they give way, to the Outcry of some, falsely entitled Liberty of
Conscience, against Impositions, etc. Nor is it the least Evil this Spirit of
Strife is Guilty of, that uses the words Liberty of Conscience, and
Impositions against the Brethren, in the same manner, as our Suffering Friends
have been accustomed, to intend them against the Persecuting PRIESTS AND POWERS
of the Earth.'

9. They Declare themselves against Kingly Government.
Edw. Bur. his Works, p. 244. 'The Lord is risen to Overturn, to Overturn,
Kings and Princes, Governments and Laws: -- And he will Change Times, and Laws,
and Governments; and there shall be no King Ruling, but Jesus; nor no
Government of Force, but the Government of the Lamb; nor no Law of Effect, but
the Law of God: All that which is otherwise, shall be ground to Powder.' And p.
507. he says further: 'But as for this People (i. e. Quakers) they are Raised
of the Lord, and Established by him, EVEN CONTRARY TO ALL MEN, and they have
given their Power only to God; and they cannot give their Power to ANY MORTAL
MEN, to stand or fall by any OUTWARD AUTHORITY, and to that they cannot seek,
but to the Lord alone.'

And G. F. in his Gr. Mist. p. 31. says, 'That the Quakers are in the Power of
God, and in the Authority of the Lamb, above all Houses, and into Houses Creep
not, BUT ARE UPON THE THRONE.'

And in Truth defending the Quakers, Printed 1659. p. 9, 10. Geo. Whitehead and
G. F. Junior, being asked, Whether they did not say, That the Magistrate who
made Acts of Parliament, and does not receive them from God, as Moses; does act
contrary to the Law of God. They Answered, The Magistrate that is sent of God,
he receives the Law from the Mouth of God; and he is the Prophet whom Moses
spoke of, Deuteronomy. 18.18. And rebukes them for thinking, Men should make Acts, and
not receive them from God. They say again, The Man-Child appears, who must Rule
the Nations with a Rod of Iron.

G. Fox in his Bcok, Several Papers given forth, etc. to Presbyterians, etc.
just before the Restoration, Writ Anno 1659. and Printed the beginning of 1660.
he has these Passages: 'Friends; to all you that desire an Earthly King in
England, etc. whether Presbyterians, or others: -- Did the Elders of Old, in
the Days of Christ, or the Apostles, Cry up any King but Christ; to have any
King to Rule over them but Christ: And does not the Priests and Presbyterians
Cry for an Earthly King, and will have Caesar? -- And do they not in this
CRUCIFY Jesus? -- Are not all these Elders, that will Dote so much of an
Earthly King, TRAITORS against Christ? -- Do you read that there were any Kings
since the Days of the Apostles, but among the APOSTATE CHRISTIANS? -- For
Christ is King alone: -- I say, That is the False Church, that does not live --
upon the Head of the Kings: -- They that be True Elders, -- never go about to
Set Up an Earthly King over them to Rule: -- Herod the King was Mad at the
Child Jesus; -- there is the Fruit of Earthly Kings: -- And has not this been
Witnessed in England? etc. Ignorant and Foolish People, that would have a King:
And what work Joshua made with the Kings; how he brought them out of the Cave,
A FIT PLACE FOR THEM: -- And all these Novices Christians; that are Crying up
Earthly Kings: -- And we know that these Kings are the SPIRITUAL EGYPTIANS got
up since the Days of the Apostles,' etc. Thus much briefly touching their
Ancient Anti-Monarchical Principles; and they are the same still, and have not
Deviated in any one Point, only G. Whitehead tells us, they may see Cause
otherwise to Word the Matter, etc.

Against the House of Lords
'Oh! What sincerity was once in the Nation,' says G. F. to the Council of
Officers, 1659. p. 7. 'What a Dirty Nasty thing it would have been, to have
heard talk of a House of Lords amongst them.'

Again, G. F. to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. p. 8.
says, viz. 'Let all Abby-Lands, Gleab-Lands, that is given to the Priests, be
given to the Poor: And let all the great Houses, Abbeys, SteepleHouses, and
Whitehall, be for Almshouses, for all the Blind and Lame to be there,' etc.
And they are of the same Principles still; they tell you so, as in the
Conclusion you will see it proved from their late Writings.

Again, in their Book styled, These several Papers sent to the Parliament, the
Twentieth of the Fifth Month, 1659. Inscribed by above Seven Thousand Quakers,
there is these Passages, p. 63. 'Sell all the Gleab-Lands; and the Bells,
except One in a Town, or Two in a City, to give Notice of Fire: And all the
late King's Parks, and his Rents, and the Abbeys; and deny your selves of his [
i. e. King's] Parks, Houses, and Rents: So let them be sold; and the Colleges
sold: -- For we Declare with our Hands, and with our Lives and Estates, against
the Ministry that take Tithes; and the Setters of them up; and the first
Authors of them; and the Laws that Upholds them,' etc. And they are the same
still, they have not Deviated from their Old Principles, (as they themselves
say) only they think it Prudent otherwise to word the Matter; as afterward
you will hear.

And House of Commons.
Geo. Fox Junior, in his Works, Reprinted 1665. p. 87, 88. Intitles his
Epistle, ' A few Plain Words, to be Considered by those of the Army, or others,
that would have a Parliament, Chosen by the Voices of the People, etc. Wheren
is showed unto them, according to the Scriptures of Truth, That a Parliament so
Chosen, are not like to govern, for God, or the good of his People: Consider
these things ( says he) which I Declare unto you, which in waiting upon the
Lord, he by his Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, Opened in me, concerning
the Choosing of Parliaments, by the Voices of the People.' And p. 89. he says,
'You are not like to see your desires fulfilled, by a Parliament Chosen by the
Voices of the People: -- Now if you believe these Scriptures, Joh. 15.19. Math.
7.13. Romans 9.27. then may you see, That a Parliament that is Chosen by most
Voices, are not like to act for God and the good of his People.' And p. 91.
'And likewise, the Choosing of Parliament Men, according to the Custom of
England, which is called its Birthright, stands in respect of Persons, and not
in Equality; for the Rich, Covetous, Oppressing Men, who Oppress the Poor, they
have the only Power to Choose Lawmakers; and they will Choose, to be sure, such
as will uphold them in their Oppression.' And p. 92, 93. 'And we see, the
People have been in great Blindness, in contending for Parliaments so Chosen.'
Page 149. 'Again, it is God's proper right to give Laws unto Man. -- Now in
this particular also, Man have set himself in the Seat of God; and so have
Dishonored the one Lawgiver, by setting up many Lawgivers.' Page 150. 'Now
Mark and Consider these things, seeing that the Righteous are fewer in Number,
than the Unrighteous, and that the Lawmakers are Chosen by the most Voices,
and that of the Richest People outwardly, how are the Righteous like to be
preserved, in outward Freedom, by the Laws that are so made?' Page 159. 'And I
must deal plainly with you ( says he) in the sight of God, who has made me a
PROPHET TO THIS NATION.'

Again, Edw. Buroughs in his Works, p. 522. -- 'A Running to the Powers of the
Earth: What have you Ministers lost the Lord to be your Strength, that you must
flee for help to Men? Must they make Laws to Establish you, and Set you Up? Is
not this the Whore that Rode upon the Beast, and that the Beast Carried.'
Again, p. 524. to the Parliament thus, viz. 'You do but cause people to drink
of the Whores Cup; and you are but them ( i. e. Beast) which Carry the Whore,
viz. the False Church: And this is plain dealing to tell you the Truth; for we
are Gathered up into the Life which the Holy Men of God Lived in, and are
fallen from the World, and its Ways, and Nature:' p. 50. 'For even the FATHER
bears Witness of us; and therefore our Witness is True.'

Against Judges, Justices, and Constables.
News coming up, etc. Geo. Fox, p. 18. 'Dreadful is the Lord and Powerful, who
is coming in his Power, to Execute true Judgment, upon all you Judges; and to
Change all your Laws, ye Kings; and all you Rulers must down and cease: -- And
all you Underling-Officers, which have been as the Arms of this great Tree,
which the Fowls have lodged under: -- All your Branches must be CUT down, for
you have been all the Fruitless Branches, grown on the Fruitless Tree.' Page
20. 'Sing all ye Saints, and Rejoice, Clap your Hands, and be Glad, for the
Lord Jehovah will Reign, and the Government shall be taken from you pretended
Rulers, Judges and Justices, Lawyers and Constables, all this Tree must be Cut
down; and Jesus Christ (in us) will Rule alone: So you must be Cut down with
the same Power,' p. 19. 'that Cut down the King that Reigned over the Nation.'

And in Edw. Bur. Works, Printed 1659. and Reprinted in 1672. and Recommended
by the same Geo. Fox, Fran. Howgil, Geo. Whitehead, Jos. Coal, etc. p. 501. he
says, 'We stand Witnesses against Parliaments, Councils, Judges, Justices, who
Make or Execute Laws in their Will, over the Consciences of Men, or Punish for
Conscience sake: And to such Laws, Customs, Courts, or Arbitrary Usurped
Dominion, WE cannot yield OUR Obedience,' etc.

Against Lawyers.
Again, Geo. Fox to the Parliament of the CommonWealth of England, etc. says,
p. 5. 'Away with Capmen, and Coifmen, as they are called; away with all those
Counselors, that will not tell Men the Law without Ten Shillings, Twenty
Shillings, or Thirty Shillings: -- And away with those Lawyers, Twenty
Shillings Counselors, Thirty Shillings Sergeants, Ten-Groats Attorneys.'

Against Lords of Manours.
Again, p. 8. ibid. 'Let all those Fines that belong to Lords of Manours, be
given to Poor People, for Lords have enough.'

10. Which Government, that they might not Support, they Declare against the
Use of the Carnal Weapon, in 1660.
A Declaration from the People of God ( called Quakers) against all Plotters
and Fighters, etc. presented to King Charles II. 1660. 'All Bloody Principles
and Practices, We, as to our own Particulars, do utterly Deny, with all outward
WARS, and Strife, and Fightings, with outward WEAPONS, for any end, or under
any pretense whatsoever. And this is our Testimony, to the whole World: And we
do certainly Know, and so Testisie to the World, that the Spirit of Christ,
which leads us into all Truth, will never move us to Fight and WAR against any
Man with outward Weapons, either for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdom
of this World,' etc. Subscribed by Geo. Fox, Sam. Fisher, and many more.

Although none before, so much for it as they.
The aforesaid Sam. Fisher, in his Works, Printed 1656. and Reprinted 1679. and
recommended to the World, amongst others, by William Penn, who tells us, That
these things, came not to him by Flesh and Blood, but by the Revelation of the
Father of Lights. And thus the said Sam. Fisher speaks, in a Message from the
Lord, to O. Cromwell, and the Parliament of England. p. 19, 20. 'I will hold my
Peace NOW no longer, says the Lord, as concerning this Evil, which they so
profanely Commit and Do Daily against my Chosen, but will utterly SVBVERT and
OVERTVRN them, and bring the Kingdoms and Dominions, and the greatness of the
Kingdom, under the whole Heaven, into the Hands of the HOLY ONES of the most
High, and give unto my Son and his Saints, to Reign over all the Earth, and
take all the Rule and Authority, and Power, that shall stand up against my Son
in his Saints. -- And I will put my High Praises into their Mouth, and a Two
Edged SWORD into their Hands, and they shall Execute Vengeance upon the
Heathen, and Punishments upon the People, and shall bind their Kings in Chains,
and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and Execute upon them the Judgment, that
is written, in my Eternal Decree, and unchangeable Council, says the Lord.
Given forth under my Hand, as the Lord himself gave it into my Heart to see,
and into my Mouth to speak in part, and unto my Hand, thus at large to write
it, this Twenty fifth Day of the snme Month (viz. the Seventh) 1656. Samuel
Fisher.'

Witness also the Quakers Declaration to Oliver, viz. Oh! Oliver, arise and
come out, -- for thou have had Authority; stand to it: -- Nor let any other
take thy Crown: -- And let thy Soldiers go forth with a free and willing Heart,
that thou may Rock Nations as a Cradle. This is a Charge to thee in the
presence of the Lord God.

Also Geo. Roffe in his Book, Entitled, The Righteousness of God, etc. Printed
-- p. 11. has these words: 'To thee, Oliv. Cromwell, thus says the Lord; I
have Chosen thee amongst the Thousands of the Nations, to Execute my Wrath upon
mine Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword, with which I fought for the Zeal of
my own Name, and gave thee the Enemies of my own Seed, to be a Curse and a
Reproach for ever, and made thee an Instrument against them; and many have I
Cut down by my Sword in thy Hand, that my wrath might be Executed upon them to
the Uttermost.' Subscribed Geo. Roffe.

And Geo. Fox, in his Letter directed to the Council of Officers of the Army,
1659, etc. Complains of many Quakers Disbanded out of the Army (as well as
Justices of the Peace) in these words, p. 5. 'And many Valiant Captains,
Soldiers and Officers, have been put out of the Army (by Sea and Land) of whom
it has been said among you, that they had rather have had one of them, than
Seven Men, and could have turned one of them to Seven Men; who, because of
their Faithfulness to the Lord God, being Faithful toward him, it may be for
saying Thou to a particular, and for Wearing their Hats, have been turned out
from amongst them.'

And may Reassume it again when they shall judge it meet.
As appears to us, by a Declaration, wrote by Edw. Bur. in the Name of all the
Quakers, and Subscribed by several of the Principal Leaders of them, Printed
1659. p. 8. They speak thus, 'We are Dreadful to the Wicked, and must be their
Fear, for we have Chosen the Son of God to be our King, and he has Chosen us
to be his People; and he might Command Thousands and Ten Thousands of his
Saints at this Day, to FIGHT in his Cause; he might lead them forth, and bring
them in, and give them Victory over all their Enemies, and turn his Hand upon
all their Persecutors.' But (say they) p. 9. 'We cannot YET believe that he
will make use of us IN THAT WAY, though it be his only Right to Rule in Nations,
and OUR HEIRSHIP to possess the uttermost parts of the Earth; but for the
PRESENT we are given up to Bear and Suffer.'

11. They have a Government within the Government, Independent from it, and
Opposite to it. First, their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, which are after
the mannerof the Justices Monthly Meetings, and Quarterly Sessi^s in the
Country, which are Subordinate to the Yearly Meeting; which Yearly Meeting
consists of Deputies from all the Counties in England and Wales, as well as
Agents from beyond the Sea, and it their Supreme Assembly, which gives Laws to
the whole Body of the Quakers, wheresoever they are. And there they make their
Orders, for the Government of their People: For Suppressing of any Books wrote
against them, and pass Censure upon Offenders: And there also they take an
account of their Fund, which is raised by an Order of this Yearly Meeting, in
all the Counties of England and Wales, by way of Collection: And the Money when
Collected, is Transmitted to London, and lodged in the hands of Six Feoffees,
who, as to the Disposal thereof, are to be Governed, by the Second Day Meeting,
held on every Monday throughout the Year; which Money is for diverse uses, viz.
Stipends for their Teachers: Wages for their Clerks: Attendants upon the Houses
of Parliament: For Printing and Dispersing of their Books: For the Maintenance
of the Poor: For the Relief of such as have suffered for Nonpayment of Tithes,
and the Breach of other Laws; and for several other things, tending to the
Propagating of their Doctrines, and Supporting of their Government.
Mr. Bugg's Pilgrims Progress, Chapters 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, give an Account of
their several Meetings, and of their Fund, Exchequer, or Common Bank.

Mr. Keith, who has been a Quaker above Thirty Years, in his Second Narrative,
p. 5. says, I am not able to Print Books as they (Quakers) can, they are many,
and have a Common Stock; I am but one.

And in his Book, called, The Pretended Yearly Meeting of the Quakers, their
Nameless Bull of Excommunication, given forth against him, etc. Printed 1695.
p. 5. speaks thus, 'To my certain Knowledge and Observation, I saw the Door of
the Meeting (where that called the Yearly Meeting Sat) kept by Three or Four
Persons, that Refused to let in some that desired to come in, and yet were
owned by them. And it is sufficiently known, they who keep the Door, let in, or
keep out, such as they think fit. But again, such as they let in, if they be
not of the Ministry, nor any of the Two Chosen out of every County, they are
allowed only to be there as Standers By, and Spectators, but have no allowance
to give any Judgment in the Case, which has been a discouragement to some
honest Friends, owned by the Yearly Meeting as Friends, from coming to the
Meeting, being only permitted to be there as Ciphers. And yet further, it is
sufficiently known, the way that they take, either by Persuasions or
Terrifications, to gain the Universal and Unanimous Consent, of them called
Commissioners, or Chosen Members from every County; as does plainly appear, by
the late most Absurd and Insolent Method, (more like the Spanish Inquisition,
than a Free Assembly of sincere Christians) they did take a Preacher, one of
their Commissioners, or Chosen Members, who having said in Private, out of the
Meeting, He could sooner Die, or lose his Right Hand, than Sign to a Paper
Disowning G. K. which coming to their Intelligence, that there was such a
Person, but not knowing who he was, they were so earnest to find him out, that
they caused to call over the Roll or List, of the Names of the Persons sent
from the respective Counties, to find out this Person, asking them one by one
to find him out. And the poor Man, not daring to Lie, owned he was the Person;
and being Terrified, lest he should be severely Proceeded against by them, he
came (with some others, to be Witnesses of his Recantation,) and disowned to
me, what he had formerly said, though a few Hours before, he professed so great a
Concern and Tenderness of Conscience toward me. This Passage is so
Considerable an Advance toward the Erecting the Spanish Inquisition among the
Quakers, that I hope some will be awakened to take notice of it, and withstand
it.'

And though the King and Parliament, were so Gracious, as to include the Quakers,
in the Act made primo Gulielmi and Mariae, For Exempting Their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalty of
certain Laws, etc. wherein it is Expressed, That nothing herein contained,
shall be Construed to Exempt any of the Persons aforesaid from paying of
Tithes, or other Parochial Duties, or any other Duties to the Church or
Minister: Yet notwithstanding, the Quakers in their Yearly Epistle, sent forth
from their Yearly Meeting, held in London, the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth
Days of the Fourth Month, 1693. to the Monthly and Quarterly Meeting of
Friends, in England, Wales, and elsewhere, thought fit to Order, 'That all Due
and Godly Care be taken (as they word it) against the Grand Oppression, and
Antichristian Yoke of Tithes, that our Christian Testimony' (say they) born
and greatly Suffered for, be faithfully Maintained against them in all
respects, and against Steeple Houses, Rates or Lays.

And in the fore Cited Testimony from the Brethren, met together in the Third
Month, 1666. they take Care to Stifle and Suppress (what they can) all Books
wrote against them: Ordering thus; 'That if any Man or Woman, which are out of
the Unity, with the Body of the Friends, Print, or cause to be Printed, or
Published in Writing, any thing which is not of Service for the Truth, but
tends to the Scandalizing, and Reproaching of faithful Friends, or to beget or
uphold Division and Faction, then we do Warn and Charge all Friends, that do
love Truth, as they desire it may Prosper, and be kept clear, to beware and
take heed, of having any Hand in Printing, Republishing, or Spreading such
Books or Writings. And if at any time such Books be sent, to any of you that
Sell Books in the Country, (after that you, with the Advice of Good and
Serious Friends, have Tried them, and find them Faulty) to send them back
again, whence they came. And we further desire, from time to time, Faithful and
Sound Friends, may have the View of such things, as are Printed upon Truth's
Account (as formerly it has used to be) before they go to the Press, that
nothing but what is Sound and Savory, and that may answer the Witness of God,
even in our Adversaries, may be exposed to Public View.'

They have also a Six Weeks Meeting.
Which Meeting, is one of the most Ancient Meetings for Government, made up of
Chosen Men amongst them, expert in the Laws and Customs of the Nation, well
skilled in the Courts of London and Westminster, and other His Majesty's Courts
of Record, and such as understand the way and manner of Soliciting the
Parliament: And to support them in all these things, they have the Common Bank
to assist them. F. B. Pilg. Prog. p. 65. chapter 10.

12. They have also a Register of their Sufferings, (which have been inflicted
for their Breach of the Laws,) thereby to render the Governors and Government
odious for Persecution, to Posterity. And do threaten, in After-ages, to
publish the same, when the reasons of the things, and matters of Fact may be
forgotten.
In their forecited Yearly Epistle from their Yearly Meeting, held 1693. they
Ordered, 'That Friends, at all their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, should be
reminded, to call for the Records of the Sufferings of Friends, to see that
they be duly Gathered, truly Entered and Kept, and accordingly sent up (to
London) as has been often advised, both of what Tithes, etc. are pretended to
be due, and for how long a time, and the time when taken, and by and for whom:
And what Goods are taken, and the Value thereof, as well of those not
exceeding, as those exceeding the Sums or Quantities demanded (it being a
Suffering, in both, for Truth's sake) they being in these particulars, found
Defective and Imperfect in diverse Countries, which is an Obstruction to the
General Record of Friends Sufferings. And therefore the Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings are advised to take more Care for the future, that all Friends
Sufferings for the Truth's sake, may be brought up as Full and Complete in all
respects as possible may be.'

The Author of Satan Disrobed, Printed School. p. 82. Informs us, that in this
Register, there are many Groundless, and many downright Falsehoods, which it is
very fit the World should know; because they take great Care to swell this
Register, and have threatened to publish it to After-ages (when the Facts
cannot be Disproved) whereby they hope to make their Suff rings for the Truth
(as they call it) to exceed all the Ten Persecutions, and to be more
Undeserved, than the Sufferings of Christ himself, or of the Apostles, as Edw.
Burr. (their Second Pillar next to Geo. Fox) expressed in his Works, p. 273.
'The Sufferings of the People of God ( that is Quakers) in this Age, is greater
Suffering, and more Unjust, than in the Days of Christ, or of the Apostles, or
in any time since. -- What was done to Christ or the Apostles, was chiefly done
by a Law, and in great part by the DUE Execution of a Law,' etc. And p. 85.
says he, It is here worth Notice, That the first Difference, betwixt Mr.
Pennyman (who was a Quaker about Twenty Years) and the Quakers, was the False
Returns of their Collections, from the several Counties in England, of the
Sufferings of the Friends, and Entering them (though proved to be False) in their
General Register of Sufferings at London, For this they (to quiet Mr. Pennyman,
and others, who Exclaimed against this, as a great Deceit) made a show as if
they would turn off the Clerk of this Register, one Ellis Hooks, but, as we are
informed, they did not turn him off.

13. Whereas they have published of late Yours, several Confessions of their
Faith, which seem to be much more agreeable to the Word of God, and more
conformable to the belief of the Church of England, than formerly, we have just
cause to distrust these their Professions, as being designed to Serve a Turn,
because they are so far from disowning their Ancient Books, in which these
Blasphemies are contained, that they tell us, they have not deviated from any
one Point of Doctrine which they first held.
Joseph Wyeth, in his Primitive Christianity continued, Printed School. p. 6.
Afferts thus, 'Our Principles are NOW no other then what they were when we were
first a People, for Truth Changes not.' And page 53. he repeats it again,
saying, 'That our Principles are NOW no other then what they were when first a
People.'

And in their Yearly Epistle, Printed 1696. they say, 'We cannot but Recommend
unto you, the holding up the Holy Testimony of Truth, which had made us to be a
People; and that in all the parts of it, for TRUTH is one, and CHANGES not.'

And in The Quakers Cleared, Printed -- p. 7. they speak thus, God is the same,
Truth is the same, his People the same, and their Principles the same.

And for Conclusion, Geo. Whitehead, in his Brief Remarks on T. Cs Book annexed
to the Counterseit Convert, Printed 1694. p. 72. says, I may see Cause,
otherwise to Word the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same.

A Postscript by another Hand to the Quakers.
Friends,
HAVING observed your Timerousness about the Petition, since I came to Town, I
take leave to tell you, that it seems to me, to arise from a sensible Knowledge
and Conviction of your Errors; though you have the boldness to Impose upon the
World in your late Book, An Apology for the Quakers, and an Appeal to the
Inhabitants of Norfolk, etc. to say, Who can Convict us of any Errors in
Fundamentals? etc. Who can? I can: I have: And, God willing, shall continue to
do it still, unless you Retract them: And so have many others; and this you are
deeply sensible of, else you would not be so startled and affrighted because of
the Petition, which neither Incite to Persecution, nor any Alteration of the
Act of Toleration of Protestant Dissenters; but only, That the Quakers
Principles and Practices may be strictly Examined and Censured, or Suppressed; as
they (upon Examination) shall appear to deserve; and as to the Wisdom of the
Government shall seem meet, etc. This is the Substance of what is desired in
the Petition, which does so startle you, which is a great sign, that you are
Convicted of Errors in Fundamentals: You formerly blamed others for flying to
the Powers of the Earth, as a sign that they had lost the Lord, p. 18. calling
the Parliament the Beast that carry the Whore, yet now none are so
industriously concerned, nor more tedious in their solicitations to the
Parliament, than the Quakers, Sic mutantur.

As for your Term, Apostate, which you often throw upon me, and others; it is no
more than you cast upon all People, (read the 16 page herein) that Love, Own,
and Honor the King, yea, any King, since the Apostles time; and thereby charge
all to be Apostates, and in the Apostasy; whether Lords and Commons in
Parliament, Judges, Justices, etc. Yea, both Clergy and Laity of all Ranks and
Degrees, who either are or have been Loyal to this, or any other King, in any
Age since the Days of the Apostles; all are by your Ancient Testimony
Apostates; and the Kings are with you Spiritual Egyptians. These are your
Primitive Principles you came into the World withal; which in your Yearly
Meetings, or Convocations, as well as in your late Prints, you Revive and Renew
in all its parts, and tell us you are not changed: Only G. Whitehead in your
Name, says, We may see cause otherwise to word the Mattor, and yet our
Intentions the same, etc. as above quoted: And that your Principles are now no
other (notwithstanding your new late Creeds to the contrary) than what they
were when first a People; and what your Principles then were, here is both
Authors produced, Book, Page and Line. What can you desire more? They do not go
behind your Backs to Try, Judge and Condemn you; when you challenged them, they
met you, and would have proved their Charge upon you but to my Knowledge (being
present) you refused to own your Books, or the Doctrines therein contained, or
make any Defense to the Charge upon you: I say, they did not go behind your
Backs, to Try, Judge, and Condemn you, as you have done them. See Burrough's
Works, P. 223. viz. A just and lawful Trial of the Teachers and Ministers of
this Age, (Reprinted 1672.) by a perfect proceeding against them, and they are
Righteously examined, Justly weighed, Truly measured, and Condemned to be
contrary to all the Ministers of Christ in former Ages; and to Agree and
Concarr with all the false Prophets and Deceivers; and being brought to the
(Quakers) Bar of Justice, these things are truly charged, and legally proved
upon them, and found Guilty, etc.

Now Friends consider, and be cool, do you think this was fair Dealing in you,
thus to condemn the Clergy of all Ranks at once? If not, how can you have the
Face to go to the Bishops for Favor, until you have retracted these your
abominable Ancient Testimonies, Printed in 1657, and Reprinted 1672. And you
tell us you are the same still, only you can word the Matter otherwise. I know
I anger you, for bringing to Light your hidden Works of Darkness; and it is for
that you account me unreasonable: But if it be unreasonable in me to Recite
these your Clandestine Trials, Judgments and Sentences of the Clergy behind
their Backs, (and a Hundred more of your horrible Tenants) how much more
unreasonable are your old Prophets, and present Teachers, who first writ and
published these things, and now justify and defend them?

Again, This your Prophet and Son of Thunder, in his Works, P. 273. tells the
World, that the Sufferings of the Quakers are greater, yea, and more unjust
too, than the Sufferings in the Days of Christ his Apostles and Martyrs; yea,
all the Ten Persecutions, by your Doctrine, were nothing to the Quakers
Sufferings. See Page 26. herein. But that I may show the Vanity of this your
Presumption, as well as the Quakers Design, I shall once more give a Hint of
the Nature of the Sufferings of the Quakers, and of the Apostles and Martyrs,
and let the World judge what Principles you came into the World withal. In
order to which, take this short Parallel.

Of the Quakers Sufferings, see their Book, styled, A horrible thing committed
in the Land, etc. Page 8. Taken from Robert Minter, the 4th. of the 4th. Month,
1658. by Priest Alexander Bradley, of Elmston, in Kent.
First, Two Feather-Beds. Three Bolsters, and one Pillow. One Flock-bed and
Bolster. One Bedstead and Curtains. Iron Rods and Cords for two Beds. Ten pair
of Sheets, and one Rug. Five Table-cloths, and six Towels. One Dozen of
Trenchers, and one Spade. A Mattock and Dung-fork. 45 double Clouts for a
Child. 12 Beds and 4 Blankets. Six Caps for a Woman. Two Neckcloths, and four
double Crosscloths for a Woman. One Mantle and seven Chin-stays. Three Shirts
and three Biggins. A Swadling-band and Back-band. Two double Bibs and one
Dressing. Three Bushels of Barley. Three Milk-Pails, and half a Cheese. Three
Forms, and two Tables. Three Pin-cusheons and Pins. Besides a Thousand Pins
more, etc.
Of the Sufferings of the Apostles and Martyrs, as I find them in Hist. John
Baptist, St. Stephen, St. James, Philip, Andrew, Matthew, Mark, etc
Some of whom were flee'd alive. Some their Brains knocked out. Some Crucified.
Some burned alive. Some put in Boiling Oil, and the like. Again, One hanged,
and her Skin flee'd off. One had his Tongue cut out. One broken in a Mortar.
One put in a Cauldron of boiling Oil. One fried in a Pan. One whipped, and her
Dugs cut off. Some bound to Axle-trees and burnt. Some thrown to Lions and
Tigers, etc. Some tossed on the Horns of wild Bulls. Some their Brains beat out
with Clubs. Some burned at Stakes. Some pressed to Death with Lead. Some hanged
on Gibbets. Some hanged on Trees till dead. Some hewn in pieces with Swords.
Some sawn in pieces. Some Women's Bellies ripped up. Some torn in pieces with wild
Horses. Some hung on Tenter-hooks till dead. Some hanged by the Hair till dead.
Some had their Noses and Ears cut off. Some their Mouths slit to their Ears,
etc.
Thus much by way of Parallel; the Disproportion I leave to your Consideration;
not to mention your Sham-Sufferings, as that of Sam. Cater, who pretended, and
got it recorded, that he suffered 20 l. for Preaching at Phakenham in Norfolk,
when he suffered not a Penny; but by his Subtilty got 10 l. sent him from their
Fund at London, as at large elsewhere I have showed. I come next to show your
way of Canonizing your Saints, and what Persons they are you Canonize; and I
think Rome do not outdo you; as also your Design to render our Magistrates
Infamous to Posterity, in order to exalt your own Horn. For in another Book,
styled, A Word of Reproof to any Fellow Soldiers, etc. Printed 1659. P. 79. you
say, 'Here follows some Signs, Examples and Judgments for the Accursed
Generation, who desire a Sign, but they are Miracles to them that believe.' And
(says E. B.) let such reach hither their Hands, and with me feel and see the
Wounds that the Lord of Life has received in his Members, etc.

1. In Sussex, Priest Cossme caused Tho. Leacock to be Imprisoned for speaking
a few Words after he had done; and soon after the Priest was cut off by Death.
2. John Chatfield, Priest of Horsham, caused Tho. Leacock to be Imprisoned; who
soon after fell into a Dropsy, and in Six Months died. 3. Priest Cutfly of
Arundel, being Instrumental in Tho. Leacock's Persecution, suddenly after
died. 4. Edward Hunt, Norwich Jailer, who after G. Whitehead was discharged,
brought his Action against him for Four Pence a Night, soon after cut off by
Death. 5. Rob. Allen of Bath, who abused Tho. Morford in the Street, had a Boy
scall'd to Death; and Parson Feak beat Chris. Atkinson.
Reader, Here is a few of the Examples, there being about 80 more in 9 Years in
England and Wales, and still they are collecting, else how will they outstrip
Rome? It remains now to show what manner of Saints these are you now Canonize;
and for whom these Judgments and miraculous Wonders were wrought.

1. Tho. Leacock, your Teacher, was a great Drinker; who on a time, at a
Gentleman's House in Emny, near Wisbech, drank till he was so drunk, that going
out to make Water, fell backward into a Rain Cistern, brake his Bladder, was
forced to carry a Dish in his Breeches, to catch his Water, who soon after died
miserably. But whether in Judgment for your Presumption, his own Sins, or a
Warning to others, I will not determine, lest therein I turn Quaker again. 2.
Tho. Murford was a more vile Person; who being one of your Teachers, pretended
to be a Surgeon, and applied Remedies to the Female Sex where he ought not;
many in Norwich can give you a larger Account than I will do here. 3. G.
Whitehead is still living; and I could be glad he would Improve his Time, by
seeking Repentance while it may be found, for his great Sin, in making a Schism
in the Church, etc. 4. Chris. Atkinson, thus Canonized, and one of your
Prophets, Companion to G. Whitehead, in Writing, Printing, Preaching.
Traveling, and Suffering, got a Wench with Child at Norwich, tried since for
Felony, and hanged; one of your now Teachers of Fame amongst you gave me an
Account lately of his Execution.
But as this show your Design not good, thus to record such Trifles, even to a
Row of Pins and a Double Clout, so is it wicked with a Witness to Record such
as Persecutors who execute the Laws; and that such as die after, it is in
Judgment; and Presumptuous in you, to sit in the Judgment Seat.

But why should your being examined about these and the like Insolences, put
such a Dread upon you, and thus startle you, since it is agreeable to your own
Proposition in Burrough's Epistle to his Works, who thus wrote? viz. 'And so
gladly would we ( Quakers) be made manifest to all the World; that if any,
especially the Heads and Rulers have any Doubts concerning us. For that End,
let any propound that we, with the Consent of Authority, 10, 20, or more of us,
give as many of the ablest Priests and Professors a Meeting for Dispute at any
Place and Time, and for what Continuance they please -- Let the Priests and
Professors object what they can against us, our Principles, Practices, and
whole Religion; and let such that cannot prove our selves of the true Church
and Religion, but is found in Error, let such deny their Worship and Religion,
and renounce it under their Hands, and confess they have been deceived,' etc.

I find in another Book of yours to the same Purpose, entitled, The Copies of
several Letters written by undry Friends, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,
etc. Printed 1660. where Geo. Whitehead in his Admonition to King Charles II.
P. 53. has these Words: 'And if any of the Priests do Inform the King against
the People called Quakers. or against our Principles, it is but a reasonable
thing that thou hear both Parties Face to Face, that we may answer them; this
was upon me to lay before the King, that we are free to vindicate any Principle
we hold, according to Scripture.'

Now for your Friends at West Dereham; to avoid the force of these Arguments,
when urged, as a Reason for you to defend your selves from the Charge the
Clergy exhibited against you, pursuant to your Challenge, as that they were
written 25 or 30 Years since; this could be no Argument, since you pretend to
write from the Mouth of the Lord, moved thereto by the Holy Ghost. And as such,
of greater Authority than the Bible, for the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, are much older, yet still of Force: But this
your Shuffle showed the Justices of Peace, the Gentry and Clergy, as well as
the Protestant Dissenters, that your Principles are so destructive to common
Christianity, as that they did not dare to stand the Test; and this, yea, ONLY
this, so far as I know, put them upon a Petition to the Honorable House of
Commons, to do that for God and the Christian Religion, which they could not
do; namely, to examine your Principles, and censure your Errors, as to their
Wisdom should see meet: And in this, they (both Church of England-Men and
Protestant Dissenters) are Unanimous; and this disturbs you, this perplexes
you, and for this your Tool, John Field, call and compare them to Herod and
Pilate, Hamon and Judas: And say Field, Do not blame till you examine. I tell
you they have examined, and therefore blame, and they find your Blasphemies so
Great, so Apparent, and Manifest, that they also desire their Superiors to
examine; and when they have so done, no doubt but they will blame and censure
your Errors: And this starties you, this makes you look about you, and cry
Persecution, Persecution, when no Body designs it; nay, no Body desires it; for
that is the Way to increase you, who are for Boldness like a Flint Stone, which
lay it on a Table, and smite it with a Hammer, and it will abide Obdurate; but
lay it on a soft Cusheon, and a little Stroke will make it fly into many ^hivers

And though none solicit against your having the same Liberty that other
Dissenters have, yet I must say there is not the same Reason for you to expect
it: For when the Baptists in your dear Friend Oliver Cromwell's time had said,
They thought it their Duty to preserve them [ i. e. Bishops and Clergy] from
all Violence, your Teachers Assau^ted them from all Quarters, even for so much
as Tenderness toward the Bishops, as to preserve their Persons from Violence
and Injuries, much more for thinking of granting them any Toleration.

Edward Buroughs, your great Prophet and Primitive Pillar, wrote a Tract on
purpose against this Declaration of the Baptists, and says (...) them, ( P.
618. of his Works, as Reprinted 1672) What! Are you about to make a League and
Covenant with Antichrist? -- Do you look upon them to be Ministers of Christ,
or of Antichrist? And P. 619. What are you now for Tolerating Episcopacy? And
if Episcopacy, why may not Popery be tolerated, seeing they are one and the
same in Ground and Nature, etc. He was seconded by another of your Teachers of
great Name amongst you, viz Richard Hubberthorne, in his Works, Reprinted 1663.
who also attacked this Declaration of the Baptists, P. 229 of his Works,
saying, Why will you not tolerate Popery as well as Episcopacy? Have not the
Professors of Episcopacy murdered and slain, and do labor to murder and slay
the People of God, as well as the Papists? And will you tolerate the Common
Prayer among the Episcopacy, and not the Mass Book among the Papists; seeing
that the Mass was the Substance out of which the Common Prayer was extracted?
etc.

And much more to the same purpose in these and others of your Early Writers,
which show sufficiently your Ancient Principles, and you tell us they are now
no other than what they were when you were first a People, as in my Books I
have more largely set forth, which may be had at Mr. Kettleby's, at the
Bishops-Head, in St. Paul's Churchyard. And for the Truth of my Quotations, I
am ready to justify under the greatest Penalties my Superiors shall think fit
to assign; and for my Arguments, every Man is left to his Judgment of
Discretion, as I desire my self, and this may serve in Answer to all your
Clamours; and what I have yet to say, you will see in my next, which is ready for
the Press, which is a Proof of my own Charge against you at West-Dereham Church
in Norfolk, the 9th of December last: Where not only the Quakers were forced to
confess the Truth of my Quotations, but four Clergymen of known Reputation have
under their Hands certified the same. As to your scattering your Books both in
the Church and the Country round, it is in Obedience to G. Fox's Doctrine and
Example, in his Book, The Vials of the Wrath of God, etc. Printed 1655 P. 2.
This [Book] is to be scattered among the Ignorant, Simple, and Blind People,
etc. I am satisfied your Ancient Testimony was designed to bring the Clergy to
a Morsel of Bread, but hitherto you have been disappointed: For, says G. Fox in
his Paper concerning Poets, etc. P. 8. But I shall tell you the Scholars of
Oxford and Cambridge, It would be more pleasing to God, for you to get a Spade
on your Backs, and a great old Glove, and a Bill in your Hand, and stop Gaps,
and make up old Hedges, and thresh out Corn, and go amongst Day laboring Men
for 3 d. a Day, etc.

And indeed if it be as Burrough's, their great Prophet, said in the recited
Trial and Condemnation of the Clergy, in his Works, P. 223, 227, 234, viz. That
they Agree and Concur with all the false Prophets and Deceivers in former Ages,
that they are Ministers of Antichrist; and for which all honest People have
left them, yet have 1500000 l. a Year for their Antichristian Service, as his
Ancient Testimony sets forth, Printed 1655. and Reprinted by the Approbation of
Geo. Whitehead, etc. 1672. then indeed 3 d. a Day is enough; nay, too much. But
that this Ancient Testimony (from which they say they do not deviate) might be
renewed, and kept fresh in Memory, W. Penn in his Guide mistaken, etc. Printed
1668. P. 18. says, Whiist the idle Germandizing Priests of England run away
with above 1500000 l. a Year, under Pretense of being God's Ministers; and that
no sort of People have been so universal^y through Ages the very Bane of Soul
and Body to the Universe, a^ that Abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of
God's most Dreadful Vengeance is reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon,
etc. And if so, it is time for them to get a Bill, a great Glove, mend Gaps, and
Thresh for 3 d. a Day, as their Apostle Fox prescribed.

But J. Field in his Book, An Apology for the Quakers, and an Appeal to the
Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. P. 9. 1 st. Would the Clergymen
account it just, that any should Charge them, Condemn and Consure them. 2 dly,
They exhort, To do to others as they would that others should do to them. 3
dly, p. 5. We (say they) pray for all Men, for Kings, and all that are in
Authority. 4 thly, p. 7. We (say the Quakers) have, and always had a high Value
for the Scriptures above all other Book^. 5 thly, p. 1. They (i. e. Clergy)
Incense those in Authority against this Innocent People (i. e. Quakers) that
the Monster of Persecution might be again raised to Suppress them, etc.

Ans. As to the First, Would the Clergy account it just to Charge and Condemn
them? etc. Just or unjust, they are both Charged and Condemned at the Quakers
Bar, as above quoted; yea, and in Smith's Works, p. 157, 161. the Quakers
Dialogu'd the Bishops, and summoned all Ecclesiastical Courts and Officers; and
not only by their Authority Condemn them, but call the Bishops Monsters, and
into the Bargain say, The Book of CommonPrayer is conceived by an Adulterous
Womb, and that it receives its Strength from the Pope's Loins. And 2 dly, That
therein you (Quakers) do not do as you would be done by; and therein gross
Hypocrites and Dissemblers with God and Man. But 3 dly, your Pretense to pray
for all Men, for Kings, etc. This is so False and Falacious, that I challenge
the whole World to produce one Instance of your praying for King William, or
any King, save once at a Meeting at Milden-Hall, where Sam. Cater prayed for
the late K. J. II. and how should you be found in that Practice, since all
Kings (with you) are but Spiritual Egyptians, by your Ancient Testimony, from
which you have not deviated in one Point? But your Principles the same they
ever were, though as Whitehead says, You can now word the Matter otherwise.
4thly, That you value the Scriptures above any Books in the World. This is
false with a witness, when you in Print tell us, We may as well burn the Bible
as your Writings, (see p. 9. herein) calling the Scriptures Dust, Death,
Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, and that Preaching out of them is Conjuration. And
G. Whitehead tells us in his Book, Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p. 7. That
what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of greater Authority than
the Bible. And many of your Books (nay, even that) are said to be given forth
from the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, and spoken from the Mouth of the
Lord. How then do you value the Bible above all Books in the World? But as
Solomon said, Prove. 26.3. A Whip for the Horse, a Bridle for the Ass, and a Rod
for the Fools Back; and so you must give me leave to whip this John Field for
his deep Hypocrisy and Deceit; and I wish it may do him Good. What! to pretend
that the Quak^rs value the Bible above all Books, then consequently above their
own. This is such a Lie, that it stabs it self; when you exalt and value your
own as of greater Authority, and are commanded by your Teachers to read them in
your Meetings, and never read a Chapter of the Old and New Testament in your
Religious Meetings, (if such I may call them) since you were a People; neither
is it agreeable to your Ancient Testimony. Nay, I am persuaded, that should the
Government think fit, for a Proof of your Sincerity herein, to injoin you to
read a Chapter of the Bible at the beginning of your Meeting, (I mean, by such
of your Teachers as can read a Chapter) you would be so far from submitting to
Authority, that they would first go to Jayl, and then call it Persecution, and
record it to Posterity: But would it therefore ever the more be Persecution? I
trow not; since it was the Practice of Jewish, as well as the Christian Church
in all Ages of the World.

But 5 thly and lastly, That the Petitioners would Incense these in Authority
to raise that Monster, Persecution, upon you. Now, though I do profess my self a
Member of the Church of England, I have often, and do now again tell you, that
I am against Persecution, and will add, that Persecution for the Name of Jesus,
or for Righteousness sake, is a Badge of a false Church; of which, your Schism
in Pensilvania has given a Demonstration. And had you Power in your Hand (which
God grant you may not) I doubt not but we should soon feel your little Finger
as heavy, as ever you felt a Parliaments Loins. Witness your Indicting me for
Printing, unlicenced; your own frequent Practice at that time, and your
Persecuting of G. Keith, etc. in Pensilvania; but I hope all Suffering is not
Persecution. Shall Men fire House, and poison Rivers, and not be Controuled,
Limited, nay, Punished, if they will follow their own Light, blind Zeal and
Imaginations. In like manner, such as poison the Streams of the Christian
Religion, subvert the Faith, undermine Christianity, broach and maintain
Heretical Opinions, and Damnable Errors, even denying the Lord that bought
them, as you have in Print, which I take to be a Fundamental Error; and by me
proved upon you; I hope then it will not be raising Persecution, to have you
examined about these things, which is the main thing you fear, whilst you make
the World believe you fear Persecution.

Thus referring J^ F^ild to my former Books, I subscribe my self the Quakers
Friend, though I tell them the Truth,

Francis Bugg.
Feb. 18. School.
FINIS.

