WIT WITHOUT MONEY. A COMEDY, As it has been Presented with good Applause at
the private house in Drury Lane, by Her Hajesties Servants.

Written by Francis Beamount and John Flecher Gent.

The second Impression Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's -
Churchyard, 1661.

The Actors names.
VAlentine, a Gallant that will no be persuaded to keep his estate. Francisco,
his younger brother. Master Lovegood their Uncle. A Merchant, friend to Master
Lovegood. Fountain, Bellamore, Hairbraine, companions of Valentine, and suitors
to the Widow. Lance a Faulkner, and an ancient servant to Valentines Father.
Shorthose the Clown, and servant to the Widow. Roger Ralph, and Humphery,
three servants to the Widow. Three Servants. Musicians. Lady Hartwell a
Widow. Isabel her Sister. Luce a waiting Genlewoman to the Widow.
WIT WITHOUT MONEY.
Actus 1. Scaena. 1.
Enter Uncle and Merchant.
Merchant, WHen saw you Valentine?


Uncle Not since the Horsrace, he is taken up with those that woo the Widow.


Mer. How can he live by snatches from such people, he bore a worthy mind.


Uncle. Alas, he is sunk, his means are gone, he wants, and which is worse,
Takes a delight in doing so.

Mer. That Is strange.


Vnc. Runs Lunaticke, if you but talk of states, he cannot be brouht now he has
spent his own, to think there is inheritance, or means, but all a common riches,
all men bound to be his Bailiffes:


Mer. This is something dangerous.


Vnc. No Gent. that has estate to use it in keeping house, or followers, for
those ways he cries against, for eating sins, dull surfets, cramming of
serving men, mustering of beggars, maintain hospitals for Kites, and curs,
grounding their fat faiths upon old Country proverbs, God bless the founders;
these he would have ventured into more manly uses. Wit and carriage, and never
thinks of state, or means, the ground works: holding it monstrous, men should
feed their bodies, and starve their understandings.


Mer. That's most certain.


Vnc. Yes, if he could stay there.


Mer. Why let him marry, and that way rise again.


Vnc. Its most impossible, he will not look with any handsomeness upon a woman.


Mer. Is he so strange to women.


Vnc. I know not what it is, a foolish glory he he has got, I know not where,
to balk those benefits, and and yet he will converse and flatter um, make um,
or fair, or foul, rugged, or smooth, as his impression serves, for he affirms,
they are only lumps, and undigested pieces, lickt over to a form, by our
affections, and then they show; The lovers let um pass.

Enter Fount. Bella. Hair.
Mer. He might be one, he carries as much promise; they are wondrous merry.


Vnc. O their hopes are high sir.


Fount. Is Valentine come to Town.


Bella. Last night I heard,


Fou. We miss him mounstrously in our directions, for this Widow, is as
stately, and as crafty, and stands I warrant you.


Hair. Let her stand sure, she falls before us else, come lets go seek
Valentine.


Mer. This Widow seems a gallant:


Vnc. A goodly woman, and to her handsomness she bears her state, reserved, and
great Fortune has made her Mistress of a full means, and well she knows to use
it.


Mer. I would Valentine had her.


Vnc. There Is no hope of that Sir.


Mer. A that condition, he had his morgage in again.


Vnc. I would he had.


Mer. Seek means, and see what I Will do, howevr let the money be paid in, I never
sought a Gentleman's undoing, nor cat the bread of other men's vexations, you
told me of another brother:


Vnc. Yes sir, more miserable then he, for he has eat him, and drunk him up, a
handsome Gentleman, and fine Scholar.

Enter three tenants.
Mer. What are these?


Vnc. The tenants, they will do what they can,


Mer. It is well prepared, be earnest honest friends and loud upon him, he is
deaf to his own good.


Lance. We mean to tell him part of our minds ant pleas you.


Mer. Do, and do it home, and in what my care may help, or my persuasions when
we meet next.


Vnc. Do but persuade him fairly; and for your money, mine, and these men's
thanks too, and what we can be able:


Mer. You Are most honest, you shall find me no less, and so I leave you, prosper
your business my friends.

Exit. Mer.
Vnc. Pray heaven it may sir;


Lance. Nay if he will be mad, I Will be mad with him, and tell him that I Will not
spare him, his Father kept good meat, good drink, good fellows, good Hawks,
good Hounds, and bid his neighbors welcome; kept him too, and supplied his
prodigality, yet kept his state still, must we turn Tenants now, after we have
lived under the race of Gentry, and maintained good yeomantry, to some of the
City, to a great shoulder of Mutton, and a Custard, and have our state turned
into Cabbidge Gardens, must it be so:


Vnc. You must be milder to him.


Lance. That's as he makes his game:


Vnc. Entreat him lovingly, and make him feel:


Lance. I Will pinch him to the bones else.


Valen. Within. And tell the Gentleman, I Will be with him presently, say I want
money too, I must not fail boy.


Lance. You Will want clothes, I hope.

Enter Valentine.
Val. Bid the young Courtier repair to me anon, I Will read to him.


Vac. He comes, be diligent, but not too rugged, start him, but afright him not.


Val. Phew, are you there?


Unc. We come to see you Nephew, be not angry.


Val. Why do you dog me t^us, with these strange people? why all the world
shall never m^ke me rich more, nor master of these troubles.


Tenants. We beseech you for our poor childrens sake.


Val. Who bid you get um: have you not threshing work enough, but children
must be banged out oth' sheafe too, other men with all their delicates, and
healthful diets, can get but wind eggs: you with a clove of garlic, a piece
of cheese, would break a saw; and sour milk, can mount like Stallions, and I
must maintain these tumblers.


Lance. You ought to maintain us, we have maintained you, and when you slept
provided for you; who bought the silk you wear, I think our labors; reckon,
you will find it so: who found your horses perpetual pots of ale, maintained
your Taverns, and who extold you in the half crown boxes, where you might sit
and muster all the Beauties, we had no hand in these; no, we are all puppies:
Your Tenants base vexations.


Val. Very well, sir.


Lance. Had you Land, sir, and honest men to serve your purposes, honest and
faithful, and will you run away from um, betray your self, and your poor tribe
to misery; morgage all us, like old cloaks; where will you hunt next, you had a
thousand acres, fair and open: The Kings Bench is enclosed, there is no good
riding, the Counter is full of thorns and brakes, take heed sir, and bogges,
you will quickly find what broth they are made of.


Val. You Are short and pithy.


Lance. They say you are a fine Gentleman, and excelient judgment; they report
you have a wit; keep your self out oth' ram, and take your cloak with you,
which by interpretation is your state sir, or I shall think your fame belied
you, you have money, and may have means.


Val. I prithee leave prating, does my good lie within thy brain to further,
or my undoing in thy pity: go, go, get you home, there whistle to your
horses, and let them edify; away, sow hemp, to hang your selves withal, what
am I to you or you to me; am I your Landlord, puppies?


Vnc. This is uncivil.


Val. More unmercifull you: to vex me with these bacon broth and puddings, they
are the walking shapes of all my sorrows.


3 Tenants. Your Fathers Worship would have used us better.


Val. My Fathers worship was a fool.


Lanc. Hey, hey boys, old Valentine in faith, the old boy still.


Vnc. Fie Cosen.


Val. I mean besotted to his state, he had never left me the misery of so much
means else, which till I sold, was a mere meagrome to me: If you will talk,
turn out these tenants, they are as killing to my nature Uncle, as water to a
fever.


Lance. We will go, but it is like Rams, to come again the stronger, and you
shall keep your state:


Val. Thou lie, I will not.


Lance. Sweet sir, thou lie, thou shall, and so good morrow.

Exeunt Tenants.
Val. This was my man, and of a noble breeding, now to your business Uncle.


Unc. To your state then.


Val. It Is gone, and I am glad on it, name it no more, it is that I pray against,
and Heaven has heard me, I tell you sir, I am more fearful of it, I mean of
thinking of more lands, or livings, than sickly men are traveling a Sundays,
for being quelled with Carriers, out upon it, caveat emptor, let the fool
out-sweat it, that thinks he has got a catch on it.


Unc. This is madness to be a wilful beggar.


Val. I am mad then, and so I mean to be, will that content you? How bravely
now I live, how jocund, how near the first inheritance, without fears, how
free from title-troubles.


Unc. And from means too.


Val. Means, why all good men's my means; my wit's my plow, the Town's my
stock, Taverns my standing-house, and all the world knows there is no want; all
Gentlemen that love society, love me; all purses that wit and pleasure opens,
are my Tennants; every man's clothes fit me, the next fair lodging, is but my
next remove, and when I please to be more eminent, and take the air, a piece,
is levied, and a Coach prepared, and I go I care not whether, what need state
here.


Vnc. But say these means were honest, will they last sir.


Val. Far longer then your jerkin, and wear fairer should I take ought of you,
it is true, I begged now, or which is worse then that, I stole a kindness, and
which is worst of all, I lost my way i'nt, your minds enclosed nothing lies
open nobly, your very thoughts are Hindes that work on nothing but daily sweat,
and trouble: were my way so full of dirt as this, it is true I shifted; are my
acquaintance Grasiers: but sir, know no man that I am allied too, in my living,
but makes it equal, whether his own use, or my necessity pull first, nor is
this forced, but the mere quality and poysure of goodness, and do you think I
venture nothing equal.


Vnc. You pose me Cosen.


Val. What Is my knowledge Uncle, is it not worth money, what is my understanding,
travel, reading, wit, all these digested, my daily making men, some to speak,
that too much phlegm had frozen up, some that spoke too much, to hold their
peace, and put their tongues to pensious, some to wear their cloths, and some
to keep um, these are nothing Uncle; besides these ways, to teach the way of
nature, a manly love, community to all that are deservers, not examining how
much, or what is done for them, it is wicked, and such a one like you, chewes his
thoughts doule, making um only food for his repentance.

Enter two servants.
1. Ser. This cloak and hat sir, and my Masters love.


Val. Commend's to thy Master, and take that, and leave um at my lodging.


1. I shall do it sir.


Val. I do not think of these things:


2. Ser. Please you sir, I have gold here for you.


Val. Give it me, drink that and commend me to thy Master; look you Uncle, do I
beg these:


Vnc. No sure it is your worth sir.


Val. It Is like enough, but pray satisfy me, are not these ways as honest as
persecuting the starved inheritance, with musty Corn, the very rats were sain
to run away from, or selling rotten wood by the pound, like spices, which
Gentlemen do after burn byt'h ounces, do not I know your way of seeding beasts,
with grains, and windy stuff, to blow up Butchers, your racking Pastures, that
have eaten up as many singing Shepherds, and their issues; as Andeluria breeds;
these are authentic, I tell you sir, I would not change ways with you,
unless it were to sell your state that hour, and if it were possible to spend
it then too, for all your Beans in Rumnillo, now you know me.


Vnc. I would you knew your self, but since you are grown such a strange enemy,
to all that fits you, give me leave to make your brothers fortune.


Val. How?


Vnc. From your morgage, which yet you may recover, I Will the means.


Val. Pray save your labor sir, my brother and my self, will run one fortune,
and I think what I hold a mere vexation, cannot be safe for him, I love him
better, he has wit at will, the world has means, he shall live without this
trick of state, we are heirs both, and all the World before us.


Vnc. My last offer, and then I am gone.


Val. What is it, and then I Will answer.


Vnc. What think you of a Wife yet to restore you, and tell me seriously
without these trifles.


Val. And you can find one, that can please my fancy, you shall not find me
stubborn.


Vnc. Speak your Woman.


Val. One without eyes, that is self commendations, for when they find they
are handsome, they are unvvholsome, one without ears, not giving time to
flatterers, for she that hears her self commended, wavers, and points men out a
way to make um wicked; one without substance of her self, that woman without
the pleasure of her life, that's wanton, though she be young, forgetting it,
though fair making her glass the eyes of honest men, not her own admiration,
all her ends obedience all her hours new blessings, if there may be such a
Woman:


Vuc. Yes there may be.


Val. And without state too.


Vnc. You are disposed to trifle, well, fare you well sir, when you want me
next, you will seek me out a better sense.


Val. Fare well Uncle, and as you love your estate, let not me hear ont.

Exit.
Vnc. It shall not trouble yo, I Will watch him still,
And when his friends fall off: then bend his will.
Exit. Enter Isabella, and Luce.
Luce. I know the cause of all this sadness now, your fister has ingrost all
the brave Lovers.


Isab. She has wherewithal, much good may't do her, prithee speak softly, we
are open to men's ears:


Luce. Fear not, we are safe, we may see all that pass, hear all, and make our
selves merry with their language, and yet stand undiscovered, be not
melancholy, you are as fair as she.


Isab. Who I, I thank you, I am as haste ordained me, a thing slubberd, my
sister is a goodly portly Lady, a woman of a presence, she spread sattens, as
the Kings ships do canvas, every where she may spare me her misen, and her
bonnets, strike her main Patticoate, and yet outsail me, I am a Carvel to her.


Luce. But a tight one:


Isab. She is excellent, well built too.


Luce. And yet she is old.


Isab. She never saw above one voyage Luce, and credit me after another, her
Hull will serve again, a right good Merchant: she plays, and sings too, dances
and discourtes, comes very near Essays, a pretty Poet, begins to piddle with
Phylosophie, a subtle Chimicke Wench, and can extract, the Spirit of men's
Estates, she has the light before her, and cannot miss her choice, for me it is
reason, I wait my mean fortune.


Luce. You are so bashful.


Isab. It is not at first word up and ride, thou art cosen'd, that would show
mad I faith, besides, we lose the main part of our polliticke government, if we
become provokers, then we are fair, and fit for men's embraces, when like towns,
they lie before us ages, yet not carried, hold out their strongest batteries,
then compound too without the loss of honor, and march off with our fair
wedding: Colors flying, Who are these?

Enter Franc. and Lance.
Luce. I know not, nor I care not.


Isa. Prithee peace then, a well built Gentleman.


Luce. But poorly thatcht.


Lance. Has he devoured you too?


Fran. Has gulp'd me down Lance.


Lance. Left you no means to study?


Franc. Not a farching: dispatched my poor annuity I thank him, here is all the
hope I have left, one bare ten shillings.


Lan. You are fit for great men's services.


Fran. I am fit, but who will take me, thus men's miseries are now accounted
stains in their natures, I have traveled, and I have studied long, observed
all kingdoms, know all the promises of Art and manners, yet that I am not bold,
nor cannot flatter, I shall not thrive, all these are but vain Studies, art
thou so rich as to get me a lodging Lance?


Lan. I Will sell the titles of my house else, my Horse, my Hawk, nay's death I Will
pawn my wife: Oh Mr. Francis, that I should see your Fathers house fall thus.


Isab. An honest fellow.


Lan. Your Fathers house, that fed me, that bred up all my (name.


Isab. A grateful fellow.


Lan. And fall by.


Fran. Peace, I know you are angry Lance, but I must not hear with whom, he is
my brother, and though you hold him slight, my most dear brother: A gentleman
excepting some few rubs, he were too excellent to live here else, fraughted as
deep with noble and brave parts, the issues of a noble and manly spirit as any
he a live, I must not hear you, though I am miserable, and ha made me so, yet
still he is my brother, still I love him, and to that tie of blood link my
affections.


Jsab. A noble nature, do thou know him Luce?


Luce. No Mistress.


Isab. Thou should ever know such good men, what a fair body and mind, are
married; did he not say he wanted.


Luce. What Is that to you?


Isab. It Is true, but it is great pity.


Luce. How she changes, ten thousand more than he, as handsome men too.


Isab. It Is like enough; but as I live, this Gentleman among ten thousand
thousand, is there no kowing him; why should he want? fellows of no merit,
slight and puffed solus, that walk like shadows, by leaving no print of what
they are, or poise, let them complain.


Luce. Her color changes strangly.


Isab. This man was made, to mark his wants to waken us, alas poor Gentleman,
but will that keep him from cold and hunger, believe me he is well bred, and
cannot be but of a noble linnage, mark him, mark him well.


Luce. 'Is a handsome man.


Isab. The sweetness of his suffrance sets him off, O Luce; but whether go I.


Luce. You cannot hide it.


Isab. I would he had what I can spare.


Luce. It Is charitable.


Lance Come sir, I Will see you lodged, you have tied my tongue fast, I Will steal
before you want, it is but a hanging.


Isab. That Is a good fellow too, an honest fellow, why, this would move a
stone, I must needs know; but that some other time.

Exit Lance, and Frank.
Luce Is the wind there? that makes for me.


Isab. Come, I forgot a business.


Actus 2. Scaena 1.
Enter Widow and Luce.
Wid. MY sister, and a woman of so base a pity, what was the fellow?


Luce. Why an ordinary man, Madam.


Wid. Poor?


Luce. Poor enough, and no man knows from whence neither.


Wid. What could she see?


Luce. Only his misery, for else she might behold a hundred handsomer.


Wid. Did she change much?


Luce. Extremely, when he spoke, and then her pity, like an Orator, I fear her
love framed such a commendation, and followed it so far, as made me wonder.


Wid. Is she so hot, or such a want of lovers, that she must dote upon
afflictions: why does she not go romage all the prisons, and there bestow her
youth, bewray her wantonness, and fly her honor, common both to beggary: did
she speak to him?


Luce. No, he saw us not, but ever since, she has been mainly troubled.


Wid. Was he young?


Luce. Yes, young enough.


Wid. And looked he like a Gentleman?


Luce. Like such a Gentleman, that would pawn ten oaths for twelve pence.


Wid. My sister, and sink basely; this must not be, does she use means to know
him?


Luce. Yes Madam, and has employed a Squire called Shorthose.


Wid. O that is a precious Knave, keep all this private, but still be near her
lodging; Luce, what you can gather by any means, let me understand; I Will stop
her heat, and turn her charity another way, to bless her self first, be still
close to her counsels; a beggar and a stranger, there is a blessedness, I Will
none of that; I have a toy yet, sister, shall tell you this is foul, and make
you find it, and for your pains take you the last go wne I wore; this makes
me mad, but I shall force a remedy.

Enter Fountain, Bellamore, Harebraine, Valentine.
Fount. Sir, we have so looked for thee, and longed for thee; this widow is
the strangest thing, the stateliest, and stands so much upon her excellencies.


Bell. She has put us off, this month now, for an answer.


Hare. No man must visit her, nor look upon her, no, not say, Good morrow, nor
Good even, till that's past.


Val. She has found what dough-you are made of, and so kneads you: are you good
at nothing, but these after-games? I have told you often enough what things
they are, what precious things, these widows -- --


Hare. If we had um.


Val. Why the Devil has not craft enough to woo um, there be three kinds of
fools, mark this note Gentlemen, mark it, and understand it.


Fount. Well, go forward.


Val. An Innocent, a Knave fool; a Fool politic: the last of which are lovers,
widow lovers.


Bell. Will you allow no Fortune?


Val. No such blind one.


Fount. We gave you reasons, why it was needful for us.


Val. As you are those fools, I did allow those reasons, but as my Scholars
and Companions damned um: do you know what it is to woo a widow? answer me
coolely now, and understandingly.


Hare. Why to lie with her, and to enjoy her wealth.


Val. Why there you are fools still, crafty to catch your selves, pure
politic fools, I looked for such an answer; once more hear me, it is to wed a
widow, to be doubted mainly, whether the state you have be yours or no, or
those old boots you ride in. Mark me, widows are long extents in Law upon
news, livings upon their bodies winding-sheets, they that enjoy um, lie but
with dead men's monuments, and be get only their own ill Epitaphs: Is not this
plain now?


Bell. Plain spoken.


Val. And plain truth, but if you will needs do things of danger, do but loose
your selves, not any part concerns your understandings, for then you are
Meacocks, fools, and miserable, march off amain, within an inch of a Fircug,
turn me oth' toe like a VVeather-cock, kill every day a Sergeant for a twelve
month, rob the Exchequer, and burn all the Rolls, and these will make a show.


Hare. And these are trifles.


Val. Considered to a VVidow, empty nothings, for here you venture but your
persons, there the varnish of your persons, your discretions; why it is a
monstrous thing to marry at all, especially as now it is made, me thinks a man,
an understanding man, is more wise to me, and of a nobler tie, than all these
trinkets, what do we get by women, but our senses, which is the rankest part
about us satisfied, and when that is done, what are we? Crest fallen Cowards.
What benefit can children be, but charges and disobedience? What Is the love
they render at one and twenty years? I pray die father: when they are young,
they are like bells rung backwards, nothing but noise and giddiness; and come
to years once, there drops a son, byth' sword in his Mistresses quarrel, a
great joy to his parents: A daughter ripe too, grows high and lusty in her
blood, must have a heating, runs away with a supple ham'd Servingman: his
twenty Nobles spent, takes to a trade, and learns to spin men's hair off; there is
another, and most are of this nature, will you marry?


Fount. For my part yes, for any doubt I feel yet.


Val. And this same VVidow?


Fount. If I may, and me thinks, however you are pleased to dispute these
dangers, such a warm match, and for you, sir, were not hurtful.


Val. Not half so killing as for you, for me she cannot with all the Art she
has, make me more miserable, or much more fortunate, I have no state left, a
benefit that none of you can brag of, and there is the Antidote against a
VVidow, nothing to lose, but that my soul inherits, which she can neither law
nor claw away to that, but little flesh, it were too much else; and that
unwholsom too, it were too rich else; and to all this contempt of what she does
I can laugh at her tears, neglect her angers, hear her without a faith, so pity
her as if she were a Traitor, moan her person, but deadly hate her pride; if
you could do these, and had but this discretion, and like fortune, it were but
an equal venture.


Fount. This is malice.


Val. When she lies with your land, and nor with you, grows great with
joyntures, and is brought to bed with all the state you have, you will find this
certain; but is it come to pass you must marry, is there no buffe will hold
you?


Bell. Grant it be so.


Val. Then choose the tamer evil, take a maid, a maid not worth a penny; make
her yours, knead her, and mould her yours, a maid worth nothing, there is a
virtuous spell in that word nothing; a maid makes conscience of half a Crown a
week for pies and puppits, a maid will be content with one Coach and two
Horses, not falling out because they are not matches; with one man satisfied,
with one rein guided, with one faith, one content, one bed, aged she makes the
wise, preserves the same and issue; a widow is a Christmas-box that sweeps all.


Fount. Yet all this cannot sink us.


Val. You are my friends, and all my loving friends, I spend your money, yet I
deserve it too, you are my friends still, I ride your horses, when I want I
sell um; I eat your meat, help to wear her linen, sometimes I make you drunk,
and then you seal, for which I Will do you this commodity, be ruled, and let me
try her, I will discover her, the truth is, I will never leave to trouble her,
till I see through her, then if I find her worthy.


Hare. This was our meaning Valentine.


Val. It Is done then, I must want nothing.


Hare. Nothing but the woman.


Vnl. No jealousy, for when I marry, the Devil must be wiser than I take him;
and the Flesh foolisher, come let us to dinner, and when I am well whetted with
wine, have at her.

Exeunt. Enter Isabella and Luce.
Isab. But art thou sure.


Luce. No surer then I heard.


Hare. That it was that flouting fellows brother.


Luce. Yes, Shorthose told me so.
He did searce out the truth.

Lece. It seems he did.


Har. Prithee Lu call him hither, if he be no worse, I never repent my pity, now
sir, what was he we sent you after, the Gentleman ith black.

Enter Shorthose.
Shrot. Ith torn black.


Isa. Yes, the same fir.


Short. What would your Worship with him.


Isa. Why, my Worship would know his name, and what he is.


Short. 'Is nothing, he is a man, and yet he is no man.


Isa. You must needs play the fool:


Short. It Is my profession.


Isa. How is he a man, and no man.


Short. He Is a beggar, only the sign of a man, the bush pulled down, which
shows the house stands empty.


Isa. What Is his calling?


Short. They call him beggar:


Isa. What Is his kindred:


Short. Beggars.


Isa. His worth.


Short. A learned beggar, a poor Scholar:


Isab. How does he live.


Short. Like worms, he eats old Books.


Isa. Is Valentine his brother.


Short. His beging brother.


Isa. What may his name be?


Short. Orson.


Isa. Leave your fooling.


Short. You had as good say, leave your living.


Isab. Once more tell me his name directly:


Short. I Will be hanged first, unless I heard him Christened, but I can tell what
foolish people call him.


Isa. What?


Short Francisco.


Isa. Where lies this learning, sir?


Short. In Paul's Church yard forsooth.


Isa. I mean that Gentleman, fool.


Short. O that fool, he lies in loose sheets every where, that is no where.


Luce. You have gleand since you came to London, in the Country, Shorthose,
you were an arrant fool, a dull cold coxcombe, here every Tavern teaches you,
the pint pot has so belabored you with Wit, your brave acquaintance that gives
you Ale, so fortified your mazard, that now there is no talking to you.


Isa. Is much improved, a fellow, a fine discourser.


Short. I hope so, I have not waited at the tail of Wit, so long to be an Ass.


Luc. But say now, Shorthose, my Lady should remove into the Country.


Short. I had as lieve she should remoove to heaven, and as soon I would
undertake to follow her.


Luce. Where no old Charnico is, nor no Anchoves, nor Master such-a-one, to
meet at the Rose, and bring my Lady such-a-ones chief Chambermaid.


Isa. No bouncing healths to this brave Lad, dear Shorthose, nor down oath knees
to that illustrious Lady.


Luce. No fiddles, nor no lusty noise of drawer, carry this pottle to my
father, Shorthose.


Isa. No plays, nor gally foistes, no strange Ambassadors to run and wonder
at, till thou be oil, and then come home again, and lie both Legend.


Luce. Say she should go.


Short. If I say, I Will be hanged, or if I thought she would go?


Luce. What?


Short. I would go with her.


Luce. But Shorthose, where thy heart is:


Isab. Do not fright him.


Luce. By this hand Mistress it is a noise, a loud one too, and from her own
mouth, presently to be gone too, but why, or to what end?


Short. May not a man die first, she will give him so much time.


Isab. Gone ot'h sudden; thou do but jest, she must not mock the Gentlemen.


Luce. She has put them off a month, thy dare not see her, believe me
Mistress, what I hear I tell you.


Isab. Is this true wench? gone on so short a warning, what trick is this, she
never told me of it, it must not be: sir, attend me presently, you know I
have been a careful friend unto you, attend me in the Hall, and next be
faithful, cry not, we shall not go.


Short. Her Coach may crack.

Enter Vallentine, Francisco, and Lance.
Val. Which way to live, how dare thou come to town, to ask such an idle
question?


Fran. Me thinks it is necessary, unless you could restore that Annuitie you have
tipled up in Taverns:


Val, Where have thou been, and how brought up Francisco, that thou talkest
thus out of France? thou were a pretty fellow, and of a hansome knowledge; who
has spoiled thee?


Lan. He that has spoiled himself, to make him sport, and by Copy, will spoil
all coms near him, buy but a Glass, if you be yet so wealthy, and look there
who?


Val. Well said old Copihold.


Lan. My hearts good Freehold sir, and so you will find it, this Getleman's your
brother, your hopeful brother, for there is no hope of you, use him thercafter:


Val. En'e as well as I use my self, what would thou have Francke.


Fran. Can you procure me a hundred pound?


Lan. Hark what he says to you, O try your wits, they say you are excellent at
it, for your Land has lain long bedridden, and unsensible.


Fran. And i will forget all wrongs, you see my state, and to what wretchedness,
your will has brought me; but what it may be, by this benefit, if timely done,
and like a noble brother, both you and I may feel, and to our comforts:


Val. (A hundred pound) do thou know what thou have said boy?


Fran. I said a hundred pound.


Val. Thou have said more, then any man can justify believe it, procure a
hundred pounds. I say to thee, there is no such sum in nature, forty shillings
there may be now ith Mint and that is a treasure, I have seen five pound, but
let me tell it, and it is as wonderful, as Calves with five legs, here is five
shillings Francke, the harvest of five weeks, and a good crop too, take it, and
pay thy first fruits, I Will come down and eat it out.


Fran. It Is patience must meet with you sir, not love.


Lanc. Deal roundly, and leave these fiddle faddles:


Val. Leave thy prating, thou think thou art a notable wise fellow, thou and
thy rotten Sparrow Hawke; two of the reverent.


Lan. I think you are mad, or if you be not, will be, with the next moon, what
would you have him do?


Val. How?


Lan. To get money first, that is to live, you have showed him how to want.


Val. Slife how do I live, why, what dull fool would ask that question, three
hundred three pilds more, I and live bravely, the better half oath town, and
live most gloriously, ask them what states they have, or what, annuiries, or
when they pray for seasonable harvests, thou have a handsome wit, stir into the
World, Francke, stir, stir, for shame, thou art a pretty Scholar, ask how to
live, write, write, write any thing, the Worlds a fine believing World, write
News.


Lan. Dragons in Sussex sir, or fiery battles seen in the air at Aspurg.


Val. There Is the way Francke, and in the tail of these, fright me the Kingdom
with a sharp Prognostication, that shall scowr them, dearth upon dearth, like
leven taffaties, predictions of Sea-breaches, wars, and want of herrings on our
coast, with bloody noses.


Lan. Whirl-winds, that shall take off the top of Grantham steeple, and clap it
on Poules, and after these, a Lenvoy to the City for their sins.


Val. Probatum est, thou can not want a pension, go switch me up a Covey of
young Scholars, there is twenty nobles, and two loads of coals, are not these
ready ways? Cosmography thou art deeply read in, draw me a map from the
Mermaid, I mean a midnight map to escape the Watches, and such long senseless
examinations, and Gentlemen shall feed thee, right good Gentlemen, I cannot
stay long.


Lan. You have read learnedly, and would you have him follow these megera's,
did you begin with ballads?


Fran. Well, I will leave you, I see my wants are grown ridiculous, yours may
be so, I will not curse you neither; you may think, when these wanton fits are
over, who bred me, and who ruined me, look to your self sir, a providence I
wait on.


Val. Thou art passionate, have thou been brought up with girls?

Enter Shorthose with a bag.
Short. Rest you merry, Gentlemen.


Val. Not so merry as you suppose, sir.


Short. Pray stay a while, and let me take a view of you, I may put my spoon
into the wrong pottage-pot else.


Val. Why, will thou muster us?


Short. No, you are not he, you are a thought too handsome.


Lan. Who would thou speak withal, why do thou peep so?


Short. I am looking birds nests, I can find none in your bush beard, I would
speak with you, black Gentleman.


Fran. With me, my friend?


Short. Yes sure, and the best friend sir, it seems you spoke withal this
twelve-moneth, Gentleman, there is money for you.


Val. How?


Short. There Is none for you sir, be not so brief, not a penny, law how he
itches at it, stand often, you stir my color.


Lan. Take it, it is money.


Short. You are too quick too, first be sure you have it, you seem to be a
Faulkoner, but a foolish one.


Lan. Take it, and say nothing.


Short. You are cosen'd too, it is take it, and spend it.


Fran. From whom came it, sir?


Short. Such another word, and you shall have none on it.


Fran. I thank you, sir, I doubly thank you.


Short. Well sir, then buy you better clothes, and get your hat dressed, and your
Laundress to wash your boots white.


Fran. Pray stay sir, may you not be mistaken.


Short. I think I am, give me the money again, come quick, quick, quick.


Fear. I would be loath to render, till I am sure it be so.


Short. Hark in your ear, Is not your name Francisco?


Fran. Yes.


Short. Be quiet then, it may thunder a hundred times, before such stones fall:
do you not need it?


Fran. Yes.


Short. And it is thought you have it.


Fran. I think I have.


Short. Then hold it fast, it is not fly-blown, you may pay for the poundage, you
forget your self, I have not seen a Gentleman so backward, a wanting Gentleman.


Fran. Your mercy, sir.


Short. Friend, you have mercy, a whole bag full of mercy, be merry with it,
and be wise.


Fran. I would fain, if it please you, but know.


Short. It does not please me, tell over your money, and be not mad, boy.


Val. You have no more such bags.


Short. More such there are, sir, but few I fear for you, I have cast your
water, you have wit, you need no money.

Exit.
Lan. Be not amazed, sir, it is good gold, good old gold, this is restorative,
and in good time, it comes to do you good, keep it and use it, let honest
fingers feel it, yours be too quick sir.


Fran. He named me, and he gave it me, but from whom.


Lan. Let um send more, and then examine it, this can be but a preface.


Fran. Being a stranger, of whom can I deserve this?


Lan. Sir, of any man that has but eyes, and manly understanding to find men's
wants, good men are bound to do so.


Val. Now you see, Frank, there are more ways than certainties, now you
believe: What plow brought you this harvest, what sale of timber, coals, or
what annuities? These feed no Hinds, nor wait the expectation of quarter days,
you see it showers into you, you are an ass, he plodding, and lie fooling,
about this Blazing Starr, and that bepeep, whyning, and fasting, to find the
natural reason why a Dog turns twice about befoae he lie down, what use of
these, or what joy in annuities, where every man's thy study, and thy tennant,
I am ashamed on thee:


Lan. Yes I have seen this fellow, there is a wealthy Widow hard by.


Val. Yes marry is there.


Lan. I think he is her servant, or I am couzned else, I am sure ont.


Fran. I am glad ont.


Lan. She Is a good woman.


Fran. I am gladder:


Lan. And young enough believe.


Fran. I am gladder of all sir.


Val. Francke, you shall lie with me soon.


Fran. I thank my money:


Lan. His money shall lie with me, three in a bed sir will be too much this
weather. (things -- --


Val. Meet me at the Mermaid, and thou shall see what


Lan. Trust to your self sir.

Exeunt Fran. and Vall. Enter Fount. Bella. and Valentine.
Fount. O Vallentine.


Val. How now, why do you look so?


Bella. The Widows going man.


Val. Why let her go man.


Hare. She Is going out oath Town.


Val. The Town's the happier, I would they were all gone.


Fount. We cannot come to speak with her.


Val. Not to speak to her.


Bell. She will be gone within this hour, either now Val.


Fount. Hare. Now, now, now, good Val.


Val. I had rather march in the mouth oth' Cannon, but adieu, if she be above
ground, go, away to your prayers, away I say, away, she shall be spoken withal.

Exeunt. Enter Shorthose with one boot on, Roger and Humphey.
Rog. She will go, Shorthose.


Short. Who can help it Roger?

Within Raph. Roger, help down with the hangings.


Rog. By and by Raph, I am making up oth' trunks here.


Raph. Shorthose.


Short. Well.


Raph. Who looks to my Ladies wardrobe? Humphrey.


Hum. Here.


Raph. Down with the boxes in the gallery, and bring away the Coach cushions.


Short. Will it not rain, no conjuring abroad, nor no devices to stop this
journey.


Rog. Why go now, why now, why oath sudden, now what preparation, what horses
have we ready, what provision laid in it'n Country.


Hum. Not an egg I hope.


Rog. No nor one drop of good drink boys, there is the devil.


Short. I heartily pray the malt be musty, and then we must come


Hum. What sais the Steward? (up again.


Rog. He Is at's wits end, for some four hours since, out of his haste and
providence, he mistook the Millars mangie mare, for his own nagge.


Short. And she may break his neck, and save the journey, oh London how I love
thee.


Hum. I have no boots nor none I Will buy (or if I had) refuse me if I would
venture my ability, before a Cloak-Bag, men are men


Short. For my part, if I be brought, as I know it will be aimed at, to carry
any durty dary Cream-pot, or any gentle Lady of the Laundry, Chambring, or
wantonness behind my Gelding, with all her Streamers, Knapsacks, Glasses,
Gugawes, as if I were a running flippery, I Will give um leave to cut my girts,
and flay me. I Will not, be troubled with their Dislibations, at every half miles
end, I understand my self, and am resolved.


Hum. To morrow night at Olivers, who shall be there boys, who shall meet the
wenches.


Rog. The well brewed stand of Ale, we should have met at.


Short. These griefs like to another Tale of Troy, would mollisie the hearts of
barbarous people, and Tom Butcher weep, Eneas enters, and now the towns lost.


Ral. Why whether run you, my Lady is mad.


Short. I would she were in Bedlam.


Ral. The carts are come, no hands to help to load um the stuff lies in the
hall, the plate:


Within Widow. Why knaves there, where be these idle fellows


Short. Shall I ride with one Boot.


Wid. Why where I say:


Rnl. Away, away, it must be so.


Short. O for a tickling storm, to last but ten days.

Exeunt.
Actus 3. Scaena. 1.
Enter Isabella and Luce.
Luce. BY my troth Mistress I did it for the best:


Isab. It may be so, but Luce, you have a tongue: a dish of meat in your mouth,
which if it were minced Luce, would do a great deal better.


Luce. I protest Mistress.


Isa. It will be your own one time or other: Walter.

Walter within: Anon forsooth.


Isa. Lay my hat ready, my fan and cloak, you are so full of providence; and
Walter, tuck up my little box behind the Coach, and bid my maid make ready, my
sweet service to your good Lady Mistress; and my dog, good let the Coachman
carry him.


Luce. But hear me.


Isa. I am in love sweet Luce, and you are so skillful, that I must needs undo
my self; and hear me, let Oliver pack up my Glass discreetly, and see my Cuiles
well carried, O sweet Luce, you have a tongue, and open tongues have open you
know what, Luce.


Luce. Pray you be satisfied.


Isab. Yes and contented too, before I leave you: there is a Roger, which some
call a Butcher, I speak of certainties, I do not fish Luce, nay do not stare, I
have a tongue can talk too: and a Green Chamber Luce, a back door opens to a
long Gallerie; there was a night Luce, do you perceive, do you perceive me yet:
O do you blush Luce, a Friday night I saw your Saint Luce: for to: her box of
Marmaladde, all is thine sweet Roger, this I heard and kept too.


Luce. En'c as you are a woman Mistress.


Isab. This I allow as good and Physical sometime these meetings, and for the
cheering of the heart; but Luce, to have your own turn served, and to your
friend to be a dogbolt.


Luce. I confess it Mistress.


Isab. As you have made my sister Jealous of me, and foolishly, and childishly
pursued it, I have found out your haunt, and traced your purposes, for which
mine honor suffers, your best ways must be applied to bring her back again,
and seriously and suddenly, that so I may have a means to clear my self, and
she a a fair opinion of me, else you peevish -- --


Luce. My power and prayers Mistress.


Isab. What Is the matter?

Enter Shorthose and Widow.
Short. I have been with the Gentleman, he has it, much good may do-him with it.


Wid. Come are you ready, you love so to delay time, the day grows on.


Isab. I have sent for a few trifles, when those are come; And now I know your
reason.


Wid. Know your own honor then, about your business, see the Coach ready
presently, I Will tell you more then;

Exit Luce and Shorthose. And understand it well, you must not think your
sister, so tender eyed as not to see your follies, alas I know your heart, and
must imagine, and truly too; it is not your charity can coin such sums to give
away as you have done, in that you have no wisdom Isabel, no nor modesty where
nobler uses are at home; I tell you, I am ashamed to find this in your years,
far more in your discretion, none to choose but things for pity, none to seal
your thoughts on, but one of no abiding, of no name; nothing to bring you to
but this, cold and hunger: A jolly Jointure sister, you are happy, no money, no
not ten shillings.


Isa. You search nearly.


Wid. I know it as I know your folly, one that know not where he shall eat his
next meal, take his rest, unless it be in the stocks; what kindred has he, but a
more wanting brother, or what virtues.


Isab. You have had rare intelligence, I see sister.


Wid. Or say the man had virtue, is virtue in this age a full inheritance: what
Jointure can he make you, Plutarohs Morals, or so much penny rent in the small
Poets, this is not well, it is weak, and I grieve to know it.


Isa. And this you quit the town for.


Wid. Is It not time?


Isa. You are better read in my affairs than I am, that's all I have to answer,
I Will go with you, and willingly, and what you think most dangerous, I Will sit
laugh at.

For sister it is not folly but good discretion governs our main fortunes.


Wid. I am glad to hear you say so.


Isa. I am for you.

Enter Shorthose and Humphrey with riding rods.
Hum. The Devil cannot stay her she will ont, eat an egg now, and then we must
away.


Short. I am gaul'd already, yet I will pray, may London ways from henceforth
be full of holes, and Coaches crack their wheels, may zealous Smiths so housel
all our Hackneys, that they may feel compunction in their feet, and tire at
Highgate, may it rain above all Almanacks till Carriars sail, and the Kings
Fish monger ride like Biko Arion upon a Trout to London.


Hum. At S. Albones, let all the Ins be drunk, not an Host sober to bid her
worship welcome.


Short. Not a Fiddle, but all preached down with Puritanes; no meat but Legs of
Beef.


Hnm. No beds but Wool-Packs.


Short. And those so crammed with Warrens of starved Fleas that bite like
Bandogs; let Mims be angry at their S, Bel-Swagger, and we pass in the heat ont
and be beaten, beaten abominably, beaten horse and man, and all my Ladies
linen sprinkled with suds and dishwater.


Short. Not a wheel but out of joint.

Enter Roger laughing.
Hum. Why do thou laugh.


Rog. There Is a Gentleman, and the rarest Gentleman, and makes the rarest sport.


Short, Where, where?


Rog. Within here, has made the gayest sport with Tom the Coachman, so tewed
him up with Sack that he lies lashing a But of Malmsie for his Mares.


Short. It Is very good.


Rog. And talks and laughs, and sings the rarest songs, and Shorthose, he has
so mauld the Red Deer pies, made such an alms ith butterie.


Short. Better still.

Enter Vall. Widow.
Hum. My Lady in a rage with the Gentleman.


Short. May he anger her into a feather.

Exeunt.
Wid. I pray tell me, who sent you hither? for I imagine it is not your
condition you look so temperately, and like a Gentleman, to ask me these mild
questions.


Val. Do you think I use to walk of errands gentle Lady, or deal with women out
of dreams from others.


Wid. You have not known me sure?


Val. Not much.


Wid. What reason have you then to be so tender of my credit, you are no
kinsman?


Val. If you take it so, the honest office that I came to do you, is not so
heavy but I can return it: now I perceive you are too proud, not worth my
visit.


Wid. Pray stay, a little proud.


Val. Monstrous proud, I grieve to hear a woman of your value, and your
abundant parts stung by the people, but now I see it is true, you look upon me as
if I were a rude and saucie fellow that borrowed all my breeding from a
dunghill, or such a one, as should now fall and worship you in hope of pardon:
you are cozened Lady, I came to prove opinion a loud liar, to see a woman only
great in goodness, and Mistress of a greater fame then fortune, but==


Wid. You are a strange Gentleman, if I were proud now, I should be monstrous
angry, which I am not, and show the effects of pride; I should despise you, but
you are welcome sir: To think well of our selves, if we deserve it, it is a
luster in us, and every good we have, strives to show gracious, what use is it
else, old age like Seer-trees, is seldom seen affected, stirs sometimes at
rehearsal of such acts as his daring youth endeadeavour'd.


Val. This is well, and now you speak to the purpose, you please me, but to be
place proud:


Wid. If it be our own, why are we sit here with distinction else, degrees, and
orders given us? In you men, it is held a coolness, if you lose your right
affronts and loss of honor: streets, and walls, and upper ends of tables, had
they tongues could tell what blood has followed, and what fewd about your
ranks; are we so much below you, that till you have us, are the tops of nature,
to be accounted drones without a difference? you will make us beasts indeed.


Val. Nay worse than this too, proud of your clothes, they swear a Mercers
Lucifer, a tumor tackt together by a Taylour, nay yet worse, proud of red and
white, a varnish that buttermilk can better.


Wid. Lord, how little will vex these poor blind people, if my clothes be
sometimes gay and glorious, does it follow, my mind must be my Mercers too, or
say my beauty please some weak eyes, must it please them to think that blows
me up, that every hour blows off: this is an Infants anger.


Val. Thus they say too, what though you have a Coach lined through with
velvet, and four fair Flanders mares, why should the streets be troubled
continually with you, till Carmen curse you, can there be ought in this but
pride of show Lady, and pride of bum-beating, till the learned Lawyers with
their fit bags, are thrust against the bulks till all their causes crack? why
should this Lady, and the other Lady, and the third sweet Lady, and Madam at
Mile-end, be daily visited, and your poorer neighbors, with course napses
neglected, fashions conferred about, pouncings, and paintings, and young men's
bodies read on like Anatomies.


Wid. You are very credulous, and somewhat desperate, to deliver this sir, to
her you know not, but you shall confess me, and find I will not start; in us
all meetings lie open to these lewd reports, and our thoughts at Church, our
very meditations some will swear, which all should fear to judge, at least
uncharitably, are mingled with your memories, cannot sleep; but this sweet
Gentleman swims in our fancies, that scarlet man of war, and that smooth
Senior; not dress our heads without new ambushes, how to surprise that
greatness, or that glory; our very smiles are subject to constructions; nay
sir, its come to this, we cannot pish, but it is a favor for some fool or other:
should we examine you thus, were not possible to take you without Prospectives.


Wid. It may be, but these excuse not.


Wid. Nor yours force no truth sir, what deadly tongues you have, and to those
tongues what hearts, and what inventions? Ah my conscience, and 'twere not for
sharp justice, you would venture to aim at your own mothers, and account it
glory to say you had done so; all you think are counsels, and cannot err,
it is we still that show double, giddy, or gorged with passion; we that build
Babels for men's conclusions, we that scatter, as day does his warm light; our
killing curses over Gods creatures, next to the Devils malice: lets entreat
your good words.


Val. Well, this woman has a brave soul.


Wid. Are not we gaily blessed then, and much beholding to you for your
substance; you may do what you list, we what beseems us, and narrowly do that
too, and precisely, our names are served in else at Ordinaries, and beleht
abroad in Taverns.


Val. O most brave Wench, and able to redeem an age o women.


Wid. You are no Whoremasters, alas no Gentlemen, it were an impudency to
think you vicious; you are so holy, handsome Ladies fright you, you are the
cool things of the time, the temperance, mere emblemes of the Law, and vales of
Virtue, you are not daily mending like Dutch watches, and plastering like old
walls; they are not Gentlemen, that with their secret sins increase our
Surgeons, and lie in foreign Countries, for new sores; women are all these
vices; you are not envious, false, covetous, vainglorious, irreligious,
drunken, revengefull, giddie-eyed, like Parrats, eaters of others honors.


Val. You are angry.


Wid. No by my troth, and yet I could say more too, for when men make me
angry, I am miserable.


Val. Sure it is a man, she could not bear it thus bravely else, it may be I am
tedious.


Wid. Not at all sir, I am content at this time you should trouble me.


Val. You are distrustful.


Wid. Where I find no truth, sir.


Val. Come, come, you are full of passion.


Wid. Some I have, I were too near the nature a god else.


Val. You are monstrous peevish.


Wid. Because they are monstrous foolish, and know not how to use that should
try me.


Val. I was never answered thus, was you never drunk Lady?


Wid. No sure, not drunk sir; yet I love good wine, as I love health and joy
of heart, but temperately, why do you ask that question?


Val. For that sin that they most charge you with, is this sins servant, they
say you are monstrous.


Wid. What sir, what?


Val. Most strangely.


Wid. It has a name sure.


Val. Infinitely lustful, without all bounds, they swear you killed your husband.


Wid. Let us have it all for Heavens sake, it is good mirth sir.


Val. They say you will have four now, and those four stuck in four quarters,
like four winds to cool you; will she not cry nor curse?


Wid. On with your Story.


Val. And that you are forcing out of dispensations with sums of money to that
purpose.


Wid. Four husbands, should not I be blessed sir; for example, Lord, what should
I do with them? turn a malt-mill, or tithe them out like Town-buls to my
tenants, you come to make me angry, but you cannot.


Val. I Will make you merry then, you are a brave woman, and in despite of envy a
right one, go thy ways, truth thou art as good a woman, as any Lord of them
all can lay his leg over, I do not often commend your Sex.


Wid. It seems so, your commendations are so studied for.


Val. I came to see you, and sift you into flour to know your pureness, and I
have found you excellent, I thank you; continue so, and show men how to tread,
and women how to follow: get an husband, an honest man, you are a good woman,
and live hedged in from scandal, let him be too, an understanding man, and to
that steadfast; it is pity your fair Figure should miscarry, and then you are
fixed, farewell.


Wid. Pray stay a little, I love your company now you are so pleasant, and to
my disposition set so even.


Val. I can no longer.

Exit.
Wid. As I live a fine fellow, this manly handsome bluntness, shows him
honest; what is he, or from whence? bless me, four husbands, how prettily he
fooled me into vices, to stir my jealousy, and find my nature; a proper
Gentleman: I am not well oth' sudden, such a companion I could live and die
with, his angers are mere mirth.

Enter Isabella.
Isa. Come, come, I am ready.


Wid. Are you so?


Isa. What ails she, the Coach stays, and the people, the day goes on, I am as
ready now as you desire, sister: fie, who stays now, why do you sit and pout
thus.


Wid. Prithee be quiet, I am not well.


Isab. For Heave'n sake lets not ride staggering in the night, come, pray you
take some sweet meats in your pocket, if your stomach --


Wid. I have a little business.


Isab. To abuse me, you shall not find new dreams, and new suspicions, to
horse withal.


Wid. Lord who made you a Commander: hay ho, my heart.


Isab. Is the wind come thither, and coward like do you lose your colors to
um, are you sick ath Valentine; sweet sister, come lets away, the country will
so quicken you, and we shall live so swetly: Luce, my Ladies Cloak; nay, you
have put me into such a gog of going, I would not stay for all the world; If I
live here, you have so knocked this love into my head, that I shall love any
body, and I find my body, I know not how, so apt; pray lets be gonsister, I
stand on thorns.


Wid. I prithee Isabella, I faith I have some business that concerns me, I will
suspect no more, here, wear that for me, and I Will pay the hundred pound you owe
your Tailor.

Enter Shorthose I. Roger, Humphrey, Ralph.
Isab. I had rather go, but --


Wid. Come walk in with me, we will go to Cards, unsaddle the Horses.


Short. A Jubilee, a Jubilee, we stay boys.

Eter Uncle, Lan. Foun. Bella. Harebrain following.
Vnc. Are they behind us.


Lance. Close, close, speak aloud sir.


Vnc. I am glad my nephew has so much discretion at length to find his wants:
did she entertain him?


Lance. Most bravely, nobly, and gave him such a welcome.


Vnc. For his own sake do you think.


Lance. Most certain sir, and in his own cause bestir'd himself too, and wan
such liking from her, she doors on him, has the command of all the house
already.


Vnc. He deals not well with his friends.


Lance. Let him deal on, and be his own friend, he has most need of her.


Vnc. I wonder they would put him.


Lan. You are in the right ont, a man that must raise himself, I knew he would
cosenum, and glad I am he has: he watched occasion, and found it ith nick.


Vnc. He has deceived me.


Lan. I told you howsoever he wheeled about, he would charge home at length,
how I could laugh now, to think of these tame fools.


Vnc. It Was not well done, because they trusted him, yet.


Bell. Hark you Gentlemen.


Vnc. We are upon a business, pray excuse us, they have it home.


Lanc. Come let it work good on Gentlemen.

Exit Uncle, Lance.
Font. It Is true, he is a knave, I ever thought it.


Hare. And we are fools, tame fools.


Bell. Come lets go seek him, he shall be hanged before he colt us basely.

Exit. Entor Isabella, Luce.
Isa. Are sure she loves him.


Luce. Am I sure I live? And I have clapped on such a commenmendation on your
revenge.


Isa. Faith, he is a pretty Gentleman.


Luce. Handsome enough, and that her eye has found out,


Isa. He talks the best they say, and yet the maddest.


Luce. Has the right way.


Isa. How is she?


Luce. Bears it well, as if she cared not, but a man may see with half an eye
through all her forced behaviors, and find who is her Vallentine.


Isa. Come lets go see her, I long to prosecute.


Luce. By no means Mistress, let her take better hold first,


Jsab. I could burst now.

Exeunt. Enter Valentine, Fountain, Bellamore, Harebrain.
Val. Upbraid me with your benefits, you Pilchers, you shotten, sold, slight
fellows, was it not I that undertook you first from empty barrells, and
brought those barking mouths that gaped like bung-holes to utter sense: where
got you understanding? who taught you manners and apt carriage to rank your
selves? who filled you in fit Taverns, were those born with your worships when
yon came hither? what brought you from the Universities of moment matter to
allow you, besides your small base sentences?


Bell. It Is well sir.


Val. Long Cloaks with two hand-rapiers, boot-hoses with penny-poses, and
twenty fools opinions, who looked on you but piping rites that knew you would
be prising, and Prentises in Paul's Churchyard, that sented your want of
Brittanes Books.

Enter Widow, Luce, Harebrain.
Font. This cannot save you.


Val. Taunt my integrity you Whelps.


Bell. You may talk the stock we gave you out, but see no further.


Hare. You tempt our patience, we have found you out, and what your trust comes
to, yea'r well feathered, thank us, and think now of an honest course, it is
time; men now begin to look, and narrowly into your tumbling tricks, they are
stale.


Wid. Is not that he?


Luce It Is he.


Wid. Be still and mark him.


Val. How miserable will these poor wretches be when I forsake um, but things
have their necessities, I am sorry, to what a vomit must they turn again, now
to their own dear dunghill breeding; never hope after I cast you off, you men of
Motley, you most undone things below pity, any that has a soul and sixpence
dares releeve you, my name shall bar that blessing; there is your cloak sir keep
it close to you, it may yet preserve you a fortnight longer from the fool; your
hat, pray be covered, and there is the Satin that your Worships sent me, will
serve you at a Sizes yet.


Fount. Nay faith sir, you may ene rub these out now.


Val. No such relicke, nor the least rag of such a sordid weakness shall keep
me warm, these breeches are mine own, purchased, and paid for, without your
compassion, a Christian breeches founded in Black Friars, and so I Will maintain
um.


Hare. So they seem sir.


Val. Only the thirteen shillings in these breeches, and the odd groat, I take
it, shall be yours sir, a mark to know a Knave by, pray preserve it, do not
displease more, but take it presently, now help me off with my boots.


Hare. We are no grooms sir.


Val. For once you shall be, do it willingly, or by this hand He make you.


Bell. To our own sir, we may apply our hands.


Val. There Is your hangers, you may deserve a strong pair, and a grdle will hold
you without buckles; now I am perfect, and now the proudest of your worships
tell me I am beholding to you.


Fount. No such matter.


Val. And take heed how you pity me, it is dangerous, exceeding dangerous, to
prate of pity which are the poorer; you are now puppies; I without you, or you
without my knowledge be reugues, and so be gone, be rouges and reply not, for
if you do --


Bell. Only thus much, and then we will leave you, the air is far sharper than
our anger sir, and these you may reserve to rail in warmer.


Hare. Pray have a care sir of your health.

Exit Lovers.
Val. Yes Hog-hounds, more than you can have of your wits; it is cold, and I am
very sensible, extremely cold too, yet I will not off till I have shamed these
rascals; I have endured as ill heats as another, and every way if one could
perish my body, you will bear the blame ont; I am colder here, not a poor penny
left.

Uncle with a bag.
Vnc. Ta's taken rarely, and now he is flead he will be ruled.


Lance. Too him, tew him, abuse him, and nip him close.


Vnc. Why how now cozen, sunning your self this weather?


Val. As you see sir, in a hot fit, I thank my friends.


Vnc. But cozen, where are your clothes man, those are no inheritance, your
scruple may compound with those I-take it, this is no fashion cosen.


Val. Not much followed, I must confess; yet Uncle I determine to try what may
be done next Tarm.


Lanc. How came you thus sir, for you are strangely moved.


Val. Rags, toys and trifles, fit only for those fools that first passessed um,
and to those Knaves, they are rendered freemen Wicle, ought to appear like
innocents, old Adam, a fair Figleaf sufficient.


Vnc. Take me with you, were these your friends, that leat'd you thus.


Val. Hang friends, and even recknings that make friends.


Unc. I thought till now, there had been no such living, no such purchase, for
all the rest is labor, as a list of honorable friends, do not such men as you
sir, in lieu of all your understandings, travels, and those great gifts of
nature; aim at no more than casting off your-coats, I am strangely cosen'd.


Lance. Should not the town shake at the cold you feel now, and all the Gentry
suffer interdiction, no more sense spoken, all things Goth and Vandall, till
you be summed again, velvets and searlets, anointed with gold lace, and cloth
of silver turned into Spanish Cottens for a penance, wits blasted with your
bulls, and Tavernes withered, as though the Term lay at St Albones.


Val. Gentlemen, you have spoken long and level, I beseech you take breath a
while and hear me; you imagine now, by the twirling of your strings, that I am
at the last, as also that my friends are flown like Swallows after Summer.


Unc. Yes sir.


Val. And that I have no more in this poor pannier, to raise me up again above
your rents, Uncle.


Unc. All this I do believe.


Val. You have no mind to better me.


Unc. Yes Cosen, and to that end I come, and once more offer you all that my
power is master of.


Val. A match then, lay me down fifty pounds there.


Unc. There it is, sir.


Val. And on it write, that you are pleased to give this, as due unto my merit,
without caution of land redeeming, redious thanks, or thrift hereafter to be
hoped for.


Unc. How?

Luce lays a suit and letter at the door.
Val. Without daring, when you are drunk, to relish of revilings, to which you
are prone in sack, Uncle.


Unc. I thank you, sir.


Lance. Come, come away, let the young wanton play a while, away I say sir, let
him go forward with his naked fashion, he will seek you too morrow; goodly
weather, sultrie hot, sultrie, how I sweat.


Unc. Farewell, sir.


Unc. Farewell, sir.

Exeunt Uncle and Lance.
Val. Would I sweat too, I am monstrous vexed, and cold too; and these are but
thin pumps to walk the streets in; clothes I must get, this fashion will not
fadge with me; besides, it is an ill winter wear, -- What art thou? yes, they
are clothes, and rich ones, some fool has left um: and if I should utter --
what is this paper here? Let these be only worn by the most noble and deserving
Gentleman Valentine, -- dropped out oth' clouds; I think they are full of gold
too; well, I Will leave my wonder, and be warm again, in the next house I Will shift.
Exit.


Actus 4. Scaena. I.
Enter Francisco, Uncle, and Lance.
Fran. WHy do you deal thus with him? it is unnobly.


Unc. Peace Cosen peace, you are too tender of him, he must be dealt thus with,
he must be cured thus, the violence of his disease Francisco, must not be
jested with, it is grown infectious, and now strong Corrasives must cure him.


Lance. Has had a stinger, has eaten off his clothes, the next his skin comes.


Unc. And let it search him to the bones, it is better, twill make him feel it.


Lance. Where be his noble friends now? will his fantastical opinions cloth
him, or the learned Art of having nothing feed him?


Unc. It must needs greedily, for all his friends have flung him off, he is
naked, and where to skin himself again, if I know, or can devise how he
should get himself lodging, his spirit must be bowed, and now we have him, have
him at that we hoped for.


Lanc. Next time we meet him cracking of nuts, with half a cloak about him,
for all means are cut off, or borrowing sixpence, to show his bounty in the
pottage Ordinary?


Fran. Which way went he?


Lance. Pox, why should you ask after him, you have been trimmed already, let
him take his fortune, he spunne it out himself, sir, there is no pity.


Unc. Besides some good to you now, from this misery.


Fran. I rise upon his ruins, fie, fie, Uncle, fie honest Lance. those
Gentlemen were base people, that could so soon take fire to his destruction.


Unc. You are a fool, you are a fool, a young man

Enter Valentine.
Val. Morrow uncle, morrow Frank, sweet Frank, and how, and how dee, think
now, how show matters? morrow Bandog.


Unc. How?


Fran. Is this man naked, forsaken of his friends?


Val. Thou Art handsome, Frank, a pretty Gentleman, in faith thou look well,
and yet here may be those that look as handsome.


Lan. Sure he can conjure, and has the Devil for his Tailor.


Unc. New and rich, it is most impossible he should recover.


Lan. Give him this luck, and fling him into the Sea.


Unc. It Is not he, imagination cannot work this miracle.


Val. Yes, yes, it is he, I will assure you uncle, the very he, the he your
wisdom played withal, I thank you for it, neighed at his nakedness, and made
his cold and poverty your pastime; you see I live, and the best can do no more
uncle, and though I have no state, I keep the streets still, and take my
pleasure in the Town, like a poor Gentleman, wear clothes to keep me warm, poor
things they serve me, can make a show too if I list, yes uncle, and ring a peal
in my pockets, ding dong, uncle, these are mad foolish ways, but who can help
um?


Unc. I am amazed.


Lan. I Will sell my Copyhold, for since there are such excellent new nothings,
why should I labor, is there no Fairy haunts him, no Rat, nor no old woman.


Unc. You are Valentine.


Val. I think so, I cannot tell, I have been called so, and some say
Christened, why do you wonder at me, and swell, as if you had met a Sergeant
fasting, did you ever know desert want? you are fools, a little stoop there may
be to allay him, he would grow too rank else, a small eclipse to shadow him,
but out he must break, glowingly again, and with a great luster, look you
uncle, motion and majesty.


Unc. I am confounded.


Fran. I am of his faith.


Val. Walk by his careless kinsman, and turn again and walk, and look thus
Uncle, taking some one by the hand, he loves best, leave them to the mercy of
the hog-market, come Frank, Fortune is now my friend, let me instruct thee.


Fran. Good morrow Uncle, I must needs go with him.


Val. Flay me, and turn me out where none inhabits, within two hours, I shall
be thus again, now wonder on, and laugh at your own ignorance.

Ex. Val. and Franc.
Unc. I do believe him.


Lan. So do I, and heartily upon my conscience bury him stark naked, he would
rise again, within two hours imbroidered: sow mustard-seeds, and they cannot
come up so thick as his new sattens do, and clothes of silver, there is no
striving.


Unc. Let him play a while then, and let us seatch out what hand: ==


Lan. I there the game lies.

Exeunt. Enter Fountain, Bellamore and Harebraine.
Foun. Come, let us speak for our selves, we have lodged him sure enough, his
nakedness dare not peep out to crosfe us.


Bell. We can have no admittance.


Hare. Let Us in boldly, and use our best arts, who she dains to favor we are
all-content.


Foun. Much good may do her with him, no civil wars.


Bell. By no means, now do I wonder in what old tod Ivy he lies whistling for
means, nor clothes he has none, nor none will trust him, we have made that
side sure, teach him a new wooing.


Hare. Say it is his uncles spite.


Foun. It is all one Gentleman, 'tas rid us of a fair encumbrance, and makes us
look about to our own fortunes. Who are these?

Enter Isabel and Luce.
Isa. Not see this man yet, well, I shall be wiser: but Luce, didit ever know a
woman melt so? she is finely hurt to hunt.


Luce. Peace, the three Suitors.


Isa. I could so titter now and laugh, I was lost Luce, and I must love, I know
not what; O Cupid, what pretty gins thou have to halter Woodcocks, and we must
into the Country in all haste, Luce.


Luce. For Heavens sake, Mistress.


Isa. Nay, I have done, I must laugh though; but scholar, I shall teach you.


Foun. It Is her sister.


Bell. Seve you Ladies.


Isa. Fair met Gentlemen, you are visiting my sister, I assure my self.


Hare. We would fain bless our eyes.


Isab. Behold and welcome, you would see her:


Foun. It Is our business.


Isa. You shall see her, and you shall talk with her.


Luce. She will not see um, nor spend a word.


Isa. I Will make her frat a thousand, nay now I have found the sab, I will so
scratch her.


Luc. She cannot endure um.


Isab. She loves um but too dearly, come follow me, I Will bring you tot'h party
Gentlemen, then make your own conditions.


Luce. See is sick you know.


Isa. I Will make her well, or kill her, and take no idle answer, you are fools
then, nor stand off for her state, she will scorn you all then, but urge her
still, and though she fret, still follow her, a Widow must be won so.


Bell. She speaks bravely.


Isa. I would fain have a brother in law, I love men's company, and if she call
for dinner to avoid you, be sure you stay, follow her into her chamber, if she
retire to Pray, pray with her, and boldly, like honest lovers.


Luce. This will kill her.


Foun. You have showed us one way, do but lead the the other.


Isa. I know you stand a thorns, come I Will dispatch you.


Luce. If you live after this.


Isa. I have lost my aim.

Enter Vallentine and Francisco.
Fra. Did you not see um since.


Val. No hang um, hang um.


Fran. Nor will you not be seen by um:


Val. Let um alone Francke, I Will make um their own justice, and a jerker.


Fran. Such base discourteous Dog-whelps


Val. I shall dog um, and double dog um, ere I have done.


Fran. Will you go with me, for I whuld fain find out this piece of bounty,
it was the Widows man that I am certain of.


Val. To what end would you go.


Frau. To give thanks.


Val. Hang giving thanks, have not thou part deserves it, it includs to a
further will to be beholding, beggees can do no more at Door, if you will go,
there lies your way.


Fran. I hoye^ you will go.


Val. No not in ceremony, and to a woman, with mine own father, were he living
Frank; I would tot'h Court with Bears first, if it be that wench, I think it
is, for to others wiser, I would not be so looked upon, and laughed at, so made a
ladder for her wit, to climb upon, for it is the tartest tit in Christendom, I
know her well Francke, and have buckled with her, so lick, and ^reaked, fleard
upon, and flouted, and shown to Chambermaids, like a strange beast, she had
purchased with her penny.


Fran. You are a strange man, but do you think it was a woman.


Val. There Is no doubt ont, who can be there to do it else, besides the manner
of the circumstances.


Fran. Then such courtesies, who ever dos um fit, ^^^ing your own wisdom, must
be more looked into, and better answered, then with deserving slights, or what
we ought to have con^^^red upon us, men may starve else, means are not gotten
now with crying out I am a gallant fellow, a good Soldier, a man of learning,
or fit to be employed, immediate blessings, cease like miracles, and we must
grow, by second means, I pray go with me, even as you love me sir.


Val. I will come to thee, but Francke, I will not stay to hear your fopperies,
dispatch those ere I come.


Fran. You will not fail me.


Val. Some two hours hence expect me.


Fran. I thank you, and will look for you.

Exeunt Enter Widow, Shorthose, and Roger.
Wid. Who let in these puppies, you blind rascals, you drunken Knaves several.


Short. Yes forsooth, I Will let um in presently, -- Gentlemen,


Wid. Sprecious, you blown Pudding, bawling Rogue.


Short. I bawl as loud as I can, would you have me fetch um upon my back.


Wid. Get um out rascal, out with um, out, I sweat to have um near me.


Short. I should sweat more to carry um out.


Rog. They are Gentlemen Madam:


Short. Shall we get um intot'h butterie, and make um drink.


Wid. Do any thing, so I be eased.

Enter Isabel, Fount. Balla. Hare.
Isab. Now too her sir, fear nothing.


Rog. Slip aside bay, I know she loves um, howsoever she carries it, and has
invited um, my young Mistress told me so.


Short. A way to tables then.

Exeunt.
Isab. I shall burst with the sport ont.


Fount. You are too curious Madam, too full of preparation, we expect it not.


Bella. Me thinks the house is handsome, every place decent, what need you be
vexed?


Hare. We are no strangers.


Fonnt. What though we come ere you expected us, do not we know your
entertainments Madam are free, and full at all times.


Wid. You are merry Gentlemen.


Bell. We come to be merry Madam, and very merry, men love to laugh heartily,
and now and then Lady a little of our old plea.


Wid. I am busy, and very busy too, will none deliver me?


Hare. There is a time for all, you may be busy, but when your friends come,
you have as much power Madam.


Wid. This is a tedious torment.


Foun. How hansomly this little piece of anger shows upon her, well Madam
well, you know not how to grace your self.


Bell. Nay every thing she does breeds a new sweetness.


Wid. I must go up, I must go up, I have a business waits upon me, some wine
for the Gentlemen.


Hare. Nay, we will go with you, we never saw your chambers yet.


Isab. Hold there boys.


Wid. Say I go to my prayers.


Foun. We Will pray with you, and help your meditations.


Wid. This is boystrous, or say I go to sleep, will you go to sleep with me.


Bell. So suddenly before meat will be dangerous, we know your dinners ready
Lady, you will not sleep.


Wid. Give me my Coach, I will take the air,


Hare. We Will wait on you, and then your meat after a quickened stomach.


Wid. Let it alone, and call my Steward to me, and bid him bring his reckonings
into the Orchard, these unmannerly rude puppies --

Exit Widow.
Fonn. We Will walk after you and view the pleasure of the place.


Isa. Let her not rest, for if you give her breath, she will scorn and flout you,
seem how she will, this is the way to win her, be bold and prosper.


Bella. Nay if we do not tire her. --

Exeunt.
Isab. I Will teach you to worm me, good Lady sister, and peep into my privacies
to suspect me, I Will torture, you, with that you hate most daintily, and when I
have done that, laugh at that you love most.

Enter Luce.
Luce. What have you done, she chafes and fumes outragiously, and still they
persecute her.


Isab. Long may they do so, I Will teach her to declaim against my pities, why is
she not gone out ot'h town, but gives ocoasion for men to run mad after her.


Luc. I shall be hanged.


Isa. This in me had been high treason, three at a time, and private in her
Orchard, I hope she will cast her reckonings right now.

Enter Widow.
Wid. Well, I shall find who brought um.


Isa. Ha, ha, ha.


Wid. Why do you laugh sister, I fear me it is your trick, it was neatly done of
you, and well becomes your pleasure.


Isab. What have you done with um.


Wid. Locked umith Orchard, there I Will make um dance and caper too, before they
get their liberty, unmannerly rude puppies.


Isa. They are somewhat saucy, but yet I Will let um out, and once more sound um,
Why were they not beaten out.


Wid. I was about it, but because they came as suitors.


Isab. Why did you not answer um.


Wid. They are so impudent they will receive none: More yet, how came these in.

Enter Francisco and Lance.
Lan. At the door Madam.


Isab. It is that face.


Luc. This is the Gentleman.


Wid. She sent the money too.


Luce. The same.


Isa. I Will leave you, they have some business.


Wid. Nay, you shall stay sister, they are strangers both to me; how her face
alters?


Isa. I am sorry he comes now.


Wid. I am glad he is here now though, who would you speak with, Gentlemen?


Lan. You Lady, or your fair sister there, here is a Gentleman that has received
a benefit.


Wid. From whom, sir?


Lan. From one of you, as he supposes Madam, your man delivered it.


Wid. I pray go forward.


Lan. And of so great a goodness, that he dares not, without the tender of his
thanks and service, pass by the house.


Wid. Which is the Gentleman?


Lan. This, Madam.


Wid. What Is your name, sir?


Fran. They that know me, call me Francisco Lady, one not so proud to scorn so
timely a benefit, nor so wretched to hide a gratitude.


Wid. It is well bestowed then.


Fran. Your fair self, or your sister as it seems, for what desert I dare not
know, unless a handsome subject for your charities, or aptness in your noble
will to do it, have showred upon my wanrs a timely bounty, which makes me rich
in thanks, my best inheritance.


Wid. I am sorry 'twas not mine, this is the Gentlewoman, fie, do not blush,
go roundly to the matter, the man is a pretty man.


Isa. You have three fine ones.


Fran. Then to you, dear Lady.


Isa. I pray no more sir, if I may persuade you, your only aptness to do this
is recompense, and more than I expected.


Fran. But good Lady.


Isa. And for me further to be acquainted with it, besides the imputation of
vain glory, were greedy thankings of my self, I did it not to be more affected
to; I did it, and if it happened where I thought it fitted, I have my end; more
to enquire is curious in either of us, more than that suspicious:


Fran. But gentle Lady, 'twill be necessary.


Isa. About the right way nothing, do not fright it, being to pious use and
tender sighted, with the blown face of Complements, it blasts it, had you not
come at all, but thought thanks; it had been too much, 'twas not to see your
person.


Wid. A brave dissembling rogue, and how she carries it.


Isa. Though I believe few handsomer; or hear you, though I affect a good
tongue well; or try you, though my years desire a friend, that I relieved you.


Wid. A plaguie cunning queen.


Isa. For so I carried it, my ends too glorious in mine eyes, and bartered the
goodness I propounded with opinion.


Wid. Fear her not, Sir.


Isa. You cannot catch me, sister.


Fran. Will you both teach, and tie my tongue up Lady?


Isa. Let it suffice you have it, it was never mine, whilst good men wanted it.


Lan. This is a Saint sure.


Isa. And if you be not such a one, restore it.


Fran. To commend my self, were more officious than you think my thanks are, to
doubt I may be worth your gift a treason, both to mine own good and
understanding, I know my mind clear, and though modesty tells me, he that
entreats, intrudes; yet I must think something, and of some season, met with
your better taste, this had not been else.


Wid. What ward for that, wench?


Isa. Alas, it never touched me.


Fran. Well, gentle Lady, yours is the first money I ever took upon a forced
ill manners.


Isa. The last of me, if ever you use other.


Fran. How may I do, and your way to be thought a grateful taker,


Isa. Spend it, and say nothing, your modesty may deserve more.


Wid. O sister, will you bar thankfulness?


Isa. Dogs dance for meat, would you have men do worse, for they can speak,
cry out like VVood-mongers, good deeds by the hundreds, I did it that my best
friend should not know it, wine and vain glory does as much as I else, if you
will force my merit, against my meaning, use it in well bestowing it, in
showing it came to be a benefit, and was so; and not examining a woman did it,
or to what end, in not believing sometimes your self, when drink and stirring
conversation may ripen strange persuasions.


Fran. Gentle Lady, I were a base receiver of a courtesy, and you a worse
disposer, were my nature unfurnished of these fore-sights, Ladies honors were
ever in my thoughts, unspotted crimes, their good deeds holy temples, where the
incense burns not, to common eyes your fears are virtuous, and so I shall
preserve um.


Isa. Keep but this way, and from this place to tell me so, you have paid me;
and so I wish you see all fortune.

Exit.
Wid. Fear not, the woman will be thanked, I do not doubt it, are you so
crafty, carry it so precisely, this is to wake my fears, or to abuse me, I
shall look narrowly, despair not Gentlemen, there is an hour to catch a woman
in, if you be wise, so, I must leave you too: Now will I go laugh at my Suitors,

Exit.
Lan. Sir, what courage?


Fran. This woman is a founder, and cites statutes to all her benefits.


Lan. I never knew yet, so few years and so cunning, yet believe me she has an
itch, but how to make her confess it, for it is a crafty Tit, and plays
about you will not bite home, she would fain, but she dares not; carry your
self but so discreetly sir, that want or wantonness seem not to search you,
and you shall see her open.


Fran. I do love her, and were I rich, would give two thousand pound to wed her
wit but one hour, oh it is a dragon, and such a spritely way of pleasure, ha
Lance.


Lan. Your ha Lance broken once, you would cry, ho, ho, Lance.


Fran. Some leaden landed rogue will have this wench now, when all is done, some
such youth will carry her, and wear her greasy out like stuff, some Dunce
that knows no more but markets, and admires nothing but a long charge at
Sizes: O the fortunes.

Enter Isabel and Luce.
Lan. Comfort your self.


Luce. They are here yet, and a love too, boldly upon it; nay, Mistress, I
still told you, how it would find your trust, this it is to venture your charity
upon a boy.


Lan. Now, what is the matter? stand fast, and like your self.


Isa. Prithee no more wench.


Luce. What was his want to you.


Isa. It Is true.


Luce. Or misery, or say he had been in the Cage, was there no mercy to look
abroad but yours?


Isa. I am paid for fooling.


Luce. Must every slight companion that can purchase a show of poverty and
beggarly planet fall under your compassion.


Lance. Here Is a new matter.


Luce. Nay, you are served but too well, here he stays yet, yet as I live.


Fran. How her face alters on me?


Luce. Out of a confidence I hope.


Isa. I am glad on it.


Fran. How do you gentle Lady?


Isa. Much ashamed sir, but first stand further off me, you are infectious to
find such vanity, nay almost impudence, where I believe a worth: is this your
thanks, the gratitude you were so mad to make me, your trim counsel Gentlemen?


Lanc. What, Lady?


Isa. Take your device again, it will not serve sir, the woman will not bite,
you are finely cosened, drop it no more for shame.


Luce. Do you think you are here sir amongst your wastcoateers, your base
wenches that scratch at such occasions; you are deluded: This is a Gentlewoman
of a noble house, born to a better fame than you can build her, and eyes above
your pitch.


Fran. I do acknowledge --


Isa. Then I beseech you sir, what could 'see, speak boldly, and speak truly,
shame the Devil, in my behavior of such easiness that you durst venture to do
this.


Fran. You amaze me, this Ring is none of mine, nor did I drop it.


Luce. I saw you drop it, sir.


Isa. I took it up too, still looking when your modesty should miss it, why,
what a childish part was this?


Fran. I vow.


Isa. Vow me no vows, he that dares do this, has bred himself to boldness, to
forswear too; there take your gewgaw, you are too much pampered, and I repent
my part, as you grow older grow wiser if you can, and so farewell sir.

Exit Isabella and Luce.
Lan. Grow wiser if you can, she has put it to you, it is a rich Ring, did you
drop it?


Fran. Never, nere see it before Lance.


Lan. Thereby hangs a tail then: what slight she makes to catch her self, look
up sir, you cannot lose her if you would, how daintily she flies upon the Lure,
and cunningly she makes her stops, whistle and she will come to you.


Fran. I would I were so happy.


Lan. Maids are Clocks, the greatest Wheel they show, goes slowest to us, and
mak's hang on tedious hopes; the lesser, which alre concealed being often oiled
with wishes, flee like defires, and never leave that motion, till the tongue
strikes; she is flesh, blood and marrow, young as her purpose; and soft as
pity; no Monument to worship, but a mould to make men in, a neat one, and I
know how ere she appears now, which is near enough, you are stark blind if you
hit not soon at night; she would venture forty pounds more but to feel a Flea
in your shape bite her: drop no more Rings forsooth, this was the prettiest
thing to know her heart by.


Fran. Thou puts me in much comfort.


Lan. Put your self in good comfort, if she do not point you out the way, drop
no more rings, she will drop her self into you.


Fran. I wonder my brother comes not.


Lan. Let him alone, and feed your self on your own fortunes; come be
frollicke, and lets be monstrous wise and full of council. drop no more Rings.

Exit. Enter Widow, Fountain, Bellamore, Harebrain.
Wid. If you will needs be foolish you must be used so: who sent for you? who
entertained you Gentlemen? who bid you welcome hither? you came crowding, and
impudently bold; press on my patience, as if I kept a house for all Companions,
and of all sorts will 'have your wills, will'vexe me and force my liking from
you, I nere owe'd you.


Fount. For all this we will dine with you.


Bell. And for all this will have a better answer from you.


Wid. You shall never, neither have an answer nor dinner, unless you use me
with a more staid respect, and stay your time too.

Enter Isabella, Shorthose, Roger, Humpherey, Ralph, with dishes of meat.
Isab. Forward with the meat now.


Rog. Come Gentlemen march fairly.


Short. Roger, you are a weak Servingman, your white broth runs from you; fie,
how I sweat under this Pile of Beef; an Elephant can do more! Oh for such a
back now, and in these times, what might a man arrive at, Goose, grase you up,
and Woodcock march behind thee, I am almost foundred.


Wid. Who bid you bring the meat yet? away you knaves, I will not dine these
two hours, how am I vexed and chafed; go carry it back and tell the Cook, he is
an arrant Rascal, to send before I called.


Short. Faces about Gentlemen, beat a mournful march then, and give some
supporters, I or else perish --

Exeunt Servants.
Isab. It does me much good to see her chafe thus.


Hare. We can stay Madam, and will stay and dwell here, it is good Air.


Foun. I know you have beds enough, and meat you never want.


Wid. You want a little.


Bell. We dare to pretend no, Since you are churlish, we will give you Physic,
you must purge this anger, it burns you and decavs you.


Wid. If I had you out once, I would be at charge of a percullis for you.

Enter Vallantine.
Val. Good morrow noble Lady.


Wid. Good morrow sir, how sweetly now he looks, and how full manly, what
slaves was these to use him so.


Val. I come to look a young man I call brother.


Wid. Such a one was here sir, as I remember your own brother, but gone almost
an hour ago.


Val. Good e'n then.


Wid. You must not so soon sir, here be some Gentlemen, it may be you are
acquainted with um.


Hare. Will nothing make him miserable?


Foun. How glorious!


Bell. It is the very he, does it rain fortunes, or has he a familiar.


Hare. How doggedly he looks too.


Foun. I am beyond my faith, pray lets be going.


Val. Where are these Gentlemen?


Wid. Here.


Val. Yes I know um, and will be more familiar.


Bell. Morrow Maddam.


Wid. Nay stay and dine.


Val. You shall stay till I talk with you, and not dine neither, but fastingly
my fury, you think you have undone me, think so still, and swallow that
belief, till you be company for Courthand Clerks, and starved Atturnies, till
you break in at plays like Prentises for three a groat, and crack Nuts with
the Scholars in penny Rooms again, and fight for Apples, till you return to what
I found you, people betrayed into the hands of Fencers, Challengers,
Tooth-drawers Bills, and tedious Proclamations in Meal-markets, with throngings
to see Cutpurses: stir not, but hear, and mark, I Will cut your throats else, till
Water works, and rumors of New Rivers rld you again and run you into questions
who built Thames, till you run mad for Lotteeries, and stand there with your
tables to glean the golden Sentences, and cite um secretly to Servingmen for
sound Essays, till Tavernes allow you but a Towel room to Tipple in Wine, that
the Bell has gone for twice, and Glasses that look like broken promises, tied
up with wicker protestations, English Tobacco with half Pipes, nor in half a
year once burnt, and Biscuit that Bawds have rubbed their gums upon like Coralls
to bring the mark again. tell these hour Rascals so, this most fatal hour will
come again, think I sit down the looser.


Wid. Will you stay Gentlemen, a piece of Beef and a cold Capon, that's all, you
know you are welcome.


Hum. That was cast to abuse us.


Bell. Steal off, the devil is in his anger.


Wid. Nay I am sure you will not leave me so discourteously now I have provided
for you.


Val. What do you here? why do ye vex a woman of her goodness, her state and
worth; can you bring a fair certifificate that you deserve to be her footmen;
husbands, you pupies, husbands for Whores and Bawds, away you wind suckers; do
not look big, nor prate, nor stay, nor grumble, and when you are gone, seem to
laugh at my fury, and slght this Lady, I shall hear, and knw this: and though I
am not bound to fight for women, as far as they are good I dare preserve um: be
not too bold, for if you be, I Will swinge you monstrously without all pity, your
honors now go, avoid me mainly.

Exeunt.
Wid. Well sir, you have delivered me, I thank you, and with your nobleness
prevented danger, their tongues might utter, weell all go and eat sir.


Val. No, no I dare not trust my self with women, go to your meat, eat little,
take less ease, and tie your body to a daily labor, you may live honstly, and
so I thank you.

Exit.
Wid. Well go thy ways, thou art a noble fellow, and some means I must work to
have thee know it.

Exit.
Actus 5. Scaena. 1.
Enter Uncle and Merchant.
Vnc. MOst certain it is, her hands that hold him up, and her sister relieves
Franck.


Mer. I am glad to hear it: but wherefore do they not pursue this fortune to
some fair end?


Vnc. The women are too crafty, Valantine too coy, and Frank too bashful,
had any wise man hold of such a blessing, they would strike it out oth' flint
but they would form it.

Enter Widow and Shorthose.
Mer. The Widow sure, why does she stir so early.


Wid. It Is strange, I cannot force him to understand me, and m make a benefit,
of what I would bring him, tell my sift r i will use any devocions at home this
morning, she may if she please go to Church.


Short. Hay ho.


Wid. And do you wait upon her with torch sir?


Short. Hay ho.


Wid. You lazy Knave.


Short. Here is such a tinkle tanklings that we can here lie quiet, and sleep
our prayers out, Ralph pray empty my right shoe that you mide your
Chamber Pot, and burn a little Rosemarie in it, I must wait upon my Lady. This
morning Prayer has brought me into a consumption, I have nothing left but flesh
and bones about me.


Wid. You drousie slave, nothing but sleep and swilling.


Short. Had you been bitten with Bandog fleas, as I have been, and haunted with
the night Mare.


Wid. With an Ale-pot.


Short. You would have little list to morning Prayers, pray take my fellow
Ralph, he has a Psalm book, I am an ingrum man.


Wid. Get you ready quickly, and wen she is ready wait upon her handsomely; no
more, be gone.


Short. If I do snore my part out --

Exit Short.
Unc. Now to our purposes.


Mer. Good morrow, Madam,


Wid. Good morrow, Gentlemen.


Unc. Good joy and fortune.


Wid. These are good things, and worth my thanks, I thank you sir.


Mer. Much joy I hope youl'l find, we came to gratulate your new knit
marriage-band.


Wid. How?


Unc. He Is a Gentleman, although he be my kinsman, my fair Niece.


Wid. Niece, Sir?


Unc. Yes Lady, now I may say so, it is no shame to you, I say a Gentleman, and
winking at some light fancies, which you most happily may affect him for, as
bravely carried, as nobly bred and managed.


Wid. What Is all this, I understand you not, what Niece, what marriage-knot?


Unc. I Will tell plainly, you are my Niece, and Valentine the Gentleman has made
you so by marriage.


Wid. Marriage?


Vnc. Yes Lady, and it was a noble and virtuous part, to take a falling man to
your protection, and bouy him up again to all his glories.


Wid. The men are mad.


Mer. What though he wanted these outward things, that fly away like shadows,
was not his mind a full one, and a brave one? You have wealth enough to give
him gloss and outside, and he wit enough to give way to love a Lady.


Vnc. I ever thought he would do well.


Mer. Nay, I knew how ever he wheeled about like a loose Cabine, he would
charge home at length, like a brave Gentleman; Heavens blessing a your heart
Lady, we are so bound to honor you, in all your service so devoted to you.


Unc. Do not look so strange Widow, it must be known, better a general joy; no
stirring here yet, come, come, you cannot hide um.


Wid. Pray be not impudent, these are the finest toys, belike I am married
then.


Mer. You are in a miserable estate in the worlds account else, I would not for
your wealth it come to doubting.


Wid. And I am great with child?


Vnc. No, great they say not, but it is a full opinion you are with child, and
great joy among the Gentlemen, your husband has bestirred himself fairly.


Mer. Alas, we know his private hours of entrance, how long, and when he
stayed, could name the bed too, where he paid down his first fruits.


Wid. I shall believe anon.


Vnc. And we consider for some private reasons, you would have it private, yet
take your own pleasure; and so good morrow, my best Niece, my sweetest.


Wid. No, no, pray stay.


Vnc. I know you would be with him, love him, and love him well.


Mer. You Will find him noble, this may beget --


Unc. It must needs work upon her.

Exit Unc. and Mer.
Wid. These are fine bobs in faith, married, and with child too, how long has
this been, I trow? they seem grave fellows, they should not come to flout;
married, and bedded, the world takes notice too, where lies this May Game? I
could be vexed extremely now, and rail too, but it is to no end, though I itch a
little, must I be scratcht I know not how, who waits there?

Enter Humphrey, a servant.
Hum. Madam.


Wid. Make ready my Coach quickly, and wait you only, and hark you sir, be
secret and speedy, inquire out where he lies.


Hum. I shall do it, Madam.

Exit.
Wid. Married, and got with child in a dream, it is fine in faith, sure he that
did this, would do better waking.

Exit. Enter Valentine, Fran. Lance, and a boy with a torch.
Val. Hold thy torch handsomely, how do thou Francke? Peter Bassell, bear up.


Fran. You have fried me soundly, Sack do you call this drink?


Val. A shrewd dog, Francke, will bite abundantly.


Lan. Now could I fight, and fight with thee.


Val. With the, thou man of Memphis.


Lan. But that thou art mine own natural master, yet my sack says thou art no
man, thou art a Pagan, and pawnest thy land, which a noble cause.


Val. No arms, nor arms, good Lancelot, dear Lanec, no fighting here, we will
have lands boy, livings, and titles, thou shall be a Vice Roy, hang fighting,
hang, it is out of fashion.


Lan. I would fain labor you into your lands again, go too, it is behoovefull.


Fran. Fie Lance, fie.


Lan. I must beat some body, and why not my master, before a stranger, charity
and beating begins at home.


Val. Come, thou shall beat me.


Lan. I will not be compeld, and you were two masters, I scorn the motion.


Val. Will thou sleep?


Lan. I scorn sleep.


Val. Will thou go cat?


Lan. I scorn meat, I come for rompering, I come to wait upon my charge
discreetly; for look you, if you will not take your morgage again, here do I
lie Saint George, and so forth.


Val. An here do I St. George, bestride the Dragon, thus with my Lance.


Lan. I sting, I sting with my tail.


Val. Do you so, do you so, Sir, I shall tail you presently.


Fran. By no means, do not hurt him.


Val. Take this Nelson, and now rise, thou maiden Knight of Malligo, lace on
thy helmet of enchanted sack, and charge again.


Lan. I play no more, you abuse me, will you go?


Fran. I Will bid you good morrow Brother, for sleep I cannot, I have a thousand
fancies.


Val. Now thou art arrived, go bravely to the matter, and do something of worth
Frank.


Lan. You shall hear from us.

Exit Lance and Frank.
Val. This rogue, if he had been sober, sure had beaten me, is the most terrish
Knave.

Enter Uncle and Merchant: May with a torch.
Vnc. It Is he.


Mer. Good morrow.


Val. Why sir, good morrow to you too, and you be so lusty.


Unc. You have made your brother a fine man, we met him.


Val. I made him a fine Gentleman, he was a fool before, brought up amongst
the midst of small Beer Brew-houses, what would you have with me?


Mer. I come to tell you, your latest hour is come.


Val. Are you my sentence?


Mer. The sentence of your state.


Val. Let it be hanged then, and let it be hanged high enough, I may not see it.


Unc. A gracious resolution.


Val. What would you have else with me, will you go drink, and let the world
slide Uncle? Ha, ha, ha, boys, drink sack like whey boys.


Mer. Have you no feeling, sir?


Val. Come hither Merchant: make me a supper, thou most reverent Land-catcher,
a supper of forty pounds.


Mer. What then, Sir?


Val. Then bring thy wife along, and thy fair sisters, thy neighbors and their
wives, and all their trinkets, let me have forty trumpets, and such wine,
we'll laugh at all the miseries of morgage, and then in state I Will render thee
an answer.


Mer. What say you to this?


Unc. I dare not say, nor think neither.


Mer. Will you redeem your state, speak to the point, Sir?


Val. Not, not if it were mine heir in the Turks galleys.


Mer. Then I must take an order,


Val. Take a thousand, I will not keep it, nor thou shall not have it, because
thou came in the nick, thou shall not have it, go take possession, and be sure
you hold it, hold fast with both hands, for there be those hounds uncoupled,
will ring you such knell, go down in glory, and march upon my land, and cry,
All Is mine; cry as the Devil did, and be the Devil mark what what an echo
follows, build fine March panes, to entertain Sir Silkworm and his Lady, and
pull the Chapel down, and raise a Chamber for Mistress Silver-pin, to lay
her belly in, mark what an Earthquake comes, then foolish Merchant my Tenants
are no Subjects, they obey nothing, and they are people too, never Chistened,
they know no Law, nor conscience, they will devour thee: and thou mortal, the
stopple, they will confound thee within three days; no bit nor memory of what
thou were, no not the wart upon thy nose there, shall be ere heard of more, go
take possession, and bring thy children down, to roast like Rabbets, they love
young toasts and butter, Bow-bell Suckers; as they love mischief, and hate Law,
they are Cambals: bring down thy kindred too, that be not fruitful, there be
those Mandrakes that will mollify um, go take possession, I Will go to my
Chamber, before boy go.

Exeunt.
Mer. He Is mad sure.


Unc. He Is half drunk sure, and yet I like this unwillingnesse to lose it,
this looking back.


Mer. Yes, if he did it handsomely, but he is so harsh and strange.


Unc. Believe it it is his drink sir, and I am glad his drink has thrust it out.


Mer. Canibals; if ever I come to view his regiment, if fair terms may be had.


Vnc. He tells you true sir, They are a bunch of the most boystrous Rascals
disorder ever made, let um be mad once, the power of the whole Country cannot
cool um, be patient but a while.


Mer. As long as you will sir, before I buy a bargain of such Runts, I Will buy a
College for Baers, and live among um..

Enter Franscisco, Lance, boy with a Torch.
Fran. How do thou now.


Lan. Better then I was, and straighter, but my heads a Hogs-head still, it
rowls and tumbles.


Fran. Thou were cruelly paid.


Lan. I may live to requite it, put a Snaffle of Sack in my mouth and then ride
me very well.


Fran. It Was all but sport, I Will tell thee what I mean now, I mean to see this
wench.


Lan. Where a devil is she, and there were two, 'twere better.


Fran. Do thou hear the bell ring.


Lan. Yes, yes.


Fran. Then she comes to prayers, early each morning thither: Now if I could
but meet her, for I am of another mettle now.

Enter Isabel, and Shorthose with a Torch.
Lan. What lights yond.


Fran. Ha, it is a light, take her by the hand and court her.


Lan. Take her below the girdle, you will never speed else, it comes on this way
still, oh that I had but such an opportunity in a Saw-pit, how it comes on,
comes on, it is here.


Fran. It Is she, fortune I kiss thy hand -- Good morrow Lady.


Isa. What voice is that sir, do you sleep as you go, it is he, I am glad ont,
why Shorthose.


Short. Yes forsooth, I was dreamt, I was going to Church.


Lan. She sees yon as plain as I do.


Isa. Hold thy torch up.


Short. Here Is nothing but a stall, and a Butchers Dog asleep in it, where did
you see the voice.


Fran. She looks still angry.


Lan. To her and meet sir.


Isa. Here, here.


Fran. Yes Lady, never bless your solf, I am but a man, and like an honest man,
now I will thank you.


Isa. What do you mean, who sent for you, who desired you.


Short. Shall I put out the Torch forsooth.


Isa. Can I not go about my private meditations, Ha, but such companions as you
must ruffle me, you had best go with me sir.


Fran. It Was my purpose.


Isa. Why, what an impudence is this, you had best, being so near the Church,
provide a Priest, and persuade me to marry you.


Fran. It was my meaning, and such a husband, so loving, and so careful, my
youth, and all my fortunes shall arrive at -- -- Hark you.


Isa. It Is strange you should be thus unmannerly, turn home again sir, you had
best now force my man to lead your way.


Lan. Yes marry shall a, Lady, forward my friend.


Isab. This is a pretty Riot, it may grow to a rape.


Fran. Do you like that better, I can ravish you an hundred times, and never
hurt you.


Short. I see nothing I am a sleep still, when you have done tell me, and then
I Will wake Mistress.


Isab. Are you in earnest Sir, do you long to be hanged.


Fran. Yes by my troth Lady in these fair Tresses.


Isa. Shall I call out for help.


Fran. No by no means, that were a weak trick Lady, I Will kiss, and stop your
mouth.


Isa. You Will answer all these.


Fran. A thousand kisses more.


Isa. I was never abused thus, you had best give out too, that you found me
willing, and say I doted on you.


Fran. That Is known already, and no man living shall now carry you from me.


Isa. This is fine in faith.


Fran. It shall be ten times finer.


Isab. Well, seeing you are so valiant, keep your way, I will to Church.


Fran. And I will wait upon you.


Isab. And it is most likely there is a Priest, if you dare venture as you
profess, I would Wish you look about you, to do these rude tricks, for you know
the recompenses, and trust not to my mercy.


Fram. But I will Lady.


Isa. For I Will so handle you.


Fran. That's it I look for.


Lan. Before thou dream.


Shor. Have you done.


Isa. Go on sir, and follow if you dare.


Fran. If I do not hang me.


Lan. It Is all thine own boy, an were a million, god a mercy Sack, when would
small Beer have done this.

Exeunt. Knocking within. Enter Vallentine.
Val. Whose that that knocks and bounces, what a Devil alles you, is hell broke
loose, or do you keep an Iron mill.

Enter a Servant.
Ser. It Is a Gentlewoman sir that must needs speak with you.


Val. A Gentlewoman, what Gentlewoman, what have I to do with Gentlewomen?


Ser. She will not be answered Sir.


Val. Fling up the bed and let her in, I Will try how gentle she is -- Exit
Servant. This Sack has filled my head so full of bables, I am almost mad; what
Gentlewoman should this be, I hope she has brought me no butter prins along
with her to lay to my charge, if she have it is all one, I Will for wear it.

Enter Widow.
Wid. O you are a noble Gallant, send off your servant pray.

Exit Servant.
Val. She will not ravish me, by this light she looks as sharp set a Sparrow
hawk, what would thou woman.


Wid. O you have used me kindly, and like a Gentleman, this is to trust to you.


Val. Trust to me, for what?


Wid. Because I said in jest once, you were a handsome man, one I could like
well, and fooling, made you believe I loved you, and might be brought to marry.


Val. The widow is drunk too.


Wid. You out of this, which is a fine discretion, give out the matter's done,
you have won and wed me, and that you have put fairly put for an heir too,
these are fine rumors to advance my credit; in the name of mischief what did you
mean?


Val. That you loved me, and that you might be brought to marry me; why, what
a Devil do you mean, widow?


Wid. 'Twas a fine trick too, to tell the world though you had enjoyed your
first wish, you wished the wealth you aimed at, that I was poor, which is most
true, I am, have fold my lands, because I love not those vexations, yet for
mine honors sake, if you must be prabing and for my credits sake in the Town.


Val. I tell thee widow, I like thee ten times better, now thou have no Lands,
for now thy hopes and cares, Lie on thy husband, if ere thou marry est more.


Wid. Have not you married me, and for this main cause, now as you report it
to be your Nurse.


Val. My Nurse, why, what am I grown too, give me the Glass, my Nurse.


Wid. You nere said truer, I must confess I did a little favor you, and with
some labor, might have been persuaded, but when I found I must be hourly
troubled, with making broths, and dawbing your dacaies with swaddling, and with
stiching up your ruins, for the world so reports.


Val. Do not provoke me.


Wid. And half an eye may see.


Val. Do not provoke me, the worlds a lying world, and thou shall sinde it,
have a good heart, and take a strong faith to thee, and mark what follows, my
Nurse, yes, you shall rock me: Widow I Will keep you waking.


Wid. You are disposed sir.


Val. Yes marry am I Widow, and you shall fell it, nay and they touch my
freehold, I am a Tiger.


Wid. I think so.


Val. Come.


Wid. Whither?

Sings.
Val. Any Whither.
The fit's upon me now, the fit's upon me now,
Come quickly gentle Lady, the fit's upon me now,
The world shall know they are fools,
And so shall thou do too,
Let the Cobbler meddle with his tools,
The fits upon me now
Take me quickly, while I am in this vein, away with me, for if I have but two
hours to consider, all the widows in the world cannot recover me.


Wid. If you will, go with me sir.


Val. Yes marry will I, but it is in anger yet, and I will marry thee, do not
cross me; yes, and I will he with thee, and get a whole bundle of babies, and
I will kiss thee, stand still and kiss me handsomely, but do not provoke me,
stit neither hand nor foot, for I am dangerous, I drunk sack yesternight, do
not allure me: Thou art no widow of this world, come in pity, and in spite I Will
marry thee, not a word more, and I may be brought to love thee.

Exeunt. Enter Merchant and Uncle at several doors.
Mer. Well met again, and what good news yet?


Unc. Faith nothing.


Mer. No fruits of what we sowed?


Unc. Nothing J hear of.


Mer. No turning in this tide yet?


Unc. It Is all flood, and till that fall away, there is no expecting.

Enter Fran. Isab. Lance. Shorthose, a torch.
Mer. ^s not this his younger brother?


Unc. With a Gentlewoman the widows sister, as I live he smiles, he has got
good hold, why well said Franks faith, let us stay and mark.


Isa. Well, you are the prettiest youth and so you have handled me, think you
ha me sure.


Fran. As sure as wedlock.


Isa. You had best lie with me too.


Fran. Yes indeed will I, and get such black eyed boys.


Unc. God a mercy, Frank.


Isa. This is a merry world, poor simple Gentlewomen that think no harm,
cannot walk about their business, but they must be caught up I know not how.


Fran. I Will tell you, and I Will instruct you too, have I caught you, Mistress.


Isa. Well, and it were not for pure pity, I would give you the slip yet, but
being as it is.


Fran. It shall be better.

Enter Valentine, Widow, and Ralph with a torch.
Isa. My sister, as I live, your brother with her, sure I think you are the
Kings takers.


Unc. Now it works.


Val. Nay, you shall know I am a man.


Wid. I think so.


Val. And such proof you shall have.


Wid. I pray speak softly.


Val. I Will speak it out Widow, yes and you shall confess too, I am no
Nurse-childe, I went for a man, a good one, if you can beat me out oth' pit.


Wid. I did but jest with you.


Val. I Will handle you in earnest, and so handle you: Nay, when my credit calls.


Wid. Are you mad?


Val. I am mad, I am mad.


Fran. Good morrow, Sir, I like your preparation.


Val. Thou have been at it, Frank.


Fran. Yes faith, it is done sir.


Val. Along with me then, never hang an arse, widow.


Isa. It Is to no purpose, sister.


Val. Well said Black-brows, advance your torches Gentlemen.


Unc. Yes, yes Sir.


Val. And keep your ranks.


Mer. Lance, carry this before him.


Unc. Carry it in state.


Enter Musicians, Fount. Hare. Bell.
Val. What are you Musicians, I know your coming, and what are those behind
you,


Musi. Gentlemen that sent us to give the Lady, a good morrow.


Val. O I know them come boy sing the song I taught you,
And sing it lustily, come forward Gentlemen, your welcome,
Welcome, now we are all friends, go get the Priest ready,
And let him not be long, we have much business:
Come Francke, rejoice with me, thou have got the start boy,
But i will so tumble after, come my friends lead,
Lead cheerfully, and let your Fiddles ring boys,
My follies and my fancies have an end here,
Display the morgage Lance, Merchant i will pay you,
And every thing shall be in joint again.

Vnc. Before, before.


Val. And now confess, and know,
Wit without Money, sometimes gives the blow.
Exeunt.
FINIS.
Plays written by Francis Beamount; and John Flecher, printed in. Quarto.

1 Wit without Money. 2 Night walker: or, the Little thief. 3 Opportunity. 4
Coronation. 5 Scornful Lady. 6 Elder Brother. 7 Philaster. 8 King and no King.
9 Mounsteur Thomas. 10 Rollo Duke Normandy. 11 Rule a wife and have a wife. 12
Thierry and Theodoret. 13 Woman Hater. 14 Maids Tragedy. 15 Knight ot'h Burning
Pestle. 16 Cupids Revenge. 17 Noble Kinsman.

