THE BEHAVIOR AND EXECUTION OF Robert Green and Laurence Hill, Two of the
Persons condemned at the King's Bench Bar, February 11th, for the most Notorious
and Barbarous Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, the Twelfth of October last.

Who Suffered at TYBURN On Friday, February 21, 1678/9.

With an Account of their Lives, Conditions, Deportment after Sentence,
Discourses with Mr. Ordinary, and other most remarkable Circumstances.

Having at the Publishers Request perused this Sheet, I do certify, That the
Discourses betwixt me and the Prisoners, and other matters of Fact therein, are
truly related.

Samuel Smith, Ordinary.



LICENSED. 1678/9.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678/9.

The Behavior and Execution of Robert Green, and Laurence Hill, who Suffered
at Tyburn Feb. 21. 1678/9.
THe Murder of that Noble true English Protestant Patriot, Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, is now so notoriously known, not only throughout England, but I hope
our Neighbor Nations too, (especially of the Reformed Religion) that it will
be wholly unnecessary with any Artifice of Rhetoric, to draw forth the Readers
Compassionate Tears for that worthy Gentleman's Martyrdom, or raise up his just
indignation against the base and barbarous Assassinates that were the Authors
of it. It was on Saturday the 12th day of October, this Bloody Fact was
Committed, which long lay concealed in darkness, black as that which had
overspread their Souls who were concerned in it. But at length, that infinite
adorable Power, the Avenger of Innocent Blood, who hears the cries of his
Slaughtered Saints from under the Altar, and brings Light out of Darkness, was
graciously pleased to make some discovery of this Hellish Crime; upon which,
several persons were committed to custody. And of them, three on the 10th of
this instant February, were brought to their Trial at the King's Bench Bar at
Westminster, where after a fair hearing, and full Evidence, by a Jury
consisting of persons of Worth and Quality, they were found guilty, and next
Morning received Sentence of Death. The particulars of the Proof and Trial, we
shall not intermeddle with, but rather refer the Reader for his full
satisfaction therein, to that entire and perfect Narrative, which the World may
shortly receive from the indubitable approbation of Authority.

Of these three persons Attainted of the Felony and Murder, one (on some
important considerations) is (at least for some time) thought fit to be
graciously Reprieved. An acount of the other two, viz. Robert Green and
Laurence Hill, as to their Behavior, etc. after Sentence till Execution, we
shall briefly, but most truly and impartially give you.

Robert Green was an Irishman born, his Father a Protestant, as himself
acknowledged, but his Mother (whose weaker Sex rendered her more liable to such
absurd delusions) a Papist, who bred him up with an Uncle of his, in the Popish
Heresy, though his Education was so mean, that he could neither Write nor
Read. But where Ignorance is celebrated as the Mother of Devotion, he was so
much the apter Instrument for Jesuitical Engines of subtilty to make use of.
His aforesaid Uncle instructed him in the common Notions and Prayers of the
Romish Superstition; and he had his abode in Ireland, till he was 16 or 18
years old, being now 54 years of Age.

They being all after Condemnation kept separately in Newgate, Mr. Ordinary
according to his place, and ready inclinations to Christian Charity, offering
him his Assistance, Advice, Exhortations, and Prayers, he very modestly
accepted of his visits; who frequently exhorted him (as the first step to a
sincere and hearty Repentance) to unburthen his Conscience, by a free, full,
and ingenuous Confession of the horrid Murder for which he stood Condemned,
and justly was to suffer, using all the persuasive Arguments he could to that
purpose. But though he seemed to hearken to his Admonitions, yet could he not
be prevailed upon therein, but rather appeared to stand it out in
self-justification of his Innocence as to that particular. Which (as Mr.
Ordinary very well observed unto, and pressed upon him) could not be
(considering the plainness of the Evidence, and apparentness of the Crime and
his Guilt) but upon one, or all of these three Reasons, viz.

1. That either they were under an Oath of Secrecy, which (as he truly told
him) was a wicked Oath, and in that case not at all obligatory.

2. Or that betwixt the time of the Murder committed, and that of their
Apprehension, some Priest had given them a pretended Absolution, and so they
conceited themselves now Innocent: which Mr. Ordinary had the more reason to
urge, because of some former experiences he had had of common Felons, who in
such case had resolutely denied even at place of Execution, with their last
breath, those very Crimes, which but some days before they had freely Confessed
to himself; and that merely on the reason aforesaid. Which there is good reason
to believe, not only from his irreprochable Testimony, but even from that
Popish Doctrine which some of them have not blushed to assert, Quod non peccat
mortaliter, qui negat se admisisse peccatum Mortale, alias legitime Confessum,
Navar. in Man. Cap. 21. Number. 38. That Man sins not mortally, who having
shriven himself of some Mortal sin, denies afterward that he was ever guilty
of that sin.

3. Or lastly, That they believed it to be a meritorious act to kill an
Heretic, as they call every Protestant; for so too runs their Hellish
Doctrine* That any private man may lawfully Take, Spoil, and Kill such
Heretics as are so denounced to be, and burn their Houses over their Heads --
Symancha Inst. Cathol. Cap. 45. Numb. 13.

To all which he declined to answer much in particular, but only gave a
general denial, though he did confess that in other matters he had been a a
great sinner against God, etc. And upon some occasional discourse, justifying
himself from some particular sins, did declare that he accounted Fornication
(and much more Adultery) not to be Venial, but mortal sins; nor did believe any
sin to be Venial in its own nature. He also affirmed, that he did not believe
some of the grossest points of Popery; yet said, he was resolved to live and
die in the Roman Catholic Religion, (as he called it) because he was born and
bred in it. To which Mr. Ordinary most appositely answered, and told him, that
was no argument; for then he might likewise resolve to live and die in sin,
because born in, and too much accustomed to that also. He replied only, That
he would venture his Eternal State in cleaving to the Religion he had been bred
in, and would hear no Arguments to the contrary.

Mr. Ordinary yet failed not daily to visit him, instructing and exhorting him
to Repentance, and Faith in the alone all-sufficient merits of Christ. To which
he was very attentive, as also to the Exhortations of another Reverend and
Worthy Divine sent to assist in that work of Charity, and joined with much
seeming affection in Prayer with them. And so thanking the Ordinary on the
Thursday for his great pains, and saying he would excuse him from attending him
at the place of Execution, yet in the mean time desired his Prayers, took his
leave of him.

Laurence Hill, the other unhappy Criminal, was born and bred up in the Popish
way, and resolved likewise to live and die therein. He declared that he was not
a Shoemaker, as has been reported, but put forth to be a Servant about 13
years of age, and successively continued in that condition, (at least till very
lately) being 34 years old at the time of his death. He would not (though much
pains and many such Arguments as to the other, too tedious here to be related,
were used to him) confess the Crime for which he suffered; but in general, that
he had been a great sinner; and particularly said, that he never wronged any
person, but one of a very inconsiderable sum, (which he specified) and of which
(he said) he had lately made restitution.

He would not admit any Protestant Divine to pray with, yet desired their
Prayers at home for him; and so thanking Mr. Ordinary for his pains, and
praying God to reward him, took his leave of him, excusing him likewise from
further attendance.

On Friday the 21th of February they were both pretty early in the morning
conveyed in a Cart to Tyburn, where, after very few words, and some short
private Prayers, they were Executed.

FINIS.

