AN ALARM TO LONDON: OR, The Famous LONDON's blowing up by LONDONERS. SOUNDED,
Not to Fire their Buildings, but to Quench their Burnings. IN A Letter to MAjOR
GENERAL BROWN.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, next door to the gilded Lion in
Aldersgate Street, 1650.

An Allarum to LONDON, Not to fire their Buildings, but to quench their
Burnings. In a Letter To Major General BROWN.
SIR,
I Am bound by the duty I owe to old Israel, to make inquiry after Joseph's
portion; The Birthright of the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND. Religion and Liberty,
and good Laws, and Reformation, were the blessed Inheritance bequeathed and
promised to England and London; and you, Sir, were one of the Feoffees left in
trust, to take care that Simeon and Levi (brothers in blood and cruelty) might
not murder him: The knife (Sir) was lately at Joseph's throat, and you were
then, a Reubenite, to bestride him from the intended cruelty of Treacherous
men, at the first assault, and TREATY OF THE BROTHERS. Joseph (Sir) is newly
taken out of the Pit, and your self (with some others of the DIVISION OF
REVBEN) standing at the pits brink, discontented that Joseph is raised. It has
pleased the Divine Power to secure the young man in that deep and dark place,
and has already begun to exalt Joseph against the unkind desires of
Israelites and Aeyptians: Sir, you may believe it, that the same good hand will
lead on the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND (as much hated and shot at, as ever Joseph
was) through the deep red Sea (of Englands blood) and through she Wilderness,
and through Divisions, and through Contradictions, and through Murmurings. This
(Sir) is the present estate of Englands afflicted Joseph; and this (Sir) will
be done with an outstretched arm, and England shall have passage from the red
Sea, and Egypt, and the Wilderness, and arive safely in the Land of Canaan,
and rest; and shall have powerful Victories over all Gods, and their Enemies.
Of this and other Nations, and all people, good and bad, far and near, shall
gaze and stand amazed, to see and hear the rare and unheard of executions, yet
unfinished. Be pleased to read the Record underneath; being the Will and
Testament of good and great Men, great Prophets, and consider of it, and do
unto Joseph what right you can, without more violence, and persuade your
Friends so to do; for your own sake, and for your Friends sake, and for the
Cities sake, and for Joseph's sake ( Joseph advanced to a Commonwealth) for the
Commonwealth of Englands sake; and shun all prejudice in the reading of it,
for Benn's sake; whereby you fully gratify his desires, and good will to
Joseph, your self, and this great City.

Yours, for the sake of Joseph, BENJAMIN.

The hand of old Jacob upon the head of young Joseph, THE COMMONWEALTH OF
ENGLAND.
Genesis 49. 22, 23, etc.
ENGLAND is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a Well, whose branches
run over the Wall.

The Archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him and bated him: But his
Bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob.

Even by the God of thy Father who shall help thee, and by the Almighty who
shall bless thee with the blessings of Heaven above, blessings of the deep,
that lies under, blessings of the breast and of the womb.

The blessings of thy Father have prevailed above the blessings of my
Progenitors; unto the utmost bound of the everlasting Hills, they shall be on
the head of ENGLAND, and upon the crown of the head of him that is SEPARATE
FROM HIS BRETHREN.

The Rod of Moses, and the red Sea (the red Sea of English blood) divided, for
the safe return of afflicted England out of Egypt, now sojourning in a
Wilderness of wild Beasts, and stinging Serpents.
Deuteronomy. 23. 13, etc.
Blessed of the Lord be his Land for the precious things of Heaven, for the
dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath.

And for the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious
things brought forth by the Moon, and for the chief things of the ancient
Mountains; and for the precious things of the lasting Hills.

And for the precious things of the Earth, and the fullness thereof, and for
the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush: Let the blessing come upon the
head of England, and upon the top of the head of him that was SEPARATED FROM
HIS BRETHREN.

The glory of ENGLAND is like the Horns of Unicorns, and with them he shall
push the PEOPLE.

The Waters of Jordan divided; And ENGLAND upon his advance to Canaan.
Joshua 10.
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon, in the Valley of Ajalou, and
there was no day like that.

And Joshua said, Bring out those five Kings unto me, and he said unto the
Captains of the men of War which went with him, Come near and put your feet
upon the neck of these Kings.

Fear not, nor be dismayed, for thus shall the Lord do to all your Enemies
against whom you fight.

For my Honored Friend, Major General BROWN.
SIR,
LIberty of all enjoyments is near to life, and as much as that amounts unto, I
do acknowledge that to be the just sum of my Obligation to you; for I bear
you witness, you were that vigilant Governor of Abingdon, that did (by
Exchange of me for another Prisoner) give me my freedom from a harsh
Imprisonment at Wallingford, when a little longer stay there, would have made
me as miserable, as the malice of an enraged Enemy could make me. Sir, The
Obligation (wherein I stand bound) is double; you were faithful then to the
Public, you were freindly then to me; I have therefore endeavored to make my
suitable address unto you; the one was private, to thank you, the other is
public, to acknowledge you.

Sir, It is emminently known unto you, what a great turn of Providence there
is visible amongst us, since that time; and how strange and amazing it has
been (and yet is) to the Inhabitants of this Island, as if there had been a
total and perpetual Eclypse of the Sun of Englands glory; you know also, how
it has pleased the wisdom of God, to suffer the judgments of good people,
to vary about this matter; and how dangerously their opinions have diversified
them into very unkind speeches and behaviors one toward another, and I hope
neither of them will forget what fat advantages were given thereby to the
Enemy, yet how rawny and lean they grow still upon the variety and full
mouthfulls of them, they could never thrive, but were so cursed upon the top of
them all, that it was usual to observe, they could never come off without the
loss of a head, the breaking of a neck, or the battering of the bones; some
mischief or other did still post after them, from place to place, Kent, Essex,
the North, etc. Where ever they went, they could never keep off the Gentleman
upon the pale Horse, but vengeance would over the Wall, and pull them out by
head and shoulders.

Sir, It is acknowledged, you did manifest much wisdom and courage in the
first part of your Actings for this Nation, but it is also said that in the
latter part of your adventures, the more you excelled in boldness and
abilities to speak, the more of danger it did portend: I did never yet know
any that did suspect (much less impeach) your INTENTIONS as retrograde (for
the maine of them) or declining from the first integrity of them, but there
does lie a BLAME upon you, that you did not so soon or seasonably submit unto
the wisdom of God, that has, it seems, against your declared will, made
better provision for you and us too, then it was possible for you to make for
your selves, or for us, by all the wisdom you could put forth.

Sir, Let us extol and speak well of that wisdom, that does restrain the
dangerons results of our Counsels, and of that Providence that cures our
improvidence; the good God (we may see) is so much the more careful of us, by
how much he espyeth our weakness and shallowness to be the more in dealing
for our selves with a subtle Enemy, and in providing for our own safety.

Sir, The wisdom of God, has wonderfully (next to a Miracle) determined,
that Englands Joseph could not come home safe by a Treaty, nor yet be ever
restored to his Father with Life and Honor, before his cruel and treacherous
Brethren were brought upon their faces, put in ward, and made to acknowledge
their great trespass; We are verily guilty concerning our Brother.

Sir, It is manifest, that the Patriarchs were (almost all of them) very ill
affected to Joseph. Steven notes as much in his Confession* Acts 7. 9. and
there files up their Malignity upon Record. And the Patriarchs ( moved with
envy) sold Joseph, etc. There was but one amongst ten, but voted against
Joseph, but voted him a bondsman in Egypt, and you well know that Isreal's
Joseph was a type of Englands Joseph, sure there is an English Israel, and
doubtless there is an English Joseph too, and the parallel that runs along
in all the veins of the troubles, and preservation of them both goes as free
from halting, as any I have read of.

Indeed there is some disproportion between the number and the virulency, of
the haters of the one and of the other, Isreal's Joseph had but nine against one
that hated him, but Englands Joseph, can make their Units, tens, their Tens,
hundreds, their Hundreds, Thousands, and these within us too, besides those
many without us, and these Patriarchs too, English Patriarchs, and for the
implacability of their Envyings, ours observe no measure or limitation of time
or condition but are beyond compare. Those in Dothan did weep and take on in
Egypt (now that they saw their younger Brother was preferred) that they dealt
so ill with him in Dothan; ours in England weep Milstones, nay when stones
weep, they be dry, Joseph in anguish, they rejoice, Joseph advanced, they
Malign still, and do reach after him; and though he be advanced above the
Sun, yet do bark, (though in vain) as Dogs that will wawle against the Moon.

Sir, I would begin with Isreal's Joseph, and with the Archers that shot at him
first, you do remember the sacred History, had the Patriarchs any cause to
hate Joseph, yet did they not resolve his death? and did they not cunningly
contrive his ruin? indeed Reuben is honorably recorded for his willingness
to save him, and to restore him to his Father, but alas! the man is more to be
commended for his affection, then his discretion. True, Reuben does bestride
the Child, and very manfully delivers him at the pit, and pleads, O do not
kill him, shed no blood, lay no hand upon him, Here Is a pit, throw him there.
Honest man! Joseph is more beholding to thee for thy good wish, then thy great
wit* What? throw him into a pit, Reuben? Is that all the liberty thou can
obtain for Joseph by a Treaty? what do think thy Brothers be Children? or
be they babes? and will they so soon be pleased? and can they forget the
dream? or are they strangers in Dothan? or do they not know the way to the
pit where Joseph is? Alas Good man! Thou know is not, thy Brothers are too
revengefull, and too deep for thee to deal with, for life and liberty by a
Treaty, what cares Simeon and Levi for conditions and promises, when they
resolve to be Treacherous? have they not Swords by their Sides? what do they
care for a Treaty; Treaty them no Treaties, hatred and revenge for Joseph's
Vision are settled upon the Lies; what if the Malignant Tribes return when thou
art gone, and kill Joseph in the pit, when no man sees it to tell the old Man?
has not thy wisdom provided well for thy young Brother, to make a Grave for
him? and to save the Tribes the labor of digging one? and to save Old Jacob
Funeral expenses for his Beloved Joseph, what have thy Brothers more to do
now, but a knock, and a Shovell of Earth, and Joseph is not. Ah Reuben, Reuben,
I love thy pity, but I fear the Pit, there is but little good like to be of
this Treaty, however Joseph thanks thee for thy good meaning.

And Judah (Sir) would be thought a friend to Joseph too, but it is easy to
prove him an Arch Malignant, indeed his enmity glides along in smooth Language,
and runs away in a still Channel, without noise, which argues the depth
thereof: we have nothing but his own words, and his own Declaration, that
speaks him a friend, and these neither speak him any other but a Comparative
friend, he would not be thought less then an Enemy to Joseph, but only not to
be so bloody, as the rest were, or would have been. Then all his deeds be Acts
of Hostility* Oh it is Joseph! our Brother, our flesh and blood, yet let us
sell him, save his blood, bit sell his body, save his body in Does in, but
damn his soul (if possible) in Egypt; if this be all thy kindness (Judah)
thou will kill thy Brother with kindness.

Judah, Sir, was a dangerous Enemy to the budding Commonwealth of Israel, I am
more then half persuaded, that it was he which gave his Brothers Commission
of Array, to do what they did, indeed we could not find his Packet of
Letters, but we find him in the head of the bloody Crew, and the Orator upon
all occasions. He was that Noble Tribe, that had many Kings in his loins. He
was a declared Royalist, and it fell to him by Eldership, to be their General
upon this design: Reuben (the Eldest) was too honest for their purpose, and
had declared his good affection to Joseph, at the first Assembly of the
Brothers. His vote went that Joseph should go home, he should go home and be
a comfort to old Israel.

Simeon and Levi (next in years) had carried the Generall-ship from Judah, but
that they had before discovered their incapacity to manage such a Command, by
their rash and treacherous dealing with the Sichemites, after they had yielded
unto certain Articles in a Treaty with them, they had made themselves and the
Old man to stinck before the Inhabitants of the Land, and therefore are now by
the others judged unfit; Judah is the man that must direct them in their
Counsels, and lead them on, A man of incomparable parts and Majesty. He was
one that knew how to play his game well, it is he that animates against Joseph,
in the Cabinet Whisperings, it is he that pleads for Joseph in a more open
Council.

What ever they do with Joseph, home he shall not go, that he resolves
against Reuben, and for the down right killing of him, he will not yield to
that neither, that he urges against Simeon and Levi. He ^^rsiwades rather to
a Treaty and gives the Ground and Reasons of such an Accommodation. He is our
brother, and what profit in his blood? rather save his life and sell the young
man. He has not the spirit of a Soldier, but of a Butcher that delights in
blood.

It is confessed Judah's pleading for Joseph was very patheticall and seasonable
to save present execution, but withal, there was much cruelty and
selfishnesse in the bowels of those bowels. What profit in his blood? The blood
of Joseph might have stuck upon their sheepheards coats in Dothan, there was
danger in that, what profit?

It seems gain and other selfe-ends might have prevailed very far upon
Judahs good nature to make him forget Joseph was any kift or kin to him.
Those sacred Records leaves a stain upon his very kindness.

But to speak truth, what could Judah do or say less? How could he do so
little for him? A stone could not retain its hardness to see such anguish as
was upon Joseph's soul, they do confess afterward in the Ward, that they did
see much of it but were hardened, and that they confess was their sin,
surely none but such as had quite blown out the glimmering light of nature, and
had forgotten they were men, but would have melted long before, with that
abundance of tears that ran down Jesephs cheeks, but would have bin moved
with all those moving pleadings that Joseph had to pour forth. They confess
them to be very peircing and visible to be seen, but themselves hard and
impenitrable.

Joseph's Plea for his Life.
ANd shall I never see my dear Father again? But must I lose my Life? or (that
which is as near) my Liberty? And will brothers be my Executioners? Will
Israelites be bloody? O! Brother Judah help! why brother Levi, brother
Zebulon; It is the day of Joseph's trouble: has Joseph no brother, will not
Nepthali, will not Gad, will not Asher know or pity him? why, I am the son of
your Father, I am Joseph, I came in duty and kindness to see you, and shall I
be killed for my kindness? Am I not worthy to live for my love? Let me know my
fault that I may be sorry, that I may repent before I dye. Is it because I did
tell you my Dream? Truly ( brothers) it was a real vision, and no idle fancy;
Is it because your sheafe was lower then Mine? It is not possible that your
sheafe should be the lower for Josephes sheafe; Is it because the Sun and Moon
did obeisance to me? why? what ill can that presage to you? can those HONORED
LUMINARIES be ecclipsed by Josephes Glory? or can your native Luster and
brightness be lessened by any Splender of his? And alas what profit will arise
unto you out of a Dead carcass, and a little coat? will not a loud Conscience
for the blood of an Innocent, sting more than that can heal.

Besides, What if Joseph's Dream proves a Vision indeed? and your brother
become such a Prince as may require such bendings? as may deserve such honor,
from a Family so illustrious and honorable as is the family of Jacob? what if
you my Lord Judah and the rest of my brothers should see cause to bow before
me? would Joseph be stiff while you bend? And could his eyes be dry, while
yours be wet? do you think Joseph so unnatural, and undutifull both? I
beseech your Excellency to consider, you may rather weaken then strengthen the
family of Jacob, by the ruin of Joseph, Besides the errand I come about
deserves not such entertainment; I come to enquire after your WELFARE. Ah let
me go home again, that I may do my errand to the old man, our Father, that I
may tell him I did escape the wild beasts, and did see my loving brothers in
safety upon the Plains of Dothan.

And now sir, could a General say less? or could a Nobleman do so little
for Joseph, as Judah did for him? a man that had so much elegancy in his lines,
and of excellency in his loins, could he use less courtesy in his behavior?
What was it for him to say, Simeon hold, Levi be not rash, Joseph is our
brother indeed, and his blood will do us but little good, a child's coat will
be but little booty, no such plunder here, as you had of the Sichemites when
you put them to the sword in Shalem: Sir, this is one of the best of all those
cursed resolves amongst the worst of enemies. No profit in the Carcass of a
Commonwealth. It is a principle that swaies with the most moderate of the
Degenerate Kind of Cataline, yet rather then fail in their Design of
mischeife and violence, let Joseph, the joy and comfort of Old Israel be sold
to Pharaoh, nay, let him go to the devil (so far as they can doom him)
they will do their best to send him thither, so they may have Joseph's portion of
honor and estate; his portion of honor in Jacobs family; and his portion of
estate in Jacobs flocks: they regard neither the Life nor Liberties of young
Joseph, nor old Israel, if they may have but Coin by making their Coffins,

Sir, I have now my purpose, now that I have minded you of those ancient
Treaties, and Treacheries; and prayings, and pleadings; and stirrings, and
strivings; and good meanings too (a few of them) touching Isreal's Joseph: that
I have minded you of the little number of Joseph's friends. It is one of the
least of numbers, if you reckon him at home, and him abroad at the Treaty too,
that I have given you a review of the multitude of Joseph's enemies, even
amongst Patriarks, and how cunningly they did work against Joseph; To let you
see that neither cunning nor cruelty could ever prevail upon innoceney first
and last too, but Truth has always had the day after hard Skirmishes, that
you might observe how honest hearts may be undermined, and prevented in their
intentions to preserve Joseph.

It was Reubens Case, he had by Treaty, provided a Pit which (though dry) was
safe neither for himself nor Joseph, How excellently Enemies act according to
their Principles. Judah does far exceed Reuben in Abilities to treat, Joseph's
bondage is Iudahs aim, and a dark Dungeon is Joseph's fate. It is not so with
Reuben, a plot could not succeed worse to Reuben then this did, for he tare his
hair. In the interim, sir, there is an old catching for Joseph, the Tribes
will kill him, but Reuben catches him, The Tribes do sell him, but God does
send him:

And now sir, here we find a third party as well in Israel then, as in England
now, a party sir (and a gallant one too) that was no more dreamed of by the old
Patriarchs (but only what Joseph saw in his vision) then was of late thought on
by the young Patriarks of England: Good and bad men with us (all of them)
miscarry alike in their Counsels concerning Joseph, Reuben (with us too) beats
off Simeon and saves Joseph, Judah he cousens Reuben, and sells Joseph, GOD
befooles them all and sends the man in a dispatch of his own to Egypt, there
to provide food for Israel. And thus the wisdom of God Deludes crafty Judah,
and secludes king Reuben (though he was for the cause) from his wiser
Counsels. Nay it pleased PROVIDENCE to cage them up both in Ward together in
Egypt, with their Parti-colored counsels, as if they had been both alike
enemies to his Great stateliness, and as being equally destructive in their
judgments, and purposes, to his own sanctity and Isreal's safety.

Sir, I thought to be more short, but the way I took to follow Joseph, I find
to be rough and intricate, and the way I find, is longer too, from Dothan to
Egypt, and from thence backs again to England, then I could imagine, I was
forced to go somewhat about, because I discovered a variety of Engagements,
and Holds, and Garrisons. I saw, sir, pits and petitions, and treaties and
treacheries, and cries and counsels, and clamors, and accusations; and
dungeons, and dangers by the way, and so I could not wait upon Joseph through
all these, and return to you so soon as you might expect, however my
presumption is your candor, and I though you would not take offense that I
tarried so long, for that the occasion of this wearisome length of lines was
not only in loyalty to Joseph, but in love to you, sir, and if I fail something
in method and memory, you will remember I went through a thicket, and forest
of wild beasts, and will soon excuse my failings, while only love and
thankefullnesse to your self and Joseph does guide the pen.

Sir, It has been the good will of him that dwelt in the bush to go as well
before Englands Joseph as Isreal's, and has led him on through a wilderness of
pits, a Dothan of dangers, and a Dungeon of Difficulties, has so cleared the
pits of water, the Dungeons of darkness, the Wilderness of Serpents:
Serpents of their stings, has so taken out the malignity of every wild beast
in the way from Dothan to Egypt and from thence to England, knocking out great
teeth, breaking jaw bones, chopping off HEADS, so that Englands Joseph as well
as Isreal's, is now beyond the reach of his cruel brothers, preserved in the
midst of Israelities and Egyptians, Malignants are either in ward, or else have
learned to pronounce our English shibboleth without faultring, they begin to
say my Lord Joseph and make low Congies and humble addresses To the SUPREME
AUTHORITY OF THE NATION; TO THE COUNCEL OF STATE, TO THE KEEPERS OF THE
LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND, The Lords Commissioners, and to all these, RIGHT
HONORABLE.

Those greater LUMINARIES that would not do obeisance to our Joseph, are
uterly darkened, the Sun of this lower Orb, is gone quite Retrograde more
degrees then that in the Dial of Ahaz, 2 King, 20. And the other of our dark
worlds greater LUMINARIES the MOON (the very emblem of mutability and change,
being most full of spots in her greatest fullness) for her ILL WILL TO JOSEPH,
is Commanded sistence, and standing still in the VALLEY OF AJALON; in a Country
of valleys, and there amazingly made to behold and gaze upon the rare and
unheard of execusions of the GREAT JEHOVAH, done by his despised Joshua's, and
the most glittering stars that will not bend shall fall down, and whatever
be their Luster or largeness, the fall of Lucifer shall be their fate, it is
manifest to all beholders, that a Divine hand has set a Crown of Glory upon
the HEAD of Englands Joseph, and that Sun or Star that shall dare reach
after Joseph's Crown, now in his Glory. Believe it, Sir, the despised Saints,
will but triumph at their Treason, and they will do no other but utter a Song
of praise to God for their plagues amongst men; BABYLON is fallen, is, fallen;
How art thou falen, LVCIFER, Sun of the morning? This, this will be the song of
Saints (Honored Sir) so long as the Sun has a course to give, or England an
Age to live.

I will not stand to run the parallel, I humbly crave that to be the fruit of
your Meditations. It is now vacation with you there, though it be Term time
with us here: Indeed, Sir, they are most happy that have least to do with a
deceitful world, that are most vacant from the businesses of an uncertain
Age, unless they have their eyes the better, and are of a more quick sight, to
see their WORK before them.

But now Sir, who ever malign that the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND begins to be
Illustrious, surely no English heart, no Reubenites should do it; yet there
are great thoughts of heart for the divisions of Reuben; for the discontents of
Reuben, the contradictions and murmurings of this friendly Tribe; It is not
Irelands Rabsheka, but it is Englands Joseph that is honored; He is not an
English man, but an Irish man, that hates the young LAD. Believe it Sir, (or
suppose it possible) The wild Irish, the savage Orcades will go near to turn
Round in half an Age, will engage to submit to the Commonwealth of England, if
our Joseph will protect them; And what a base dishonor will it be to our
English Cavalry; (and to some of the division of Reuben too, it will be no
credit: That they will be younger brothers to Pagans and Papists, and to the
Moors, and to the worshippers of Mahomet, in their duty of submitting to
Englands Joseph; will it not be a blushing shame to such as are not quite
brased against it, to think that the barbarous Irish should be sooner disarmed
of their blood-thirstinesse, then our wretched Cavalry can be brought in by
kindness and freedom: O how soon will the succeeding Age that is already
treading upon the heels of this, befool, and (pittyingly) beheast the pride,
and ignorance and wretchedness, and stubbornness of this present Generation.

I said indeed there were some that could already frame themselves to say, My
Lord Joseph; but it is as sure that many of these (I would I had not cause to
suspect them all) I say most of the s^, do but pour out their old malignity
into new bottles, have, and will act against young Rubenites upon old
principles of hatred and revenge, because Reuben delivered Joseph at the pit. I
do very well know the men that now lie in the pit upon that very account.

But Sir, my purpose is to mind you that what ever their hopes may be, they
do sumbmit in point of Act unto Joseph, they dare not for their lives take up
Arms again, unless they be men of base and broken fortunes, and are desperate,
because Joseph is a Prince, a Potentate: He is the Commonwealth of England. And
because the LORD OF HOSTS has made him a Father to Pharaoh, not to Pharaoh
mystical, Joseph will be a ruin to his Kingdom, but Pharaob natural, to
black and swarthy complexioned people; I am persuaded our Joseph will soon
enlighten and interpret their Dreams, that those dark people in the darker
places of the world, may not for ever perish in the years of death and
darkness, for want of Interpreters, for want of such an Interpreter as Joseph
will be; When Magicians are silent, Joseph will such an Interpreter as Joseph
will be; When Magicians are silent, Joseph will speak truth and Prophecy. He
will be an Enemy to no Nation. He will be a friendly Neighbor to the (late
oppressed, now the) High and Mighty States of the Low Countries, and Lords of
the United Provinces. He will be an Enemy to none, but to the lowest Country of
all, the Principality of blackness and darkness for ever. Joseph will be a
scourge to all the Loousts that come out of that bottomless pit: The Legates
alatere of that infernal Hierarchy; these darken the Christian world; Their
General Vicar, the Pope. The FLYING FIERY SERPENT Copp, and that wretched
Ly-monger the Man in the Moon; These be the Pests of the Commonwealth of
England; these came in the smoke, Rev. 9. 2.

Joseph will be a Friend to Enemies, much more a Friend to Friends, now that he
has power; but then Friends must be Friends, and sign the Engagement; and
Enemies must give a pledge too, that they are not Spies while Joseph does
nourish them; Judah must take the Engagement, as well as Reuben, and Simeon
too, as well as Judah, and confess their trespass too (such as are faulty)
before they can be trusted in a place where there is such variety of good
food, and abundance of great treasure. Isreal's Joseph would nourish no Spies,
no more will Englands Joseph, if an Engagement can tie them from Treachery. I
do see there is one provided, that must either bow them or break them; will
either mend them, or end them.

But now Sir, There are great thoughts of heart, for, and in the divisions of
Reuben; Deborah and Baraak, are pensive at this sad conceit, in that stately
Song of their Triumph: It is now Reubens case to be put in ward, by the command
of that Joseph, whose life he was a means to preserve at the first onset of
Englands Cavalry. I do wish much tenderness of heart may be showed to those
that are of tender consciences, that are not yet assured of Joseph's safety; if
they be of Reubens division, and not Simeonites.

And will Joseph require his friends thus? It were no pity to see Simeon and
Levi tied neck and heels together, and to put Judah in a fright; but for Reuben
to be clapped up in ward, and for him to be ranked with rank Malignants, seems
strange. Malignants rejoice at that, and Reubenites mourn for that, and all be
divided, and offended at that; yet Sir, you see, Providence will have it so; I
pray submit to it.

Sir, I would the consideration hereof, might serve for a helmet, and a
breastplate both, to keep you entire, and unwounded in those two principles of
life, the head and the heart; Believe it Sir, Saints themselves are shot in the
mouth, and do speak boldly, and I fear bloodily. I have sent you therefore a
larger piece of Joseph's party colored Coat, and have used the more expressions
that it might be unto you as so many quiltings to make you shot-free, and to
keep you from the Malignity of these revolting times. That though (it seems)
you have fainted somewhat in the conflict, yet you may not utterly fall in the
Exit.

And will Simeon take the Engagement, and not Reuben? will Reuben tear his
hair? what will he do it now? now that Joseph is safe? He might have done it
at the Pit, but will he take on like a mad man at the Court? It had been a
suitable deportment for wretched Simeon and Levi so to do; for Cop, the Pope,
and the Man in the Moon so to do; but men wonder to see Reubenites divided
about the matter of Joseph's glory. O how do wicked men hiss? How do most
Taverns and Alehouses, and how do all Stews and Brothel-houses, laugh and
dance at this evil report? I could herein exceed, but in my exceeding, I
should fall abundantly short of what you, and all the world, know to be, but
too true.

I believe you would give me leave to conclude, but shall I be bold to come
nearer to you? would you know the mystery? It is this, God is gone by you (and
others too of Reuben's division) unseen, and has taken Joseph along with him
in all the haste: There has been much snatching amongst us, in the Parliament,
in the Army, in the City, Country. This has made great noise every where. And
shall not the Wisdom, and Power of God have one snatch amongst us. He will
have something as well as we, He has catched what he could get, and was worth
the taking, and this he has done without much noise, wisdom is deep, the
more Divine, the more deep; Man's wisdom is shallow, and from hence proceed
the great stirs, and the clutter that is amongst us. Sir, Joseph was taken
from you, and from your counsels in the night, and went in ways untrodden
with a good guide. Quick sighted men could no more see him in his march to
Pharaohs Court then blind men. Hence all our discontents, fears, dispaires.
Hence it is, that Joseph's good friends that was kind to him on his bed of
sickness, do now draw the curtains upon him as if he were dead Religion, and
Laws and all good order, Learning, Trading (all) utterly defunct, friends, and
enemies too agree together about this. It is so, it must needs be so, Joseph is
not, Jacob is bereaved, some evil beast has eaten up the child.

This was old Isreal's fear, though his internal eyes were very good, and by
the help of a prophetical prospective could see so many Generations after him,
yet he could not tell what was become of his son. He was so subtily, and
secretly convaied away to Court that neither he, nor Reuben, not little
Benjamin could tell, or believe any other but that he was dead. No hold, but
the old man and Reuben would go after him, one to the pit, the other to the
grave, and there will never want malignant Tribes to settle the conceit of
Iesephs death fast upon Israelites and Reubenites, for say the old ones, see
his Coat if it be not so, a bloody, torn, party colored Coat, look on it.

The New Tribes are, as if they were spit out of the old ones mouths. O what a
bloody, party-colored Coat, do they hold forth, and show to the world. The
wild beasts did do it, but who were those wild beasts? They poor harmel^sse
creatures, did not tear nor besmeare the coat with blood, no not they.

See thy sons Coat, it should seem Joseph was Jacobs son, but not their
brother, I pray note how wicked men will shift off their sins with their
relation to Joseph. The coat was Joseph's ( Thy sons Coat) the party-colored
Coat was Joseph's, the bloody coat was Joseph's. Joseph was Jacobs son, but
now he shall be none of their brother, they had made a match, and were sworre
brothers to the wild beasts; they could not then be Joseph's brethren too until
the ward and some fears and frights, had purged them of some gross malignity.
O how impudently do the ill affected Tribes of this age shift off their GREAT
TRESPASS from themselves, what blood they pour upon Joseph's coat? How boldly
do they hold it forth and tell it? how shamelessely do they object the
Party-colourednesse of it, and the sad hap thereof to Jacob and Joseph: The
Parliament and the Commonwealth of England. Crnelty, and Injustice, and errors
and irreligion, and Blasphemy and Profaneness, and Divisions, and sects, (all
that is bad) that is theirs See thy sons coat.

Sir, Snatchings you know are the sudden catching away of things unexpectedly.
Men think themselves wronged when they be thus dealt with. Such a snatcher is
Providence, only it can always justify what it does in that kind, which we
can do but seldom. We are offended that things are thus snatched away from us.

Sir, In these sad Conflicts amongst Reubenites, I find and have observed a
threefold Provision made by the wisdom of God. First for it self, next for
Joseph, then for the friends of Joseph.

1 For it self, The Wisdom of God will provide that Instruments shall have
their due ( Truth and justice call for it) but men must wait the days of
payment. Neither Men, nor Angels, nor Devils shall take away that which is
Gods, namely his Honor and Reputation in the world, That Is one Provision. If
Reuben had been the only instrument to deliver back young Joseph to old
Jacob, O what a man Reuben had been! How Great for Courage? how wise for
Counsel? That hand which is most seen, carries away all the Honor. Saul has
slain his Thousands, and David his Ten thousands, but (it should seem) God
stood by and did nothing. O what Gallant men had Brown, and Waller, and Essex
and others been cried up to be, if they had done all the work? what had they
done at Abbington! what at Newbury! what at Winchester! what at Gloucester! what
in the West! What great feats they had done every where, this had been the
talk, Sir, (Whither you will or no,) people will argue thus. And man's way of
reasoning is very destructive to the Glory and ways of God. If Instruments
stand in the peoples light so that they cannot behold his exceeding great
Glory, let the men be never so precious, they shall be laid aside for a time.
God himself will bury Moses with his own hand, rather then the people shall
set the man up in his place.

Moses was honored with the conduct of Gods people through the red sea, as
far as the Wilderness, and there he is put out of Commission, and shall go
no further. Joshua shall be their Captain General in their March to Canaan.
You your self and other worthy Commanders were honored to go before English
Israel from Egypt, through a red sea, as far as the Wilderness, and are you
offended that the Wisdom of God has taken away your Commission, and buried
your honor for a little time? Sir, It was come to this pass, that your Honor
must be buried or Gods, your Wise dome or his, your Treaties or his Counsels?
and would you have his fall and yours stand? his go down, and yours go up.
Downs with that spirit I pray you, or else it will sink you as low as any
place God has to put you in. Are you Angry that he makes no further use of
you, when all men know you have been so? and so? so for Courage, and so for
trust, etc. Why, that's the reason that Providence takes you off, It is policy
to take men off when they begin to be so popular. When meant are great, God is
little. London is populous, and popularity is a great temptation to by ass
men; it is infinitely against the height of his spirit to overcome a world by a
world, or by many in the world. God is upon a design that people will not
believe. With 2 or 3 he will turn the world upsidedowne. He has done so, and
he will do so.

That's the first Provision.

And then, next, Provision must be made for Joseph too; Our of Egypt have I
called my Son; The Truth of God is engaged to bring Joseph out of Egypt, He
shall not for ever dwell among Egyptians, Joseph shall be advanced to a
Commonwealth; Sineon shall not kill him; Judah shall not sell him, God will
ceize upon his goods where ever he find them; and it shall go freely from him
again, for the nourishment, and preservation of Israelites; and for
Interpretation to the Egyptians too.

And now Sir, to come as near as I am able unto you, can it be, do you think,
that the good Providence should make no provision for the friends of Joseph?
What? not for Reuben? not for friendly Reuben? not for the Elder brother? not
for the best brother? what, not for valiant Reuben, that withstood nine, for
the cause of Joseph? Yes, Sir, care is taken for Reuben, by crossing Reuben;
and there is made for him too, a gracious provision of good, by a careful
prevision of evil; Sir, it is a work of Providence, admire it, and stoop to it.

Ah Reuben, ( Englands true hearted Reuben) It is well for thee, and for all of
thy division, that the Treaty at the Pit took not! It was well that Joseph was
taken out, though to thy discontent. Dear Reuben, It would have grieved thee
to have found thy brothers carcass in the Pit, and they self thrown there to
bear him company for a Roundhead; Were not thy brothers in Commission of
Array against Joseph? and against all the friends of Joseph?

Sir, Treaties near a Pit, (where men be divided, and do mistake one another,
as in a place of darkness) are dangerous, especially such Treaties as are
managed with such disadvantages; of nine against one, of nine against one, did
I say? of ninety against one, I dare say, if you take in all the Confederacy,
and such as wish well to our il. Treaties of cunning men against well minded
men; of united men in evil, against divided men, about that which is good; of
bloody men against peaceable men: Reuben, Reuben, I tell thee again, I do love
thy pity, but I did fear the Pit.

Sir, I am more then only persuaded, that by this time, you, and we too, had
known sorrow, if those Counsels had took. Your wit had gratified our Enemies,
more then their courage could ever have done; yet this I know too, men are
observed to be Mutineers against present Providence always, either it is too
hot, or too cold; either too wet, or too dry for them; but I hope you will
prove a better student of Providence, and that you will submit unto it, and
that you will engage for it, against such as will make but little distinction
(less then men will imagine) between Presbyterians and Independents, and
against such as have already resolved how to level all our new Names, into one
heap of Rubbish.

To conclude, Sir, It is against such as, you may be confident, will come with
such a powder of wrath against your persons, and of hunger to your estates:
(for can they ever forget how much you beat them, and how Penny your Marshall
used them;) that they will give no other but the same quarter to the City of
London, as that merciless Powder did unto those Families near the Tower of
London. Sir, they will easily take (or else take the pains to dig out) your
Treasure, I speak to more then to your self, and will kindly help you to make
good ( for themselves) so much of that known Proverb; Lincoln was, London (yet)
is, and Montrosse shall be, etc.

I cannot part with so many friends without one word more of remembrance,
because my design is to awake sleepers.

O London, London! How many sighs have you made? how many groans have you
uttered? how many precious tears have ye shed? That the keeper of Israel, would
keep you? and your God with you? and your Religion with you? and your Liberties
with you? and your Wives with you? and your Children with you? and your Friends
with you? and the Glory of Englands Joseph with you? And now that he casts a
good eye upon you, now that he has told you of so many Treasons to prevent
them; Of so many designs to blast them; Of so many Combinations and Devises to
scatter them, them that would soon have scattered you; Are you offended at this
Providence? Do you repine at this Provision? Will the Irish, or the uncertain
Scots, or the Orcades, or France, or Spain, or Barbary; Will any of these do
you think, give you content, if a wise God cannot do it?

I pray, Sirs, think and bethink your selves, and walk about the City, the
Island, tell the Towers,: Mark well her Bulwarks: And in your ROVNDS, peep
under the foundations, search the Vaults, not with dark Lantherns; Guide Faux
and Traitors did so, they do, and have done so, that would blow you up:
Londoners! Englishmen! Take the benefit of the Sun by day, and of a Torch by
night. Pray be not so unkind as to send up such annoying, such choakingsmoake,
to offend the pure and clear eye that England and London seem to have
Monopolized to it self for the safety of both, and for the preservation of all
that any of us do enjoy. Video, Rideo, do ye understand and remember the old
Powder Treason; it was the very Mother of this; that was the Mother, and this
the Daughter.

Sir, it is a Child begotten of the same Black Father, a child begotten after
his own likeness, as black and dark as himself, Oh how many barrels of powder,
be laid! and how many Billets, and Logges, and great bars of Iron too, be laid
over those barrels! Those unhappy ones in Towerstreet, were but as a boys
Squib in comparison of these Vanlts and Barrels, yet how many sweet families
were blown up by that Squib? and those barrells? and that improvidence? I do
melt into a brine of saltish tears at the very writing of it, but you will
melt into tears of red blood at the feeling of it, if better provision be not
made for you by your Guardians, and by him that guides your Guardians.

Those barrells were laid, (whither in a Seller or Shop, or Warehouse, I know
not) under some weak timber-houses in a street of London, these are laid
under the very foundations of the strong Tower of London, the City of London,
the Towns and Cities of England, and the very weal of all the Commons of
England. Here all enslaved-Nations do contribute to give a sound blon indeed,
The work will be the more easy if many hands be put to it. Believe it
(honored sir) the Pope has barrels, and billets, and faggots, and Oneale has
barrels, and the Scots have barrels, and the Danes have barrels, and they say
some Londoners have barrels too, I fear if you help them not with powder, yet
you put fire enough at the Touch hole: but shall these blow up England? No I
trust, nor yet London neither. Better provision is made for both. I hope
Providence will snatch London from those barrels or those barrels from London,
and take away the knife least the child hurt himself, and prove a grief to
Father and Mother: Dear Londoners, engage against all powder plots, your
Solitary Ben: does give you an Alarm; And it is an Alarm of Love to London.

Not to fire their Buildings,

BUT,

To quench their Burnings.

FINIS.

